Two and twenty Sermons of Master John Calvin. In which Sermons is most
religiously handled, the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm of David, by eight
verses aparte according to the Hebrewe Alphabet. Translated out of French into
English by T.S.

Imprinted at London for John Harison and Thomas Man. 1580.

To the right worshipful Sir Robert Iermyn, Knight, and to the right worshipful
his godly and virtuous wife, the Lady Judith Iermyn, Thomas Stocker wishes
continual increase of all spiritual and earthly good things in this life,
with an earnest zeal to the glorious Gospel of Christ Jesus, and
perseueraunce of practice thereof unto the end and in the end, and after this
life* everlasting joy and bliss in the life to come through the same Christ
Jesus our Lord.
ALbeit the whole Scripture universally (Right Worshipful) is as it were a
divine Maistresse, teaching both virtue and true faith: yet notwithstanding
the Book of Psalms has over and besides that in a manner an express image
of the state and condition of souls, and therefore very necessary for all
people in general. Howbeit this hundredth and ninteene Psalm, namely
conteyneth a perfect art and a wonderful vehemency of the Kingly Prophet, in
setting forth and highly extolling the praise of Gods law and the excellency
thereof: wherein he cannot satisfy himself, nor yet sufficiently express
the affection which he bears thereunto, adding moreouermany notable
complaints and consolations, wherefore it is most meet for all the children of
God to have it always both in their hearts and mouths, and so continually
meditating thereon as this holy Prophet did in his distress, they may also
find the like comfort, whenever and whatsoever affliction shall assail
them, and also to fly and abhor that which is wicked and evil in the sight
of the Lord.

Which Psalm being divided into two and twenty parts, by eight verses
aparte, according too the Hebrew Alphabet, the godly and learned Father and
most famous furtherer of the glorious Gospel of our Savior and Redeemer
Christ, has according to that order, very religiously handled and drawn into
as many Sermons, too the benefit and comfort of all the true and faithful
Scholars in the School of God, which shall diligently read them, and
earnnestly strive to follow the same direction in their life and conversation.

Which Sermons according to my poor skill, I have englished from the French,
and have taken boldness to dedicate and offer this my simple travel unto your
Worships, as a special token of my good will in Christ: beseeching you to
accept of this my labor, not according to the rude translation, but the
goodness of the matter which they propound, and my hearty affection unto you.
And the rather have I been enbo dened this to do: both for that I have been
crediblly informed off, either of your great pains taking in reading over
such like godly works as also that my self am Testis oculatus, of your daily
presence and diligent attention at all Sermons and godly exercises used in this
country of Stuff. Whose good and godly beginnings with the rest of the right
worshipful both men and women in these parts (and all others of what state
and condition so ever they be) I heartely beseech our good God and merciful
father, even for his Christ, his truth, and mercyes sake, to increase,
strengthen, and continue witth daily practice of the same, in some measure in
your lives and conversation, with full perseueraunce unto the end of your
days here, without which all the rest is but labor lost. For as the Apostle
witnesses, we are made partakers of Christ, if we keep sure unto the end
that beginning wherewith we are vpholden.

The Lord God therefore by his holy spirit work these effects in you and in us
all that profess his gospel, and lead our adversaries (when it shall please
him) into the truth, as he is God of truth: that when his son Christ our
Savior shall appear in glory, we may be found to have walked without
halting in whatsoever he has thought meet to open to us for our salvation,
From Mildenhall the 4. of November. l579.

Your worships to command in the Lord Tho. Stocker.

To all faithful Readers.
THE Reading over of these present Sermons, will sufficiently declare what
commodity and profit they may bring with them: As in very deed the Author of
them right welsheweth throughout all his works, in what sort the Lord GOD
has heretofore been served, and also how ordinarily he is served by him.
And therefore for a full recommendation as well of the Author, as also of the
work it self, I intend through GOD his assistaunce too set forth none
other thing, then the same fruit and profit, which they have already gotten,
that have read them, and that fruit which they may make report of, that shall
hereafter read them. For this may very well be thought that nothing in the
whole world makes a man more blessed, then the lively and continual
meditation of the holy law and good will of our heavenly father. Now then
this is the Psalm, which is framed, and wholly serves too this end and
purpose, daily to exercise our selves here in, and although that he so
oftentimes repeateth these words, Law, Ordinances, Statutes, Edict,
Commandments, Decrees, and other such like: yet are they no vain
repetitions: but used to this intent and purpose, too let us thoroughly
understand, how marvelous perverse and froward our nature is causing these so
necessary things, too too easily to melte (like wax against the Sun, as we
say) clean away from us, and also to make us too be touched at the quick,
that we might feel how fervently we ought too sigh and groan, after the law
and ordinance of God, how zealously too desire to put the same in execution,
and also how greatly too be grieved with beholding the most proud and
villainous contempt of the ungodly treading the same under their feet.

And because there are some who rather desire too have such Books as they may
easily carry about with them, I have the rather to please all parties been
very willing too satisfy them herein, always reserving this good affection,
that GOD might be honored, and glorified, by this my small travel, and the
building up of his Church advanced.

Farewell.
The first Sermon of M. John Calvin, upon the hundredth and ninteene Psalm of
the Kingly Prophet David,
The first eight Verses upon
ALEPH.
1 Blessed are al those which are upright in the way: and walk in the law of
the lord.

2 Blessed are they which keep his Testimonies: and seek him with their whole
heart.

3 Surely they work no iniquity: that walk in his ways.

4 Thou have commanded to keep thy Precepts diligently.

5 O that my ways were directed too keep thy Statutes.

6 Then should not I be confounded: when I have respect unto all thy
Commandments.

7 I will praise thee with an upright heart: when I shall learnt the judgments
of thy righteousness.

8 I will keep thy Ceremonies: o forsake me not ouerlonge.

Beloved, we ought to be greatly ashamed of our selves, when as our good God
and heavenly Father, goes about by all means possible too draw us unto him,
and yet we in no wise will come nighe him, but rather as is commonly said, do
pull our heads out of the collar and hale backwarde. If there were none other
testimony hereof against us, but this Psalm which I am here now in hand
about to handle, it might suffice. The sum whereof is this, to show unto us
what grace the Lord our God offers unto us, when as we are taught the
straight rule and order, by which we may rightly and truly serve him, wherein
cons^steth the whole effect of our salvation, and the same to be the very way
and mean to com thereunto. When as God then grants unto us his grace, to be
thus instructed by his word, behold he has now given unto us an
unspeakable treasure, and impossible too be sufficiently valued. By this
Psalm is declared unto us, that this is the very use of the law of God, and
also of all the holy Scripture: and that we are instructed and exhorted too
profit our selves by that which is there offered unto us. But because that when
any talk is ministered of drawing us to God, we are so blockishe and dull,
that it is pity and lamentable to see: and albeit that God approaches near
unto us, and that we have many and sundry times clearly forgotten all
whatsoever we have understood and learned of him, see here what an aid and
help he has added for our behoof: which is this, that his will and meaning
is, that this Psalm should be drawn and framed into an order of eight
verses aparte, and that all the verses of every eight aparte, should begin with
a several letter, after the order of an A.B.C. As if he should say, It shall
not be material that we be profounde learned men, for our instruction in that
which is necessary to our salvation: But that the doctrine is common as well to
the learned as to the unlearned. Are our wits and memoryes grown so short?
Let us then reckon and tell upon our fingers, when as we have learned A.B.C.
Let us then join eight verses together, and so eight by eight, and go through
the whole crosserow, and we shall have the whole Psalm at our fingers ends.
What shall we farther say? If we will hereby profit our selves no way,
neither yet vouchsafe to hearken unto our good God, ne suffer us to be so
familiarly guyded by him, yea even unto that thing which is more then
necessary, may it not be very well said, that we are al most accursed? True it
is that verses in deed begin not either with the English or yet the Latin
letters: but with the Hebrew: wherein David made and wrote this Psalm
Notwithstanding so it is, that the will and purpose of the holy ghost, is to
make us to fieele and understand that which before I have declared: to wit,
that the doctrine herein contained, is not only see down for great Clearkes
which have gone to school ten or twenty years: but also for the most simple:
to the end none should pretend any excuse of ignorance. And herewithal let
us note this by the way: That weal, ought too know and understand this Psalm
as perfectly as our Pater noster as we usually say. But here we must not say as
a number of men do, that our wit and capacities are not so excellent and fine,
as to comprehend and understand the holy scriptures: and besides, that our
memory will not serve too retain and keep that which sometimes is preached
unto us. A strange case: we will easily retain and keep in mind not only
vain and foolish songs and ditties, but also such as are both wanton and
dissolute, and even such as S. Paul says, do corrupt and poison good
manners, for this horrible infection is always shut up for an evil intent and
purpose. For if we shall hear any villainous and ribaudrous song, which shall
only stir us up all to all filthy lust and shamelessness the same by and by
we retain with great ease.

Behold now* how the Lord our God here teaches us as it were by an A. B. C.
a most excellent song amongst the rest, by which we may learn to rule and
order our lives, whereby also he exhorts us to well doing, to comfort us in
all our afflictions, to ratify unto us the promises of salvation, too open
unto us the Gates of his everlasting Kingdom, that we might enter into
everlasting life: and all this is contained within this A. B. C. of this
present Psalm, and yet we will all say that our memory is over short, and
our wit too too gross, or weak to hold it. Now I beseech you tell me
this, will this excuse go for payment or not? Verily I believe not, wherefore
let us learn to bestow our whole endeavor and study to record the lessons
which are here taught us: and that we may be hereafter thoroughly acquainted
with this Psalm, if we will be repured and taken to be the children of God. And
seeing we see our nature to be given to many ungodly and pernicious, or at the
least to very unprofitable thing: let us yet retain and hold that which shall
be most profitable for us, and the rather because that God so abaseth himself
to the most rude, simple, and ignorauntest among us. For mine own part,
because I will frame my self to that manner and order which the holy Ghost
has here set down, I shall enforce my self to follow as briefly as I can
the plain and true meaning of the text: and without continuing in long
exhortations. I will only do my best too mince or shred, as we say, the
words of David, because we may the better digest them. For performance
whereof, I determine by the grace of God, too finishe eight verses aparte in
every Sermon, and to hold my self with in such a compass, as that the most
ignorant shall easily, acknowledge and confess that I mean nothing else but
to make open and plain the simple and pure substance of the text. And now
let us come to the contents if the first viii. verses apart, beginning with the
first letter Aleph: Blessed are they (says David) which are upright in the
way: and walk in the Law of the Lord. First of all, he does us here to
wit, that we understand not wherein our chief blessedness consists, and
the reason is, because that we are blind, and do live in the world as
savage? and wild beasts, utterly void of sense and reason: and suffer our
selves to be led and carried away of our brutishe and swinish affections and
lusts. And because it is so, that we are thus carried away, it is a manifest
sign and token that we discern not good from evil: or else that the Devil
has so bewitched us, that we think thereof no whitte at all. True it is that
the most wicked will confess and say, that they desire too be saved but yet
in the desire thereof, they clearly fly from it, and go as clean away from
it, as they can for their lives.

But what is the cause why they so greatly withdraw them selves from that
which they so highly proteste too love? Yea they draw as near unto it, as
they can possibly fly from it. By this it seems that they have conspyred too
reiecte and make little accounte of that good which GOD means to do for
them. And here we are too note, that David in this first verse accuses us of
horrible blindness, as if he should say, Surely you are all senseless and
without wit. And to say the truth if there were but one drop of reason in
us, without doubt, we would not so reiecte and refuse our salvation of a set
purpose as we do. See here how mercifully our good God deals with us, who
shows us how and in what manner we may be blessed, and yet we for all that
draw altogether backwarde. Does not David then of very right, justly condemn
us? But because every of us protests to know the right way, he adds, They
which walk in the way of the Lord. He has said: Blessed are they which are
undefiled in their way: that is, which walk aright. And who are they? It is
very true in deed as before I have said, that there are a great number,
which will boast them selves too walk aright, and that in such sort, as that
it can not be much amended: and yet notwithstanding, if they be asked who made
their way, and who it is that assures them that they shoot at the true mark,
they know not what answer to make. For there is but one way which leads to
salvation, which is the law: as David hereof speaks, wherefore as many as
walk in the Law of the Lord, says he, go not out of their way. We have in
this first verse two notable lessons: The one is, that God here acuseth us,
that every of us strayeth and erreth from the way of salvation, and although
we proteste that we are willing and desirous to be saved, yet for all that
our wicked affections do in such sort carry us away, as that we desire
nothing else but that we may be far from that felicity and blessedness
which is set before us. For there it is said, Blessed are they which walk in
the right way. And thus much for the first point. The second is, That we may
invent and devise many and sundry kinds of life, and so think that we go the
best and surest way that may be, and by this mean deceive our selves, for
there is but one way that leads to salvation. What way is it? It is not that
which we of our own brain do imagine: For when Isaiah says, Esaias. 53.6.
that every one has declined from his way, he means that we all run into
everlasting destruction. The Law of God then is the way which must rule and
order our life, and when we will hearken unto it, all things shall go well
with us, but whosoever swarueth from that, the same is like unto a savage and
wild beast, which can do nothing else but gallopp and flinge overthwart the
fields. There is none of us all but that may have many motions which may seem
good to us, as we may see by the poor and filly unbelievers, which are very
fervent and earnest to do this or that, which too their thinking seems very
good and profitable: but yet the spirit of God is not their leader and guide.

Now it is said, That when we have the law of God before us, it shall go well
with us: and that without it, it is impossible, but that our life must needs
be confounded and come to naught. He says a little after, Blessed are they
which keep his Testimonies: and seek him with their whole heart. David now
uses another word, then this word the law, to wit, testimonies. This word in
it self imports a covenant or contract, and it is not to be understood
otherwise than to be ayplyed to this end: to wit, that God couenanting with us,
declares, that his meaning is to pull and draw us unto him, and also how we
ought to order our life, because cause it is a mutual Contract between him
and us. As if he should have said* Go to now, understand you that here I
make a covenant with you, that you acknowledge me to be your GOD: That you
doubt not of my love toward you, and in loving you that I am your Savior,
and that you call upon me in this affiaunce and trust, and besides that you
be also my loving and obedient Children, that I do protect and govern you,
and that you are my householde Servants. When the Lord our GOD thus abaseth
and offers him self unto us, and that he uses such famyliaritie and
gentleness toward us, as to talk with us, It is said, that he gives us
his Testimonies of his love and favor toward us.

Here now David declares, That they are blessed which keep the Testimonies
of GOD: and seek him with their whole heart. As if he should say that the
Law of God consists not only in this, that it shewweth unto us what we
ought too do, but that it carries also with it another special Doctrine: too
weete, to assure us that he will be our Father, that he loves us so dearly
that he desires none other thing of us, but that we would be his sons
and heirs. And hereunto tend all the Ceremonies, whereof we shall speak
hereafter more at large. Yet this is true, that as well in this place
abouesayde, as also by the rest of the names couched in this Psalm, as of
Statutes, Decrees, and Ordinances, David always means the doctrine of the
Law. Howbeit it is to be noted, that this diversity of words, it is not
here set down without good cause. For it expresses most plainly unto us,
what variety of consolation we receive by that which GOD shows unto us in
the Law of Moses, and in all the Prophets, who are as it were Expositors
thereof. For many times when we speak of the Law, we suppose that there is
nothing else meant but that which GOD commands us to do. But there is a
great deal more to be considered: to wit, he assures us of his favor and
grace, and wills us to stay our selves thereon, that we might be assured of
our salvation, and that also we might be certain of his love by his sacraments
therein ordained. Moreover, that we should address our selves to Jesus
Christ, and by that means be instructed to run unto him who is our only and
alone Savior. When God then speaks unto us, we must consider that he says
not only, do this, or that, but declares himself unto us, what manner of
one we should think him to be, and what one also he shows him self on his
part too be toward us, both by experience and effect. This diversity of
words used here in this Psalm by David, is not superfluous: For it shows
us that the Law of God does hot only command us how we should live, and
after what sort: but does also certify us of the good will of God, promises
us salvation, leads us too Jesus Christ; stirs us up too call upon the
name of God, gives us Ceremonies to confirm us therein, and moreover, that it
guides, and holds us within our limits. And surely there is not one verse in
all this Psalm (although there are very many) wherein there is not mention
made of one of these words, too wit, either of the law of God, or of his
Commandments, either else of his Ordinances, Statutes, or Testimonies, or
of his voice, Judgments, or Justice. These words are here so many times
repeated, as that there is not one verse, but that there is one or sometimes
two of them in it: as hereafter we shall see throughout the whole Psalm*

And now let us come to the matter heerin contained: Blessed are they which
keep the Testimonies of the Lord: and which seek him with their whole heart.
First David decalareth here (as before said) that we have greatly profited in
the law, when as we shall acknowledge and confess what affection and love
God bears us, and how we ought to assure our selves of his good will and
fatherly love. And afterward he tells us to what end and purpose it is, that
God grants unto us such an assurance, because (says he) we should seek
him. For this is most sure, when as we shall understand God to be such a one,
as he declares himself unto us by his word, it is impossible but that we
should stir up our selves, and be moved to give our selves wholly unto him.
And to prove that this is true, behold the inestimable bounty and goodness
declared unto us in our God, what man is he that is so perverse and void of
sense and reason, which will not be contented to place him self there, where he
thinks his whole blessedness and felicity consists and lies. Even so
likewise, when as become careless in seeking after the Lord our God, it is a
sign and token that we have understood nothing of that which he has showed
unto us of his goodness and mercy, and of all his fatherly affection, which is
witnessed unto us in the law, and in the holy scriptures. But because it shall
be no great ado for a number of men, to make a countenance of seeking the
Lord, David shows that we must not seek him with our feet and hands, with
the outward gestures of the body alone, but with a true and pure affection.
And therefore, he says, Blessed are they which seek him with their whole
heart. As if he should say, I would not have you to do as the hypocrites do,
which bear of religion with strong hand, no, I mean not so: but I would have
your love to be sound and true. As touching that saying, With their whole
heart, it is to declare unto us, That God cannot away with parting of stakes,
as we men many times do: For we are well contented to bestow some part upon
God, and would be at free liberty to hold us with the world, and to serve God
by halfes. But David teaches us here to serve him with our whole heart: to
wit, in all integrity and soundnes, and not with two faces in one hood. He
would not have us patted in sunder, to say, Well, I am contented to serve God,
howbeit I would not that he should require my whole service to him self: but
that I might after satisfy and follow my own lusts and pleasures, that I
might be at liberty to serve the world. No not so (says he:) It must be
brought into a true and perfect soundnes, and not to divide man after such a
manner. True it is that we shall never be able to seek God with such a
perfection, but that it may be greatly amended: neither does the holy scripture
mean by this saying, With their whole heart, full perfection, but only opposes
it self against the hypocrisy of a great number of men, and which would be in
us al, were it not that God him self did remedy and help it. That is, we would
with good will serve God by halfes, if so be he would let us alone with the
rest, to do what we thought good. As for example, We shall have very many
which will not stick with God, to come to the Sermon on a Sunday, and to be
present at the prayers of the faithful, and to make some show of religion:
and yet they would have God to give them free choice to do what they listed at
the rest of the week after: or if they come to a Sermon oftener then on the
Sunday, it seems to them that they have done very well, that they are
thoroughly discharged of their duties if they tarry there but one hour. But
because they might be set at more liberty, they will not stick to say, that
they will be free from some one vice, one will say that he will be no
whoremaister, Another, that he will be no drunkarde, Another, that he will be no
blasphemer: and yet every one of these will have his particular vice, and think
that God ought to bear with them, seeing that for his honor, and to do him
pleasure, they absteined from some sin, and that they obeyed him in some
point. But the scripture tells us that all this is nothing, but that every
one ought to examine him self thoroughly and in all points, and finding in him
self any thing which is against the will of God: to be utterly displeased
therewith, clearly to renounce it, and to desire nothing but to be cleansed
thereof. See now, this is that perfection, whereof David here speaks. Now
let us see what is the sum of the second verse, to weete, that we should do
nothing else but study in the law of God, not only to know what is forbidden
or commanded, but to be certain what manner of one GOD is toward us, and
what affection he bears us, that we might put the trust of our salvation in
him, and call upon his holy name. And besides, there is declared unto us, that
when we have tasted of the mercies of God, that he has certified us of his
love and grace, that the same ought to stir us up to seek him, and to cleave
wholly unto him, and to yield our selves wholly to his service: and that not in
the outward show, and in hypocrisy: but with a pure and sound heart and
affection, and not by halfes: so that there be found true soundnes and
integrity, as before I have touched. Now it follows,

Surely they work none iniquity that walk in his ways. First David here
shows in this present verse, what the cause is why all men abound in evil
and iniquity: to weete, for so much as they will not be ruled by the Lord
their God. See here the spring head of the outrages, of all the disorder, and
confusions in the world, to weete, that God is pressed and ready to guide and
govern us, but what? we may not away to bear his yoke, every man refuses
it, and will be exempt from it. Lo here whereupon arises our dissolute and
wanton life, to weete, because we will not suffer the authority which God has
over us, to lead and guide us, as he is always ready to do, and as he also
shows us by his law. Let this then be an Item for us.

And it follows further. For David means to confirm the words before
spoken, to weete, how it comes to pass that we are blessed, that is, if
we keep the testimonies of our GOD, and walk in his law. For, says he,
they which do no wickedness walk in his ways: contrarywyse, we do nothing
but provoke his heavy wrath and displeasure against us, in committing of sin
and iniquity.

when as God then stands against us, and becomes our enemy, must not our
life be unhappy and accursed? It can not be otherwise chosen. Here then is one
proof of that which before has been said: to wit, that our whole felicity
consists in this, that God is our instructor and teacher, and that we hold
our selves too the doctrine which we receive from him And what is the reason?
For lo, says David, they will abstain from evil doing. When then we
abstain from doing of evil, we provoke not God his heavy wrath against us:
and so let us conclude, that herein consists our chief felicity. Moreover,
here is to be noted, that as many as walk not in the law of God, cannot but
run into mischief and destruction: yea how soever they think of their well
doing, and persuade them selves to live holily and godly, yet has God told
them that it is clean contrary. And here this parcel of scripture is worthy
the marking, for hereby we may see the pride of us men, in that we make all
the world believe, that all things go with us as well as is possible, when as
we follow our own fantasies, being thus arrogant to say, whatsoever we do it is
all well done. But behold what God (the only judge hereof) has certainly set
down, which we can no way, repeal or call back, neither shall be possible to
be retracted as we lust, to wit, that no man can abstain from evil doing, but
such only which walk after this heavenly doctrine. They then which walk
after their own pleasure, must needs run into everlasting perdition. Now
then there are two manner of ways wherein men do err. For one sort exceed in
open and most manifest transgressions and sins: and although they very well
know that they are evil and wicked, yet take they leave, continually to
follow them. As a whoremonger can not justify his wicked doing: no more can a
thief, a swearer, nor a dronkard. And yet it is so with them, that they
always give them selves leave to go from better to worse. Howbeit there is
another manner of way of evil doing, which is mere d^agerous, and a great deal
more to be feared, because it is more covert and secret, to weete, when as men
will not acknowledge them selves to be worthy of commendation, and that they
think that there is none that can detecte or condemn them, having a foolish
and devilish opinion which blinds their eyes. These men then (as it is the
manner of all hypocrites) may well justify them selves: but yet the case so
stands, that God condemns them, as here we may see. It remains now, that
we use nothing for the whole rule and order of our life, but the law of God
alone: for without it, all our life must needs be dissolute, and there shall be
nothing in it but confusion and destruction, It follows next after, That God
has commanded us too keep diligently his precepts, That is, always,
according to the truth which David holds. For it is very sure, that God is so
careful over our salvation, that he procures and furthereth it, as much as is
possible for us to desire. No we if God be thus touched with us, and bears us
such a good will and love: let us understand that when he charge us to keep
his ordinances and precepts, that he thereby signifies unto us, that the same
is our whole blessedness and felicity. And to prove it to be so, God
requires not our service, because he has some business for us to do: For he
has not, nor needs any help of his creattres. When then we are not able do
that which he commands us, we can neither do good nor hurt vnro our creator.
What is it that moves him to be so careful over us as he is, and what is it
that pricketh and thrusts us foreward to keep his commandments? Surely,
since neither his profit nor gain leads him to be thus careful, doutles he
respects only our salvation. By this we may conclude, that there is none
other blessedness which we can enjoy, but to walk in his law, as he has
before said. But in the mean while we may see how villainous and wicked a thing
our unthankfulness is: for God shows not unto us only in a word what is our
duty to do, but uses also a familiar and gentle doctrine, to draw us unto
him. And afterward he exhorts us, because he sees us to be very cold and
untoward. And for the selfsame cause he uses much diversity, and pursues it
diligently as we see: to the end we might pretend no excuse of ignorance,
when we have nor performed that which he has set down unto us by his law:
but that we should be convinced of malice, and that we might understand and
know that we are well worthy of everlasting cond^enation. And so much the
more ought we thoroughly to mark this doctrine, where it is declared unto us,
that no excuse shall serve us, when as every of us outrageth so much and
follows his own lust: seeing that God has prevented us, and that he has
declared unto us, that the right rule to walk by, is to follow his
co^mandementes: neither that he has done the same slightly, but that he has
persisted and continued therein, as much as was possible for him to do.
Thirdly, that by this mean he has showed unto us his great love toward us,
and what care he has of our welfare and life. David the^ goes on forward, and
says. O that my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes. Here David pricketh
him self fowarde, and shows the desire he has to come to that blessedness
and felicity whereof he has spoken before. And we must be sure to observe
this order, for it is not enough for us to understand and know wherein our
felicity and blessedness consists, and the way to come thereunto, as God has
appointed us: but we must also enter into our selves. For every man must think
thus with him self. What manner of man am I? Seeing my God is so loving and
merciful tha the seeks me, and that he requires nothing else of me but that
I should come unto him, is it reason that I should sit still? shall I become a
block? shall I become a sensles and witles creature? shall I not be moved with
such favor and grace as my GOD shows unto me, and makes me to feel.

See here what David means to teach us in this verse, O that my ways were
made so direct, that I might keep thy commandments. When as he speaks of
his ways, he means all the actions of his life, for the life of man is called
a Way: And that not without cause, for all our thoughts and affections, are
as ways, and as our footesteppes. Now he says, O that my ways were made so
direct, that I might keep thy commandementes. Herein he declares, that a
faithful man, after he has known this mercy of God in guiding our life,
ought to enter into him self, and think that there is neither reason nor
wisdom in him how to govern him self: but that all proceeds from the good
will and loving kindness of the Lord. Sythens then that we are so inclined to
roue in our own ways hither and thither, by reason of the foolish
presumption and vain confidence which we have of our own wisdom, let us use
such remedy as God has assigned us: to weete, that we forsake our selves, and
tread under foot this carnal reason which deceives us: that we set at
naught all our lusts and ungodly affections that God only may bear rule, and
our life be guided according to his his law.

It follows, Then should I not be confounded, when I have respect to all thy
commandments. Here David confirms him self in the doctrine next before:
for he declares what the mark is whereat he aymeth. O Lord, says he,
when as thou shall do me that good, that I may be directed according to thy
word* I shall never be confounded. When David now has such a desire, he there
by right well declares, that every man ought to be careful and to endeavor
himself theru^to, or else he shall never obey the will of God, considering that
there are so many gainsayings in our flesh and nature, as is most pitiful to
think upon. For look how many our affections and thoughts are, we have even
so many enemies rebelling against God, and which hinder us to walk after his
will. We ought therefore to pray unto him that he will hold us in, that he
may be our master, and we his vassails. Moreover, let us consider well of that
which is here spoken, to weete, that in keeping the c^omaundementes of God, we
shall never be confounded. By this he does us to understand that so many as
follow their own lusts and fantasies, which look this way and that way, and
do imagine them selves a mark, and forge them selves such away as seems good
in their own sight, that they shall be confounded and deceived. No doubt when
men do that which best likes the^ selves, they streightwayes think all things
shall go so well with them as is possible to be wished, glorying in their
own vain imaginations: but what follows thereof? God confounds them in
their own arrogancy wherewith they were puffed up for a time: Would we
eschew this confusion of the unbelieving persons? Let us have an eye to the
commandments of God: to wit, let our eyes be settled on them, and look not
on our own reason, nor of our natural sense, neither yet of any other thing
that lies in our own power, which may turn us away from them. And it is a
necessary point for us to be enfourmed thereof. For as often as men will give
them selves leave to imagine and think what they list to have done, there
shall a thousand thoughts for close their minds, and so will turn them away
from God, and wholly estraunge them from the doctrine of salvation. And for this
cause David declares that there is but one only mean, to wit, that we should
wholly settle our eyes upon the Law of GOD, without turning away from it either
on this side or on that, as commonly and usually we do. Afterward he goes on
and says, I will praise thee with an upright heart: when I shall learn the
judgments of thy righteousness. David shows in this verse how we may praise
the Lord our God, and that is continually following the plainnes of his matter.
For we must all confess that our life is miserable, if it tend not to the
praise and glorifying of God. Let us now see how we may praise him: We must be
exercised in his judgments, that is, in the rule which he has set down
unto us. For this word, Judgments, imports that we are taught and
instructed of that which we have to do For our life is outrageous if we pass
the limits and bounds which he has appointed us: and contrariwyse, we keep a
true vprightnes in obeying of him. Now then he says, that when he shall have
learned the righteous judgments of God, that then he will thank him with an
unfeigned heart. By this he signifies unto us, that although men persuade them
selves to love GOD as much as is possible, nevertheless that it is but fained,
until such time as they are unfeignedly instructed in the law. And thus much
for that. Moreover, here is to be noted, that that is not all which we have
learned that God shows unto us in his word: but David speaks here of an
instruction which takes root, and is settled and abides in the heart of a
man, according to that which has heretofore been said. For a number may
imagine of their own brain what the law of God is, but in the mean while it
stands so with them, that when we behold their life and conversation, it
appears that they have profited no whit at all in his school. It is meet
therefore that out heart be brought to the school of God, to weete, that
whatsoever he teaches us, it may be thoroughly imprinted and engraven within.
And this is that manner of learning, whereof David here speaks. For if we have
been exercised in this sort, that we have holden the doctrine and law of God,
we may very well glorify his blessed name: to weete, we may truly praise him
as he has commanded us.

When he says, I will keep thy Statutes: that is, That he is so resolved and
confirmed in the doctrine of the law, that he has overcome all the affections
and lusts of the flesh and the world, which might resist and hinder him in
the service of God. He has said before, O that my ways were made so direct.
He desires, as a man which when he cannot have that which he wishes for, is
in great pain and travel. It behooves us also to pour out such sighs and
groans, considering the rebellion of our flesh, which is so contrary to the
righteousness of God, that all our thoughts and affections (as is abouesaid)
are so many gainesayinges, that they turn us clean away from his obeysaunce.
We must therefore say with David, Alas: how is it possible that I should be
ever able to come to the perfect serving of my God? to trust upon him, and
wholly to settle my self upon that rule and order which he has set down unto
me? Lo I say, these should be our wishes and desires. But this is not
sufficient enough, to have a desire that we might serve God.

But there is yet much more, as when we shall desire that God will pushe us
forward and stir us up thereto, and yet we must not stay there neither. What
must we then do? Let us step forth with David and protest, that we will keep
the commandments of God: to wit, when we have fought against our inordinate
affections, and that we are assured to have victory over them, that we then
make this conclusion: God shall so conduct me, that I shall be able to keep his
Statutes. As for the rest, because we can not have this as of our selves, we
are always to pray as David did:

O Lord forsake me not utterly. For if God withhold his holy hand from us, alas
what shall become of us? Is it possible for us to have one good desire or
thought in us? No, it is impossible, but we shall wholly decline to all evil
and mischief, yea and we shall become his enemies and adversaries. We must
therefore, having all our refuge from God, beseech him with David, that he will
not forsake us. When he says, O Lord forsake me not ouerlong, He signifies
unto us, that God many times suffers us to go wrong, and suffers us to
fall, or else to stu^ble. And why does he so? Because he would humble us: for
what is he which goes not out of the way, or at the least halteth not, and
which oftentimes falls not flat down? But yet for all that he would not
have us discouraged. When then we see our weakness, and that there are many
faults and imperfections in us. Let us beseech the Lord our God that he will
not forsake us for ever: for there is no difficulty which David would not but
that we should know, and he knew a great many of faults in himself: But
yet he hoped that God would not forsake him for ever. And he knew also that
though he happened oftentimes to fall, yet that he would relieve him by his
grace.

And this is his meaning also what we must do: for we know this, that there
is no man which wholly keeps the law of God: we are al transgressors thereof,
we are all miserable sinners. We must therefore run unto our good God, and
beseech him that when we are fallen, that he will relieve us through his
fatherly goodness, as he is always ready to do, and that he has promised he
will govern us, in supporting of us, until such time as he has despoyled us
of all the imperfections of our flesh. And according to this holy doctrine,
let us prostrate our selves before the face of our good God in confessing our
faults, beseeching him that it would please him to give us a taste that we may
feel what a pleasure he does us, when he communicates his word familiarly
among us, and that he will instruct us thereby, not only to understand to
discern betwixt good and evil: but that we may also be sure and certain of
his love and good will toward us: to the end that we living under his charge
and conduction, might run unto him, that in the midst of the miseries and
wretchedness of this world, he will make us blessed, that we may come to
everlasting bliss, and the glory immortal, which has been purchased for us
once for all by our Lord and savior Christ Jesus his son. And that when he
has once set us into the right way, that he would keep us therein more and
more, until the time that he has brought us into his heavenly kingdom. That
not only, etc.

The second Sermon of the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm.
BETH.
Wherewithal shall a young man redress his way? in taking heed thereto
according to thy word.
With my whole heart have I sought thee: let me not wander from thy
commandments.
I have hid thy promise in my heart: that I might not sin against thee.
Blessed art thou O Lord: teach me thy statutes.
With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth.
I have had as great delight in the way of thy testimonies: as in all manner of
riches.
I will meditate in thy commandments: and consider thy ways.
My delight shall be in thy statutes: and I will not forget thy words.
Upon Sunday last past I declared unto you in sum the argument of this
Psalm, the use thereof, and the instruction that we may gather by it: to
weete, that a faithful man is here taught to stir up himself to the reading
of Gods word, and thereby to confirm him self accordingly. David him self
has done this, who of all others was the most excellent: how much more then
ought we to do the like? even we I say, which are so rude and ignorant, and
far from so much profiting in the school of God as he? But because we are so
cold, and have need to be spurred forward like Asses: Behold why David here
shows us, what profit and commodity we may receive by this continual study,
if every of us will apply our selves to see and hear that which God has
manifested unto us in his law, and in the holy Scriptures: As here he says,

Wherewithal shall a young man redress his way? in taking heed thereto or
standing upon his guard according to thy word. He shows us here, that if we be
desirous to order ou^ life as it becomes us, to have it rightly governed, and
to be pure and simple, we must hold that way which GOD has set before us. For
we must not trust unto our own wits. Neither frame and fashion unto our
selves such a way as shall to us seem best: but to suffer God to rule and
conduct us, and to obey him simply and plainly. To be short, David signifies
unto us, that all the wisdom and perfection of our life, is to follow GOD,
and cleave unto his will. True it is, that this sentence at the first sight may
seem to us too to common, and as it were more then needs. For we will say,
what is he that knows not this, and will not confess it, I will not deny but
that it is an ordinary thing to confess it: But in the mean while, how few are
there which are persuaded of that which is here spoken: or if we imagine such a
thing in our head, where is the practice of it? I fear me, we shall find it in
a very small number of us. Let us not therefore think that this rule which the
spirit of God has set before us, is in vain, for it is for the amendment of
our life according to his word, and to make us to understand, that without
it, all is but doung, and filth, that we have al erred, and that we hold no
way, although we think al to the contrary. But we are to consider, why he
especially speaks here, of a young man. For we are sure that God has given
his law as well for the great as the small, for the old as the young: that when we
shall begin to be taught it even from our youth, we must hold and continue it to
the grave. Wherefore then does David strain this doctrine of the law too young
men? It is not for that it reaches not unto the aged: but there are two
reasons why he so spoke. We know the hot affection that is in youth, and that
there is such an heat in us, as that it seems it can no way be kept in.

And because it is a hard matter, too repress the hot and exceeding boiling
affections of yongmen: David especially shows, that the word of God is the
best remedy to repress the same. As if he should have said, It is very true,
that young men are recheles and do err, yea like unto wild beasts which cast
no doubts, so hoate and furious, as that it is almost impossible to bring them
to any good pass, or yet to restrain them. For when we think to have surest
hold on them, then are they farthest off, but if they shall be advised and
counseled to be ordered and governed by God, no doubt of it they will be greatly
daunted. And although their passions and affections do greatly exceed, yet
shall a man see in them some modesty, and a quiet and courteous behavior. The
mischief then is, that young men will not be subject to God: for if they
would, they should find a good mean in his word, yea, and the same very
sufficient, to remedy all their vices. And it tends to this end, to declare
unto us what virtue is in the word of God, even to suppress the most
outrageous passions that may possibly be within us. And thus much for the first
point. The second reason is, that David his meaning is chiefly to: show unto
the younger sort that they had great need to be held short: for otherwise they
would exceed more and more in all mischief: for their nature is the rather
more and more inclined to evil, because it has little advice and small
wisdom. His mind therefore is to advertise them of this necessity, because
they should be more careful to bestow their study upon the word of God. And
to be brief, his meaning is to advertise the whole world in general, that we
ought betimes to enter into the school of God, if we will be taught according to
his will. We know what Solomon says in the book of Ecclesiastes, that we
must not tarry until we come to old worn years, Eccl. 12.2.
and then to remember God and think upon him. But that we should begin so
soon as God has given us wit and discretion, and to continue it unto the
end. Lo here, a doctrine which ought thoroughly to be marked of us, for we
see from whence the springhead of all the excess and wantonness, which do now
reign, and have in all ages reigned in the world comes, because that God is
not obeyed, for if that were so, we should have a bridle to keep us in awe and
in good order, so that we would suffer our selves to be ordered by the doctrine
which is contained in the holy scripture. If we the^ would humble our selves
and be subject to God as to our Master, all things should be as well directed
as we could possibly wish. But why do we not so? The world forsooth will not
obey God as becomes it, neither will it he brought to this reason. Behold then
the cause why we see all things so confused as they are. So it is that we are
altogether inexcusable, seeing that our God so offreth him self unto us, and
declares unto us that if we will follow his word, that all things shall go
well with us, that our way shall be pure and clean, and that our life shall be
true perfectnes it self. And when God gives such a testimony unto his law,
al mouths must be stopped, and we must be cast down hedlong, when as we know
that we thus rebelled against our God, who is always ready truedy to guide us.
And thus much for this. Moreover, if our affections be so contrary, that our
lusts and affections be like wild beasts, that we cannot repress the^: let
us know that our God will give power and strength to his word that we may be
joined with him, if so be that we will direct our selves to that mark. And to
prove it to be so, he here speaks especially of the corruptions of youth,
which (as I have already declared) are more excessive and disordered then they
are in the aged. But so it is that both great and small might very well be
brought to this pass, to suppress their inordinate affections and lusts, if
so be they would give that honor to God which unto him apperteineth, that is,
if they would follow his word.

Furthermore, we are here to note the exhortation which we have already
touched, to wit, that it is David his meaning to manifest unto us that we
ought betimes to be Gods scholars, and to suffer him to rule us, and to
continue and hold us in this study all the days of our life. Let us not then
tarry until we come to the graves brinke to become wise in this behalf, as
we see these scorners, which make them selves merry, and outrage in mocking of
God, saying, Well sir, we shall have leisure to repent time enough. For if we
may have but one hearty sighe, care away. Since then this is most sure that
it is Satan which eggeth the^ thus grievously to abuse the patience of God: let
us bew are that we be not so bewitched. But let us follow that which is here
set down, to weete, that we may be Gods scholars even from our youth. And
above all things let us consider, that young me^ have here a special lesson to
learn, as before has been touched. For David here declares unto them, Psalm.
73.22.
that they have a great deal more need to be restrained, the^ any of the
rest. It is very true that we are before God always, even as young children:
Yea, I say that the elder sort of greater experience, and such as appear grave
and wise to the world, are without all dout before the majesty of God very
fools and idiotes. We hear also what David confesses of him self in an
other place, where he says, that he was like a calfe, and a beast without
reason or wisdom. And if it went so with him, with him I say, that was so
excellent a Prophet, what shall become of us? I say then that the elder sort
ought greatly to profit in this school of Gods wisdom: and yet this is no
vain thing, whereunto David here especially exhorts the yongemen. And why
so? For as I have already said, this age is so without any consideration, as
nothing can be more, and is much subject to the temptations of Satan, and of
the flesh. And on the other side, over and besides that, there is neither
judgment nor wisdom in yongmen, in so much that they are so stirred up with
heat, as that their boiling affections break out: Yet in stead of having
some modesty, and to take in good part the admonitions which might be given
them, they will be the more lofty and stubborn, which might take better
occasion to be more grieved in being reprehended or rebuked.

And that this is true, we see at this day how all things are out of order.
This is sure, that the true virtue which should be in youth, is modesty: and
that the younger sort ought to know that since they are not furnished with
wisdom and discretion as the elder sort are, they ought to hear them, and
not to be given over to their own will and wit. This is the most principal
wisdom that ought to be in young men. But what? they are at this day past
all shame. By this we may see that the world is even as it were utterly
desperate, and that we are grown to the fullness of all mischief and
iniquity. For we shall see these beastly and graceless boys and wenches,
which scarsely are able too wype their own noses, as we say, yea and that
might yet be under the rod ten years, like peevish wretches as they are, that
when so ever they shall be spoken unto, will make no reckoning of whatsouer is
said, but poute and mow at it, counterfaiting the very Apes and Monkeyes, as
daily we may see. And when we see such extreme pride in this people, what
shall we say but that Satan has even possessed them? and that they will show
themselves as in deed they are, to weere, without all amendment? So then, this
point is so much the more to be well considered of, when as he says:
Wherwithall shall a young man address his way? by taking heed thereto
according to thy word. True it is, that a great many which have need here to
be told this geere, care not for filling of their ears with any such matter,
they have knowledge enough too keep them selves from the Church: For they have
the thing which they desire when they may be at the Tavern, playing and
Dancing. But what? It is certain that this doctrine will not leave them
uncondemned when as God cries unto them, as he witnesses by Solomon, Prou.
1.20.21* 22.23.
where he brings in Wisdom saying, I have cried out, and put forth my
voice in the streets, I have bidden both great and small, to the end that men
might hear me, and none has vouchsafed too receive me, ne yet to give me
lodging. When God declares unto us, that our life shall be well ordered if we
keep his word, surely as many as fly from this doctrine and admonition, shall
render an account at the last day, because God has called them. And also
because they have not only bin deaf, but also have added this mischief, to
fly from the admonitions, which Gods word admonished them off, to bring them
again into the way of salvation, from which they were strayed. It is
especially said, Tea, by taking heed thereto according to thy word. David his
meaning is here to express unto us, that we may make our selves believe, that
we have wisdom and discretion enough. But yet it shall profire us no whit at
all, without we will be governed and ruled by God, according to that which
has been before said. Now it follows:

With my whole heart have I sought thee: let me not wander from thy
Commandments. David here makes a notable confession, which is not common
to all men, That he bath sought God with his whole heart. For although we have
a desire to go to God, yet it is so feeble as is lamentable, seeing we are
with drawn with so many vanities, by reason the world has such dominion over
us, and yet ought not to retire our selves from any good devotion, when as we
have had a through feeling thereof. There are very few of us that are able to
say with the prophet David, that we have sought God with our whole heart: to
wit, with such integrity and pureness, that we have not turned away from that
mark, as from the most principal thing of our salvation. It is very true,
that David had not yet any such perfection, but that he slacked in the fight
against the prickings of the flesh, and went back.

Saint Paul also confesses that he went too God as it were halting, that he
did not that good which he would and desired, Romans 7.19.20.
but that he was encompassed with his natural vices, to do the evil which he
condemned. David was not without such temptations: but how soever it was, it is
most certain that the principal matter whereto he bent himself, was to serve
God. Now as I have before said, we are all far from this example. For as many
of us as at this day are best affected, may be let and hindered by a number
of vices, vain cares of this world, and with lusts and desires of the flesh,
that if we should remove our foot every day too go one pace forward, it were
much and yet it may come so to pass often times, that we would draw back
again to the place from whence we came. And yet notwithstanding, David, after
he had protested that he sought God with his whole heart, besought God that
he would not suffer him to decline from his Commandments. Hereby let us see
what great need we have to call upon God, too the end he may hold us with a
mighty strong hand. Yea, and although he has already mightily put too his
helping hand, and we also know that he has bestowed upon us great and
manifold graces: yet is not this all: But there are so many vices and
imperfections in our nature, and we so feeble and weak, as that we have very
great need daily to pray unto him, yea and that more and more, that he will
not suffer us to decline from his Commandments. For although David protested
that he sought God with all his heart, never thelesse, he adds, yet suffer
me not O Lord too go wrong from thy Commandments: What shall we do
then? Let us also learn to walk carefully: for since he is the God which
gives us that good mind to will, and that also gives us the power too
perform, and all of his mere favor and grace: we ought (says Saint Paul)
to walk in fear, and to keep good watch, too the end that Satan takes not
us unprovided, Phil. 2.12.
and that he enter not within us.

And lo what is the cause that we have seen some men which have made a
great show of holiness for a time, and have seemed too be more like Angels
then men, which at length have grown too outrage: and have so greatly exceeded
their bounds, as that GOD even forsook them, like desperate men. And whence
then proceeds this? Verily from their own securytie and negligence, because
they thought them selves to be very perfect, But Paul is c1eane contrary to
this, for thus he says, I have not attained as yet to that full perfection,
neuerthelese I have done what in melyeth. Phil. 3 12.
When he says, I have done what in me lies, he declares that there was that
humility in him, whereof he spoke in the place before by me already alleged:
and this humility imports, that we should call upon God as David did, as he
shows unto us here in this place.

It follows: I have hid my promise within my heart: that I might not sin
against thee.

When David speaks after this manner, I have hid thy word or promise in mine
heart, he wet declares, that if we have but only a wandering knowledge, that
the same will not hold us in, but that the Devil has by and by woone upon us
to oppress us, with temptations, and in the end to cast us down hedlong.
What must we then do? It is not enough that we have been at church, and
heard what has bin there said unto us, and that every of us has mumbled up
unto himself some one thing or another, but the word of God must be settled in
us and be hid in our heart, to wit, that it may there be resiaunt and
continually abiding: and to have received it with such an affection, as that it
be as it were imprinted in us. If this be not so, sin will reign in us, for
it has by nature his habitation with us: For all our senses are wicked and
corrupt, all our wills and desires are enemies unto God, unless Gods word be
well hidden in our hearts. Moreover, we are to understand, that David here
vaunted not him self of his own power and strength, as though he were in
admiration thereof: but the spirit of God speaking by his mouth, entendeth to
give us a glass, wherein we must be confirmed, to weete, that we must not have
only our ears beaten with the Doctrine of salvation, and receive it in our
brain: but that it should be hidden in our heart, to wit, that we should lay
it up as in a Treasure house. For this saying, to hide, imports that David
studied not to be ambitious to set forth him self, and to make a glorious
show before men: but that he had God for a witness of that secret desire which
was within him. He never looked to worldly creatures, but being content that
he had so great a Treasure, he knew full well that God who had given it him,
would so surely and safely guard it, as that it should not be laid open to
Satan to be taken away. Saint Paul also declares unto us, 1. Tim. 1.19.
that the chest wherein this treasure must be hid, is a good conscience. For it
is said, that many being void of this good conscience, have lost also their
faith, and have been robbed thereof. As if a man should forsake his goods and
put them in adventure, with out shutting of any door, it were an easy matter
for thieves to come in and to reaue and spoil him of all: Even so, if we
leave at randon too Satan the Treasure which GOD has given unto us in his
word, without it be hidden in this good conscience, and in the very bottom of
our heart as David here speaks, we shall be spoiled thereof. He adds
immediately after:

Blessed art thou O Lord: O teach me thy statutes. After he had fayd, I have
sought thee with mine whole heart: he adds, Blessed art thou O Lord: O
teach me thy Statutes. David shows in this verse, that the request which he
made here before, is not founded or grounded of any merit or desert which he
pretended to have. In very deed, at the first sight it might be said, that
David meant that God would not for sake him, because he had sought him, and
thereupon conclude that man must first begin to go on, too prevent Gods
grace, and then that God will afterward aid him. Ye see here what men may
imagine, but this is not David's meaning and purpose. And to prove it to be so,
it is most sure, he attributes it not to his own power and strength, that
he had sought God with his whole heart, for we must first be touched with the
spirit of God, when as we have any such affection. And why so? For by nature
we have all strayed from God, and all our force, power, and study, bend them
selves to estraunge us from him. And therefore we must come unto him in such
sort as is declared unto us in many places of the holy Scripture. David then
was prevented already by Gods grace, and he only requires of God to continue
the same in him which he has begun, for he knew right well that he had
great need thereof. As if he should have said, I know very well O Lord, that
thou have already mightily put too thy helping hand by thy holy spirit, when as
I sought thee: in very deed I had never done it, without I had been conducted
by thy holy hand, neither is this yet enough, except thou continue the same in
me: and when thou shall so do O Lord, all praise and glory shall be thine for
the same, because thou have done it of thy mere favor and grace.

By this then we may see, that David here means not to glorify himself as
being puffed up with his own virtues and merits: But because God deserves
to be blessed and exalted to the end that we should render unto him all honor
and glory. See now wherefore he assures himself that he will teach him, and
that he shall be more and more confirmed in that doctrine which he has already
learned. For when he says, Teach me thy Statutes O Lord: it was not because
that he was altogether rude and ignorant, that he could be now a Nouice,
which was a Prophet, had charge to instruct others, and was also a King. David
then spoke not as one that was unlearned: but he knew well enough that all
this was not sufficient, without he profited still more and more. Now if David
spoke after this manner, I beseech you what ought we to do? When soever then
that we would obtain this grace at Gods hands, to be instructed in his
statutes, let us bring this reason unto him, and ground our selves upon this,
to wit, that he be blessed and praised. And above all things, let us understand
the great need we have hereof: that is, that although we have already been
instructed in the holy Scripture, that we must be Scholars unto the end, and
too pray unto God daily to increase our faith: I mean such chiefly as are
appointed too preach the word. True it is, that it were a marvelous great
presumption for any man too come into the Pulpit, and to usurp the office of a
Preacher, except he were well studied in the holy Scripture. But so it is
that we go up in the Pulpit daily, with this condition too learn, when as
we teach others. And being thus, I do not only speak that I might be
heard: but for mine own part I must also be the Scholar of God, and that
the word which proceeds from my mouth might profit my self likewise,
otherwise cursed am I. Let us then note this by the way, that they which are
most perfect and ready in the Scriptures, are arrogaunt fools, except they
acknowledge that they had need too have God for their Schoolemaister all the
days of their life, and to be more and more confirmed, after the example of
David.

In very deed these things very well deserve to be spoken of more at large,
but that I respect one thing, that in handling of this Psalm by parcels, it
may be imprinted the better in our memory. For as I have said in the first
Sermon which I made on Sunday last past, that it is not without cause, that the
spirit of God would have this Psalm to be made according to the Letters of an
A.B.C. because every one should learn it as perfectly as their Pater Noster,
as we commonly say. Seeing then that our Lord God would that we should have
this Psalm perfectly, and for our own use, it is also good and necessary that
the handling of it be pure and simple, and so to follow the plainness of the
text, as that we might understand as it were word by word, whatsoever is
contained therein. It remains now, that every of us understand what has been
handled, without looking after any longer repetition. Nevertheless I will so
endeavor my self to be short, as that (God willing) the words which I shall
utter shall not be very dark, especially to those which be attentive.

It follows: With my lips have I declared all the Judgments of thy mouth.

David shows here the accord which ought to be betwixt God and us: to wit,
that god has instructed us, and when we have heard that which has bin said
unto us, that every one should say Amen, and that there be a sweet harmony
and accord betwixt him and us, without iar or contradiction. Lo here in
sum that which is meant in this verse. Now in the mean while we have to
note, that David declares that he contenteth not himself alone with following
of God and cleaving unto him: but that he labors and desires as much as in
him lies, to stir up his neighbors likewise, and to bring it so to pass,
as that God might be served with a common accord, throughout the whole
world. He then that will have a true zeal to honor God, will not think only
of himself, but will have an eye every where, and seek by all means possible
that he can, too redress those which are wickedly given, to stir up those
which are cold and negligent, to strengthen those which are weak and feeble,
to entertain those which are already in a good forwardness and to make them
more forward. Lo here whereunto all the faithful have an eye. For the Lord
our God teaches us upon this condition, that every of us think not only
particularly of himself, but that we should also have a mutual care one of
another, and whenever we shall have this zeal, let us understand, that God
has created the whole world upon this condition, that we all should be
obedient unto him. But we must well way the order that is here set down: For
David begins not with this sentence, That with his lips he has told of
all the Judgments of the Lords mouth. For he has said before, that he has
hid them in his heart. The thing which David said to be hid in his heart, he
soon after declares it with his mouth, wherein he shows that every of us
ought to begin with himself. When we mean too instruct and teach our
neighbors, we must not say unto them, Go you before: but, Come next after me,
or else hard by me: and having care all to go the right way, we should all
at-once labor to go together to our God, to be conjoined unto him in true
faith. And I speak it too this end, because we shall see many who in this
behalf can very well prattle and babble, and would seem to be the greatest
doctors in the world. But what of all this? Let us in the mean time look into
their lives and conversation, and we shall find in them nothing but infection
and stench, nothing else but mocking of God in all they go about and do.

We must therefore follow the order which David here holds: to wit, that
the word of God be hid as a Treasure in the bottom of our heart: and
afterward when as we shall have this affection, let us endeavor our selves to
draw others also thereto, and go altogether with one accord to honor our
Lord God: and that he which has been better taught then any of his
neighbors have been, let him confess that he is so much the more beholden
and bound unto God, to do that which is here showed unto us by David. For
although we are not all Prophets as he was, yet for all that, this was
spoken to us all in general, 1. Thessa. 5.14. Collo. 3.16. Heb. 3.13.
Admonish ye one another. Saint Paul speaks it too all the faithful and to
all Christians. And that we should also know that this belongs and
appertains too us: and chiefly as I have before said, that they which are
most forward, should lay forth the grace which was given unto them for the
common building up of the Church, and instruction of their neighbors. It
follows:

I have had as great delight in the way of thy testimonies, as in all manner of
riches. Here David declares that having wayned him self from his earthly
affections, wherwithall we are over greatly entangled, he wholly traueleth to
come to God. For it is impossible for us too taste the sweetness contained in
the word of God, to take pleasure in this doctrine of our salvation, and to
be altogether given thereunto, before such time as we have cut off from us,
all our wicked lusts and affections which reign too too much in our mortal
bodies. It is like as if a man would have land to bring forth Corn, which
were altogether full of thorns and weeds. Or what is he that would have a
Vine grow upon stones and rocks, wherein is no moisture? For what is the
state of the nature of man? Forsooth it is as barre^ land as possibly can be.
What are al our affections, but bushes, thorns, and weeds, which choke and
make all the good seed of God nothing worth? So then, it is not without cause
that David here matcheth riches with the word of God, and this avarice
wherewith we are led and inflamed, against the desire that he had too follow
God, and too walk after his word. As if he should have said, Alas Lord, it is
true that I am given to the vanities of this world as well as others are: But yet
have I chiefly desired thy word, and have even striuen with my self to subdue
all the evil affections of my flesh. Here we see what doctrine we have to gather
unto our selves out of this place: to wit, that if we will be the good scholars
of God, and take delight in the way of his testimonies, we must first subdue
the lusts of our flesh, and not learn to be given to worldly things, neither
yet to be nousled in that which we imagine to be the highest point of our
felicity: but that we might understand to conte^ne riches, and al other things
whatsoever, which might withdraw us from our God and our savior Jesus Christ,
Phil. 3.8.
to make no more account of it then of doung and dyrt, as S. Paul says. And
yet it is most sure that David contemns not the riches which he had. For
being a mighty rich king, as we know, yet he cast not his Gold and silver
into the botto^ of the sea, but used of the abundance and store which God had
given him yea we see what an excellent and beautiful house he had, as the holy
history tells us. But yet he followed the rule which the Scripture sets
down unto us: which is, that he so used the goods of this world, as though he
never had them. We must therefore pass through this world, 1. Cor. 7.31.
without staying our selves altogether in it, as S. Paul exhorts: that if God
give us abundance of riches, we might know how to use the^, with out having our
hearts imprisoned in them: and yet notwithstanding to be pore in spirit: to wit,
to be ready to forsake all whatsoever, as often as god would have us to be rid
of the^, and to have always one foot ready lifted up to go unto him,
whensoever it shall be his will and pleasure to take us out of this world. But it
is not without cause that David has spoken here of the abundaunce of riches.
For we see it makes men covetous, which is the springhead of all mischief,
as Saint Paul says. 1. Tim. 6.1^.
Forasmuch then as we are so much given to the goods of this world, and that
we hold our selves accursed if we have not wherwithall, and them to be
blessed which are well furnished with them: let us keep well the lesson which
is here taught us: to wit, that all our desire must be in the way of the
testimonies of God, as in all manner of riches: to wit, that all our delight
and contentation be wholly in them. Now in the end David goes on and says, I
will meditate in thy Commandments and consider thy ways.

My delight shall be in thy statutes: and I will not forget thy words. This is the
conclusion, to confirm the matter which we have already spoken off. For David
here speaks of no new matter, but protests as he has begun: That his
delight shall be always in the commandments of God, and in the doctrine
contained in the holy Scripture, and that he will bestow his whole study
therein, and so continue the same and never forget the desires which he has to
profit in the obedience of God. If David now has thus said, let us
understand that it is not enough for us to be well affected to serve God, and
that for the performing thereof that we have already sufficiently traueled:
but we must also be pricked forward, that we might always go on. For even
the very faithful, never run with so fervent and hot a desire, but that they
continually draw one leg after them, and never come unto God but in halting
wise. What is there then for us to do? Forsooth we must protest with David,
never to forget that which God has once declared unto us, and also never to
cease to prick our selves on, to the end there might be greater vehemency in
us to go unto him, with a more seruent desire and boulder courage. So that at
the last we may grow to this perfection, whereunto God calls and allureth
us: that is, that being uncased from out of our flesh and nature, he might
fully conioyne us unto his righteousness, that thereby his glory may shine in
us.

And according to this holy doctrine, let us prostrate our selves before the
face of our good god, acknowledging our innumerable sins, by which we
continually provoke his heavy wrath, and indignation against us. Beseeching him
that it would please him to make us to feel our sins and iniquities, more
then ever to fore we have done, to the end we might seek for such remedies as
he has ordained for us in exercising our selves about the reading of his holy
word, and the daily Preaching thereof which has granted unto us. And
furthermore not to forget to stir us up to call upon him, to the end that by
his holy spirit he might to put his helping hand even in our hearts, and not
too suffer the doctrine which we hear by the mouth of his Preachers, to become
unprofitable unto us, but that it may have the full power and strength: so that
we may from day to day be confirmed therein: and more and more learn to
forsake the world, and all whatsouer may withdraw us from the union and
conjunction of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, who is our head. And that
he will not only show unto us this favor and grace, but also unto all
people and nations of the earth, etc.

The third Sermon of the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm.
GIMEL.
Be beneficial unto thy Servant: that I may live and keep thy word,
Open mine eyes, that I may see the wondrous things of thy law.
I am a stranger upon Earth: hide not thy commandments from me.
My heart breaks out: for the desire unto thy judgments always.
Thou have destroyed the proud: cursed are they that do err from all thy
Commandments.
Remove from me shame and contempt: for I have kept thy Testimonies.
Princes also did sit and speak against me: but thy Servant did meditate in
thy statutes.
Also thy Testimonies are my delight and my counsaylers.
IT shall greatly have profited us, if so be we have learned what the end of
our life is. For, for that cause, has God placed, and brings us up in the
world: and yet few there are which think upon it. True it is, that every man
will say, that it is good reason we should do homage too GOD for our life and
being, because we hold all of him: and that we should glorify him with so
much of our goods as he has largely bestowed upon us. But what of all this?
When as we have confessed that, it is but to show our ingratitude and
unthankfulness: and yet no man makes any account hereof. Lo here,
wherefore the holy Ghost, seeing us so tied to the world, puts us in mind
too what end we live here. As here David makes this request to God too
obtain that benefit of his Majesty: That he mght live and keep his word:
As if he should have said, I desire not O Lord to live for my self alone in
this world* to receive here my pleasures and commodyties: but desire it too
an other more precious and excellent end than that: to wit, that I might serve
thee. Even so then, as often as we are desirous to live, we must remember us of
this request which David makes: That is, that we should not be like unto
brute beasts, living we know not to what end: but that we should always
aim at this make, to honor GOD. For without this we are more miserable then
all the rest of his creatures. Every creature will follow his own natural
inclination: and albeit that brute beasts have an hard and irksome life, yet
notwithstanding they are not in their kind so tormented and grieved as we are.
We know and feel by experience, that our evil desires and lusts, are like hot
burning furnaces, so that we need no body to persecute and vex us, for there
is none of us all, but can tell well enough how to grieve and vex our selves one
with ambition, another with covetousness, and some with fornication and
adultery. So the^ our life should be very accursed if we looked no farther. But
we must always aim at this mark, to serve God, and to keep his word. For
when as all our affection and love shall rest in it, then shall our life be
blessed. But contrariwise, when we are so brutish as to desire nothing else but
to live here a long time, and to have none other care but of our body, and
this temporal life: the longer we live here in the world, the more do we
heap upon us the malediction and curse of God. Let us then keep in mind
this prayer which David here makes: to wit, that he beseeches God to bestow
that benefit upon him, that he might keep his commandment all the days of
his life. As if he should have said. Alas my God, I see us to be so perverse
and froward, as that none of us all thinks to what end we live. And we are
so given to all sin and wickedness, that we do nothing else but more and
more provoke thy heavy wrath and indignation against us. Suffer me not O Lord
to be one of that company, but grant unto me thy grace, that my life may be
ruled and governed as it ought to be: that is, That I may employ my self
wholly to serve and honor thee. It follows by and by after.

Open mine eyes, that I may see the woondrous things of thy law. Here he
declares that it was not without cause, that he made this request unto God:
For if it were in our power to follow the word of God, and keep it, it were
mere hypocrysie and feyned holiness to make any such prayer. For we crave at
Gods hand that which we have not: and in our Prayers we must always confess
our poverty and want. Were it not a mockery think you, too crave of God the
thing which I have already? I shall beseech him to give it me, and I have it
already in my possession?

It is most true, that we must crave that at Gods hand which already we
have. And why so? Because we are certain that we cannot enjoy it, nor yet
use the same without his grace and favor: And that the use thereof shall never
profit us without he bless it, even as we desire of him our daily Bread. And
although the table be covered, and the meat set ready on the boorde, yet we
desire of God to make it nourishment for our bodies. Whereby, as I have before
said; it shall profit us no whit at all, without God bless it through his
grace and liberality. It is very so that we do crave it, by reason of our
continual confessing of our want and need.

So then, it cannot possibly be, that this was in David his own hand and
power, to keep the word of God. And he shows it to be so in this which
follows, O Lord open thou mine eyes. As if he should have said, Alas dear
father, it is so far off that I am able to keep thy word, as that I should
not be able to understand any whit thereof, if thou guidest me not thereto:
For it is thou which must both begin the same, and also perform it wholly in
me. This is the way and means for us to understand what to do: For many
there are which know the thing that is good, and yet for all that they
utterly refuse it. Now David declares, that he is not only void of all
power too keep the word of God: but also that he is without all
understanding, except it be given him by the holy Ghost. Let us note well who
it is that speaks Even David a most excellent Prophet. And yet for all that
we see that he declares (yea and that boldly) him self to be ignoraunte,
without GOD iustructeth him: Neither does he here speak of any worldely
iustruction, as we would imagine of the things which we knew nor of
before. David confesses, that all that, would serve him to no purpose at all,
without God, added thereunto a notabler or more excellent thing: to wit, that
he did enlighten him with his holy spirit.

Since then it is so that David, who was an excellent Prophet, did know,
that he could neither by reading nor preaching understand that which was
requisite unto salvation: what shall become of us, which are yet far from
that forwardness that was in him? And let us not think that through our own
labor and industry, and by our own sharpness of wit, to come so far as to
understand the secrets of God, but let us know that we had need to be
enlightened with the grace of his holy spirit, to open our eyes, for without it
we are poor blind souls. Now if this were well understood, we should never
see such a pride amongst us as is, that every of us is wise enough too govern
himself. It is an easy matter for us to make protestation that God has given
us his word: and yet for all that we shall still be blind, and know nothing,
until such time as he opens our hearts and minds. For when nothing else
shall govern us but our own sense and natural reason, what beasts and Calves
shall we then be? See then how we shall be better instructed in humility,
when as the doctrine shall be imprinted in our hearts. True it is, that this was
not spoken in vain, but to the end, that we should be admonished after the
example of David, too present our selves before God: and in confessing our
selves that we are not capable to understand any thing, without that he put to
his helping hand, let us beseech him too open our eyes by his holy spirit. And
because it should not seem strange, that David desired to have his eyes open,
he declares, that the wisdom contained in the law of God, is too high for our
capacities, yea although we think our selves to have never so sharp and fine
wits. And therefore he says, O Lord open mine eyes: that I may see the
woonderous things of thy Law. Wherefore uses he this word woonderous. It
is, as if he would have save said: Although the world takes the law of God
to be but a light thing, and seems to be given but as it were for simple
souls, and young children: Yet for all that there seems such a wisdom to be
in it, as that it surmounteth all the wisdom of the world, and that therein
lie hid wonderful secrets.

As Much is said of the Gospel, and that not without great cause. And in very
deed, that which at this day is most plainly declared in the Gospel, was
before contained in the law: only these were darker shadows, then they are,
which were since the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. And yet notwithstanding,
there is no chaung or alteration in this wisdom, as God also is not mutable.
Ephesians. 3.10. 1. Pet. 1.12.
It is not then without cause that all the holy scripture is called wisdom,
and that the Angels of heaven themselves do wonder thereat. If then the Angels
be astoyned at the secrets contained in the holy scripture, I beseech you tell
me, what reverence deserves it to have among us mortal men? For we are but
poor worms upon earth, creeping here below. If there be comparison made
betwixt us and the Angels, what shall it be? See how the Angels are
wonderfully ravished to see the wisdom of the word of God, and yet we make no
account of it, but esteem of it as a base and childish thing. The more
therefore ought we thoroughly to mark this saying of David, that the doctrine
of the law is not as we take it to be: to wit, a thing of small valor, or a
common and ordinary doctrine, but a wonderful wisdom, wherein are such
secrets as ought to ravish us with admiration, because they far surpass our
wit and reason. But what is the cause that we so lightly esteem of the law of
God? that is to say, his whole word? Herein the common proverb is verified
when we say, A fool regards nothing. Which proverb we declare to be
rightly verified in us: For many of us make no estimation of the holy
scripture, and it seems to us, that, that which we read there, is too to
common: and this is the reason, because we know not what it is, ^^e yet the
great and abundant treasure hid therein. But such as have once known what
the Majesty of God is, which he shows and declares him self to be there,
and do see whether it is, that God calls and allureth them, and do also
understand and know the large and sweet promises offered unto them therein,
such I say, will say with David, O Lord, thy law is wonderful. And so
consequently will desire that their eyes might be lightened, confessing them
selves to be blind, until such time as God has aided them with his holy
spirit. Now it follows,

I am a stranger upon earth: hyde not thy commandementes from me. When David
did put to this verse, he meant to confirm the matter which before he touched,
that is to say, that he desired not simply to live, as if his life had been
dear and precious unto him, without any other respect: but he had a further
meaning. For he says by a by after, I am a stranger in the world: therefore
hyde not thy commandments from me: They which make their continual nest here
according to their own fancy, and think to make their heaven in this world,
these men I say, have nothing to do with the commandementes of God for their
salvation. For they are safe enough if they may eat and drink to be glutted,
that they may take their pleasures and delights, that they may be honored,
that they may be in estimation and credit. lo here is all that they desire or
wysh to have. Yea forsooth: For they look no further, but to this corruptible
and transitory life. These men I say are not greatly troubled, ne yet have
any care of the commandments of God, but when as they shall be taken from
them, all shall be one to them. When as the covetous man, the whoremonger, the
dronkarde, the ambitious person, shall hear no preaching of the word at all:
neither any talk of God, ne yet of Christianity, nor of life everlasting. He
in the mean time cease not to pursue his own way. Yea, and it is to them a
loathsome and unpleasant kind of speech to hear God spoken of, but had rather
have no mention in the whole world made of him. And therefore it is not
without cause why David requires, not to have the commandments of God taken
from him, and this is his reason: to wit, because he is a stranger on the
earth. As if he should have said, O Lord, if I had none other consideration but
of this present life, I should be even accursed, and it had been better my
mother had been delivered of me as of a dead body, and that I had been an
hundred times plunged in hell. And why so? For we are here in this world but as
pilgrims and wayfaring men: and we pass to a more excellent life: as to that
also wherein we repose our whole trust. Seeing then, O Lord, that I am a
stranger in the world, let not thy commandementes be taken away from me. Now
in this part is contained a very profitable doctrine, and exhortation for us,
for we know how cold we are, where in deed we ought to have an ardent desire
to be taught the word of God, and to be more and more confirmed therein. And I
beseech you how careless are we? But what is the cause hereof? No doubt of
it, we must always even search and look into the depth and bottom of this
corruption and mischief: for when we see any vice in our selves, we ought to
enquire from whence the cause proceeds, to the end we might find remedy for
the same. Now the reason is, because we are blind, and do suppose our abode
should be here still upon earth, and every man imagines him self to have
here everlasting life. Wherefore when we are thus given to the world, and
think our selves to have here an everlasting enheritance, lo this is the
cause of our thus conte^ning of God and his word, or rather that we care no
whit at all for the seeking out of the doctrine of our salvation. What must we
then do? Forsooth we must look a great deal further then to the world, if we
will come unto God, and be exercised in this study whereof mention is here made,
and to say with David, O Lord, because we are strangers in this world, to wit,
that we are to pass here only, and that nothing can be shorter then our life
is here, let not thy commandments be taken away from us. On the other side,
David his meaning here, is to signify unto us, that he was but as a poor
pilgrim and wandering man, without he were conducted and guided by the word of
God.

And this is a very fit similitude for the purpose. We know that a man in a
straung country, will think him self to be a straung and forlorn man, so
that if he has not a conduct and guide, he knows not what shall become of
him. Eue^ so fares it with us, if we be not directed and conducted by the hand
and power of God. And why so? Because we are as strangers here in this world.
It is very true, that we are but too too much tied unto our affections and
will, and yet out alas, our sense and wits are so confounded, that we know
not what way to take or hold, except we be showed it. Lo here the meaning of
the similitude which David here uses, in saying that he is a stranger in the
world: which is, that he complains that he is a strange and forlorn man, and
therefore beseeches God to guide him by his word. Now it follows.

My heart breaks out, for the desire, unto thy judgments always. When he
says, that his soul breaks out, it is too protest, that he desired not
that thing of God which we have heard, either for fashions sake, or
countenance, as many do, which beseech God very often too inlighten,
confirm, and guide them, in the truth of his word: but in the mean time,
they never seek after it as they should do. Now, this is but after a sort,
and God will not be thus mocked. For in thus doing, we do nothing else but
profane his holy name, when as we make such requests, as proceed not from a
true affection and desire. Lo here, wherefore David says, that his soul
brake out: For this word emporteth as much as if his soul had utterly
fainted. My soul then faints for the desire which it had to thy
commandments. Wherefore here are three things to be considered off.

The one is, that if we will obtain at Gods hands to be conducted by him, and
to have his word to be our way and direction, we should not make such an
hypocritical nor cold prayer unto him, with mocking of him thereby: But with
such a true desire as carries us even out of our selves, and to make no such
account of this present life, but to be well advised, to shoot at an higher
matter. And thus much as touching the first point, which here we have to note.

The second is, that this desire, ought not to be only as a wavering desire,
but an ardent and an hot desire. For he says, That his soul has fainted.
And why so? Let us here a little consider, what our appetites and lusts are,
when we turn our selves away from God, and give our selves wholly to worldly
things. They are so excessive and inordinate, that it is even pitiful, being
without end and measure. But if we have a lean desire, and such a one as I
know not what, to walk according to the will of God: this desire would be as
soon alayed, as a drop of wine put into an hundredth times so much water. I
beseech you what shall that be? shall it taste any more as wine? Even so
forcible should the good affection of a faithful man be. If this affection be
not fervent, and very vehement, it shall be soon choked by the corruptions of
our carnal passions and affections which (as I have before said) have neither
measure, modesty, nor temperance. See then for the second point what we have
here to note in this behalf, to wit, that it is not enough that we have a mean
desire to serve God, for that would be very soon quenched in us, and be made
nothing worth. But we must be so attentive thereto, as that we may able to say
that our soul faints, and languisheth, that our power and strength droppeth
and melts away as it were until such time as God relieueth us, in granting
that unto us which we require of him.

The third point which we have here to note, is, the firmenes and constancy in
this our desire. And see here why David is not contented with this saying, that
his soul is broken out: but he says, Always, As if he should have said,
this was not a blaste of wind, but a rooted affection in his heart, and that
he perseuered therein. Now these three things are most necessary: For we see
in the first place that we are as it were by nature inclined to vanity,
because that being so addicted unto the world, we think no whit at all of
heaven. We ought therefore to be so much the more very attentive to this
doctrine, and to have a burning desire to follow the word of God: and besides
this our affection ought to be so vehement, as that it might be able to have
the dominion over all our affections, which hinder us to cleave unto our God,
and eue^ to be marueilously ravished therewith. Now it had need to be mightily
strengthened with the power of the spirit of God: For our lusts being too
too mad and furious, if God stretched not forth his arm unto it, what should
become thereof? And put the case that we had a good desire, surely it would
very soon vanish away in us. We must be wonderful fervent therein, and
afterward, when we hall have such a good and steadfast affection, we must be
wonderfully in love with the word of God, not for a day, nor yet for a short
time, but even so long as we live. It follows soon after.

Thou have destroyed the proud: cursed are they, that do err from all thy
commandments. David adds hereto an other reason, whereby he is more
enflamed to pray unto God, and to address him self unto him, to be taught in
his word: to wit, when he sees that he has so rebuked the proud: For the
chastisements and punishementes which God lays upon the faithles and
rebellious, should be a good instruction for us: As it is said: That God has
executed judgment, and that the inhabitants of the land should learn his
righteousness. It is not without cause that the Prophet Esaias also has so said:
for he signifies unto us, that God has by diverse and sundry means drawn us
unto him, and that chiefly when he teaches us to fear his majesty. For
without it, out alas, we shall become like unto brute beasts, if God lay the
bridle in our necks, what license we will give unto our selves, experience
very well teaches us. Now God seeing that we are so easily brought to run at
randon, sends us examples, because he would bring us to walk in fear and
carefully.

And for our part, when we see God to chastise the wicked and disobedient, we
should by them take example and instruction. Lo here (in sum) what David
says. Thou O Lord, have chastised the disobedient: as if he should have
said, True it is, O Lord, that I have desired, even with a vehement affection,
and true constancy, to cleave unto thee, and to thy holy co^mandementes: But
yet had I need to be more thoroughly instructed, that I might beware of the
punishementes which I have seen with mine eyes. When I have seen that thou
chastisedst the proud, I have been by and by humbled thereby: so much
discipline have I received by it, see then now why I do beseech thee, that I
might be more carefully and diligently instructed in thy law. If now it was
behooueful for David (who was already so well instructed in the law) to be thus
aided for the drawing of him self to God, to wit, that he sees the
unbelievers punished, and God to lay his hand upon them: I beseech you tell
me, had not we need of such instruction, and also of a great deal more? And
so, as oftentimes as we shall plainly see, God to send his chastisements into
the world, to punish sin, we ought greatly to consider thereof, and to
understand that it comes not by adventure or chance (as we commonly say.

And when GOD so strikes the proud and disobedient, let us consider that he
means not to punish their persons, and bodies only, but to teach us, to
have a greater regard to our selves: that we might be humbled, to the end
the like fall not upon us. For God does us great pleasure, when he punishes
others, thereby to teach us to take heed: as also it is great wisdom for a
man to beware by the harm of an other according to the old prouer be. And so
also means God. Let us then consider of the favor and grace which he shows
unto us, when as he sets forth his judgments before us, it is to
advertise us of our faults, to the end we should the better walk in his
fear, to obey him: yea, and that he punishes others for our amendment, as I
have already said. And especially he adds, Cursed are they that err from thy
commandments, or that go wrong.

By this he farther declares and expresses that which we have already
showed, to wit, how he has been taught to walk according to the will of
God, by the punishments which lighted upon the proud and disobedient. And here
he makes this general conclusion, That all they which err from the
commaundemen of God are accursed. Whereupon we are to gather first of all, that
the particular judgments of God ought not to serve us for one deed alone:
but that we should apply it for a general instruction all the days of our
life. As how? When as we see God punish one person, O, we must not stay our
selves upon such an act, to say, that God punishes but one person which
deserves it: but we must conclude and say (according to that saying of S.
Paul) There is no respect of persons with God. Romans 2. 11.
Now when he has punished such a fault, we must then say, that this fault
displeases him in as many as do commit it. As in an other place he shows,
Since that God so grievously punished the children of Israel for Idolatry,
we must conclude that he utterly abhors Idolatry. As greatly also abhors
he Lechery, murmuring, and disobedient persons, and horrible and wicked
covetousness. And all this (says S. Paul) should serve us for an Image or
pattern, 1. Cor. 7. ver. 7.8.9.10.
to the end, that when we see the like come to pass, we should remember us of
that which is contained within the holy scripture, and apply it wholly to our
own use and profit. And thus much as touching the first point, which we have
here to note: to wit, that if God punishes a man, we must gather out of it a
general instruction, and conclude, that all they which go wrong from the
commaudementes of God are accursed.

Now we have to touch the second point, which is also notable: that is, we must
not tarry until such time as God scourges us, but being advertised by that
which he has showed us a far of, we might prevent the punishments and
corrections. which might light upon us in the end.

And this is it which we must gather unto our selves in general, of that
which has been spoken. That all they which err from the commandments of
God, are accursed.

Moreover, let us also in the third place learn, that all the happiness which
we imagine, when we are far from God, is nothing but accursed, and that in
the end the sentence of our Lord Jesus must be accomplished, Luke 6. ^ 25.
Cursed are ye which laughe, for ye shall weep, and your laughter shall be
turned into gnasshing of teeth. Let us then understand, that whiles the poor
world makes it self merry, and that it seems to be come even to the full
aboundane of the wis^hes and desires, and that it has obtained the chief
felicity, that it is even then under the greatest and chiefest curse. And why
so? For all they which stray from God, are accursed, because that he is the
fountain of all goodness, and without him there is nothing but all misery.
True it is, that for a time he suffers the infidels and unbelievers to make
them selves merry, that we might think them to be the happiest people in the
world, but what of that? It will all return to their greater confusion. It
follows soon after,

Remove from me shame and contempt: for I have kept thy testimonies. Here
David commenceth a new suice unto God, to wit, that he would hold him in his
innocence and purity. And it is not without cause that he so does, for we
see that they which serve God with their whole heart, are contemned, and
despised, yea, they are most shamefully slaundered. For we see even at this
day, that he which walks simply, he shall by and by be called an hypocrite.
All they which would serve God, are thus cried out upon, O these hypocrites! O
these mortified! See here how the purity and simplicity of the faith full is
despised and naught set by. For the devil possesses the contemners of God in
such sort, as that they vomit out their blasphemies, not only against those
whom they purpose to oppose them selves, but even against God him self.

But this mischief and corruption is not of a days hatching: and therefore
we are thoroughly to consider the saying which David here sets down:

O turn from me rebuke, to wit, suffer me not O Lord, to be lightly esteemed
of men, because I have kept thy testimonies. We see then that the sum of
this verse is this: That David desires GOD to uphold and maintain his
purity. Now the cause is incontinently added,

For princes also did sit, under the shadow of Justice, and speak against me.

Now this was a great temptation to David, that he was not only mocked and
scorned at the Tauernes and Innes, being there blasoned by dissolute Iesters
and Scoffers, and talked of in the streets and market places, but even in the
place of Justice (which ought to be holy) it could not therefore be chosen
but that they also would utterly defame and slander him, and condemn him to
be as it were a most wicked and cursed man. When David then did see, that he
was thus unjustly entreated and handled, he makes his complaint unto God: and
says, O Lord the Princes and Governors them selves do sit and speak evil
against me: And yet for all that I have kept thy Testimonies. Herein sum we
are to gather out of this place, that if it so fall out, when as we have
walked uprightly and in a good conscience, to be falsely slaundered, to be
accused of this and that, whereof we never once thought: yet ought we to bear
all things patiently, for let us be sure of that, that we are not better then
David, although we would make never so great protestation of our integrity and
purity.

David walked both before God and men so faithfully as none of us all is able
to do, and yet we see that he was subject to these slanderous reports. Let
us then be patient, when the like shall happen to us. But let us also follow
his example in that he says, that is, that we should not be discouraged:
seeing our selves to be so evil and unjustly recompensed at men's hands, that
we forbear not for all that to exercise our selves in the commandments of
God. And how should we come by that patience? we must come to that which he
there speaks off, to wit, that we take all our whole delight and pleasure in
the commandments of God. It is the thing which he often beats upon before
by me touched, and therefore it shall not be needful to stay upon it any
longer.

Let us only understand this, when David says, that all his pleasure was in
the commandments of GOD, that we (after his example) must do the like. He
added,

They are my Councellers. Lo here a sentence worthy to be wayed of us, when
David calls the commandments of God his counsaylers: for in the first place
he means, that he might scorn at all the wisdom of the most able and most
expert men in the world, how goodly and gay shows soever their counsels
seem to be to those, which so exceedingly commend them, and are also commended
of all in that he was conducted by the word of God, and governed thereby. Lo
what he means here by the first point.

The second is, That when he shall be so governed by the word of God, he might
not only say that he was truly wise, but that it was so much, as if he had
all the wisdom of all the men in the world, yea and a great deal more, put
even in one man. When any one man mistrusteth his own wit, he will ask
council, and arm him self the better, and when he shall have used such
counsel, as every one shall soundly give him, he will hold him self a great
deal the better resolved.

David then declares unto us, that if we will not be without good counsel
and advise, we must follow the statutes and ordinances of God. But what? few
men at this day are able in truth thus to say. Every man will say the best
for him self he can, and yet it shall be all but a mere mockery. How many of
us are there which will be contented to be governed as he was, by this
counsel? We shall hardly find one among an hundredth. How do we justly
promise our selves rightly to know that GOD has spoken unto us?

And let it be that we are in the right way, what assurance have we of it? It
cannot be chosen but that the least let in the world will trouble us: Our
spirit always greatly desires to be contrary to God, we have greater regard
to the vain opinions and fantasies of men, then to the heavenly doctrine, so
that we lend out ears to whatsoever men babble, and are so carried with every
wind, that we know not what it is to hold our selves to the counsel; of God.

And so let us be advised to make out profit of this sentence, beseching the
Lord to grant us that his grace, that we may be governed by him, and that with
such humility and reverence, as that whatsoever is set before us in this
world, we may always go on our ways, in true and invincible constancy. And
according to this holy doctrine, let us prostrate out selves before the face of
our good God, in acknowledging our faults: beseching him that it would please
him to govern us in such sort, as that we look not down here on the earth,
ne yet stoop down to the corruptible things of this world, but that we might
continually aspire unto this heavenly life, where unto he daily calls us by
his word: And for performance thereof to suffer us to be truly united to our
Lord Jesus Christ, yea, and that with an inseparable bond, as we may always
follow the way which he has showed unto us, until such time as we be come
to that immortal glory, whereunto he has gone before us, to gather us all up
unto him, and to make us partakers of that blessedness, which he has gotten
and purchased by his death and passion, and where of he will make us
enheritours with him in the kingdom of heaven. That he will not only grant
us this grace and favor, but also unto all people and nations of the earth,
etc.

The fourth Sermon of the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm.
DALETH.
My soul cleaves unto the dust: quicken me according to thy word.
I have declared my ways, and thou heardest me: teach me thy statutes.
Make me to understand the way of thy commandments: and I will meditate of thy
wondrous works.
My soul melts with very heaviness: raise me up according unto thy word.
Take from me the way of lying: and grant me graciously thy law.
I have chosen the way of truth: and thy judgments have I laid before me.
I have sticken unto thy testimonies: O Lord confound me not.
I will run the way of thy commandments: when thou shall enlarge mine heart.
David shows unto us in these eight verses what the joy and contentation of
the children of God ought to be. And this is a doctrine for us, most
profitable. For there is not that man which longs not too have the thing that
may content and delight him: but there is none of us which holds the true
mean. So much the more therefore ought we rightly to record the lesson here
contained: to wit, that all our reioyring is accursed, and will come to an
evil end if we look not to God and to his word. Lo wherefore here he
says,

My soul cleaves unto the dust: quicken me according to thy word. David
confesses here that he was driven to an extremity. For behold what he
means by this saying, That his soul (or life) cleaves unto the dust: As if
he should have said, O Lord, there is nothing that I more looked for then my
grave, I am like to a poor castaway and forlorn creature. Now whether or to
whom should he have recourse? Even unto God, he desires to be restored. And
how may that be? according to the promise which he has received. We see then
whether, and to whom we must have recourse in all our necessities, And thus
much for the first point. The Second is, when that we shall have had our
refuge to God, we might find in him wherewith fully to rejoice us. Thus much
then for the second. The third is, That if we will obtain tobe restored at
Gods hands, we being as it were dead and confounded, should look unto his
promises: For behold he will give us encouragement to come unto him. We have
here then a good admonition and very profitable: that is, That as often as we
shall be overwhelmed with all the misery that can be, we should yet look unto
God, because that then he will seek after us more then ever he did before,
willing us to come unto him. But here we are to note, that there is not any so
great a misery which ought to let and stay us from coming straight on unto
him: For David confesses that he was become as a dead man. When then we
shall be even as it were at the last cast, as we say, that we can no more, that
we should be as a man would say, oppressed and overcome with sorrow and
grief, yea and that the grave even gapeth to swallowe us up, let us not for
all that cease to beseech God to restore us. For it belongs properly unto
him, when he has appealed and brought us to deaths door, to restore and
quicken us again.

But we are to understand that we must not come unto him after an hypocritical
manner: we must not require him too restore us, and yet have our minds
wandering here and there, neither yet must we seek for that thing in the
world, which we make countenance to seek for at his hands: We must not make
us two ways to the wood as we say, but our whole delight and contentation
must be in God and in his grace, that it suffiseth us to have him only, and to
feel his mercy and compassion toward us: and when we have gotten that, to
be contented only therewith. But because we can not come unto God, without he
him self draws us, when as we desire him to restore us, and to stretche out
his hand unto us, we must add thereto this saying here expressed, to wit,
that he will quicken us according to his word. Now by this, as I have already
said, we are taught that in the midst of death we find salvation and
health, because the promises of God never fail us. It follows in the second
verse,

I have declared my ways, and thou heardest me: teach me thy statutes. Here
David alleges another reason that GOD hears him, to wit, that this is not
the first time that he had heard him, neither yet that God is merciful and
liberal, to grant unto his faithful, their petitions and requests. But we
in very deed must, in continuing the matter which we are here in hand to
open, be thoroughly assured and resolved, that it is not in vain, when as we
make our prayers unto God, neither yet that we lose our labors, but that our
prayers shall profit us. We must therefore be fully resolved herein. And how
must that be? Forsooth, David even very now alleged unto God, his promises
assuring him self that he received them through his mere mercy and goodness.

And this is no foolehardinesse. Even so then, let us in no case fear to come
unto God boldly and cherefully upon this condition, yea so long as we build
upon his promises. We must not come unto him according to our own fantasies:
neither must we allege and say, my God, I present my self here before thy
majesty, because I think or suppose that thou ought to hear me: this were
too too fond and lewd arrogancy: but to say, Alas my good God, it is very
true that I am not worthy to come near unto thy presence: and although it
shall seem to me that I might approach to thee, yet must I pull back that
foot again: Nevertheless, since thou biddest me to come unto thee, and have
commanded me to call upon thee, and promised also for to hear me: Lo here
my God the cause which makes me so bold, not to doubt to come unto thee,
because I believe thy word. And now O Lord, I stand in no doubt that thou will not receive me, when as I thus build upon thy promise.

After David has used this kind of speech, to stir him self up to pray
unto God, and also to obtain his request, he adds, O Lord, I have
acknowledged my ways, and thou heardest me. As if he should have said, Over
and besides thy promise, my God, there is another reason which enboldeneth and
encourages me to come unto thee: to wit, the experience which thou have showed
unto me of thy great goodness. I never required any thing of thee in
mynecessitie, but thou did hear me: to wit, but that thou satiffiedst my
request, but that I have felt how thou have relieved thy servants, and have
always been ready to succoure them in their distress: Yea, O Lord, and that
thou have not tarried nor waited until they came unto thee, but have even
offered thy self first unto them.

Seeing then it is so that thou have showed thy self to be so good and
liberal, O, I now doubt not but that thou will continue the same thy
goodness: Wherefore I beseech thee teach me thy statutes. See here a text
worthy the marking: For, as I have before said, we must not come unto God
doubting and wavering: but with full resolution, that he will hear us.

And how is that? O, we have a most sure and infallible testimony: too wit,
he has promised too be near unto al those which shall crave and beg of him
in truth: we may then say, we beseech thee, O Lord, to have regard unto us
according too thy word. It is very true, that we are unworthy that thou
should be careful over us: But so it is, that having thy word and
promise, we may boldly come unto thee: and besides, let us add there too the
experience which God has already showed unto us: that he never forgets
his, but preserves and keepesh them, and always watches over them. And why
so? That we ought to be much more heedful then we are of all the benefits of
God, too the end we might come too this consideration of the reason which
David here brings in: too wit, that we might say unto God, that he has
heard us. Now there are very few of us that can do this. And why so?
Because that when we are in any distress, we never think to call upon God,
yea although the grief or disease press and grieve us never so much. And yet
if we do then call upon him, it is so, that as soon as we have escaped the
danger, we will not acknowledge it too be God that has had pytie and
compassion upon us, but is quyte out of memory and trodden clean under foot.
By cause then we remember not the benefits of God, Lo what is the cause why
we cannot say, when we come afresh to pray, O Lord, thou have heard me. For
(as I have before said) our unthankfulness hinders us that we cannot have
any such experience and practice too pray unto God incessauntly. And see also
what is the cause of our so cold and faint prayers: for if we were ready too
call to mind the graces of God: O, we should be sure and certain to be
always fenced, when as we meant to present our selves before him, to say, Alas
my God, this is no novelty unto me: neither ought I, Lord, to think it
strange too present my self before thee, for thou have granted me free
access and liberty: this is not the first time that thou have done me good,
no, I have felt thy favor by experience even from my youth: and when as I
shall speak e of the number of times which thou have heard me, I shall find
them infinite: I may very well then repose and put all my trust in thee, hoping
that thou will continue thy goodness toward me, as thou art always ready so
to do. Now because we are so unthankful unto God, as not to acknowledge his
benefits as becomes us, and as to him apperteyneth: Lo here, why we cannot
benefit our selves by this confession in truth, to confirm our hope to come
unto him, as should be good for us.

Moreover, we are to note, that we must not deal with God, as with mortal
men. For if any man has done us a pleasure, we may truly say, as we commonly
do: I shall be the more beholding unto you, because you have already bound me
thereto, this shall come in amongst the rest: But yet if we shall have
borrowed much of any man, we shall be a shamed that we have troubled him so
often. But the case stands not so betwixt God and us. And why so? For God is
never weary of well doing as men are, and besides he never diminishes his
substance when he does us any good. If any man bestows his goods
liberally upon us, he has so much the less: if he give his word for us:
he will say, this is all that I can do for you. But God so abounds in
riches, that it is like too a Spring which can never be drawn dry: and the
more that is drawn out of it, the greater abundance is to be seen.

So then, we must not be affrayde too come unto God, when as he shall have
bestowed upon us store of wealth, and that we shall be so much bound unto him,
as is possible to be thought, but the same ought to make us the boulder, as
David here declares unto us. And of this are many like sayings in the
Scripture. O Lord (says Jacob) I was never worthy of the benefits which
thou haste bestowed vson me: Genesis 32 10.
but yet thou haste so bountifully dealte with thy servant, as that I must
needs call upon thy name continually. See then, how GOD moves us to come
familyarly unto him, by reason that he shows him self so liberal, and has
his hands wide open*to the end he might give us whatsoever we stand in need
off. And when as be shall have continued thus all the days of our life, we
ought the boldelyer to call upon him as David him self shows us here by
example. And now let us mark his saying:

I have declared my ways, and thou heardst me: teach me thy statutes. David
here protests that God has given ear unto his particular matters, to wit,
when as he was perplexed and full of forowe, he then called upon God. Lo what
this word, Way, in the Hebrew means, where it is said, I have acknowledged
my ways, and thou answearedst me: to wit, heardst me. Heerevpon he desires
that God would teach him his Statutes: to wit, that he would show him
the right rule to live well. Here we are to note, that God yeldeth his consent
even unto us, and that he will assist us in all our several needs. We see
that our Lord Jesus has taught us too ask our daily bread, which imports
all that concerns this transitory life. Even so when we have any thing to do
or too treat off, God grants unto us this privilege and license too come
vrito him: yea if we should step on but one pace, or but remove our hand,
we may come unto God, beseeching him to direct and conduct us.

Let us then mark this inestimable goodness which God uses toward us, when
he sees well that we have showed unto him all our ways: to wit, all our
desires and smallest matters. If a man had his brother or dear companion, he
durst hardly show him self so familyarly, for fear he would be importune
upon him, as God gives us leave too come unto him. What bounty is this? Now
when we see that God makes himself so familyar in our small affayrs so much
the snore ought we to beseech him, after the example of David, that he would
conduct us according to his law: to wit, that he will grant us his grace
to live in such sort, as that we may follow the rule which he has set
down here unto us. See then, how that by the less, we must come too the
greater, as by particularityes we must come to generalities. From the less
too the greater, say I, is this, That if God gives unto us our daily bread,
let us also crave of him health for our souls. If God will so humble him
self, as to advise us: when we have any thing to do amongst men, about the
earthly affairs of this transitory life, let us also beseech him to do us
this good, as to conduct: us likewise according to his law. Lo here how we
may come from the lesser to the greater. We may also descend from
particularities to generalities, when as we shall say, O Lord, thou have
heard me in such a thing, which is a special matter: now by a more forcible
reason, I may call upon thee for a thing which may serve me all the days of
my life, which is, that when thou have set me into the way of salvation, thou
would keep me therein, and that thou never forsake me, until such time as
thou have brought me unto that end and perfection, whereunto thou have called
me.

It follows, Make me to understand the way of thy commandments: and I will
meditate of thy woondrous works.

Mark here the third reason which David alleges to obtain of God, that he
might be taught in his law. O Lord (says he) make me to understand the way
of thy commandments, and so shall I talk of thy woondrous works. As if
he should have said, O Lord, if it be thy good pleasure instruct me according
to thy will, and it shall not serve for my self only: but also for my
neighbors: for I will endeavor my self to bring also others unto thee. And
thus we ought to use the graces and gifts of God: to wit, that they be not as
it were buried in us, but that we may also profit our neighbors: and to
communicate them unto such, as they may do good unto, to the end that God may
be honored, and that they all may serve to the common salvation of the
members, of our Lord Jesus Christ.

But here we have in this Text too note, that it is impossible for us to
instruct others, except we have been before the disciples and Scholars of God.
There area great many which will put forth them selves, as if they were
sufficient and able Clearkes inoughe too teach others: And in so thrusting in
them selves, they have not once known what they ought to understand, either
for themselves or yet for any others. Let us then consider the order which is
here observed: to wit, that every of us do acknowledge our own ignorance.
David was a most excellent Prophet, and yet notwithstanding he besought God
that he would make him too understand the way of his commandments. Yea,
but had not he the Law written? Wherefore then desired he that which he had
already in his hands? For he knew well enough that to read, to preach, and to
hear, was not all that was needful: For unless God open our ears, we shall
never be able to understand it. And therefore it behooves that he inlighten us,
or else we shall never be able to see the brightness thereof, albeit it lie
wide open before our eyes. If David made this request (as we have already
heretofore entreated) I beseech you what shall we do then? Let us then even
so confess our ignorance, and beseech God that it would please him to teach
us. See now that we must needs be first scholars: before we usurp the office
of a Master: and before we thrust our selves in, too speak unto others, that
we hear God first speak unto us, and that we be grounded in his word, that
we may protest as Saint Peeter tells us, 1. Pet. 4.11.
that it is the word of GOD which comes out of our mouths. Who soeure
speaks, (says he) let him speak the word of God. For it is rid reason
that a mortal man should extol him self, and prefer his own dreams and
fantasies. And although that this sacrilege be ouer-common in the world, it
behooves us too have great regard thereto: and that we al keep silence, and
that both great and small, ignorant and wise, the simple and learned, give
ear to the word of God, and suffer them selves to be taught by him: and after
that, every man according to those graces which he has received, to
communicate them unto his neighbors. And when any of us shall be better
instructed in the word of God then any of our brethren, we ought so much the
more to exhort them that have need thereof to reprehende and rebuke those
which make defaulte, and to instruct the ignorant and unlearned. For our Lord
God bestows not his graces liberally upon us, to the end we should hold them
fast locked as it were in a chest: but that we should make them common to
others, to set forth and commend them to other according as opportunity shall
serve, and also according to the dispositions of those to whom we addict our
selves to teach, are contented to hear us.

Moreover when David says, That he will speak of the woondrous works of
God. Let us mark that he does it not of any ambition, or vain glory, as many
do, which could be very well contented that we should hear them, when as they
shall do nothing else but babble at randon of the word of God. And why is
that? It is because they profane it, without having any reverence thereto. For
we see that the most ignorant will be most bold, according to the old
saying, None so bold as blind Bayard, or, A foolish man doubts no peril.
When soever any would go about to teach them, O by and by the word of God
shall be nothing with them: For ye shall have them always to have answeares
ready coined in their sleeves. There are then which would be accounted great
Clerks, who notwithstanding show them selves not to know what holiness, and
Majesty the word of God carries with it. But contrariwise David tells us,
that if we will instruct and teach our neighbors, that we ought first to
understand the law of GOD to be full of wonderful and strange secrets: to
be so high a wisdom, as that we ought not to presume to take on hand too
handle it without all modesty and sobriety. Let us then learn, if we will be
good Doctors and teachers, to proceed in all hunblenes and fear, knowing that
the least sentence in the scripture surmounteth our understanding, and that we
are too too dull and blockish to attain unto so high wisdom, except the Lord
our God guides and leads us thereto. Lo how that both scholars and masters
and as many as are hearers, and speaker, ought to come with great reverence
when as they mean to handle the word of God. It follows soon after: My
soul melts with very heaviness: raise me up according to thy word.

Here David more clearly expresses that which we have already touched: to
wit, that the abundaunt joy of the faithful consists wholly in this, that
God is merciful unto them, and knowing him to be such one, they are comforted
by his grace, nothing douting of his good will, And to prove it to be so, David
says in the first place, My soul melieth away with very heaviness, as if he
should have said, that all his power and virtue was clean gone from him. For
this similitude here, is also very well set down in diverse places of the
Scripture. We have gushed and burst out like water. So then, see how David is
here become as a forlorn man, so thrown down and humbled, as that he is
clean void of all strength, and all other things whatsoever, and thereupon
beseeches God to comfort him. Now here we are to note that he speaks not of
the feeblenes of his body, to say that he was humbled by sickness, and yet his
soul to be lusty and strong: but he says that he is melted away with very
heaviness, as if he should have said, that he was utterly overthrown. And
thereupon he desires to be comforted, and that by the word of God. Here then
we see, that when God shall mortify us, we shall be as men forlorn: and that
not only all our force and strength in this present life shall be of no value,
but also our souls and spirits shall be as it were humbled and cast down, too
this end that we might boldly call upon God after the example of David Let us
not fear then that God will forsake us, but let us rather learn to beseech him
to comfort us, for David has showed us the way unto it, neither went he so
on of his own proper motion, but it was the spirit of God which pus^hed him
forward thereto. Wherefore, having so good a guide, let us not fear, to be
frustrate and void of our petitions and demaundes, so long as we follow the
doctrine herein contained.

Now returns he to the first Argument which we have already touched: to
wit, according to the word of God. Wherein we see, that all the assurance and
certainty which we ought to have in our prayers to God, is, to look unto that
which he has promised us. For they which trust unto themselves, and think
there is sufficient in them, why God should hear them: it, is most sure that
they shall never open their mouths to desire any thing of God: or if they do,
it shall be all but mere hypocrisy: As in Popery, where we are not taught
the promises of God True it is that they will babble much, mumble over a number
of Pater Nosters with a mixture of Aues, yea and will also direct their
Paternoster to the Puppet of S. Agatha, or some other Saint, as if it were too
God. Now this is nothing else but beastly to profane the name of God. And
therefore I have said that the principalest point that we ought to use in
praying unto God, is to lay before him his promises saying: O Lord God it is
true that we rightly deserve to be rejected of thee, but seeing thou inuitest
and call us, shall we go from thee? Is it not meet that we should do
thee this honor, as to give credit unto thy word, and to hold it for
steadfast and sure? Since then it is so, that we have thy promises, we may
boldly trust unto them, considering that they are true, and because we cannot
but have them granted unto us, we only rest and stay our selves upon them.
Lo here the meaning of David in this verse. Now he goes on and says,

Take from me the way of lying: and grant me graciously thy Law. Here he
acknowledges, that although he were already exercysed in the law of God, and
in his knowledge, and that although he were a Prophet to teach others,
nevertheless, that he was yet subject to a number of wicked thoughts and
imaginations which might always wickedly lead him from the right way, except
God had held him with his mighty and strong hand. And this is a point which
we ought here rightly to note: For we see how men greatly abuse them selves.
When any of us shall have had a good beginning, we straight ways think that
we are at the highest: we never bethink us too pray any more to God, when as
he has showed us that favor too serve our turns: but if we have done any
small deed, we by and by lift up our sails, and wonder at our great
virtues. To be short, we think straightway that the Devil can win no more
of us. This foolish arrogancy causes God to let us go astray, so that we
fall mightily, yea that we break both arms and legs: and are in great
hazard of breaking our necks. I speak not now of our natural body, but of
the soul. Let us look upon David him self: For he it is that has made
proof hereof. It came too pass that he villanously and wickedly erred, when
as he took Bethsabe the wife of his subject Vry, to play the whoremonger with
her, 1. Sam. 1^.
that he was the cause of so execrable a murder, yea and that of many: for he
did as much as in him lay, to have the whole army of the Lord and all the
people of Israel to be utterly overthrown. Lo then too too great negligence
and security in David: and see also wherefore he says, Alas my good God, I
beseech thee so to guide me, that I may forsake the way of lyings.

This is the whole sum, that David (although he exceedingly profited in the
law and word of God) acknowledged that he was subject and apt to be carried
away and abused: that the devil might sundry ways beguile and deceive him:
that he might be seduced through many temptations: allured by the lusts of
the flesh: and oftentimes fall, were it not that God did take from him the way
of lying. Lo here a point which we ought thoroughly too mark, O Lord, says
he, take from me the way of lying. It is spoken to this end, that every of us
might know our own want: to wit, that we should enter into our selves, and
meditate after this manner. Go to now, I am as a poor, wretched, and so
frail a creature as is possible: my faith so very weak, and the lusts of my
flesh so strong, as that they might have sudenly oppressed me. Alas my God,
since I am so weak and feeble, I must needs be assisted by thee and by thy
power and might. And again how many are our enemies which molest and grieve
us? how mighty and strong is the Devil? How great and infinite are the means
wherewith he assayleth us? and when he shall assail us with his Darts and
arrows, it is impossible for us too escape them, we shall become then like
unto the Lamb in the throat of the Lion. When we shall thus have understood
these our wantes and needs, then may we say with David, O Larde take from me
the way of lying. Now he shows the remedy when he says: Cause me to make
much of thy Law, or grant me thy grace that I may keep thy law: For the word
which David uses, imports mere favor and free gift: As if the should have
said, it comes of thy mere favor and grace, that thou give me thy law.

See here the remedy which our lord and Savior uses, when he would withdraw
us from the law of lying, to wit, that we should keep his truth: For the truth
of God is sufficiently able to encounter all the subtelties and slye practizes
of Satan, to withstand al temptations, and to vanquishe and overcome all the
lusts of our flesh. The truth of God then will suffice against all this. And
this is it which Saint Paul speaks of, Ephe. 6.10.11* 12* etc.
that when we shall be str doctrine of the Gospel, that then we shall have
wherwithall too be Iusty and strong, and become valiant Champions too fight
under thensigne of our Lord Jesus Christ, and triumph over al our enemies. So
then, will we be far from hypocrisy? will we be delivered from lying, from all the subtelties of Satan, and from all the deceits of the world? Let us beseech
God then to grant us his law, and to do us that good that we might be
instructed therein, as we are here taught by the example of David. Now after
all this he makes his protestation:

That he has chosen the way of truth, and has cleauen unto the testimonies
of God, that he has followed his judgments: and heerevpon he beseeches him,
not too be confounded. Here now we see, that when we beseech God to give us
his law, to deliver us from temptations, to suffer us not too be deceived
neither by Satan, nor the world, that we do it with such a true desire, as
David shows us here, in this place. For there are many which may say with
their mouth, O Lord I would gladly resist all temtations. But what? They
compound with the Devil, conspire with him too set them selves against God,
flatter them selves in all their iniquities, and desire wholly to give
themselves to all wickedness. Are not here I beseech you fair and proper
petitions which we make with the mouth, when as the heart bends it self
altogether to mischief, and iniquity. Is not this I pray you to mock God?
what other thing else is it? Let us then learn to say with David, O Lord, I
have chosen the way of truth, and have sticken to thy testimonies. When he
says, that he has chosen the way of truth, he means that he desined
nothing else, but to follow that which was right and good, as God had showed it
unto him. When he says, that he cleaued to the testimonies of God, he
declares what truth that is whereof he made mention: For men many times
imagine unto them selves certain fantasy in their heads, and think the same
to be the best and most sure foundation in the world, and that there is no
other reason, truth, nor wisdom, but that which they have conceived in their
own brain. Let us now beware of that, and assure our selves that truth self
is enclosed within the word of God, and that that is it, which we must seek:
And not to have us think that to be the truth, which we in our own
fantasies do judge too be good: but even then have we chosen the way of
truth, when as we shall stick to the testimonies of God, when we shall
understand and know that it is he only which may lead us straight, and that
we have done this honor unto his word, to be ruled thereby all the days of
our life. Lo* how we should follow the way of truth.

Now when David has made all these protestations, he desires that he may
be confounded. As if he should have said, My GOD, since that it is so that
I desire to obey thee, suffer me not now to be confounded, that I be not
scorned, and supposed to be as a vacabonde and without a guide, Lo here a
place which ought dilygently to be marked: For I beseech you, when we shall be
desirous to cleave unto God and his word, when we shall have preferred the
same before all our Iustes and pleasures, yea above all whatsoever shall seem
good and right in our own eyes: if we shall then I say be put to confusion
and shame, what shall become of us when we shall lay the rain of the bridle
in the neck of all our desires, and take from God all his authority? Deserve
we not to be utterly confounded? No doubt we do. So then, let us way the
first part of this doctrine, that we must not let our tongues walk against
God: For he knows how to be right well avenged thereof. How many do we see
at this day too become after this manner so beastly, as that it is shame to see
their brutishness? and what is the cause? They have cast of the yoke of God,
they have not vouchsafed to do him that honor, as to be governed by him: It is
meet then that they be confounded in the open sight of the world, that they
may be pointed at, that even young Children may perceive their beastlynesse,
and are very well worthy so to be served. And so least we fall into such
shame: let us pray with David, that it would please God to make us so too
stick unto him and his word, as we never be confounded. Now, too conclude
with these eight verses aparte, David says,

I will run the way of thy Comaundements: when thou shall enlarge mine
heart. When he says, That when God has set his heart at liberty, he will
run: it is too show unto us, that when our hearts are enclosed and fast
shut up, that we are not able so much as too remove one of our fingers to
well doing, until such time as GOD gladdeth us, and shows us a merry
countenance. Now David in this first place declares unto us, that we are
able to do nothing except God stirs us up thereto.

And although he has already solicited and admonished us, yet that is not all.
We should cry out and Alas: and pour out some sighs and groans. But because
God will be served with a cheerful mind, and not with an evil will, so long
as we are fast shut up, we cannot once stir out of the place, to go on
forward in the way of salvation. And how can we then run? When as he shall
have set our heart at liberty: to wit, that he shall have so disposed and
ordered us, as that we should freely bend our selves, and sully and wholly yield
our affections unto him. For otherwise, we having our hearts fast shut up shall
always become the bondslaues of sin. It is very true, hat while we are in this
world, we never run so fast ne yet so perfectly, as is required, yea we shall
many times go as it were halting where in deed we should make have. But thus
it is with us, that whenever he shall govern us with his spirit, and that we
shall be under the conduct of our head and Captain Jesus Christ, we may say
with David, that we do not only walk in his commandments, but that we also
run in them: Yea, so that our affection be not hypocritical, and that our
zeal be also fervent to addict ourselves unto our good God, since he has
placed us in the world to this end, to obey him, and too glorify his holy name.

And according to this doctrine, let us prostrate our selves before the face of
our good God, in acknowledging our sins: beseeching him, that it would please
him to make us to feel our sins and iniquities more and more, and that it
would also please him to make us so to remember them, that we may learn to
acknowledge how necessary it is for us to be more and more increased and
confirmed in his graces which he bestows upon us, to the end that in allowing
and esteeming of his benefits as it becomes us, we may render unto him our
humble and hearty thanks: beseeching him also to continue us in such sort in
his holy vocation, as that we may be glorified in the latter day in having
fought a good fight, and that we may enjoy the prize and reward of the
victory, to triumph in our Lord Jesus Christ. Let us beseech him that he
will not only give us this grace, but also all the people and nations of the
world, etc.

The fifth Sermon of the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm.
HE.
Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes: and I will keep it unto the end.
Give me understanding and I will keep thy law: yea I will keep it with my
whole heart.
Direct me in the path of thy Commandementes: for therein is my delight.
Incline my heart unto thy testimonies: and not to covetousness.
Turn away mine eyes from regarding vanity: and quicken thou me in thy way.
Stablish thy promise to thy servant because he fears thee.
Take away thy rebuke that I am afraid off: for thy Judgments are good.
Behold I desire thy commandments: quicken me in thy righteousness.
THese eight Verses here contain the Prayers which we have already before
seen: to wit, that David prays too be taught in the law, that he might
the better serve God. Now upon this we have to note, that this is not all to
hear and to be taught by preaching unto us, that the same is as it were from
the truth of GOD: but we must also be taught by the holy Ghost, yea and
that two manner of ways. For when God shall have enlightened us, to the end
we might know that it comes from him, it behooves that he imprinte in our
hearts a desire too cleave unto it, for without that we shall do clean
contrary, as naturally we are enclyned.

So then, although it be not superfluous too read and hear: yet will it
profit us nothing at all, except the holy Ghost teaches us: yea and that to
discern as well between good and evil, as also to be well and rightly affected,
too walk according to the Commandments of GOD. Which thing is sufficiently
confirmed unto us in the person of David: For (as we have heretofore declared)
he was a most excellent Prophet.

Now it appears that he was not only sufficiently instructed for him
self, but GOD had also ordained him too govern and instruct others: this
was the Doctor of the whole Church. And yet notwithstanding, he confesses him
self too be utterly ignorant and blind, except God directed him by his holy
spirit. Yea, and he declares unto us most plainly, that he had need of
these two parts of the grace of GOD, here by us touched: to wit, to be
taught too know that which is good: and afterward too have his mind framed
to continue therein.

This circumstaunce also is specially too be noted, that David in making his
requests herein contained, was no Nouice: For God had already instructed him
by his holy Spirit. And that which is more, he declares that he had already
desired too follow God, and too obey his Commandments. Wherefore then is
it, that he prays afreshe, but only that he felt in him self great
weakness in this point, and that he was but in the mid way?

Let us the^ understand, that even they which are enlightened by the spirit of
God, and are well affected, ought not to content themselves heerewith, as if
they were already come to a full perfection: but rather to acknowledge their
weakness, that they are not grown to that forwardnes, but that they may fail,
and that it is God which causes the^ to persevere and to be more and more
confirmed. Lo here, what we have yet to observe, by the example of David.
Now let us follow the words which he uses; to the end the effect of this
doctrine may the better be imprinted in our memoryes:

Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes: and I will keep it unto the end.
Here David declares that he has well begun to serve God, but he right well
feels that we are so frail, that we can never come home to the mark,
without God stre^gtheneth us: wherefore he has recourse unto this high and
mighty power, by which God remedieth the vices that are in his chosen, which he
knows, not to be in their nature. We see then, that when God stretches out
his hand unto us, so that we have already bin instructers and teachers of our
neigh bours, yet that we must not presume of our own power and strength, but
stand always upon our guard beseeching god with all humility and reverence,
that as he has well begun in us, so he will perform and go through with the
same. David said not, O Lord, I have strayed. But he has very well said
heretofore, that he was by nature a wandering sheep: and so shall we see him to
be: And yet notwithstanding our Lord had already brought him into the way of
salvation, yea and had bestowed upon him excellent graces. But yet he knowing
that he might err an hundredth times in a minute, without God held him with a
mighty hand: prays to be instructed anew, as if all the rest which he had
done had bin nothing. So then, when as God shall have bestowed upon us his
graces, let us not be negligent and secure to lul our selves asleep, as though
our state and condition were not to be amended. But let us rather think with
our selves and consider, that he which has bin taken and holden for a good and
virtuous man for the space of ten or xx. years might be seen overcome in a
matter of nothing, were it not that God assisted him.

Lo here how the faithful, after that God has liberally bestowed upon them
great graces, ought always to walk in fear and humblenes, knowing that they
are subject to many temptations, which they are never able to resist if God
continued not the same in them, as well to instruct them, as also to aid them
with his power and strength, and to fortify them more and more, as before I
have said.

And here we are diligently to mark this saying, And I will keep it unto the
end. As if he should have said, My God, I have already followed thy
commandments for a certain time: but what shall become of it, if thou do
not always put too thy helping hand unto me, as thou have already done? I may
in one minute fall into a great and horrible confusion. O Lord, I beseech thee
therefore, that as thou have begun well in me, so to perform the same
thoroughly. By this we see what a devilish arrogancy that of the papists is,
wherewith they are puffed up, when as to their seeming, that a man, after God
has once stretched out his arm unto him, can by and by work wonders of him
self: and is sufficiently able too overcome all temptations. But let us rather
understand and know, that even as it is God that must begin to set us in the
right way, so likewise that we cannot continue and abide therein, without he
always hold us by his mighty hand, and never to suffer Satan to seduce us,
neither yet to be wickedly led, by his subtelties and wyles. And thus much as
touching the first verse Now it follows:

Give me understanding and I will keep thy law: yea I will keep it with my
whole heart. Here David declares unto us in the first place, what our true
wisdom is: to wit, that we should walk in the fear of God: as also it is
said in the scripture, That the fear of God is true wisdom: In sum, we
have here the confession of David, that al they which withdraw themselves from
the obedience of God, are people void of wit, judgment, wisdom, and reason.
In very deed we shall never have the world to judge thus of it: For we will
say, lo this is a witty fellow, this man is very wise, when he is able to
beguile his neighbors, and craftily invent, how to give himself too all
iniquity. Such is the wisdom of this world. But in the mean while let us
note this by the way, that these words are not spoken without cause, too
wit, that al our wisdom and reason consists herein, that we walk in
the fear of God, and seek after his will, yea and too hold us too it. In the
second place as David has already protested, that we are not capable to
understand the law of God, and the contents thereof, if we be not taught
from above, that is, by the holy ghost: he also adds, that he can have no
good affection nor desire to give himself thereto, until such time as his
heart be reformed.

The law of God may seem to be but a common thing, yea we our selves do see,
that the proud men of this world contemn it as a thing too too common: But
yet, as David has before said, God has set down unto us in his law
wonderful secrets, which he here repeteth not in vain, that it must needs
be that in receiving the spirit of God from heaven, he should be
conducted, to the end to follow the commandments of God. Now he namely
says. That I will keep, yea that I will keep it with my whole heart. This is
no superfluous repetition, when he says, That I will keep, yea that I will
keep it with my whole heart. For behold what it is that abuses a great
number of men, so that they cannot be reprehended by men, that their life is
not so dissolute as that they may be pointed at, and be not brought to rebuke
and shame: Lo these men be like little Angels. They make themselves
believe, that they are more then just before God: they feel themselves guilty
in nothing. For this cause then David having said that he will keep the law of
God, declares, that it is not so common a thing to do as we take it.

And why so? For says he, he must keep it with his whole heart. When he
means to show unto us what the good keeping of the law of GOD is, and such
an observation as God requires of us, it is not only meant that our feet and
hands should be seen to be well ruled and compassed, that our sins and
iniquities should be so apparaunt, as that they might be condemned in the sight
of the world: this say I, is not all, as to use such an observation. But we
must (says David) keep the law of God with our whole heart. When as we
shall be never so little affected or desirous thereto, it shall be a great deal
more worth then all the substance in the world. But we must beware that we
have not a double heart, that our desire be so cold and feeble, as to say,
very well, I would gladly that God would bestow his grace upon me that I might
follow his commaundeme^ts: and thereupon, to show our selves weary and
slougthfull: but we must have a true sincerity to walk therein with all
fulness and integrity. But I beseech you what is he that is able to attain to
that perfection? It is so far of that there should be any such vprightnes in
us, as that we are not able to think once a good thought, except God chau^geth
our perverse nature, which before should be repugnant and contrary unto his
righteousness. Wherefore, in sum, David, after that he had prayed unto God
that he would instruct him, to the end he might keep his commandments:
adds, for a more ample confirmation:

That I may keep thy commandments with my whole heart. As if he should have
said, O Lord I know that we men, as we are puffed up with pride and
arrogancy, do think us too have accomplished and fulfilled all the whole
law, when as we have set a good countenance of the matter, and have made
some apparaunce or show to the world: if there were no more in it but this,
yet should it be enough for me, considering that all our members do so rage
in wickedness, as that it is very hard too hold them in. But all this
should be nothing. For it should be all but mere hypocrisy: and because
that thou have respect to the heart, all my carnal passions and affections
must be pulled down and my self in such sort renewed, as that I may be wholly
conformed unto thy righreousnes. Alas my God, and if I must be brought to that,
I see it to be an impossible matter. And so thou must needs put thy helping
hand unto me, that I might be taught by thy holy spirit. It follows in the
third verse,

Make me to go in the way of thy commandments: for therein is my desire.
Here we see that which has been touched, to wit, that David prays not unto
God that he would begin to set him in a good way: For he was already entered
into it, he had already walked in it a good long season. And in deed, this
desire is a very great furtherance unto us, when as we may pray unto God to
beseech him to govern us, and we ought to prefer this felicity or
blessedness before all the things in the world. And herein let us show our
selves to have greatly profited. Now David protests, without hypocrisy, that
he has kept the commandments of God: Nevertheless he beseeches the Lord to
grant unto him power to persevere therein, and that he may come to the
perfection thereof. Wherein we see that it is not enough that when God has
begun and set us in a good way, that we may ever after do what soever
seems good in our own sight. We see here to the contrary, that when God
shall have taught us, and that we have been apt to learn from the beginning:
nevertheless that his grace should be made void every minute, without he
did continue it. And so in the first place, when as God shall have instructed
us, to make us to come to a good understanding and knowledge, he must also
grant unto us a good affection and desire. And has he given us that? It is
also meet that he continue the same in us, and make us desirous to walk in
his commandments. Finally after that he has given us to will, the must also
give us to perform as S. Paul says, that he do all in all, but not to
reward this good will or any other good preparation which is in us, but to do
it according to his pleasure, to wit, of his free mercy.

Moreover, let us on our behalf consider, when as we would obtain any such
grace at Gods hands: to wit, to lead us into the way of his paths, that
our hearts be there settled as that we be not so accursed as to forsake God, and
to set light by him, to que^che this light which he shall have put in us. For
otherwise, if we be always given to the vanities of this world, as commonly
we are, and that we make no account of the graces which God shall bestow
upon us: it is good reason, that he take them from us, and set us clean
without them, yea and that he take his holy spirit from us, although we had
been before endued with the same. He added soon after,

Enclinemy heart unto thy testimonies: and not unto covetousness. Here we see
how it has already been taught, that God must have the government of all the
parts of man: that it is not enough that he give him a good wit, to the end
to judge that which is good, but his courage and mind must also be tied
thereto. He has said before, Give me understanding: and by and by, Incline my
heart unto thy testimonies. And to what end should he incline it? Let us here
note that it is the office of God, to incline our hearts unto his ordinances,
or else, they would go clean against the hair. For if we were disposed of our
selves to walk according to the will of God, to hold and conceive whatsoever is
written in his word, David needed never to have made this request, or else he
should speak it faynedly and after a lying manner. When then the besought God
to incline his heart to well doing: it is as much, as if he had confessed and
said, It is not in me, O Lord, neither yet in any mortal creatures, to walk as
thou have commanded, for our hearts are altogether perverse and wicked. There
is nothing in us but rebellion and treason against thee, we shall never be
able to walk in thy obedience, nor never place ourselves therein, except thou
put to thy hand, and enclinest our minds and hearts thereto. We see then
what the condition and disobedience of man's nature against God is, until such
time as he has softened our stony and flinty hearts and that we have learned
to bear his yoke: to be short, that our hearts be so abased and humbled, as
that we have learned to hate that which is evil, and to desire that which is
good. Lo, what is declared unto us in the first place.

Now when David speaks here of covetousness, he shows unto us that these
things can abide no fellowship together, as to follow the word of God, and to
be given to the goods of this world. In very deed, he puts in here one
kind for all the whole. But in the first place, let us note, that in opposing
against the keeping of the commandments of God, that, which he knew to be
clean contrary unto it: he means to declare that we are entangled with so
many vices and desires, as is most lamentable. And to say the truth, what are
the appetites and desires of men? when as we shall have called out every of
them by their self, we shall find nothing in them but a mere contrariety to
resist die Lord our God. For look how many thoughts and affections are in
us, they are even so many me^ of war to fight against God. So then David
acknowledged, that he can not serve God, until such time as he be cleansed, from
all his evil desires, and vicious affections, and therefore he beseeches God
to expel out of him, that perverseness which he felt in him self, that he
was overmuch given to covetousness, and to such other like things. And thus much
for this first point.

Even so, when as we would follow God, let us understand that we can not do
it without great conflict: to wit, until such time as all our passions are
mortified. For out heart will never place it self rightly, until such time as
our nature be brought under. True it is, that we must not serve God either by
force or constraynedly. Yea, but let us see how we do serve him, Are we
thereunto inclined as of our selves? Alas, it is nothing so, until such time
as he has renewed in us our mind and will. For so long as we remain in this
our nature, all our senses are stirred up to do evil: so that, as I have
before said, we shall never be able to serve God, in captiuing our
affections, and holding them in, as prisoners: to the end we be not let to
follow that which God has commanded us.

Let us now come to the second point. Because that some vices are greater then
other some, and since that every man may be given more to one vice then to an
other: let us keep good watch, and ward, and stand upon our guard. If
there be any man that feels a vice to reign in him self, let him understand
and say, lo a combat even ready at hand: and so let every other man do the
like. As how? If a man have a great number of servants under him, he will
appoint every one his task: he will appoint to one man this thing, to another
that thing, and every of them must bestow him self accordingly as he is
appointed. Even so is it in an army: Some are appointed to wait upon the
ordinance, some other are harquebuziers, some are horsemen, and other some
armed pykes, or otherwise. Now every of these must have regard whereunto to
apply him self, and the same is looked for at his hand. Even so it is with
us, when as any vice warreth against us: for it is as much, as if God addressed
us to be exercised therewith, to the end we might fight against it. No
doubt, there is not that man, which has not in him self some one root of
all kind of wickedness, and this is a bottomless pit wherein we are all
confounded. But yet, as I have before said, there are vices which more
plentifully do abound in one more then in another. Every man therefore ought
to have great regard, whereunto his nature is most inclined, and so much the
more enforce him self to resist all those temptations, wherewith he may be
most crusshed and shaken. And that which is more, we must have respect to
those wicked affections and thoughts, which might in any wise deceive us by
occasions offered us.

It is not like to be true that David was naturally covetous, neither yet do we
find that he was so. But we read that he was a king, that he had a fertile
and plentiful country, and that he might have gathered together excedingly,
as we also see he did. When men come to wealth and riches after that manner, it
is great peril, but that they will give them selves too too much thereto,
where before they had them in contempt. Even so then, it may be that David had
a care to desire to be more welthy the^ he was, although as the scripture
witnesses, that Gold and silver was then little set by: For he had such plenty
of them, as that gold and silver were no better accounted off the^ lead or
earth. He then seeing him self to have so great occasions to be given and
drawn unto covetousness, was the more careful to pray unto God to deliver him
from it. We have now to gather out of this place a good and wholesome doctrine,
that they which are chosen to dignity and honor, ought to have great regard
that they be not overtaken with ambition, whereby they might show themselves
to be both mighty and noble touching the world. And again, that they which
are welthy and rich, be not given over unto their wealth, as in another place
of the Psalm is said. If thou abound in riches, set not thine heart on them.
And also that they which might be overtaken with their pleasures and
delights, should keep an hard hand on the bridle, and be well advised that
they abuse not the goods which GOD has bestowed on them.

Lo here, say I, in the first place how every man ought to bridle his nature,
to the end to resist and withstand the vices and sins, whereunto he is
inclined. And next, as every one having lettes or occasions to cause the^ to
exceed, they ought to keep so much the better watch over them selves. For,
as I have already said, albeit that every of us is given more to one vice then
to another, yet for all that, we are every of us contagiously infected with
them all, and there is not that man which can exempt him self from the same.
Now it is true in deed, that David here speaks namely of covetousness. And
why so? Because it is a vice which breeds exceeding many mischiefs. And it
is not without cause, that S. Paul calls it the root of all evil: For after
that a man is once given to the pestilent covetousness of the goods of this
world, 1. Tim. 6.10.
he makes an Idol of his money, riches, and possessions. He is so violently
carried away with them, as that he will never be satisfied. He is like unto a
bottomless depth which never will be filled. And afterward it makes him to be
full of cruelty, having neither pity nor compassion of his neighbors,
making neither conscience nor doubt to fall out with God and the world, so that
he may have them, al shall be one to him. Let us note then, that if there be any
vice which hinders us from the serving of God, this is it: to wit, this
covetous desire of getting worldly goods. Now David (after he has spoken
specially of covetousness) says,

Turn away mine eyes from beholding of vanitee: and quicken me in thy way.
When as David prays that his eyes might be turned away, least he beheld
vanity: It is as if he should have said, Alas, my God, I had need too
withstand a thousand temptations, yea and they are infinite which may come
before me, and that the devil may present me with: to the end I might be
wickedly led, from serving of thee, if there were nothing else but this, it
must needs be that I must have been vanquished a thousand times, if thou
had not instructed me, and that I had been strengthened with thy mighty
hand: And yet O Lord, behold two gates open to receive in the enemies. I
beseech thee, O Lord, that whenever we shall be assailed with an huge army,
and being not of our selves able to resist them, and that in stead to be in
some most sure place, where we might repulse and beat back our enemies, the
gates shall stand wide open to let them in: to what purpose were all this?
Even so is it in this case, for the two eyes of man are as it were the two
gates whereat the enemies enter. And to what end shall it be, when as we
shall have neither power nor ability too resist, and go out against them. And
so, since we have enemies even lurking within our selves, and that we are not
only weak, but that there is nothing else but weakness in us: and are also
thrust out as it were for a pray too Satan, when we shall see these two gates
stand so wide open unto all the assaults wherewith he assaileth us, we have
very great need to pray unto God (after the example of David) to turn away
our eyes, least they behold vanity. Let us then understand, that the meaning
of David is to declare unto us in this place, that the eyes of men are always
bent to behold vanity: that is to say, that they are ever carried away to
all evil, to all wicked concupiscenses, until such time as God turns them
away. Yea, and our eyes are not only gates to receive all evil: but are even
messengers also. As if the gates were not only open, but that there were also
traitors within, to give intelligence to instruct the enemies. Lo where and
which way you must come: and which way you must enter. Even so is it with our
eyes: our eyes receive on the one side the enemies, and on the other side, they
send messages even from the bottom of the heart, to enuenime and poison us all
over. So then, we see how necessary this request is for us all, as David has
made before us. But according as every man most profited in the knowledge of
God: so much the better comprehends he this doctrine: and they which know
and understand least herein, shall be they which will presume greatliest of
their own power and strength. But contrariewise, when God shall have given,
and liberally bestowed upon us many of his graces, it should be to this end,
that we might so much the better understand our miseries and calamities:
beseeching him to remedy the same, and too make provision for us against all
our evils and vices, Now he adds,

Quicken thou me in thy wye, as in the end he says, quicken thou me in thy
righteousness. This may be interpreted two manner of ways: Quicken thou me
in thy way, to wit, O Lord, make me to walk in thy word, that I may
live. Or else: O Lord, give me strength, to the end I may follow thy word.
We know that when we withdraw our selves from God, we can not but commit
all iniquity, for which is the way of life but even that which God shows
us, and calls us unto? All they then which forsake the word of God, go
astraye, and run headlong unto death, and into everlasting destruction. Even
so, it is not without cause, that David desires to be quickened in the way
of the Lord: as if he should have said, that all they which forsake the
Lord, and the way which he shows them, are undone, and utterly
overthrown. But according to the true meaning of the place, we are to note
that David his meaning is rather to signify unto us, that all men of them
selves, are as it were dead, that they have no power nor strength when there is
any question of walking according to the will of God.

True it is, that in all evil, we are therein too too puissaunt and strong,
and so diligent in it as in nothing more: to be short, there is not that he,
which is not therein too too able: But when we mean to walk according to the
commandments of God, we are not able once to remove a finger: our arms and
legs shall be clean broken: to be short, we are not only weak in this, but
also utterly dead therein.

The Papists will confess, that men are weak, and not able to satisfy the
law of God, except they be aided: and think it sufficient enough, if God give
them a sign to aid their weakness, as if a man should reach his hand to
a young infant, and say unto him, come hither my pretty child, and he
comes, and the other makes sembla^t as though he would take him by the hand
to lead him, and yet suffers him to go alone by himself. Lo how the
Papists have diminished the graces of GOD. But contrariwise, the scripture
tells, us that we are as dead men, to wit, that there is in us no strength
nor ability at all. And therefore David desires to be quickened in the way
of the Lord. As if he should have said, O Lord, my life is altogether given to
wickedness. For all my power and strength bends and displaieth it self
thereto. Even so, O Lord, since thou grauntest unto me a clean contrary
kind of life: to wit, that I endeavor my self to serve thee, grant me now,
O Lord, that I be earnest and fervent, where before I was very slow and dull,
yea, eue^ altogether weak and impotent. Now he goes on and says:

Establishe thy promise to thy servant, because he fears thee. When as he
desires God to establish his word in him, and with this addition that he may
fear God, he confirms the requests which he had before made. Now we
ought to carry this point always in mind, that when we mean to pray unto
God, we must lay our foundation upon his promises. We must desire nothing of
him, but that we are already assured that he will give it us, that he has of
his own good will promised us without our requiring thereof first. For it were
foolehardines to present our selves before the Lord our God, and to make our
petitions after our own pleasures: but it is mete that God him self prevent,
and speaks first unto us. Hereupon then we may assure our selves to pray
when as we have his word for it.

According to which reason, David after he had made his requests as we have
heard, adds, O Lord, establishe thy word in thy Servant. As if he should
have said, O Lord, I desire nothing of thee, but that which thou have
promised. And lo it is it that makes me so bold too come unto thee, because
I know that thou art faithful, and wilt too do unto me even as thou have
promised. Wherefore as the promises of GOD ought to give us an entrance into
our prayers, and always to go on: even so also after that we have prayed,
let us call too mind his own promises, to the end we may be assured
that it shall not be in vain, that we have required of him. And why so?
Because that God of his own free good will, has bound him self unto us,
there is no doubt but that we shall obtain, considering that he will
accomplish whatsoever he has said, for he can not fail us. Lo then the
meaning of the beginning of this verse.

Now when David says that he may fear the Lord, he means not that he
would here allege his merits: but he does it to this end, to declare that
he has followed the same vocation whereunto he was called: and yet
notwithstanding he shows, that he could not walk in the fear of God, but
by the virtue and power of the holy ghost, which was continually in him. And
even so must woe also do. For whenever we shall feel any good zeal in us,
we must not brag upon it: for what have we that we have not received:
according to the saying of Paul? For what is it that should separate us, that
we should not be like unto the most wicked? comes it of our own nature? no
surely. It must needs be then, that it is God which has put to his helping
hand. And so, whatsoever goodness is in us, it is a testimony of the good
will which God bears us, and that he will be our father and Savior. Lo here
why David sets this foremost, as though he would ratify the promises of
God. Now he concludes.

Take away my rebuke that I am afraid of: for thy judgments are good.
Behold I desire thy commandments: O quicken me in thy righteousness.
We shall never be able to know, what the rebuke which David here speaks of
is, except we have regard whereunto all his whole drifte heretofore tends,
and too what end: to wit, that God would defend and keep him, and also
guide him, as it were with his hand, to the end that as he had begun well,
he might also in like manner persevere and continue. Now the shame which all
the faithful ought to fear is, that God suffers them not to be confounded:
that when they have for a certain time walked well, they might not in the end
give them selves to wickedness: that the latter part of their life might
manifest that it was not well and surely rooted within, but was hypocritical
and dissembled.

Behold the rebuke which David feared, to wit, that after he had walked well,
that God would not leave him as a confounded man: And namely he says, For thy
judgments are good. As if he should have said, Alas, my God, so that I
follow the same which thou have commanded me, although that men speak evil
of me and slander me for it, all is one to me, when as my conscience shall be
pure and clean, and that thou art my warrant and witness, it is enough\ for
me. Behold then, O my God, the rebuke from which I desire to be delivered, to
wit, that thou suffer me not to be wickedly given, nor that I depart from thy
commandments: but let my life and conversation be agreeable to thy word. O
that suffiseth me: and let men speak what them list, their judgment is
false, and I appeal from them.

Then to conclude he says, My delight is in thy commadementesse: O quicken me
in thy righteousness. The righteousness of God oftentimes is taken for the
grace which God uses toward his children, or at the leastwise wherewith he
conducteth them. But he sets down righteousness here, for right, and
equity. He has said before, quicken me according to thy word: Now by and
by after follows righteousness. Neither must we think this to be strange,
for we have showed here before, that David speaking of the commandments of
GOD, after that he has used his term namely of these words, ordinances and
statutes, he takes other words. As in this place, after he has said, quicken
me in thy word, he says soon after, In thy righteousness. And he makes
also this request, that he might be conducted in the way of the Lord. Whereby
he would show, that it is not enough that we be well affected, but that God
must increase the same in us, yea, he must conduct and quicken us, as here he
tells us. For it is so far off, that of our selves we can do any good,
that we are not able once to think a good thought, as S. Paul says.

Lo then, how David desired to be quickened: but that was in protesting that
he was as touching him self and his own nature, but as it were a condemned
man.

And herein must we also do the like. For we must go unto our good God as men
condemned in our selves, beseeching him that he would quicken us. And when he
shall have caused us to feel his grace, and that we have stayed our selves
thereon, let us say, we beseech thee O Lord, that since it has pleased thee
to begin in us well doing, that thou would also perform the same in us.
And according to this doctrine let us prostrate our selves before the Majesty
of our good God, in acknowledging our faults: Beseeching him that it would
please him to make us feel our misery and wretchedness, whereunto we are
given whiles we live here in this world: to the end we may walk so fearfully
and carefully as that we may be able to perceive that we have received some
favor and grace from our God, and that in following the right way which he
has showed unto us, we may daily more and more aspire to the end which he
has set before us, which is to attain to that immortal glory, to conioyne
us unto our head and captain our Lord Jesus Christ, after that he shall have
despoyled us of all the vices and imperfections of our flesh, and cloathe us
with his righteousness. And that he will not only grant us this grace, but
also unto all people and nations of the world, etc.

The sixth Sermon of the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm.
VAV.
And let thy loving kindness come unto me, O Lord: and thy salvation according
to thy promise.
So shall I make answer unto my blasphemers: for my trust is in thy word.
And take not the word of thy truth utterly out of my mouth: for I wait for
thy judgments.
So shall I always keep thy law: yea for ever and ever.
And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy commandments.
I will speak of thy testimonies also even before kings: and will not be
ashamed.
And my delight shall be in thy commandments: which I have loved.
My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments, which I have loved: and
my study shall be in thy statutes.
THE beginning of these eight verses co^teine a request which David made unto
God, that he felt the acco^plishment and performance or the promises which god
granted unto him, and after which he hoped. As if he should have said, O Lord,
declare unto me, that the promise which thou have made unto me to do me so
much good, be not in vain, but that thou will make me feel in deed, that thy
word and promise is most certain and true. Now, that he founded him self upon
the promises of God, appears by his thus saying:

And let thy loving kindness come unto me, O Lord: and thy salvation,
according to thy promise.
So shall I make answer unto my blasphemers: for my trust is in thy word.
Wherein also we see that Satan craftily goes about to overthrow his faith,
as if God had made it nothing worth. So then, First of all we are to note, that
David feeling him self pressed down, runs unto the promises of God. And
this is a point very profitable for us. For behold how we must put the word of
God in practice, when as we have learned it, that when we come to the fight,
and Satan assaileth us on every side, in such sort as that it might seem that
all the world had conspyred against us, and that we see nothing but
destruction round about: Even then, I say, must we run unto the promises which
God has made us, and make accounte of them, and so apply them to our own use,
that then we may feel the power and strength of them. Now it shall be an
easy matter for us, when as we are at rest and quiet, to receive whatsoever
God has said unto us. And why so? Because our Faith all that while shall not
be exercised and troubled, so that we shall never be able to feel whether we
have believed in good earnest, until such time as we are tried. Lo, Why I
have said that this place is worthy the marking, that David speaks not with
out cause when he says, So shall I make answer unto those that go about to
sha^e me. For by these words he protests, that the wicked conte^ned, despised
and mocked him, as if he had bin a very fool, in trusting so much unto God,
but yet for that, his faith was not shaken. And see how Satan assayleth us with
temptations, when as the wicked and ungodly speak reproachful words of us:
insomuch as we have thought it to be wonderful strange geere, because that
we having heard the so honorable and excellent promises of God, thought our
selves straightwayes to be rapte and carried above the clouds, and yet this
same our persuasion proved nothing at all so, as it made a show to the outward
appearance: Even so likewise came it to pass in David, as we may especially see
in the twenty and two Psalm.

And our Savior Christ also, who is the very true pattern and mirror of all
the Children of God has sustained and abiden such combats. Very well (said
they unto him) he trusts in God, Let him now see whether God will hear him
or not. Let us then note, that David has not devised and made here any vain
speculations, as an idle body might do, which never had been tempted nor
distressed. But being so mocked by his enemies, that his faith seemed to be
overthrown, and he him self in great hazard utterly to be destroyed, then
came he for refuge to the promises of God, saying: My God, thou haste given me
thy word, which cannot fail me: Lo wherein is all hope and trust. Even so
also ought we to follow this doctrine, too wit, when the world on the oneside
shall deride and scorn us, because we have over lightly credited God, and that
Satan shall travel all he can too turn us clean away from the certainty
which we have had: yet let us not cease too say, O Lord, it is thou which have
spoken, and in thee is all our hope and trust.

Moreover, as we are to call too mind the promises of God, when as we are
assailed by Satan and the ungodly: Let us also note (as has been heretofore
treated of) that this is it whereon we must build al our requests: For if we
will earnestly pray unto God, and obtain that which we pray for, we must not
pray in the air, and say, O Lord I pray unto thee for such a thing, and I
would it might so come to pass. For this were over rash and too too great
boldness to think to make God subject to our wills, to briddle him as we
list, and to desire him to grant us whatsoever shall please our appetites:
but it is his word that must lead us, and be our Cresset: and we must refer
our selves wholly to it, and altogether rest thereon. Behold, say I, after what
sort our prayers are allowed, to wit, when as we pray not to God for that which
seems best in our own eyes, but when as we be fenced with that which he has
promised us.

And this is it, wherein we differ from the Painimes and Infidels. For we see
that the Turks and Idolaters do greatly pray unto God. But after what manner
pray they? Forsooth even at all adventure: so that they know not what they
do. But contrariwise we must pray unto him, with full assurance that he will
hear us. But from whence shall this certainty proceed, if we have not the
truth to go before us, and say: behold the Lord, who calls us unto him?
And then when we come unto him, this is no foolish presumption: But we come in
such sort unto him, as he has commanded us.

Let us then see what we have yet to note in this place, when David sets
down here the promises of God, by which he is bound unto him: O Lord, says
he, let it be done unto me according to thy word. Now here is a very
profitable point to be considered off: to wit, after that we are once
assured, that God has promised too do that for us which we shall ask of him,
we must no more doubt, that it shall be so: but that the thing is fully
concluded upon, so that we are ever sure and certain thereof. For when God
speaks unto us, we are very sure, that he will not deceive us: he will not
give us fair words, and then deceive us, as men many times do, dealing very
liberally with their tongues, but yet notwithstanding very close fisted: But
God deals not in such sort. Let us then come before him without distrust,
Have we his word? Let us then hold the thing as already performed. And so
when David says, according to thy word, he signifies unto us, that he was
not only assured, that God is faithful and liberal, that he means not to
abuse us when as we trust to him: but shows us, that this certainty which
we have of the truth of God, should not make us weary, to say, that we be
as it were even overwhelmed. But we must rather be careful and diligent to
pray unto him.

There are some men which will in deed say, that they believe the promises of
GOD, but since, say they, he knows what we have need of, what need we to
be importune upon him.

Now these men indeed, very well declare, that they never understood what
faith and hope are. For if we received the promises of God without hypocrisy
we ought to be thus earnest and zealous, to pray, and have recourse unto him,
saying, O Lord God, when as thou have assured me of thy bounty and mercy,
it is to this end, that I should call upon thee in my need. And that I see the
necessity which urges and presses me, I must needs come unto thee as thou
haste called me by thy word. Behold then, that all the promises of God
should serve us instead of so many spurs to prick us forward, in making our
prayers unto him. Let us now come to the words of David.

Let thy loving mercyes, or thy graces, come unto me O Lord, and thy salvation.
After that he has laid his foundation whereupon too build, he desires one
self same thing in two words, which to the outward appearance are diverse and
sundry: to wit, the graces of God, and his salvation. And yet notwithstanding
David meneth nothing else, but that god would show him self to be his Savior.
Neither is there any thing here spoken superfluously: For it is as much as if
he had said, O my God, I beseech thee that according to thy promise, thou will
make me feel thee to be my savior and father. But yet in the mean while, he
expresses unto us whence this salvation which we must wait for, and which
God has promised us comes, and that is, of his mere good will. For men
cannot otherwise choose: but that they will ever wrongfully take upon them some
thing or other, which appertains nothing unto them, and always to be
foolishly and arrogantly bound unto them selves. Now David, clean contrary,
shows here, that all the salvation which he hops after and desires,
comes from another springheade, then from the virtue and dignity of men: to
wit, even from the mere goodness of God. So then we see, that as before he
has spoken of the promise, even so also he here adds and expresses the
cause, which moved God to bind himself so unto us: to wit, his mere mercy.

By this we are admonished, that when we are to call upon God, we should
always have regard unto these two things: to wit, the grace of God and his
free mercy, and after that his promise. God is good and liberal, and see why
it is, that he with pity looks upon us: and beholding us with his eyes of
compassion, vouchsafes to receive us, yea and calls and allureth us unto
him, and also imboldeneth us to crave of him, to the end he would help and
succor us in all our needs and necessities. Now this goodness should lie
hidden in God, were it not that he made us to feel it by his promise: For God
shows himself unto us, to be such a one as in deed he is, he lays his
heart wide open, when he renders us a testimony of the love he bears us.

Lo here why I have said, that in all our prayers we ought to have these two
considerations: The one is, that God is so good and loving, that although we
be poor and miserable creatures, and nothing else but doung and stench, yet
for all that he cease not too love us, and to have great care of our
salvation. And since we are come too the promise, which is a sure testimony
that God is such one we should no more doubt what affection he bears us,
whether he be our friend or enemy, seeing it is so that he is very well
willing to be bound unto us, in declaring unto us that he is our father, and
takes us to be his Children.

Now David makes such a request as we have already touched, to the end he
might answer those which wrought him shame. Although he says word for word,
To the end I may answer these which work me shame. Here David declares,
that when God shall have aided him, that then he shall be able to withstand all
his enemies, put by all the injuries and scorns of the unbelievers and
faythlesse which they did lay before him, to the end too shake and crush the
faithful and to destroy them, yea and utterly to make their faith nothing
worth, if it were possible for them to do it. By this we are let to
understand, that if we make our prayers to God, whenever it shall happen all the world too assail us, and that it might seem we should be plunged in hell
an hundred thousand times, yet we might stand sure against al our enemies:
yea verily, for God will never fail us, whenever we shall desire and pray him
to perform his promises unto us, and make us feel his goodness for our
salvation. Moreover if we have wherewithal too resist the wicked and ungodly
which come upon us too daunt and quail our faith, we shall have also wherewith
to withstand Satan. For when men shall persecute us, or deride the promises of
God, and labor al they may to turn us away from them, it comes not of
themselves, but it is the Devil which pusheth them foreward. Even so then, we
may fight and win the victory against all the combats of Satan, if we will
pray unto God, after the example of David.

This is also to be considered and noted which here he adds, when he
says, My delight is in thy word. He declares what signs and tokens he
desired of God here before, that he would do unto him as he had promised. For
I have delight therein, says he, would we then have God his promises to take
place in us, to open the gate that we might come unto him, that they might
be as keys too give us in entree, too the end our requests and petitions
might be received? we must then join hope therewith. And lo what is the
cause why we feel not the power of the promises of God as we ought: the
reason is, for that we have no hope nor trust in them. It is most true, that
god for his part is always true of his word: and although we are miserable
faythlesse people, yet will he never falsify his faith which he has given to
us. But what? Surely we are unworthy ones too feel such a pleasure. In very
deed, god has promised to power his grace upon us, as also he offers it
unto us: But yet are we utterly unworthy thereof, without we believe his
promises, would we that god should do unto us according to his word? we must
then receive his word, and embrace it by faith: Heb. 4. 2.
as also the Apostle treats thereof. And thus much as touching these two first
verses.

Now it follows: Take not the word of thy truth utterly out of my mouth:
for I wait for thy judgments.

When David says, O take not the word of thy truth out of my mouth: He
means not, that it suffices too magnify God with his tongue: and to make
many goodly protestations before the world: but he presupposes, that when he
has witnessed of the truth of God with his mouth, that it must also be
graffed within his heart. And in deed, David speaks not here like an
hypocrite, as they do which would seem to make a goodly show before him: and
think them selves well enough and in good case, when as they are openly supposed
too be very faithful, well thought off, and taken to be very honest men, this
think they is all that is to be required. But David has not proceeded after
this manner: For when he says, Take not the word of thy truth out of my
month, O Lord: It is as much as if he had fayde, O Lord, do me not only this
grace, that I trust secretly in thee, that I stay me upon thy promises, that I
stand sure against all the assaults of mine enemies, but namely and chiefly
even before the face of men: that my faith might declare it self, that by this
mean I might guide and instruct all those which would come unto thee: and
contrariwise that I might withstand all those which shall go about to
overthrow this spiritual hope of mine, which I have in thee and in thy
truth. And when thou O Lord shalt have deeply rooted thy word in mine
heart, let it also be often times in my mouth, that I may magnify thy name
before men.

We have to learn out of this place, that in the first place we must be
assured of the truth of God, yea although that men perceive it not us: And
again although every man would keep it so secret too him self, as that no
man in all the world knew thereof, yet GOD and his Angels do know, how true
and certain we esteem it to be, and also how we yield thereto, the honor
which unto it appertains, and to be such in deed as deserves to be holden
for true and faithful. And thus much for the first point. Now for the second,
Let us advisedly consider to edify our neighbors, that they might be
confirmed by our example, and all with one accord to trust in God, that the
wicked and ungodly might be ashamed that we might vex them, that we have
wherein to glory, notwithstanding all their windelasses, privy devises, and
whatsoever mischief else they are any way able to imagine against us, and
thinking to make us as profane as themselves, yet that we may be able to cast
them of, after the example of David, Lo then, the word which he desires to
have always in his mouth, too confirm all those which would trust in God, and
to confound all them which deride and scorn his word and truth. But what
means he by this saying, For ever? That is, that he being as it were
forsaken of God in all his afflictions, was as one that were dumb and could
not speak, as he complayneth in another place. And in deed, so long as God
shows unto us no token of his grace, although our enemies deride us with open
mouth, yet we are not at that liberty to confute them and stop their mouths.
David then being thus tempted a long time, desires that the confession
wherewith he might be able to magnify God, might not to be taken from him for
ever. Wherein we are to observe, that if God sometimes leaves us confounded
after the manner of the world, in stead of being dismayed, we ought too
beseech him that he would not suffer our mouths too be stopped for ever.

Now he repeateth it over again: For my hope is in thy judgments. It is not
without cause that David still makes this protestation: For as I have already
said, behold what power and efficacy the word of God causes us to feel
(according to that place which I have alleged out of the Epistle too the
Hebrews) when we have therewith hope also, which hangs upon faith. It is
true that God stretched out his hand unto his people, when he brought them out
of the land of Egypt, to the end he would bring them into the promised
land. But what? the people stayed not them selves upon God, and therefore it
was meet that that promise should be void, yea and that justly unto such a
faythlesse people. God had no long time to find out such a wonderful and
meruaylous strange mean as that man could not possibly conceive, how that
might be brought to pass which he had spoken. But this auayled them nothing
which were faithless: For lo they being excluded from such a benefit: are
deprived of that promised inheritance. Let us then learn, that when we
would have God to open his hand unto us and deal liberally with us, to have
us to feel his mighty power, and that we might perceive the fruit and
benefit of his promises. It is meet that we plant them deeply in our
hearts: that we may say after the example of David, My hope O Lord is in thy
judgments. For this word Integrity or judgment, we have here before
already declared, signifies nothing else but the doctrine contained in the law
of God, yea although he here uses diverse and sundry words, yet do they
tend always to one and the self same end. Lo then whether we must refer
the judgments of God: to wit, that that which we read in the word of God and
that which is preached unto us out of the same, we must understand and know to
be sure and certain Statutes and ordinances, and so well ordered as that
they cannot be bettered, and therefore to have all our hope and trust in them.
Now he goes on and says,

So shall I always keep thy law: yea for ever and ever.
And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy commandments.
David here makes protestation not only of his good affection and
integrity, but also shows the fruit and benefit that might come unto him,
when as God shall have so helped him and that he shall have put in proof the
fruit of his faith. Lo then how this place must be expounded: O Lord, when I
shall once have known thee to be my savior and felt by proof thy mercy:
then will I keep thy law a great deal better: As if he should have said, I
shall be continually confirmed in thy obedience: and that shall greatly help
me, to make always forward. And to say the truth, all the graces which we
receive from God, should conduct and lead us a great deal further, that if
we have already been in a good way and forwardness, it is to this end that
we should continue in it, and go on more and more, until such time as we
come to the end.

It is very true that God in conducting us, looks not for any recompense. For
he will lightly pass it over: but this is spoken for our use and instruction.
And when we pray unto God, we ought to seek after all the things that can be
which might confirm us, that we should not doubt but that God would hear our
requests, and that we should also understand and know to what end we ought
to refer those benefits which he bestows upon us, and that we receive at
his hands. Now then, when David says, I shall always keep thy law: yea for
ever and ever. By this we have to note, that accordingly as God liberally
bestows his benefits upon us, that our faith should be so much the more
strengthened in him, that we ought the rather too be inflamed with a true
desire and zeal, to yield our selves fully and wholly too him, to cleave to
his righteousness, and to keep his law and word. And I would it pleased
God that this might be deeply imprinted in our mind. But what? we see the
unthankfulness, which is as it were in us all. For God never cease to do us
good, and will daily give us new matter to trust in him, to love and serve
him. But whatsoever he does for us, it avails us nothing, for we are always
cold as yse: there is no zeal in us, no not so much as any motion, so that it
seems we are altogether senseless. And the rather ought we to meditate upon
this Doctrine: For it is the right remedy to amend our so great lithernesse and
coldenesse.

Let us then learn, that when David says, I shall keep thy Law, O Lord,
that by this he means, that accordingly as God puts unto us his helping
hand, and that we have had proof of his graces, that we receive the fruit
and commodity thereof, which we have hoped for in his promises: that it ought
to serve us for a more ample and large confirmation, and that we ought a great
deal rather too be stirred up to love God, and to serve him, and too yield us
unto his word, in sum as here it is said, too keep his law. But yet
there is a great deal more to be considered. For David speaks not here of a
blast of wind, as some shall be very forward for a little time: But he
says, I will always keep thy law: yea, for ever and ever. Wherein he
shows, that we ought to have such a remembrance of the benefits of God,
that it never slip from us. For as I have hereof already spoken, we shall see
some in this behalf, which shall be moved for a little while, when as God
shall have delivered them from any danger, and has bestowed upon them some
favor and grace: they shall have a very good taste and feeling, and say, Alas,
how greatly am I bounden and beholden to my God? Lo a man would think that
these men were well affected. But in the turning of a hand, no doubt it is
soon forgotten: or at the least if they remember it a little while, they wax
cold again and think no more of it. Since then it is so, let us mark,
according to that which is spoken in this place, that it is not meet that the
remembrance of God his benefits should at any time be wiped out of our
hearts: but let us beseech him to make us to keep his law for ever and ever:
and in such sort to instruct us, as that we desire none other thing of him,
but to stick unto his majesty, and to his righteousness. It follows:

That he will walk at liberty: because he seeks his Commandments. To
walk at liberty, signifies to go at a man's own will and pleasure: For like as
when we are in a narrow and straight rowme, we know not which way to turn us,
but think our selves clean pend up: Even so also are we over narrowly held
in, or else surely we look about us to see if we can find which way to get
out, and so do remain in perplexity or doubt. And is this the assurance
and joy that we must have in the law of God. What? is this it? David
contrariwise says, That he will walk at liberty: to wit, that he will
boldly walk the broad beaten way, as we say, after he has sought the
Commandments of God. This is also a thing which we ought well to observe and
keep. For the holy Ghost by the mouth of David means rightly to show us,
that when we are desirous to have our life ruled by the commandments of God,
to suffer him too be our leader and guide, and give unto him the conducte of
all our affairs and businesses, that he will so frame himself unto us, so
far forth as he shall know to be good and expedient for our salvation.

And this benefit which we receive by the knowledge hereof is inestimable:
to wit, that we may walk at liberty, That is to say, that we are delivered
from many doubts and griefs: that we cannot be utterly overthrown and cast
down, although we happen to be pressed with some griefs: because we always
conclude thus, that we cannot be overcome, seeing God holds us with a
mighty and strong hand. And in very deed what is the cause, I pray you,
that men are so oftentimes tormented, but only that they submit not them selves
unto God? It is very true, that there are very few which know this, but this
is the very cause: For when as we shall have looked somewhat nearer the
matter, we shall find that nothing so much has hindered us, as our own
unthankfulness: But because we will be ouerwise, in not yielding unto God the
honor to govern us, and wholly to rule our life, ne yet become his subjects, it
is meet we should receive the hier due for the same. For men when any thing is
in question that they have to do, will straight ways enter into their own
speculations, they never make question to have recourse unto God, nor to call
upon him, but every man will do what seems best to himself. And therefore it is
meet that God pay us in such money as we deserved, that he put us, I say, in
such doubt as that we shall never be able to know what shall become of us, so
that the anguishes shall force us too say, What shall become of this matters?
Which way shall I begin? And what shall be the end and issue hereof?

Behold how we see the miserable and wretched world, daily so fast shut
up in streights, as that it seemeeth that we are more then cast away. And what
is the cause hereof? Even the men which have built unto them selves such
Mazes. For it is even they them selves that are the cause of their so great
torments. For David has here declared unto us, that as many as seek the
Commandments of God, do walk at liberty. It is very true, that the
faithful although they endeavor themselves all they can, to obey God, and
suffer him to govern them, yet for all that they are not void of merueylous
griefs and vexations that they are many times at their wits end and know
not what to do, but yet they come unto God, and lay all their care upon him,
as it is written in the thirty and seventh Psalm. And there they find them
selves discharged and unburdened. And so go they daily on: for they are
assured that God can never fail them. Behold then, how we may be very well
tempted with many sorrows and griefs, neither can we be exempt from a great
number of disquietnesses: but yet God will always unburden us of them, as it
is said in an other place of the Psalm, that when we have been for a while
fast shut up, yet God will set us at liberty: as also Saint Paul says in the
second to the Corinthes: It is very true, says he, that we are oppressed
with many torments and griefs, but yet we continue not in sorrow and pain:
For God will always deliver us, and will give us a good and joyful issue, so
that in the end, we shall be able to overcome them.

See then what is declared unto us in this place, where it is said, I will
walk at liberty, O Lord, because I seek thy Commandments. Even so let us
know, that when our life is miserable and wretched, and that we must needs
live in pain, torment, and sorrow: that all comes by reason of our sin,
because we present not our selves before GOD, suffer us not to be conducted by
him, put not our lives into his hands, neither do we come willingly too
seek for remedy, after we have once known out grief: that is too say, too
desire God that it would please him to take us into his custodye, without
hoping or waiting for any other thing, but for that which he tells us out of
his word. For when we shall so do, there is no doubt, but that he will
make us too walk at liberty. Now it follows:

I will speak of thy Testimonies also even before Kings: and will not be
ashamed. Behold a declaration of the matter which we have already touched
here before: For David making this request, not to have the word of truth
to be taken out of his mouth for ever, had regard to two things: that is to
say, being able too speak, after that GOD in bestowing his grace upon him,
had opened his mouth, had confirmed the Children of GOD by his example, and
brought them unto him in showing them the way, and in the mean while had
foiled the wicked and despisers of God and of the Law, the scorners of his
hope, and the blasphemers of God: yet was he able, I say, too beat them
back, and make his part good against them all. And this matter he
manifestly declares, whereas he says, I will speak of thy Testimonies,
because GOD should no more take the word of truth out of his mouth.

Now besides this, that God gives unto us matter whereof to speak freely,
yet must that come from him, as we hear, that our Lord Jesus Christ has
spoken off: that it is the holy Ghost which guides our tongues, that it
comes not of ourselves, to be able to answer our enemies that there neded
but a small gale of wind to overthrow us. So then, it is meet that God should
use his power that we might be confirmed by him: For when as he shall put his
word in our mouth, we may speak before Kings and Princes, and never be
ashamed. As if he should have said, O Lord, thy word ought to be of such
power unto us, as that we may foil our enenemyes, yea how great and mighty
soever they be: albeit they should be such as were able to astonish and
fear all the whole world, yet let our Faith be overthrown, through their
mightiness, and pomp: knowing that when as they shall think too swallowe all
up, yet that we be left still always as Conquerors, yea even because we have
regard to it.

Now here we are too note, that when God makes his truth forcible in us,
it shall be sufficient too hold us up, yea, notwithstanding all the Combats
that the Devil shall stir up against us, and that the whole world opposed
it self too the contrary. And it is not without cause that this is spoken, for
whereon is our faith settled? Even upon the truth of God. Let us now compare
God with men, and with all their works and virtues. Let us take Emperors and
Kings: and let all their glory and pomp be set forth too the show, and
let God be set right over against them: too wit, whether men with all their
mightiness and great boasting, are able too surmounte God, too reuerse his
will, or too make void his power and virtue? Oh, it is very sure they can
never be able to do it.

So then, let us consider with whom we have too deal, and remember this
saying of Saint Paul, Thou know (says he) to what end thy belief
serves. When then we shall have our eyes so fixed upon GOD, who has armed
us with his infallible truth, we may be able too withstand and fall out
with all whatsoever that lifts it self up too the contrary: We shall have
no occasion too fear the world, for GOD is sufficiently able too overcome all
the scruples and griefs which the Devil shall raise up against us. And
thus much as concerning this point.

Moreover we see that when there is any question to make confession of our
faith, it cannot be that men shall be able to abash and fear us with all their
power and might: As at this day we see, when as they would gladly make us too
tremble. What I beseech you Sir? (will they say) you are but even a handful of
people. Do you think your selves wiser then all the Kings and Princes of the
world? You see that all the world, are against this doctrine which you hold
and profess: and what do you think to do? True in deed, that at the first
sight, this were even enough too shake us, yea were it not that we knew, and
were very certain: but when we look unto God, then all this geere vanishes
intoo smoke: these are but Bladders pufte full of wind: and the least pinnes
point, will empty them. In very deed these will be great fraybugges, but
yet it will all prove nothing. Behold these Frogs, behold these Pismeres,
yea, behold these Flies and Gnattes, for they are all no better then very
vermin and worms, when as they shall lift them selves up thus against God.

So then let us learn, yea let us learn to stay our selves so upon God, as
that when we shall be called too make confession of our faith, since it is so
that it is GOD which has spoken, let all the creatures in the world be
nothing to us ward: let us not be ashamed, and let nothing hinder and stop
us, from mainteining of his word. In the end David concludes and says,

My hands also will I lift up unto thy Commandments, which I have loved:
and my study shallbee in thy statutes. These two verses here need no long
declaration, for we have already had the same sentences: and yet
notwithstanding David shows us, that it is not enough to think of this
Doctrine for a time: but we must all the course of our life profit our
selves therein more and more. Lo here the principal point which we have to
note, that we must take pleasure in the commandments of God which we have
loved: to wit, that we ought to learn to conceive such an affection and
desire to follow the word of God, and to stick thereto, as that we should be
fully resolved to say, In very deed, this is the most sweet and amiable thing
that possibly can be, to subject our selves under the yoke of our God and to
bear it and therefore we must draw in it, and obey him. Have we done this?
We must then in stead of a number of foolish vanities whereunto we are
inclined, yea, and in place of the wicked affections* and allurementes of
Satan, learn to take pleasure in the word of God, so that we may protest in
truth (after the example of David) that they are the commandments of God
which we have loved. Moreover let us mark well this sentence, when he says,
My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments. For this is as much as
if he had said, O Lord, I will not only protest with my mouth that I love thy
word, but I will also lift up my hands: yea, as we commonly say, I will lift
up my hands to the caky God. By this he lets us to understand, that if we
would serve God as becomes us, that it is not enough for us to witness the
truth of God with our mouth, but we must also show by our good and godly
life, that which we protest with our mouth, and that there be an accord and
sweet harmony between the one and the other. True it is, we shall find
some doubts when as there shall be any question of following God: but this
sentence is to be noted, when he says, I will lift up my hands. And to know
that when God shall see, that it shall surpass our force and strength, let us
pray unto him to grant us that grace, that we may lift up our hands unto his
commandments, to wit, so high as we can possibly, to the end we may take
hold of his grace and virtue, better then heretofore we have done. Lo in what
manner we ought to do in this case, that not presuming of our own power and
strength, we might pray notwithstanding this good God, to make his grace so
forcible in us, as that it may settle and reign there, and to have us know
that it is not in vain that he calls us unto him and gives us his truth.
Which thing no doubt he will do so that we reject not his grace, which he so
freely offers unto us. And according to this holy doctrine let us prostrate
our selves before the majesty of our good God, in acknowledging our faults,
beseeching him that it would please him to open our eyes, to the end we may
know our wretchedness, and the miserable condition wherein we stand, that we
might return to him: yea, and that with a certain confidence, that he will
perform that which he has promised us: that we be not frustrate of our hope,
when as it shall stay upon him, and in his truth, but that he will more and
more strengthen us therein, until such time as we come to the perfect
knowledge of things, which we yet know not but in part. That not only he
will grant us this grace, but also unto all people and nations of the world,
etc.

The seventh Sermon of the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm.
ZAIN.
Remember the promise made unto thy servant: wherein thou have caused me to
put my trust.
The same is my comfort in my trouble: for thy word has quickened me.
The proud have had me exceedingly in derision: yet have I not declined from
thy law.
I remember thine everlasting judgments, O Lord, and received comfort.
I am horribly afraid for the ungodly which forsake thy law.
Thy statutes have been my songs: in the house of my pylgrimage.
I have thought upon thy name, O Lord, in the night season: and have kept thy
law.
This I had: because I kept thy commandments.
David here, makes a request unto God, which we are all wonted to make: but
not with such affection as he deeth. For we can not protest, after his
example, that all our joy, in the midst of our adversities, is in meditating
and studying of that which God has showed unto us by his word. And that it
is so, we see that whenever any of us shall endure and abide any grief,
whether run we then for refuge and aid? Forsooth every of us faineth him
self a comfort, as best pleases him. For very few of us rest upon God and
trust in him, ne yet lean upon his promises: yea, we shall find none almost
which does it. And see why we can not crave of God, as David does, Which
remembers him of the promises, that he has made us. And therefore it can not
be that this was set down in vain. Let us therefore note, that God shows
unto us, from whence we must receive our comfort and consolation in all our
afflictions: to wit, because he has bound him self unto us, and that he has
witnessed unto us, that he will have pity and compassion upon those which will
call upon him in their miseries, and holding us to that, we should be as it
were quickened: that is to say, that although we were oppressed with
afflictions even to the uttermost, so that we were as it were almost dead,
that this only point might suffice us: certainly to know that God will not
forsake us. And for doing hereof, we are to observe two points: The first is,
that we rest neither upon our selves ne yet upon creatures, setting our hope
too fondly here and there: but let us know, that our life and all our felicity
consists in God, and that there it is which we must seek after. Lo then the
end, whereat we must begin, if we will have true comfort in our adversities.
And contrariwyse, we see how our minds wander and go astraye, and that is,
because every of us faineth unto him self foolish and unprofitable
confidences: for if we knew the thing that is in God, it should make us never
to turn away from him, we should never more wander after creatures, for in
them is nothing else but vanity. And therefore we ought to have the greater
regard unto this doctrine: to wit, that if we will be delivered from all evil,
we must still look unto God. The second is, that we are to crave of God, that
he would have pity and compassion upon us, and deliver us from all our
afflictions:yea and that we may come unto him by reason of his promise. For
without God call us unto him, we can not come unto him but unadvisedly. For it
should be too too great presumption for mortal men to take upon them such
boldness, as to come unto God, without he gave them leave, and exhorted them so
to do. We must then have the word which God gives us, by which he testifies
unto us, that he is ready to receive us, and wills us also to come unto him.
Lo what this verse emporteth, when David says, that the comfort which he
received in all his adversities, was, that he was quickened by the word of
God. By this he shows, that he not only waited upon God, to be saved by
him but that he had respect, namely to his promise: for without it (as I have
already said) we can have no access unto God.

In the mean time, we are to note, that this word, to quicken, imports a
great matter: to wit, that the word of God should have this power and strength,
that if we should be as it were forlorn and desperate, that it would comfort
and restore us, and that we should receive life through it. In very deed,
this is a hard matter to put in practice: but we must not think that David
has spoken any thing here, but even as in deed it was. For in making of such
a protestation, his meaning is to instruct us after his example, what our
duty is. And that which is more, the holy Ghost means here to show us,
that the word of God has not taken deep root in us, except it quicken us: to
wit, that it plucketh us as it were out of the grave, when we are cast down
and that we can do no more, giving us fresh force and strength, to be as it
were men brought back out of hell, as if he took us by the hand lifting us up
into a lusty courage. And thus much for this verse.

Now here above, David makes his request, That God would be mindful of his
word, which he had given him: wherein (says he) thou have caused me to put my
trust. Here David shows us, that when the faithful do glad and comfort them
selves with the promises of God, and be as it were restored, it is not done to
the end that we should become cold and blockish: but that we ought rather to
be stirred up the more to pray unto God. Whenever then we shall be oppressed
with any adversity, lo what the remedy is that we must take: to look unto
the promises of God, and to think of that which he has testified unto us of
his own good will. Hereupon let us boldly confirm our selves, and return as
it were to life, if that we have been in death. But after that we have made
the promises of God so forcible, as to take courage, and to be fortified
therein, we must oftentimes fall to our prayers and offer them to God,
beseeching him to perform his word. And since it is so, that he is
faithful, let us be sure that we shall not go away empty, if we believe his
word: but that he will perform whatsoever he has promised. See then, that
after we have meditated of the promises of God, and trusted to him, let us make
our prayers many times and run unto his majesty for aid, beseeching him to
acco^plishe that, which through his infinite goodness he has showed unto us,
and never forsake us. but too declare the same too be so in effect and deed.
This is it that David here means by this sentence. Be mindful, O Lord, of
thy word and promise. David speaks here according to the grossenes and
weakness of man's understanding. For it is most certain, that God never
forgets that which he has said, so that he needs to be solicited, to be
put in mind of it as mortal men are, which promise much at randon, and never
remember it after. Now we must not imagine God to be such one, but suffers us
to stammer after our own fashion, when he deferreth the accomplishment of his
promises, so that we know not who is the cause of the let: God, I say, then
suffers us to speak after our own guise, and say, be mindful, O Lord,
that is, we beseech thee to show unto us by the effect, that thou have not
forgotten the promises which thou have made to us Thou O Lord, art not like
men, who after they have determined upon any matter, never think after of that
which they have said. Wherefore, O Lord, show not thy self to be like mortal
men* but when thou have spoken the word, let it be done, and forthwith
executed.

See then how we must proceed, that after we have once known to stay our
selves upon the promises of God, we must beseech him to show unto us by
proof, that so many as put their trust in him, shall not be deceived. Now he
says, Thy word toward thy servant. And this sentence is worthy to be well
wayed, because that there are very few, when any mention is made of the word
of God, which understand and know that it is spoken to them, and without they
know that, all is to no purpose. We may read the Bible an hundredth times
over, but we shall never have any taste of the promises of God, or certainly
if we learn any thing out of it, that shall no whit assure us, to conceive a
true certainty of our salvation except we know that it is to us which God
speaks, that it is we even we, I say, whom he would make to feel his
mercy and fatherly love. If we conceive of the promises of God as hanging in
the air* that God has spoken, and we know not to whom, to what purpose shall
this be? What benefit shall we reap by this? So then, let us thoroughly
consider of this doctrine* Be mindful, O Lord, of thy servant according to thy
word. David applies unto him self the promises which he had received, for he
knew that they appertayned unto him, because he doubted not that he was the
child of God: for having received them with such a faith, he says, O Lord.
Thou have not spoken to this body or to that body, as though I knew not to
whom* but I am out of all doubt, that thou meanest to call me unto thee* and
have declared unto me that I shall be partaker of all the benefits which thou
have promised unto the faithful. Lo then, after what manner we must do herein.

So likewise, when it is said in the holy scripture, 1. Tim. ^.
that this is a true and undoubted saying that God has sent his only begotten
son* to save all miserable sinners: we must include it within this same
rank I say, that every of us apply the same particularly to him self: when as
we hear this general sentence, that God is merciful* Have we heard this? Then
may we boldly call upon him, and even say, although I am a miserable and
forlorn creature, since it is said that God is merciful to those which have
offended him: I will run unto him and to his mercy, beseeching him that he
will make me to feel it. And since it is said. That God so loved the world;
John. 3.16. Romans 8.32.
that he spared not his only begotten son: but delivered him to death for
us. It is meet I look to that. For it is very needful, that Jesus Christ
should pluck me out from that condemnation, wherein I am. Since it is so,
that the love and goodness of God is declared unto the world, in that that
his son Christ Jesus has suffered death, I must appropriate the same to my
self, that I may know that it is to me, that God has spoken, that he would I
should take the possession of such a grace, and therein to rejoice me.

We see now, how we must practice this sentence, that we may say unto God,
Think upon thy servant, O Lord, according to thy word. If any man will reply,
that it can not be said, that God has spoken to him, when as he speaks to al
in general: let us consider, that God offers his grace too men in common, to
the end that every man might afterward enter into him self, and not to doubt
being a member of the church, but that he has a part and portion of that,
which is common to all the faithful. And where it is said, Rejoice thou
daughter of Syon, for behold thy king comes toward thee, Zach. 9.9.
all the faithful in general ought to receive this promise, and that al also,
eue^ from the greatest to the least, might know that God offers him self
unto them, and allureth them, to the end that this promise might be performed
and perfited unto them. And see why the sacraments are not administered unto us
in common: but to every one severally. We will never baptize the whole Church
with one baptism: but every one will be baptized in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And what other thing is meant by baptism, but a co^firmatio^, of all the promises of God, which he has given in common to the whole body of his
church. See then, how the promises are special in the virtue of baptism.
And so is it in the Supper. For when we come to receive the bread and wine in
the Supper, our Lord Jesus declares unto us, that as he once for all shed his
most precious blood for our redemption, and salvation, that his body also is
our meat and nurriture. Lo then, how we ought to be fully assured, that it is
to us which God speaks, and that he also offers his mercy to us in common.
And see why David also adds, and says,

The same is my comfort in my trouble: for thy word has quickened me. For
this is the right and true use whereunto we ought to apply the promises of
God: to wit, that where it might seem that we were discomforted and cast
away, yet should we not but have a firm courage, and an invincible constancy
For else we should greatly dishonor God, since he has told us, that we should
not despair, but that he would be our savior unto the end. Whereupon we
must conclude, that so often as we conceive any distrust in our adversities,
so often do we blaspheme his majesty. For we can not do greater injury and
despite unto God, then to accuse him to be a liar, and think him to be
disloyal or unfaithful. Now if we think God to be true and faithful, we
must hold it for a full conclusion, that he will never suffer us to be
frustrate, so long as we put our trust in him. Now by this mean we shall live
even in death.

Let us therefore thoroughly consider of this sentence which David has here
couched, that God having promised him to be his savior, has quickened him in
this, yea in the midst of his afflictions, as if he had said, O Lord, since
it is so, that I have a testimony of thy good will and love, I ought not to be
discouraged, nor faint hearted, for whatsoever may come to pass. Now it
follows,

The wicked, or proud have had me exceedingly in derision: yet have I not
declined from thy law. Here David shows his constancy in resisting the
temptations and combattes wherewith Satan assailed him. For behold how our
faith shall be rightly and duly approved: to wit, when as we sbalbe assailed,
and when as the devil shall think that he has gotten the better of us, yet
must we persevere and still continue to trust in God: lo, I say, a good proof
of our faith. And this is it that David means to signify in this place: for
it is an easy matter, when as we shall have no temptations to trouble us, to
take a taste of the promises of GOD, and to hope that he will do that which he
has spoken. But when as we shall be tormented with afflictions, then the devil
comes and puts us in mind of many irksomenesses, and fantasies, as if God
were retired and gone far from us, and that the wicked and ungodly make a
mock at our simplicity: when I say, that we are so assailed: then must our
faith show it self, whether it be true or not. And if then we shall
constantly persevere without being vanquished and overcome, O see now a sure
and certain sign that we have believed in good earnest and not
hypocritically, that we have not taken his word in vain, but it has been
lively rooted in our souls. Let us then well note, that if we will have a
true proof of our faith, and learn too speak in truth that we have trusted
in God, and his promises: it is meet that we should feel very boisterous
assaults: and yet for all that, we have not been forsaken and left, until
such time as we withdraw our selves from God.

Moreover David speaking here of the wicked, calls them the proud: neither
does he so entitle them without cause: for it is the property of all those
which trust not in God For it can not be chosen, but that a man which puts
not his trust in God, must needs grow proud, and swell therewith like a
toade. And why so? For when men do know them selves to be such as in deed
they are, they must needs be cast down and humbled. And this common prouer be
which reigns even amongs the faithless, says, he that knows him self,
makes very little of his painted sheath. Now we will speak this with the mouth
but yet it is to our condemnation. Nevertheless, it is God his will that all
men should know this, because there should be no excuse. In sum this is very
true, that if men knew them selves, thy should be humbled, and utterly
discomfited. Hereupon they would come to seek God, and hide themselves under
the shadow of his wings, they would have recourse to him, to be aided in all
their necessities. Contrariwise (as I have already touched) it must needs be
that all the faithles be full of arrogancy and presumption, to lift themselves
up against God, to promise wonders as of themselves, where in very deed they
have nothing* neither yet are any thing.

See now wherefore David in this place speaking of the faithless and enemies
of God, calls them proud* And it is not only here, but the holy scripture
uses this speech throughout. And hereupon also it is that the Prophet Abacuc
says, That a man shall live by his faith. Abac. 2.4.
And he sets down to the contrary, that they which lift up them selves,
and in such sort some out their pride, shall never take hold: they may well
make a fair show, but it can not be but that they must needs fall down
hedlong. We see then, that the Prophet comparing the faithful with the
faithless, gives this title and quality to all those which put not their
trust in God. That they are puffed up, and presume without measure. Even so
then, let us note, that if we will render a true testimony of our faith, we
must needs be cast down in our selves, and be truly humbled. And
contrariwise, if we feel, that pride puffs us up, let us conclude, that we
have as yet profited very slenderly in the school of God, and that if faith
reigned in our souls, that this pride should there be corrected. See then,
how we ought to put this lesson in practice.

Moreover, let us also note, that they which so lift them selves up against
God, contemn and despise their neighbors, that all they which presume upon
their own power and strength, knowing not, that their whole blessedness lies
in the mere grace of God, these men I say, can not be but cruel: and will be
fierce and malicious against their neighbors. And therefore, after that we
shall have learned to humble our selves before God, let us use such courtesy
and gentleness unto men, as that we practice that which Saint Paul speaks
of: Phil. 2.3.
to wit, That every man esteem of his brother better than of him self. Let us
not study to go about to advance and esteem of our selves, in rejecting and
naught setting by of others, but let us acknowledge the benefits which God
has bestowed upon every one of us, and confess the infirmities and vices
which be in our selves: to the end we might be humbled, and rather commend
and praise others* Let us now come to this complaint, and protestation which
David makes:

The proud have had me exceedingly in derision: yet have I not shrinked from
thy law. When he says, that the proud have had him exceedingly in derision,
there is no doubt, but that he means that they derided him for his
simplicity, because he put his trust in God. Very well say they, he thinks
that God should dandle him in his lap, but we no we see what is become of him.

Lo the combattes wherewith Satan daily assaileth us. When as the ungodly do
see the children of God in any misery and calamity, they rushe even upon them
at the first dashe and say, ha, ha, this man thinks that God ought to watch
over him, and that no sorrow nor grief should come upon him, and now we see
what is become of him. And because he has heard him speak, he thinks that
God should never forsake him. But we see now what comes of it. It is very
true, that the ungodly of their own motion and inclination, will soon vomit
out such blasphemies: but surely this comes a great deal farther of, for it
is Satan that puts it into their minds and pussheth them on thereto, to the
end to shake their faith, and utterly to overthrow it.

Now this is not the first time alone that David has been thus assailed: for
this was an ordinary thing with him: as we see throughout the whole two and
twentieth Psalm, and since he has put his trust in God, say they, let him now
save him: and let us see whether God will help him or not. And as David was
grieved with these torments there is no doubt but that Jesus Christ has
abidden the like conflictes.

And since that this appertained to the son of God, we have to note, that it
can not be chosen but that it must spread it self throughout his members, and
that every faithful man must be exercised with such temptations. And
therefore, if we see the wicked, and the enemies of God jest and scoff at us
when as we are in affliction, taking occasion thereby to lift up their horns,
and to deride us, let us not yield for all that: but let us remain firm and
constant, since that David has showed us the way: and not only he, but also
our Lord Jesus, unto whom we must be like: and therefore we must be of a lusty
courage to follow him. And thus much for the first point. For the second, let
us note that we have not war with men, when as the ungodly do so rise against
us, and vomitte out such mockeries: the same say I, comes not from them: but
it is Satan that casts his darts at us, and means mortally to wound us.
And to put by these blows, we had need to be armed with the word of God,
which is our sword, with the buckler of faith, and the Helmet of hope: even as
Saint Paul exhorts us to do. Mark well this point: we must not be too too
tied unto men, when as they shall thus grieve and vex us: but we must look a
great way farther: to wit, unto Satan, who by such assaults and co^battes
goes about al he can too overthrow our says, Ephe. 6.16.17
if it were possible for him to do. Now the protestation which he makes, is
well worthy the noting: for after he had complained of these rebukes and
mockeries of the ungodly, he adds, yet have I not shrinked from thy way, O
Lord. Let us then conclude, that since we have the word of God, that if all the world, should conspire against us too turn us from it, we ought too abide
steadfastly in it, and too be fast tied thereto, and too cleave so hard unto
it, as that we might never be pulled away from the same. To this end ought
this protestation to serve us: to wit to strengthen us in constancy, that
we might know, that if David was so steadfastly settled in the hope which he
had: that the truth of God is not at this day diminished or decreased.

It behooves us then to make the promises of God forcible, and to be so sure
and certain, as that we be not shaken, nor moved, for all the scorns and
mockes which the wicked can make at us. Let us also mark, that David speaks
not here of one combat, or of a word cast out at randon, as sometimes it may
escape from the mouth of a Scoffer or Iester among the wicked. But it must
needs be that the holy Prophet was thoroughly sooked in them: as he him self
declares, that they derided and scoffed at him, and that exceedingly. Let us
apply this too our selves, that we quail not, nor faint for one conflict,
wherewith Satan shall assail us by his substitutes: but that we persevere in
all conflictes, that when we shall have made an end with the first, to be
ready and pressed to enter into an other, never altering or changing, our
determination nor will, come there whatsoever shall come: that the scoffs and
scorns of the wicked, yea and whatsoever Satan shall craftily invent against
us, hinder us not from steadfastly abiding and continuing in faith, without
turning or writhing us away from the law of God, after the example of David,
as here we have heard him make thereof protestation.

And if there were such constancy in David, having the law only, we that
have the doctrine, which is given by him, and by the Prophets after him, by
our Lord Jesus Christ, and his Apostles: we then which have a great many more
convenient helps, then David had, should we be shaken and crusshed, when as
the devil, the wicked, and all the girnardes and firebrandes of hell, shall
assail our faith? There remains now no excuse for us, seeing he has done
thus. Let us then learn too help our selves with the means which God has
given us, and puts in to our hand, so that his word be not vain and
unprofitable unto us, but that it serve us in deed as it ought. Now he
adds,

For I remembered thine everlasting judgment O Lord: and have received
comfort. Here David declares that he is confirmed (over and beside the word)
in all the judgments of God, which is the thing that we must also do, after
that we have meditated upon the promises of GOD, by which he testifies that
he is nere unto all those which call upon him, after that we have known
that which he declares and pronounces, to humble and overthrow the wicked,
in showing them to be their judge: that over and besides this, we would
acknowledge as at all times we have need, how he has helped and sustained
his, how he has delivered them out of all the miseries they were in: and
besides, how he has stretched forth his arm against the wicked, and
contempners of his justice. See, I say, how we must link together the
works of God with his word, for the more notable confirmation of our faith.

And this is it which David means in this place: for he speaks not here of
the judgments of God as he has done before, and as he will hereafter: to
wit, for his statutes, and commandments: but he means the acts and
deeds which GOD in all ages has done, to show him self to be judge over all
men. It is very true, that such judgments as God has put in execution, are
contained in the Scripture. But by this which is here spoken of them, we are
warned how we ought to read such histories: that is, that God never forsakes
his faithful: and although for a while he slacketh, yet will he not leave the
wicked unpunished in the end. David then meditated on these judgments: and
exercised him self in them. And so we are to remember, that when we have made
the word of God forcible, to resist Satan, and all the assaults wherewith he
shall assail us, we must also know, that God has not only spoken, but has
likewise showed by experience, that his word is no vain thing, but that the
execution thereof is at hand.

And therefore, when as we shall see that God shall put to his helping hand
before our eyes, and shall give us so many testimonies of his judgments, it
is no reason that we should ouerslippe it: but should have our eyes open, and
acknowledge these things as they are declared unto us: when as also we shall
feel any of GOD his grace toward us, that we ought to imprint the same
surely in our minds. Lo how we must follow David, in that which he
says, O Lord, I have remembered thy judgments.

Moreover, when it is said, that he has called to mind the judgments of
GOD from the beginning of the world, I pray you, what excuse shall we be
able too make, if we ouerslippe that, which he sets before our eyes? For
when as at this day GOD should hold him self as if he lay hidden, that
we should have no token nor proof, that he should be the judge of the
wicked and ungodly for to confound them, and the Savior of those which trust
in him, and call upon him, yet that which is contained in the holy Scripture,
and that which we read too be done before we were borne, the same, I say,
might suffice. But now since God declares him self unto us, and shows unto
us his presence, and all this to be cast under foot through our
unthankfulness, must not we needs be more then culpable or blameworthy? In
sum, let us mark, that here the holy Ghost accuses us of negligence: for if
we were such as in deed we should be, we should apply our study to read
the holy Scriptures, where God shows us his judgments as it were in
beautiful glasses, and all for our instruction and profit. See then, how we
ought to link together that which is written, with that which we daily see
before our eyes, and to be confirmed throughout all the histories, in such
sort as that they might serve as it were to seal up the word of GOD, that
it might be of a great deal more strength and force, and too magnify the
same when need shall be.

Now have we so remembered the judgments of God, and are we so exercised in
them, yea even in those, I say, which were made before we were borne into this
world? Whatsoever then that we shall now perceive and mark, and whatsoever
also shall be declared unto us so long as we live, we ought by a more forcible
reason, so much the narrowlier to consider, and to be a great deal the more
confirmed in them, and not to be like unto brute beasts, when as god
stretches forth his hand, and gives us some testimonies, that it is he alone
which so helps us: when as I say, God shows us this, we must think on
them in good earnest, and so stay our selves in them: to wit, that we make not
account of them as vain speculations: but too apply all the Judgments of God
to our use, since it is to this end and purpose, that he shows us them. For
when we shall read that God revealed himself to Abraham, and that he did
help him in such a necessity: Let this be our conclusion, Very well, that
which God did unto his servant Abraham, is to assure us, that he will do the
like for us, and therefore we must even now run unto God for refuge and
succor. See how all the testimonies which God has left unto us in the holy
Scripture of all his wonderful works, ought to serve every of us for aids
and helps. Now David sets down soon after.

I am horribly afraid for the ungodly which forsake thy law. Here David
protests that he has resisted another temptation over and besides that
which we have already seen. This is already a very sore and hard combat too
abide, when as the wicked mock and scorn us, as if God had deceived us, as if
we had bin too too simple and foolish to put our trust in him. Lo here a
great trouble for miserable and wretched weakelings, yea and that such as it
cannot be chosen, but that they must (at the least) be moved and astonyed.
But this temptation which here follows is none of the least to overcome: as
when we see all the whole world addicted and given to wickedness, that what
soever we do, is as it were to conspire and to lay a platform to provoke God
his wrath, to distrust him, to reject all his graces, and to tread them clean
under foot. When then we shall see men so estraunge them selves from God,
even to make open war against him, it goes very hardly, if we be not as it
were utterly overcome. And yet nevertheless it is, as David here protests:
that it is so far of that he gave him self wickedly, seeing the corruptions
to be such as they were all over, as that he was horribly affrayde for the
ungodly which so forsook the law of God. Wherefore, let us learn to be thus
horribly affrayde, so often as we see men exceed in wickedness: Let us
learn, I say, too have recourse unto God, and as it were in gathering our
wits unto us, that we might conceive an horror and fear, when as we see
such monsters, and such things so committed against nature. If this has been
always a necessary doctrine, it is at this day most necessary: for let us a
little behold what a general confusion there is, when as we shall see the
order and doings of the Papists, we shall find it to be a most hellish
outrage. And amongst us alas, where the word of God should be of greater
power and force, yet we see how the more part will not only alter and
change the law of God, but desire nothing more then even utterly to abolishe
it. What is to be done then? It is not enough that we follow not the wicked
and ungodly in their impiety, and not to link in with the^ as their
companions, but we must be horribly afraid, because we know that they must
perish as miserable and wretched creatures: and therefore we should be grieved
and vexed: but yet a great deal the rather, when as they see them make open
war against the majesty of God. For these are matters too to monstrous, to see
mortal men lift them selves up against their creator, and in very good earnest
to fight against him. Lo then, what is here showed unto us by the spirit of
God under the example of David. And in this let us see, whether we ought to
cover our selves: with such horrible, yea and most detestable filthynes and
uncleanness, when as any talk shall arise of the conte^ning of the majesty of
God, and of the discrediting of his law or word, whether we ought I say, to
make countenance as if such talk were nothing, whether we ought to support
and maintain the same: and to pass it lightly over, as though we cared
nothing at al for it, or that it no whit appertained unto us. Now if in this
behalf we shall do so, it is a sign and token that there is neither zeal nor
affection in us. And heerin we show our selves not worthy that God should take
us for his children: For we must remember that which is written, The zeal of
thy house has even consumed me, and the rebukes and slanders which have bin
laid upon thee O Lord, are come upon me. When then we shall see the name of
God to be contemned and made no account off and shall see the wicked to cast
him clean without the doors, in such sort as that they will make no more
reckoning of the law of God, without all question we must not dissemble and
hold our peace, and make account as though it were nothing: but if we be the
servant of God, it shall behoue us not only to be touched, but also to be
horribly afraid, and to be as it were forlorn men when as we see such
abomination, that it should in such sort fall out, as to have the name of God
to be so conte^ned by his creatures. Now for a conclusion David says, Thy
statutes have been my songues in the house of my Pilgrimage.

This was yet another great temptation to David as well as the other, that it so
fell out as that he was once driven out of the country of Judea and was far
from the temple of God, and dwelt among the Pagans and Infidels. Now he says,
that notwithstanding all this, that he was not estraunged from God, nor yet
from the knowledge of salvation: but contrariwise, that he was the rather
stirred up to sing praises unto God, and those Psalms which God did put in his
mouth, yea even such as were taken out of the law. For we have to note, that
David made not the Psalms, as a new doctrine ne yet as a doctrine separate
from the doctrine of the law: but drew them from it as out of a Fountain.

So then it is not without cause that he protests here that the Statutes of
God served him for Psalms and for songs, yea in stead of his Pilgrimages,
that is to say, in a strange Country in the midst of Infidels, when he was
as it were banished from the Church, that he could not be in the Temple to
make confession of his faith, yet was he not for all this wickedly addicted.
Now here, they which are travelers, are admonished of their duty. For
albeit they see a great many of enormities committed in the world,
nevertheless they are steadfastly purposed to hold themselves in the fear of
God, and to walk in a pure and sound conscience, albeit they are mingled
emongst the infidels. As behold even the very Christians which are in the
Papacy, although they are there prisoners, having no doctrine preached unto
the^, without liberty to serve God publicly, and to make confession of their
faith as they would: yet do they not exceed and outrage with the rest in these
villanyes which reign amongst them: but confirm themselves the best they can
to the word of God, take all their delight and pleasure therein, and make the
law of God their song, which makes them to withdraw themselves from all the
vanities and corruptions which they commit, so that they keep them selves
within this compass.

Moreover, if they which are in a place where the word of life is not taught,
and do so, yea even great store of offenses wherewith they may take occasion
too be drawn to wickedness, and to be corrupt with the rest: these, I say, be
inexcusable, but are commanded to take their delighte and pleasure in God, and
in his law, and too encourage themselves, taking the holy songs to exhort
them to well doing, what shall become of us, when as we are in a place where
the Bell ringeth too call us that we might be admonished by the word of God,
to be instructed too call upon his name, and to make confession of our faith?
When GOD then calls us unto his School, and opens his mouth to instruct
us, I pray you, are not we worthy of most horrible condemnation, when as we
shall do altogether preposterously in that, whereof David here makes
protestation. As we shall see very many, which can never be merry, but when as
they shall deafely hearken unto God: and if they come to a Sermon, it is only
to hear their condemnation. For whatsoever is said unto them, and laid before
the^ to bring them into the right way, they soon forget what has been said.
Must not these minds then be violently carried with a merueylous fury? Yes,
without all doubt. And therefore let us keep in mind the conclusion which
David here makes: That he remembered the law of God unto the end. As if he
had said, Behold what is the cause that I being a miserable vacabond, cast
out of the Temple, and driven out of my country, did yet never but stay upon
thee. And after that, being assailed by the Infidels, have perseuered in the
consideration of thy law, and delighted my self therein. Even so also must
we do, For if we see many offenses and many things which might withdraw us
from the law of God, let us overcome all that in the virtue and power of the
promises which God has made us, that by them we might be confirmed in his love
and bounty, to the end we fall not into such a confusion, as we see the
wicked and ungodly fall, and daily cast themselves.

And according too this doctrine, let us prostrate our selves before the
Majesty of our good God in acknowledging of our offenses: Beseeching him that
it would please him to make us better too feel, what taste we ought too take
in his holy promises, and to be exercised in them, that we might valiantly
fight against those vices which might hinder us, to stay upon his protection,
and that by the power of his holy spirit we might overcome all offenses and
griefs, to the end that being fortifyed by his grace, we might not have any
access to Satan, whereby he might win and get of us: but that we constantly
perseuering in the holy vocation of this good God, might follow our course
until such time as he shall take us out of this world, to bring us unto that
heritage, which he has prepared for us before the beginning of the world,
and also which Jesus Christ has purchased for us with his most precious
blood.

And that he will not only grant unto us this grace, but also to all people
and nations of the earth, etc.

The eight Sermon of the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm.
HETH.
Thou art my portion, O Lord, I have determined to keep thy law.
I made mine humble petition in thy presence with my whole heart: O be
merciful to me according too thy word.
I have considered mine own ways: and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.
I made haste and prolonged not the time to keep thy Commandments.
The hands of the ungodly have robbed me: but I have not forgotten thy law.
At midnight I will rise too give thanks unto thee: because of thy righteous
Judgments.
I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and keep thy commandments.
The Earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercy: O teach me thy statutes.
THese eight verses next before contain none other thing but the
protestations which David makes in giving himself wholly too God, and
sticking unto his law: except two requests which he makes in the second
verse, and in the last. Now (in the first place) he says that his sovereign
good, and chief felicity was, in that he was resolute to keep the law of
God. It is very true, that some do expound this thus, that David calls God,
his inheritance. But when as the matter shall be well wayed and considered, the
meaning is this, that he sets his whole felicity in this, that he is fully
determined and resolved (as already has bin touched) to follow that which God
had showed and taught him. Now this word Portion in the Scripture is taken
for inheritance: and inheritance is taken for the chiefest and most desired
thing that man has. And so, it is as much as if he had said, That every man
might divide it as he would and lusted. As we see the desires of men too be
sundry and diverse, one draws one way, another another. And in deed (says
he) every man wishes as he fantasieth, but as for my self, I desire none
other blessedness nor felicity, but to content my self with the law of God,
and when I have this, I have gotten a good and an excellent inheritance,

And now we see the sum and effect of this first verse, it remains that
we gather out thereof such Doctrine as is therein contained. For when we
hear David speak after this manner, there is no doubt of it, but that the
spirit of God declares unto us where it is, that every of us must fully and
wholely assure himself. And this to do, we must have regard too the desires
wherewith we are allured by nature, for one nan is given too be ambitious,
another to be covetous, another to be lecherous. In such sort as that men are
carried away with their desires, as here before we have declared. It is meet
therefore that we retire our selves from all these vain and perverse desires
and lusts and to fight against all whatsoever may hinder us to come unto God:
and when we have thus repressed our passions and fleshly lusts, let us then
desire nothing else, but that God would draw us unto him self, link us unto
him, and grant us the grace to keep his Commandments.

But we are oftentimes too note, that David speaks here of a conclusion,
which he holds for most certain and of no light motion: as when we have
sometimes a desire to go unto God, yet it lasts not long: for the flesh
also pricketh us on the other side, and withdraws us from that good,
whereunto we had willingly bent our selves. It is not enough then to have a
little desire, which soon waxes cold, or rather, which waxes even dead
through contrary temptations: But we must hold a sound and steadfast
conclusion, as David here speaks, I have fully determined, says he. He
puts in the word, to promise: But the Hebrews do take it to be fully
resolved, to stand firm and constant in a matter, to the end not to vary or
change.

Now (in sum) let us note, that so long as men give them selves too worldly
things, they do nothing else but wander: they know not wherein their
felicity consists, but we must come to this conclusion here set down unto
us, to keep the Commandments of God: and then shall we never have occasion
to have a desire to these miserable foolish worldly things, which fly about in
the air, which suffer them selves too be carried after their frivolous and
vain desires. For we shall be assured to chose a good portion, when as we
shall be so united to God, by the bond of his word. Now as we have already
touched, the second verse contains a request which David says he
continually made:

I made my humble petition in thy presence with my whole heart: be merciful
unto me according to thy word. Now in saying, that he continually prayed unto
God, herein he shows us what the manner is to pray well: that we should be
constant to follow it, and not too be weary, not that God needs to be
importunately urged, but it is to exercise our faith, and the better to try us,
whether we seek all our felicity in him or not. For it is so, that the holy
scripture requires co^stancy in our prayers, especially and above all other
things, and not to pray unto God this day, and quite forget him to morrow, but
we must continue, if we will be heard. And lo wherein we must show our
selves to have trusted in God, that is, that although it seems to us that he
has stopped his ears, yet for all that we must not cease too go continually
unto him, and pray unto him an hundred times as much as we did before: knowing
it to be no superfluous labor, when as we have thus prayed. Lo here as
touching the perseverance whereof David in this place speaks: Now set us see
what the substance of his prayer is, O Lord (says he) be merciful unto me
according to thy word.

The request is general: But David shows the very springhead of all the
benefits which we are too crave of God, and which also he lyberally bestows
upon us, as well for our souls as for our bodies: too wit, that he is
merciful unto us. For God owes us nothing, neither can we bring any thing
with us whereby we may be able to say that we can provoke our selves too do
well: But this is the whole sum, that he uses it toward us of his mere and
free liberality. Let us then mark that David his meaning is to show, that
when God reaches forth his hand, liberally to bestow upon us so many
benefits as we receive of him: that the same proceeds and comes even from
his mere goodness. Lo why he says, O Lord be merciful unto me. Whetfore,
whatsoever thing we desire of God we must always come with this mind to
trust in his goodness. As how? we must desire God to pardon our offenses, and
to assiste us with his holy spirit: we must beseech him that we be not
overcome with temptations: that he will give us his grace, whereof we are
empty and naked: that he will feed us: that he will heal us when we are
sick, that he will keep us out of danger: or we may make any other or
particular prayers whatsoever. Al these requests must be drawn out of the
Springheade: to wit, that he gives us this of his own goodness, and that
we know why it is that God gives us so many benefits, as well for this
present life, as also for the health of our souls: to wit, because he has
pity and compassion upon us, and that we are miserable and poor Creatures,
without he inclyned himself to be merciful unto us.

To be short, before we enter into all the particular prayers which we make
vntof God, let us begin at this end, and let it be the foundation whereon we
must build: That God has pity and compassion upon us. Now because we should
be assured in our prayers, David adds this which heal ready before said to
wit, according too thy word: For if we desire of God that which seems good
in our own eyes, and that we have not his promise, that he will hear us,
this comes of presumption: and therefore we must come humbly and soberly
with our Prayers, and not after a wandering and careless manner, neither must
we come before God with shameless face, and boldelyer then we would come
before men: but too come unto him in such modeste and sober manner: as that
nothing escape our mouths without good warrant, which thing we are not able
too do, except we be assured that all our Prayers are according to his
hearts desire, and that he allows, and ratifieth them. And how shall this be
done? When as he shall have said, that we should not follow our own
brain, giving the raines too our own wits: but that when God shall say, Lo
what I would have you to crave of me, come unto me, and make your requests
in this sort: O, according too those promises of God, we may assure our selves
to come unto him after the example of David and say, O Lord be merciful unto
me according to thy word. And this is an holy presumption, and such one, as
God allows. Now we ought the better to note this doctrine, when we see
that it has not only been obscured and darkened in the world, but also
utterly made void: As at this day it is in Popery, for when they pray unto
God, they pray at all adventure. And especially, this is one of the points
that the Papists strive most about, that we must not assure our selves (when
we pray unto God) that he hears us: but remain in suspense. Forsooth, but
the scripture tells us that it is not possible that the man which is thus
floating, as the waves which are tossed with the wind and tempest, should
obtain any thing. It tells us that when we come unto God, that we must come
with faith, hope and boldness.

And so then, (as I have already touched) this is an holy and a commendable
presumption, that when we stay our selves upon the word of God, to set down
in sum that he will accomplish that which he has promised us: For we hold
him as one bound unto us: not that he is any thing in our debte: but because
that of his mere liberality, he stoupeth so low, as to declare unto us that
he would, that we should have this liberty and leave to present our selves
so before him, with such boldness, and assurance, as already I have
declared. And thus much for the second verse. In the third it follows:

I have considered mine own ways: and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies.
This protestation is worth the noting: For we are admonished, why it is that
men so greatly flatter the^ selves in their own follyes and devices, and make
themselves believe, that they will make their Prayers unto God albeit they rest
not upon him, trust not unto him, neither yet follow that which he has
commanded them, but only their own imaginations.

And that forsooth in such sort, as that they think a man should offer them
great wrong, if he said, that all is lost labor which they have bestowed:
and that they greatly tormented themselves to no purpose, except they did know
that God heard them. It is most true, that every one will say, And how so I
beseech you? wherefore will not God think well of that which I do, since it is
my final intent to to serve him? no, no, God forces not of all this. And what
is the cause that men so arrogauntly strive and spurn against God? It is
because they call not their ways too remembrance: For it they had this
consideration and wisdom, to look narrowly unto their doings, and to think
thus with them selves. How shall I do? In what case am I? I must not go
astray, but keep a sure and certain way and good mean: and to consider how
to live: and above all, I must do thus much, as that God be not disappoynted of
the soueraintie which he has over his.

So then, when as men look well to their ways, it is very certain and sure,
that they will wholely give themselves to follow the word of God, and
therein take all their delight. And this is it that he says on the contrary
part, that he would turn his feet too the testimonies of God. Wherein he
shows too all men by his example, that they should walk as God has
commanded them, and not too be ruled after their own head and brain. For see
from whence this madness comes, which possesses as it were all the whole
world, that every man will serve God as he thinks best: It is because we
turn not our feet unto his Testimonies.

Now we ought so much the more too practice this which is here declared: to
wit, to look too our ways: that we should know that seeing that God has
placed us here in this world, that he has not done it too that end that we
should do whatsoever our senses would lead us unto: But our life must be
ordered and ruled. And whence must we have this rule? Even from the word of
God. And when as we shall be so careful as too order and rule our life, there
remains no more for us to do, but to follow even whether our God calls
us. Lo the testimonies of God, lo his truth which he has declared unto us:
Lo, there must we place and set our selves. We must never hereafter make any
more question too wander any longer, and to discourse and say, why should not
this be good and commendable? No forsooth, not so, let not us follow our own
fantasies, neither let us be wise in our own conceits: but let us consider
with our selves to hear our God, and obey him, lo then the effect of this
third verse, where it is said, That David looked unto his ways, and that he
turned his feet to the testimonies of God to wit, to the law, where God
has declared his will. Now he adds:

I made haste and prolonged not the time: to keep thy Commandments. He
continues his purpose: but he shows that this his affection was not slow, I
made haste (says he) yea and that without delay. Now it is not without cause,
that David puts to this: for we see how straightly we ought too deal
against our own appetites: yea even they I say, who are best affected to serve
god, do yet com as it were halting, trayling either an arm or a leg after
them, as we commonly say. And what is the cause hereof? We carry about with
us such a number of corruptions, as that the very weight of them makes us to
go exceeding slowly so that we have much to do to go on. And we know, and have
too too great experience, how weak our nature is, when as we intend to do
well.

Let us then understand and know these two things, and we shall never think
it strange, that we are so slow and slack to follow God as in deed we are:
yea even these two things (I say.) For behold, Satan will never cease craftily
to go about to imagine whatsoever he possibly can to cause us to draw back,
he will set bars and pitch Hayes before us, he will lay Bushes, Thorns and
evil favored stumbling blocks whatsoever which any way may hinder and let
us: that if we mean to march on but only three paces, we shall be violently
carried away to turn on this side and on that, not knowing what shall become
of us. Again, we shall be solicited and moved by our inordinate appetites, to
draw us clean awry. For if we will wholly put our trust in God, the Devil
will draw us too the contrary and make us to give our selves up too this
wordly pelf, and so consequently to all the rest. Seeing then, that we are
drawn and haled with so many Cart ropes, yea and are of our selves so feeble
to do good, even burning after wickedness: Alas, no marvel though we be
slow too follow God, but yet for all that we must needed fight. It is no
question but that we flatter our selves, when as we see such slacknesse in our
selves and say, in deed it is very true such is the state and condition of our
nature, and again our infirmities are so great as that it is an impossible
thing for any man too discharge himself as he ought. O dear brethren, let us
not build upon such a foundation, but let us fight against our vices, and take
and get unto us strength and courage, against all the stumbling blocks and
ambusshes which Satan shall lay against us, that we may break all the bands
and Cords wherewith he holds us bound. See I say how we ought to do in
this case. For, let us not think but that David was a man, passionate as we
are, and felt in himself great infirmities: neither made he protestation of
this in vain, when he says, that he hasted and made no delay to do the
Commandments of God. And so let us haste, after his example, when God
speaks, and let us bow down our ears to hear him, and lift up our foot
to obey that which he shall say unto us.

Lo then what David means to declare unto us in this place: to wit, what
readynesse ought to be in all the children of God, to hear his word, and to
receive it, and not to defer from day to day: For we know not what time God
will give us the grace to offer his word unto us. They which in such sort
delay the time, do make their account that God is greatly bound and beholden
too attend upon them. Now we see how he scorneth such our arroga^cy, when as
we pray unto him with such terms and conditions. Wherefore, we ought a
great deal the more too force our selves, to the end to attain to that
perfection, after the example which is here set down unto us, too run
without delay so often as God shall have mercy upon us. It follows soon
after, that David was not given too do wickedly notwithstanding all the wrongs
which the wicked had done unto him, and had persecuted him with all the greefes
and conflictes which he had sustained.

Albeit (says he) that the hands of the ungodly have robbed me: yet have not I
forgotten thy law. This is not here put to without a cause. For we shall
herein see very many which are peaceable and moderate enough, when as they be
not grieved, but suffered to run their own course; But if any trouble over
take them, and that they be molested, behold then are give to do wickedly,
then alter they their determination and purpose, and change their copy. So
then, because men are so easy to be drawn to evil, although before, they
followed the thing that was good: see therefore we ought diligently to note
this place, which David here adds. For it is as it were to ratify that
which he has before spoken of the ready nesse to follow the word: because
that that had not been enough, without he had been so confirmed in it. For
although the Devil had so lain upon him, even too have discouraged him, yet
was he not without hope, continually to make his part good against him.

And so must we also do in this case. When our Lord then shall set us in
the way, and shall give us some good motions: let us beseech him so to confirm
us in the same, as that when the Devil shall go about for too assail us,
we might repulse and over come all the assaults wherewith he shall assail
us: and always too continue and remain in our determination and purpose
without change. Lo the thing which is here declared unto us.

And we are also to note that there are two temptations, which we must resist,
when as we shall be grieved and iniuried. The first temptation is, that when
we are iniuried, we are by and by moved too render the like: Mark I beeseech
you the state and condition of our nature. Now since God commands us to
fly that which is naught, and to, do that which is good, even to love our
enemies, we had need tobee very well armed and furnished with these textes of
the Scriptures. For we shall never be able to attain to the end to over
come any such temptation nor desire of revenge, except God puts to his
helping hand. We think it also lawful to do evil, when we see our selves
compassed with nothing else but evil, and wickedness, if we look into the
order and government of the world, we shall see one man exceed in lechery,
another to be an horrible blasphemer, one an extortioner and usurer, and
another a deceitful bargainer, one in this thing another in that: and very
many estranged from God, and become near neighbors to Satan, violently
carried to this and that. When as then we are thus encompassed with evil and
iniquity, we think that we may take leave to do wickedly.

Lo how the children of God may be tempted, and how we see a;so and infinite
number to be as it were daily deceived. And therefore let us note, that if we
have at any time been boldly affected too come unto God, and that he has
reached forth his hand for a season, to have us too come unto him, that yet
this is not enough: But we must hereupon endeavor our selves too gather unto
us new force and courage, to the end the Devil might not shake us when as
he shall raise up against us troubles and vexations, and lay a great number
of stoppes and stumbling blocks in our ways. We must therefore be armed
against him, to the end we forget not the Law of God, whatsoever come of it.

And here we are to note this circumstance, that David does not only say,
that he was grieved by one man alone, ne yet by two or three, but he says, The
congregation of the wicked. When he says, The whole congregation, this is
very much: if there had been but a small number, it had been enough: But he
says, The whole congregation, signifying that he was assailed on every side,
that he was like a sheep among Wolves, Lions, Bears, and other wild beasts
of rauyne: and yet for all that, that he always put his trust in the Lord.

Now if we shall look well into our selves, how few shall we see which have
not been overcome with the least temtation that has come unto them? there
shall need but one man to oppose him self against us, and lo we are by and
by carried to do wickedly, now we know not that this comes from God. To be
short, the least fly which flies before our eyes (as we say) is even enough
to turn us quite out of the right way. And surely we may be greatly ashamed so
suddenly to change our copy: where before we made great show of following
of God, and by and by to go clean against the hair. And we think this may
be a most lawefull excuse, when as we can handle the matter thus, to say, that
we were carried to do wickedly through some te^tation. It is so far of that
this excuse should go for payement, as that it is neither worth ware nor
money. But we must seye with David, yea and that truly as he has done, That
whenever the whole congregation of the wicked shall assail us, let us not
cease to persevere and continue in the law of God. And namely he says, That
they have robbed him, which is yet the most grievous and sharp thing that can
come to a man, and which might soonest make him to quail. For it may be that
the wicked will go about to molest us, and yet come not to the end of their
enterprise: but David says, that he was put out for a pray, that he was as a
wretched forlorn creature, and assailed on every side: and yet that he forgot
not the law of God. And in so saying, it is as if he should have protested and
said, that he had always one self and the same affection to follow the
law of God.

Now let us return unto that which we have before touched. For this is no
small temptation, that God suffers us to be so molested, grieved, and
tormented. When GOD suffers Satan and his suppostes too take this course,
this should as it were discourage us an hundredth thousand times. And in very
deed this is Satan his policy, as we see in Job. For when Satan meant to
show, that it was an easy matter for Job to serve God. O, says he, he is
well at liberty, and lives quietly, he is rich, and therefore it is a very
easy matter for him, to praise God: but whenever he shall have lost all that
he has, all his substance, and be vexed with many anoyannces and torments,
we shall then see whether he will bless God yea or no. Lo then how God
proves us, when he suffers the wicked to molest and trouble us, that they
are even come to this point to set their foot upon the very throat of us. By
that he means to prove us whether we love him in good earnest or not. And
therefore we are the rather to mark this doctrine. For it is impossible for
us to serve God as we ought, without we have this constancy whereof David
here speaks: to wit, that when we shall be afflicted in any sort whatsoever,
we must not cease to pray always unto God, that we may be able to yield our
selves wholly to him. Lo what is the sum and effect hereof. And by this we
are taught, that neither afflictions nor any such other like things ought to
stay us from praying unto God, to the end we might always walk in his
obedience. For if he permit us to be afflicted in our flesh, we must not
therefore say that his love is diminished toward us, neither that he has
little care of our salvation: let us only attend and wait to see the end and
issue of our afflictions, and in the mean, while continue to walk according
to his word, and never forget his law, howsoever Satan soliciteth us to the
contrary. Now it follows by and by after,

At midnight will I rise to give thanks unto thee: because of thy righteous
judgments. Lo here an excellent protestation, which also hangs upon that,
whereof we have already treated in the first verse. For there David protests
that this is our true and very perfect felicity, when as we give our selves
to GOD and too his word.

Now he says here, that he rose at midnight too give thanks unto God,
even because of his rightuous Judgments. As if he should have said, I have
already declared, O Lord, that my portion is too have thy word, and too have
possession thereof: which if I have, I am blessed, and most blessed: And now,
O Lord, suffer me not to be unthankful for such a benefit, and privilege,
which thou have given me. He alleges also unto him his rightuous
Judgments. We have here before declared what the meaning of these words
importe: too wit, the Statutes of God: which are to govern us in such soundnes
as that our life shall be plain and honest, David then, saying that he
praised God because of his rightuous Judgments, signifies, that he thanketh
him for that, that he was taught in his word, knowing it too be a singular
benefit. We are now too note this saying. For we see what our
unthankfulness is, not only for all the benefits of GOD, but principally and
chiefly for this, that God has so declared himself unto us by his law:
Prophets and Gospel, and yet we never think of all this: and that which is
worse, that although he means too overcome our malice through his goodness,
and offered himself unto us as a father and Savior, yet do we fly as far
from him as we possibly can. It is very true that we will make sembla^ce to
seek him, as it were for our discharge, yea and that shall be too, when as we
shall be theretoo forced: But yet if we were at our own liberty and choice,
we would come as far aloof as were possible.

Now when we seek God in this wise, it is not too come directly unto him,
but only too say, Lo I am well affected unto GOD, I am one of those which
seek him.

And in deed, when God goes about to draw us unto him by his word, how may
we be able sufficiently enough to understand so notable a benefit? Wherefore
let this doctrine be well marked, seeing it is so very necessary to correct
and amend our so great villainous malice and vntha^kfulnesse? and that we
might hereafter learn to praise God, because it has pleased him to make us
partakers of this inestimable treasure, to wit, the doctrine of salvation: that
his meaning is to rule and order our life, that we might not be like wretched
strayed sheep, to be cast down hedlong into the bottomless pit of hell.
Here is likewise an ardent affection expressed in this saying. That David arose
at midnight. As if he should have said, that the day was not sufficient enough
for him, but that in the time of his quiet test, he lifted up his mind into
heaven to give thanks unto God. In this he signifies that he continued
praising of God without weerisomnesse.

Now then, if we will rightly follow the example of David, we must not give
GOD thanks when we think good, and when we shall have remembered him ones in
fiftene days, or I know not when: or else when as it shall be for fashions sake,
as when the Bell ringeth to cause us too come to the Sermon. But it must be
always, for we must both in the evening, and morning, and also at midnight,
have our minees waking to give him thanks. He adds,

I am a compaignion of all them that fear thee: and keep thy Commandments.
By which he signifies, that he has sought all the means possible too give
him self to walk in the fear of God. We have here to note, that David was an
excellent man, even like an Angel among mortal creatures: and yet for all
that, it was needeful for him to accompany him self with faithful men, men of
good example, and pure, and holy in life and conversation. And why so? To the
end he might be always the better confirmed in his vocation and calling, and
not to be withdrawn from the same by evil example. Now (as I have already
touched) if David had need hereof, what shall become of us, who are so
inconstant and mutable in all our doings? Lo then the first point which we have
to note in this place: to wit, that David protests that although the holy
Ghost assisted him, and that he felt him self confirmed, as we have seen,
nevertheless, he yet sought other helps to continue and hold him in the fear
of God: as the companies which were most meet for him, to cause him to follow
his vocation, and not to withdraw him from it, seeing there must be nothing
that must pull us aside from the right way. Now he means to signify further,
that he joined him self with men that feared God, to the end also that he
might serve him as he ought. For we are bound to stir up one another through
mutual exhortations and good ensamples. It is meet then that we have these
two considerations: in the first place we are to consider to follow those
which can advance and further us in the right way, who can profit us more
and more in the fear of God, and after that, we must also labor to to
profit those with whom we shall be likewise conversant, inciting them by all
means possible, to follow the right trade, wherein God shall have set them,
to the end he may be honored with one accord: and that every of us might say,
come, let us go, and let us travel and take pains to cause to others to go
with us, that we may altogether honor the Lord our God. Now the conclusion of
the eight verse, is the second request.

The earth O Lord is full of thymercie: O teach me thy statutes. Here we see
how necessary a thing it is for us to be always praying to God, beseeching
him more amply to instruct us, that we may acknowledge him better then
heretofore we have done: yea, and that specially, when as we think we know
all that is to be known, that we thoroughly consider, that we have yet great
need to profit continually more and more. For, which of us, I pray you,
dares be so bold as to compare with David? Lo so excellent a Prophet, as
that he is like unto an Angel of God: we see also how God has reveled unto
him his secrets, as if he had bin taken up into the heavenly kingdom: and yet
he having such excellent gifts as we know, desires notwithstanding to be
instructed in the statutes of God. And which is he amongs us that has not
greater need of the^? So then when as we shall be greatly learned in the word of
God, not only for our selves, but also to instruct our neighbors: let us for all that be co^te^ted to yield our selves to be taught of him, to beseech him to
grant us his grace, that we may daily profit more and more. And therefore we
ought the better to note the reason, which David sets first down, For the
earth, O Lord as full of thy mercy. As if he should have said, thou O Lord
spreadest abroad thy fatherly goodness over all creatures: we se how of thy
mercy thou feedest the beasts of the field, we se the trees flourish, the earth
bring forth her increase, thy goodness spreads through heaven and earth, and
how is it then possible, that thou shuldst not do good unto thy children? I am
one of that number which call on thee, and that put their trust in thee* Seeing
thou art so loving and merciful to al creatures, thou shall not forsake me.
The reason, here set down, serves David for a confirmation, that he should not
dout to obtain the request which he had made. And so as often as we desire God
to instruct us in his statuts, the good nes dout to obtain the request which
he had made. And so ost as we desire God to instruct us in his statuts, the
goodness, wherewith he ouerspreadeth al his creatures serves us as a foundation,
whereon to build al our petitio^s. And since that God has given us this grace
to allow us in the number of his children, and to show him selt to be our
father, let us be sure that he will not refuse to give us those things which he
has promised. And according to this holy doctrine, let us prostrate our selves
before the Majesty, etc.

The nienth Sermon of the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm.
TETH.
O Lord, thou have dealte graciously with thy servant according to thy word
O teach me good judgment and knowledge: for I have believed thy
commandments.
Before I was troubled I went wrong: but now I keep thy word.
Thou art good and gracious: teach me thy statutes.
The proud have imagined a lie against me: but I will keep thy commandments
with my whole heart.
Their heart is as far as greece: but my delight is in thy law It is good for me
that I have been in trouble: that I may learn they statutes.
The law of thy mouth is better unto me: then thousands of gold and silver.
IF we be oftentimes foolish and unadvised in a great many causes, it may
chiefly appear when we mean to pray to God: for the^ if there be but one drop
of wit or reason in us, it will show it self but we discover, our own folly in
that behalf, more then in all the rest of our actions. And what is the reason
For sootli we will behave our selves more modestly, whenever we shall crave
any thing at the hands of men, then when we come before the majesty of God:
for we go on hedlong thereto, not knowing what we ought too desire of him: but
even power out at all adventure whatsoever shall come into our mouths. And we
should then the rather call to mind our lesson, to the end we might know the
order rightly how to pray. For we profane the name of god, and show ourselves
too much to conte^ne his majesty, if we beg at his hands any other thing the^
that* which he has declared unto us to have liking off in such sort* as that
his will, be always preferred, and our desires thereby chiefly ruled. Now we
are here advertised, that above all things we ought to pray unto God that he
will teach us, and cause us to understand his will, accordingly as he has
declared unto us in his word: and to open our eyes that we may do it, so that
we might understand that which is comprehended therein.

And this is the sum and effect of these eight verses, which here we have
now to handle. For David demands of God none other thing but to know the
contents of the law, and the doctrine thereof; that he might be ruled thereby,
and his whole life framed thereafter.

But in the first place he remembers God of all the benefits which he had
already received from him. For that it which must give us trust and confidence,
when as we come to make any prayer unto God. And in deed there is nothing in
the world which gives us a better access, nor that does more readily assure
us to be heard, then when we behold his benefits bestowed upon us. And how
must that be? Thus must every man consider with him self and say, I have
found heretofore by experience the bounty of my God: yea, I have had as great
prouse hereof, as is possible. And therefore it were unreasonable that I
should mistrust him, and stand in any doubt that he would not now grant me
that which I desire of him: considering that I have so good a proof of his
love, that he is always ready, liberally to bestow upon me his benefits.
When then I shall have received so many benefits of him, should I now think
with my self, how is it possible that this thing should come to pass? to
wit, that I should obtain that which I am about to pray for? If we shall
stand in this doubt, we shall do God great wrong, and show our great
unthankfulness unto him: for he never does us any good, but it is to this
end and purpose, that we should be partakers of his mercy and grace, which
he will continue unto us even to the end: for he is never weary in liberally
bestowing his benefits upon us, as me^ are wont when as they bestow bountifully
of any, and by and by pluck their heads again quite out of the collar. But
God is no such manner of one, he is a well that can never be drawn dry. Lo
then whereunto this tends which is here spoken in the first verse: O Lord,
thou have dealt graciously with thy servant, David spoke not this to the end
to measure him self, that he would have God never hereafter to bestow any more
benefits upon him: But clean contrary, that because he had had already so
great experience of the grace of God, he was fully resolved, that he should
also feel his benefits too come. For God is no chaungling: and as I have
already said, his grace is never lessened, but he will always increase it
toward us. And so let us learn after the example of David, that as often as
we are to pray unto God, to consider with our selves, and call to mind, the
benefits which we have received from his hand, that the same might be as it
were an entrance for us unto prayer, and thereupon to conclude, that seeing God
has showed him self heretofore liberal: we should feel him also to be the
same, ever hereafter unto the end.

Now namely David adds, According to thy word: And not without cause: for
this is not all that we ought to know, that God has done us good, and that all that we have, proceadeth from him:but we must put this confidence unto it: to
wit, that he has done it according to his word. For like as meat, although it
be good and sweet, has no savor nor taste, but is altogether unsavory
without salt: even so likewise the benefits of God, will have no perfect
taste, that we might savor them as appertains, if it be not, that they be
salted and seasoned with faith and belief, and too know that the graces and
benefits which GOD has bestowed upon us, have been according to his word
and promise. And why so I pray you? For if we shall not have the word of God
and his promises: yea and although (as I have already said) we might very
well make our petitions unto him, and come before him, in building our selves
upon this, that he has already aided us of his mere favor and goodness:
yet should we not for all that, be assured that he will always do the like,
ne yet abide constant therein, that when he has begun, that he will finishe
it, we can never be able, I say, too have any such certainty without his
word. And why so? when God says unto us, go to now, and hearken unto me,
I will be your father, and show my self savior toward you, and you shall
find me to be such one for ever: after that we have feit the proof and effect
of these promises: we may then very well apply his benefits to that use
whereof I have already spoken: has God done me good but for a fit? has he
done this only, but by the way of talk? and will he not now hold and
continue it? no, not so: but he has done it according to his word. Does the
word of God stand but for a day or for a month? No, it remains and abides
both in life and death. Let us then conclude, that the benefits of God are
everlasting, and that he will continue them unto all those that are not
unthankful. Lo this sentence which David adds is not superfluous, but of
great wait, when he faieth, O Lord, thou have dealt graciously with me,
according to thy word. If we will then be confirmed by the benefits of God,
which we have heretofore received; and when we shall make our requests, that
we would have him to hear us: we must join his benefits with his word, and
even to speak property, like unto confectes closely wrapped up together in
sauory salt, for otherwise we shall never be able to feel any such taste them,
as to apply then to such an use, to build a true certainty of faith in him.
Now David having used such a preface, adds,

O teach me good judgment and knowledge: for I have believed thy
commandments. Here David desires God to give him true wisdom, that he
might know what he had to do. And why does he so? he sets down the reason
which is that, that we have already seen, for I have believed, says he, thy
word. Now it seems to implie, that they which have believed, are
sufficiently instructed, that they have, I say, true understanding, and so
great wisdom, as they need not to pray unto God, to inlighten them any more.
Wherein consists and stands all our wisdom but in faith? when as we
receive the word of God, and being taught by it do rest us in that which he
says unto us? Lo this is our full and whole perfection.

Now David protests, That he has believed the word of God: wherefore then
desires he to be taught, as if he were without knowledge and ignorant? Now
here we are to note (as we have touched this morning) that we believe the
word of God two ways: to wit, our faith must be distinguished in two
parts: not that we mean to divide, and dismember the same, but to make a
distinction of it, as is comprised in her own natures kind. From whence then
takes faith her beginning? Forsooth, she must despise her self to receive
whatsoever God shall say, we must suffer him to be master, and to acknowledge
whatsoever comes from him, to be good, holy, and just: that before he has
spoken unto us, we be already prepared and disposed to obey him:and albeit we
know not yet his will, nevertheless to have this resolution with our selves,
does God speak? Well then, we must not only give our ear and attention:
but also receive without contradiction, whatsoever shall proceed out of his
holy mouth.

Lo here what is the first part and condition of faith. Now there is a second
part and condition: to wit, the instruction which God gives us, after that we
are come unto him with that reverence that Scholars ought to come to their
master: for we are more fully and soundly taught of him. This is it that
David desires. He protests That he has believed the word of God: that is
to say, to have known the majesty contained therein, to have obeyed it, and
to have yielded himself subject unto the same. When he had made this
protestation, O Lord, says he, now that I have felt the power and virtue of
thy word, and have chiefly been desirous thereof, grant me this grace that
I may comprehended it.

Lo here a notable place and worthy the noting. For in the first place* we are
advertised, that we shall never profit our selves either in the Gospel, or yet
in any part of the holy Scripture, if we have not this modesty with us, as
too yield our selves too God: with this persuasion, that the same which we
account too be good and faithful with us is nothing in respect of that which
he means too do therein on his behalf: considering that he has showed it
unto us:For we are simple and ignorant, and cannot conceive the things which
are necessary for our salvation, until such time as we have yielded our minds
to this reason. And lo wherefore there are so few scholars of God at this
day in this point. For how many shall we find at this day, which have their
mind so humbled as it ought? But the greater part are arrogant fools, we
shall find very many in this behalf, that will make no more account of the
word of God, then if a mortal and seely man had spoken. For So Much then as
men come thus too God with such a pride, let us not wonder although he
leaves them without wit or reason: and although the Sun shyneth bright
before their eyes, yet remain they continually blind, and groape about, as it
were in the dark, and wander about even too the hazard of their neck
breaking. We must not be abashed at this, although God depriueth them of his
grace, since they will not submit themselves unto his word. Even so, when
as this shall be in us to attribute unto God the authority and honor which he
is worthy off, we may after the example of David, hope that he will instruct
us more and more: and also make this request unto him. For this is the first
degree and step of all Christian wisdom: to wit, to humble them selves in
such sort, as that they be ever ready to receive whatsoever God shall say unto
them. When as they shall be thus prepared, they can not do amiss, nor yet fear
that God will ever forsake the^: but that he will spread forth his power to
maintain the^, as he has therein promised the^ to do. And thus much as
touching these two verses. Now it follows,

Before I was troubled I went wrong: but now I keep thy word. Here David
signifies that he was more dau^ted, then ever he was, because God corrected
him: As if he had said, In very deed, O Lord, among all the rest of the
benefits which I have already alleged, this is one, that thou have made me to
know my self through affliction: lo, it makes me to keep thy commandments.
Now when we tell God thus of the graces which he has bestowed upon us that
we might be prepared to serve him, it is for this cause that he might increase
and augment them more and more in us, until such time as he has brought the^
to their perfect end. Now we have to note in this matter, the order which David
keeps, O Lord, says he, I confess that I have erred. The first point, is
this confession which he makes: for when God finds us to be untamed and hard
to be kept in array, it is meet that this our stubburnesse should be pulled
down, and he to show his authority over us, to the end we might soon
after feel his clemency. And therefore, David knowing that he was once very
wild and untamed, and had not walked in such fear of God as became him,
confesses, that although he had been taught, yet that it was needful for
God to set him in array, and to keep him in good order. O Lord says he, I
confess that I have erred, yea and that was before thou had chastised me:
but now I keep thy commandments. By this he signifies in effect, that
which I have touched: to wit, that he was already prepared in this wisdom of
the knowledge of God: yet he always prayed that he would augment this grace
in him, and confirm him therein until such time as he were thoroughly made
perfect. In the mean while we have to note, that David was not a man
altogether wickedly bent, ne yet so untamed as a great number of the
contempners of God are. It is very true that he committed very grievous and
extreme offenses, were it but this adultery which he committed with Bethsabe
Vrie his wife, which was so horrible an act, as that he deserved even for that
to be utterly forsaken of God. And after that, he became so proud when he
would have mustred the people, as that he was violently carried with a vain
and foolish arrogancy, clean forgetting who it was that had advanced him
unto this royal seat: and in stead of doing homage unto God for such a
notable benefit, he determined with him self to have escaped away on
horseback. Lo what grievous and shameful faults these are. But if we look
into the course of his life, we shall find that he was a man of a continual
singleness very teacheable and full of courtesy, following the vocation of
God, and wholly given thereto. Now herein appears a great difference between
a man which outrageth all the days of his life, and him which commits some
particular evil, showing nevertheless in all the rest of his life a fear of
God: As it may happen, that a man shall serve God all his life, and yet in the
mean while may somewhat fall, and perhaps very grievously: as we see to have
come to pass in David. Now we shall see others to be very wicked, and to
despise God all their life long, delighting altogether in wickedness. But
David never was such one: and yet for all that he confessed that he had erred,
before such time as God had visited him with afflictions. And if this came so
to pass in David, alas what shall become of us poor wretches? So then, let us
understand that afflictions, are more necessary for us, then bread and drink.

We crave of God that he will feed and nourishe us. It is very true, and he
gives us leave for to make such request: but yet we must not leave out the
principal point: to wit, we must beseech him not to make us so fat, as we,
make pampered and restife lades, too wynse and kick at him, but that being
governed through his bountiful goodness, we might be easy and tractable to
be guided according to his will. So it is (as already I have said) that we
ought in deed, to be tamed through afflictions: or else we should always
become like unto savage and wild beasts.

And too prove that it is so, we see our nature so rebellious, as is most
pitiful: and our affections such terrible beasts, as that we are not able to
hold them in any good order: in so much that if God slack the reins, and lay
the bridle in our neck, it is out of all question that we will be very
stubborn and rebellious against him: and in such sort outrage, that we will
desire nothing else but clearly to overthrow all justice, equity, and right.
To be short, it will be out of all doubt, that we will even iustle and spurn
against God, when as we shall live at our own pleasure, and in great
prosperity.

Now there is none other remedy to help this matter, but to have God to
afflict us, for this is the only mean, by which he keeps us in subjection
and in awe, otherwise, if he leave us in rest and at quiet, it were impossible
but that our nature should stubburnly rebel against him. If we carry away
this lesson well, we should never be so grieved with the afflictions which he
lays upon us as we are:but we should take another manner of consolation in
all our miseries and adversities then we do: knowing that although they be
bitter medicines unto us, yet that they shall turn to our health. Let us chose
whether we will be like wild and mad beasts, straying from the way of
salvation, yea even like very frantique men to lift up our selves against God,
rather then to bechastised with his rods, and to be so conquered as that by
the same mean he might order us to live in his obedience.

Since then we be so profited through afflictions, as that the gain which we
get thereby is not heavy and grievous to bear, let us comfort our selves
therewith, attending the issue which God shall give unto us. Moreover, let us
also have in memory, that we must not be incorrigible, after that God has
lift up his hand to chastise us, and has rebated out foolish and inordinate
appetites, neither moyle and groyne as we are wonted, as if he did us great
wrong: but let us suffer our selves to be chastised and afflicted after the
example of David. Lo, the very savage and fierce beasts, yet for all that at
last they may be made tame, when as a painful and industrious man shall take
them in hand, which can tell how to rule them.

Behold the untamed horse, of nature fierce and stout, and yet for all that he
suffers him self to be handled and led, turns with the bit, when he shall
have a man upon his back which knows how too ride and tame him. I beseech
you, ought not we to be greatly ashamed, when as our God shall employe him
self to order us, and win us unto him selse, and yet cannot compass it? So
then, let us after the example of David, strive to profit our selves under the
rod of God, to the end we might keep his laws, after that he has
scourged us. Now it follows soon after.

Thou art good and gracious: teach me thy statutes. David here repeateth again
the same petition which we have heard. And it is the very same which I have
already touched: to wit, that amongs all the prayers which we must make unto
God, this is one of the most principal, to desire him to instruct us in his
word: that we be not given in such sort to that which concerns this
present life, and our bodies, as that we think no whit of the glass of our
souls. Now this glass is it which consists in the word of God.

So then, let us not forget this so great a benefit, when as we are about to
pray unto God, that we have this in a most especial remembrance, that we
may be instructed in his statutes. Now over and beside this request, David
uses the same reason which he has set down in the first verse: that is when
he says, That God is good and gracious.

It is very true, that they are two sundry sentences: but yet they proceed
from one self same springhed, and the meaning also tends to one and the self
same end. He has said, thou have dealt liberally with thy servant: and
here, thou art good and gracious. There he has said, even according too thy
word: and here he has put them in both: so that we may see, that this
verse is but a confirmation of that which we have seen in the two first:
that David alleging to GOD, his bounty, which he used toward his, even
accordinig to his nature, beseeches him that he would teach him his
Statutes. Now he adds,

The proud have imagined a lie against me: but I will keep thy
Commandments with my whole heart. This is alleged for two reasons: the one
is, that by it David shows the need which he has of God his help, and to
be confirmed in his word, yea and to be instructed in the same. And why so?
Forsooth to withstand temptations. As if he had said, Alas my God, if thou
instruct me not, and guidest me e by thy holy spirit, what shall I do? For I
am not without temptations, when as I shall have but mine own will which ever
strives against thee: But I have also enemies without, which oppress and
grieve me: Wherefore I have very great need to be guided and governed by thy
hand. David then considered that it was needful for him to be chastised of
God: to the end he might a great deal the easelyer obtain his request.

Now in the mean while he means too show that he made his prayer without
hypocrisy: that he came too GOD in very good earneste, and with a pure and
sincere affection: as if he had said, O Lord I desire not to be instructed in
thy law and Statutes for fashions sake: but because I esteem of this good
that is in it, and for that I know this to be the most sovereign felicity
that we can have. And to prove that it is so, although the wicked have assailed
me, and taken great pains to draw me too do wickedly, and have bent all all
their force and power thereto: yet have I kept thy commandments. By this he
has made good proof how greatly he loved the word of God, when as he
lothed it not whatsoever they craftily and maliciously practiced against him.

See then the two reasons which we have here to note. Now (in the first place)
when David speaks here of the proud, let us remember that it is the title
which the Scripture commonly attributes to all Infidels and contemners of God.
For from whence comes this villainous and beastly impiety, that men will not
bow them selves under the hand of GOD, but are hardened, and lift them selves
up against him? It cannot be chosen but that this must needs be an horrible
pride. Even so then this infidelity is it that gives too man as it were
Horns which he so naturally esteems (although in deed it be less then
nothing) and thinks the same to be wonderful. And contrariwise, let us mark
that it is only Faith that must induce us to humility, and which frames and
fashioneth us therein, considering this swelling of our hearts, our growing in
presumption, like unto swelling Toades. There is nothing I say, that can amend
this vice, but Faith alone. The reason is, because that Faith brings us unto
God.

Now when as we know what the righteousness of God is, Let us then come
unto our selves, and we shall find in us nothing else but iniquity: when we
shall consider of the Wisdom of God, we shall see that all whatsoever we
thought too be good reason, to be nothing else but vanity and folly. So then,
when men do wonder and look at the brightness of God, they then learn that
they are no better but doung and filthy stench, are even angry and displeased
with them selves, and greatly ashamed of their own filthynesse. See then,
that humility proceeds from faith. And therefore David says, that the
proud, to wit, the wicked and Infidels imagined a lie against him. Let us
then know, that pride is engendered of men, and that they bring it with them
into the world so soon as they are borne, that it grows and increases unto
full age, until such time as God corrects it by his holy spirit and by Faith.
And so when as we shall see the contemners of God, and the wicked who know
not what it is too be ordered by GOD, when we shall see them, I say, thus
outrage: let us not think it strange, seeing it is the course of nature.

Moreover, let us well note that David speaking of the need which he had of
God, shows us by his example, that the more we are vexed with temptations,
that so much the more bold we ought too be, too beseech him of his aid, that
he will reach out his hand too uphold us, and not to suffer us to be overcome.
And this is specially too be noted: for when we are grieved with any
temptation, we know not that the same is to make us run too God, who is the
only remedy by which we must be delivered.

And so the Devil may very easily enter into us too overthrow our faith,
since it is as it were put out there unto him as a pray, and besides we
vouchsafe not once too receive the remedy which is offered us for our help. So
then, let us keep the order which David here sets down: to wit, that if
we be assailed with great and very strong temptations, that then it is high
time for us to have recourse unto God, beseeching him to save us, and too
remedy our faults, which else would lead us too everlasting destruction. And
thus much for this.

Now we have soon after too note: that we shall make good proof of our well
willing to serve God, if we resist the temptations. If the wicked go about
too draw us unto wickedness, and yet we stand fast and sure, then is our
Faith and constancy well approved. And this is spoken, to the end that no man
should flatter him self, for we think this to be a sufficient excuse, and
that God should also be well contented therewith, too say, that we were
drawn to do wickedly by the mean of some other. See I pray you, will every
one say, I was once in a very good forwardenesse, and desired to live according
too the will of God. But when I see the world so perverse and wicked, and that
all men were given to so many vices, it was impossible for me too escape, but
that I must do as other men did. When we shall allege for our selves such
excuses, we think that God should hold himself well contented therewith.

But contrariwise, we see here that the faithful never cease for all that to
serve God: when all the whole world go about to hinder and let them: that
although the wicked invent never so many lies, and lay never so many stumbling
blocks in their way to cause them too turn and decline from the right way,
yet do they still stand firm and sure. And see also how we must be feign too
do, that if we will faithfully serve our good God, we must not cease too
pursue our vocation, yea although the wicked bente all the force they were
possibly able to make against us, too turn us clean from the way of salvation.

Now if this admonition has been always necessary, it is more needful at
this day then ever it was. For we see that the world is grown too a
monstrous heap of all iniquity, that we are not able too step forth one
step, but that we shall meet with great store of evil and dangerous
incounters, which might weary and withdraw us, and carry us to do wickedly in
all kind of things. Therefore we ought so much the rather to practice this
doctrine, That the wicked have imagined lies against us: but yet that we have
kept the law of God. For the lies which the proud and the enemies of God do
imagine against us, are not of one kind. For sometimes they will seduce us
under the color of Friendship, sometimes they will charge us with a great many
of things to make us faint hearted, sometimes they will make such a confusion
of all, that we shall not be able to discern between white and black. We must
then be so much the more well advised, and stand the surer upon our guard. And
although the devil transform himself so into diverse manners, let not us
leave to keep the law of God, yea and that with out whole heart: which is a
thing that we ought diligently to mark. For if we have but only some little and
feeble affection too follow God, we shall soon be very weary thereof. Our
heart therefore must be wholly addicted thereto, for else we shall never be able
to make our part good against Satan. Now it is said a little after,

Their heart is as fat as grease: but my delight is in thy law. Here David
makes a comparison between the contemners of God, and those which desire to
serve him. And why does he so? He shows, that the cause which so induces the
Infidels too contemn GOD, is the dissolute and brutishe life which they lead:
because they are as fat as an Hog in his stye, that has been fed with
Accornes and Barley, and that lies wallowing on an heap in his own grease.
He is so very fat and heavy that he is not able to get up: and although he
be already a marvelous fat and ^^auy beast, which desires nothing else but
draffe and swill, yet will he be far fatter and heauyer, when as he shall
be styed up and so fatted. Even so fares it with these cursed conte^ners of
God, which have no regard unto everlasting life, but are wholely given up too
their God the belly. They wallowe them selves in their own grease, as a Swine
which has his groine always in the trough. Now contrariwise David says,
that all his delight has been in the word of God. Whereby he does us to
wit, that although God had made him fat, yet that he wallowed not for all
that in his own grease, but delighted in that spiritual gift which was given
him, because that God had taught it him in his School.

Lo then what we have to gather out of this place: that although we see the
greater part of the world contemn God, yet must we not be abashed thereat.
And why so? Let us well consider wherein men do put their chief felicity:
and we shall find them too be like unto Oxen, and Swine, desiring naught but
to live here in this world, without looking any farther. Now we must have a
farther regard, if we will serve God as too him appertains to wit, that
we take such pleasure and delight in the word of God, that we be no more
given too the world, as we are overmuch. And although God gives us
abundance, yet that we have our ease and commodities in this world, let us
not settle our minds on them, but know that all these are but pety small
means and necessaryes: but let us labor to go too the principal, and
acknowledge him too be our Father and Savior: And when we know him too be so,
then let us clime up unto him, and too that everlasting life, whereunto he
inuyteth and calls us. Lo I say, what we have here too retain.

Moreover if God tameth us by affliction. Let us come to that which David
adds, to wit, That it was good for him that he had been in trouble.
Although then that God pulls back his hand, and that in stead of gently
entreating us, he handles us roughly, in stead of sending us plenty of
wealth, he causes us to suffer hunger and thirst, in stead of giving us
health, he greeueth us with diseases: that being vexed with many anguishes
and torments, so that we know not what too do: yet must we always look
to the end, to be comforted with David, in saying, It is a good turn for me
O Lord, that I have been in trouble, That I may learn thy Statutes.

Now since it has so fallen out, that David was afflicted, to the end he
might be the better disposed too learn the ordinances of God, what shall
become of us, which are full of worldely vanities? Let us then know that we
had need to be corrected by the hand of God, and to be tied short, if we will
profit in the doctrine of salvation. Lo then, how we must practice the
admonition of David. And when we shall have so done, we may conclude and say
with that which is set down in the last verse, to wit: That the law of God
is more dear unto us then Gold or Silver. And this is it that we must do in
this point, we must esteem and make much of the word of God, as it is
worthy and not to stay our selves on the things of this world, but to look
always farther off: to wit, unto heaven. When then we shall have profited our
selves thus by the afflictions which God shall send us, he will bestow his
grace upon us by little and little, that we shall so esteem of his word, as
that we shall wholly stick to it. And let us beseech him, that it would please
him too dispoyle us of all our wicked fleshly desires and affections, and to
cause us to crave none other thing but that he will reign and live in us.

According too this holy doctrine, let us prostrate our selves before the
majesty of our good God, in acknowledging our offenses: Beseeching him that it
would please bim too take from us the wicked affections which might turn us
away from him, and from his service: and that we might forget all whatsoever
might turn us from the right way of salvation, that we desire nothing but that
we may attain too that everlasting life, which we look for in heaven. That
it would please him not too suffer us to live here like brute beasts, not
knowing to what end we were created in this world: but that we might
acknowledge him to be our Creator, our Father and Savior, that we might
subject our selves unto him as his creatures, and obey him as true and
faithful Children, until such time as he shall take us out of this world to
make us partakers of that everlasting bliss, and immortal inheritance, which
he has prepared in Heaven, and which is purchased for us by our Lord Jesus
Christ. That he will not only grant us this grace, but also unto all people
and nations in the world, etc.

The tenth Sermon of the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm.
IOD.
Thine hands have made and fashioned me: O give me therefore understanding
that I may learn thy Commandments.
So they that fear thee, when they see me shall rejoice: because I have put
my trust in thy word.
I know, O Lord that thy Judgments are right: and that thou have affficted
me justly.
I pray thee that thy mercy may comfort me: according to thy promise unto thy
Servant.
Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live: for thy law is my
delight.
Let the proud be confounded, for they have dealte wickedly and falsely with
me: but I meditate in thy Commandments.
Let such as fear thee, and know thy Testimonies: turn unto me.
Let my heart be upright in thy Statutes: that I be not ashamed.
WE ought to hold and keep this rule and order in our prayers to God, not
too measure his affection and love after our own imaginations and thoughts but
to acknowledge him to be such one as in deed he is, and as he shows himself
unto us to be. And lo why he says by his Prophet Esaiah, after he had
declared, that he would have compassion to save his church. Think not (says
he,) that I am like unto you, for there is as great distance between my
thoughts and yours, as is between Heaven and Earth. Let us then measure the
goodness of God after our vain imaginations: But (as I have already said) let
us know that it is not in vain, which he declares and testifies unto us,
that the good will and love which he bears us, are infinite things which we
must behold by faith only. And it is to the end that we should come unto him
with greater boldness too call upon him, not doubting but that we shall
obtain whatsoever we crave at his hands, yea even as much as shall be
expedient for our salvation. And according to this, David here sets down,
that God had made him. As if he had said, I come not unto thee, O Lord, as we
commonly come unto men. I set not down any merit or worthynesse, whereby I
have bound thee unto me: For thou art beholden nothing at all to me: but I
talk of thy benefits which I have already felt, too the end I would have
thee to continue them unto me. For behold the true and very perfect nature of
God: to wit, his nature is always to spread upon us his graces without
ceasing: as he is a fountain which never can be drawn dry: even so must we
not fear that he diminishes or lesseneth them, neither yet is sparing of his
benefits, for he has plenty enough to continue them without end or ceasing.
Let us then thoroughly consider this argument which David here uses: to wit
that he tells God that he is his Creature, to the end he might teach him,
yea even to understand his law. We have here then to note, that Daiud puts
not in himself here, simply in the rank with all the rest of his creatures:
but comes before God, as a man fashioned after his own image and likeness:
Thy hands (says he) have made me and fashioned me: that is to say, Thou have
granted me O Lord to be an inhabiter in this world, yea, and have made me a
reasonable Creature. Since then it is so, O Lord, that thou haste already
begun so gently too entreat me, I beseech thee that thou will continue it.

Now we see what a kind or vain of speaking we must use, to be assured that
God will hear our requests: to wit, that we must lay before him his graces,
which we have already received of him. For that ought to make us to hope that
like as he has begun, so likewise will he go through with it, until such
time as he has brought his work to perfect end. Now, if we desire god to give
us understanding to comprehe^d his law, inasmuch as he has made us mortal men
we have so much the better occasion to do it, in telling him that he has
adopted us to be his children, and takes us to be as of his household. Now,
when as we have this advantage and privilege, our confidence ought to be so
much the more certain, that we should not dout but that he would augment those
graces which he before had bestowed upon us. And so, to the end we might
profit by this place, we have to gather briefly three points: The first and
principal which we are to wish is this, that God will instruct us in his
law, that we be not so given either to the goods of this world, or else to
the pleasures of the body, and to all the rest, but that we might always have
regard to our spiritual health.

As touching the first, we are to desire that this affection may reign in us,
to the end to keep all the rest in good order, which violently might carry us
away: to wit, that we should desire to be the right Scholars of God. And thus
much for this. Now immediately after follows the mean to beseech him, that he
will bestow upon us his grace to be taught in his law: to wit, because he
has made us too this end, and not like unto Oxen, Asses, nor Dogs, which are
brute beasts, and nothing but corruption: but that he has imprinted in us his
image, and ordained us too everlasting life. Seeing then that he has created
us after this manner, let us trust in him, and beseech him, that he will
continue and make perfect that, which he has begun in us. But we shall have
the greater courage too make this request unto him, when as we shall be
brought unto him in the second place, that over and besides that he has made
us men, he has chosen us also to be his children, has made us partakers of
this divine wisdom, which is contained in the Gospel, has showed him self
to be our father, and called us into the company and fellowshipp of his Son
Christ Jesus, that we might be members of his body. When as then we may
charge God with this. Lo this is a far greater approbation of our Faith: and
we ought to beseech him with much more certainty and assurance, without
doubting that it would please him too hear us. And thus much for the second
point.

The third is, that although God has taught us, we must not by and by think
that we are such great Clerks, and so well learned, as that we need not to
desire him too confirm us more and more in his knowledge, and too be always
like unto prentises and young nouices. As in very deed they which have most
profited, should always be thus humbled, not to think that they had attained
to the greatest abundaunce of knowledge: But that they had only some little
taste and smattering of the wisdom of God, that they had need too have him
to increase it always in them more and more.

Now if David made this request, yea and that in truth knowing that he had
great need to be instructed of God: I pray you what arrogancy shall this be
in us, when as we shall presume to have our brain so full stuffed, as that
we needed no more instruction? that we should content our selves with that
which he had learned: ought it not to be said that we are most arrogaunt? And
so, let us after the example of David, all the days of our life pray unto God
to teach us, and that we be never weary of being taught of him, until such
time as he has despoyled us of this mortal body: For so long as we shall
remain in this body, we must needs be compassed about with black and
thick clouds of ignorance, from which he will then deliver us, through the
brightness of his coming. Now it follows soon after,

So they that fear thee shall rejoice to see me: because I have put my trust
in thy word. David brings in here yet another reason, for the obtaining of
his request: to wit, that the faithful will be glad seeing that God has
heard him. And this is a place greatly worth the marking: For we are let to
understand by these words, that when God bestows any benefits upon any one
of our Brethren and neighbors, we ought not only to acknowledge this
goodness in this act simply, but wholly apply it too our own use, that it may
serve us for our better confirmation: that we might understand, that we shall
be more refused, then he which has already obtained his desire. And why so?
For God is equal and just to all those which call upon him unfeignedly. He
says not, that he will do good too one and not too another: but we have a
general promise which extends it self too all without exception: to wit,
that if we come unto him for succoure, and that in truth, that he will be
very ready to receive us: yea, that before we shall open our mouths he will
stretch forth his hand too give us whatsoever he knows to be good and
profitable for our salvation. Since then that this promise is general, if we
be not too too unthankful, we must needs believe that God will hear as
as well as those whom we have already seen him to have heard heretofore:
and we must take their example for our better confirmation of the promises
which he has made unto us. See here, why David says, That they which fear
God, shall see him, and in seeing him, will be glad of it: yea and we are
thoroughly too consider of that which follows: for I have put my trust in thy
Commandments. As if he had said, They shall find nothing in me why thou haste
showed thy self so loving and liberal, when as thou have taught te by thy
holy spirit, but because I have put my trust in thy word. Now thy word, is
come too all those which fear thee. So then, let them know that the same
which thou have done too my person, appertains too them also, and may apply
it too their own use. This is said for a better co^firmatio^ of that which I
have already spoken: to wit, that if God has gently dealte with any of our
neighbors, that he has had compassion upon him: we are to conclude, that we
shall feel him too do the like unto us And why so? Because he has given us
his word: which is true and will never deceive us. Let us then put our trust
in him, and we shall feel the like of that which we have seen in others that
have gone before us, and showed us the way, and have given us an example too
repose all our trust in the goodness of God, having the promises which he has
offered us. Lo here the meaning of David in this verse. Now it follows,

I know O Lord, that thy judgments are right: and that thou haste afflicted
me justly. David thinks good to speak here a common thing, That he knows
the statutes of God to be right. For what is he that is so accursed, which will
confess that? Yea, even they which dare blaspheme and speak evil against
God, when they shall be pressed thus far, yet will say, that the holy
scripture is a doctrine that cannot be amended, and that the law of God is
the rule of all equity. The very wicked then, will speak thus well of it: but
yet there are very few which have this consideration imprinted in their hearts:
to wit, to make this estimation of the law of God, as too say, that what
soever is contained therein is just. And why so? That is first, by reason of
the co^trarietie that is between our wit and the wisdom of God. And next, by
reason of the contrariety of our wicked lusts, and affections, with the
bridle which he holds us, too rule us according too his pleasure, and in his
obedience, when as men will take council of their own head, that they think
to control thereby, whatsoever God speaks in his word: we then agree even
like fire and water. For all our wisdom is but vanity and leasing, when as
we shall appose and set our selves against the holy Scriptures, the doctrine
of the Law, and whatsoever is contained in the Prophets and the Gospel. As
we see at this day, the world will in no wise subject it self thereto. From
whence come all these controversies and dissentions throughout al christendom?
Forsooth it is because that men will be ouerwise, and will never honor God in
such sort, as to say, Although O Lord our ownwittes lead us altogether
preposterously, yet must we needs be ruled by thee. And because that we are
not able to attain to this reason, it cannot be chosen but that the tyle
shardes must needs fly about and the world be infected. See then, what is
the cause that lets the bigger number too confess both with heart and
mouth, that the judgments of God are right: to wit, that all perfection of
wisdom is in his law, in his Prophets, and in his Gospel: that it must
needs fall out, that we ought to do him homage in all this, knowing that it
is impossible too find any one jot therein contained, to be amended. For
although we very well know, that the judgments of God are right, to wit, in
such sort as that our wits and minds might thereby be confirmed, that we
might judge it to be so: yet it so stands nevertheless, that behold our
lusts and passions, do violently withstand God, and are ever against him. As
how? An whoremonger shall be vanquished that his whoredom is wicked and
abominable. A drunkarde shall condemn his drunkenness: and shall never be
able to say, that the vice whereunto he is given is a virtue. And so much may
be said of the swearer and thief. But yet it is so, that such kind of
people cannot give God the glory, saying, that his law is right: For they
murmr against him and are very angry, that they have not the raynes of the
bridle laid in their neck, and gives them not all the liberty that may be
too do what them selves list. No doubt of it, if it lay in their power, they
would pluck GOD out of his seat, that he might have no authority over them.
Lo what men's affections and desires are. So then, we shall find a very small
number of people to be like unto David, which will say in truth and without
hypocrisy, I know O Lord that thy judgments are right. When he says,
that he has known, he means that he has gotten new understanding which
he never had before, as if he had said, I have O Lord profited so much,
that I have clean given over mine own wit and reason. For I know it to be
blind, because that men will always lift up them selves above measure. But
now O Lord, thou have brought me to this point, that I will no longer be
governed by mine own head and fantasy: I will not trust to my self to know
whether the matter shall be good or not, but I will rest me on that which thou
say unto me. And thus much for the first point.

And a little after he says, Although mine affections are clean against thy
law, that they are ready to cast me quite out at the Carts arse, as we say,
yet for all that O Lord, I have bridled all my passions, yea and that through
thy mighty power beseeching thee to continue and hold them as prisoners,
until such time as thou shakte fully have delivered me from them. Lo how
David practiced this knowledge which he said he had of God by his word. And
let us after his example continually record this lesson: Let us bestow all
our study both evening and morning upon it, to the end we may say that we have
known, that it is that, which GOD has commanded us, yea too follow it. But
David does not here set down this simple knowledge of the word of God: but
goes on farther: too wit, that God of very faythfulnesse, had caused him to
be troubled. Now is this far harder then the first.

It is very true, that we shall have great conflictes before we can be able to
submit our selves to God, in such humility, as for to know and say, that he
is only wise: But yet, they which know this, think not his chatisements too
be gentle and gracious, but are impacient, and conceive some grief, that
makes them too grind their teeth. Now David joined these two together, to
wit, that he did not only make much of the word of God, but also of the
punishment which he sent him: as if he had said, O Lord, I do not only
suffer my self to be taught by thy word, but to be chastised also with thy
hand: and I beseech thee to scourge and beat me with thy rodes, so often as
thou see me too do amiss, and too cause me too amend, showing thy self
a most loving and pitiful Father toward me.

We have here now a very good admonition: to wit, that first we must learn
to be ruled after the will of God, to receive his word without contradiction,
that we reply not according as it pleases our own wits and affections,
neither too make any noise when we hear God speak: But let him have such
authority over us, to make us so silent, as that we may know that whatsoever
he says unto us is just and true. And thus too do, let us learn not to be
so sleepy and sluggish, as we are by nature in our vices and sins, and
specially in this vice of ambition, having always a gready desire to be
advanced.

Let us rather know that God is the Master of the humble and lowely: and let
us therefore humble our selves, and not look so big and be so foolish
hautie, which does nothing else but cast us hedlong into destruction, when as
we advance our selves higher then becomes us. Let us rather be advised to
bridle all our Lusts and that which holds us as it were captives as Saint
Paul says. For what is the cause that so many people at this day do set them
selves against the Gospel? It is not, because they know not this doctrine too
be good, and that they judge not so of it: But yet are they not therein
thoroughly persuaded too say, Lo how we must live: Every man will do
whatsoever himself thinks to be good. We must then needs confess that the
judgments of God are right, that we learn to hold all our passions in
bondage: that we suffer our selves to be condemned by him, and to be rebuked
for all our vices and imperfections as becomes us. Now can we do this? to
wit, are we become subject and obedient to the word of God? We must also submit
our selves under his hand, to strike us when it shall please him, and lively to
understand that we have done amiss, confessing that he has justly
chastised us, or as here it is said, of very faithfulness.

This is the sum and effect, that he is just in punishing of us, as he is
wise in teaching of us: the one ha^geth on the other, that is to say, the
second hangs upon the first. For whosoever shall come to this humility that
David speaks off, to know, that in the word of God there is but one holy
doctrine, one infallible truth, one so perfect equity, as can be no perfecter:
he that shall have known this, shall by little and little have wherewith too
be fortified too receive the corrections with a meke spirit, and not to be
grieved, and to kick against the prick, as we are wonted to do. Let us now
then suffer God to rebuke us, yea and to correct us, seeing he does all this
for our profit and health. And this is the sum and effect of this verse. It
follows next after,

I pray thee that thy mercy may comfort me: according unto thy promise unto
thy servant. Here David makes and more general request, then that which
before we have seen. He desires God to instruct him: and now he adds, O
let thy merciful kindness be my comfort. As if he had said, O Lord I have
besought thee for a special and particular thing, but I add now, that thou will be merciful unto me in all and through all, that thy mercy be extended
upon me, that I fail in nothing. Thou know what is necessary and
profitable for me: O Lord let me feel thee to be gracious and pitiful all
manner of ways. Lo what difference there is between the first request which
we have already seen, and this second. Now this is a point worth the noting.
For (as we have before said) see the first which we ought to have in a
singular recommendation, and that is, that we may be taught by God, and not
to be taught only by words, but that he will also lighten us with his holy
spirit, to make us know, that it is his word which guides us. See here, I
say, the very right way to salvation. Now have we made this request? we may
crave of God that he will not let us fall in anything whatsoever, that his
mercy may comfort us. But yet here we se how that David was not comforted nor
yet rejoiced but only in God, knowing that all the joy that we have here
bilowe shall be accursed, when as we have no regard unto our Creator. And yet
for all this, se how commonly we are wonted to rejoice and comfort our selves,
that is, even to forget God, and to turn our backs upon him. Now accursed be
such joy, for the issue thereof can be none other, but as our Lord Christ Jesus
says, That it shall be turned into weeping and gnasshing of teeth. Howbeit,
the world is waxen drunk, for whatsoever is said unto it, it makes no
reckoning thereof, but utterly refuses al good and sound doctrine. In deed
this is true, that this same was not written in vain: but that we shall be so
much the more inexcusable, when as we shall have the example of David, except
we follow it. See then for this first point, that after David had compassed the
whole world both above and beneath, he found no rest to comfort his spirit
and soul, but at such time as he made his repair unto God. And there I say,
he found wherewith to rejoice and comfort him self: finding nothing else but
unquietness in all living creatures. Now he soon after sets down, how we
ought to rejoice and to be comforted in God: to wit, through his mercy: for if
God should deal with us according to our deserts, we should have no cause
wherefore to rejoice, but rather be confounded with very horror and fear.
When as God shall declare him self to be our judge, alas, which way shall we be
able to turn us? Must we not needs be cast headlong into the deep pit? If
it be said that we must appear before the majesty of our God, what shall
become of us which suck up iniquity even as the fish sucketh in water, as it
is written in the book of Job? Wherefore, let us know that if we will rightly
rejoice, and find sure rest in our consciences, we must betake our selves to
this free mercy of our God, that he declares him self pitiful unto us in
that he sees us to be miserable and wretched creatures, and to put forth our
hand unto him to receive his mercy. Now David in the end shows whereupon
he builds him self, in making such a request:

According unto thy word, made unto thy servant. Lo whereupon we must build
and settle our selves, when as we will come unto God, to be heard of him to
wit, upon his mere mercy, as we have here above said. But are we already
come thus farrefurth? And if we be, yet is there an other point farther
required: to wit, we must assure our selves that the graces of God shall
adorn and garnishe us, so we seek them according to his word. And to prove it
to be so, mark I beseech you, for it were marvelous great presumption in us,
to come unto God, without we had his promises for it, and to desire of him any
thing, and say, O Lord, I have need of this and that. Go to now, here is
already some occasion which causes us to come unto God. And again, O Lord,
thou art good and gracious: lo this is an other thing also which augmenteth
our courage and boldness. But because we are so far from God, that we are not
able to come nere his majesty, without he come down unto us: we must then,
before we can have any access to make our prayers unto him, lay this
foundation which is here set before us: that is to say, the word of God, when
as thereby God witnesses unto us, that his mercy is always ready, that he
there lays it before us, and offers the same there unto us. There remains
now nothing else, but that we receive it by faith, and that there we declare
our faith through our calling upon him. So then we see, the order which David
here sets down, that is, that he brings us to God, to the end we might
take our whole contentation, repose, and rejoicing in his mere goodness. And
since, that he has received us through his mercy, let us beseech him that he
would look unto us with his eyes of pity. For the third point, he shows us
how we ought to make such our petitions, that is, because God has bound him
self unto us of his own good will, and has witnessed unto us that he will be
near us. When then we shall come unto him in this sort, let us not doubt but
that he will hear us and grant whatsoever we shall desire according to his
will.

And namely he says, thy word made unto thy servant, to the end he would
declare to every of us that every man should apply the promises of God
particularly unto him self. And not to use the manner of the Papists, to say.
It is very true that God has promised this and that, but we know not whether
the same belongs unto us or not. And these are no fools, which say thus, but
this is the doctrine which they teach in all their Satanicall and deuelish
Schools and Synagogues. Lo here the very doctrine of popish doctors, that the
promise of God are uncertain, and that we must receive the^ as things hanging
in the air, not to take them generally, to say, I doubt not but that GOD
speaks the same unto me. But contrariwise, we must conclude as David here
does, and O Lord let it be done unto thy servant according to thy word. He
says not, according to thy word, I know not to whom, nor unto such me^ of
which number I am not, so that I can not build upon it: but he says,
according to thy promise O Lord, made unto me. Let us then learn by his
example, that when we desire the Lord God to assiste us, to charge him with his
promises, yea and let us apply them unto our selves, and believe that they are
also spoken to every of us in particular, and generally unto all: I mean unto
all the faithful. When as the Lord our God says, I receive all sinners to
mercy: let every one say, O Lord, I am one of those miserable and wretched
creatures, and therefore I come unto thee, charging thee with thy promise made
unto me. Lo how we must behave our selves herein: for else, we shall but
wander in the holy scripture all the days of our life. It follows immediately
after,

Let thy tender mercies come unto me that I may live: for thy law is my
delight. In this verse we may very well see, that David was as it were
estranged from the mercy of God. Now this is a very notable point to be
considered off: for what is the cause of our distrust, yea even to close up the
gate against God for that we would not come unto him, but only because we
think that God has estraunged him self from us, and that we should be
thereby confounded. It is very true that he will sometimes cause us to feel
them, as if he had clean turned him self away from us, and all because we
first forsook him: but yet we must notwithstanding return unto him, and not
be discouraged, but follow the example of David, that although the mercies of
God to the outward appearance and in our judgment be far from us, and in
such sort, as that we may well perceive it: yet must we never cease to say, O
Lord, let thy loving mercies come unto me: surely to the outrward show, and so
far as I can judge, they are far of me: but yet O Lord, I know that thou will in the end make me to attain unto them: yea and although thou manifestly
show me them not, yet notwithstanding I will wait and surely look for
them, with an assured faith and hope. Moreover, when he says, that I may
live: that is to signify unto us the same which I have already said: to wit,
that although his wit and spirit, stayed it self upon creatures, yet that he
was but as a dead man, and whiles he thought God not to be near him, he
supposed him self to be but as a forlorn man. And in deed although we had all
the world on our side, and had GOD against us, and were sure that he neither
loved nor favored us, all the rest would turn but to our ruin and
destruction. And if we esteem not thus of him, must it not needs be but that
we must be bewitched by Satan, and carried violently away, when we shall
content us only with these worldly things, and never have regard unto the
spring head and fountain of all goodness: to wit, the bounty of God? But in
the mean while let us note this, that although we be dead for a time, after
the example of David, yet shall we be quickened, so that we come to God,
beseeching him not to hold back his mercies far from us. Now he says in
the end, For thy law is my delight. By this we are admonished what it is that
we must crave at the hands of God in good earnest, forsooth that his mercies
may remain with us: to wit, when as we are conformable to him and to his
word.

Let it not now abash us although we feel so little taste of God his mercies.
And why so? For what is he that will acknowledge it? We are so beguiled with
these false deceiptes of the world, that we think we may triumph by them,
that we shall be exceedingly blessed when as we shall have all things after
our own hearts desire. But in thus doing we can contemn God and his grace.
We must not then be abashed if we be set besides that which apperteineth to our
salvation, and that God suffers us to languishe in wretchedness and misery.
And so let us learn after the example of David, to be as it were rejected of
the word of God, and to be as it were estraunged from it to crave in good
earnest, to cause his mercies to return unto us: to wit, that he would grant
us this grace, to let us in such sort understand what need we have of his
favor and aid, that notwithstanding that we have declined from his
commandments, yet that he would grant us for all that, to feel his mercy,
although he has held the same from us for a season. Now it follows,

Let the proud be confounded, for they have dealt wickedly and falsely with me:
but I meditate in thy commandments. Here David sets down another reason,
to confirm him self continually more and more, that he shall obtain that
which he prays unto God for: to wit, because the wicked do persecute him:
whom he calls the proud. And this is the sentence which we have already
heretofore treated off, neither will the time suffer us to stay any longer upon
it. It shall therefore suffice us for this time, that faith only is the thing
which brings us within the compass of humility, when as we know that there
is nothing in us but wickedness, and that we are thereto tied, by the just
judgments of God. When I say, that the faithful know this, it pulls down
their high minds, they are no more arrogant nor presumptious, to lift
themselves up against God, and their neighbors. Contrariwyse the wicked and
enemies of GOD are called proud: for the pride which they use against GOD,
engenders also cruelty against their neighbors.

As many as will humble them selves before God, will also be very gentle too
their neighbors: but they which have a fierce and high mind to stand against
God, must needs likewise cast their poison against their neighbors. And for
this cause David says, let the proud O Lord be confounded, for they go
wickedly about to confound me. Whereby we are admonished, that although the
wicked vex and grieve us never so injuriously and without cause, yet we are
thereby taught to have the rather a great deal more trust that God will have
mercy upon us. And why so? because it is he which grants our request: and
when as we shall make it unto him, it shall not come of our selves, but he
shall be author thereof. So then, when as we shall be grieved and iniuried by
malicious and cruel men, let us go boldly unto God, and beseech him to have
pity and compassion upon us. Now he adds, that he never ceased to meditate
upon the testimonies of God, although he was so afflicted. And this is an
excellent admonition for us, that when we are tormented both from heaven, and
on the earth, that God on the one side, to the outward show, estraungeth him
self from us: and we on the other side are so forsaken, that we are trodden
under men's feet, besides a thousand other villains done unto us: when as, I
say, we shall be so vexed and grieved. We must learn after the example of
David to meditate of the testimonies of God, and there to seek our whole
comfort, for that is the very mean by which God means to pluck us out of
all our anguishes and griefs which might any way trouble us.

That now which follows, has been already handled: to wit, that men which
fear God do turn unto him: to say, that they will keep him company. And in
the end he sets down this conclusion:

Let my heart be upright in thy statutes: that I be not ashamed. Now like as
in the first verse he desires GOD to give him understanding that he might
learn his Law, here he desires that he would grant him affection. Whereby
we may see, that this proceeds from us and from our nature: to wit, to be
very poor blind soul, until such time as God opens our eyes.

And thus much for the first point. But yet understanding only shall not
serve. God must make our hearts pliant unto his obedience, and place us so
with him self, as that we have none other desire but to serve him. Let us the^
learn to pray unto him as David here has done: for after he had desired him
to give him understanding of his law, he desires him also to give him a pure
and a sound heart: yea and that we should also do the same in verity and
truth, not doubting but that when God has bestowed upon us some graces, that
he will also increase them more and more, and have compassion upon us, so that
we be obedient unto him in our behalf, and yield him the homage and authority
which unto him belongs.

And according unto this doctrine, let us in all humility prostrate our selves
before the majesty of our good God, in acknowledging our offenses, beseeching
him so to touch us, as that we might learn after the example of his Prophet,
how to make and present our requests unto him, and to bereave us of all our
earthly affections, which we feel to be most violent against us, to the end
that our mind be not withdrawn through them from his righteousness, but that
we submit our selves wholly unto his holy will, desiring nothing else but to
have him to govern us: to the end that being fortified by his holy spirit, we
might persevere unto the end to resist those temptations which shall grieve us,
to obtain the victory abouesaid, and come to the triu^phe which is prepared
for us in heaven above. That he will not only grant us, this grace, but also
unto all people and nations of the earth, etc.

The eleventh Sermon of the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm.
CAPH.
My soul faints for thy salvation: yet I wait for thy word.
Mine eyes fail for thy promise: saying, when will thou comfort me?
For I am like a bottle in the smoke: yet do I not forget thy statutes.
How many are the days of thy servant? when will thou be avenged of them that
persecute me?
The proud have dug pittes for me: which are not after thy law.
All thy commandementes are true: they persecute me falsely: be thou my help.
They had almost made an end upon me on the earth: but I forsook not thy
commandments.
Quicken me according to thy loving kindness: so shall I keep the testimonies
of thy mouth.
IF we could rightly call to our remembrance the promises of God in our
afflictions and miseries, it were sufficient enough too make us pacient. And by
this mean we should render a true proof of our faith: but so soon as we are
grieved with any affliction, we by and by wax fainte hearted, because we
forget all the promises of God: which to our seeming, we had long before very
well understand and learned: Now we should not at the least be forgetful of
them, when need requires, yea, and that when we are thereby enforced. And
for that cause we have here a very excellent lesson for the purpose, and
worthy the noting: for David does not only teach us as a Prophet of God, what
our duty is, and what the power and virtue of our faith ought too be: but
shows us also the way by his example, how we must be pacient in all our
adversities, and how we ought not to fall from that: to wit, that we always
have our eye fixed upon the promises of God. For that shall be enough to
entertain and keep us, in such sort as that we should patiently wait for his
saving health, yea, even in calling upon him. But that we might the better
profit by this doctrine, we are here to note, that the two first verses are
both of one and selfsame substance, save that the order of the words are
changed. He says in the first place, My soul faints for thy salvation,
That is to say, O Lord, I have longed, albeit the afflictions and miseries
which I have abidden, were very great: and lasted long, and that I see neither
end nor issue of them, yet nevertheless I rested altogether hereon, that I
always trusted, that thou would be my supporter and aider. Now he adds
the reason how he could so faint: to wit, because he trusted unto the
promises of God. In the second verse he says, That he has failed for the
promise of God, yea even looking for this promise, and that he has said, When
will thou comfort me? And in the third he handles that which before he had
spoken of: to wit, that although he had beeene as it were parched and dried,
even as a skin bottle in the smoke, so that there remained neither moisture
nor substance in him but dried up with very miseries, yet that he had not
forgotten the testimonies of God.

We see then now what the sum and effect of this is, which is here showed
unto us: to wit, that there is but one only mean too cause us to be constant
and pacient, when as we are afflicted, and that our adversities do ever long
last as we imagine: that is, too be mindful of the promises of God, and to
have them depely imprinted in our hearts. For if that be so, it will not cost
us much to be patient: and although it be an hard matter, yet we shall at
the last come too the end of it. Let us then now mark, from whence our
impatience springs, and what the reason is why we are so oftentimes overcome
with temptations: or else, when as we shall have for a time resisted them, yet
in the end we are confounded and faintharted. Truly, it is because we
forget the testimonies of GOD, and turn away from his word. In very deed,
this at the first sight may seem too be a common matter with us. And to say
the truth, every man will say, that we ought to remember them, and that it is
the only remedy too comfort us. But we shall the oftener do it, when as we
shall have learned this lesson which is here set down unto us, and that we
record it all the days of our life: For this is one of the principallest
points that is too be required in all Christians, that when they perceive that
God has laid his hand on them, that they be as it were almost cast down:
yet that they might comfort themselves, in staying of the promises of salvation
which God has promised them. But yet, let us thoroughly consider the word
which David here uses: I have longed (says he) after the salvation, and I
have hoped, or after that I had hoped, because of thy word.

The second part of this verse, is as it were the foundation whereon David
builds. Let us understand then this hope which we ought to have in the
word of God, as David had: for without that, it is impossible but that we
must be confounded. for although it seem in the judgment of men, that
there is in us some virtue and soundness too endure and suffer patiently, yet
shall it not be such a true patience as GOD allows. And why so? For we shall
never bear him that affection too obey him, without we comfort our selves
that he loves us, and that we trust to his bounty.

A man, I say, shall never be disposed to obey God, and to glorify him in
afflictions, except he have a taste of the bounty, and fatherly love, which
he bears us. Now how can it be that we should be fully persuaded that God
loves us, and procures our wealth and health, when as he afflicts us,
without we be armed with his promises? For it is impossible for us to know the
truth of God, except he declare the same unto us in his word. Let us learn
then, as I have already said, that the patience of the faithful can not be
built, but upon faith and hope in the promises of God. Lo then what we have to
note in this place.

Now David having laid such a foundation, builds thereon, saying, that his
soul longed after the salvation of God: when he says that his soul longed,
he means not that he was so forlorn, as that he had in the end given him
clean over: ne yet that Satan had gotten any advantage of him: but that
word, to long, is taken in the scripture, for that which notwithstanding is
conjoined with such obedience as we ought to yield unto God, staying and
settling our selves upon him. As how? Saint Paul says, That we ought to hope
beyond all hope as Abraham did: to wit, we must surmount all our wits and
imaginations, when there is any question of our belief in God. For if we will
measure the promises of God by our own wits, what shall become of it? our
faith then must exceed and go beyond all the wisdom of men, as here it is
said, That his soul has longed: which is as much as if David had said, it is
true O Lord, that according to man's reason, I was utterly forlorn: yea I was
so oppressed with miseries, as that I could bear no more: but when I was in the
mids of death, I ceased not for all that until I was arrived at a sure
haven: to wit, thy aid and help. Now he namely speaks of Gods succor,
because it shall go very hard, but that we will wander, look above, and
beneath, both before and behind, to see if we can find ready help.

But if the trouble last long and we see not which way to get out of it, but
that it is like a bottomless pit: although before we somewhat trusted and
hoped upon God, yet for all that we shall then be driven and egged, to seek
for aid here and there, we know not where. And how so? Is it not possible for
me to find remedy? Because, I say, we are so dull, and the hope which we
have in God, passes so lightly away from us, and melts, and runs about,
this way and that way: David for this reason says, That he hoped for the
salvation of God. Hereby then he shows, that although this occasion was
offered him to seek after other helps, and to cast his eyes upon creatures,
and to forsake God: yet that the temptations had not so won upon him but that
he always remained constant in this resolution, that it was God which must
relieve his need. Now hereupon he adds,

Mine eyes fail for thy promise, saying: when will thou comfort me? I have
abready said that this verse contains no new or strange thing, but David
changes only the order of the words. For when he says, That his eyes sore
longed after the word of God, he means none other thing but this, that
although all his wits were troubled, and that he was as it were blinded with
the multitude of afflictions which he endured, yet that he always stayed him
self upon this word of God, and never ceased calling upon him, saying: O when
will thou comfort me? By this he shows us, that if we have a true faith
settled upon the promises of GOD made unto us, when as it shall please him
soon after to afflict us, we must not by and by be angry, biting the bit as
Mules do: but let us yield him true obedience, saying: O Lord, when will thou
comfort me? We must then suffer and abide thus to do: to wit, that when we
beseech and require God, to help us according to his promise, we must also
desire him, to show it us by the effect: and we must remain firm and
constant, until such time as he causes us to perceive it: for although he
delayeth his aid, and holds it as it were in suspe^ce, yet must we be fully
persuaded that he has not forgotten his office, which is, to comfort us. By
this mean we shall find in the end the fruit of our prayers. Now he fully
and wholly explaneth in the third verse following, when as he shows it to be
no small matter to be thus cast down, had not the word of God sustained, and
vpheld him, but that there was great reason in it. I am, says he, like unto a
Goats skin wherein oil, or wine is put, hanging in the smoke, and so dried
and parched, as that there was neither substance nor moisture left in him.
David uses this similitude, to show that his afflictions were so great and
excessive, as that he was without all strength, and without hope of life. Now
he adds notwithstanding, That he did not, yet forget the statutes of God.

Lo an example which we ought too follow, neither must we allege here our
infirmity: for David was a passionate man as we are: he might very well have
fainted, if God had not strengthened him. And how so? Having the promises, he
hoped upon them: knowing that God continues his benefits toward his
children, because they should have recourse unto him: he called upon him, for
that he had already found mercy and succor of him: God so help him through
his holy spirit. Now, have not we at this day the same promises which David
had? Yea, have we not more large and ample promises? Have not we and great
deal more familiar access then David had, because that Jesus Christ is
declared too be a mediator more manifestly, then he was under the law? When
God then renders us such a testimony of his good will, that we may freely
come before him to pray unto him, to the end he might help our necessities:
I pray you what excuse shall we make, if we come not boldly unto him as
David did, and be constant to persevere in the same purpose, seeing that God
offers the self same means, to fight against whatsoever may turn us away
from it. Moreover, is the power of God lessened since that time? Does he not at
this day help all his faithful with his holy spirit, as he did under the
law. Yea, does not he say that he will increase the kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ, more then ever he did at that time?

There is nothing then but our unthankfulness which has shut the gate
against God, so that his graces can have no access nor entrance into us. It
is very true, that he will say enough unto us, but we will stope our ears: he
will make us fair promise enough, but we will soon forget them: or else if we
keep them in mind, it shall be but a raunging imagination, neither shall it
have any deep print, or yet lively root in us. Because therefore, that we
esteem not of the promises of God, lo the reason why we are so suddenly cast
down, even with the least temptation that may come. How exercise we our faith
in prayers? what readiness and zeal is there at this day amongst Christians
in calling upon the name of God? Alas it is so cold and feeble as it can not
be more. And so see why God has plucked back his hand from us, because of our
infidelity, so that we feel not his help as we should. The more depely
therefore ought we to consider of this sentence here, when David declares that
he was clean dried up, and yet for all that forgot not the promises of God.

Let us now go and vaunt our selves to be good Christians, that we have
greatly profited in the Gospel, and yet when as we shall be touched with any
little, yea, and that with a very light affliction, we shall be so amassed as
it is wonder. Alas what should become of us, if we should be as David
protests he was? that God threatened us through stitche, that there were but
one drop of substance of life, and that it should seem that we were even as
it were dead. If then there were such a kind of parched dryness in us, what
should become of it? But what? herein rests the fault, that every man
flattereth him self, and we also think that GOD should submit him self
to our flatteries,

But it is not in vain that this example is here set before us. Let us
exercise our selves then better then we have heretofore done, and call to mind
the testimonies of God. When as we shall be parched, and so dried, as that it
might seem we had not one drop of life? let us notwithstanding, meditate
yet more the^ ever before we did of the promises of God, to the end we might
get us new force and strength. Now when David had thus spoken, he adds,

How many are the days of thy servant? when will thou be avenged of them that
persecute me?

The proud have dug pittes for me: which are not after thy law.

Here David pursuing his purpose makes mention of the griefs which he
endured, that is, the wicked and ungodly persecuted him wrongful, and that he
being retired to God, as to his saulfegarde, found no succor of him at the
first dash, but that God held him at a bay, as a forlorn man. Now hereupon he
rightly shows that his faith was not clearly quenched, ne yet lessened: but
that he still continued in prayer. And in the end concludes, that he will yet
better remember the word of God, when as he shall be so restored by him, and
raised up again as it were from death. Let us then note, that David here
sets down a certain manner and order to show us, that when God, to the
outward show shall seem to estraunge him self, yet we must take heed that
the same keep us not from having recourse unto him. Now it may very well seem,
that God sometimes thinks not of us, but specially, when he shall suffer the
wicked to run whether they lift, and let them do whatsoever they desire.

Now this is a terrible temptation. And why? For on the one side we look that
if God took us for his children, and loved us as he testifies, should he not
by and by have compassion of our miseries? should he not put forth his hand to
help us? When then he suffers us to be thus unjustly trodden under foot, it
is a sign that he has forsaken us, and that he has no care of us, nor of
our health*

Lo here a very hard and grievous temptation. And the second is, that it
should seem that God does not his office, How is that? Behold how the ungodly
fall out with him so that it seems they would give him open defiaunce. For is
not this to make war against him, when as they give them selves license to
do wickedly: that whatsoever can besayd unto them, they can never be brought
too goodness? And yet God makes semblaunce as though he had no care of their
wicked dealing. These we see are two marvelous dangerous temptations. And this
is the cause namely why David has here recited his persecutions, which he
abode at the hands of the wicked.

Now it is so, that he being in such conflictes, having to fight against these
two temptations, which I have noted, shows right well that he remained still
conqueror. And see why he says, How many are the days of thy servant? when
will thou be avenged of the^ that persecute me? David signifies that he made
not this request until such time as he was driven too this extremity, that
he was no longer able to abide it. As if he should have said, Alas, my good
God, will thou help me after I am dead? For thou see that I have already
abidden so much, as it is not possible to endure more: thou see me even at
the graves brinke: It is now time, or else never to help. But yet I perceive
no succor coming from thee. And what is the cause? When will thou do it? It
cannot be chosen but that David had as it were an intolerable affliction,
when he called upon God in this manner. Wherefore we are so much the rather to
meditate on this place. For although God suffers us to be afflicted but for a
little while: yet the same lasts so with us, as that we being vexed even to
the vttermoste, will say, I know not where I am, nor what to do herein. What
is the cause why God deferreth his aid so long? For in stead too call upon
him, it is out of doubt rather that we murmr, yea and moyte as it were
secretly against him. Now the right remedy to overcome these temptations, and
not so to murmur against God in our afflictions, is this, to call upon him with
full assurance, beseeching him to grant us his grace, that notwithstanding all the afflictions which he lays upon us, yet that he leave us not for all that
too hope after that which he has promised us. And this is it which David
declares yet more fully, when after he had said, that the ungodly had gone
about to dig pittes for him, which is not after his law, he adds, and
says,

All thy Commandments are true: they persecute me falsely, be thou my help.
Here he expresses what the iniuryes and outrages were which they had done
him, They have (says he) dug pittes for me, yea and he protests that
they did it unjustly, that he never gave the wicked occasion to hurt him: but
that he had walked in a good and pure conscience. Yet says he, They have gone
about to circumuent and compass me round about. We see then that David had
no small assaults, but such as were even deadly, that it was without all
question that he must be utterly confounded: yea and although he never hurt any
of them, that it might be said, that he had injuriously persecuted them, yet
had he always his recourse unto God. So then, we may now be better confirmed
in the doctrine which we have heretofore handled: to wit, that to whatsoever
extremititie we are driven unto in our afflictions, we shall bring them to a
very good end, when as we being fenced with the power of the spirit of God, do
look unto his promises. Now let us see why he adds and says, Thy
Commandments are true, they persecute me falsely, O help me. David sets
down here three points, The one is that God is true: and after he adds a
protestation of his good conduct and guydance, and of the malice of his
adversaries: Thirdly, he calls upon God in his afflictions. Now as
concerning the first, he shows us, that although Satan to shake us, and in
the end utterly too carry us away subtly and cunningly goes about to
deceive us, we must, to the contrary, learn how to know his ambushes, and to
keep us from out of them. So often then as we are grieved with adversity and
affliction, where must we begin? See Satan how he pitcheth his nets, and
lays his ambushes to induce and persuade us to come into them, what says he,
do thou not see thy self forsaken of thy God? where are the promises
whereunto thou did trust? Now here thou see thy self to be a wretched
forlorn creature. So then, thou right well see that God has deceived thee,
and that the promises whereunto thou trustedst, appertain nothing at all unto
thee. See here the subtlety of Satan. What is now to be done? We are to
conclude with David and say, yet God is true and faithful. Let us I say keep
in mind the truth of God as a sheelde too beat back whatsoever Satan is able
to lay unto our charge, when as he shall go about to cause us to deny our
Faith, when as also he shall lie about us too make us believe that God thinks
no more of us, or else, that it is in vain for us too trust unto his promises.
But let us know clean contrary, that it is very plain and sound truth
which GOD says unto us. Although Satan casts at us never so many darts,
although he have never so exceeding many devises against us, although now and
then by violenve, sometimes with subtlety and cunning, it seems in very
deed too us, that he should overcome us: Nevertheless, he shall never bring
it to pass, but that we shall have the truth of God, to be sure and certain
in our hearts. And thus much for the first.

The protestation which David makes, ought too stir us up too walk in such
sort with our neighbors, as that we give them no occasion too hurt us. But
too live plainly and simply one by an other. The wicked may very well hurt
one another, yea and even destroy them selves: but in the mean time, the
Children of God must have this testimony always with them, that they will
neither do nor yet procure them any hurt: but are grieved and sorrowful too
see them run headlong into destruction.

When this mind shall be in us, then shall we have an excellent entrance to call
upon God: but contrariwise, if we render evil for evil, being molested by
our enemies, and enforce our selves to do the like, and cry quittance (as we
say) with them, our cause will quite be overthrown. And why so? For if we
shall be so vengefull, it is impossible for us to trust and believe that God
will help us. Yea even then I say, when we shall have a good and just quarrel.
For God will discharge us if we shall not have a good conscience: and although
some there, are which would both wish and do us hurt: We must say, O Lord,
this is injuriously and falsely done. But (as I have already touched) let us
have such a testimony in our hearts, that although they which persecute us
are the instruments and limbs of Satan, and do it of mere malice: Let us not
clean contrary purchase them any hurt or displeasure. Then may we call upon
God with David, knowing that he will never fail those which are wrongfully
persecuted. Lo then the meaning of these three points which are here
touched. Now after that David had thus spoken, he adds,

They had almost made an end of me upon the Earth: But I forsake not thy
comaundements. See here a sentence worthy to be well weyed. It is very true
that David expresses that which he had before spoken, I have not (says he)
forsaken thy commandments O Lord, although I was as one clearly dried up,
and as a man utterly forlorn, yet for all that have I not forsaken thy
Commandementes. Now it must needs be that David resisted two temptations in
continuing so firm and constant in the obedience of God. The first was, that
he might have been brought into some distress. The second, that he might have
bin bent to have done wickedly. And why so? seeing that the wicked had unjustly
persecuted him, he might have been revenged of them. Lo the two assaults
which was meet and convenient for him to sustain and keep of. Even so must
we follow his example: For when men shall unjustly molest and grieve us, and
that they shall not only do us one injury, yea two or three: but that our
trouble shall continue without end and without ceasing, let us yet learn to be
pacient. And chiefly, when as there shall be no question of abiding a little
damage, or small grief: But that we shall be mortally persecuted, and our life
too be as it were desperate, to be already as it were in the very throat of the
Woulfe, yea to be already even as men swallowed up and devoured. When as we
shall be brought even to such a pass, yet let us not cease to say with David, I
have not forsaken thy commandments.

And so that we might the better practice this doctrine, and apply it to our
own use and profit, let us learn too have recourse unto God in all our
afflictions, calling upon him to be our warraunt and safegarde. And in the
mean while, although we be wrongfully molested, let us beseech him to grant
us his grace too yield our selves unto that which he has commanded us: to
wit, too love our enemies, to do good unto them which seek to do us all
the hurt they can, to pray for those which slander and wish us as much evil
as is possible. Lo here we must meditate upon the Commandments of God,
although we be as it were consumed on the earth.

Now here we are to note, that it was not without cause, that David says,
that he was almost consumed: For this shall even so come to pass in us, when
men shall judge and condemn us, and that we have already received sentence of
death in our selves: as S. Paul says in the second too the Corinthes. Even
so David being as one condemned too death, and seeing no likelyhoode too be
delivered, 2. Cor.
ceased not for all that to call upon God. So likewise must we do, knowing
that he will never forsake us: for see what the cause is, that God oftentimes
keeps back his helping hand from us, but even when we prevent him by mean
of our own lightness and inconstancy. For so soon as we are grieved somewhat
more then we are wonted: we straight ways conclude and say, O, all is naught:
we are clean undone: it is past all hope. When we after this sort prevent
him, it is like unto a man that would cast himself into his grave before he is
dead, and so smoother himself. After this manner, say I, do we, preventing
by this mean that aid, which God has deferred to give us, until the time be
come, which he knows to be most meet. Let us then well consider, that when
God shall defer the aid which he means to give us, although we seem as
dead men, and our life desperate, yet that he can restore us again in the
minute of an hour, although in the sight of men we were even as the pictures
of death, yet that he leaves us not without life inwardly. For as we see in
Winter the trees to be as it were dead, that we can perceive neither sap,
leaf, nor nothing else: yet there is life hid in them. Even so fares it with
us: For when we shall be still and quiet attending for aid at the hands of
God, we are sure that when Winter is past: to wirte, the time of our
afflictions, that God will give us life, which was before as it were hidden.
Now to conclude the Psalm he says,

Quicken me according to thy loving kindness: so shall I keep the
testimonies of thy mouth. We see here, that David speaks as one that were
dead, when he says, O quicken me, he shows then that he was not beaten
softely with the rod, or with a mean affliction: but was punished even too
the vttermoste. For he was so dried up, as before we have said, that there
was no substance at all left in him. Lo what was the cause why David after
this manner made his petition.

Let us learn then, not too flatter our selves, when as the Lord our God
shall visit us with any little affliction, that we think too have done even
sufficiently, if we call upon him: But if we shall have done so an hundredth
thousand times more, yet that we must not give over praying and calling
upon him. And herein may be seeene the hypocritical dealing of men: For
they are so womannishely minded and tender hearted, that they think themselves
too have wrought a million of miracles, when as they have sustained never so
little adversity, no not worth the value of an hour.

Moreover if they be over laden with any adversity they may be bold, as they
think, clearly too forget both God and his word. But our good God will not
have us to proceed in this sort: For he sets before us here, the example
of David for our instruction, but yet he has set it forth unto us for this
end and purpose, that we should not cease to continue too call upon him in
our adversities: yea were our afflictions never so great, and lasted never so
long, yet that we should notwithstanding continually persevere in prayer.

To be short, let us understand, that David made this prayer at such time as
he thought not too have lived any longer, but that he was as a dead man, when
he says, O quicken me.

Moreover we may see, that his constancy was not like a puffed of wind, but that
he perseuered therein. For although his troubles contained, that he was as it
were in a very deep pit, whereout he was not able too get: yet ceased he never
but to trust that god would deliver him out of it: and there upon called on
him, and received great courage. Namely, he desires too be quickened
according to the loving kindness of God For we must also be at that point, if
we will be heard, to know that God is bound unto us of his mere grace and
favor: and that we also must have recourse unto him, if we will have him too
accomplish his promises unto us. Men must not then abuse themselves, too look
unto their own dooinges, ne yet too have regard unto worldly means: But
that they seek for the same in GOD, and in his mere goodness and free gift,
for the which he will hear them, and receive them also unto himself. In the
end David protests, that he will keep the testimonies of the mouth of God.
Now let us not understand hereby, that he had not kept them before: For we
have seen the clean contrary. But this is to signify, That seeing in the
midst of the afflictions which I have sustained, thou have always given me the
grace to persevere in faith, and that I have continually upon thee, Satan has
not shaken me, to cause me too do wickedly, since then, O Lord, thou haste
given me such constancy at the time that thou wast estraunged from me: by a
more strong reason, when thou shall be mine aid and succor, and shall restore
me, I shall have a far greater constancy, to keep the testimonies of thy
mouth. See then, how that in the midst of all our afflictions we must
glorify God, not doubting of his faithful dealing, that he will perform
whatsoever he has promised, have pity on us in the end, and confirm us
more and more too keep the testimonies of his mouth: knowing that he will
continue to do that unto us, which he has already once showed us.

And according to this doctrine, let us prostrate our selves in the presence of
our good God, in acknowledging our offenses: Beseeching him that it would
please him to open our eyes better that we may behold the power and virtue of
his word, and thereon to stay us: in bereauing us of all the lightness and
inconstancy, which might turn us away from it, desiring him also not to suffer
us too wander this way and that way, as commonly we are woonted, to turn us
from the right way, as we are by nature overmuch inclyned thereto: but being
fully resolved, that it is not in vain which he has declared unto us, that
he will assist us in all our necessities, which we shall crave of him in true
faith: yea not only in our small and mean afflictions: but even when as he
thinks we should be utterly overthrown: knowing that he will accomplish
for our profit and health, whatsoever we may hope after, and behold with the
eyes of faith. Let us beseech him that he will not only grant us this
grace, but also unto all people and nations of the Earth. etc.

The twelfth Sermon upon the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm.
LAMED.
O Lord, thy word indureth for ever in Heaven.
Thy truth is from one generation to another: thou haste laid the foundation
of the Earth and it abides.
They continue even to this day, according too thy ordinance: for all are thy
servants.
Except the Lord had been my delighte: I should now have perished in my
trouble.
I will never forget thy Commandments: For by them thou have quickened me.
I am thine, save me: for I have sought thy Commandementes.
The ungoodly laid wait for me: but I will consider thy testimonies.
I have seen an end of all perfection: but thy commandment is exceeding
large.
WE see how chaungeable men are. It is very true that when we shall talk of
the shadow, we may say that it remooueth and changes every minute of an
hour, so that it rests not but if we look well and thorowlye search out
that which is in the mind of man: we shall see there a great deal more
vanity and change, then is too be seen in the very shadow. And that which
is more, David says in an other place, that if man were laid in one schole,
and vanity in an other, that vanity which is nothing, would way down man
greatly. And we shall not need too stand long disputing of this: For every
man by his own experience can testify what it is, and what it can do, albeit
there were nothing written nor yet any thing thereof contained in the
Scripture. What rests there then for us to do. Forsooth we must seek for
our constancy else where then in our selves.

Now God gives us a very good mean if we will take it, which is, to build
and settle our selves upon his word. And for this cause it is, Isai 40.8.
that the Prophet Esaiah says. That the word of God indureth for ever: He
had spoken before of the frailty and fickleness of men, as that nothing could
be more: and although it might seem that there was some strength in them, it
is yet incontinent clean parched and dried up, that it vanishes away into
less then nothing: But he concludes and says, That the word of God abides
for ever. So then, see the mean, how that men (although they be transitory,
and have constancy at all in them) shall notwithstanding have a perfect
constancy, and sure estate: to wit, when as they shall stay themselves upon
the truth of God and his word. According to this, it is here said, Thy word
O Lord abides for ever in heaven. Some expound this, as if it had been
said, That because the heavens have continued long, they render a good
testimony of the truth of God. But here David namely speaks of the heavens
because we see by them a more manifest sign of the Majesty of God then we see
here below on earth. And in deed in that we are rude and earthly, we had
need to have God to guide us, and too lift up our minds when that he would
have us to think on him: too the end we might forget the world, and all the
corruptible things here beneath. See the^ the reason why David in this makes
the seat and house of the word of God in heaven* because we had need to look
a great deal more hyer then into our own senses, when we would comprehend
how God is true and faithful. When we would feel the certainty and
assurance of his word, we must enter into a more deep consideration, then
our sense is able too bear, and not look so into the visible thing, or into
that which we conceive on earth.

He adds, That the truth of God it from generation to generation. As if he
should have said, It is true. O Lord, that men are here very circumspect and
advised: and we see also how things have their alterations, so that there is
nothing which is not wavering and inconstant: we are as it were in the
whirlewindes and tempests: and if at some time things be in peace and at
quiet, it lasts not long: and although the creatures be peaceable and at
quiet, yet are the men never at rest, but are continually chafed and troubled.
But thy truth, O Lord, is sure and certain, which can never be shaken
through the alterations and chaunges which here we see, no otherwise but by
the lightness and inconstancy of men, when as they do nothing else but wander
here and there. True it is, O Lord, that all this impayreth no whit the
certainty of thy truth and word.

Lo here in sum, the meaning of David in this place. Now he brings in a
proof of this sentence, too wit, That God has laid the foundation of the
earth, and it abides: that is to say, That the order of nature has her
course, and so continues without end. And why so? For So Much as God has
appointed them: because that he has so declared it, and that al creatures are
subject unto him. This disposing and ordering must needs continue in his
estate. And although we see all things to turn on this side and on that yet
God always gives us some visible sign, too show us that he never alters
nor changes his purpose. And chiefly, that his truth is never subject too
any change.

We see now in sum what the substance is that is contained in these three
verses.

Now that we may apply all this too our use, and too make our profit
hereof, let us learn too have recourse unto the word of God, so often as
we shall be astonyshed, and know not what shall become of us: too wit, all
the days of our life: For there passes not one quiet day over our heads,
wherein we are not moved too think either of this thing or of that.
Sometimes the temptations are easy too overcome: but after, we shall see some
apparaunce of danger, that shall trouble us a great deal more, yea and some
one threate or other we shall have that shall even abashe us. And if that were
not so, yet should we have occasions enough in out heads too make us unquiet,
that we should not need to be otherwise troubled: but every one of us has in
himself store of tempests and storms, so that if there were nothing else but
our own very fantasyes, they would be so many whyrlewindes, too make us never
to have quiet minds. Now see then a good remedy, that is, Let us know, that
although we are environed with a great number of dangers, although there be
no certayntie in our life: although there is always an hundredth deaths before
our eyes, yea that we thought the devil should swallowe us up every minute
of an hour: yet must we be peaceable, and hold our selves quiet and still,
because that God has laid the foundation of our salvation in his word: and
that he has promised to keep our life. When then, we shall have the word of
God, to certify us, that he has care both of our souls and bodies, let us
know and be certainly assured that herein consists all our constancy.

So then, let us rightly apply this doctrine for our instruction, that when it
is said, that the word of GOD is permanent in Heaven, that his truethe
shows it self from age to age, and so continues, that it is namely spoken,
to the end that we should be patient in the midst of all the troubles,
giefes, and anguishes, which we may have, being shaken amidst so many
dangers: and also, seeing the endless and incessaunt chaunges which are here
beneth, and nothing else but all unquietness. Let us then see, what is here
to be considered for the first point: we must not seek to take our rest in
this world, for we shall never have it here: But let us always have our
recourse too the truth of God.

Moreover, let us see if we can rightly practice this doctrine, that nothing
hinder us, but that we may live in peace and tranquillity in the midst of
the most great and dangerous confusions which may light upon us. Let us also
see, that whether the winds blow in this corner or in that, that there be
garboyles of war, that there be pestilence and famine, and such like, that it
seemed we should perish a thousand manner of ways: yet all they which settle
them selves upon the word of God, will never be but certain: For they shall
feel both in life and death, that they are in his hand and protection. And
having this confidence with themselves, they will make no reckoning of all
whatsoever shall come unto them: as we see Saint Paul commands us too
exalte our selves against all things present and too come, so that we be
fully resolved, that God loves us. When this shall be in us, Romans 8.38.39.
and we shall have hereof a good testimony in our own consciences, through
Faith and the word of God: Lo how we may assure our selves, and solace our
selves in the midst of all our troubles and confusions which here we see:
and by that means be never at peace and rest, and not too be greatly
turmoyled for any thing that may come unto us the next day. And why so? For
has God, who has declared him self unto us too be our Father, spoken it but
for a day only? where as he has testified unto us, that he will have our
salvation in his hand? is here any time lymitted?

Now we see too the contrary, that God says, That he will never forsake us.
Our hope then must stretch it self clean beyond the world, and so we shall
not be tossed with the winds and tempests which shall blow against us, to
make us turn back, when as we shall have a sure foundation upon the word of
God. And as concerning this proof which David adds, saying, That God has
laid the foundation of the earth, the same is but a little taste which he gives
us of the truth of God. Now it is not enough for us to have this taste only,
to know whether God be faithful and that his truth is everlasting. For to
prove it to be so, we see that neither heaven nor earth, but are subject too
corruption, and that all must pass, only the word of God is said too last
for ever. And it must needs be so: for else what should become of our
salvation? It should be corrupt very soon.

Let us not once think then, that David his meaning here is too make a
comparison, and an equal proportion, of the continuance of this world, and
the constancye which we see in the order of nature, with the truth of God.
But he shows unto us that even in these corruptible things, we might the
better perceive how faithful GOD is: and if he be true in these things on
the earth, what shall he him self then be? I beseech you tell me, from
whence has the earth her foundation? It is founded both upon the water and
also upon the air: Lo her foundation. We can not possibly build a house
fifteen foot hight upon the firm ground but that we must lay a
foundation. See all the whole earth is founded only wavering, and as it were
hanging, yea, and upon so bottomless deapthes, as that it might be turned
vpsidedowne in the minute of an hour, and the whole substance of it utterly
overthrown. It must needs then be, that there is a wonderful power of God
showed in the conseruing of it, in the same sort it stands. And that is it
which is here showed unto us: to wit because that God has said, That the
earth was in the midst of the world, and that it was so laid as it is:
hereby we know what the certainty of his truth is. But we must here
forsooth compare the less things with the greater, as we say. How from the
lesser to the greater? I will show you by example, If I say we did se such
excellency in the body of a man, as that it might bethought to be even the
very image of God: whereby we know the thing that is written, that God has
ordained man to be the chief of all his creatures, and given him great
dignity, nobleness, and power over all living creatures. Psalm. 8.6.
Even so also, in praising that which is in man, we may descend from the body
to the soul: and this is from the highest too the lowest, and from the less to
the more: So likewise is it in this place, when David sets before our eyes
the order of nature: This is not (as I have already said) to measure and
compare the truth of God, with such a measure: But to the end we might
reason and say, If in these frail and transitory things which are subject to
corruption, we see such a constancy because it is God his will it should be
so: What shall we then say of his truth, which surpasses all the world? When
then we shall make such a comparison, between the state of the world, and the
truth of God, we may certainly conclude, that God sufficienly grants us
wherewith too settle our selves upon his word, we must not be so inconstant
as too let our Faith be shaken, so often as we shall see the world tossed
with any troubles, but rather too take this place which is here showed unto us
by David for our refuge. And this is the sum of this place. Now it follows
afterward,

Except the Lord had been my delight: I should now have perished in my
trouble. David here speaks this of his own proper experyence and knowledge
before he spoke of the truth and excellencye of GOD in general, and says
that it was in heaven: and afterward he proves it by visible things, which
is very manifest unto us, and which God poynteth out unto us, as it were with
his finger. In the third place he says that he speaks not of unknown
things, that he might dispute of them at randon, but that he had rightly
practiced that which he had spoken, because that he was preserved by the word
of God. And therefore he now shows us, where we ought to seek for this
word, whereof he had generally spoken heretofore. For we may use this name
of the word of God, and yet it may be hidden in the air, or emongst the
Clouds: But because he has given unto us his word familyarly, and
communicates the same with us daily, even in the holy scripture: Let us
consider, that in giving honor unto the word of God. We say that it is
infallible, Let us not imagine it to be an unknown word, but let us go unto
that, which God at all times has given to his servant: and that is it which
is contained in the law. See then, how God has first declared his word unto
us, wherein our salvation is altogether certain.

Now here we have to note in this streine, that David having had such
experience, deserves well to be heard, and that they are no vain words which
he here sets down before hand: But that God also would have it so, too
the end we should give the more credit unto it, and that we should no
whitte doubt of any thing that he teaches us, when as he him self has
made proof of all that which he before had spoken. And thus much for the
first point. The experience then whereof David speaks should very well
serve us in stead of our Seal, by which GOD means too make the Doctrine of
his Prophet to be of so much the more antiquity. And thus much for this.

Moreover, let us learn rightly too understand, how sure we ought too be
of the word of GOD, not too seek for the certainty thereof without our
selves, but rather in our own Consciences. It is true, that we ought
thoroughly too look both above and beneath, too make the testimonies which GOD
gives us too serve our faith, too the end we might be certified of the
truth of his word, as already we have heard: but yet the principal point is
this, for every man to enter into himself, and make such account of this
certainty of the word of God that it may take such root in our souls, as
that we may there feel it to be such as here it is said: to wit, that it
never be shaken, although the whole world should be confounded, and that it is
the same which must give us peace and rest, notwithstanding it seemed, that all
were utterly overthrown. We must then acknowledge the effect and
accomplishment of this certainty, which the Prophet here attributes unto the
word of God. In sum, it is as much as if he had said, that no man is able
rightly to feel how God is faithful, and his word certain and sure,
without he has a true faith and belief thereof within his heart, and the same
to be discharged of whatsoever is contrary to his salvation. As namely he
says, that he should have perished in his trouble, if he had not delighted in
the word of God. David here shows what experience he had: to wit, that he was
so afflicted, that he was as it were even in the gulf of death.

Now if the word of God brings us out of the grave, quickens us in death,
and preserves our health, notwithstanding that it seems to be swallowed up
in the gulf, do we not see a good proof given us from God, how firm and
sound it is? So then, let us well consider (as we have already said) that since
we have known the power of the word of God, to be such as it is here showed
us, we may in such sort resist all the greatest temptations which the devil
is able craftily to work against us, so that we shall be able to escape as it
were both from death and the grave. And thus much for this.

Now for the second point, David shows us how it is that we are preserved in
all our afflictions by the word of God, how our life shall be saulfe, and our
health assured thereby. And that is, if we delight therein: to wit, that we
be so comforted with the love which GOD there shows us and wherewith he
certifieth us, that since he has adopted us for his children, he will
therefore always show him self to be our father. Wherefore we may boldly
recommende our souls unto him, and he will receive them, so that we shall not
perish, having all our refuge so unto him. If we then content our selves so,
the word of God will give us life in the midst of an hundredth thousand
deaths. But if we hear it without having any such affection, that we taste not
of the promises of God, or else that we always somewhat distrust and doubt, to
reason how it goes, and afterward wander after creatures, or else build upon
our selves, if we be so changeable, we shall never feel any virtue of the
word of GOD, but may be overthrown an hundredth times: the lead affliction in
the world, shall be as a gulf to swallowe us up: that we shall not need the
main sea: but even a finger depth of water too smouther and drown us, if it
were not that we had learned of David, to be assured of the love which God
bears us: and that by his word.

So then, let us understand what the true delight of the faithful is, and that
which preserves them from death, and quickens them: that is, when they are
contented with the love of God, to set their whole felicity there, to have him
to be merciful and favorable, to have this privilege to have recourse unto
him, being assured that he will hear them. See, I say, how we should be
quickened by the word of God. Now when that David has declared the profit
which he received by the consideration of the law, he adds, That he will
never forget it. Wherein he protests that he will not be unthankful to
GOD, as we are accustomed.

Now although we are not without a great number of vices, yet is this one of
the greatest, that we do not only so oftentimes suffer the benefits of God
to escape out of our minds, but we are also so wicked, as that we desire
nothing more then for to bury the^: we think we should have never time enough
utterly to forget them. See, I say, the state and condition of our vile and
corrupt nature. And therefore, David in this place protests, that he will
never forget the commandments of God, because he has bin quickened by them.
And moreover, he speaks it not only for him self, but shows unto us by his
example, what our office and duty is. When God then shall have thus aided us
in our afflictions, that he shall have raised us up even from the grave through
the might and power of his word, and that we shall feel such a benefit, let
us never forget it, but be always mindful thereof. And yet David means to
show unto us a farther point: to wit, that because the word of God has
already profited him, that he will esteem of it and have it in great price
for the time to come. Knowing that it is is not for a time only, that we must
be preserved and comforted by the word of God, but for ever and ever. This
might seem for us to be very obscure, were it not declared unto us more at
large. See now then what David his meaning is. If a man be as it were cast
down, not tasting of the promises of God, and when it shall be laid before
him, that although God afflict his children yet that he does it not utterly to
overthrow and destroy the^: but to the end to calthe^ to repentance, that
afterward they might feel his merciful goodness. If a man then be thus
admonished by the word of God, it may be, that this admonition will serve him
to no purpose, because he him self seeks not after the remedy which is set
before him, and so is made void of this comfort which is here touched, and by
that mean the power of the word of God turns into all evil to himward.
What is the^ to be done? Let us mark well that which David here speaks, that
he will never forget the commandments of God, because he has bin quickened by
them. As if he should have said, when as thou have once preserved me by mean
of thy word, that thou have given unto it this power and property, that I being
as one dead, and out of the world, have bin thereby fully restored to health,
the^ have thou taught me what I ought to do all the days of my life: that is,
I must meditate upon thy word, I must exercise my self therein, and I must
continually study to think upon the testimonies, which thou of thy fatherly
love have bestowed upon me to the end I might hold me contented, and be
sure that thou will never forsake me. The use, O Lord, then that I feel by thy
word, has caused me to apply the same to my profit all the days of my
life: to the end I might be able to resist whatsoever Satan shall craftily
go about to work against me, and too persevere in thy fear and love,
whenever the wicked and ungodly shall make war against me. Thou then, O
Lord, haste showed me that thy word ought always to be before me. For that
never loses his power and strength: neither is it a thing that is consumed and
worn by much wearing. A man may soon make an end of a loaf in eating it:
but when he has so done, he must look for more bread. And in continual
drinking of wine, the hoggeshead will be empty: but when as the word of God
has served to quicken us, it still remains sound and whole, without
diminishing any whit at al. So then, let us learn after the example of David,
too make estimation of the virtue and power which God has given to his word,
and never forget it. Now he adds by and by after,

I am thine, save me: for I have sought thy commandments.

The ungodly laid wait for me to destroy me, but I will consider thy
testimonies.

After that David had made such protestation, he commits him self to GOD,
even declaring that he has sought his commandments. And so he speaks
not only of the time past, but remains always constant in this purpose. Now
we have here to consider of three points: the one is, the request which David
makes to God, O save me: The second is, the reason why he desires God to save
him, Because says he, I am thine. And afterward he shows how he is gods,
that is, for I, says he, have sought thy commandments. And thus we see in
the first place, how God offers him self unto us, and that he desires
nothing else but to hold us in his protection, to have care of our salvation,
yea so that we come unto him after the example of David.

And I beseech you, what privilege is this, that we have such liberty to
come unto God, and to commit our selves into his hands? whether we wake, or
sleep, whether we labor either in the town, or in the fields, that God is
as it were a watchman over us, to keep us, Yea, and that he has not care over
our souls, to keep them from the ambushes of Satan, but also that his
fatherly providence and love extends it self even to our bodies? When God
the^, I say, gives us the liberty, that we may make such request unto him, I
pray you tell me, is not this an inestimable privilege? But we never a whit
think of this: as may well be seen by our slackenesse and weariness in
prayer to God at this day. And yet for all that, it is not without cause that
David sets down here this request: but to the end that we should know,
that in praying to God, he will grant us the grace to comme^d our selves wholly
unto him, no more also should we have too top great a care over our life: for
we being assured of his love, should be contented with all the rest
whatsoever. And thus much for the first point.

Now for the second we are rightly to consider, that if we will have God to be
our warrant, and to be under his protection, we must needs be his, and may say
truly, as David here does.

It is very true that God keeps his creatures, who are not worthy thereof, as
he also causes the Sun to shine as well upon the good is on the bad, and
that it is of his own goodness and mercy that the wicked do live: but yet
to their utter destruction. And when it is here said, to be kept by God: it is
such a keeping and preservation, as that the issue thereof is both good and
healthful. And this is not done save only to such as are truly the
possession and inheritance of God, and his true household servants and
children Will we have God then to receive us into his protection and to be our
protector? Will we have him to take care and charge both of our souls and
bodies? Let us first be his. And how shall we be his? Forsooth, we must come
to the third point: to wit, to seek his testimonies. Lo then how God will
take us for his possession: for he even then allows us for his children,
when as we put our whole trust in him, seeing that he has so familiarly called
and bidden us, and has certified us by his word, that he will never forsake
us. If then we so seek the testimonies of God, and stick unto them with a
sure faith, let us never doubt but that he will allow us for his household meiny
and children, And then we may well say with David, save me O Lord. See I say,
in what manner we ought to come unto God, if we will be sure to have him to
protect us. Now David adds,

The ungodly have laid wait for me, to destroy me: but I will consider thy
testimonies. Whereby he does us to wit, that although God is steadfastly
purposed to be the protector of the faithful, yet that they are not without a
great number of griefs and troubles, subject to many sorrows: and be
maruelously, encrapped and thereby think, that they can not chose but to fall
into the snares of the ungodly. And besides, the subtelties of Satan are great:
and again, all the ungodly which serve Satan, and are lead by his spirit,
cease not to invent subtelties and deceiptes, to entrappe the children of God,
by lying in wait for them. David his meaning then here, is to declare unto us,
that although God preserves us, it is not therefore to be said, that we are
without molestations, and temptations. But what? So it is that the word of
God ought to suffice us, as he faieth, I will consider thy testimonies. As if
he should have said. O Lord, I have made this my buckler and fortress, which
is, that thou have promised to be my savior: and hereupon have not forced for
all the treasons, that all the ungodly can conspire against me. It is very
true that they have laid a platform to betray me, yea, and it seems that I
am already within their claws and teeth, ready to be devoured but thy
testimonies, O Lord, have so strengthened me, as that I have not fainted. Let
us learn then to fight in this sort against all the subtelties of Satan, and
malices of men, and notwithstanding that they shall go about to destroy us,
yet let us fasten our eyes upon the word of God, attend upon it, and therein
persevere unto the end. Now for conclusion David adds,

I have seen an end of all perfection: but thy commandment is exceeding
broad, or large. The word then which David uses, signifies sometimes
perfection, and sometimes accomplishment because that the things which are come
to a perfection, have an end. Now he says in sum, that when he has
thoroughly considered of all things, that there is nothing in this world which
has not an end, and that is not consumed by continuance: but that the word of
God is plentiful: that is, it extends it self unto all the creatures of God,
and over all whatsoever we are able to see. See here a sentence very like unto
that which we have seen in the first verse. David then by this conclusion
confirms the saying which before he held to wit, that the word of God is
everlasting. Although that we here see marvelous alteratio^s, that we se the
world tossed with so tempestuous whirlewindes, as that there is another end nor
measure of the^ yet shall we have in the midst of al those troubles an
everlasting aboade in the word of God, which will assure us of all together.

Let us not then measure our salvation by the present estate of the world, and
as it seems now in our eyes, whereby we may well perceive and discern the
same. And why so? Because that all things here below have an end, as we have
said, that heaven and earth shall perish: but God has given to us his truth,
which is of such an euerlastingnesse, as that it surpasses both heaven and
earth. It behooves us then to be lifted up and rapt with, this eternity of
the kingdom of God, so often as his word shall be spoken unto us, wherein
consists all our salvation.

And according to this holy doctrine let us prostrate our selves before the
majesty of our good God, with acknowledging our innumerable offenses, by which
we cease not daily to provoke his heavy wrath and indignation against us:
Beseeching him that it would please him to cause us to feel our wretchedness
more, then heretofore we have done, to the end we might be displeased with
our sins, and seek for remedy, where it is showed us: to wit, that seeing
there is nothing else in us and in all creatures, but vanity, that we beseech
the same good God to confirm us in his promises: that all our study be wholly
there: knowing that all our life rests in them, to the end we search no
other where but there where he has promised we shall find it, that is, in
his word. That it would please him so to make us taste and sauoure the power
and strength thereof, as that we may be wholly given to serve him, and that
receiving us into his holy protection and conduct, he will not impute unto us so
many vices and imperfections as are in us: but that he will supporte them
through his goodness, until such time as he has despoyled us of altogether.
And that it would please him also, too use the like grace and favor toward
all people and nations of the earth etc.

The thirteenth Sermon upon the hundredth and nineteen Psalm.
MEM.
O Lord what love have I unto thy law? all the day long is my study in it.
Thou through thy commandments have made me wiser then mine enemies: for they
are ever with me.
I have had more understanding then al my teachers: for thy testimonies are my
study.
I understood more then the aged: because I keep thy commandments.
I have refrained my feet from every evil way: that I might keep thy word.
I have not declined from thy judgments: for thou did teach me.
How sweet are thy words unto my throat: yea, sweeter then honey unto my
mouth.
Through thy commandementes I get understanding: therefore I hate all the ways
of falsehood.
WE shall see in this behalf a great many which will not stick to brag, and
say, that they have greatly profited in the word of God; but yet if we look
into their lives, we shall see and find that they have profited as much, as
if they had never read, nor heard, one word of the holy scripture. Moreover,
all the goodly and gay protestations which they shall make, tend to none other
end but to get them selves estimation and credit: there is noone other thing in
them, but a foolish and vain glorious show, that is, they desire to be
commended and praised, as though they were the most able and worthy people of
all others. Now when we will say that we have profited in the school of God,
first of all we ought to show by our life and conversation whether it be so
or no. For this is the true testimony whereunto we must hold us. God
teaches us not to the end we should do nothing else but prattle and babble:
but he instructs us in what manner we ought to live. He then which shall
lead a dissolute and wanton life, declares manifestly, that he never knew
either God or his truth, Moreover, the meaning is not that we should set
forth our selves, to be had in estimation of men, or to get us reputation and
credit: but we ought rather to glorify God, knowing that we are so much the
more beholden and bound unto him, in that it has pleased him too bestow such
his grace and favor upon us, as that we surmount others in learning, for that
comes not unto us by reason that we are sharper witted, or that we have
gotten it through our own industry: to know, I say, the way of salvation, but
it is a free gift which comes unto us from above. Furthermore, when we shall
acknowledge this too come from God, it is then great reason that we should
draw our neighbors with us, and like as we are in a good way, even so ought
we to be desirous to have every one to follow us.

Lo to what intent David declares in this place, that he has loved the word
of God above all, and that by it he has been so well taught, as that he
surpassed his masters, and enemies, and all those which were in great
reputation and credit. Very certain it is, that David is not here led by an
ambitious or high minded spirit, meaning to be coyed and clawed, and looking
to be thought to have greater understanding then others: but desires none
other thing, save that the profit which he had received by the law of God,
might be thoroughly engraffed in all men, and that it might be a thing common
unto every one. In very deed, since that we are all members of one body: we
ought continually to labor and travel for the upholding and mainteining of it
one with another: neither ought any of us to serve him self, and his own
particular profit, but we ought rather to desire to have the graces of God to
abound in all our neighbors, that every of them might have a feeling of them,
and that when as we shall have enjoyed this common salvation, that we might
all with one accord, and as it were with one mouth, glorify him. And besides,
David shows soon after, that he was no babbling scholar, to show it only
in mouth, too have many times turned over the leaves of the law of God, and to
have very well understood it: but shows his life to be agreing to his
speech: and that God has give^ him grace to walk according to his will. A
great deal the rather ought we then thoroughly to consider of the order that is
here set down in the first verse: he says, O Lord, what love have I unto thy
law: all the day long is my study in it. The saying which David here uses,
signifies speech and meditation. And the verb whereof it comes, signifies,
to speak, to devise, to talk, or rather to apply his mind to any thing, to
be therein exercised, and stadied. Now there is no doubt, but that David spoke
here of a matter which is conjoined with meditation. For (as before we have
said) it is not meant by them which make some certain show at their tongues
end, and yet to have nothing to be found in their life and conversation of the
thing whereof they babble. He then was exercised in the word of God, and that
not only for his own particular use, but to the end also to instruct his
neighbors, and to communicate to them the matter which he had heard and
learned. Now we see the sum and effect of this first verse. He protests
that he has loved the word of God, and that not after a common manner, but
with a vehement zeal, in such sort as that it has been his whole purpose and
drift; as when we have liking of any one thing, we cannot hold from talking
thereof, and continually to be thinking of it. As we shall see a miserable
covetous man, never but hunting after his wealth: occupied about his lands,
possessions, merchandise, and cattle: and must make provision for this and
that, In like sort also is it with the whoremonger, and the glutton: and
accordingly as every man's desire leads him, so must the tongue speak, and
every one apply him self wholly to that. Se wherefore David adds, that he was
continually exercised in the word of God: meaning thereby to show, how greatly
he has loved it, as he has in deed said. And now we see what thexample is
which is here set down before us: for David speaks not this for himself, but
tells us what we ought to be, if we will have God to instruct us, and too
have him to make us partakers of his truth, wherein consists our whole
felicity and welfare: for if we wax cold, and make no account of the word of
God, we are not worthy that he should give us the least taste thereof. And for
this cause, we must not marvel much, though so small a number at this day
have profited in the scripture. Although every man desires to be praised and
esteemed amongst men to be very able and sufficient, yet for all that we see
what ignorance is in the greater number. And therefore it is good reason that
God should shut the gate upon us, so that we might not have so much as the
least entrance into his word. And why so? For where is the love and desire
that David here makes mention of? Now when we shall know such a vice to be
within us, we ought by and by to seek to amend it, and beseech God to put
this coldness from out of our hearts, and that it would please him to inflame
us in such sort, as that we might learn to prefer his word before all our
fleshly desires: that we be no more so much given to all these vain follies of
the world, but that we may look unto the principal thing. Let us now come to
that which follows. He says,

Thou through thy commandments have made me wiser then mine enemies,
teachers, and auncientes. He sets down here three sorts of people, with
whom he compares him self, and says, that God has bestowed this grace upon
him to surpass them all. Now here David shows unto us, what profit shall
redounde unto us, when as we shall read the word of God, after his example: to
wit, that we shall get thereby such wisdom as shall defend us from our
enemies to be better learned then our teachers, and those which otherwise
should have been in stead of our instructours. To be short, that all the men of
the world shall not have that which we shall find there, and that all the
wisdom which is in all the creatures of God, deserves not to be egall and
comparable too it. Lo here in effect, that which he means. Now we ought
always to call to mind that which we have already touched. When as David here
sets down him self in the first rank, and says, that he has surpassed
his enemies, teachers, and those which were the most wise, and of greatest
understanding, that this is not too attribute any thing unto him self, and
to his own person: but to the end that God might be glorified in him: and
that we might know what profit shall redound unto us by the word of God, when
as we shall give our selves unto it. We see then that David had no regard to
him self, but means rather to give us occasion to glorify God. And besides
his purpose is to stir us up to the love, as we have already touched, which
he had to the word of God: knowing the same to be so profitable for us. For
what is the cause that we are so very negligent, as in deed we are, in
giving our selves to the study of the holy scripture: that we think it to be
even labor and time lost if we only spend but one hour of the day therein?
What is the cause of such contempt? Verily because we know not the profit that
might come unto us thereby: for if we were thus persuaded that all our wisdom
is and consists in the word of GOD, and that without it we are like unto
miserable beasts: so that Satan has caught and holds us fast bound in his
grinnes and snares, and that we cannot err in all the whole course of our life
if we know this: and again, that it is sufficient that God has taught us, and
so have thereby such a clear light, as that will never fail us, that we be
fenced against all the ambushes of Satan, and against all the villainies and
deceiptes of the world: if then we were thus thoroughly persuaded that the word
of God were sufficient against all this, it is most certain that we should be
a great deal more in love without all comparison with the study thereof, then
now we are.

And therefore, let us well record this lesson, which is here set down unto
us by David: to wit, that in the first place, we shall be wyser then all our
enemies, if that we have the word of God always remaining with us.

Now when he says, that he was made wyser and had more understanding then
his enemies, he means that he had so excellent a knowledge, as that God
would not suffer him to fall into the ambushes and privy engines which the
ungodly had laid for him, suddenly to be entrapped and caught by their
subtle trains and policies. Lo already a wonderful profit which we receive
by the word of God, that although we be encompassed with the wicked which
seek nothing but our destruction, when as we do think that we should
perish every minute of an hour, yet that we shall be guarded from all
whatsoever, that they may any way attempt and privily lay in wait against us,
so that we be instructed in the word of God.

Lo, say I, an inestimable treasure: but we must consider who they be that are
our enemies. For we have not only to do with men which seek our hurt,
dishonor, or that which might grieve us as touching this present life: but we
have Satan, and all his favorers and mainteiners, which are deadly enemies too
our souls, who seek nothing else but our destruction: yea, not only as
concerning the world, but to withdraw us clean away from the kingdom of
God. Now it is very sure, that when the word of God shall remain and
continue with us, that we shall have wisdom enough too defend and keep us
from all such enemies. We are then thoroughly too way this saying: too wit,
that if we apply the word of God to our own use, after that we have been
instructed therein, we may be sure to walk in sauftie and without danger. And
how so? Because God will preserve us against all our enemies: for although
Satan pitcheth his nets to take us, notwithstanding all the marvelous
policies of men, yea notwithstanding all our own crafts and deceites
whereunto we are sufficiently enough inclined of our selves, yet cannot we be
assailed nor shaken, either on the one side or on the other: but shall be well
fenced, when as God shall hold us with his hand, and that we suffer our selves
to be governed by him. And besides our souls shall not only be preserved,
but also whatsoever we have to do in this world: neither shall our enemies be
ever able to hurt us, when as we shall have been thoroughly instructed. It is
very true, it shall not be other wise, but that they will molest us: as we see
the faithful to be greatly troubled and vexed through the wicked and ungodly:
but what comes of it? We se that God in the end turns all to their profit,
and too the confusion of those which persecute them. Moreover, let us mark,
when David says, that he was made wiser the^ all his enemies, he very well
shows that there were a great many of people, which sought nothing else but to
destroy him: nevertheless he speaks not so much for him self, as he seeks
to show a common example appertaining to all the faithful. And this ought the
more to increase our courage, to be more careful to profit in the word of God.
And why so? we had need to be very well advised, and of good understanding,
because we are continually to fight against Satan, and his co^paignions, which
will never cease to lie in privy wait for us. And since we see that the
wicked are as hungrestaruen dogs, and ravening wolves against us, their
cruelty is insatiable.

Seeing then we see by experience, that the children of God must needs be
compassed with enemies, and that there are many ambushes laid, and many wicked
trecheries practiced against them: so much the more ought we to have our refuge
to this word, which can only keep and defend us, in such sort as that our
enemies can do nothing against us, but that we may be assured, as David here
makes mention. But we must note that which he says, that he has had the word
of God continually with him: for so he uses to say, And that is to signify
unto us that we ought never to depart from that which God has once declared
unto us, and not to be so fitching, as the more part of us is accustomed to be.
And there is not that he amongst us, which is not infected with such a vice:
that although the word of God has taken root in us, yet can we not hold our
selves from howling as the wolves do (as we commonly say) when as we shall be
vexed with any temptation. But see how David shows us, that he abode
steadfast and constant, whatsoever came of it, although he had a number of
enemies which sought nothing else but to oppress and assault him with horrible
temptations, he notwithstanding held the word of God for even: and whatsoever
vexing and turmoiling he saw on the other side, he still held him to it. It
follows,

That he was wyser then his teachers: yea because, says he, that upon that
was my whole talk, or, meditation, as the testimonies of God. In this, and in
the verse following, David means, that there is no worldly wisdom, nor
doctrine, which is worthy to be compared with that which we learn in the
school of God. It is very true that we may well study the doctrines of men, and
attain thereby unto some judgment, as ye know that learning does fine a
natural man's wit: but what shall it be, if we were the most perfect that is
possible to be spoken of in all such knowledge: to wit, in whatsoever man can
teach us? It is al but an A.B.C. For we come never a whit the sooner to heaven
by it, but it abides still in this present life. So that, as our life is
transitory, and less then nothing: even so also must we confess, that all the
sciences which men teach us, are no better then smoke: it is a transitory
thing which is soon vanished. And as there is nothing everlasting but the
kingdom of God, so also is there but one only truth which is a wisdom
everlasting, and has a sure and ever continuing foundation. See then what
David his meaning is here to show us, that men may very well teach us, yea,
but that shall be but as an A. B. C. until such time as we are come to the
school of God.

It can not be denied, but that God teaches us very well by the mean of men,
as in deed it comes from him which we learn, when as men make plain unto
us his truth, and lead us in the right way of the Scripture: but here, David
speaks of that, which might he taught him, without this doctrine which he
has learned of GOD, when as he has been enlightened by the holy Ghost, and
has known what the secrets of the law are. When then he has had this
spiritual knowledge, he says that all whatsoever he had learned of men,
was nothing in comparison. Now he adds for confirmation,

That he was wiser then his enemies. Here, he does not only declare, that the
word of God instructs us more perfectly, then all the Sciences in the world
are able to do, but also scorneth the usage, experience, and subtletie of all
whatsoever that may any way come from men, saying that it is all nothing in
respect of this wisdom which we learn in the school of God.

Lo here a place right worthy to be noted and imprinted in our memoryes. For
we see how men extol and magnify them selves, when they have attained too any
knowledge, to get them selves credit and estimation. For if a man be eloquent,
and can speak gallantly, and write excellently, or that he has some other
especial science or knowledge, he thinks him self a marvelous man, and able
to catch the Moon with his teeth, as we say. Seeing then it is so, that men
are so rash and hedstrong, that they persuade themselves to be wonderful men,
if they have once gotten never so little knowledge in humanity, which passes
no farther then the outward elements of the world: by this we are so much
the more too be admonished, too esteem this heavenly knowledge which is
contained in the holy Scripture, which we can never be able to attain unto
without it please God to instruct us: to the end that in the first place,
none of us all should be proud of our good wits, ne yet of our other
excellent aids, nor too be hautie in that we have greatly profited at Schole,
have understood all the liberal sciences, and to be men of great experience.
When then a man shall be the most perfect in science, and knowledge, that it
is posibly to be imagined, yet ought we to learn to humble our selves, and to
cast all our pride clean under foot that the worldly knowledge which God has
given unto us to serve him, be subject unto his word. Shall we find a man
that shall be most eloquent, most cunning and most excelling in every
condition all others? That man I say, ought to do homage unto God for that
which he has received from him knowing that no worldly science or knowledge
ought to shadow or darken him who far surpasses the same, because the
Heavens are far above the earth. In very deed both two proceed from the
mere goodness of God. But to this point must it be brought, That whatsoever
he be that shall attain to the true and heavenly light, must say, I am nothing
O Lord: For all that which thou have given me comes also from thee, receive
thou then the same as the most special thing above the rest. And since thou
haste showed me that grace and favor to be instructed by thy word, work so
in me I beseech thee, that all the rest yield such honor and homage as
appertained to this wonderful knowledge which I have learned in thy school.

See then, what it is that David means to learn us by his example. And
besides, when he says, That he is become wiser then his ancients: It is to
show us, that we ought too have such a certainty of our faith, as that when
there shall be laid before us what soever shall be alleged of this world,
that it be said, And what I beseech you? must not the ancient men be wise?
They lived thus in the old time: There are a great number of persons: And we
see a great many to be of the contrary opinion to this. If then they shall
allege unto us men for their age, for their long experience and all their
study, and whatsoever else that may be said: What of all this? All that can
be said, is nothing in respect of this word of God. So then, we see how
David after he has taught us the way unto humility, to the end we should
present before God all the knowledge that is in us, he shows again that the
word of God ought to be of that authority with us, as that we should not
fear too walk the way which he has taught us, although we see all the rest
of the world to go clean contrary. When as we shall hear that that may be said,
And what I pray you? Is it possible that they which are held and accounted to
be so wise, should err like poor and miserable beasts? yea, and that the
same has continued so many years? will any man say, that it has no reason for
it in all the whole world? Is it possible that this may be so? we ought not to
trouble our selves for all these speeches. And why so? I answer: has god
spoken the word? Then, I say, let man's reason and wit stay there, let it humble
and make it self nothing worth, and let us confess with David, that there is
one only word of God, which ought to bear rule over all, and that this word
has such an excellent wisdom in it self, as that it shall consume all the
knoweledge and wisdom whatsoever, that men think they have. Now like as the
faithful ought to scorn that which men on their behalf shall allege, to the
end too divert them from the obedience of God, and the certainty which they
have in his word: so also let us learn, that the old men ought not too be
opinatiue against God, under this shadow that they have seen much: that they
have seen many things even before their eyes: as many of them there are which
in this point under the shadow of their age, would go beyond God, and
remain in their opinion stiff and obstinate saying, What I beseech you? I
have lived thus long and thus many years, and would you have me now too
change my condition, and manner of dealing: It is for wild headed young
Gallants so to do, which know not what it means. But since I have lived
thus long: be it as be may, I will end my life so. See then how aged men
will go beyond God. But in this place David shows unto us, that when as we
shall be young as he has before treated, that although we have hot boiling
affections, and that our wits are troubled with many hard matters, that we
be without all consideration: yet if we be ruled by the word God, no dout it
will make us peaceable and quiet, and cause our life to be rightly governed. And
thus much forth younger sort. As touching the ageder, it is folish arrogance
in the^, to build upon that which they have seen, and passed through their
hands: but let them know that true wisdom which is, to be ordered by God, is
common to all: and that therefore they ought to apply and give them selves
thereto in all ages. And for this cause it is that S. John in his Canouical
Epistle, 1. John. 2.12.13.14.
after that he has made a general exhortation unto all men, says I speak
unto you fathers, to the end you should have regard unto him who is the
Father of all the world, I speak unto you young men, to the end you should call
upon your heavenly father. And you old men, I send you again unto him which
is from the beginning.

To beshorte, David shows unto us by this place, that the faithful have
wherein too rejoice, when as they are taught in the word of God: that they
have whereon too stay and assure them selves, knowing that they shall never
want any thing: that they ought not to be drawn neither this way nor that way,
because they follow him of whom they held the doctrine. So then, they being
settled heerevpon, may be able too make their part good without any great a
do: and when they shall see every man go about to withdraw them, let them
pray unto God that he will give them the grace to hold them selves simply
unto him. Lo here David his meaning. Now he adds soon after.

I have refrayned my feet from every evil way: that I might keep thy word.
Here David teaches us, that they which are desirous to serve God and to stick
to his word, are never without afflictions. But what is then to be done? We
must be of a good courage to withstand all the temptations which Satan can any
way assail us with, to withdraw and turn us from that which is good. I have
says he refrayned my feet from every evil way. And had David need of this?
he that was an holy Prophet, yea, and such a one as we see the holy Scripture
too have reigned in, even from his youth: He then having received so excellent
graces of God, being a mirror of all perfection, was it needful that he
should keep him self from every evil way? It should seem that he was
already utterly past going any evil way: Yea, but because he was a mortal man,
he was not for all that without being encompassed with many vices and evil
lusts against which he was to fight. And in deed, we see how God suffered
David to fall once so grievously, as that his fall ought to be an horror unto
us all.

Moreover, let us well consider, that if it was needful for David too fight
against the temptations which might withdraw him from the right way, and that
he was with much to do, turned away from evil ways to serve God: every of
us verily ought a great deal more too enforce our selves: For we are nothing
so forwards as he was. For if he has gone on an hundredth paces, we have
hardly gone on that way three or four. So much the more then ought we rightly
to practice this doctrine, when it is said, that we ought to refrain our
feet from every evil way. And too do this, let us a little behold how
naturally we are inclyned to wickedness. We need never once too remove our
arms, legs, head, nor any thing else within us to do wickedly: For we are
altogether given thereto. And besides, we are as it were upon the yse. I pray
you tell me, when a man is not able to hold himself up, that he shall have
neither feet, nor legs, but that all shall tremble and be afraid, and shall
be set upon the yse, and in a steep place, how is it possible for that man to
hold him self up? In like sort is it with us: for first and foremost there is
nothing in us but debilitie and weakness: and besides, what is our life in this
world? Have we any firm or certain place to hold or stay us in? We are
always upon the yse, considering the temptations which assail us on every
side. And David also uses this similitude in another place: and yet this is
not all, that we are upon the Yse: but the place is also steep too bring us
downewarde. The more therefore have we need too pray unto God, that he will
strengthen us, to the end we be not overcome of the evil: For otherwise,
we shall never come to that end and perfection, constantly too abide by his
word.

Now when David says that He kept him self from every evil way, He
means not that he was so thoroughly preserved from all, but that he might be
amended. For as we have already said, he fell so horribly, as that the very
thought thereof should make the hayres of our head too stand upright. He
means not that his life was so perfect, as that he was able to say, that he
failed not: in some one point, and that he had wholely fulfilled the law of
God. That is not the intent of David. What is then his purpose? he means
simply; that for the holding of himself in the obedience of God, and keeping
of his word, it was needeful for him too resist a number of temptations: too
stand upon his guarde, and to be watchful, or else that he should be thrown
down hedlong an hundred thousand times. And hereby he admonishes us, that if
we will follow the way of salvation, and take good heed that we be not turned
therefro, that there is no question of bending, nor of leading us here and
there, but that we must remain constant in the vocation of God, when we are
once brought into it by him. It follows anon after:

I have not declined from thy judgments: for thou haste taught me. Lo in
sum what David here says, that because God has instructed him, he has not
turned away from his commandments. When he says, That he has been taught
by God, he means not that he has learned any such simple knowledge as is
with us, when God shows us that favor and grace, to have his word faithfully
handled amongst us, his Gospel to be preached, or that we have Lectures read
unto us, which are requisite to our salvation. For we shall have a great many
hearers, which shall yet profit nothing at all, because it pearceth not their
ears. David therefore speaks here of such a manner of instruction as
specially belongs to Gods chosen. For this grace is not common to all: but
God bestows it on them on whom it pleases him: neither must we say that we
are given thereto as of our selves: But when as it shall please God to instruct
us, the same proceeds from his mere good will and mercy. So then, David
says not simply in this place that he was taught, because he had a Book of
the law, and that it was made plain unto him: but his meaning is that he was
enlightened by the spirit of God. And for this cause declyned he not from the
right way. Now he adds in the end for a conclusion:

O how sweet are thy words unto my throat: yea sweeter then honey unto my
moath. This sentence has been already handled, and therefore we will no
longer stand upon it. There are two things in the word of God which we ought
rightly too keep. The one is, the majesty which God shows unto us therein,
to the end we should be brought to a reverence, whereby every one should
humble himself, and say, It is meet O Lord, that we tremble and fall down
before thee. As also it is said by the Prophet Isaiah that the spirit of God
shall rest upon those which tremble at the word of God. The first duty
then that we owe unto the word of God, is this reverence and fear.
Because, I say, that God shows there his majesty unto us, that we might be
thereby abased and humbled: to be short that we should have it in great
admiration. The second is, that it is sweet and amiable unto us. For we might
in some sort very well fear the word of God: and yet for all that we should
not be touched therewith as was meet.

And in very deed, you shall se very many which will not stick to say, Lo God,
which speaks, and therefore it is good reason that we should lay our ears
unto him: But that they should be subject unto him, in all, and through all,
they make thereof no novelty, but cast that far enough off. And that which
is more, They would if it were possible, pluck him but of his Throne, and make
void and cast of all instruction to the end they would not be so straightly
kept in: to be short, that they would neither be subject to God, nor too what
soever else might be said unto them. Now in the end he says,

Through thy commandments I get understanding: therefore I hate all the ways
of falshoode. Wherein he signifies unto us, that we shall never hate that
which is evil, until such time as we know, what goodness is. It is very
true that we shall sometimes see men to have a great desire to do good,
forsooth as they think: But indeed that is nothing: all is but hypocrisy,
until such time as God has so taught us, that we might know and discern in
good earnest and say. Lo it is God that speaks, and therefore let us see
what it is that he says unto us. And so after that we are fully resolved in
his truth, then shall we begin to hate all the ways of wickedness: For it
cannot otherwise be, but whatsoever is against God we must needs detest and
abhor. For howsoever Satan indeuoreth himself to carry us to do wickedly,
we ought too have this by and by in our minds. What, shall we estrange our
selves from our creator, whose we are? Shall the devil beguile us too make us
renounce him, who has so dearly bought us? And besides we also know, that
the health of our souls, and all our felicity consist in the obedience of our
good God. When the^ we shall be thus taught by the word of God, we shall hate
all wicked ways. Without this, contrariwise, it must needs be that we should
be wholly inclined thereto, and that the deceits of Satan shall please us: as
we see it come to pass emongst the infidels, unto whom we shall be very like,
without God restrain us with a bit. For if we walk after our own nature and
fantasy, what shall beecome of all our wicked ways? And so let us learn,
that we shall never be brought to that which David here speaks of, until
such time as we are instructed and understand it by the word of God, and the
testimonies of his law.

And according too this holy doctrine, let us prostrate our selves before the
majesty of our good God, with acknowledging of our faults, beseeching him to
make us so to feel our wretchedness, as that we may learn too seek our
felicity in him only. And because he so familiarly instructs us by his
word, let us not be so accursed as too reject this inestimable treasure
whereof, we may be possessed: but that being in possession thereof, we might
increase daily more and more in the knowledge which he has given us, and
continue therein unto the end, and until such time as we shall attain unto
that Heavenly inheritance, and too the full possession of that eternal rest
which he has promised us, after that we shall be delivered from all the
assaults of this frail and transitory life. That he will not only bestow this
grace upon us, but also upon all people and nations of the earth. etc.

The xiiii. Sermon upon the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm.
NVN.
Thy word is a Lantern unto my feet: and a light unto my paths.
I have sworn and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments.
I am very sore afflicted, O Lord: quicken me according unto thy word.
O Lord I beseech thee let the free will offeringes of my mouth please thee:
and teach me thy iudgemeates.
My soul is always in mine hand: yet do I not forget thy law.
The ungodly have laid a snare for me: But yet I swarued not from thy
commandments.
Thy testimonies have I claymed as mine heritage for ever: for they are the
very joy of mine heart.
I have applied mine heart too fulfill thy statutes always: even unto the end.
IF we did thoroughly consider that it were very requisite for us too read the
word of God, and to listen unto the doctrine taken out of it, we should not
need to have the matter to be so much preached off, what profit and use we
receive by it: For every of us should feel the same by experience. But because
we are so cold and blockishe in reading and hearing of that which God
declares unto us, it is meet we should be stirred up thereto some other ways,
and be showed for what cause the word of God shall profit us, when as we
shall be thus wise and of this mind, thoroughly to exercise our selves, and to
apply our whole study therein. And see why David pursues this matter so
diligently. For besides that which we have already seen here before, he
adds and says, Thy word is a Lantern unto my feere, and a light unto my
paths. Whereby he shows, that it is an inestimable treasure which we shall
receive when as we be taught by the word of God: to wit, that we shall never
err all the days of our life, as the unbelievers do, who know not whether they
go, but walk at rando^. David shows unto us, that when as we shall be guided
by the word of God, we shall be without al danger of falling. Now because it is a
very easy thing for a man to say thus, it seems at the first sight that
this saying is so common, as that we need not to stay any longer upon it. But
in the mean while let us se how the world practizeth that which is here
spoken. In deed we shall see it all clean contrary, for there are very few
that will abide to be guided by the word of god: but the more part reject it,
and like rather to follow their own wills and desires, or rather can be
contented to be governed as it pleases men, so that they will not suffer God
to bear any rule or authority over them. Therefore let us well mark what this
imports, when as it is said, That the word of God has bin as it were a
Lantern unto the feet of David, and as a light unto his paths. Now hereby he
signifies, that he means not to be wise in his own conceit, but has
sought how he ought to be governed by the word of God, and so wholly held him
self thereto.

Now if this has been a necessary point for David, let none of us think that
we can go beyond him. And see also why S. Peter writing too all the faithful in
general, tells them, that they should do very well to be attentive and to
take heed to the word of God, as to a light shining in dark places. 2. Pet.
1.19.
By this S. Peter declares unto us, that it is not without cause that David
has used this similitude of a Lantern. And why so? For he says, that we
being in the world are as me^ in the dark: and to prove it to be so, I beseech
you what wisdom is in any of us? Although that every of us estemeth of him self
enough, and a great deal more the^ needs, yet for all that when as we shall
be thoroughly known, we shall find all our understanding too be full of
vanity and folly, and although we think our selves to have a goodly light,
yet are we in a deep dungeon of darkness. And besides, let us seek all the
means possible too guide and govern us well here in this world, yet shall
it be always but darkness.

Let us then understand, that it cannot be chosen but that we must be as
strayed wild beasts without the word of God, and that without it there is
neither way nor stay for us. And although we think our selves to be wise
enough, yet shall we be altogether abused: and when as we shall think us to
be fully resolved, yet shall all our case and estate be but smoke. When then we
shall know this too be true, we may very well say with David, that the word
of God is in stead of a Lantern unto us. For what is the cause that we will
not be ordered and ruled by God, but either by reason of our pride, or else
because we know not our own want? Some of us are hindered through a vain
foolish opinion which we have of our selves, that we are sufficiently learned
too judge of that which is good and profitable. Lo here is the very cause why
we will not give place unto the word of God.

There are other some of us: that although we trust not so much unto our own
wisdom, yet know we not what a misery it is to be here, as it were in a
place of confusion, and that there is no stay of all the whole course of our
life. And heerevppon we contemn the word of God, and make no accounte of
it. So then, we must come too this humility that being wholly thrown down
as touching the presumption of our wits, we must suffer our selves too be
taught of God.

And besides that we might also know, that our state and condition is too too
miserable, until such time as we are lightened with this lantern. Now then,
like as David shows unto us by his example, that we ought not to have any
other guide, nor stay, but that which proccedeth from the word of God: Even so
also shows he unto us, that if so be we be teachable of God and accept him
as our scholmaister, and submit our selves to him, that we shall find light
enough in his word, that we need not to fear to be confounded as though we
knew not which way to turn us. For God will give us sufficient light in his
word, to lead us to salvation. And this is such a comfort as cannot be
sufficiently enough expressed: For as it is declared, that we are miscrable
blind souls, and that whilst we walk in this world, we are but in darkness,
see how God puts a remedy into our hands: that is, that we should hear him
speak, and that we should learn to be ordered by his word; and that then,
although this same world be a maze, although we have many troubles in our life,
although the devil never cease crastely to invent many deceits to turn us
from the right way, yet we shall be assured to go straight, and to attain unto
salvation. And by this we may see how Satan has possessed the papists, when
as they say, that the word of God is so dark, that we are never able once to
bite at it: and that we ought not to stay our selves thereon, because it is so
uncertain a thing: and besides that it is also a nose of wax, which a man may
turn what way he lists. They shame not to spue out such horrible
blasphemies. But contrariwise, let us trust unto the spirit of God, speaking by
the mouth of David: to wit, that if we be lightened by the word of God, we
need not to fear falling: and that there is no rule so certain. For although
the devil went about with a thousand deceits to turn us this way and that by
crooked bypathes: yet must we be fully assured that the word of God is a
lantern unto our feet, to lead us the right way. Nevertheless David shows
unto us, how we shonlde seele such a commodity coming unto us by the law of
god: to wit, when as we shall receive it with hearty affection. For he says,

I have sworn and will perform it: that I will keep thy righteous
judgments. Now here he shows, that if there be a wavering minded spirit,
which reads the Scripture for curiosities sake, the same must needs remain
and continue always blind and ignorant: as we shall see many of them which
do nothing else but turn over the leaves, and wander in such sort, as that
there is neither firmness nor yet soundness in any of them. And what is the
cause thereof? For sooth it is, because they seek not God with a right and
earnest affection. If we then will have the commodity, which David here
speaks of, we must come back again to the word of God, and apply all our
study so courageously, as that we desire nothing else but too be instructed
in this truth, and to submit our selves wholly unto it. And yet David was not
contented to say that this was his only determination: But says, that he had
sworn and was steadfastly purposed to observe it: For the word which he uses,
signifies, that I will establish it: to wit, I will wholly give my self unto
it: for I am so resolute in this matter, as that I will never be turned away
from it. Whereby he shows, that there is no question, but that we have
certain small motions, which slip us, but we must have such a fervent zeal,
as possesses our whole mind: and after we must with this zeal be constant,
because then we shall be able rightly to see those men which so trimly and
fairly pus and blow at us. But what? This is but a false fire as we say. Now
if we be truly affected to serve God, the same our affection must be firm
and sure, that we may unfeignedly say with David, that we have sworn, and are
fully purposed too stand and abide by this matter. In very deed here may some
question arise: For it should seem that David has too too much presumed of him
self, to swear that he will keep the testimonies of God. For we are not able
to promise any thing, which is not in our power and strength. If a man shall
thrust in himself to promise that which he has not, he of right is to be
accused of folly: for every man will say, that it is great arrogance in him
because he has passed his bounds. Now when as we shall have thoroughly
considered hereof, we shall find that it is impossible for any mortal man,
perfectly to observe the Commandments of God.

This should seem then at the first sight, that the oath which David here
speaks of, ought rather too be reprehended then commanded: But here are two
things too be considered of: The one is, that when the faithful bind them
selves so unto God, they lay not this foundation in their own proper strength,
they look not into their own ability, but they desire of God to accomplish
that which they have promised him. And why do they so? Now let us note, that
here he speaks of the commandments of God. And we have here already
declared, that when David names the law, he looks not simply too the
Commandments, but also to the promises: and in these promises it is said,
that God will circumcise the hearts of his children: He says, that he will so
lively touch them, as that he will bring them into his obedience. So then (as
we have already said) the faithful bind not them selves to God to do any
thing of their own power and strength, but they desire him to fulfill what
soever is wanting in them, to supply their weakness, and to send such remedy
as he knows best to be most needful and expedient for them. See then with
what confidence David has sworn too observe the Testimonies of God: he did
it not, I say, of any vain presumption, that he had conceived of his own
power and strength, ne yet that he was able to do it, no, he attributed
nothing to his own strength: But swears and does it, by reason of the
promise of god, by which promise he declares that he will by his holy spirit
govern al those which are his. Lo whereupon David stayed himself. Now by and
by follows the second point: to wit, that David has sworn too observe the
testimonies, yea even staying himself upon that which God has promised, that
he will uphold us through his mercy, that although we halte and that all the
obedience which we go about to yield unto him be weak and faulty, because it
is done but by halues, yet he not having respect to al our faults, means to
make a taste of the desire which we shall have to please him: and in effect,
will accept our service as it is, dispensing with all the faults which shall be
mingled amongst them. Which thing David considering, was able to say that he
would observe the commandments of God. So then let us note, that when the
faithful bind themselves to observe the word of God, they must not trust to
them selves, ne yet be puffed up with a foolish opinion, that they have the
power to do it: but they must say. Accomplish thou this, O Lord, and then I
will follow it: write thy law O Lord, in mine heart, and then shall I have
a desire to serve thee: and besides, Let the faithful always remember* that
God will not handle them sharply: yea and although they fail in a great number
of points, so that they are not able to observe one only point, nor jot
perfectly: yet will he spare them through his free goodness and mercy. When the
faithful and children of god shall have known thus much, and shall swear that
they will observe the commandments of God: yet let them not cease for all that
too fly unto the forgiveness of their sins, that they may feel the same too
be a necessary remedy agreeable to the will of God, for the fulfilling of one
part of his commandments. We see now then why David has sworn to keep the
Commandments of God, and that he will never change this purpose in his heart.
Now he makes two requests immediately after: whereof, the one is to be
quickened and restored. Wherein he shows that which I have already touched:
which is, that he was not led with a foolish presumption of his own power
and strength. For he which desires god to be restored, confesses that he
lives not as of himself, but that he must needs live by the grace and goodness
of God. And yet David makes this confession more expressly, when he adds the
reason why he uses to make such request: For I am very sore afflicted O Lord,
says he. See then David who confessing him self to be troubled, and as it were
utterly made nothing besecheth god for to restore him. Shall we say that he
trusted to own strength? or that he attributed any thing whatsoever unto him
self? we se the clean contrary. So then, according to that which we have
already declared, let us understand that he swear not upon any vain
presumption: but because he knew that God would never fail him. And this is
the reason why he took upon him this boldenes. And that is it which he adds:
According to thy word: that is, according to thy promises. Now we ought
thoroughly to consider all what soever that is here said. Quicken me O Lord,
says he. And thus much for the first point. Wherein he shows that he lives
not as of him self, but defiereth it of God. And afterward, he adds the
reason, saying after this manner, I am very sore aflicted. Whereby he
declares unto us, that we are not able too relieve and maintain our selves,
when as our strength fails us, but that it is God which must put to his
helping hand. And besides we may be assured that he will help us, and be ready
to restore us, so that we will desire him, and call upon him, and have recourse
unto his goodness. Lo here a mighty comfort for all the faithful, when as
they find them selves to be so without strength, as that they feel them
selves too fainte, too be clean cast down, and to see nothing else in them
selves but death: yet may they be fully assured and resolved, that God will
always be their watchman, too restore and quicken them. And why so? To wit,
according to that which David adds when he says, According to thy promises.
Then it follows, that God has promised too restore and quicken his, when as
they shall be in death. And therefore we shall never be able too make our
request in faith, as David here has done, if that we have not the promises
of God. For, as we have before said, it is a foolehardines in men to put forth
them selves too pray unto God as they list, without being sure and certain
of his will before.

See then the cause which moved David so expressly too set down here the
promise of GOD. Now this promise was not made too him alone, this is no
personal Privilege, as we say, appertaining to one man only: But it is a
general rule which we must hold, that God will raise up again from death
those which are thrown down, and as it were made nothing: yea even when as
they do call upon him, and acknowledge, that it comes of his own pure grace
that they ought to be so restored, and not otherwise. Now here is yet another
request which he makes,

O Lord, I beseech thee let the freewill offringes of my mouth please thee:
and teach me thy judgments. Here David desires God to accept the praises
which he shall render unto him. For the oblations whereof David speaks, are
nothing else but praise and thanksgiving, by which David acknowledges the
benefits of God. And yet for all that, he in very deed looks unto the
common order of the law: For when a man has been cured of a disease, or has
been delivered from some danger, or else that God has endued him with
prosperity, he comes to the Church to make his oblation or offering, for an
especial testimony, and too acknowledge how greatly he is bounden unto God.
David had small regard to any such ceremonies, but yet he notes and
expresses the end and the use, that is, that we should stay us upon the
principal: for if a man should sacrifice a beast, that were nothing at all. And
wherefore then served such manner of sacrifice? Forsooth it was an aid and
help: because it is needful that we should be always stirred up. And besides,
this is a good advertisement to show us, that when we will give GOD thanks
for his benefits which he bestows upon us, we must come unto him by the
mediation of our Lord Jesus Christ: for we are not once worthy to open our
mouths to honor God, because our lips are unclean and defiled. And so we
the^ knowing our unworthiness, must come unto our Lord Jesus Christ, and give
thanks unto God by him, Heb. 4.14.15.16.
as also the author to the Hebrews exhorts us to do. For he namely declares
that unto us, that it is only Jesus Christ, which gives us access unto God
his father, to confess his bounty toward us: and otherwise, we shall but
profane his name, yea he will not accept our praises and thanks giving, but
they shall eue^ as it were stink in his nosethrilles. Se then to what end the
sacrifices are. But David notwithstanding shows, that the principal end of
the benefits of God is, that our lips should open them selves to confess
his goodness, when as we have proved and felt it. And that is it which he
speaks of in the hundredth and sixteen Psalm, Ps. 116.11.12.
What reward shall I give unto the Lord: for all the benefits that he has
bestowed upon me? I will receive the cup of salvation: and call upon the name
of the Lord: as if he should have said, that he knew none other way to
please God but to giuethankes unto him, when as he had liberally bestowed all
the benefits of the world upon him, in such sort as that he felt himfelfe most
bounden unto his goodness Even so likewise will he be contented with us,
when as we render unto him such thanks. Yea, but in the mean while let us
consider that David knew, that if God had not freely accepted the praises
which he yielded unto him, that they had been nothing worth, as we have already
declared: but we have of this here a sufficient and manifest co^firmatio^. What
is the reason why David besought God to accept the praises which he re^dred
unto him? he did it not like an hypocrite. He confesses then, that when he
presented him self before God, to magnify his name, that he might very well
have been put by, and his mouth to have been stopped. And why so? because that we
profane the name of God seeing there can proceed nothing but filth and stench,
from those which are altogether corrupt, neither ca^ there be any one drop of
goodness in the^. And although God has put in to them any good virtues, yet
they are so entermedted with vices, as that it is lamentable. And therefore
David knowing this to be so, prays God that his praises might please him. Now
if David knew his unworthiness to be such, I beseech you, dares any of us to
say, that we are of our own power capable, to magnify the name of God, and to
render him such thanks as to him appertains, without he of his mere free
good will allows the^, not imputing unto us the vices and imperfections which
are therewithal entermedled* and that he will also think well of our praises and
thanksgiving, yea although they deserve it never a whit? And besides, if we
need to desire God, to accept our praises which we render unto him: I pray you
what shall become of the rest? For it is most certain, that if there be any
service which pleases God, it is even this when we come to do our homage for
whatsoever we have received at his hands: and that we confess and protest that
we have nothing but that we hold of him. When as we do this homage unto God;
lo this is the service, which he chiefly desires of us: Lo this is that
sweet smelling sacrifice, which the scripture speaks of. Now so it is, that
when we would do this homage unto God, thereby to humble our selves, yet may it
be amended: in such sort as that we deserve to have it to be put by, and to be
disalowed: what shall then become of our other mean services, and in effect, of
al our whole life? Shall we now go and glorify him with our merits as the
Papists do, who lift up their heads against God with an whorish shamelesnes:
For they think that GOD is beholden too them: or else, although they have
offended his majesty, yet after that they have reckened with him, they think
that they may very well reco^pense him with their satisfactions. Go too now,
let us think thus of our selves, that when we see that in the very best and
most requisite, yea and as it were the very flower of all our good works, even
of those wherein God guides us, that they do nothing else but stink, except
God himself cleanse them too make them sweet, and takes from them the
superfluities and filthiness which are in them. Now if of all our good
works, yea even of the most excellent we are exhorted to crave pardon of God
for them, what shall become of our gross and over manifest sins whereof we
are convinced, and whereof men, yea, and young children, may reprehende us? So
then, see here an excellent place, which rightly abolisheth al vain and
devilish confidences, wherewith we deceive our selves, when as we think too
stand before the majesty of God with our merits, and such other like
gewgawes and trifling toys I know not what thinking thereby to recompense him.

And thus much for this verse. Now David afterward says,

My soul is always in my hand: yet do I not forget thy law.
The ungodly have laid a snare for me: but yet I swarued not from thy
commandments.
Here David protests as before, that he had such a resolute affection to
follow the word of God, as that no temptations could withdraw him from it.
And see how we may say, that we serve God, without hypocrisy and in truth. For
if we be easily and gently dealte withal, so we have no affliction, that our
God handles us as we would wish, and leaves us to our own pleasure, or
else, if he so much favors us, as that we are not pressed with any griefs
and sorrows: it is an easy matter then for us too serve and honor him. But
when God afflicts us, that it seems he would oppress and grieve us every
minute of an hour, when we see death pursuing us on every side, that the
ungodly are wholly about us, as it were ready to pull out our eyes, and our life
so wretched; as that the world judges us to be as it were reprobates: when
then al these temptations shall touch us, and yet we remain still constant
praising of God, and holding us unto him, perseuering in his obedience, and
calling upon him, being patient in all our afflictions, until such time as he
delivers us: when we have all this, we may then say with David, that we have
displaied and laid wide open our life to serve God: and this shall be a good
and sure proof thereof. But if we have not this constancy, a great number may
make a wonderful show of godliness before the face of the world, but all
that shall prove nothing. And so, let us well consider of this place: for David
spoke not this for him self, but for our common instruction. And besides, if
we will in deed profit our selves by this doctrine, let us consider that if we
sometimes see the apparaunt dangers of death, so that we be pressed down on
every side, not to think it to be any strange thing. And why so? Because the
same came too pass as greatly sometimes to David. For he says that he was
not without continual trouble. My soul (says he) is always in my hand: my
life is as it were I can not tell where, it is put forth to abide all
mischief, that it seems I were at deaths door every minute of an hour. If
David was always thus troubled, and yet perseuered in the praising of God: I
beseech you ought not we to be ashamed to be faint hearted, when as it shall
please God to exercise us only but now and then? Even so, although afflictions
oppress us, yet must we not cease too fight against them, attending and
craving the help of God. And thus much for this. And besides, when we are
thus assured, let us seek our comfort where it may he found, that is, in the
word of God, and to be thus constant never to forget the law of God. Let us
the^ consider and observe this doctrine. For it is not without cause that David
says, That although my soul be in my hand, yet have I not forgotten thy
law. He shows us hereby, that as we are weak, so we should be soon
shaken, and in the end thrown down, when as we should see our selves laid
wide open to death. We then having this understanding ought to stand upon our
guarde, to the end the devil might never beguile us, under the color, that
God had as it were forsaken us, and that we should be as it were in the shadow
of death. Moreover, we see what doltishnesse (or rather beastliness) this is
amongst the Papists, to take this place for proof of freewill. My soul is in
my hand to wit, I am able of mine own nature, and of my own proper strength,
to discern between good and evil: and to do whatsoever I think best. If
brute beasts could speak, they would speak a little wiselier then thus. For
to what purpose should David say, although, O Lord, that my soul is in my
hand, yet have I not forgotten thy law? He should altogether speak clean
against nature. But as we have already declared, this is a kind of speech
much used in the scripture, to say that the life of a man is in his hand, it
is as it were in the wind, or I know not where. Let us now come unto the
protestation which he adds,

The ungodly have laid a snare for me: but yet I swarued not from thy
commandments. This sentence is like unto the other which we are about to
handle. For he shows how his life was in his hand: too wit, that over
and besides the afflictions which were directly sent him from the hand of God,
that the wicked also persecuted him as well: and besides the violences, and
outrages, that were done unto him, he had also secret ambushes laid for
him. See then how diversely he is oppressed, and yet he never shronke from the
law of God. In the end he adds and says,

Thy testimonies have I claymed as mine heritage for ever: for they are the
very joy of mine heart. Now here he shows, how he was able to remain
firm and constant without being withdrawn by any temptations: but that he
always stood steadfastly in the law of God: that is, because he always chose
it for his heritage, that is for his chief felicity. For this word heritage,
in the scripture, is taken for the thing that man most desires, and that
which most properly belongs unto him. To be short, it is such a similitude,
as that is which is spoken of the Treasure: as if a man should call it, the
sovereign good, the true and perfect felicity. See then at what end we must
begin, if in the midst of death we will abide so constantly as David has
done, too keep the law of god: that is I say, to choose it for our
inheritance. And how is that? First of al we must understand, that all the
commodities wherevntoo we are overmuch given, are transitory, without
certainty, and without property. For we may want them every handewhyle:
neither can we enjoy any thing be it never so justly given, but that we may be
robbed of it betwixt this day and too morrow. What is then the surest felicity
which we can have, and may enjoy for ever? it is even the word of God. And
this is it which we ought chiefly too desire, and wherein we are especially
too rejoice. Lo then how we must understand that which David here
protests, That he has chosen the word of God for his heritage.

Yea and he sets it down by and by after, that it has been the very joy
of his heart. For until such time as we have had this taste in the word of
God, that we truly joy in it, it is a sign that we never yet had any good
affection thereto at all. Although we have known that our chief felicity
lies therein, yet are we not able well too keep our selves in it, until
such time as we have conceived, that it is that wherein we must delight, and
in none other thing.

Now it is impossible that we should ever take any delight or pleasure in the
law of God, except we did know that he declares him self to us in it, that
he is our father, and takes us for his children, that we have a testimony
that our sins are forgiven us, that we may have access unto him, and he
able to call upon him in all our necessities. If God says only unto us, lo
what it is that I would have you to do, I would have you too take me for your
God, and to serve me with all your heart: if we have but these two tables, to
look into, to know what we have to do, shall the law of God delight us?
No, but contrariwise, it shall fear us. We see then very well when David
says, that he took all his delight and pleasure in the commandementes of
God, that he had not simply the bare word of the law, to say that God
commanded him that which he ought to do* but that he also joined the promises
thereto, because that God willing his children to come unto him, promises to
make them feel his goodness and fatherly love which he uses toward those
that are his. To be short, he shows them that all their felicity consists
in his only mercy* He says in the end,

I have applied mine heart to fulfill thy statutes always: even unto the end.
Now when he says, that he inclined his heart to observe the commandments
of God: he shows us, what service it is that God requires: that is a
voluntary and willing service. See here yet a point which ought well too be
considered off, too the end we should not think that we are ever able to
please God, when as we serve him constrainedly, as we see the miserable and
wretched faithnesse do, which greatly torment the^ selves. And why so? For all
that they do, they do it co^strainedly because they would the better escape
the hand of God, but when they come near unto him as well as they may, it is
but as it were enforced and constrained, because he is their judge. Now if we
have such a constant desire (as we term it) that we are enforced to do that
which we are commanded: our whole case is little worth, and God will never
allow of it. And why so? because he likes of nothing else but of obedience,
and would have us come unto him with frank and willing minds.

See then why David says, that he has inclined his heart to keep the
commandments of God: not that he protests, that he has done it of him
self, nor of his own mind:but because that God has given him both the will
and the power to do the same. And to prove it to be so, we shall never see
that David braggeth of him self in any one place, that he willed any good,
being so led of his own proper mind: Psalm. 51.5.
he will never say, that it was his natural inclination, but says clean
contrary, I was conceived in sin, says he, he reserueth nothing to him
self but all that which is naught. When then in this behalf he protests that
he had inclined his heart, he only shows what the grace of God was in him.
And for conclusion he adds: That he did it for ever, or, even unto the end,
or, this is it which we have touched heretofore: to wit, we must be like
sudden blasts which pass by and by, but we must be constant* and that when
we shall have once begun, we must pray unto God that he will continue the
same our well doing which he has begun in us, and to hold us by the hand
until such time as we have finished our course. After he had said, for ever,
he adds, even unto the end. It is very true, that the saying which he here
uses, imports sometimes, salarie Or reward: But in this place (as in the
first verse of the letter. HE, he uses the self same saying) it signifies
but too the end: as if he should have said we may alter and change our
minds in other things: but we must follow unto the death, when God calls us
unto him, being assured that in this pursuit we cannot sail to come to the
true end, without to fail and err for ever.

And according to this holy doctrine, let us prostrate our selves before the
majesty of our good God in acknoweledging our faults: beseeching him that it
would please him too make us so thoroughly too feel them, as that we may in
all humility be able too crave pardon of him for them, groaning for all the
offenses which we have committed against him. And that in the mean while also
we may have recourse unto him, beseeching him too remedy all our vices and
imperfections: and so too confirm our weakness, as that being strengthened
by him, we might overcome all the temptations wherewith Satan can any way
assail us, that being more and more confirmed in his holy dictrine, we
desire nothing else but to submit our selves unto it, and too be squared by
none other rule, but by that which he has given unto us through his word. That
it would not please him only to grant unto us this grace, but unto all
people and nations of the world. etc.

The fifteenth Sermon upon the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm.
SAMECH.
I hare vain inventions: but thy law do I love.
Thou art my refuge and my shield: and I trust in thy word.
Away from me ye wicked: for I will keep the commandments of my God.
Stablish me according too thy promise that I may live: and let me not be
disappointed of my hope.
Hold thou me up and I shall be saufe: yea and my delight shall be continually in
thy statutes.
Thou have trodden down all them that depart from thy statutes: for their
deceit is vain:
Thou have taken away all the ungodly of the earth like dross: therefore I
love thy testimonies.
My flesh trembles for fear of thee. and I am afraid of thy judgments.
WE have so many lettes and stoppes both from above and here beneath which
draw us on to do wickedly, or at least wise which cause us too slack our
serving of GOD, that which soever of us that is minded to do well, must remove
from him al his wicked and evil affections, and all the temptations, which any
way may come against him. See then why David in this place, meaning to
proteste that he loved the law of God, says to the contrary, that he
hated high enterprises, or rather wicked and crooked imaginations, evil
considerations. For the word which is here touched, signifies a bough or
branch: and by a similitude takes it for the evil and wicked imaginations
and devises of men which, run this and that way. Now we see what a
bottomless depth the spirit of man is, and how he wreatheth or windeth him
self in his fantasies. This self same word signifies, the very height and
top either of an hie hill, house, or any other hie thing. And thereupon also
as by a similitude, the imaginatiue co^ceipts of men, when as they entend to
bring them selves into credit, and go about to advance them selves, even as
ambition rules our nature, until such time as God has tamed us by his holy
spirit, and humbled and made us gentle and meek. And now that we may have the
true and natural meaning of this place, let us see in effect, that David
protesting that he loved the law of God, says, that he removed quite from
him whatsoever might withdraw him from it. Now he speaks not this here to
the end to brag of him self: but rather that this example should be for
our better instruction. For the spirit of God has spoken it by his mouth to
the end we might understand and know, which is the mean whereby we might be
wholly given to the service of God, and to take hold of the law with such an
affection, as that our hearts might be as it were even fast tied thereto. For
it is impossible, I say, that we should ever come or attain unto it, until
such time as we have clean cut of the things which withdraw and turn us away
both on the one side and the other: to wit, al our own fantasies and lusts:
we must thrust out from us all whatsoever, for the love which we ought to bear
to the law of God:we must also forget all hawtines or pride, yea even studying
how too separate our selves from those which any way might draw us too
evil: and not too communicate with the ungodly which are double hearted, full
of hypocrisy, or else, such as are but vain glorious and of that pride which
even moves the^ to lift themselves up both against God and men: For their
company will so corrupt us, as that being uuzzeled amongst them, our hearts
can never be so ordered and ruled in the love which we ought to have to the
law of God. Now then let us keep well in mind this admonition, as a thing most
profitable for us: to wit, as before I have said, that as we are inclined to
committee a great number of offenses and villainies, which will withdraw us
from the love that we ought to bear to the word of God, let us so much the
mere fly from whatsoever draws us away backward. Yea and let us understand,
that look how many our imaginations and affections are, that they are even so
many cartropes to hale and pull us away from this love: or else, they are so
many poisons which Satan gives us, to the end we should not once taste of the
word of God, neither to be so amiable and pleasant unto us as it ought: but
rather that we might be grieved and lothed therewith, and so to leave it, as if
it were a grievous matter, and an occasion of heuines. Since then it is so, let
us be well advised too purge our hearts of all earthly affections, if we will
take in hand to love the word of God. And yet it is not enough that we have
fought against our ungodly lusts, and fleshly fantasies, but we must also as
it were gather our wits together: for hardly can we open our eyes to look
about this way and that way, but that Satan will lay before us some evil
and wicked stops and encountries. It is very true, that so long as we live here
in this world, we can not but both see and hear a great many of things: but
yet must we bridle our senses. And above all the rest, we ought to fight
against these strange, and counterfeit hypocrisies and affections, wherein we
are nuzzeled. We must even hate deadly all this in our heart, to the end we
be not hindered from the love of the word of God. And thus much for the first
verse. Now in the second, David shows how we should find the word of God
pleasant and gracious, that we might love it, that is, when as we shall trust
to his word. Thou art, says he, my refuge and my shield: and I trust in thy
word.

This is not added hereunto without just cause. For if there be none other
doctrine in the law but too say unto us, Lo this must you do, we can never
be comforted. For we shall find nothing in it but condemnation. When as god
shows unto us what our duty is, we must needs be confounded, and know, that
before him we are condemned and accursed, seeing that no man performs that
which he ought. So then, the word of God should be both bitter and grievous
unto us, if there were nothing else contained in it but a rule too live well:
But when God is a testimony and witness unto us of his goodness and mercy, and
declares unto us that from him we must look too receive our chief
felicity, that he is pressed and ready too help us, that the treasures of his
infinite goodness are open unto us: when I say, this shall be in us, then may
we sauoure and taste his word, and conceive the love of it, when as we know
that therein consists and lies all our health and joy. Now then, when as
we would profit in the word of God, and exercise our selves in it, let us
learn to receive the promises therein contained. And let us not be like unto
them, which think that God says nothing else unto in all the whole
scripture, but do this, or do that: for then, this were a very thin and
feeble doctrine. For if God were there as a Philosopher, to preach unto us of
virtues, and to declare unto us, that we must be thus governed: we should have
but a pitiful cold pull of it: and because we are altogether and wholly
contrary to the righteousness of God, it is impossible but that we should be
grieved and troubled with whatsoever shall be said unto us.

But I have already showed, that the principal matter which God declares unto
us in his word, is this, that he protests how well he loves us in
alluring us unto him self, to the end we should not doubt, but that he will
be our father in all and through all, and that we should be bold to come
before him: that when there is any question of our salvation, and of whatsoever
else we have need off, we should not doubt but that he is ready to hear all
our prayers, that his hand is always liberally bent, to the end to give us
whatsoever we want. When we shall once know this to be true, then, as I have
already said, the word of God shall be pleasant unto us. Lo now why David
by and by adds, My trust is in thy word, O Lord. This is also, in sum, our
faith, which brings us to the obedience of God when I say that it is faith
which brings us into the obedience of God. I mean, that after we have
understood of his good will, that we are the^ stirred up to yield our selves
unto him. And until such time as he has imprinted in our hearts the
testimony of his love, and the benefit which he means unto us, we shall
fly from him as much as may be: and as often as this word of God shall
sound in our ears, so often shall it grieve and torment us, as we see how
the faithless do fear, when the word of God is spoken unto them: it
brings unto them nothing but terror and fear, as if a thief or murderer
were brought before a judge. But when as we have faith to stay our selves upon
the goodness of God, too call upon him as David does here, our succoure, and
shield: we may call upon him with such a confidence, as that he will never
be deaf, too hear our prayers: when then we are thus assured, we are
forthwith won to love him, then delight we to yield our obedience unto his
law. Now in following that which we have already declared, David again
adds,

Away from me ye wicked: for I will keep the commandments of my God. Here
he speaks of the temptations which come unto us by reason of the ungodly who
allure us, as much as in them lies too make us too contemn God, and work so
many offenses as that they break all good order, yea, even to leave the world
naked and bare of all goodness. For so much then as we are too live here
amongst contemptuous and outrageous people, who have neither faith, trust, nor
truth: and that these temptations are very perilous unto us: as we see what a
great number of men are corrupt by them: David says, Away from me ye wicked,
because I keep the commandments of my God. Here we are to note, as before I
have touched, that he speaks not this, too make recital of his worthiness,
or that he alleges it for his power and strength to win him reputation:
but speaking by the spirit of God, he admonishes us to live holily: to wit,
that if we will walk in the fear of God, and be under his yoke, we must in
the first place separate out selves from the ungodly. Now this is an easy
doctrine to be learned, but it is so slenderly practiced of us, as that we had
need better to think of it, then heretofore we have done. If there were a
great number of offenses in David his time, which were to turn the faithful
away from the fear of God, and too lead them to do wickedly, in what case
then stand we now? It is very true that we are come to the full measure of
all iniquity. For if we do behold at this day the states and conditions of
all men, it will seem that it is impossible for the world to be worse, that the
devil so possesses both great and small in towns and villages, as that it is
a very hell and tormentory to see it. Even so the^, how is it possible that a
faithful man can persevere to live in the fear of God and in such soundness
as he has commanded, without he stand very sure upon his guarde? without he
keep a good watch? and chiefly except he separate him self from so great a
number of corruptions? For at this day a man can come in no company, but that
the talk shall tend to the dishonouring of God, with all ungodliness: or else
the talk shall be so vain, as that it shall have no good sauoure, yea, and
too make whatsoever good seed that is in any man, who is yet teacheable, to
be nothing worth. And yet many times this shall not be the greatest
mischief: but a man shall hear the most cursed blasphemies that may be
vometed out by these grenning helhoundes at this day, who are grown to the
full measure of impudency, like unto shameless harlottes, discovering their
vilanies not only against God and all true Christianity, but do also even
like mastife curres bark against al religion. This we see, let us then come to
the greatest number of those which seem to be a little more tolerable, I
beseech you what lesson or fruit shall we reap by them? We shall find some
of them to use abundance of wicked traffic, crafts, deceiptes, or else
outrages, violences, oppressions and cruelties against their neighbors.
Another sort shall be given to lech ery, and to such beastliness: another kind
shall be gluttons and such like brutish people of life and conversation? To be
short, turn which way soever we will, and we shall find nothing but
corruption: so that if this doctrine has been any time necessarily to be
taught, it is at this most necessary and hie time, since we are come even to
so full a measure and bottomless depth of iniquity, let us then be well
advised too depart from all those that work iniquity, yea and let us chase
them far from us, if we will faithfully and truly serve God.

It is most sure that we must needs be conuersaunt with the ungodly, or else
depart out of this world at once: but yet we must not keep them company so
familiarly, as too draw with them the same yoke. Let us take heed that we in
no ways wind our selves in with them: but that our life and conversation be
so simple and plain, as that they be never able to bring us in, and to be
infected with their vices. For we hear what the holy scripture says, that we
had no need of any thing to corrupt good manners. For as a little leaven
sowreth the whole lump of dough, even so when the devil can thrust in amongst
us the least drop of corruption, lo all shall be perverted and come to naught.
We see not at the first sight how the devil goes about to beguile us, and
therefore we ought to be so much the more watchful. Let the ungodly complain
as much as they will, as we see at this day the murmurers and grudgers do,
that they think them selves to be ill dealt withal, when as we will not be
partakers of their filthiness. Now we know right well that they seek none
other thing but too make wicked, whatsoever is well ruled and ordered, too
overthrow whatsoever has been builded up in GOD, and too bring souls too
destruction. All this we know. Now if any man keep him self from this,
here at they are all grieved.

How so? They say our company is eschewed. Yea, but give you the occasion that
you may be followed, seek the right mean to give your selves to God, and
follow you the right way of salvation, and the better sort will not absent
them selves far from you, but will rather join with you. If they shall see
you ready to march forward, they will say, Let us go together: If they shall
see you go before, they will come after: if they shall see you tarry behind,
so that you be entered into the right way, they will stir you up too follow
them. But when as we see such kind of people to go clean backwarde from all
goodness, and desire nothing else but to lead us too wickedness, yea too
cast us down hedlong with them into hell mouth, wherein to they run like mad
men, what should we do but separate our selves from amongst them, and retire
us from thence, as David shows us. And namely he says, For I will keep the
commandments of my God. As if he should have said, These cursed men do right
well show that they have no feeling nor knowledge of everlasting life, but
that they live here like to brute beasts: Nevertheless for my part I will not
go one foot forward with them, but will go toward my God. And out of this
saying we are to gather a good instruction, to wit that when we see round
about us all people given over to wickedness, that it seems the world has
conspired to make the majesty of God nothing worth, that we declare by our
lines and conversation, that we have no knowledge of everlasting life: when as
then we shall see such impieties, it is even to this end and purpose too
withdraw us quite and clean from our God. It is very true, that these are
very dangerous offenses and temptations. But let us always be sure to abide
firm, and steadfast, let us continue constant in this truth which once we have
received. See then what David means to express in this saying, My God. It is
true that the faithful will often say thus. But when there is any question to
make these comparisons with contrary things, the scripture uses not this
saying, My God, so that it is to declare unto us, that nothing ought to make us
waver: when we see the things confused in the world, when we shall see all
whatsoever to be there perverted and overthrown, that there is neither any
more law nor order, that it seems unto us as it were an Hell, let us not for
all that be shaken: Abac. 1.12.
Let us stand still upon our guarde, as the Prophet Abacuc thereof speaks,
our faith must serve us in stead of a Tower, wherein we keep good watch, and
yet too say notwithstanding, no, no, God will tarry with me, and then I need
not to care for the whole world. See then that no temptations ought to quail
us: being even in closed amidst the impieties and abhominaons of the
faithless, seeing we cannot otherwise chose but to be conuersaunt amongst
them. It follows next after,

Establist me, or stay me, in thy word that I may live: and let me not be
disapoynted of mine hope.

Although David protests here above, that he trusted in God, and that this
hope proceeded unto him from his word: yet prays he his majesty
notwithstanding too establish him. Wherein he shows us, that we shall never
have so well profited neither in faith, nor yet in hope, but that there shall be
always some want, and remnaunt of incredulity and weakness in us, so that
whenever there shall be any question of coming to God, yet shall we go as
it were halting unto him. Now if David has made such a request, I beseech you,
have not we a great deal more need to do it as well as he? It is most
sure, that he never spoke it hypocritically. When he says, Uphold me, or
establish me in thy word: this is not too make a show that his faith was
imperfect, and that he needed not be strengthened: no, not so, but he knew
well enough his own infirmity. If he then who was as it were an Angel of
God, had need to profit in faith, and in hope, and that he had been moulten,
and been quite consumed had not God thoroughly confirmed and established him: I
pray you what shall we do?

So then, when as God shall have already showed us this favor too be surely
grounded in his word, so that we are able to say that we trust in it, let us
not cease notwithstanding to continue this request and say, O Lord, establish
and confirm me. For when we shall well consider our weakness, we shall
find that a very small thing will quayle us, if God holds us not up with
his hand and power. And afterward let us consider how boisterous the
assaults of Satan are, what violence he brings against us: and are we ever
able too withstand them, if that we be not daily strengthened? They then
which shall have conceived a true hope in the word of God, let them know that
they are yet but in the midde way, and that they must always march
furtherforward, until such time as they are come to the end thereof. Which
thing shall never be, until they are uncased of this flesh, and are departed
out of this present life.

Seeing then we cannot go forward as of our selves, nor yet be strengthened,
without God assist us: Let us beseech him after the example of David, that he
will confirm us in his word. And afterward he adds and says,

That then he shall live: and disappoint me not, says he, of my hope. When he
says that he shall live, It is to show us, that all our felicities lies in
this, that we are thoughly confirmed and fully settled in the word of God: When
this shall be so, let us then fear no more. It is very true, that we shall never
be but subject to a great many of myseryes and afflictions for it cannot be
otherwise but that this life must be full of afflictions, and many griefs and
vexations. We are then to fight whiles we live in this world. And so we
shall find a great number of miseryes, and yet we shall not choose but to live
still, when we shall be thoroughly founded upon the word of God? that is to
say, our salvation shall be sure and certain even amidst all the afflictions
which may come unto us. And so shall we have wherewith to be contented.

For under this word. to live, David comprehends all whatsoever concerns
the welfare and felicity of men. He says then, Although O Lord, I shall be
taken as a miserable creature, and that in deed I shall abide many troubles
which shall be grievous unto me: yet shall I have true life and salvation, so I
be thus established in thy word. Now he adds a little more, Let me not be
disapoynted of mine hope: wherein his meaning is to signify, that God never
suffers his Children to be disapoynted, when as they put their trust in him;
But yet the case so stands, as that we must so beseech him by reason of our
weakness. For although we trust in God, yet for all that we go coldely unto
him, and we shall find our faith to be always too too weak and feeble.

To be short, our heart shall be so shut up, as that the graces of God, as
touching our selves, shall hardly water it by dropmeale. It is very true that
God for his part pours upon us his graces abundauntly: but we therein are
nothing capable for the receiving of them. Wherefore, we are not worthy to
taste and feel his aid in our need, What should this then be, if he
surmounted not our hope, to help that which therein is wanting? And besides we
know that the Devil would soon overthrow al our hope, were it not that it is
very well kept by an heavenly power, as also S. Peter makes thereof mention.
1. Pet. 1.
For when he speaks of faith, he says not that men are the Gardians or
keepers of it. For if that were so, it should oftentimes be violently taken
from them. But that is a treasure which God keeps in his own hands, and that
by his own invincible power and strength. See also why our Lord and Savior
Christ in the 10. of John, for our comfort says, Ioh. 10, 24.
That the father who has us in his hand, and through whom we are committed
unto him to be kept, is mightier and greater then they all. Accordingly then as
we know, the power of God to be infinite, so must we also assure our selves
of our salvation. And therefore it is, that we are to require of God as David
has done, that we be not disapointed of our hope. Now in sum when we make
such requests, it is too the end that the promises of God should be so much the
more certain and better ratified unto us. See then what God says unto us.
Fear you not when as you shall put your trust in me, for I will nether
deceive, nor abuse you, ne yet shall you be destitue of mine aid: but be you
assured that my hand shall always be streatched out too succor you. We have
this promise made unto us which can never fail us. Mow it behooves that it be
ratified and sealed in out hearts. And how is that? That in our prayers and
supplications, we beseech God to accomplish and perform that which he has
promised, which shall be in stead of a seal sealed within, to the end we
might have such a certainty as is requisite: and anon after God shows in
effect, that he speaks not in vain unto us. Lo, say I, what we ought to
note of the accord that is betwixt the promises of God and the prayers which
we make unto him in desiring to make us feel by experience, that he is faith
full in what soever he speaks. Now David by and by adds,

Hold thou me up and I shall be safe: yea and my delight shall be continually
in thy statutes.

Now the word which he uses, signifies sometimes to meditate, sometimes to
speak: and therefore it may be said I will recite over thy Statutes. But the
most proper sense and meaning is, I will meditate or study in thy Statutes, and
therein take delight. In stead that before he has said, Establish me O Lord,
or stay me in thy word: Here he says, Hold me up. Now this is no simple
and plain prayer which here he makes, but having spoken of the word of
God, he speaks of the power which he shows toward his faithful? It is
very true, that when we think that we have not one foot of ground too
stand upon, that there is nothing but the sea under us, and darkness over
us, that we should be as it were in a bottomless pit, and overwhelmed: yet
we ought to stay and settle our selves on the word of God. But when as our
hope shall be thus cxercised, and that we have done God this honor, to hold
him for faithful, although we do not perceive any succor to come from him: he
will add a second grace, to wit, he will give us his hand, to be relieved by
his power, and to be vpholden by him. and will preserve us all the days of our
life. Lo here the^ the meaning of David, when he desired God to stay him in
his word, he says, Hold me up, yea by thy hand and power. So then, let us
learn to to fly unto God, when as we would be in any good safety. For with
out it, as I have already said, we may very well for a while assure our
selves: and think no evil can come unto us: But when as we shall be thus
foolishly persuaded, too say peace and assurance, destruction must needs
suddenly come upon us, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.
and we to be utterly confounded. But after we have waited and seen God too
have appeared in very deed, let us learn to seek all our assurance in his
word, to walk in his commandments, to take our whole delight in them, and in
them to bestow all our study. In sum, David in this place declares, That
when as God shall have bestowed any benefits upon us, that we have proved
his mercy, and fatherly affection: It is to confirm us more and more in his
word, to tie all our senses thereto: to learn to forsake all vanities, which
hinder and occupy our spirits in these wild affections wherewith we are
carried hither and thither. That we then being retired from them, might be
inflamed with such a zeal as David was to meditate in the commandments of
God, and in them too take our whole delight. Now it follows,

Thou haste trodden down all them that depart from thy statutes: for their
deceiteis vain. Here in this place David considers of the judgments of
God, which he executes upon the wicked: howbeit we are not always able to
perceive them. For we shall oftentimes see (as it were against all Gods forbod,
as we say) the wicked to bear authority, and in such sort to triumph, as
that they think it cannot be possibly amended, and suppose them selves to be
the most blessed people in the world. And then for the while we shall see all
things go clean against the hair. But after that the Lord God shall long
time patiently have abidden all these abusers of his merciful loving
kindness: it cannot be chosen but that at the last he must utterly destroy
them. And so let us consider not too be so blockish as too forget the
judgments of God: but let them rather instruct us after the example of David,
to walk in his fear and to love his Commandments.

Now he say thin the first place: Thou haste trodden the ungodly under foot,
and all them that depart from thy statutes, for they imagine but deceit,
says he. He adds one reason, which we ought thoroughly too weigh: For what
is the cause that the ungodly hearke^ not unto God, and so outrage against him
beyond all measure: For if at any time GOD moves them too repentance,
through the admonitions of his word, they do nothing else but scoff and
laugh at him: yea they are so shameless, as it is pitiful too see? What is
the cause of this? It is because the wicked have their hearts fast shut up
in their back warehouses, thinking thereby to beguile GOD, too escape his hand
through their starting holes, and subtle devises, and they seeing them selves
too be brazen faced, to cover their villanyes before men, think that they
shall easily enough put of the plagues and punishments of God.

See how the wicked do increase in their wills, that they are even come too
this point that they fear nothing at all of what soever they ought too be
affrayde. And this is it why the Prophet Isaiah also says, Isaiah.
That they dig Caves in the earth for their defense, thinking that when their
eyes are shut up, that their sins shall be no more seen, and that God
shall not be able too find them. Accursed be you (says he,) which thus
dig deep pittes.

Now David says in this place, that all the subtlety of the ungodly is
nothing else but vanity. It shall be forsooth to great purpose for them, when
(as they think) they shall through their hypocrisies shroude them selves and
cover their wiles and subtilties: yet shall their devises be but vanity: for
they shall be taken in the tripp, as it is said in the other place, yea and in
the end shall be fast shut up in all their deceits and inventions. Heerevpon
he says,

Thou have taken away all the ungodly of the earth like dross: therefore I
love thy testimontes. Here David declares unto us in brief by his example,
That when God punishes the Godless, he lays his hand upon them, in such
sort as that we may perceive that he shows him self to be their Judge, to
the end that we thereby should be the rather stirred up too love his
Commaundemens, and to be ruled by them in bestowing al our desire and affection
upon them. See then how the judgments and corrections which God lays upon
the ungodly ought to profit us. And this is it why Saint Paul in exhorting
the faithful to walk holyly, and to abstain from all pollution sayths, Ephe.
5.6.
Take heed that you be not beguiled through vain words: For, for such
things the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience.

Now it is true, that before God has executed his judgments we ought already
to be instructed too walk in his fear. But when God shows us openly how he
puts to his helping hand, it is good reason that we should be so much the
more attentive to his Judgments. Esa. 59.17. 18
And lo why the Prophet Isaiah says, That when God executes his Judgments,
that the inhabitants of the earth might learn, that he does it righteously.
Moreover, let us consider how slack we are to come unto God, that he is feign
to draw us perforce unto him. Ought not we even to run unto him, so often as
he lifts up his finger unto us? So often as he shall open his holy mouth to
instruct, and show us the way of salvation, should we slack and defer it
from day to day? But what? Mark the perverseness, and that not only of the
most wicked, but even of the holiest and perfectest which are infected with
this vice. See what David says, that he had need to be pricked forward like
an Affe: yea even David himself, who was the most forward of all other
according to the graces which he had received. If it has so fallen out with
him, by reason of the rest of the imperfection which he had, that he was
spurred, and his flesh pricked like an Ass: what shall become of us which
have scarcely received one drop of the spirit of God, in respect and comparison
of this holy mane?And so ^et us consider to be the more watchful over our
selves so often as God shows us any token that he is Judge, and calls the
ungodly to an accounte: that at the least we be stirred up to run unto him for
refuge, and to love his word. Now in the mean time, to conclude David adds,

My flesh trembles for fear of thee: and I am afraid because of thy
judgments. Here David sets down two things which seem at the first
sight not to agree together: For it may be said, that this fear whereof he
speaks can no way agree with the fear of the commandments of God: but yet
there is a sweet hermony between the one and the other. And why so? For as
the faithles in fearing God wax desperate, and are so thrown down, that they
can never have that boldness to come near unto him: Even so on the contrary
side, there is a frank and free fear in those which are governed by the spirit
of God, which bears a reverence unto his word, to make them tremble before
it. For by the judgments which David here speaks of, he means not the
punishments only which God executes, but now he treats as he does
throughout the whole Psalm, either of Statuts or else of ordinances? which
are to direct our life: as also the Prophet Isaiah says, that the faithful
tremble at the voice of God: that they conceive his incomprehensible majesty
in his word, and thereupon are humbled: But yet they cease not for all that, too
come boldly unto GOD, knowing that he will be their merciful father and
desires nothing else but to receive them. This humble fear then, may well be
conjoined with the love of God, agree with faith, and with a taste which we
might take in the word of God, in giving our selves wholly thereto. But the
fear, which serves to none other end but to astonish the wicked, which only
feel an hell in their consciences, and yet have no taste of the grace of God:
this fear I say serves to none other purpose, but to shut up the gate
against these miserable accursed people, without all hope of salvation. Now
David speaking of the fear of the word of God, leads us to a deeper and a
more weighty consideration. For his meaning is to show unto us, how that God
is our father and Savior, and that he freely draws us unto himself, as
already he has declared.

According to this holy doctrine, let us prostate ourselves before the majesty
of our good God, in acknowledging our offenses, beseeching him that it would
please him too make us to feel the sweetness of his word, as his servant
David has been thereon thoroughly settled: too the end we might have such a
fervent affection to it, as that it might cause us to forget all the desires of
this world, wherein we are too too much plagued: and that we might cut of
all the superfluties of our flesh: to the end we might be dedicated in all
holiness unto our God, and to be confirmed more and more in his service. And
that being once brought by him into the way of salvation, although we must
walk in this world, because we are compassed about with so many dangers: yet
that he will always stretch forth his hand unto us, to keep and hold us in
his protection unto the end. That he will not only grant us this grace, but
also unto all people and nations of the world, etc.

The xvi. Sermon upon the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm.
AIN.
I have executed Judgment and justice: give me not over unto mine oppressors.
Answer for thy servant in that which is good: and let not the proud do me
wrong.
Mine eyes have failed in looking for thy salvation: and for thy just promise.
Deal with thy servant according unto thy loving mercies: and teach me thy
statutes.
I am thy servant, grant me therefore understanding: that I may know thy
testimonies.
It is time for the Lord too lay to his hand: for they have destroyed thy law.
Therefore love I thy Commandments, above gold: yea above most fine gold.
Therefore I esteem all thy commandments most just: and all false ways I
utterly abhor.
THE holy Scripture oftentimes admonishes us, that if we will have God to
stand with us against our enemies, we must walk perfectly and soundly: For if
we will be like the wicked, rendering evil for evil, it is in vain for us
too hope that God will be on our side, either yet favor us: But it is meet
that he be judge on both parts, when as they incline thus to do evil. Would
we have God to be our warrant and defender? Do we believe that he will have
compassion on us, when we are troubled and violently oppressed? Let our
consciences be pure and clean before him, because we know that he takes
upon him self this title, too be the maintainer of all those which are
unjustly oppressed, and also of the miserable and afflicted. Now if we have
such wicked hearts, to enforce us to wicked dealing, how shall God put forth
his hand too aid us? For then must he intermedle himself with a naughty
cause: which is an impossibility, and altogether contrary to his nature. See
then wherefore it is said in this place,

I have executed judgment and justice: give me not over unto mine oppressors.
David here makes a request unto God, that he might not be delivered into the
hands of his enemies which sought to destroy him. Now for the obtaining of
that which he demanded, he makes this protestation, That he has walked
rightly before God, yea, even with them which went about to destroy him.
Moreover these two words, Righteousness and Judgment: when they go
together, importe as much as too do wrong too none: but too proceed in
equity, and in good faith (as we say) for too maintain every good cause, and
not to suffer any wrong to be done: For it is not enough for us too abstain
from hurting and greeuing of our neighbor. Neither is it enough for us to go
about to discharge us of our duties: But when we shall see any man unjustly
trodden down, and a good cause go too wrack, we ought too oppose our selves
against every such wicked act and injury, and as it were to take part with
God, who as he is the commender of all equity, so will he also have us to
maintain it forasmuch as we are his children. We see then in sum, the
protestation which David here makes, that is, that he did not only abstain
from hurting his neighbors, and go about to render to every man, that which
was his: But over and besides all this he set himself against al violences and
extortio^s, which were committed, he would not suffer the innocent to be
oppressed to be put forth for a pray or spoil, but payned him self to do
what in him lay to help them. When we may be bold too make such a
protestation in truth, Let us not dout but that God will stretch forth his
hand: that if men went about to trouble us, yea and that we were as it were in
great danger too fall into their hands, Let us not doubt but that God will
have pity on us and aid us. For this Prayer which David here makes was not
made at adventure: but the holy Ghost put it into his mouth, to the end to
teach us to walk (as he has done) so soundly and perfectly. And heerevpon,
if men should lift themselves up against us, and use all the outrages and
malice they can against us, Let us have recourse unto God, and be assured that
he will be our defendor and protector.

Now we very well see by this, that David made no mention of his merits unto
God, as if he should have said, I have right well deserved, O Lord, that thou
should keep and defend me against the wicked, because I have done that
which is lawful and right. David spoke it not too any such end. But he had
regard (as I have already said) to the goodness of God and to his promises
which are contained in the law, and imprinted in his heart: too wit, That God
will uphold all those that are unjustly trodden down, and always help those
which are outraged and iniuryed: Because that they for their part have taken
great pain to be at peace withal the world: that they have not given occasion
for any to grieve and torment them, and yet that the ungodly have risen up
against them. See what a regard David had. Now he adds,

Answer thou for thy servant in that which is good: and let not the proud do
me wrong. The saying that David here uses, signifies sometimes a man to give
his word, as we say in this country: that is, to become a man's surety, and
his pleadge, and some there are which do so expound it: but the true sense and
most natural meaning of it is this, that David prays that he might be
given to do good and to delight therein. Wherein we see this to be a work of
GOD, and a grace proceeding from him, when we shall desire too be given too do
good, so that we have pleasure in it, and do taste thereof. For this is very
certain, that notwithstanding that men follow the very inclination of their
flesh, to hate the good and love the evil: and when any thing shall be told
them of God, we see how it makes them Melancolique and sorrowful. So then, it
is God that must change and reform us, or else we shall never attain to
this affection here spoken of, to take pleasure in well doing, and so to love
it.

Now David was no hypocrite, too make a fair show, to desire a thing at the
hands of God, which was in his own hand: But he knew this too be the manner
of men, that it was impossible for him to come to the full perfection of that,
except it were given unto him from above. See here in sum, what we have to
learn and keep by this. For when he adds that the wicked (or the proud)
outrage against him, he shows that when we shall be so given too well doing,
we must trust too the protection of God according to that which I have already
said. Let us also note that David in this verse confirms the matter already
handled. He has heretofore very well said, O Lord, I have done the thing
that is lawful and right: and yet he cease not to beseech God too grant
him such courage and strength. And how is that? Forsooth, that he would
increase it in him, and give him the grace to stand steadfastly therein unto
the end. We see then, that whenever we shall be the most desirous in the
world, to follow sincerity and equity: we must understand for all that,
that we may yet be amended, and that we are nothing near that perfection which
is requisite.

Wherefore it remains that we desire this performance with the graces that
David has here demanded: Thy graces O Lord, had need to increase in us,
grant us therefore that we may come too the accomplishment of them. We have O
Lord walked purely so farfoorth as thou have given us the power: But we fly
unto thy promises: to the end thou might make us to persevere in well
doing. See, I say, how we ought too crave the thing at the hands of God
which he has already given us, and that we have received from him: that is,
that it would please him to conserve and increase it, considering that we are
very far from such a perfection as is most requisite: in such sort as that
we never decline from well doing, which we should do if he shaked his hand.
See then too what end this petition tends which is here placed.

Now we must turn again to the matter, to wit, that David here repeateth,
that they which have been thus perfect, and have loved well doing, should be
under the hand and safegarde of God, never to be delivered into the power of
their enemies, so that the proud shall never be able to do them that
excceeding great wrong which they had pretended: Not that they shall not be
assailed, neither yet that the wicked will not craftily go about to work them
mischief: but yet so, as that God will be their buckler, and defend them with
his mighty power. And namely he says, The proud. Because that they which
are our enemies, and make war against us, have such an unbridled liberty,
as that they think neither God nor yet any other living creature is able to
stay them, but that they will bring to pass whatsoever they have determined.
Since then it is so, that we have too deal with such kind of people as are
both stout and cruel, who lift them selves up against all truth, that
neither the fear of GOD, nor yet natural honesty can stop them, but that
they will destroy whether it be right or wrong as we say: for this cause David
says, O Lord let not the proud do me wrong. And so as often as we shall see
this boldness in men, to lift themselves up, and to vomit out their pestilent
malice against us, let us fly unto GOD, and beseech him too hold his holy
hand over us, and to repress so great and insolent arrogancy. This being
done, although men for their parts make such attempts, yet shall they never
bring them to pass: For God will hold them back, as it were with a sharp
brake.

Now if this petition came ever in season, it comes now at this day in very
good season. For we see how many the enemies of God are which bend themselves
against the Gospel: we see the malice and obstinacy throughout the whole
world. And so, it is not possible but that a man which fears God must needs
be assailed and troubled on all sides. Seeing then that men are so furious to
wrong us, so much the rather ought we to be careful to make this request unto
God with David, yea and that with such a confidence, as that we should not
doubt but that when we are under his protection, he shall be sufficient too
maintain and defend us. Now it follows:

Mine eyes have failed in looking for thy salvation: and for thy just promise.
We shall not need to stand long upon this sentence, because it has been
already handled here before. David only protests, that he has looked for
such help from God, as he desired. And that is to show, that he prayed not
hypocritically, but faithfully. And this is a thing which we ought thoroughly to
mark. For we think our selves too have done very substancially and
sufficiently, when as we have pronounced and rightly placed our words in the
time of prayer; but if we shall have spoken never so loud, and with never so
full and open mouth, and yet have empty or fast closed up hearts, empty I
say, and void of all trust and fast closed up, it is a most manifest token
that we never surely looked for any succor at the hands of God: and therefore
behold why of very right all our prayers are unprofitable and to no purpose.
And so, when as we will beseech the Lord our god to take our cause into his
hand to help us, let us take this with us which david here shows in this
place by his example: to wit, let us attend and look for our salvation and
deliverance from God: Yea and let us consider of that which is said, and
according to the word of thy righteousness. For by this he signifies to us,
upon whom we must look and cast our eyes, when as we would thoroughly stir up
our selves unto such an hope: to wit, unto the promises which God has given
us: for if this be not in us, it can never be said to be any more hope, but a
vain imagination which we have forged too our selves: for to hope or trust in
God, is to be established in his promises. For if a man imagine a thing which
seems good in his own sight, and after, leans thereto, this man trusts
not in God but in him self. So then, if we look to have any help at the hands
of God, we must have a sure testimony of his will, we must be sure that he
loves us, and that when he loves us, he will not fail us in our need. And
how shall we be assured of this? It shall be by the only mean of his word. Now
because men are so hard to be brought to rest them selves upon God, and not to
content them with his promises, David says these promises to be just,
according to the word of thy righteousness, says he, It is not in vain that
he thus intituleth the word of God. And why so? For he thinks that if he
have but his bare word, that it is enough for him. And why so? For God makes
not unto us liberal and large promises as men do, and then deceives us. His
words are just. And as he says in an other place, Psalm. 12.6.
his words are like to pure silver which is tried in the fire, and has been
seven times purified in the furnace. Even so is it with all the promises of
God, we ought to be very assured of them. Because he is faithful and just,
and that there is nothing but righteousness and truth in all that he says.
Now David goes further on for he speaks not of a simple affection: But
says, that his eyes have failed, as if he should have said, that he was hardly
so resolved and not without great pain. By this he shows us, that his faith
was so troubled, as that he knew not what would become of him, that he had
great and strong conflictes, that he was in marvelous anguishes, and troubles,
so that he was as a man half dead: and yet that he was armed and fenced
amiddest al these hard cases, with the hope and trust which he had in God. See
what the words import which he used, that his eyes failed for the health, and
succoure, which he looked for at the hands of God. Will we then have a right
hope, and such an one as God allows of? Let us then not trust only when we
are quiet and at rest, ne yet be thrown down by any temptations: but when as
we shall be in our extremest troubles that we know not at all what shall become
of us, that we shall see nothing else but death before us and round about us:
here upon, I say, let us always be firm and constant, trusting that God will
be our savior, since he has so promised us. Lo how we may make this
protestation as David here does. Now it follows,

Deal with thy servant according to thy loving mercies: and teach me thy
statutes. Here it may very well seem that David makes two petitions, but yet
they tend both to one end. For in the first part of this verse, he shows,
how he desires, and trusts to be heard: to wit, through the mere mercy of
God. As if he should have said, O Lord, teach me thy statutes: and teach me
them, not for that I think my self worthy of them, but because thou art
pitiful and know my need, and have promised also to help all those which
call upon thee. Deal then, O Lord, with thy servant according too thy
mercy, to the end thou might teach me. By this we see that, which I have
already touched: to wit, that this verse contains not two petitions, but one
only. And yet notwithstanding David so sets it forth, in declaring that
when he comes to God to pray him to teach him, that he does it not to the
end that he presumes of his merittes, neither yet to make vaunt that he
deserves any thing of him. Wherefore then? Forsooth because he looks and
trusts to the mere mercy of God. And in very deed, this is a far more
precious thing then that which David here demands, to be taught the statutes
of God, to say that it hangs not upon our merits, neither yet of any
worthiness of ours. It is a question to know the way of everlasting life, and
wherein it consists and lies. It is very meet then that God do it, because
he is pitiful: that he use his goodness toward us, and looks to none but
unto him self, because he is good, and that it pleases him to put to his
helping hand to those which are his. Now although he has here spoken of an
excellent thing, yet of all the petitions which we make, were they the least
in the world, we always ought to lay this foundation, yea, and to stay upon
it, that is, upon the mercy of God. If we should only demand but a drop of
water or a morcell of bread, we must not think too obtain, by reason of our
desert, as if God paid unto us our wages: but his mercy must always go before,
for that is the cause why we receive so many benefits at his hand, and
especially that we are taught his statutes.

Now it follows, I am thy seruauant, grant me therefore understanding: that
I may know thy testimonies.

This is a more large exposition of the verse going before: he has said, O
Lord, deal with me according to thy mercies, and now he says, I am thy
servant. And how is this? it should seem that there is some diversity betwixt
these two sayings. For does not David in calling him self the servant of God,
set down before, what service he has done him? Now let us note that for the
first place that it is not said for any brag, nor that he was so able a man
to attain unto any such worthiness, neither yet that he deserved to be
preferred before others: he means not that this honor apperteined unto him
of right. What then? It is as much as if he had said, O Lord, I am thine. Now,
comes it of our selves, that we are the servants of God? have we obtained
this estate, or degree as of our selves? Alas it is very far of: for we have
it of free gift. Since the time that we were the bondslaues of Satan, God has
taken us unto him self, to be of his household and of his number. In that then
that we are his, it is not because we have deserved it, but because he has
called us unto him of his free mercy and goodness. And in deed, if a man who
was first of a base condition, serves a noble man, he will not say that he was
worthy of the service of such a master, nor yet that he was put unto him
therefore: but will thus say, sir, I confess that you have received me into
your service of your mere favor and grace, and have done me the honor which
apperteined not unto me. And thus should we most wretched worms of the earth
say, Lo God, who cease not still to do us good: and yet we will be so
arrogant, as too determine to attribute unto our selves I know not what, as
though he had herein nothing to do with us. Now I beseech you tell me whether
is this to go? And that which is more, let us consider a little, what service
it is that God might draw and pluck out from us, to do unto his majesty. If
he shall leave us unto our selves to be as we are, about what shall he
employe us, and what service can we do him? For lo, both we and all that is
within us are altogether given to wickedness. We cannot once think any good:
how shall we then do any? Next of all, David means not, that he being
called to serve God, was able too discharge himself thereof: for he felt him
self utterly unable to do it. And so as touching this place, we must not
think that he meant to make any vau^t of the service which he had done to God,
but it is as much as if he had said, O Lord, thou have showed me that favor
and grace too be one of thy number, and have received me into it, through thy
bounty and goodness. I beseech thee therefore to continue the same thy
goodness and too heap grace upon grace in me, as in that behalf thou art
wonted to do.

Let us now come unto his petition. He says, O grant me understanding, that
I may keep thy testimonies.

We have already said, that he handled that which he had lately spoken. For
by these words he means, that we should be always like beasts, until such
time as God had opened unto us the spirit or understanding of human things.
Weary well, yet shall we learn them according too our natural disposition. It
is very true, that it shall be according to such measure, as God shall therein
give it unto us: but yet it is as it were after a natural manner. Moreover,
when we shall talk of the secrets of the heavenly life, and of the wisdom
which God shows unto us in his word: there must all men confess, that all
their senses fail them, and that all their reason is dead and buried. What is
then to be done? Let us come to the remedy which David here gives us: to wit,
that we desire of God to have understanding, that we might become very well
learned. For without that, we must continue and remain still in our
beastliness. And this prayer answers and weary well agrees with that which
we have seen in the verse next before, as that matter has been already
touched. Now it follows soon after.

It is time for the Lord to lay to his hand: for they have destroyed thy
law. Here David makes a petition against the contemners of God, and
transgressers of his law: saying, That it is time for the Lord to lay his
hand, since that he sees his law to be so destroyed, that there is no account
made of it. It is very true, that David greatly desired the conversion of all
men, and by little and little their salvation. And it is no doubt but that he
prayed too God with a good affection, that it would please him to bring to
repentance all those which he see to be lead unto wickedness but yet he was
not without this zeal which we see in this place: that is, that God would
execute his judgments upon the obstinate, and upon all those which were
altogether stubburne. And see also how we ought to temper our affections, that
when we see men go to do mischief, let us have compassion upon them: if we se
them given to sin and wickedness, if we see them to be in the way of
perdition, let us travel too bring them again into the right way, to procure
their salvation as much as in us lies, and we ought to desire and to pray for
it, have we had any such affection? Then let us never cease to pray unto God,
to stretch forth his hand upon those his enemies whom he knows to be
altogether desperate. It is very true we must not condemn them: But we ought
rather, as I have already said, to use the effect of charity toward all, and
pray unto God that he would save them: but because there are a great number
which are stubburne and without amendment, we ought to beseech God, to show
him self a judge over those whom he knows to be such. And why so? Because
they draw the simple and ignorant unto wickedness, and are an offense unto
them, because also they make the word of God to be evil spoken of, and are the
occasion that liberty is given to al evil. When then we see the name of God to
be evil spoken of, that there is no reckening made of his word, that all
doctrine is cast underfoot, we are to pray unto him to remedy it. It is
time, says he, for God to lay to his hand: for they have destroyed thy law, O
Lord. He here speaks in the third person: and after directs him self to
God. And why does he so? Although that this order is not always to be
observed, that he which prays unto God is to continue in one self same
person: yet it is so, that in this place, it seems that David meant to speak
with a greater vehemence, when he says, O Lord, lay to thy hand. As if he
should have showed, what the office of God is: for if he had simply said, It
is time O Lord, that thou did look unto the matter, because thy law is
destroyed: this had not been spoken with the like vehemency, as when he
said, it is time that thou O Lord, lay to thy hand: for by this saying, he
declares what the office of God is: to wit, to be judge of the world: and
beseeches him to lay forth his justice, in punishing the offenses, and
horrible wickednesses committed here below: that after he had suffered them a
long time, he desires him to provide for the punishing of all those which had
been so obstinate, and hard hearted against him. Now by this we are
admonished, when as we see that the law of God is as it were utterly cast
underfoot, his doctrine to be a reproach amongst men, and all right and
equity overthrown, so that there is nothing but confusion throughout: that
then we ought to pray unto God the more earnestly, to the end it might be known
that he does his office. If this ever were necessary, it is at this present
most necessary. For let us consider the estate of the world I beseech you,
what havoc is there made of the law of God? Are we not come to the very
extremity, to contemn all doctrine of salvation?

When God at this day speaks unto us, what ear give we unto him? and how
reverently? See here, he has bestowed upon us a singular grace at this
day, when as his word has been once again published. Let us behold our
unthankfulness? Let us lay all these things together, and we shall see that
the majesty of God his word is no more esteemed then the very pyll of an
onion, as we say. See I pray you too what a point we are grown and come:
even unto such an horrible and brutishe impiety as is most lamentable.
Moreover, let us look into the manner of our life and the order of government:
shall we find either justice, loyalty, reason, or modesty? no: but clean
contrary, we shall see the whole state of our life, and order of government,
full of treason, malice, cruelty, and violence: al full of blasphemy against
God: plenty of drunkenness, gluttony, and dissoluteness: store of lechery
and all other vyllanies whatsoever: To be short, it seems that the whole
world has conspired to exceed even unto the highest degree of wickedness.
When then we see the law of God to be thus overthrown every manner of way,
ought not we to give our minds a great deal more then we do, to beseech
God to take order, and to provide for the same. Now when we shall have such a
zeal to pray unto God, as we see that David had, let us not doubt but that he
will remedy all the confusions which we see to be at this day. And now he
concludes, and says,

Therefore love I thy commandementes: above gold yea above most fine gold.
Therefore I esteem all thy commandments most just: and all false ways I
utterly abhor.
See here what a notable protestation he makes, and such one as we ought
thoroughly to mark. For when David has said here before, that the wicked have
destroyed the law: yea, and speaking of no small number of men, but as of all
in general, seeing all the world to exceed and to be corrupt: he adds for
this cause, O Lord, I have loved thy commandments, above all gold, yea and
above most fine gold I have loved them in all and through al, and have utterly
abhorred all false ways.

Now I have said that this is an excellent protestation, considering the
circumstances. For if David had dwelt amongst the godly faithful ones, which
had served God, and walked in his fear: then it might have been said, that it
was an easy matter for him to have conformed him self unto them. For although
we see men always inclined to evil, yet they are many times reduced and
framed to goodness through good examples. But I pray you in what time was it
that David lived? Forsooth in such a time as that he was compassed with the
despisers of God, he see nothing but following of evil throughout the world,
he see as it were a mad and devilish impiety, he see every thing full of
all infection: to be short, there was neither justice nor equity, no fear of
God, nor yet any religion. And yet notwithstanding he says, that he loved the
word of God, and his commandments, and that he made more account of them,
then of all the most precious things in the world. Let us the^ learn to love
the word of God, not only when as we shall be stirred up by those which keep
us company to serve God all with one accord: but also when we shall be
amongst perverse and froward people, that we be as it were in hell amiddest
all the deuilles, yet to persevere in this affection, and not to leave following
of the word of God: that whatsoever offenses we shall see committed by men,
that they withdraw us not from the love which we ought to bear to the word
of God. See then what we must keep in mind for the understanding of this
text.

And after, we are too note for the last verse, that David saying, that he
loved the commandments of God, says not that he did it by halfes, as we
many times do: but I, says he, have loved thy commandments above all
things. As if he should have said, I am not like unto those, O Lord, which
come to serve thee by halfes: but in all and through all, I love whatsoever
that thou have commanded. And after this manner it is that we must also do: for
it is not in us to divide and make a partition of the word of God neither yet
can we make it. And therefore, let us be well advised to obey God, in
whatsoever he shall command us, and to love his commandementes from the first
too the last: and not to do as a great many do, which will be contented to
receive the Gospel, forsooth, so far forth as it will serve their turn and
pleasure them. Or else, if they pass over this or that: and think themselves
to give God great credit, when as they shall give him authority over them in
some one point: But if soon after, they shall be any thing grieved, they will
never ouerslip that point. Nevertheless we are there admonished too the
contrary, that it is not for us, as I have already said to make a partition of
that which god has conjoined: but we must yield our obedience unto him even
to the full: that although whatsoever he says or commands us to do, be hard
and sharp too our nature, yet let us take it in good part with a gentle and
mild mind: and say with David, O Lord I have loved thy commandments which
thou have given me, not in one, two, nor three points, but in all and through
al. According to this holy doctrine, let us humbly prostrate our selves before
the Majesty of our good god, in acknowledging our offenses, beseeching him that
it would please him to make us better to feel our miseries, to the end we
might be grieved with them and to seek for remedy at his hands: That in
renouncing whatsoever that is in us, and whatsoever power and strength we
think our selves to have, let us beseech him to fortify us, and so to
inlighten us with his holy spirit, as that we may more and more draw near
unto him: And as he has already begun to inlighten us, that it would please
him too cause us to see his brightness better than we have don heretofore, until
such time as we shall come unto his kingdom, where we shall perfectly see that
which now we do but half know. And although this world be so perverse and
wicked, as that we might take occasion to withdraw us from the right way:
notwithstanding let us beseech him, that he will always uphold us with a mighty
and strong hand, to thend we may stand steadfastly in that whereunto he has
called us, and never decline from it whatsoever came of us. That it would
please, etc

The seventeenth Sermon upon the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm.
PHE.
Thy testimonies are wonderful: therefore does my soul keep them.
The entrance into thy words: shows light, and gives understanding unto the
simple.
I opened my mouth and panted: because I loved thy commandments.
Look thou upon me and be merciful unto me: as thou use to do unto those
that love thy name.
Order my steps in thy word: and let no wickedness have dominion over me.
O deliver me from the wrongful dealings of men: and I will keep thy
commandments.
Show the light of thy countenance upon thy servant: and teach me thy statutes.
Mine eyes gushe out with ryuers of water: because men keep not thy law.
IN very deed the sentence contained in this first verse of the eight, should
be a very ordinary and common thing with us. And in very deed there is no man
but will confess it to be true: but yet it is so very far of, as that there is
none of us al which has the feeling thereof in him self: that is, that the
law of God is a wonderful wisdom: for we do see how it is contemned and
despised. It is very true that God in all the holy scripture speaks sharply
enough and also humbly: but it is for this cause that he would fit himself to
our simple capacities. And because that we are blockishe and earthly, it is
meet that he should so plainly speak as that we might understand him.
Nevertheless, in this speech, whcih carries no great glory with it, ne yet
is colored with any worldly eloquence, are certain secrets, which may very
well ravish us with marvelous astonishment. And in deed, the very cause why
these faithless, and comtemners of God, so little esteem of the doctrine of
salvation, is, for that they being brutish, never tasted of that, which it
means to utter. See then whereupon this pride and ungodliness arises which
we see at this day too be in the greater part of the world, so that there
are very few which bear that reverence to the word of God as they ought:
for it is an old saying, no man can love a thing, before such time as he
knows it. They then which are so blockish, as that they have neither sense
nor judgment rightly to discern of the truth of God, slip it over, yea, and
tread such an inestimable treasure as it is under their feet. But they which
have once known, what it is that God teaches us in the holy scripture, may
very well say with David, that they are wonderful things, and so high
mysteries as that we ought to wonder at them, and do deserve that every one of
us should wholly apply his mind thereto. Now he says, That for this cause his
soul did keep the testimonies of God. This imports a greater matter, then
if he had simply said, I have kept them: for he signifies that he has kept
them (as we say) with an hearty affection. And lo, how indeed, we ought to
esteem of the doctrine of God: it is not only to have an opinion, that it is
excellent, and worthy to be had in sovereign and high honor: but that we
should be very earnestly touched therewith that we might have such a fear and
an obedience rooted in our hearts, as that the saying of the Prophet Isaiah
might be fulfilled in us, that we might tremble at the voice of our God. Lo
here in effect the content of the first verse, of these eight, which we are
now about to handle: that is to say, that the faithful whose eyes God, has
opened, might know, that the holy scripture contains no common doctrine, but
such a wise doctrine as is worthy to be reverenced and honored all the world
over. Now when as we shall once have known that God lays wide open his
heavenly mysteries in his law, it is good reason that we for our part be
touched, and moved to hearken unto our God when he speaks unto us: yea and
that in such sort, as that he handles no small and light matters, and of no
importance: but opens unto us his mysteries, which are far beyond our reach
and capacities, except that of his infinite goodness, he bare us that favor
too fit him self to our understanding. Now David adds in the second verse:

The entrance into thy words, shows light and gives understanding unto the
most simple. Wherein he signifies, that if we understand not all the mysteries
of God which he shows unto us in his word, we must not straightwayes
therefore say, that the doctrine is unprofitable unto us. Why so? Because the
only sauoure which we shall feel therein shall profit us. It is not nedeful
that we be great clerks nor perfect doctors to receive some benefire and
edifying from the word of God: for we can not have so small an entrance into
it, but that we shall become already both wise and well advised. Lo here in
sum the meaning of the second verse. And it is a place which we very well
ought to observe: for like as there are a great sort of people which make no
account of the word of God, because they never tasted of the mysteries therein
contained: even so also there are some which excuse them selves and say that
the word of God is too too dark and hard, in so much that it makes them too
fly from it, and dare not come near it.

Alas will one say, I am a very ignorant soul, or, I am not so sharp witted
as in deed a man would judge: or else, I am but a simple scholar, and
therefore can not conceive of so high mysteries, Lo here what excuses a number
of men will make, because they would not be acquainted with the word of God. No
doubt of it we shall have of those people which will use such excuses and
startingholes, only because they would be ignorant, and have their eyes fast
closed up, although they have the light of God too shine upon them. Again
there are another sort which will keep them selves clean away from the word
of God, fearing that if they should once enter into it, that it would be like
unto a maze wherein they should be held fast in and so be utterly confounded.
And therefore, let us for this cause thoroughly consider the saying of David: to
wit, that although we attain not unto such a perfection, as that we are able
to understand and know whatsoever is written in the holy scriptures, and to be
so exercised therein even at the full, as that nothing has escaped us: but let
us be thoroughly acquainted with the law, and have the very true and undoubted
exposition and meaning of the Prophets, yea and let us know and understand the
Gospel at our fingers ends: and yet although, I say we have not attained unto
this excellency, let us not for all this cease to be enlightened. Let us then
boldly approach, when as we see that God calls and allureth us, and is ready
to teach us his word: and let us know that when we shall have never so little a
taste thereof, that it shall be for our salvation, so that we shall not be
altogether blind, but that we may be able to know which is the right way unto
everlasting life. To be short, we shall be enlightened as David speaks of in
this place. And hereby we may see, what a great abuse at this day reigns in
this point in Popery, when as they shall put by the greater part of
Christendom from the reading of the holy scripture under a color, it should
thereby be utterly confounded: and again being never able once to come to have
any taste thereof, that it is over high a thing for them to meddle with. Now,
this is to make the holy Ghost a manifest liar, who has spoken and pronounced
by the mouth of David, that which we have already heard, That the first
entrance into the word of God shows light: in so much that so soon as we
shall have understood but one only sentence thereof, the same to be already
even enough to lead and guide us to everlasting life. Now since then we see
how the devil possesses the Papists, when as under such a cloak, they
withdraw the simple people from the reading of the word of God, yea in
forbidding it them with such a cruel tyranny: let us for our part, having so
good and sure a ground, take great heed how we waver, and how we always abide
wittingly ignorant, considering that God having openly and at large mainfested
himself unto us, continues still more and more our good God, and gives us so
great leisure and large a time to profit in his school. And why so? Because
then tree alone is clear and bright: what will it then be when as we shall
enter on somewhat further: that even in the very entrance, we find salvation?
in what case then I beseech you shall we be, when as we shall have once passed
the midway on? And to the end that David might the better express, that the
question is not here of the great learned doctors he namely says, That it
gives instruction to the simple and silly souls, to the end they might have
light and understanding.

As if he should have said, that God has so communicated his word unto us, and
in such sort framed and wrought it for our understanding, as that there is not
the most simple and ignorant which shall not find himself capable to be the
scholar of God, yea so that we come unto it in all lowliness and humbleness.
For David in saying that the word of God makes the lowly to understand, right
well shows, that if we come unto it in the pride of our own minds, presuming
of our own fine heads, as in this point a great number of proud and glorious
men do, who will rather co^troll God then submit them selves unto him and to
his word: no doubt of it we shall be left in the dark. For let us not be
abashed although such people of whom I have already spoken, do continually
remain most blockish. But we for our parts ought to know, that we must be
humbled and thrown down in ourselves, to thend god might lighte^ us. And then
let us not dout but that we shall feel God to be ever more ready to play the
part of a good schoolmaster unto us, when as we shall show our selves to be
true and dutiful scholars. Now by and by follows, I opened my mouth and
panted: he was scarsly able to fetch his breath. And by this is signified the
fervent zeal which he had, which was to be well instructed in the law of God.
Now here David shows, how it is that we should be enlightened, that is,
that after we are known to be lowly and humbled, feeling our want and
necessity, let us sigh and groan unto the majesty of our God, in beseeching
him to instruct us. For we shall not need to be greatly learned for our right
and perfect walking, if we truly and earnestly desire to be his scholars,
and to prefer his word before all other things. David might very well say, O
Lord, I have desired to understand that which thou have showed me by thy law,
and yet contented not he him self with this only saying: But says namely,
that he opened his mouth, as a forepined ghost, who was no longer able to abide
it. And afterward he says that he drew in his breath, that he was so zealous,
as that it took away as it were his very speech from him. There is no doubt
that David meant here the very single affection wherewith he was touched: not
for any desire he had to comme^d him self, but to show unto us by his example
what our office and duty is toward God: that is, that we should seek too
profit our selves by his word. Now then we have here to note, that even the^
we shall be enflamed with the word of God, when as we shall have yea even such
a vehement desire, as hereof is mention made, and as has been before spoken
off. That the word of God ought to be more dear and precious unto us then all
the riches of the world, and more sweet then al other sweetness in the earth.
When then we shall have such a desire as this, we shall find God to be always
ready to accomplish that which is said in the song of the holy virgin, that
he has filled and satisfied the hungry and empty* God will satisfy and fill
those that hunger after the things which concern but this present life. And
do you think that when we shall be desirous of his doctrine, knowing it to be
the most principal benefit that we can possibly wish, and whereunto we ought
to apply our whole heart, that he will let us famish?

Do you suppose that he will not grant us so holy a desire, and such a one as
he approves above all the rest? But by the way let us consider, that we
perceive not at this day, the profit and edifying which David brings unto us
in this place: because in deed we are over cold to seek after the will of
God. And to say truly, I beseech you can we find one amongst an hundredth which
desires it, I say yea such a one as only has that affection to be taught of
God? We see to the contrary, that we shall not need the very least trifling
toy to keep us at the gaze: because we are so full of all vanity as is
lamentable: neither can the devil no sooner set any thing before us which we
will not run after, and take occasion to be withdrawn from all whatsoever
is good and godly. Now then, when as we shall see our selves to be thus cold,
is this to come with such a feruencie, as is here declared unto us by David?
Alas where shall we find it? ought we not then even to be abashed, when as we
shall see so few to be truly taught of God? considering that so small a number
of people are touched to the quick with a true desire of his doctrine? But we
ought rather to think it more strange, when as we seeing God to be so full of
loving kindness, as too bear with our negligence that in steed of opening our
mouths, and to desire his heavenly doctrine, as David has done, we open our
mouths too crave such things as do nothing else but offend and grieve the
majesty of God: for in that is our whole delight, and upon it bestow we all
our power and strength. When then we shall after this sort forsake God, and
seek after the transitory things of this world, yea the which cannot but
hurt, and lead into everlasting destruction, are we not worthy that God should
leave and forsake us as most miserable and wretched caitifes? And therefore
this doctrine is not here set down in vain.

Let us then understand, that God means here to exhort us by the example of
David, that if we will be well instructed by his word, we ought with such an
humility as here mention is made of, too come unto him with an earnest desire
and zeal, knowing this to be such a benefit as deserves to be preferred
above all the rest, even too know the will and love of God toward us,
considering that in it consists and rests our whole salvation. Now it
follows in the fourth verse:

Look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me: as thou use to do unto those
that love thy name. Here David right well shows, what the desires and
petitions of all the Children of God ought to be, to wit that they must hang
upon the mere mercyes of God, and to know that all their felicity consists
therein, and so to stay them selves upon this ground and foundation, That God
looks with his eye upon them, too guide and govern them. Now this thing is
greatly to be observed, because that men commonly make them selves believe that
they shall be blessed, if they may obtain that which their flesh desires.
As when the Glutton shall have wherwithal to fill his filthy paunch, so that it
may stand astrout: the Whoremonger to enjoy all his foul villanyes and beastly
lecheryes: the Covetous man to be so scraping as that he cares not what he
gets nor how he comes by his goods, to lay Land to land, and too be
filled with an other man's blood: Lo these are the men, as they think, which
are blessed. Yea, and although they were not so given to wickedness, as openly
to grieve the majesty of God: yet for all that ye shall have very few which will
acknowledge them selves to be accursed, but that God has care over them and
their salvation, and that there is none other blessedness nor felicity but
even this, that they are in the hand of God and under his protection. And so
much the rather ought we too record and have often in mind this lesson when
as David says, O look upon me O Lord, and be merciful unto me. For by this
he signifies unto us, that if we will have our life to be blessed, if we will
have good success in all our affairs, Lo from this fountain must we draw
all our felicity: which is the providence of God, because we should in no wise
dout, but that he cares for us, and bestows and imployeth himself for our
preservation. When it is thus with us, all the rest cannot but go well with
us: but if this point be wanting, we are very miserable, although it seems to
us to have even as much as can be wished. Now by the way let us note, that
David in beseeching God to be merciful unto him, declares, that so long as we
are in this world, that we are subject too a number of calamities and
afflictions. And so, we have great need of the mercy of God, or else we
shall carry away all the blows (as we say) amongst so many grievous
encounters, as shall be lamentable. Now this may serve us for two purposes:
The one is, that we being here below upon the earth, might make our account
that we cannot be here as it were in Paradise, to have such rest and
quietness as we would chiefly desire, to lack nothing, and not to be subject
to any grief nor displeasure: No, not so: But contrariwise, let us know that
here God subiecteth us to a great number of wretchednesses and miseryes, to the
end we should be always calling upon him for his mercy, and too be always
running unto him for it. Lo here the first point which we are to consider of
in this place, that the faithful to the outward show shall be very miserable,
and in a most wretched case, so long as they shall live here bylowe: and the
meaning of God is, to hold us under this condition, to the end to awaken us,
that we might have a far greater affection to call upon him, and to cleave
wholly unto him.

Now if we shall have this consideration with us, we may then in the second
place say with David, Have mercy upon us O Lord: that is to say, we may be
assured in all our miseryes; that God will be pitiful and merciful unto us,
yea so that we desire him, as we are here taught too do by the spirit of
God. Namely David adds, As thou use too do unto those which love thy name.

This is a sentence of Judgment which is here set down: But it sometimes
signifies, measure, sometimes, estate, order or fashion: the sense is not
dark: for it is as much as if he had said, O Lord, have mercy upon me, even
as thou art wonted to have mercy upon those which call upon thy name. Now we
are to gather from this saying, that David made not this petition only for
himself* but has set down unto us a general rule, which we may and ought too
apply unto every child of God, too the end that every one for his own part
might be sure that God will have mercy upon him, and stretch forth his hand to
aid him in his need. And why so? For the holy Ghost namely pronou^ceth, that
it is the ordinary manner of God to be loving and pitiful to al those which love
his name. What remains then for us to do? Forsooth we must love the name of
God. And here we are also to consider, what this saying means, too love the
name of God: For we shall have some men which will fear god, so, so, and yet be
contented never to come near him, if they could otherwise choose: yea they will
not stick to shut the door against him, and keep themselves as far from him as
is possible.

Now David shows here unto us, what the true fear of God is to wit, that
we must love him of our own good will, and that with reverence* and not
constrainedly to love and fear him, but that we desire too come unto him, and
wholly to submit our selves unto his Majesty. If we shall do thus: then may we
truly say that we love him, and in loving him, fear him also. In very deed,
these are things that may not be separated, because it is impossible for us
rightly too reverence God, and to fear him as we ought, except (as it is said
in the Psalm) that we first acknowledge him to be our father, loking for all
goodness and courtesy from him. This then affoordeth us, in the first place,
that we are assured that God loves us, that we must take him as for our
father, that we feel, that he in the loving of us, desires nothing else but
our salvation. And thus much for the first point. And after from thence also
proceeds, humility: whenas we see GOD so too abase himself, as too seek
for us miserable Creatures, wretched worms of the Earth, yea even very
condemned and utterly lost persons, the bondslaues of Satan, That God seeks
for us even in Hell, and draws us so lovingly unto himself. And must it not
needs be that we are very stubborn, if we be not touched, and moved to come
unto him, and yield our selves unto him, and be ruled and governed by his
hand and protection? Lo, say I, how we ought to love the name of God, to the
end we might be glad of that felicity which David here speaks of, that is,
that God looks to keep us through his providence. And although we are here
compassed with a great number of miseryes, afflicted a great number of ways,
and judged to be most wretched, yet God is at hand to help our necessities. And
namely it is said to love the name of God, Because we must receive a testimony
from him, to comprehend his good will. We see not God in his Essence, or as he
is in deed, but he manifests himself unto us by a another mean: to wit,
that we might behold him in the glass of his word, where he shows
himself unto us openly enough. Now David adds soon after,

Order my steps in thy word: and let no wickedness have dominion over me.
Here we see more clearly that, which I have already touched: to wit, what
the petitions of the faithful ought to be, to the end they should not be
given to vain things, For we need not to have any thing to make us by and by
to go astray, seeing our own nature draws us readyly enough thereto. There
is no question, but that we will go more then a foot pace, when as we are
bent too do mischief: yea we will trot on most swiftly and violently, even
as wretched men that were bewitched. Wherefore, here is a remedy set down
unto us: considering that our nature is inclyned to all evil, and caryeth us
thereto headlong, that we only ought to endeavor our selves too bridle our
vain and wicked affections: and besides we ought too desire God to keep us
through his word, and not too suffer any iniquity too reign in us. Lo, I
say, in what sort all the faithful must order them selves, fighting against
all their fleshly lusts: For it is meet that we utterly renounce the evil
that is in us, if we will seek after God and come unto him. Now here are
two things which David desiereth, To have his so otesteppes ordered according
to the word of God: And afterward, that no iniquity have dominion over him.
Which is as much as if he had said, That God had conformed him to his word,
and given him power and strength to withstand all temptations.

Now when he says, Order my steps according too thy word: he means, that
we can do nothing at all, except God governs us by his holy spirit. So
then, it is not enough that we have the word of God preached unto us, to
hear it, and to be exercised in the reading thereof: But it is God that must
put to his helping hand over and besides: he it is that must make the preaching
of it effectual, and pearce our ears, to the end we might understand that
which is set down unto us, and open our eyes when we read, and that
altogether by his holy spirit. And thus much for this. For although we have the
word of God offered unto us, yet shall we profit nothing thereby until such
time as God gives us understanding to see it. And besides, it is not enough to
have the knowledge of the will of God, and to understand the right way to
salvation: But God also must lead us him self, and hold us by the hand even
unto the end. And why so? For we will never cease drawing backward, when as
God shall have faithfully instructed us, if so be he himself does not still
conduct us, and always holds us with a strong and mighty arm: because
that our rebellious nature will never cease too withdraw us clean contrary.
For Saint Paul, who had so greatly profited in the fear of God, and was so
very forward therein as the like was not in his time, yet ceased he not still
too say, I see two laws in my self: I have a desire to serve God, Romans 9.19.
but yet there is another thing also which leads me to the contrary, so that
I do the evil which I abhor, and would not do: and if I do any good, it is
not done with so cheerful an affection as I would. See here in what sort
Saint Paul complayneth him self, and in the end concludes and says: Alas
most wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me out of this prison? If Saint
Paul used this kind of speech, Ephe. 6.13.14
what shall become of us, when we shall be no whit guided by the spirit of God?
I beseeech you what shall the bare doctrine profit us? It is meet then, that
after God shall have taught us, that he also guide us, and after, that he give
us the power and strength to follow him, and too confirm, imprint and engraue
his law in our hearts, as also it is sufficiently set down in the
scripture touching the same.

David goes forward and says, Suffer not any iniquity to have dominion over
me. To what end and purpose says he this? For he had before desired God too
order his steps, to the end he might serve him in true and faithful
obedience. Forsooth it is, because that when God has bestowed his grace upon
us, to be desirous too cleave unto him, yet shall we never come to the full end
there of without great afflictions, having so mighty an enemy to stand
against us as we have. It is very true that we desire nothing else but to be
made teachable of God, and to suffer our selves to be governed by the great
Pastor or Shephearde Jesus Christ: this is already one good step: but let us
a little better consider, wherefore such grace profits us not. It is because
the Devil comes soon after too set it on fire, for he always finds good
store of Wood in us according as we are stored with many vices and
imperfections in our nature, until such time as God shall have wholly taken us
from out of this flesh. For all our lusts and affections are so many
rebellions against God, as that we never cease to fight against him, that if
at anytime on the one side we go about to do good, we are on the other side
carried to do evil. What must we then do? We had need to have God too array us
with a power and constancy, to resist all these contrarietes and wicked lusts
which are in us: that we be not only teachable, and governed by him, but
also that we be fenced with such armor and weapon, as are meeete too fight
against Satan and all his crafty sleights and strengths, to the end our
enemy might have no hold of us: so that we having as Saint Paul says,
both our headpeece, and shield, might be armed and appointed at all pieces,
And when as we shall be thus armed, then to see how we should wholly and
fully cleave unto our God. And whatsoever the Devil shall craftily invent
against us, whatsoever stoppes and lettes are in us: yet let us not doubt but
too obtain victory.

So then, it is not without cause, that David here joins these two things
together, to be guided by the majesty of GOD, and abooue all to be so
mightily strengthened, as that no iniquity could have dominion over him but
that he was well able to overcome all the temptations wherewith Satan any way
could assail him. Now if David, was feign to make such a petition unto God,
with out hypocrisy, by this we may gather of what strength and effect our free
will is, which the Papists so highly extol. Whenas we shall speak of the
serving of God, they straight ways think that it comes of our own power and
strength. Not that they do not confess, but that they had in some sort need
of God his help, but yet that they will be companions and fellow workers with
God, and that without they for their part did something of their own power
and strength, all of it were nothing. And contrariwise, except the spirit of
God leads and guides us, we must needs slip, yea and utterly fall away.
We speak not here of an half aid only: But it is GOD that must take the
whole conducte and leading into his own charge. And again has he taken us
into his hand? Then no doubt of it, there is a second grace to be looked for:
that is to say, that we be strengthened with his holy spirit, and so to be
governed, as that we may have an invincible power to persevere in well doing.
Howbeit there is yet one point more to be considered of in this verse: And that
is, that David desiereth to have all his steepes ordered according too the
word of God.

Now by this he shows that if we be governed according to our own minds
and fantafies, we will be very swift to run: But yet not be too seek our
salvation. And why so? because we run thwart the fields, without holding any
way and path. Lo here the manner of the Papists, are they able rightly to say,
that their steps are ordered by the word of God? but contrariwise, the
abomination of their Antichrist withdraws them from the right way, to
makethem wander and stray here and there, and in the end to cast them selves
headlong into the bottom of hell: in such sort, as whatsoever they call the
service of God, when as both the ends shall be brought together, we shall
find to be so many blasphemies against God. And if they be asked, Now Sir. I
beseech you, from whom have you your Mass, your invocation of Saints, prayer
for the dead, images, your deifiing of Saints, your erecting of Aultars unto
them, your torches, candlelights, pilgrimages, and all the rest of your
beggarly trash? what answer will they make? They are never able to answer
you one iotte for the maintenance of this their cloutery out of the holy
scripture. What will they the^ say? Forsooth, we follow our fathers and their
traditions. Yea, but it is here namely set down, that we must be ordered by
the word of God. For all our whole life is a very great disorder: and we
wander and stray like unto brute beasts, except the word of God be our only
rule and plain square. Wherefore let us be well advised not to stray as these
miserable accursed people, which close up their eyes in the clear day light,
yea and which whet them selves and stubbornly stand in opinion against God,
when he goes about to reform them, and to show them that they have hitherto
vainly spente and lost all their time and travel. And although that they be
altogether so hardened, yet let not us be so: But let us know that there is
none other direction that is good, but the very same which God shows unto us,
as was said too Moses, Lo this is the way which thou must follow. Now it
follows soon after,

O deliver me from the wrongful dealings of men: and I will keep thy
commandments. David by this manner of speaking right well declares, that the
Children of God shall always be assailed with many and sundry assaults,
persecutions and griefs, so long as they live here in this world, and the
meaning of God is to appoint him to be as it were a Glass for all the
faithful to look in. For as we see how he has been entreated, and do also
see his condition and state, no doubt God has set him as it were upon a
scaffolde, to the end we might be conformed according to his example: as he
was also in very deed, a figure of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now we know that
our Lord Jesus was a true patron of all the Children of god, according unto
whose image we must be made like, namely in this point, to wit, in afflictions,
in anguishes, and miseryes, as Saint Paul thereof witnesses to the Romans.
Since then it is so, let us know that so long as we are to live in this world,
we shall be always afflicted and troubled by wicked and ungodly men, Romans 8.35.
neither ought we too think it any strange thing, since that David has
showed us the way: and that God has purposed too have us framed after his
example, let not the afflictions and persecutions, which we must abide at this
day, seem new and strange unto us.

Now heerevpon it followed, That he will keep his commandments. Whereby he
signified, that he will not forget him self of such a benefit, when as he
shall have God too be his protector, to succor him against the malice of men
that he will keep his commandments. Let us learn then, that when God
shall have maintained and defended us, that we ought to be a great deal the
more ready too obey and fear him: and that this ought always too stir us up
to a greater consideration: that as he daily increaceth more and more his
benefits upon us* so ought our affeetion also to serve him, increase and
besides it must more profit and inflame itself. Now it follows by and by
after,

Show the light of thy countenance upon thy servant: and teach me thy
statutes. By this he confirms the matter which he before handled: and
therefore we shall not need to stand much upon this verse: for he shows
that he is contented too have God to look and care for him, And to prove this
too be true, you may see, that the thing which he desires, is that which I
have already touched* that is, the principal safety which the Children of God
ought to have, is, to stay them selves upon this providence of God, when as
they certainly know and may boldly say, that God stands for us, and will
never forget us: and although we be never so miserable creatures, yet for all
that he cares for us, watches over us* yea, and also he has an eye unto
us, neither will he suffer any hurt to come unto us, but will provide for all
our needs and wantes. And if we carry this mind with us, we have the greatest
benefit that is possibly to be wished. And this is it which David speaks of
in this place, when he says, Show the light of thy countenance, O Lord,
upon thy servant. For he means that when he shall feel the protection of
God, he is then sure that God looks unto him, and that the same is it, which
shall deliver him from all cares. Now let us note that this manner of speech
is drawn from a similitude, as when we think God his countenance to be
darkened in the time of our trouble and adversity: and feeling no comfort
whereby too glad our selves in him, it seems to us by and by, that there are
great and monstrous thick clouds betwixt him and us, and indifferently we
imagine that God sees us not. And therefore David so far as flesh and blood
could reach unto, says, Show the light of thy countenance, that is, make me
to feel that thou have care over me. And in the end he says, Mine eyes gush
out with rivers of water: because men keep not thy law.

Here he declares that over and besides the desire which we ought to have, and
wherewith we ought to be affected to cleave unto God according to his word, what
a great mischief and grief it should be unto us, to see the scorners which so
contemn and despise the word of God, too tread the same under foot, and
besides, to see the wicked to overthrow all good order and justice. See then,
that the true children of God ought not only to be contented with their own
walking aright, and to be framed according to the law of God: But they ought
also by all means possible to labor to bring the whole world to that pass with
them, too the end that all the creatures of God might with one accord
reverence and glorify his majesty. And therefore when as they see God to be
conte^ned, they should begreeued thereat, and not only to be sorry and vexed:
but also to be as it were mortally wounded. For it is not without cause that
David says here That rivers of water gushed out of his eyes: He means
hereby, that he was so sorrowful and vexed as could not be expressed, Now if
David had occasion to groan and weep after this sort, when he see God to be
rejected, what shall become of this our time I pray you? to what an extremity
are we come? Is not impiety or ungodliness grown at this day to a full
measure? Do we not see the ungodly exceed in all abundance of wickedness? one
sort is fallen out with God and the gospel: Another sort will confess with
the mouth that they allow of it or desire it: and yet we see them to be an
hundredth thousand times worse then the papists: no dout of it we shall find
amongst us of that sort, such devils incarnate, and so vilanous and detestable,
as that the very air cries out unto god for vengeance against them. When then
we shall see these accursed monsters to make no account of God nor godliness,
must we not needs be grieved as David was? Let us know that God will bless our
crying and groaning, when we shall have this godly sorrow: as too see his law
thus destroyed and ouerthrown, and not to be regarded with that reverence that
it deserves. And yet notwithstanding the contemners of God must one day come
to an account, when as they shall be merry after another sort, and then they
shall be assured to make a reckoning for the groans and lamentations of the
children of God: when they do not only vex the mortal creatures of God, but
even the living God him self, and his holy spirit which dwells in us, from
whom all such sighs and groans do proceed. And so, when as we lament, to
see the law of God to be so destroyed by the wicked, let us put them over too
the judgment of God, before whom they shall make an accounte of all the
groans and sighs which we shall have powered out, which they thought by their
gibinges and laughinges too strangle and choke. For although they tread under
foot the law of God so much as in them lies, yet the sorrow and grief
which we abide for it, shall ascend into the heavens to cry for vengeance of
them.

According to this wholesome Doctrine, let us prostrate our selves before the
majesty of our good God, in acknowledging our offenses, beseeching him that it
would please him to make us better to feel our miseryes then we have
heretofore felt them, yea to the end we may lay them open unto him, and to
seek for remedy where it is too be found: that is, that after this our good
God has enlightened us in his knowledge, that it would please him more and
more, to increase the brightness thereof in us, and so to confirm us, as that
we never change from the right way. And although we are too withstand a great
number of assaults, and that the Devil never cease craftily too go about
infinite ways too trouble us: yet notwithstanding let us beseech him too give
us an invincible power to resist them, until such time as we beecome fully
Conquerors, and be conjoined unto him self, too live in his kingdom in
everlasting joy and felicity.

The xviii. Sermon upon the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm.
ZADE.
Righteous art thou O Lord: and true in thy Judgment.
Thou have commanded: justice by thy testimonies and truth especially.
My zeal has even consumed me: because mine enemies have forgotten thy words.
Thy word is proved most pure: and thy servant loves it.
I am small and of no reputation: yet do I not forget thy commandments.
Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness: and thy law is the
truth.
Trouble and heaviness have taken hold upon me: yet is my delight in thy
commandments.
The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting: grant me understanding
and I shall live.
IT is certain that there is no man but will easily grant, the law of God
to be both good and holy, and that we ought not only to allow of it: but
also to receive it with all fear and reverence. Notwithstanding, there are
very few touched with this affection, to understand that there is such a
perfection in the word of God, as that nothing can be found therein, but all
purity and sincerity: and too be so infallible a truth, and a righteousness
so certain as possible can not be more certain and sure. But very few there
are which understand this, or at the least which are very greatly touched
heerewith. And therefore it is not without cause, that David in this present
psalm, uses such a repetitio^, that he so highly magnifieth the doctrine
which he has learned out of the law of God: to the end too declare unto
us, that we have greatly profited, when we shall have such a savor and
judgment thoroughly imprinted in our hearts. When as, I say, this
righteousness, this wisdom, and this sincerity which is contained in the
word of God, shall be very well and thoroughly known unto us: then may we be
able to say with David, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and true in thy judgments.

Now as the holy spirit of God speaking by the mouth David, has set down here
no superfluous matter, but such as he knew to be profitable for our
instruction: Let us also dillgently weigh and consider all the words, which
are here touched. In the first place he says, Righteous art thou O Lord: and
true in thy Judgments. We have already heretofore handled, that the judgments
of God in this Psalm are called, the commandments of the law which he gives
unto us, to rule our lives by. Even so, when David says, that God is righteous
and true in his judgments: It is as much as if he had said, That god has
declared what his nature is in his law, that we might behold him in it, as in a
glass. This then is as much as if he should have said, O Lord, we have thine
Image truly and lively pictured and expressed in this doctrine which thou have
delivered unto us in thy law, there we see thee to be righteous, and also that
thou have commanded nothing therein, which tends not to the same end. Will
we the^ magnify God aright? We must know him to be such a one as he shows
himself to be by his word, and not to fashion our selves like unto a great
number of scoffers, which will not stick to say that god is altogether good,
wise, and righteous: but yet they will separate them selves from his word: forge
themselves a God in the air, or else they would be contented that there were
such a medley as that there were no more divinity known. Now see how god
shows himself, as I have said, by his word. We must then, if we intend to
confess him to be righteous, good, true, and faithful, to give these
co^mendarions unto his word, wherein he has once for all declared unto us his
will. Now after David has used this word righteous, he adds, Thou have
commanded justice by thy testimomes, and truth especially. See the^ how David
handles it him self, showing that the law of God is wholly righteous, because
says he, that it leads us to righteousness and truth. Now when these two
things are in it, what may we say, but that which has already been before
said? What is that? It is so far of with a great number, that when they are
co^uinced heerof, are persuaded in good earnest to say Amen without
desse^bling. And to prove it to be so, how many men shall we see submit
themselves in this point to the truth of God, whereunto he desires to lead
us by his word? How many I say, shall we find, which will yield the^ selves
teachable unto it? But contrariwise, we shall find the greatest part clean
contrary. It is very true we shall be ashamed, yea even horribly afraid, to say,
that there is any thing in the law of God, which is not true and just: and yet
for all that it may as easily be perceued, that there is no such knowledge
engraven in our hearts, as to be assured thereof. To be short, this is fardest of
from our minds, when we shall say thus: I speak now of those which are not yet
thoroughly instructed by the spirit of God. Neither yet let us think this too be
a common and ordinary thing, when as David says, That the testimonies of God
are nothing but true and righteous. For although we have learned somewhat out of
them, yet is not this enough, until such time as we are conformed and framed
unto them, that we fully and wholly agree with this saying and commendation
which is here given to the law of God. Now because David would show with what
affection he is moved, he protests, that he was not only grieved, when as he
felt in himself any rebellion against God, but when he perceived it in others,
that he conceived a wonderful sorrow and grief, yea even a memelous torment of
mind. For he says, That his zeal had even consumed him, that he was as one
dead, and so thrown down as he could not be more. Now, he namely speaks
of his enemies, and of such as had affiled him: But he signifies anon after,
that all the mischiefs and iniuryes which they had done unto him, did not
half so mightily grieve him, as the contempt which he kriewe to be in them
touching the law of God. For he says,

My zeal has even consumed me: because mine enemies have forgotten thy
words. Here then David shows in effect, that he was not so greatly
grieved nor yet so sorrowful for all the evils and wrongs which he endured at
the hands of men, as too see the word of God to be cast under feet and
clcerely forgotten. See here, I say, a most sure testimony that he highly
preferred the word of God, before his own person:that he had not that pleasure
in his life, nor in whatsoever concerned the same, as he had in the reverence
which all the creatures of God ought to have toward his majesty, Now if he
had not had this zeal, he could never have been thus grieved and vexed, when
as men made no reckoning of the word of God, and cast it behind their backs.
And here we are throughty too consider, that David spoke not in this place of
a mean sorrow. For then this had been enough. to have said, Alas my God, I
have been a great deal mote grieved to see the wicked contemn thy word, then
when as they persecuted my self although that I wis sore troubled and grievously
oppressed, yet had I greater regard to thy law, then to alwhatsoeuer concerned
mine own person. This had bin enough, say I, if David had said but thus much:
but he went a great deal farther, saying, The zeal of the house of God, has
even gnawne and eaten me up. Here he says that he was consumed and brought to
nothing, fo that he had no strength in himself. Now here we must note by the
way, that David spoke not this to brag of him self: but rather has set
forth this his example for our better instruction, to the end we might learn
to have the honor of God and the reverence of his word in such
recommendation, as that when we see the world to make light of it, and too
forget it, we should be grieved and tormented a great deal more, then if we
did abide all the griefs, extreme wrongs and injuries that were possible:
yea, that all our particular benefit, or damage, and whatsoever is most dear,
ought to be nothing unto us in respect of this light reckoning of the word of
God. Lo here what wholesome lessons and instructions, we have to gather out of
this place.

Now when he says, that it grieved him to see the word of God clean
forgotten, what then shall become of the matter, when as men shall not only
forget it, but even with a most detestable fury oppose them selves wholly
against it? As at this day, we shall not only say that the word of God is
forgotten: but men of a set purpose run violently upon it utterly to abolishe
it. And to prove it to be so, I beseech you, whence comes this cruelty and
fury of the Papists: but because that they are purposed clearly to go
against it? to be angry with God, not abiding too suffer them selves to be
subject unto him by any manner of means? They will not say thus in plain
words, but we may judge of the matter so far forth as we see it. For,
how should it be possible, that they should so rage against the known and
certain truth, if they were not even the very professed enemies of God? and
without they went about to stand against him eue^ to the hard hedge, as we say?
I will not deny but that men many times shall forget the word of God, when as
they shall be carried away with their wicked affections. As thus, when a man is
greatly given to lechery, this villainous desire so blinds him, as that he
clearly forgets whatsoever he has heard spoken against it never so little
before: to wit, they which defile their bodies with lechery, do deface, as much
as in them lies the image of God, pollute his temple, divide and pull in
pieces the body of Jesus Christ, shut them selves quite out of the kingdom of
heaven, and provoke the heavy wrath and curse of God against them. And yet an
whoremaister forgets all these notable sayings, which are set down too
keep him within his reyne. The covetous man also forgets what equity and
right is, let him be admonished thereof never so often, as to be pitiful to
his neighbors, to help the poor and needy, rather then to take away an other
man's goods and substance, and to be so given to our own gain: to procure and
profit the welfare of our neighbors, rather then to be given too seek our
own private commodity. A covetous man I say, will quite forget all this. And
why so? Forsooth, because he is blinded with this covetous desire of gain, and
too heap up together the goods of this world. See then when it is, that the
word of God shall be forgotten, verily even then when as men shall be drunken
with their inordinate greedy passions. But they which set them selves against
God* yea with a fury and frensy utterly to abrogate his word, too turn his
truth into leasings, these me^, I say, do not only forget the word of God, but
remember them selves of it too too much, even to set them selves purposely
against it. And we need to go no further but even into the state of Popery, to
see such a villainous and detestable impiety. For we shall see these contemners
of God, which are even here amongst us, yea and which come sometimes to defile
the temple of God, to thrust in their swynish groynes: and to scorn the
doctrine which shall be read, which makes even the very devils in hell too
tremble. We shall see then here these contemners of God, which will even lift
them velues up against him, and power out their blasphemies, and is it meet
that we dissemble this? No, not so, but let us rather stir up our selves to
groaning yea to cry out with a loud voice, beseeching GOD too stretch forth
his mighty and strong arm, against such villains, and fire bra^des of hell,
such vpholders of Satan, which thus come too defile the sacred and holy things
of God, which his majesty has set before us for our salvation. And thus much
for this point. And again let us not only be grieved and sorrowefull,
because there are in us rebellious affections which so hinder us, as that we
cannot take any such taste as is to be wished for in the word of God: but also
when as we see that men so lightly esteem and forget this word of God, that
they outrage in all wickedness, it can not be but that we must be grieved and
sorrowefull for the same. And yet there is a further matter to be required at
our hands, which is this, that when we shall see and hear the name of God to
be blasphemed, and his majesty violated, we should be tormented, and feel a
greater grief for the same, then for all the evil that might come unto our
selves: for it is very good reason that the majesty of God should be more
dear unto us without all comparison, then our own persons and lives. Now
since it is so, that if we ought to be sorrowefull, when as we see the word
of God to be forgotten by others, even to begin at the best end, if the evil
be found in us (as Satan moves us to fall unto wickedness, and we are very
far of from truly serving of God, and looking to his word, with such fear
and humility as in deed we ought:) since then, I say, we are so greatly to be
amended, that we have so many sins fighting against the law of God: even so
much the more ought we to sigh and groan: as saint Paul right well shows us,
saying, Oh accursed man that I am, who shall deliver me out this mortal body.
Lo here saint Paul, in showing their condition and state to be miserable which
live in this world, exhorts the^ to groaning, and to a continual sorrow and
care, because they are not able fully and thoroughly to yield them selves to the
word of God: so that whenever we shall do but even so much, we shall render
a true proof and testimony of our faith and Christianity. Now it follows
soon after,

Thy word is proved most pure: and thy servant loves it. Here it verily
seems (as we have before said) that David brings in a most manifest
sentence, yea, known even unto the simplest: to wit, that the word of God is
pure and clean, without spot and blemishe. But what? let us see a little
whether we put this purity in practice or not, alas, we are far from it.
For even then we may say the word of God too be pure and without spot, when
as without any gaynesaying we only trust in him, and that we have a true
certainty of our salvation, because he has once stretched forth his hand
unto us, and promised never too fail us. When then we shall have such a
confidence in God that we may boldly walk through death, and the very gulf
of hell: that in seeing the bottomless pittes open too swallowe us up, we should
not doubt of our saufetie, since that we are in the hand of God: lo how the
word of God shall be pure unto us. But now are we all in a clean contrary
vain. And from whence comes this? It is because we are full of infinite
filthiness and pollutions: to be short, there is nothing but stenche in us,
and all our senses are defiled. Let us first begin at our eyes, and we shall
have such a number of filthy troublesome and glimsing gloatings: to wit, such a
number of vanities which hinder us too know the purity that is in the word
of God, as lo we have already lost one of our senses. Afterward, we are
deprived of our hearing, because our ears are so filled with such trifling yea
and perverse matters, that we can give no ear unto God, or else, that which
enters in at one ear, goes out at another, as we say. Now if this be already
a great vice in us, to be so slack as to receive but one good lesson, the
second is no whit less, that when we shall have gotten even a very little, it
shall incontinent so melt away from us, as that we shall never think more of
it. We see how jolly and frisking our feet and hands are, when as we hear
any talk of ribauldrie and filthiness, and altogether dull and sensles when
any speech is of virtue and godliness. There is never a finger in our hands,
but will be as good as a raysour, to cut even to the quick, if any talk
shall be had to offend the majesty of God. And in the mean while we shall not
find one man that will once lift him self up too do any good. See how all
our senses are corrupt, and how full of pollutions and filthiness. And this
is it which hinders us, that we are not able to know how the word of God is
to be tried. Now it follows,

I am small and of no reputation: yet do I not forget thy commandments. This
saying here imports more then at the first sight it seems to do: It is
very true, that it should seem a far harder matter for the mighty men of
this world to serve God then the meaner sort: in so much as we will never
account it strange if a man of base condition has not forgotten the word of
God. But what is the cause why we so greatly prattle, iangle, and lift up our
selves so arrogantly against him, and that we submit not our selves wholly
unto him? Forsooth even the very honors and delights of this world are
oftentimes the chiefest causes. When a man shall be in any credit, estimation,
and reputation he imagines unto him self an idol in his own heart: and
herevpo^ forgets God, and thinks him self to be no longer under his
government. When then our Lord God holds us in a low estate, he puts
us in mind, and forces us by this means not to forget his commandments, and
to walk in his fear with all humility. But David his meaning tends to
another end, that is, although he was as it were contemned, yet ceased he not
to love God. Now as I have said, this is not here set down without cause. It
is very true, that when God liberally bestows upon us great store of
benefits, then are we so blockish, as that we think our selves least beholden
unto him. And contrariwise, they upon whom he has not bestowed such graces,
think them selves for their parts, not so greatly bounden unto him. And in
very deed, the world will always find starting holes, to keep it self out
from the service and fear of God, or else will be so lightly discharged
thereof, as that it may be done without any great pain. As how I pray you?
We see, that they which pretend color of ignorance, which have neither
knowledge either of God or of true religion, will say, surely for my part I am
but a poor simple man, and without learning, and therefore I will leave this
gear to those that are learned. One sort will excuse them selves one way,
another, another way: but yet they all tend to this end, to exempt them
selves from the obedience of God, and not to be subject either to him or yet to
his word. See here the common saying amongst the Papists. Ha sir: This is
the office of the priests and the cloysterers: our prelates have the charge
over us: we are secular and lay men, we must have nothing to do with this
gear. And besides, even the meanest sort of us, have also our excuses, and
will say, I am a poor man, I must get my living with great pains all the day
long by my handy work, I have scarsly any leisure once co come to hear a
sermon on the Sunday. See what starting holes we find out, to the end we
might follow our vanities, pleasures, and idle times, or I know not what
other our slouthfulnes, rather then we would hear the word of God and
meditate thereon. So then, David contrarily shows, that whiles he was small
and of no reputation: yet that he never ceased continually to be exercised in
this lesson, even to submit him self to the obedience of God. And so we see
him to be given from his childhood: and that he did not only take pleasure
therein, when God had advanced him to the kingdom, that he did not begin
then to taste of the law of God and to apply his whole study thereto: but when
he kept his fathers sheep and cattle, and was brought up in the sheepecoates,
before he came any thing near the court: even all that while, I say, he never
ceased but was wholly occupied in the holy study of the law of God. Now let us
learn hereby not to exempt out selves by our trifling excuses, as a great
number of men do: but let us understand, that David here exhorts all the
faithful in general: that the contemptible, base, and simple pesons, yea even
as simple as young children and that have no knowledge of that which is most
esteemed amongst me^, that they ought not for all that to forget the word of
God. And so, let also both great and small give them selves to the study
thereof, that we may be all the scholars of the law, and of the Prophets, but
especially of our savior Jesus Christ seeing that God has now bestowed a more
excellent grace upon us, then ever he bestowed upon David. For over and
besides the doctrine which David received from the mouth of Moses, see how God
has laid open unto us the infinite treasure of his heavenly wisdom, insomuch
as we have the Gospel, out of which the son of God has spoken unto us, who
is master over the whole household, as it is said in the Epistle to the
Hebrews. Now is this the doctrine that must make heaven and earth to tremble,
Heb. 3.6.
as it is spoken by the Prophet Haggay: and as this place is alleged by the
Apostle, Hag. 2.7.
to show unto us that we ought to receive the Gospel with greater reverence,
then the fathers did the law and the Prophets. For God made the earth to shake
when he gave the law by Moses, Heb. 12.25.26.27.
which since that time has bin confirmed and ratified by the Prophets: but
when as he opened his holy mouth by his son to teach us: that was to make
both heaven and earth to shake, because he has laid open such a wonderful
wisdom, as that it ought to shake and astonish us, when as God speaks with
such power and majesty unto us. See then as concerning this saying, where
David says, that he did not forget the co^mandeme^ts of God, although he was
small and of no reputation. Now he adds.

Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness: and thy law is the truth.
Yea in such sort, that when he was afflicted and grieved, that he took
pleasure in saying, thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, here
David repeateth a word which has a double signification. For in the first
place Righteousness, signifies the law of God, and that because it is the rule
of all goodness. And the^ next, he gives it the title of righteousness,
signifying thereby, that this law is so certain a rule, as that when we shall
have thoroughly sou^ded it even to the bottom, we shall find that God has set
down therein a perfection of all equity and sincerity: as if he should have
said, this is without all doubt a perfect rule of righteousness. Now he coupleth
as he has already before done, truth, with righteousness. I have already
said, that these words here, are oftentimes repeated: and yet it is no
superfluous kind of speech.

And what is the reason? Because we might fully and wholly confess that God
has spoken most wisely, that all men's mouths might be stopped, and that we
al at once might be silent and still to hear him. There is no man but will
confess this at the tongues end: But in the mean time for us to know this
equity and truth, which is contained in the word of God, Alas we are too too
far off.

So then, let every man look well unto him self, and see whether his life be
agreeable unto the word of God or no. And if it be, it is a manifest proof
that the righteousness and truth thereof is deeply imprinted in his heart.
Now if this be so, then no doubt of it God his word is honored as it is
worthy. Then let us render unto him effectually, the praises which are here
attributed unto him, and as they do appertain unto his majesty. But if we
do say that the word of God is good and holy, that it is a wonderful
righteousness and power that cannot fail, and yet despise it in deed, show
our selves clean contrary unto it in our life and conversation, and making a
goodly show to honor it, do spit at it: What a kind of honor call ye this?
Wherefore we are to consider, that it is mete that this righteousness and
truth of the law of God be imprinted in our hearts, that we may make such a
confession thereof, as David here has done. And see why here he adds,
Yet is my delight in thy Commandments, Yea when he was afflicted, and in
adversity. For it is an easy matter for men to praise God whiles they are
quiet and out of trouble, and have all their hearts desire. Yea we shall see
the very hypocrites cry out with open mouth, O blessed be God, and our good
God: Forsooth when as he sends them even their wish, and entreats them
according too their own desires. But when God shall afflict us, so that we be
grievously vexed, until we can no more: Lo here a good trial to make us
feel, that we have willingly and in earnest honored him in his word. And we
shall show it too be so, when as we shall not change our minds: but
constantly persevere in it, and say, whether shall I now run? see how I am
afflicted: well, it is my God that must restore me. It is very true that I am
not without great stoare of sorrows and griefs which trouble me: But yet I
will content my self with this, that God loves me. It is true that as
touching the world I am tormented: but I will comfort my self that my God
has called me unto him, that he shows unto me in deed that he will have
compassion upon me, that he takes me for one of his children, and will
extend his fatherly goodness toward me. See here a very good proof and
trial, that we take the word of God to be true and righteous: that is, that
if we be grieved with trouble and adversity, yet that we do never forget
him, nor it. But what? let us once come to the practice thereof, and then we
shall see how it fares with us. For it is a matter of nothing too lend our
ears, and say, surely this is a very good sermon, and that there was, nothing
taught in it but very good and wholesome doctrine, and truly if we have once
said but even thus much, we will by and by think, that God is greatly in our
debte. A man that comes thus even with the ears of an Ass to play the
hypocrite, thinks verly that God is bound unto him, because he has done
him thus much honor.

Now this is an ouergrosse and impudent kind of dissembling, in this manner to
think to please the majesty of God. But yet the case so stands, as that the
greater part is even so given: now what is the next way for us too be rid
of all together? Forsooth even this, That when we for a time shall make a
show to give diligent ear unto the word of God, that all whatsoever we have
heard, will incontinent melt and vanish clean away from us. And hereby we
very well show, that the truth and righteousness which is in his word, is not
so imprinted in us as it ought to be Now David adds in the end, Yet my
delight is in thy commandments. Whereby he aduertiseth us, that it is not
enough that we call to mind that we have understood the word of salvation, too
the end to profit our selves in the time of affliction: but it must be of
this strength and power even to glad us in the midst of our sorrows. It is
very true, that we shall not be senseles and without feeling. And David also
has very well experimented, how greatly affliction and anguish tormented him.
He felt then both hard and bitter passions: and yet this hindered him little,
to rejoice and to be glad. And although he was greatly vexed as touching the
flesh, yet felt he such spiritual joy in the testimonies of God, that sorrow
overcame him not. Now, if David as before we have declared, took such
pleasure in the law, whereas God only showed himself to the ancient fathers, as
it were in shadows I beseech you, how ought the word of God at this day to
glad us? Where as he shows him self so familiar a father toward us, eue^
opening unto us the very botome of his heart, hiding nothing from us? When the^
our Lord God pours out the treasures of his infinite love and goodness upon us
so abundantly: have not we a far greater occasion to rejoice, then the
fathers who lived under the law? Yes verily: but our unthankfulness so
hinders us, as that in knowing, we know nothing, and in seeing, we see no whit
at al. And yet is not this written without cause. Even so, when as we shall
feel the griefs, anguishes, and afflictions of this world to trouble us, let
us have recourse unto this word of God: for in it we shall find him to stretch
forth his hand to draw us unto him, declaring that he will help the
afflicted, have pity of the miserable and vexed, aid the wretched, desires
nothing else but to bring back again poor sinners which will yield them selves
unto him, lay all their cares in his lap, and that he will unburden us of
them all. When then we are sure, and resolute of such God his goodness
toward us, by his promises, we ought to come unto him, to call upon him, and
to rejoice in him: so that we may say with David, O Lord, my delight has been
in thy testimonies, that they might glad me in the midst of my afflictions.
Lo how the children of God, win all the time of their affliction may
continually do, rejoice in the assurance of their salvation, yea when as they
shall settle them selves upon his promises, and receive them in such sort as
that they may turn to their benefit. Now for a conclusion David says, The
righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting: and afterward he makes his
prayer and says, grant me understanding and I shall live. See yet again this
word, righteousness which is here repeated, and that to very good purpose: For
this is according to that which I have already said, that they which dare not
openly rail and iangle against God to blaspheme his word, yet will they be for
all that full of malice, and treason: or else they will be so nusseled in their
vanities as that the righteousness of God shall not appear in them. So then,
David yet sets it down, to be an everlasting righteousness: signifying
that we ought not to take them as puftes of wind, as a great number of men
have done, to magnify God, and after in the turning of an hand to go clean
backward. As at this day we shall have them which will make a show of great
devotion, and say, O what an excellent sermon, O what notable doctrine was
taught this day? But I beseech you what will they say the next day? Forsooth
they will not for all this stick too mock God, make one jest or other at his
word: or else, if God send them any adversity, they will be grieved and angry
with him: so that if they be put in mind of that which they before had heard,
they will answer, that they have clean forgotten it. David therefore meaning
to show, that we must not be so slack as at sometimes to commend the word
of God, says, that it is an everlasting righteousness. As if he should have
said, it is very true that men are chaungeable, and this present life also is
subject to very many chaunges, as to day we shall have some grief or other,
and to morrow be well again: oftentimes many troubles shall come unto us: and
we shall see them at last too have an end: and yet for all these continual
chaunges, men must not in the mean while be carried away with every blast of
wind, to be inconsta^t and unsteadfast: but whiles they are sailing through
the waves of the sea, they must hold them selves firm and sure in this
righteousness and sincerity which is in the word of God.

See then how me must know the everlasting stablenes of the righteousness of
the law. And in deed we shall have thereof a full feeling and declaration in
the word of God, when as we shall receive it as we ought: but for so much as
we fail herein, and that we have not as of our selves the spirit to
comprehend this righteousness, whereof in this place mention is made, ne yet to
attain thereto: yea, and if that we should attain thereto, so that there were
nothing to lead us to iniquity, yet let us pray with David, that it would
please God to give us understanding. Now it is most true that David had already
received some portion and measure of understanding: for else he could never have
said, I have been grieved and troubled, and yet my delight was in thy law.
He could not possibly be carried with such an affection, but that the word
of God had touched the very bottom of his heart: but when he besought God to
give him understanding, he mea^t, to have God to increase that grace which
before he had received. Now if he who was so greatly aduau^ced: yea that had
received the spirit of prophecy to instruct others, which is the principal
spirit to govern the people of God: If he, I say, had need to make such a
prayer, what shall we do, which have scarsely any one spark of understanding
in our minds? ought not we, I beseech you, to pray with a more fervent
desire, to have God to grant us understanding? And a great deal the more
ought we to be stirred up thereto, when as David says, that we are not
able too live, until such time as GOD has so enlightened us: too the end we
might conceive this truth and righteousness which is in his law. See here, I
say, how that the life of men cannot be but accursed, until such time as
they are come even unto this point. And so, let us not learn too please our
selves, as these miserable wretched worldlinges do, who are even drunken in
their pleasures and pastimes, and think that there is no pleasure nor
felicity, without they exceed and outrage in all vanities and follies: But
let us look a great deal higher, let us seek after God, and know that
then our life shall be blessed, when as God shall have delivered us from these
vain allurements of this wicked world, to make us feel truth and
righteousness which is in his word: that it may be the only end of our life,
of all our councelles, and our only exercise and study: To be short, the very
summarie of all whatsoever we take in hand.

According too this holy doctrine, let us prostrate our selves before the
majesty of our good God, in acknowledging our offenses, beseeching him that it
would please him to make us to feel them better then heretofore we have:
that we knowing our own wretchedness and miseries, and what need we have of
his assistance, might have recourse unto him, having our whole refuge to his
goodness and mercy, and stay our selves upon his promises, not douting but that
as he is true and faithful in all that he says, so also that he will fulfill
whatsoever he has showed unto us in his word: to wit, that he will so unite
us unto him self, as that after he has separated us from all the filthiness
of this world, he will make us partakers of his righteousness, and finally of
his glory. That he will not only grant us, this grace, but also all people
and nations of the earth. etc.

The nineteenth Sermon upon the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm.
COPH.
I have cried out with my whole heart: hear me O Lord, and I will keep thy
statutes.
Yea even upon thee have I called, help me, and I will keep thy testimonies.
Early in the morning I cried unto thee: for in thy word is my trust.
Mine eyes prevent the night watches: that I might be occupied in thy words.
Hear my voice (O Lord) according unto thy loving kindness: quicken me
according too thy judgment.
They draw nigh that follow after malice: and are far from thy law.
Thou art nigh at hand, O Lord: for all thy commandementes are true.
I have known long since by thy testimonies: that thou have grounded them for
ever.
FOrasmuch as the most requisite thing that we can possibly desire for our
salvation, is prayer unto God, and because we are so slack and cold therein,
or else that a very small matter will make us cold: we are to consider of the
examples which the holy scripture sets forth unto us of the children of God,
and of the faithful in deed, how they continually were exercised in prayer.
Even as in this place David his meaning is to set before our eyes, not that he
meant to glorify him self of his own strength, thereby to get him
estimation, but to the end that this example might direct us the right way.
We see then how careful David was to call upon the name of God, how he
applied his whole affection, and continued therein, because that every of us
might do the like. Now in the first place he says,

I have cried out with my whole heart. Wherety he signifies unto us, that he
babbled not eue^ as the hypocrites do, or else that he cried not out upon God
for a fashion or coldely, but prayed with a true and earnest zeal. Neither do
we any otherwise but even profane the name of God, when as we pray unto him
without attentive minds having our thoughts wandering this way and that way,
and on every side. Let us then consider, what it is principally to be required
in our prayers, which is, that we must not only wagge the tongue, and open our
mouth, with an intent to pray unto God: but we must pray sincerely and purely
also unto him from the bottom of our hearts. Now in very deed we ought to bring
this into a more plain order: But yet according to the manner which we have
heretofore kept in handling of this Psalm, it shall suffice that we set down
every thing briefly in certain articles. It remains then for this time that
every one privately by himself does more diligently meditate and bestow his
whole study herein. Now let us see how we ought too make our prayers to God,
to wit, our prayers must not proceed from the midst of our mouth, but from a
godly mind, and pure truth. This word to cry out, imports vehemence, as
shall again soon after be spoken of. Now David means not that he strained
his throat to call and cry out, but he rather signifies that he went not
coldly unto it, as they do which pray unto God, they know not why nor wherefore,
without it be for a fashion: or if they be pressed through any need, yet are
they no whit at al rightly moved, because they do not assure themselves that
he will hear and receive them. David the^ shows that he was not so
blockish, but that he had such an earnest desire as pusshed him thereto as S.
Paul says, that when we come to pray unto God, Heb. 5.7.
we ought to approach with groaning hearts, which no tongue ca^ express, by
which we are pusshed forward by the spirit of god. Se the^ the 2. co^dicio^
which is required in our prayers, that is, that we must lift our hearts and
minds up into heaven, when as we pray unto God. For we knowing what great need
we have of his help, must pray that he will have co^passio^ of our miserable
estate, yea and confess that we are the children of perdition, if he
stretched not forth his merciful hand unto us: and therefore that hereupon,
we ought to set out and call upon him with an earnest affection. Now in the
third place David tells us that he was very dilligent in praying unto God: to
wit: that he hoped even unto the last cast, as there are very many which do
so, when as they see welynough that they can go no further, except God help
them: and yet for all that they step back from him as much as in them lies,
and are never carried to the very point, with all their hearts to call upon
God, without it be that they can neither will nor choose, and are driven even
too their wits ends, as we say. David declares that he was not so drowsy,
for he says, that he prevented the night watches, that he occupied him
self, seeing that it was the true, and only refuge of the children of God,
and the very faithful, to recommend them selves into his protection. Now he
lastly declares, that he continued it, that it was no sudden motion or
blast, and afterward to wax cold agarne, as some do: and I would it pleased
God that we might not practice it so often as we have done. But there is not
that he amongst us which has not found by experience that we are by and by
tyered in praying to God, and that we wax very cold so soon as we have
poured out one only sigh and groan. For we think it enough, if we have set
down our whole sum to God in a word, a and do suppose, that if we have made
one only prayer, that we are discharged of all together, and that God will
help us, if he think it good. Now David shows unto us, that he
perseuered in calling upon the name of God. Lo here the four points which
we have to note in this place, to the end that every of us might discharge our
selves of them. For see from whence we must learn the manner to pray well: to
wit, in the first place, not with having our mouth going, but we must lay open
our hearts, and all our affections before the majesty of God, and pray in
spiritual truth: and not only so, but we must also be enflamed with such a
zeal, as that we be fully assured that he will both hear and help us. And
for performance hereof, we must be touched to the quick with the knowledge of
our sins: and know that our estate is most accursed, if God has not pity
on us: and also what the salvation is which he has promised us: we must have
always these things in mind, to the end we might be the more careful,
watchfully to call upon him: and not to wait until God constrayneth us
through extreme necessities, but to be always in such a readiness, as David
here speaks of, we must day and night, and every minute be occupied to look
unto God, and too call upon him: and to have this understanding with us, that
whenever any of us shall wake in the night, that it be to this end to pour
out some sighs unto our good GOD for our sins and transgressions. And also
when as we shall be alone by our selue, we must do the like knowing right
well that God sees us, and that we are always as it were in his presence.
Lastly we must persevere herein, and not take up the Bucklers, and by and by
lay them down again, and be soon wearyed: But we must still continue in our
prayers, as David here shows us an example. Now after he has made these
protestations, he goes on and says,

That after he shall be heard, and shall have obtained his requests, that he
will keep the testimonies of God. Here David shows that he will not be
unthankful for the grace which was bestowed upon him. And this is a point
which ought greatly to be considered of by us. For what is the cause that God
so easily grants unto us whatsoever we demand according to his holy will
that he so lovingly entreats us, yea that his hands are continually open unto
us, to the end liberally to bestow his benefits and riches upon us?
Wherefore shows he himself so liberal every way unto us? It is to the end
that we might have wherefore to yield him our hearty thanks, and too
glorify him. Let us then learn, that it is impossible for us rightly to pray
unto God, except we be already prepared to acknowledge his benefits, and too
have this full resolute mind that David had: to wit, to glorify God, when as
he shall have heard our prayers.

As also we see these two things to goo together in another place, where it is
said, Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou
shall gorifie me. See then what we have to note upon this saying where David
says, That he will keep the ordinances and testimonies of God. But we are
to consider in the second place, what the thanks are which God requires of
us, after he has helped us, and that we have felt his goodness in not rejecting
our prayers. Now this is true, that it is meet that the mouth does his office
to magnify the name of God, in confessing how greatly we are beholden unto
him: and yet it is not enough that our mouth has spoken, but we must
glorify him with the whole action of our life, and too show this
acknowledgement, how greatly we are bounden unto him, in serving and honowring
him in all and through all. David then in saying, That he would give thanks
unto God because he heard him, says not, that he would do it only with the
mouth, but shows that he will pass farther that is, to keep the testimonies
of God, and to submit him unto his ordinances.

See how the glory of God ought to resound, not only at the tounges end of
the faithful, but also in the whole action of their hands and feet, and
whatsoever else ought to apply them too honor this good God, that we should
do him homage all our life long, considering that we hold all of him: and
not only for our creation, but also for our maintenance and conservation, and
for that he continually shows him self too be our protector. For there
passes not one hour over our heads, wherein God delivers us not from one
mischief or other. We have then a large matter to thank him for, not only
with the mouth and in words: but also in making protestation thereof all the
days of our life. We see now the sum and effect of that which is here
spoken, to wit, I have called upon thee with my whole heart, O hear me, and
I will keep thy Statutes. And afterward, I have called upon thee, save me,
and I will keep thy Testimonies. And after that, I have prevented the dawning
of the day.

I have called upon thee, yea in trusting in thy word. Now here he again
repeateth the point which we have noted in the other Sermon: that is, that for
our well praying unto God, we must build upon the trust of his promises. And
this is the true preparation which we ought to make, even such a one as this.
It is true that we had need to feel our miseryes and necessities, as it has
been before declared. For we shall never pray unto God with a right
affection, and from the heart without this. And besides it is very needful
also that we so lay open our hearts, as that we come boldly too present them
before our good God too discharge and unburden those our hearts of all their
cares and sorrows. But in the mean while, how is it possible for us, so
watchfully and carefully too pray unto GOD, and to be at full liberty to come
before him, if we had not this hope that he would hear us? And how could
we have any hope, if he had not given us his word which witnesses unto us
his will, and certifieth us that we shall not lose our labor in praying unto
him? The first laying open then which is requisite for rightly calling upon
GOD, is, that we come unto him in full assurance that he will hear us. And
why so? Because he has promised us.

They then which shall pray at all adventure, shall gain nothing, as the
scripture says: For it is done but in hypocrisy: when as we assure not our
selves that God will hear us. We must, as the Apostle says, in drawing near
unto God, know that it is GOD which calls us unto him. And they which have
not this knoweledge, shall be void of their hope. And therefore every man must
look into him self, to be thus resolved and say, Well, since it is God, that
calls and bids me to come unto him, I must not stand in doubt of obtaining
that which I shall ask of him, yea because I trust to his word. When then
we shall be thus fully assured, we may very well begin too pray: But if this
be not in us, we may bestow great pains in praying unto God, yea from morning
until evening: we may continue all the whole night in babbling, but we shall
get nothing at all by it: although we had some desire and zeal, we should
never know what gain we should have by our prayers, because we trust not to
the promises of God nor yet stay our selves upon them.

Let us then not dout but that he will help us, and that we shall feel his
aid in time convenient. Hereby we see, that we could never duly and truly
pray unto God in all the Religion of Popery, I say according too that doctrine
which they hold. And why so? Because they teach the wretched world to be
always in doubt and wavering. See then that a mere and professed Papist can
never be able too make one prayer to please God: and cannot choose but to
provoke the wrath of God against them selves in all their Prayers. And why so?
For So Much as they look not unto his promises, upon which we must settle our
selves, to be assured: but that which is worse, they teach that in their
prayers they must always stand in doubt. So much the more then ought this
doctrine rightly too be considered of us, where it is declared, that the key
which opens the gate for us to approach unto God in calling upon his name, is
this, that we must have the promises contained in the holy Scripture, and to
learn such an affiaunce out of it, as that we doubt not that God regards us:
and that so oftentimes as we pray unto him, that our prayers enter into him,
and that he will receive them, declaring that he is ready too grant unto, us
what soever we shall crave of him in his sons name according to his will.

Now in the mean while, because that God ordinarily hears not us at the
first chop, that is to say, shows not it according to the outward show, and
as we would wish, here is required patience to remain constant in this
assurance, and too retain and nourish it in our hearts after the example of
David. For he says not, that he prayed only unto God for a time: but
shows that he continued therein, and that he prevented the night watches.
See then what perseueraunce was in him as touching prayer. Now it is a sign
that God showed him not too have obtained the thing that he prayed for. It
falls out then that David his patience was troubled in that that he
languished: and yet for all that he always trusted to the word of God. Now
we for our parts are to do even the like. For although God shows not
himself to be merciful unto us so soon as we would wish, and too grant us
our requests, yet ought we notwithstanding too build heerevpon that he will
be faithful, and show him self so in the end. Although he prolongeth it
for a time, he does it because he knows it to be very profitable for us to
humble us, and to prove our patience. It follows soon after,

Mine eyes prevent the night watches: that I might be occupied in thy word.
This verse is not put to without cause. I have already said, that we can have
no access unto God in our prayers, without we trust to his word. For it is a
very hard matter for us to stay upon God, if we only consider of him
according to our natural reason, whether he be near us or no, and whether he
puts forth his hand to help us. When then we shall not perceive this power
and grace of God, as we would wish, it is a very hard thing for us too believe
in him, and therefore we must stoutely strive in this behalf. And see why
David says, That his eyes prevented the night watch, to be occupied in that
which might confirm him. As if he should have said, O Lord, I have believed
thy word, but it was with great pain, and with many hard conflicts. For I am
a weak man, and of mine own nature inclyned to distrust, and besides I am
assailed with a great number of temptations: But yet have I remedied all this
geere, when as I occupied my self about this continual meditation of thy
word, which I did not only bestow on the day time, but also in part of the
night. See here what we are in very deed to gather out of this place. But
first we must mark the proceeding of David. For after he has spoken of the
hope wherein he was settled, to pray unto God without doubting that he would
hear him, he says,

That he carefully meditated on his word. And why did he so? Shall that which
was necessary for David to do, be superfluous for us? God forbid. For if such
a Prophet as he, had need too arm himself against the temptations of his
flesh, against the infirmities wherewith he might be assailed, I pray you how
quickly shall he be overthrown, if we have not the same remedy which we used,
and the courage also which he here exhorts us unto?

Let us then consider, that if we will be stayed upon the promises of God,
because we would call upon him in the time of need, we ought many times to
meditate upon his words both day and night: and to set all our study and
affection therein* And see what the cause is why there are so few which be
disposed to pray unto God. Yea, and when they are thereto enforced, they know
not which way too begin, because they cannot he fully resolved, to say, It is
very requisite that when I shall call upon my good God, that I be fully assured
that he will not refuse to hear me. What is the cause of this uncertainty?
It is because they are not well acquainted with the promises of God. For a man
will think that it were even enough slightly and lightly to believe, that God
will hear those that are his. And when we come to prayer with this thought, we
think that if we have said, but a word or two: that it is too much. Yea and if
we come to a Sermon, and hear the promises of God spoken of, we think it by
and by too be an unprofitable speech, and will say, that it is more then
needs, for what is he that understands not that well enough? And in the
mean while, behold a mighty great temptation, like unto a boisterous
whirlewinde and tempest even at hand: and then he which thought him self so
able a man, is become a very Milkesop: He will look whether God will have pity
of him: He will possibly imagine, that he has turned his back, yea or else he
will doubt of his providence, whether he has any care of the world or no,
there are a thousand fantasies which the Devil goes about to put in our
minds. And when we are in this case, see we are so astonished, as that there is
no coming for us too pray unto God. And what is the reason? It is because we
have not been careful to meditate upon his promises.

And therefore we ought so much the more, thoroughly to consider of this lesson,
when as it is said, That David his eyes prevented the night watches, too
meditate upon the promises of God. Let us now compare our selves with him.
But it is so far of that any of us in particular has this care, whereof
mention is here made, as that we cannot by any means possible be trained
unto it. And although God bids us to come unto him, yet cannot we be
brought to come any thing near him. See how the Bell shall ring every day to
move us to come to the Sermon: God there tells us of his will, he declares
unto us that he is ready to receive us to his mercy, as often as we shall
call upon him.

Now every of us may very well see, that we pass not of his help one minute
of an hour. And yet how many are there notwithstanding which will vouchsafe
too step one foot, too come to occupy them selves about the promises of
God, that their memoryes might be refreshed in them to thend they might so much
the better be remembered of them? Nay we shall sarcely have a number of them com
to it on the Sunday, yea, and if percase they come once, they think it too be
as it were over much. And forsooth they must not come thither neither every
Sunday, because their ears will be over much filled with noise: and again
such as do come too it, with what affection come they, think you? Verily,
because that they cannot deny, but that there must be one day in the week for
them to meet together: and besides, they will for once come thither: but it
shall be to sleep, so that they understand and carry away as much as these
pillars, or else the stoles whereon they sit.

Lo here, how a great number of the people come to the Sermon. Yea and there
are no small number which will come thither, even to mock God, as we see these
scoffers and gibers, who come to none other end, but too dispite him, bring
with them whorishe and shameless faces, and such a beastly impudency as
cannot be greater. All this we see. Now let us consider that it is so far
of that our slothfulness should be excused, as that God cannot but justly
punish us, in that we shall be deprived of the ability to call upon him in our
need, and shall have our mouths also stopped. And afterward the mischief
shall increase daily more and more, until such time as we are come even to the
deapth of the bottomless pittes: that is to say, we shall be utterly excluded
from the help of our good God, that he will retire him self from us, and
clearly banish us his kingdom. Behold here the fruit which commerh by our
negligence, when as we shall make no accounte of the exercising of our selves
in this study of the promises of God. Now David adds,

Hear my voice, O Lord, at cording unto thy loving kindenes: quicken me
according to thy judgment. Here David declares yet more plainly, upon what
ground he laid his foundation of praying unto God: to wit, he brought no kind
of presumption with him, thinking to make account of this or that, and so to be
thought very worthy that God should hear him: but he preferred the goodness
and faithfulness of God above all his own woorthinesses. Lo here, whereunto
we must look if we will have God to be merciful unto us. And when as we would
profit our selves by our prayers, we must not once talk of bringing in of
any thing of ours with us, ne yet allege this thing nor that, as thinking too
bind God unto us for some good turn that we have done him: but too have
this principal regard with us, God is good, and faithful, and just.

See then whereon it is that we must settle our confidence, if we will be
resolved that he will hear us. And this is such a doctrine, I tell you, aswe
ought well to hold and keep. For in very deed, under this word, Promise,
this must altogether be under stood. For what is it that induces God to help
us, and to say, come unto me, without he look that we would crave something
at his hands? What is the cause that our God presents himself thus unto us?
Are they our merits? have we any ways on our part deserved, that he should
be so loving and kind unto us? No without all doubt. We must then needs
conclude, that the promises do spring out from this fountain even his mere
mercy. And therefore it is not without cause that David, after he has spoken
of the promises of God, declares here that he desires not to be heard, but
in this respect, That God is good and merciful. As if he should have said, O
Lord, if any man inquire the cause why thou have heard me, and haste pity
on me, I am able to say nothing as touching mine own person, but that I justly
deserve too be rejected of thee, but thou have taken the matter and cause unto
thine own goodness and righteousness. Now it follows soon after,

They draw nighe that follow after malice: and are far from thy law.

Thou art nigh at hand, O Lord: for all thy commandments are true.

Here David complayneth unto God, and desires him to help him against the
wicked and ungodly contemners of his majesty: As if he had said unto him, O
Lord, I can allege nothing at all for mine one defense, but that they which
draw nigh unto me to hurt me, are so much the farther of from thy law, and I
the nearer thy commandments It is a commonen entendement, that they which do
imagine ma1ice, are far from God, in withdrawing themselves from his law:
but when as we shall narrowly look into the matter, that is the very true and
natural sense of the Prophet which I have already touched, that they which
imagine malice or deceit, are far off: that is, they are retired from the
law of God, to persecute those which draw nigh unto it. And see how David
has taken for his advantage, that, that the wicked are far from God, because
he did very well see, that he had been overthrown through their malice,
without God had helped him. Which thing he shows by this complaint, that the
wicked troubled him even to the uttermost. And so much the more ought we to
consider of this, because we being so woma^nish as possibly may be, do by and
by think that if the wicked bear the sway, and craftily go about too devise
any thing against us, that all is lost, and that God has given us over for a
spoil. We can in no wise abide that God should exercise our patience nor yet
humble us. Let us then thoroughly confider of the example of David. For although
that God had specially chosen him out, amongst the rest, and had bestowed so
many excellent graces upon him: yet for all that he was contented that the
ungodly should persecute him, neither could he make them stand aloof off,
for he had neither Rampares or Bulwarks, that he was able to say, you shall
not come near me. For he says that they drew nigh him. So then, when God
gives such leave to the wicked, as too have the raines at will, so that it
should seem, that they had the power even to set their feet on our throats,
yea and to swallowe us clean up, Let us consider, that it has been the will
of our God in all ages, to have his children subject to the malice of their
enemies. Let us also have a further consideration of this which he says, that
they are far from the law of God. For this imports, that they neither had
truth nor equity in them. When then the ungodly, shall with the contempt of
God, and an extreme impiety, even rushe upon us to overthrow us, let us
then, I say, remember the example of David and say, wherefore do the wicked
thus persecute us, without any regard too him, who ought and will when it
pleases him both with force and violence repress them? It is because they are
both blind and blockish, and are without all truth and equity. But on the
contrary side, let us not be afearde, because we know that God is nigh us:
and let us continually call upon him, to the end he may be always nearer and
nearer unto us, too put him self betwixt us, and make him self our buckler to
put back the attemptes, and to bear the blows wherewith the wicked shall
assail us. Moreover, let us besure and resolute, that notwithstanding that the
ungodly shall thus oppress us, yet that God is not far from us, although
that we can not perceive it. For God will oftentimes be near us, when as we
shall think that he is clean hidden: that is to say, he shows not unto us
his power and virtue, neither lays he it open at the first chop. For we must
also call upon him, that we might show what honor we bear him: that although
he prolongeth the time, and tarrieth longer before he help us, then we
would, yet must we notwithstanding tarry his good leisure. In sum we must
always be resolute in this which David here speaks of, saying, are the
ungodly nighe? very well, and God is at hand. That is to say, God is not
asleep in heaven, whiles these men are maliciously imagining to do us hurt.
God his arms are not a cross, neither are his hands closed, notwithstanding
that these men seek nothing else but to devour us. God is not yet blind,
whiles these ungodly awake, to destroy and confound us. Se then how God,
according to the necessities which he knows to be in us, will always be at
hand, so to assist us, as that whatsoever mischief is near us, it shall
never be able to overcome us, yea, invent the wicked what they can on all
sides. This is it that David means to signify in this place.

Now he also says, That the commandments of God are true. Wherein he
exhorts us to have recourse unto the word of God, for although we are thus
tormented and fast closed up in sorrow and griefs: yea and that we look this
way and that way for help, and yet see not God to remedy the same: then I
say, he teaches us too have recourse unto his word. And this is a most
profitable admonition. For when we seek after God, we must not have regard to
our own fantasies, nor to any worldly manner, as we are accustomed, nor too
look that he submit him self unto our will, to show him self unto us after
a visible sort, to have him come down from heaven in his majesty, too consume
with fire and brimstone all our enemies, to set us aloft, and to bear us such
favor, as that we might have all things at our own desire: Lo I beseech you
how we desire to have GOD to show him self, for like as we are fleshly, so
also would we have him to show him self unto us in a visible manner. All this
while, his word is of no great authority with us: for if he show us not why
and wherefore, we are not contented with that which he has spoken, but we
would forsooth see his hand altogether open. Wherefore, this admonition which
David here gives us, is very necessary: to wit, that the commandementes of God
are true. As if he should have said, O Lord, I have already said, that thou
art near unto us, for as much as thou see us to be persecuted and troubled
by the wicked, and how they come upon us to destroy us, and that thou art
right before them and against them to beat them back, and to bear their
blows. All this do I confess, O Lord, But yet I vee not this after a visible
and worldly manner. How then? It is because thy commandments are true. David
then knew that God was near unto him, because he settled him self upon the
law, and the promises which were given him. And even so must we do, although
it seem very hard, as we have already touched. It follows,

I have known long since by testimonies: that thou have grounded them for
ever. In this latter verse, for a conclusion, David says, that he was not
like a nouice, to be now too learn to know what the commandments of God
were, but he was resolute that God was near him, because he had his word,
from which he could not starte. He shows then, that the faithful ought not
too be as it were in their A. B. C. but must be long time exercised: as David
protests of him self, I have known them, says he, long since.

Now here he sets down a word which signifies continuance: From the
beginning have I known says he, long since thy commandments which thou
haste grounded for ever.

So then, let us learn that if we will boldly strive against all the
assaults, wherewith we may be assailed, we must continue in this knowledge
of the word of God, and we shall always find him ready to be neerehand us:
so that we may be sure of his protection, not for a day only but all the days
of our life. And so let us thoroughly record this lesson, to the end we may
say with David, that we have the testimonies of GOD so deeply imprinted in
our hearts, as that we have long time since known what is already in them,
too wit, that God has established them: That is to say, that although we
shall see a great number of chaunges in this world, that all things are
changed and turned, yet that God is no chaungeling, that he never alters
his mind, that his word is, as it was from the beginning, and as it shall
continue for ever: that it shall never be subject to all the turns and chaunges
of this world, but shall ever abide in his full strength and virtue, because
that God has established it for ever. And this is even so, as that we ought to
be prepapared to call upon God, to wit, when as we shall be settled upon the
true confidence of his promises: that we shall have known the everlasting
power and strength which he has given to his word: that is, that he will
remain always like unto him self. When, I say, we shall have known this,
we may boldly come and present our selves before him, being assured that he
will make us feel by proof, that which he promises us, so oftentimes as we
shall have recourse unto him, trusting herein that he has rendered unto us a
testimony of the love which he bears us.

Now let us prostrate our selves before the Majesty of our good God, and
father, in acknowledging our innumerable offenses, which we daily commit
against him: Beseeching him that he will so touch us, as that in steed that
we have been over much given to our fleshly affections, and vanities of this
world, that now we seek none other way but wholly too order our selves
according to his good will, being assured that although we be feeble and
weak, yea and utterly void of all strength, so that we cannot stepe one
foot forward without stumbling, or else in going backwarde we be far from
him, yet let us not doubt but that he will be near at hand too help us: And
also that when he has made us too feel his help, that he will give us that
grace that we may be so thankful unto him, as he deserves, desiring
nothing else but too glorify him all the days of our life, for so many his
benefits as he daily gives us, and liberally bestows upon us.

That he will not only grant unto us this grace, but also unto all people
and nations of the earth. etc.

The xx. Sermon upon the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm.
RESH.
Behold mine affliction, and deliver me: for I have not forgotten thy law.
Plead my cause and deliver me: quicken me according unto thy word.
Salvation is far from the ungodly: because they seek not thy statutes.
Great are thy tender mercyes O Lord: quicken me according to thy judgments.
Many there are, that trouble me, and persecute me: yet do I not swerve from
thy testimonies.
It grieved me when I saw the transgressors: be* cause they kept not thy
law.
Consider, O Lord, how I love thy Commandments: quicken me according unto
thy loving kindness.
Thy word is true from everlasting: and all the judgments of thy
righteousness inudre for evermore.
IF we might have whatsoever we would desire and wish, in very deed we
should be the better at ease, and without any grief. And this is it that man
naturally desires. But in the mean while we are to consider, that God will
exercise us with diverse afflictions, so long as we are in this world.
Wherefore such is the condition and state of Christians, so long as they shall
live here upon the earth: That is, they must strive, and be exercised with
diverse sorts of greeues, sometimes of the body, and otherwhiles of the soul.
And therefore for this cause must we arm our selves to the end we be not
overcome in the midest of our conflicts. Now the principal piece of our armor
is, to pray vn-God, and to call upon him to help us. And to bring this about,
we are thoroughly to consider how all the faithful which lived long before our
time, proceeded herein, too the end we might order our selves after their
example, as in this text here, we see how David was even extreemely
afflicted. Again, we see also how he behaved him self in all his
afflictions, which although they were very vehement, yet did they not hinder
him too have recourse unto God, and of him he was rescued and saved. See then
what we have to meditate upon, too the end that we might do the like.

Behold mine affliction, and deliver me: for I do not forget thy law. When
as he desires God to look unto his afflictions, it is even the same which we
have already said: too wit, That although God loved him, yet would he not but
that he should be subject, too a great number of miseryes, torments and
griefs. Let us not think then to be privileged, so long as we are to walk
here bilowe on the earth, but that God will exercise us and assay and prove
our patience, as he has proved David's, whom he so greatly loved, as the
scripture witnesses of him.

Now here we are to note two things, The one is, that when David desired God
to look upon his afflictions, and to deliver him out of them: he confesses
that he was astonyed, as if God had turned his back upon him. It is very
true, that David considered not of all that was too be considered neither did
he conclude, that God would cast off his children in such sort: But yet so
far forth as natural reason could reach, see how he might judge of his
estate.

And at that point also are all the Children of God. For on the one side, when
as they shall look upon their own state and condition, they cannot chose but
that they must be forced to say, what a thing is this, Surely, if God has any
compassion upon us, and that he sees us, is it possible that ever we should
be thus cruelly handled, will not he take some better order for this: See
then, that we cannot choose, but to conceive these and such like imaginations
in our hearts, when as we are grieved and persecuted, and look into our own
present estate: yea, even as I have already said, we cannot choose even too
feel our selves as it were to be forsaken of GOD. And yet for all this, we
must be fully persuaded and resolved, that GOD beholds us: and although it
seems, that he has turned his back upon us, yet that he cease not too
help us, and is careful for our salvation, yea and though we see nothing,
yet let us hold this for a certain and an undoubted truth, in our hearts.
And therefore so often as we shall be thus troubled to think that God has no
longer care over us, but that he has clearly forsaken us, yet let not this
hinder us from praying, after the example of David: neither let us be slack,
but even say, O Lord, behold me. In the second place we have to note, the
reason which David here sets down. For I do not forget thy law. If then
we will have God to hear us, we must have his law as it were fully settled
in our hearts. And how is that? Forsooth, we must think and study upon his
promises, we must know him to be loving and merciful, to help all those that
are his, and too aid them in all their necessities, and besides, this must be
our sure foundation that his promises are infallible, and that he will not
suffer his children to go empty away, when as they shall tend them selves
thereto.

See then how we must meditate upon the law of God that is to say, upon his
word. For under this word, the law, there is no doubt, but that David
comprehended the sum of all the doctrine which God gave unto his church. Every
of us then must be exercised in this study, and we having the law thus
imprinted in our hearts, may be certain and sure that God beholds us, and
will help us in all our afflictions: yea although it seems, and we may
judge according to our carnal senses, that he has turned his back upon us,
or that he has closed up his eyes, and sleeps, and as a man would say,
never thinks more of us. Now it follows in the second verse,

Plead my cause and deliver me: quicken me according unto thy word. Here
David expresses what this his affection is, whereof he has spoken: too wit,
how that the wicked unjustly persecuted him, as again hereafter shall more at
large be declared. Now we know, that the griefs which the children of God
do suffer in this world, are diverse and sundry: For sometimes God will lay
heavy hand upon them, without any man his touching: sometimes also men shall
persecute them with unjust actions, so that the wicked shall torment and grieve
them. David then shows that the affliction which he endured, was of this
second kind, to wit: that he had enemies which did unjustly trouble him. And
see wherefore he desires God, too plead his cause, and restore him. By this
we are admonished, according to that which I have already said, that when we
have lived in a good conscience, and have traveled even to do good unto every
man, so that no man has any cause justly to complain of us, yet although we
are persecuted and troubled we must not for all that be overmuch abashed:
because as great matters as al these were laid upon David. For this is most
sure, that he walked so marvelous soundly as that every man had occasion too
love him. And yet notwithstanding he was not without troubles amongst men.
And why so? Because of their unthankfulness. Let us then understand that
this vice began not first in these days, (I mean the unthankfulness and
iniquity of men:) But long time a go, and therefore as much as in us lies,
let us seek after peace: but if so be we shall procure to do any wrong, the
world will never give over hating of us, and procuring of our hurt, yea, and
go about even to destroy us. But as I have already said, let not that seem
strange unto us, seeing it came so to pass in David. And thus much for this.
Now in the second place, we are to beseech God too avenge our cause, too
comfort us, when we see our selves to be wrongfully dealt withal, when as we
are oppressed with false and slanderous reports, that we are evil spoken of
without just desert: we must the^ desire God to be our warrant and deliverer:
and let us not dout but that he will take our cause into his own hand, and
show him self to be more then a protector and lawyer. For he says that he
is the adverse party for the maintenance and defense of the causes and
quarrels of all his, when as they shall have walked sincerely before him self
and before men. Lo here a notable, and very profitable admonition: That is, we
must cast all our care upon God, when as we are wrongfully accused, injuriously
dealt withal, troubled, and oppressed: and beseech God to take the cause into
his own hand, and to avenge it him self. Now this may serve too make us
patient: for what is the cause that men so trouble and torment them selves,
wax so fierce, and cruel, use revenge, or else, grow to be very cowardes when
any wrong is done them, but because that they have not recourse unto God, put
not the^ selves under his protection, and pray him not, to hold his holy hand
over them, and to defend their cause? Now if we know this, it is most
certain, that our hearts shall incontinent be a great deal more quiet, and
let us not have such boiling affections as we have, to be avenged of them
which trouble us, but let us follow the doctrine which is here set down unto
us: to wit, that when we are unjustly entreated, let us pray unto God that he
will avenge our cause. And besides also, let us learn to stay our selves of
the promise, which is made unto us thereof: for like as a David makes here
such a request, so also we are to consider, that he made it not of his own
head, nor at adventure, but he knew it to be the office of God: That is, That
he will avenge all outrages, Exo. 15.
as it is said in the song of Moses, That if men oppress any unjustly, our
Lord says, that it is be which auengeth the cause of the innocent, and of him
that is troubled without a cause. David then knowing, that God having taken
this title unto him self, and declared that he will not suffer the throats of
the righteous too be thus cut, to be tormented, and troaden underfoot, but
that he will stretche forth his hand too help them: he having known this
calls upon God with a sure constancy, that will receive him. Wherefore it is
meet that we look unto this promise when as we pray, to the end we pray
not doubtfully but in full assurance, that God will be incontinent ready to
help our necessities. And this is it why David by and by after says, Quicken
me according unto thy word. It is not without cause that this saying was
added. For as I have already said, when as we will beseech the the lord our
God to take upon him our quarrel, and too assiste us in our afflictions: and
then we in the mean time shall stand in doubt of his so doing, we shall
profit our selves little in so praying. But we must be fully assured that he
will deliver us. And whenever it shall come too pass, that we shall be
destitute of all men's aid, yea that it shall seem that all the whole world
had conspired our destruction and decay, then should we chiefliest assure our
selves, that God will avenge our cause: and not only serve us in stead of a
proctour, but will be altogether also our judge, and adverse party against our
enemies, and against all those which have unjustly afflicted us. For he it is
that must take in hand all just causes. We had need then too assure our
selves of this. But from whence shall we learn this? even out of the word of
God, because he has left unto us a testimony thereof in it: as we see that
David speaks not here at a wild adventure, but has already grounded him
self upon a good foundation, whereon he has settled him self. Now it follows,

Salvation is far from the ungodly: because they seek not thy statutes. And
afterward he says, Great are thy tender mercies, O Lord: quicken me,
according to thy judgments.

Now here are two things to be considered off. The one is, that David
tells the reason why all the contemners of God, and all that rebel against
his majesty run headlong into destruction, and that he forsakes them: that
they feel no taste nor ease in their afflictions, but that God clearly
forsakes them. David sets down here the cause of all this: it is, says
he, because they have not sought after thy laws, and therefore are far from
thy salvation. Now he clean contrary, protests of him self* that he
followed the law of God, and kept it in his heart. So then we must needs
conclude, that he could not be estraunged from it. In very deed, this sentence
at the first sight is somewhat dark, but I will make it plain in three
words, and then by little and little show what doctrine we are too gather
out of this. When any tells us of our salvation, we must in the first place
know, whence it proceeds: to wit, from God, and that there is no salvation
but in him: in so much that so long as God is good and gracious unto us, it
must needs be that all must go very well on our side, and be assured that our
life is blessed, and that we shall want nothing that is meet for our welfare
and felicity. So then, our salvation, and all fullness and perfection of
benefits consist in this one only point, that God loves us and receives us
unto himself. And since it is so, let us now consider, what he is whom God
will forsake. Once, we are his creatures, and even as he has created and
fashioned us, so also will he continne his goodness toward us. Now, seeing
that his mercy extends even to brute beasts, even to the most vile and
abject things, yea even which we contemn, and disdain once to look on,
seeing the mercy of God extends so far, as the holy Scripture teaches us,
how can it be that he will forsake us, yea unto whom he has granted so great
dignity and excellency? For we have a thing excelling all other his
creatures, which is this, that God has imprinted-his own similitude and
likeness, in us: Now when as he has exalted us unto so high a degree of
honor, will he, think you, now forsake us? He will not without all doubt.
What is the cause then that we see so many caitifes, and miserable wretches
which are eue^ given over, so that God sends them not so much as the least
aid and comfort, that it seems, that he has set them as it were upon a
stage, to be a shame and rebuke to the whole world? Whence comes this?
Forsooth because they withdraw them selves from God: for when as they
withdrewe not them selves from him: it is most sure that then he showed him
self unto them, such a one as indeed he is of his own nature, that is,
loving, kind pitiful, gentle, and merciful. To be short, so long as we will
be ordered by him as his children, it is most sure, that he will play the part
of a father toward us: so long as we will yield our obedience unto him, he
will entreat us gently. But when we are so perverse as that we will not
submit our selves neither, unto him self, nor yet unto his word, but
contemn his love and grace offered unto us: is it reason that God should put
forth his hand to help us? is it meet he should entreat us as his children,
and account us in the number of those which wholly dedicate them selves unto his
majesty? No not so. But we rather are worthy to be set far from him, and too
have nothing at all to do with him. Lo here the meaning of David in this
place, when he says, O Lord, health is far from the ungodly because they
regard not thy statutes: As if he should have said, we ought not to be
abashed, O Lord, although thou give us over, and that we feel no succoure
of thy goodness, but that we languish in all misery and calamity. And why so?
Because we have forsaken and refused thy grace: and therefore of very right we
ought to be confounded and come to naught. Now I pray you tell us, what means
it that God will not be nigh us, but by means of his word? we must needs
feel his goodness by the effect, yea forsooth, and yet God comes nigh unto us
by his word: for that is a preparatiue by which he fashioneth our hearts, to
the end he might show him self to be a merciful father unto us. And so he
makes an entrance into our hearts for his mercy, that we might be capable to
enjoy his benefits. Seeing then it is so, that God by his word, shows him
self and also comes nigh unto us, we must not be abashed, although they
which refuse his word, yea, which so vilananously and contemptuously reject
it, as we see: we must not, I say, think it strange, although that they
feel no help at the hand of God in their afflictions, and that his merciful
goodness stretches not it self unto them. Now David returns to this
sentence which we have seen, and desires to be quickened according unto the
word of God. It is very true he uses the word, Judgment, but al comes to
one, as we have already heretofore declared. Quicken me then according to thy
judgments, says he, yea which I have loved. But yet notwithstanding, he
shows us how it is that God has promised to quicken us, and why he
attributes it unto his only mercy.

Now this is a saying which imports a very good and excellent lesson: for
they which confess, that they can not be saved but by the grace of God, yet
notwithstanding how soever it is, they cease not to overthrow the grace of God,
in extolling their merits, or else in making them selves believe that God has
promised them to be so kind unto them, because they have deserved it. It is
requisite then that we know with David, what it is that has moved and stirred
up God to promise to quicken us: to wit, to maintain us. For this word to
Quicken, imports all whatsoever concerns our estate and salvation. It is
because he is good, and never sought the cause otherwise but in his goodness.
When then we are enforced to confess that it is God which mainteineth us, we
must also forthwith confess that God has done it for his promise sake, and
for that he has reveled it as a testimony in his word. Moreover, see wherein
a great number of people are too too grossly deceived: that is, that God
promises too maintain and conserve us, accordingly as we are worthy thereof,
or accordingly as every man shall deserve. And hereupon, as I have already
said, we darken the grace of God, and feign through arrogancy, I know not what
presumption, that it seems, that we our selves are the cause why God
favors us, and that the same comes at the least, partly of our selves.
And therefore we ought so much the more thoroughly to consider of that which
David speaks of in this place. Thy mercies, O Lord, are great, O quicken me
according to thy testimonies.

He says not only, O Lord, I am conserved by thee, because thou have
promised: but meaning to declare that it comes altogether freely, he shows
that God was not moved too make any such promise, ne yet was induced by any
occasion that he found in us, or that he took it on our behalf. No, no: but
because his mercies are great. So then, by this saying David teaches us, that
the promises of God are altogether free, that they hang not of our worthiness,
ne yet because God found some thing in us, why to love and succor us so: but
because he is good, and pitieth our miseries.

Lo what made him to offer himself so liberal to us, and consequently to
perform his promise. We must learn then to glorify our selves in the mere
grace of God, and not to attribute any thing whatsoever, either to our own
persons, or yet to our merits, for there is nothing at all in us. Now it
follows,

Many there are that trouble and persecute me: yet do I not swerve from thy
testimonies. Here David makes a protestation and complaint, too the end God
might the rather incline him self to hear, and help him. And that is,
according too that which he has already said. For if we will have God to
help us, it is good reason that we should patiently attend his leisure. And
in very deed he that shall presume to advance him self, or thinks that
God will have mercy upon him, and then lets him self to be overcome with
temtation, and becomes altogether desperate: he by this means suffers not
God too exercise his goodness as he has promised: but in thus doing, shuts
the gate against God as it were. Wherefore if we be moved to be revenged of
our enemies, to be our own caruers, as we say, in revenge and not tarry until
God does his office, do we think that he ought to help us? He that will
do justice with his own hand, and of his own private authority, will he
come to crave aid of the Magistrate, after that he has killed his enemy? If
so be then there be any man which thinks to be saved of him self, and yet
says unto God* Save me O Lord, this a very mockery. And therefore for this
cause David says in this place, Many there are, O Lord, which trouble and
persecute me: yet do I not swerve from thy statutes. David speaks not here to
boast him self, but it is to declare that he waited for the help of God: and
putting him self under his protection, trusted to obtain his request, because
he might boldly crave it of him. See then what a full boldness we may conceive
to have in calling upon God, and not to dout but that we shall obtain whatsoever
we pray for unto him according to his will: that is, he has pity of us: so
that, I say, we must always stay our selves upon his promises, as we see David
here has done. So then, let us here consider in the first place, that so often
as we come unto God, we must come unto him attending his good leisure, and not
to be shaken with what soever temptations shall come unto us, but we must
always seek after God, meditate continually upon his promises, and have them
always in mind: we must, I say, have all this, if we will have God to help
and defend us. Now, as I have already said, David bragged not here of his
virtues, but means only that he was not carried away with the iniquity of
men, to be even with them, or to cry quittance, as we say, that he was not
in haste to have that which was promised him, but held him self continually
quiet and still, attending pacie^tly to have God to accomplish that which he
had promised, touching the revenge of his enemies: even so, when as any shall
grieve and trouble us, yet must we not leave to follow our vocation, and to
persevere in the fear of God. For the greater part of us will always be full
of malice and unthankfulness, until such time as God has reformed us. So
then, when as we shall not have hurt any man, if they rise up against us in
arms, let us not be astonished thereat. And thus much for this. Now the other
is, that when our enemies shall be infinite in number, we must not be troubled
for all this: but let us know what the power of God is, and glorify him as he
ought to be glorified. And this is a very necessary point for us to learn: For
we must not be afeard of our own shadows, as we say. And therefore, if
there be two or three men which are in credit and authority, that shall make
war against us, we are so faint hearted before the blow come, as that it
seems unto us that we are utterly undone: even as though God were not strong
enough to help us. See how we through fond ignorance glory in the power of
men, and utterly overthrow the power and might of God, And therefore we ought
a great deal the better to consider of this place, where it is said, Many
there are, O Lord, which trouble and persecute me: yet do I not swerve from
thy law, neither yet have I forgotten it: That is to say, that although we
see an infinite number of people too rise up against us, that we see a
general conspiracy of the whole world, and of all the creatures therein, yet
let us not be too too much afeard, knowing that the power of our God shall be
sufficient enough to save and defend us. See what we have to note out of this
place, where it is said, It grieved me when I saw the transgressors: because
they kept not thy law.

Here David shows that, which we have already seen before: to wit, that it
grieved him more, to see the offenses which were committed against God, then
all the outrages which he bare in his own person. And this is also it, which
we ought to have in great recommendation. For if we be so fine and as it were
womannish, that we can abide nothing, and yet in the mean while have no care
how God is dishonored, his justice violated, and his commandments broken: I
beseech you do we not right well show, that we are so given too please our
selves, as that we even contemn his sacred majesty. If a man, meaning to
defend his honor even with tooth and nail as we say, and makes no account
too see the glory of God trodden under feet: if he be so gallant and hawtie,
as to be revenged for every injury, and can abide too hear the holy name of
God to be evil spoken off, his law to be cast under foot, does he not right
well show him self to be a very sensual and fleshly man? Yes surely, he is
no better then a brute beast. And therefore for this cause let us learn,
after the example of David to be chiefly grieved and vexed, when as we shall
see the commandments of God to be broken. It is the common and ordinary
fashion amongst us, too be extreemly vexed when as any injury is done unto
us, as if the honor or credit of any of us be touched, we are by and by in a
great heat, and desire nothing else but too follow the matter hoatly. And why
so? because we have no regard but to our own person. If one man shall rob
another, his choler or anger will not be apeased: he looks to his purse, his
meadows, his possessions, and to his houses, even as he shall be hindered either
in this thing or in that. Now, a man that can well rule his affections shall
never have so great regard to his honor, nor to his goods as he shall have
when as he shall see the righteousness of God to be violated. What? (shall he
say, even groaning in him self) ought men in this sort to pervert the
righteousness of God? shall men break and corrupt all order and equity? Lo,
say I, what it is that ought to touch us, and to make us very angry: that is,
when we see offenses committed against God, and not that which touches our
own persons. But what shall we speak of this: for very few there are which
have any care hereof. And yet for all that it is not in vain that David has
set down unto us this example: but to show how the children of God ought to
moderate their passions: that is, they should always begin at this end, to
be grieved and sorrowful to see the transgressors, which break, contemn, and
tread under foot the word of God, and this should be their chief grief and
sorrow which should crucify them, and not to have such regard to their own
persons as they have, but to let God always to be preferred before them
selves, and to let him to have the most sovereign degree, as he is most
worthy. Now if it grieueth us to see the transgressors, which tear in pieces,
and break al justice and policy, it is certain, that we should also be
grieved at the evil which we know to be in our selves. For every man is to
judge of him self without exception. As for those which will say, Oh see, I am
not grieved as touching mine own person: and in very deed, I care not so much
for my self, as I am grieved to see men thus horribly to offend the majesty
of God, and yet they themselves will take leave to commit as great or else
greater villainies and wickedness, the^ the rest: and yet when they have thus
said, they will cover their own vices, and flatter the^ selves when they have
offended his majesty, whereas they should lay the^ wide open: now in deed
these men show the^ selves to be right hypocrites. And why so I beseech you?
because they are not grieved at the transgressors, when as they see the glory
of God impaired, his service not observed and his righteousness contemned: But
rather persecute the persons, and hate not the vices which are nourished, and
purposely maintained in them. For what show soever they make of condemning the
evil, yet it may be easily seen that they are no whit touched therewith. And
by this they right well show, that they know not what it is to be grieved as
they ought. Now this is not to do as we ought: For whatsoever show we shall
make of the great zeal we have to the honor and glory of God, we shall very
well see, that there is nothing but hypocrisy and dissimulation in us, if we
look indifferently into the matter. Lo here what we have to note out of this
place. Now David says in the end.

Consider, O Lord, how I love thy commandments: quicken me according unto
thy loving kindness. Here David does nothing else but sets down more
manifestly that which was spoken of heretofore, Consider O Lord, I love thy
commandments, he speaks not only of that which is said unto us, that we
must love our neighbor, live chastely, honor our father and mother, do wrong
to none: but under these words, he comprehends all the doctrine, wherewith
God means to govern his people, and church, as we have already handled. Now
in this doctrine, are contained the promises, which witness unto us his
goodness: yea and they have the chiefest place, because that God showing
himself unto us to be our father, will not give us over for any thing:
for so much as we be assured of our eternal salvation, and that in this world
he has care over us, and our life is as it were committed unto him, so that
herein lies the whole substance, that after he has pardoned us of our
sins, he allows us for righteous, and will also govern us with his holy
spirit. See then what it is, that is contained in the testimonies of God. And
so David in sum, protests in this verse, that he always walked in this
love of God which he found in his promises. This is it which he protests,
and thereupon says, Quicken me according unto thy mercy.

If David then loved the commandment of God and his testimonies, wherefore
desires he not to be quicke^^ed according to his merits? And if it be so that
he has deserved, why has he recourse to the mercy of God? Now he very well
shows, that he meant not too boaste of his virtues neither yet of any such, I
know not what perfection, to have fulfilled the law of God: but he had a
special regard, as I have already said, to the content of God his promises.
He alleges not here that he had deserved to be helped: but he desired to be
defended according to the mercy of God. In this point he sets before us his
example, to the end we might follow him, as this is also the meaning of the
holy Ghost, when as he spoke by the mouth of David. Now he goes on for a
conclusion and says,

Thy word is true from everlasting and all the judgments of thy righteousness
endure for evermore. That is to say, thy just judgments are everlasting: or
else, thy judgments are always righteous. Here David, in sum, means to
signify, that he so stayed him self upon the word of God, as that he had
set his heart upon it, yielded him self wholly unto it, and bestowed all his
thoughts and wits on it. And why did he so? says he, The beginning of it is
true, and the righteousness thereof endures for evermore. As if he should
have thus said, Thou, O Lord, art true in thy word, and shall always be found
so, and afterward, It is nothing but righteous, it is true from the beginning
and thy righteousness shall endure unto thend, and with out end. See how the two
borders or limittes of the word of God are laid out. When as we shall seek
for this word, we must make a destinction and difference, between truth, and
righteousness, with this resolution, see how God shows him self true and
righteous. And the farther we go on, the better shall we find his word to be
such: so that after we have thoroughly unripped and examined it, we shall not
have one syllable, where righteousness, and truth, will not show them selves.
Even so may we always attribute this title to the word of God, as David
here shows us. In sum, when as we would have a perfect assurance, to be
confirmed, and strengthened in all temptations, so that the devil shall never
be able to take fast hold upon us: let us have this regard, to stay our
selves chiefly upon the word of God, and therewith to arm us, attributing
thereto these true titles which are here set down, that there is nothing in it
but all truth and righteousness. And therefore this ought greatly to content
us, to assure our selves of God, not doubting but that he will grant us the
grace, that when he has once brought us into the way of salvation, that he
will continually conduct and govern us, and hold us with a mighty strong
arm, until such time as he has brought us to that end whereunto he has
called us.

According too this holy doctrine, let us prostrate our selves before the
majesty of our good God, in acknowledging our offenses, beseeching him that it
would please him to make us better to feel our miseries then we have
heretofore felt them, to the end we may lay our selves open unto him And that
we may in the mean while attain too that remedy, as to crave pardon of him
for them: not douting but that he will grant us pardon for them according to
our desire, through the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, albeit we
are miserable sinners: And also that he will through his holy spirit so purge
us from our sins, as that we desire nothing else but to be confirmed unto his
righteousness, to come unto him, and to aduau^ce us thereunto daily more and
more, until such time as he has coupled us unto that holiness of life,
whereunto he continually exhorts us. That he will not only grant unto us
this grace, but also unto all people and nations of the earth, etc.

The xxi. Sermon upon the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm.
SCHYN.
Princes have persecuted me without cause: but my heart stands in awe of thy
word.
I am as glad of thy word: as one that finds great spoils.
I hate falsehood and abhor it: but thy law do I love.
Seven times a day do I praise thee: because of thy righteous judgments.
They that love thy law, shall have great prosperity: and they shall have no
hurt.
Lord I have trusted in thy saving health: and have done thy commandments.
My soul has kept thy testimonies: and I love them exceedingly.
I have kept thy commandments and testimonies: for all my ways are before
thee.
WHen as men shall trouble us, and do us many injuries, or else any way griue
and vex us, yet are there two things too lead us too walk wickedly without
the fear of God. The one is, that it will seem that God has not compassion of
us, to help us. The other, that we will be more afearde of men then in deed
we ought: For we imagine that all is in their hand, and that they may do all
things at their own pleasure and as them selves list, do God what he can to
the contrary. Lo here, I say what it is that he hinders us from perseuering
in the fear of God: That is, That when men trouble us with injuries,
violences, and extortions, we are straightwayes discouraged. And so we are
here thoroughly too consider of this place where David says that he stood in
awe of the word of God, although princes persecuted him without a cause: and
in deed, we ought even then most specially too weygh it, when as we fee the
mightiness of men to astonish us, and our enemies to be in great credit and
authority, yea that it seem we are even as sheep in the jaws of woulfes,
that we have no mean too resist their violence, but that they may do
whatsoever seems, good-vnto them, in so much that no man dares once to open
his mouth against them. When as, I say, our enemies shall have all this, and
be thus highly lifted up over us, that we know not what shall become of us:
then it is a hard matter for us too conceive, what the help which God has
promised us is worth, so that we are overtaken with this fear, to say, O see
we are utterly undone, all our cause is clean cast to the ground. And yet in
the mean while we never once think, that they are but Gnattes, or else when
we shall esteem most of the^, that they are but Frogs leaping and skipping
up and down here below. Neither yet have they so mighty thighs and legs
as that they are able too iustle against God: but that whenever he shall
stretche forth his hand, it shall throw down even into the depth, whatsoever
me^ shall of purpose with all their accomplices, or aftely or wickedly devise,
and whatsoever power they shall be any way able to make. See then what we
have here especially too note: that is, that whenever we shall fall into the
hands of our enemies, and that it shall seem they might at their pleasure
bring to pass whatsoever they listed, so that there remained no way to
withstand them: yet let us look unto this infinite power of God, and not too
doubt, but that when it shall please him to deliver us, that the Devil ne yet
all his rabble of maintayners shall be able to do any thing against us. And
although all the creatures in the world lifted them selves up against us, yet
are they not able too do us any hurt so long as God is on our side. And thus
we must I say, receive the grace of God, which he has promised us, to the
end we might not doubt, that all the world can do us any harm, when as he
shall have taken us into his protection. And see also I pray you whether it is
that the Scripture leads, us, Although, says David, Psalm. 3.6.
an hundredth thousand men did set them selves against me, yet will not I be
afraid. And why so? Because the Lord is with me. And again, Psalm. 23.4.
If I should walk in the shadow of death, so long as I shall look unto God,
and see his Sheepcrooke before me, I will not be afraid but be assured that
I shall live. Romans 8.13.
Saint Paul also comprehends all this, speaking not only of this present
life, but of the health of our souls likewise, when as he says, If God be on
our side, who shall be against us.

I cannot deny, but that we shall have a great number of enemies, and Satan
will labor by all means possible to hurt us: we shall have great store of his
supporters to go a bout to cast us down headlong into the bottomless pit:
and yet all they shall do nothing, when as we shall be in the safekeeping of
our God. Now this is the sum, which we are too gather hereby, in the first
place of this text. But yet we must go on a great deal farther. For David
does not only show unto us, that we ought highly too esteem of this mighty
power, and great goodness of God, wherewith he has promised to help us in
our need: but also aduertiseth and exhorts us not too turn aside from his
obedience, for any hurt that men can do unto us. Now it is very true, that
the one hangs upon the other. For how can it be that we should have hearts
too serve GOD, when as we see the whole world too be against us, and we
always in danger to be hurt: That is to say, Let us pot our trust in God,
although the alarm and assaults be given us on every side: For otherwise it
shall be impossible for us too stand stoutly to it, without we be thoroughly
persuaded, that God is sufficient to defend us: yea when as we see all the men
in the world, to set them selves against us: but that we trusting in his power,
cease not to follow that which he has commanded us: notwithding all the lets
that men can possibly lay before us. Moreover, we must give our minds to this
word of God, as here it is said, I stand in awe of thy word, For David means
not that he would have God to show himself in a visible manner, that he might
come unto him to do him homage: but he is contented that God has showed unto
him his will and pleasure, and holds him self well pleased therewith. And
even so must we also do. For there are a great many of people, which will brag
that they fear God, and profess it with open mouth. And yet notwithstanding,
see how God calls us unto him by his word, and we for all that are no whit
moved therewith: yea we scarcely vouchsafe once too open our mouths to declare
that we are contented to obey him. Where then is that fear whereof we so brag,
since the word, wherein the majesty of God appears, is so contemned of us?
See then wherefore we ought a great deal the more to consider of this manner
of speaking which David here uses, that he stands in awe of the word of
God, and that he desired none other visible presence: but it suffised him that
God had only spoken, and he made good accounte thereof. Now, if we do not
thus, we shall ever be let from following that which God has commanded us,
neither shall we ever have the hearts, to discharge our selves perfectly of our
duties. Contrariwise, they that shall be resolved as David was, only to give
their minds to the word of God, shall overcome all lets and stops: Moreover
after they have walked aright, do they see that men murmr against the^ for
it, that it seems that they for their well doing shall be reco^pensed with
evil, and that this thing and that is mischeously wrought against them? that
they must needs languish in long attending without spating, yea that they
have kindled the fury of men against them, without any occasion given by them?
do they see, I say, all this? And if they do thus, it is very well: for then
stand they in awe of the word of God, knowing that they shall not be without
the help of God, as also our savior Christ exhorts us. Fear not says he
them which may kill the body: Mat. 10.28.
but I will show you whom you ought to fear, to wit: fear him who has both
soul and body in his subjection.

When as then you shall look unto your God, then shall you not need to fear
whatsoever men go about to cause you to turn aside, and to withdraw you from
the right way. And thus we see in sum, that it is our infirmity, or rather
our infidelity which hinders us, when as men threaten us, when as we see the
wicked practizes which are imagined against us, and that we are troubled and
tormented without cause. For if we still looked unto God, this should never be
able to withdraw us, but that we should always remain constant to do that
which he commands us. And by this also we may see, how al to the contrary
reigns at this day in the world, and that there is very little fear of the
word of God. For so that we can hold the favor of men, in doing our duty
any way: well, this goes for payment: But if there blows an ill wind, and
that we perceive any evil practice, or that we be threatened, and that the
ungodly bear the sway: we are incontinent astonyed, yea and that in such a
fear, as that we are not able once to stir a finger. And that which is more,
to gratify the wicked whom we see to be in authority, we will make no bones
at it, as we say, to offend the majesty of God. And from whence comes this?
but that we look not unto his word, as here it is set down? We are then even
convinced of infidelity when as we assure not our selves of the help of our
God, to do that which he has ordained, and that which is our duty to do: that
we have not this invincible power to resist the assaults of men. And why so?
Because it is most certain, that we have not earnestly stood in awe of the
word of God, which ought to be as an assured fortress, and not to make any
account of whatsoever that Satan can any way craftily invent against us.

Now after that David has thus spoken, he goes on and says,

I am as glad of thy word, as one that finds great spoils. That is to say,
he gladded more in the promises of God, then in all the riches in the world,
as we have seen in the nienth part, beginning with the letter TETH, which
has been in that place song, That he esteemed more of the word of God, then
of all the gold and Silver in the world. And here he says, that he
rejoices to hear God speak, more then if he had sound all the goods in the
world, that all the riches in the world were nothing to him in respect of it,
It seems greatly at the first sight that here is some contrariety, as to
stand in fear and awe of the word of God, and also to rejoice in it. For joy
and fear are mere contraryes. But we have already declared what it is that
David means by this fear: not that he was abashed too serve God, ne yet
that he douted of his salvation: But it was to bridle him and to hold him in
obedience, and also to declare, that God gave him such a constancy against all
the men in the world, as that when he sees all the creatures of God to lift
the^ selves up against him, yet that he ceased not to go on to do that which
God had committed unto him, and that which he saw was his duty to do. To be
short, let us then hold this for a resolute point, that David had not such a
fear as made him fierce and cruel, ne yet which made him to fly from the
presence of God: but he so reverenced that, which God spoke, as that he stood
boldly at defyaunce with all men, declaring that he made no reckoning of their
fury, poison, nor yet of all their deadly enmities. David, I say, cared for
none of all this, And why so? Because he so reverenced and honored God, as
that he fully reposed him self upon his word.

Now, when as we have such a fear, it is nothing contrary to the joy which
David here speaks off: But it is rather an excellent accord, or sweet
hermony: for it is impossible for us rightly to give our selves unto God, and
to obey him in such sort as we ought without we love him, and that his word be
pleasant and sweet unto us. And see wherefore David does not only say, that
the word of God was more dear unto him, then either gold or silver: but he
says, that it was sweeter unto him then honey. He sets down these two
things which ought too be coupled together: to wit, that the word of God ought
too be more dear and sweet unto us, then all other things, and that we ought
to take all our delight and pleasure therein, desiring nothing else, but to
order and hold our selves to it: knowing that whatsoever God has, is to this
end, too communicate the same unto us, that we might taste of his bounty and
love.

Now we see that David did not without cause join this joy: which he
conceived of the word of God, with fear: signifiing that he stood not in
awe of God perforce, and with a slavish fear, as we say: but he did it in
acknowledging him too be his God and Savior, and settling him self wholly upon
his promises. And thus much for this second verse. Now he adds soon after:

I hate falshod and abhor it: but thy law do I love. This verse is not
here added but to good purpose: For David shows that we can never be glad
(as he has declared how he has been) neither yet stand in awe of the word
of God, without we detest falshod. Now, we of our own nature are so nusseled
in vanity, as that it is lamentable. The law of God then shall never come so
fully home unto us, as that we may justly say, that we earnestly hear it, and
receive it from the heart, until such time as we have striued against our
fleshly affections, that is too say, against all whatsoever is in our nature,
because it is all but vanity. In sum, David, after he had spoken of this
joy, which he had conceived of the promises of God, wherein he declares unto
us his goodness: after he had spoken of the fear which we owe him, to become
subject unto him, and after that he had given him the authority which he
deserved above all other men and creatures: for a conclusion he adds, the
mean how to attain to all this: to wit, that we must eschew falshod, and
not only eschew, and hate it, but also detest it: yea, signifying that we
must greatly abhor it, so that we overcome all our wicked desires and tame
them, and all other our lusts which carry us away too wickedness, and withdraw
us from the obedience of God. So then, we see now, that natural men can never
be disposed to serve God, until such time as they have striue^ against the
vanity of their own nature, and that not only once, or twice, but also too
continue it all the days of their life. For what are the lusts which are in
us, and which do wickedly lead us from the right way? In very deed, the more
part are so prevented with them, as that they feel them not: or else think,
that it is nothing so marvelous thick darkness remains in them. As for
those which have a desire with all their heart to forsake them, yet shall we
find them also to be overmuch nusseled in them. Moreover, if all the men in
the world were examined, and an inquisition made, I confess that we shall
find the most wicked sometimes to be remorsed and stoong, and to be inwardly
pricked and constrained manger their hearts to have loathing to do evil. They
have an eye unto it by fittes: and yet they cease not too follows the evil
with a continual course, although between whiles they have a lothing of it.
And we must not greatly meruell at this: For carnal men which are not governed
by the spirit of God, are carried away with their wicked affections, as with a
fury, so that their whole reason is altogether brutish. And even they shall very
well have an hatred of their evil, but yet not so fly from it, as that we
shall not be able to say, that they have such a fear of God as is to be
required, too forsake them selves, and wholly to submit themselves unto his will.

Se here what we have to consider out of this place. But in the mean while
one thing is to be observed, that David makes a comparison between the law
of God, and all whatsoever that men can imagine on their own head, with all
their reasons and desires: as if he should have said, That there is but only
rule that is good, and worthy to be beloved, to wit, the law of God. When then
our life shall be conformable to the word of God, all shall go well: But we
shall not withdraw our selves never so little from it: as that we shall not by
and by royle overthwart all the fields. And why so? For all our truth and
sincerity is enclosed within this rule which God has set down unto us. We
ought then to bear this honor unto the word of God, too hear it as it is
laid out unto us, and to follow it in all simplicity: or else so soon as we
shall decline from it never so little, see, we are quite out of the way of
salvation, so that we cannot chose but to be confounded, until such time as we
are entered again into the way, which God has showed us. Now he adds:

Seven times a day do I praise thee: because of thy righteous judgments.
Here we may take this word Judgment, for the manner which God holds in
governing the world, and the punishments which he lays upon the ungodly: as
also for the grace which he causes them to feel which call upon him, and
which walk sincerely before him. For the holy Scripture oftentimes when it
speaks of the Judgments of God, means all this. But because that in this
Psalm, the Judgments, are for the most part taken for the statutes, and
ordinances that are contained in the law of God: I gladly mean too handle it
at this present thus: that is, That David praised GOD, because he had given
unto his people a law which was both just and full of equity, and that
therein he had whereof to be glad, and to praise and magnify him.

Lo here a place well worthy the noting. For by these words David does us
too wit, that we cannot praise GOD, so long as we are not instructed in
his word, our mouth shall be closed up, and our heart looked fast up,
so that a man shall not pull from us one good word, which may turn too the
praise of God.

And to prove this to be so, we see that the unfaithful shall not only be
dumb too praise God: But they will also fall out with him, that whatsoever
shall come from their mouths, shall be to blaspheme God, and to murmur against
his divine majesty. As for the ignorant, they shall be so blockish as that they
shall have no desire to praise God: and if they do praise him, it shall be
but for fashions sake, because it is but a mocking of God and his word. How
then may we praise God in good earnest and without hypocrisy? Forsooth. even
when as we shall be instructed in his ordinances, when as we shall have
known what care he has of our salvation, how he governs his Church, how
he embaceth him self, to apply him self unto our gross capacities, and to
make himself to be familiarly acquainted with us. When then we shall see God to
have such a care over us to instruct us, that he has so rightly ruled our
life, that he so purueieth for all our necessities as that we want nothing:
ought not we to give our minds unto him, yea even to be inflamed wholly to
magnify his holy name, and to be ravished with that desire which David here
speaks of.

Let us now see what we have to gather in sum out of this place: and thereby
we may see how slenderly we have at this day profited in the School of God.
For, whence comes this circumspection? Where is that zeal of ours in
praising of God, which David says, that he had? Seeing that sarcely one word
can be pulled from us, when any speech shall be of praising God, yea, were it
not for fashion sake and contenaunce only. This is far from continuing in
it, and far from extending our whole study thereto, as to make it the most
principal thing that ought to be in our whole life. Now we are hereby
convinced of our slender studving and meditating in the word of God because we
are so cold and negligent in praising of him, and without having a greater
care in acknowledging his benefits bestowed upon us. And that which is more,
Let us thoroughly consider that David says not only, that he was stirred up
to prayer unto God for once, and so continued it for certain days, but he
says daily, and afer, seven times: that is, that he continued in it all his
life long. For this word Seven, is taken in the holy Scripture for a marvelous
perseverance, when as men continue it, and are not drawn away for any cause
whatsoever, but do always hold the^ selves thereto. And this is the meaning of
the Scripture, for this number of Seven. Now David protesting that he daily
praised God seven times, means that he exercised him self therein, from the
morning unto the evening. And after that, he exhorts all other men too have
the like desire and zeal too praise God. So then, let us compare our selves
with David, and we shall find, that we have learned very little out of the
word of God, considering that we are so slothful in praising of him. And yet
for all that we are greatly too give him, yea infinite thanks, when as we
shall have known his grace and goodness toward us, in that he is so
careful to govern and order our life, and too show us the way of salvation.
The Papists have applied this saying to their set hours: and have laid hold
only on the first part of the verse, saying, That they praise God seven times
a day, when as they sing their Mattaines, Primes, their third hour, sixth
hour, at midnight, their euensong and Compline. See here how God shall be
well praised seven times a day as they think. Yea, yea, good enough, As
though God would call back that, which he has pronounced by his prophet
Isaiah, This people, says he, honor me with their lips, but their hearts are
very far from me. Isai. 29.23.
He goes on farther and says, that he will show them that he cannot abide
such mockeryes, and to be so dallyed withal. See here how God threateneth
the Jews with an horrible vengeance, because they only praised him with the
mouth. Now, we know, what their set hours which their Monks, Friars, and
Priests do sing, or rather which they bleate and houle out in their Churches,
are that they are without either understanding, devotion, and any good desire
whatsoever. And they think it not enough that they show them selves in deed
openly to mock God: but their deuilish doctrine also emporteth the same, that
they cannot but merit, having this final meaning to praise God. So that when a
Chanon has put on his Grayamisse, and Surplisse, and going out of his Chamber
with this final intent: and yet anon after thinks of his Gossip, his cheer,
and his pastime: yea that he play the Hypocrite there, yet forsooth he must
needs merit. It is very true, that they will confess, that there is venial
sin entermedled amongst: but yet that the same cannot hinder them from
meriting, when as they had this final intent to praise God: yea and so also,
as that when they come home again unto their house, they think them selves to
have discharged their duty. To be short, so that at the beginning and the end,
they had some motion to devotion, it is enough. And is not this wholly to mock
God, and to dally with him, more then a man would dandle a young Child. But
see how this miserable cursed people have perverted all the holy Scripture, in
mingling it with so shameful things that even the very Heathen, when as they
shall have gotten the understanding of the least spark of truth, will be
ashamed too see such service in the Papacy too be called godly service. When
it is all after this manner, I pray you what praising of GOD shall there
remains? Let us then understand, that these people are very far from David:
and that if we would take example by them, they right well show, that they
know not what it is too praise God, but rather profane his holy name, when as
they will thrust in such abhominatio^s amongst, as we daily see them to commit
against his word. Now David adds soon after:

They which love thy law, shall have great prosperity, and they shall have no
hurt. Here David being led by the spirit of God, as a true Prophet,
contenteth not him self with speaking of the benefits which he had received,
But instructs others of that, which they have to do. Although in truth, all
the protestations which we have seen here, are full of doctrine. And that it
is so, we see that David might very well have praised God in his heart, without
declaring what he had done: But it was needful that he might be set as a
Glass before our eyes, to the end we might be led too follow him. But yet
in this verse, he more expressly sets forth the office and duty of a
prophet, when as he says, They which love thy law, shall have great
prosperity, and they shall have no hurt.

Now by this he shows unto us that we are even in good earnest accursed,
when as we give our selves up unto our own fleshly liking, because we would
be esteemed amongst men, and take pleasure in our pastimes and delights. And
why so? Because we shall be always tormenmented with unquietness and grief,
so that we shall never be at peace and rest. And although we verily think our
selves to be assured of victory all the days of our life, yet shall we reele
this way and that, and willingly hurt our selves, so that it should seem we
had a will too break both our arms and legs, and in the end, neck and all.
And the reason is, for that we follow not the way which God has set before us.
Let us then consider, what the meaning of David is, to wit, that we must not
make reckoning of any assurance here in this world, except we love the word
of God: yea and that so to, as that we desire nothing else, but to be wholly
ordered by it, to submit and hold our selves thereto, without being withdrawn
by the intisementes of Satan, and with all the temptations of our corrupt
flesh and nature shall lay before our eyes. In very deed it may very well
seem at the first sight, that experience teaches us the contrary of that
which David speaks. For who are most grieved, vexed, and troubled? Forsooth
even the children of God, who have all the shame and offenses done unto them?
Even the self same men. For it is said, That our savior Christ is as it were
a badge and mark of all these contrarieties, we must then have all the ungodly
to be our enemies. In sum, all they which intend too serve God, cannot escape
from shame and slanderous reports, from being despised, troubled, and
outraged, and to endure great numbers of iniuryes and violences: Lo how the
Children of God are entreated and handled in this present life. And so by this
reason, it seems that David promises us here, that which we have not. But
we are here too consider, that David promises us not such a rest, as shall be
as it were an earthly Paradise. He speaks of this true prosperity, which
the Children of God have, when they are contented to serve him: that in all
their griefs: yea in all their anguishes and troubles, they run only unto
him, and lay all their cares upon him, not doubting but that he will help
them: and afterward, heerevpon not too fear, whatsoever that mortal men can
imagine or devise against them.

When as then we shall have such a peace as this, although our estate and
condition be in the view of men the most miserable in the whole world, yet
ought we too be thoroughly contented, knowing that God will raise us up, and
make us to triumph over all our enemies, although we thought we should fall
even to be crusshed and utterly beaten too poulder, yet will God be ready too
uphold us, Psam. 91.
and make us to be blessed. As it is said in the 91. Psalm. That God will not
suffer his faithful too tumble over and over, neither yet so to fall as that
they shall not be able to relieve them selves again: but will rather send his
Angels to lift them up into the Air. In very deed, yet shall it not be so,
as that we shall not sometimes hurt our selves: howbeit the assaults shall not
be such as to frush us deadly: how ever it be we shall in the end feel in
what sort God shall have assisted us by his Angels. This is the mean and the
manner too feel by effect, that which David speaks off.

Now in truth, the wicked shall never be able to take any such hold: because
they are not worthy of it. For by reason they know not what God, nor his word
is, without it be to hate him, and too anger him: it is meet that they prove
by experiment the contrary of that which is here spoken of by David: to wit,
because they love not the law of God, it is good reason that they should be
inwardly troubled, and grievously tormented without end. Now it follows,

Lord I have trusted in thy saving health: and have done thy commandments.
Here David more lively expresses and declares that which I have already
touched: to wit, that our affection in serving of God, proceeds of the trust
which we have in him, in believing his promises, If then we conceive not that
God is our savior, and so by that means trust that he will help us, it is
impossible that we should be inflamed too serve him. It is true, we may very
well have some feeling of the duty which we owe unto him, and be some what
touched therewith, although in deed few there are which think thereof: but admit
it be so, yet will no man for all that freely and of his own accord, say, O
come, Let us serve, yea let us serve our God, even until such time as we are
fully assured of the good which he means, and is ready to procure us, and of
the true and full hope of our salvation, thoroughly imprinted in our hearts.
And so let us rightly consider, that they which remember no more of that which
is preached unto them but this, to say, Lo this is it which GOD commands
us: we must either do this or that: Truly this is no point of true
Christianity. And why so? Because the principallest point of Christianity,
is to know the goodness of God, and the mercy which he uses toward us.

Lo, this is I say, the true knowledge which we must learn in the School
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and hold us to that which he has declared unto
us. And besides, we are also to consider of that which he commands us: but
his promises must be preferred, and have the cheifest place. And by this also
we are showed, that in the popish religion, the principal doctrine of
Christianity is put out and made nothing: Because that when the Papists
creake and chatter their prayers, making as though they presented their
supplications unto God, they say, that they must never assure them selves of
that which they pray for. And the cause is, for that they look not unto the
free promises of God. And how so? Behold an hypocrite shall step up and preach
nothing else but that which every man is bound to do. He will preach unto
you of Chastity, he will make you another Sermon of Alms, one of this matter,
another of that: and yet for all this, we know not what it is to believe in
God. Then do we a great deal less know what it is to call upon him in full
assurance, to say, God is our father, he allows us for his children, because
he has us as he would wish, and that our sins are forgiven us through the
grace of our lord Jesus Christ. There is no whit of this in popery: and
therefore it is impossible that there should be one word of good and sound
doctrine in it, and profitable unto salvation. Let us then well consider of
this saying of David, O Lord, I have trusted in thy saving health, and have
done thy Commandments. Now in the end he says:

My soul has kept thy testimonies: and I love them exceedingly.
I have kept thy commandments and testimonies: for all my ways are before
thee.
After that David has sufficiently protested, that he loves the word of God,
that it was so sweet and pleasant unto him, as that all his study and delight
consisted therein: he concludes and says, That his soul had kept it, as if he
should have said, O Lord, in that I was given to serve thee, it was not with my
hands and feet only, but because I loved thy word, yea and that with all my
soul, and I take my whole delight therein. For when the Hebrews mean too
show a pure and sound lyking, they say, My soul has done this, or that,
that is as much to say, as I have done it with all mine heart. Lo then an
hearty service which David here expresses: and this is yet a point which
ought thoroughly too be considered of: For we see how men are given to play
the hypocrites: even too set a very fair outward show of the matter, and by
that means think them selves to be discharged before God.

Now we must begin farther of, as David here shows us, that is, we must
keep the word of God in our hearts. Wherein he confirms the matter,
which we have already heretofore handled: to wit, that the question is not,
to have GOD simply to teach us, whereby we might know what he requires at our
hands, and what our duty is toward him: but he builds upon his promises.
Howbeit David having said, that his soul kept the co^ma^deme^ts of God, because
he loved the^, by this which he adds sone after he joins the promises with
the co^mandeme^ts, saying For all my ways are before thine eyes, It is true,
that he shows by these words, that except he had been sure that god protected
him, it had not been possible for him to have had that true lyking to have
served his majesty. And hereupon hangs the second point, that God held
him always in his presence, because he should not have leave to do evil: as
if he should have said, O Lord, because I know that no man is able too
hide him self from thee, Lo why I give my self wholly too fear and serve
thee. And too say the truth, what is the cause that the ungodly take such
liberty, to commit and devise such vilanous and grievous Acts, as that they
them selves are ashamed off, yea that it makes the very hears of their head
to stand upright: What is the cause of this? The reason is, for that they know
not that God sees them, for if they were sure of that, they would be somewhat
moved with the fear of his majesty. So then, in that the faithles war thus
against God, and take liberty too do wickedly: it is, because they think that
God sees them not, according too that saying in the Scripture, The wicked man
has said, God sees not, he knows nothing of that which is done here on
the earth.

I mean not that the wicked do thus openly speak: yet for all that they
think no less: as by experience we see, for they think that God marketh not
all their iniquities, neither yet that it is needful for them once too make
any account of their sins. Howbeit David says clean contrary, That because
he knew that all his ways were before God, therefore he kept his
commandments. See also why the scripture, in speaking of the holy fathers
which lived sinceerly, says, That they walked before God: to wit, they had
this consideration, that they knew that God did see them: and therefore they
walked, as if they had been in his presence. And this imports, that they
took not such liberty as they themselves thought good, but that they wholly
ordered them selves according to the will of God, as he had declared it by his
word. See then David his meaning. And even so must we also do, if we will
have our life and conversation to be well ordered: to wit, to know that God
sees us, and therefore that we cannot fly from his hand, but must submit our
selves unto it, albeit we will not do it freely and of our own accord. And
so let us willingly be contented to be, ruled by him, being certifyed of his
love and goodness toward us, to the end we might in truth make this
protestation which David here makes.

According too this holy doctrine, let us humbly prostrate our selves before
the majesty of our good god, in acknowledging our offenses, beseeching him
that it would please him to make us to feel the power of his word, in such
sort, as his holy Prophet here shows us, and so too feel it, as that we
may wholly submit our selves unto it: Knowing that when it shall come in
question for us too remitte our selves, and cleave unto him as he requires,
that we must forsake the whole world, and all our carnal affections which
any way hinder us from coming unto him: to the end we may so climb up unto
his majesty, as that not fearing the world nor all his assaults, we may
put our whole confidence in his merciful goodness, and boldly present us
before his face: to the end the may receive us, so that we might always be
governed through his holy spirit, until such time as he has brought us unto
that perfection, whereunto he calls and bids us. That he will not only
grant unto us this grace, but also etc.

The xxii. Sermon upon the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm.
THAV.
Let my complaint come before thee, O Lord: and give me understanding
according to thy word.
Let my supplication come before thee and deliver me according unto thy word.
My lips shall speak of thy praise when thou have have taught me thy
statutes.
My tongue shall treat of thy word: for all thy co^mandementes are righteous.
Let thine hand help me: for I have chosen thy commandments.
I have longed for thy saving health, O Lord: and in thy law is my delight.
Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee: and thy judgments shall help
me.
I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost: seek thy servant for I do
not forget thy commandments.
THese eight last verses, which arche knitting up of the whole Psalm, do show
unto us that, which we oftentimes have before seen: to wit, that David his
chiefest desire was this, to be duly and truly instructed in the word of God,
and therein to be confirmed: for he took such pleasure in it, as that all the
rest was little, or nothing worth unto him in respect of the same. Now it is
very true, that he has already sufficiently spoken of this matter: and yet
that which he presently adds is not supperfluous, especially, if we consider
in what sort our carnal desires rule us. For that is it which lets us that
we can not only have that feruency which David had, to seek thoroughly to
profit in the school of God: but we scarsely have so much as any small desire.
And therefore as I have already said, we are too too much nuzzeled in our
earthly affections. Wherefore this is a lesson which ought many times too put
us in mind: that if we will pray unto God according unto his will, we must
not come unto him with a desire of our own, to say whatsoever comes in our
brain, yea and to leave out the most principal part: but we must begin
with this saying: to wit, that it would please God so to instruct us, as that
our life may be squared according to his law, and we to cleave so unto it, as
not to come with a double and twyfold heart. Although we are to strive against
the world, and our own nature, yet must we remain constant in this chiefly
to love the word of God. And therefore for this cause David here says,

Let my Complaint come before thee, O Lord: and give me understanding according
unto thy word. When he speaks of his complaint which he makes unto the
Lord, he shows that he made no cold prayer unto God, as we many times, and as
it were daily do but with great vehemence. I can not deny but that an hypocrite
may very well make complaint with a loud noise, and thrust out his weasaunt.
But David having here consideration of God, means not to make an outward show
before men. Wherefore, That he cried out aloude, imports as much as an
earnest testimony wherewith he was pricked forward. Now by this we see, that
he chiefly desired that which he craves: to wit, to have God to instruct him,
and to give him understanding. And in desiring this gift of God, he confesses
that he was of him self a very wretched blind soul* that he never
understood any thing, yea although he had the law in his hands, which he
might read, wherein was contained a true perfection of all wisdom, yet that
he still continued eue^ like a poor miserable blind wretch, except God
enlightened him. So then, let us understand that this is an especial gift
which God bestows upon us, when he opens our eyes, too make us understand
that which is showed in his word, whether we read it, or that it be preached
unto us. Yea, and let us not here make any exception, thinking our selves to
be more sharp witted, or abler then David was: but let us rather know, that
if he needed to beseech God to give him understanding, that we for our parts
have as great need. So then, it can not be chosen but that when God has
delivered unto us his word, and declared his will therein contained: and for
performance hereof inlighteneth our hearts by his holy spirit: for other ways
we shall have our cares beaten in vain: and then the doctrine which we have
heard will do us no good. Now that which follows, According unto thy word,
may two ways beset forth, According unto thy word: that is to say, that thou will make me wise. And after what manner? That I be altogether ruled by thee,
and do that which thou commaundest. This is a very true saying, for by this we
are admonished to hear God speak, and we again must suffer him to have
dominion over us: and not to be ouertake^, with this fooolish arrogancy, and
say, I have knowledge enough, I need not so much teaching. Wherefore, when as
God shall have spoken the word, let us pass it simply and without gainesaying.

This sentence then which I have spoken is very true but yet it agrees not
with the meaning of David, he yet with the plamenesse of the text. For he
craves here two things, the one in the first verse, the other in the second.
He says in the first verse, Let my complaint come before thee, that I might
be instructed according unto thy word. And afterward he adds*

(...) my supplication come be fore thee: and deliver me according unto thy
word. It is very true that he uses two sentences: but yet they are not
without a marvelous grace in one self same signification: and by this
repetition we may the better perceive that David meant not, but to have God to
grant either obboth his requests, according to the promises which he had made
him. See then, what the natural sense is of the first verse, O Lord, give me
understanding as thou have promised. And this is according unto the rule which
we have heretofore touched, that we ought not too crave of God any thing
whatsoever, without it be that which he has promised, yea so that we be
assured of his will. It is very true, that God deals very familiarly with us,
when as he calls us, to come unto him, as the father calls his children,
suffers us to pour abroad all our affections unto him, and to unburden them
as it were in his lap, as the scriptune makes mention and yet he means
notwithstanding that we should hold this modesty, not too crave of him any
thing whatsoever that seems good in our own eyes: but to discern of that
which best likes him. And how shall we know that? Forsooth by his promises.
Wherefore we must be well assured of our prayers; and not to crave of God at a
wild adventure, this thing, or that: but we must beseech him, and be certain
and sure that he will hear us. And how may this be done, seeing that no man
has been of his counsel, too say that we have any such certainty, except
he his self had told us, that it is his pleasure to grant us? So then, it
is requisite that al our prayers be conformable unto the promises of God, that
we gather together, I say, out of the holy scripture, al whatsoever he has
promised us, to the end we may that way have an entrance to make our
supplications, and prayers unto him. Now it remains for us to know, whether
David had the promise alone made unto him by God, or else, whether it be common
unto us all. No doubt of it God spoke not to David as to a private man: but too
declare in general that he would not miss to instruct all those which come
unto him in humility, and to ask nothing, but according unto his word. Since
then it is so, that God has spoken to us in general, declaring that he is
ready to play the part of a schoolemaister, if we will become as his
scholars: we may then say with David, O Lord, give me understanding according
to thy promise. Now we are here briefly to mark two notes. The first is, that
we are advertised to acknowledge our ignorance and rudeness. For if we crave
of God to be made wise, and then we think to become wise through our own
industry and power, this is a mere mockery. We muse then acknowledge our
selves to be unprovided both of wit and reason, if we will make this request
in truth: to wit, to have God to give us understanding. And thus much for the
first point. For the rest, we ought to know, that God desires but to receive
us with this condition: to wit, even when we shall be humbled and cast down. For
otherwise we will never abide to be instructed, whatsoever holy scripture we
have, because that in it he says, that it is his office to teach the humble
and meek, that it is as it were his very proper nature to open the eyes of the
blind, and to instruct those which are altogether ignorant, to gather together
the strayed sheep, and to bring them to the haven of salvation, when as they
are in the way of perdition. Since then it is so, that God takes all this upon
him self, let not us doubt but that he will hear all our requests. But what?
We see how cold we are. For we are so hindered with the things of this world
as that we leave out the principal. Now after that David had declared what he
chiefly desired, he goes on and says,

My lips shall speak of thy praise: when thou have taught me thy statutes.
Here he prosecuteth that which he began withal at the first: that is, to show
that he would not be unthankful, but that he would acknowledge the benefits
of God. It is very true that when we come unto God, it is not any thing
needful for us to make great outward shows, as though he knew them not
perfectly enough as of him self: but thus he means, that when we pray, he
would have us to say, that we will never hereafter be unthankful unto him:
and this needed not neither but to the end, the better to stir us up to do
our duties. And this also makes us to pray with a boulder courage, to feel
the fruit which shall come unto us, when as we shall have obtained that which
we have craved and desired. David then, in saying here, My lips, O Lord,
shall speak of thy praise, when thou have taught me thy statutes: he means
that he shall be disposed to praise God with open mouth. Now why speaks David
after this manner? In thus doing, he takes upon him, and stirs up him self
too such an acknowledgement, as he protests to make: and it is, as if he had
said: Go to now, when as God shall have showed me this favor to instruct me,
what is then my duty to do? Forsooth, I must even the^ praise him, for that I
ought to be thereto the more stirred up, and to be greatlier occasioned
therein. And since I desire God too teach me, what fruit shall I reap
thereby, when as he shall have called me unto the way of salvation? I shall
then have wherefore too sing praises unto his holy name, knowing the grace
which he has bestowed on me. See then how that in this protestation David
speaks not to bind God, through any recompense or service: but only
stirs his self up, and pricketh him self foreward as it were with a
spur, to the end he might be the better disposed, too receive the benefit
which God had promised him: and that he might know, that this benefit ought
not to be an occasion to make him unthankful unto him from whom he received
it. Howebeit we are here briefly to consider of two points. The one is, that
as God has liberally bestowed upon us his graces, so much the more ought we
to be ready to praise, and magnify him for ever. For furely this is all the
recompense that we are any way able to yield him, if so be, Psalm. 116.
it may be called recompense: howebeit he accepts it thankefully under this
title, as the scripture thereof makes mention. Since then it is so, if we
will not that the benefit which God has bestowed upon us, turn it self into
condemnation by reason of our unthankfulness, let us be well advised to
discharge our selves toward him: and so, when as he shall have laid open
his goodness upon us, let us not be forgetful of it, neither yet let our
mouths be closed up, but even to acknowledge the same unto him.

And thus much as touching the first point. The second is, That he which shall be
well and duly instructed in the word of God, let him show it, yea in
glorifying his name all the days of his life. They then which are so cold in
praising of God, do right well show, that they never felt what the power of the
word is. And thy so? Because it is impossible for us to have any taste of the
word of God, to receive thereby any instruction, but that we must needs be
moved and ravished therewith to sing praises unto his glorious name. Whatsoever
he be then that shall show him self negligent herein, sufficiently enough
declares that he knows not what the word of God is, albeit he protest him
self to be a Christian. Let us now come to those, which are not only dumb
them selves: but that, which is also worse, which would shut up the mouths of
others, to the end it might not be lawefull for them too praise God. And yet
forsooth these men are so shameless, as that they would notwithstanding be
taken for good Christians: but by these means they declare them selves too be
the deadly enemies of God, yea worse then the very deuilles. And why so?
Forsooth they think it not enough that they have nothing profited in the
school of God, neither yet are they contented to show the way, to do well,
unto others: but they would have all the world to be like unto the^ selves, that
there should never mention be made of praising God, and yet in the mean
while, as I have already said, this word Christian shall stand them in never a
penny. Now without all dout. God disaloweth of all those, which will not give
them selves to sing praises unto his majesty, and that will not stir up
their neigh bours to do the like, that they might show them selves to have
studied his word. But let us be well assured, that it is notinough, too open
our mouth and to sing praises unto him with the tongue: but it must also come
from a well affected heart. For David tells us nothere, that he will
solemnize the praises of God: but in addressing him self unto God, he
protests before him, that he will sing praises unto him. And in speaking
this, he right well knows that his heart must needs be disposed thereto.
Wherefore, when as we would magnify the name of God as appertains, let us not
deliver it out with the mouth only: but our heart also must be set thereto,
and that it agree therewith to make a sweet hermony. If this be so, all our
life by little and little shall be answerable thereto, that it shall be no
untruth which we have pronounced with our mouth. Now he adds a sentence
which is very short: to wit,

My tongue shall treat of thy word: and why? because all thy commandments
says he, are righteous. In this verse he shows that after he has been
well instructed, that he him self will also travel to bring others by little
and little, to the like knowledge.

Lo here his full pretense. But yet the better to express his affection that
he has too draw on his brethren and neighbors, to the knowledge of God and
of his truth, he uses this word, to Sing, not contenting him self to speak
after a plain manner: but expressing, that he will sing alowde and clear: that
he will make his word to resounde, that it might be heard, yea that it should
be a thing as notoriously known, as the very common songs. Now since it is
so, that David speaks after this sort, let us now see what our duty is.
For as I have already said heretofore, he bragged not of his own power: but
the holy Ghost has set him before us in stead of a glass, to thend it might
serve us for our better instruction. Now when as we shall have known the
truth of our good God, what is there the^ for us to do? Forsooth, we must not
hold fast this treasure as it were locked up in a cheste, but communicate his
graces unto others: yea and do the best we can, to draw on the miserable
ignorant people, too the service of God: and too carry about with us the
doctrine, to publish it to all men, when as it is committed unto us as a
treasure, and to bestow the gift which we have received, upon our neighbors,
according to that measure of faith, which God has given us. Howebeit this
order is far of from us: For if there be but three words of the word of God
spoken, we will soon be weary of it, may, we shall not hear it spoken of at
this day. It is so far of, that it is talked of* both at the table, in the
way, and every where, as that we can hardly abide, that even for fashions
sake, the preaching of it be kept: and although it be here lawefull too speak
in the pulpit one hour in the name of God, yet shall you have a great number
of dogs which will not stick even to gyrne at it, as if God were too too
much privileged. It is very far of to have every man to apply him self to
sing the commandments of God, and his whole word, and for us to have our
ears beaten with it. Now whence comes this unthankfulness? verily because
we never tasted of that which David here adds, All thy statutes says he,
are righteous. If we did thoroughly know, what equity and pureness there is
in the statutes of God, without dout we should be more earnest, to learn,
hold, and show them, unto others, then heretofore we have been. So then, all
they which make no account too instruct their neighbors, and do not esteem of
the knowledge and faith which they have received: do hereby show, that they
will not render the righteousness to God as to him appertameth, accordingly as
it is contained in his word, and as he him self shows it therein. Now David
by and by adds,

Let thine hand help me: for I have chosen thy commandments. He yet
returns too that which before he had said of deliverance. For after he had
required to be taught of god, he said* O deliver me: yea he right well knew
that if he had not him for his protector, that he should always remain as
it were in death. Now he adds, Let thine hand help me. And why so? For I
have chosen, says he, thy commandments.

When he desires God too help him with his hand, he confesses his want,
and that he was as a man which needed help, even as though he had never had
more need: and that it was not in him, to deliver himself, neither could he
find it in any of his creatures. And therefore except God had stretched forth
his hand, see how David had been utterly cast away. Now, this confession
here is very profitable for us. For which of us is he, that can be without
afflictions? and that is able to say, I have all things that are necessary?
It is most true, that we are more careful for that which concerns our
bodies, and this present life, then for that which is required for the
salvation of our souls. If we stand in need of meat and drink, if we be
sick, if we be in danger of any plague or war, that stirs us, and
touches us too the quick: but when we are pressed with any evil, we abuse
our selves, and lift our selves up in such a fond presumption, as that we
think we have some power to do this, and that we then make our selves
believe, that we are very well able to defend our selves, although not wholly,
yet at the least partly. And therefore we ought so much the rather rightly to
mark, the sayings of the scripture where it is said unto us, that it is the
hand of GOD that must help us, to the end that every man may learn to know
his need, and that we had all need too be defended fended by this heavenly
power: so that we are all cast down into the bottomless depth, without it
pleases GOD to stretch forth his hand to help our necessities. And thus much
for this. Now when David sets down the reason, that he had chosen the
commandments of God, he did it not to extol any dignity or worthiness of
his own. Wherefore then? Forsooth, even to show that he waited for his aid
and help, from the hand of God. And therefore they which persuade them selves
at adventure that God hears their prayers, and yet have this foolish hope
with them, to find help at the hands of his creatures: refuse the hand of
God as much as in them lies: and so by that means shall never find him to
be favorable unto them. And for this cause David says, I have chosen the
commandments of God, that is to say, that all his whole liking was in them.
And this saying imports a very great matter, and much greater then at the
first sight it seems. Why does David rather set down this word Election, or
choice, then any other? I have chosen thy commandments. It is because we
are always carried with perverse affections, and because we cannot make
choice, neither can we hold us to that which is best. Every man will gladliest
desire that thing which is meetest for his own ease, and quietness: to be
short, every man desires to be happy. We are nothing indifferent herein: for
the very wicked in the world, and the most vile persons, will say, I would have
that which were good and meet for me: howbeit we can not chose: but even the
very worst. We shall very well have a natural desire, which shall carry us as
it were to one self same end: but we cannot keep the way. Every man goes
out of it. One man will chose this thing* another that and in this choice we
are all confounded. One will chose, goods, lands, and possessions: another,
great trade of merchandise: another to come unto dignity and into credit: some
one man will be given to lechery, and be wholly carried that way: another will
yield him self, too some other filthiness, as too drunkenness, intemperancy,
and wantonness.

See then, how we al make choice of that which is naught, And for this cause
David says, that he chose the comma^dementes of God: to wit, that although
he was a mortal man, subject too a great number of wicked affections, yet
that he never trusted his own flesh, neither yet obeyed his lusts, to chose
nothing but vanity, and that which might withdraw him from the right way, and
lead him too destruction: but that he made a good wise choice: to wit, that he
held himself to the commandments of God. So then, let us learn to make a
good choice: when as God shall present unto us his word, when as he shall
offer him self so liberally on his part, as to look for nothing at our hands
but that we should come to seek him, and that he presents him self before
us: let not us be deceived nor carried away by the deceiptes of Satan, through
the corruptions which he lays wide open before our eyes: let us not be so
foolish as to stay our selves upon matters of nothing, and to leave that which
ought to be the most principal, and wherein lies all our felicity and
salvation, It follows,

I have longed for thy saving health, O Lord, and in thy law is my delight.
This sentence comprehends all whatsoever we have already touched, and is the
only confirmation thereof. For he says, that he has longed for the saving
health of God. And how is that? For it seems that every man might say as
much: and so, that David had no more then the very faithless. For if we shall
ask a desperate man, yea even a very half devil, and say, would not thou
have God to be thy savior? he will make answer and say, yes forsooth. Lo
what answer we shall find in the mouths both of great and small, of good
and bad.

Now David his meaning is, to make a great protestation, and such a one as a
very few can make in truth. For we suppose him to be all our Saviors: and
yet we seek our saving health at a wild adventure, and every man will have
regard to his own considerations and providence. When there shall arise any
question of our maintenance here in this present life, do we believe that God
must keep and preserve us, and that it is he in deed which mainteineth us
herein? whence comes it that we have so mighty evil consciences? whence
comes all deceiptes, frauds, excess, cruelties, injuries, violences, and
all such like? What is the cause that makes us to live with such evil
consciences? but because we do not believe, that God will give us our daily
bread? We desire God to feed us, and yet we will have the devil to do it:
in so much that there are very few which at this day think, that that which
they have, comes from God* So then, it is very far of from the thought of
our hearts, to say, O Lord, I have desired thy saving health. For in stead
of attending upon God, to have him too guide, defend, and help us at all
times whenever that we have need: in stead of this I say, what do we?
Every man as I have said, seeks for his saving health at a wild adventure.
We should rather seek for i^ in hell, then to have our eyes lifted up into
heaven to call upon God, and to seek for our saving health both of body and
soul in him. So then, there are very few which are able to say as it is here
set down, O Lord, I have longed for thy saving health: if they will not lie.
As we see the impudency of hypocrites which will make mighty great bragges
inought but yet for all that, it is no small matter, as I have already said, to
trust altogether in God, and to say, that it belongs to him to guide us,
that we run to him, and have there our refuge both for soul and body. Now
then he adds, In thy law is my delight: To signify, how we ought to
demean our selves not to hope for salvation, nor yet to wish for it otherwise
then from God alone: to wit, when as we have taken delight in his law.

It is meet then that we tame and bridle our affections, that weseuer them
from all other our desires, and say, that in looking upon his word and in
cleaving thereto, we take there our repast, and in it do truly joy.

For whenever we shall be brought unto this point, it will stand us in
nothing to seek our saving health in God. And why so? because we see none
other thing in all the holy Scripture, but so many promises where God so gently
bids us, and where he declares unto us that he is most ready to receive
us, that he looks for none other thing at our hands but that we should
seek him, and that he thrusts him self forward, and presents him self
even before us. The Scripture, I say, is full of this doctrine, to show unto
us that God is ready prepared too help us when as we shall take pleasure in
his law. We may very well then long after the saving health of God when as we
shall in truth have sought him. But what? we see very few whose hearts are
so confirmed, as too say that they will hold the right way, whatsoever
comes of it. And therefore see here consequently why God disapointeth us,
and helps us not, as we gladly desire to be helped. Now he adds,

Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee: and let thy judgments help me.
He always pursues his purpose, but here he coupleth together two things
which before he severed. When he says, let my soul live that is always, as
he has said, that he seeks his saving health of God, and longs after it.
He says not, I will that my soul live: but has recourse unto God knowing
right well that he is the keeper of his life: and therefore puts it into
his hands, and leaves the keeping thereof unto him, as appertaining only
unto him and after he sa^eth that he will give him thanks, for that his life
shall be prolonged.

Now here we see too what end the faithful ought to desire too live in
this world: to wit, that they might praise GOD: as it has been also spoken
in the other places. And chiefly without going far, in the song of Ezechias.
Psalm. 113.
For there, as in the hundredth and thirteenth Psalm, and as it were in the
song of Jonas, it is showed, that if we must live, we must not live, for too
live (as we say) and to have none other regard: neither yet, too say, I will
only live to eat and drink and to dwell here in this present world. But we
must go yet farther: to wit, we must live, to the end to praise God: so that
if this be wanting in us, Let us wish to be a hundredth feet under the ground,
that we may be never more spoken off. Lo, I say, how our life shall be
blessed, and agreeable unto the will of God: to wit, when as we bend our
selves to none other end, but to praise and magnify his holy and blessed name.

Now in the mean while David adds, O let thy judgments help me. This is it
which he had in effect before spoken of the saving health of God. For he
sets the Judgments of God against all the helps which men and the
faithless are any way able too inuente for the seeking of God. For they
suppose that they shall be very well helped else where, when as they shall
have their pretty shifts too think that the creatures shall be sufficient
enough to help them. When then these worldlings think too bring it so about,
to be defended without the aid of God, they must needs be deceived in
forgetting the judgments of God: to wit, his providence, whereby he uses to
rule the world: as we must be fully assured that he holds the ungodly in a
bridle, when as they skirmish, and forcibly set them selves to hurt the good
and innocent: and that it is too repress the malice of all those which torment
his, because he has taken them into his hand and protection. See then, how the
faithful ought to put them selves to the Judgments of God, to wit, to this
providence, by which all is disposed and governed. It is very true that God may
very well arm all his creatures to defend and maintain us: but yet must we
not cease for all that to feel his hand, and too behold it by faith when as
it shall help us. We must not cease too see this providence which is hidden
from the faithless, because their spirits are wreathed up in horrible
darkness.

To be short, let not us cease too attribute all the help which we shall feel
from the hand of God, unto his judge mentes* although he has inferior means
too help us, Now in the end David concludes,

I have gone astray like a Sheep that is lost: seek thy servant for I do
not forget thy Commandments. Here we might think it very strange why David
says, that he has strayed like a lost sheep, seeing that he adds, That
he has not forgotten the Commandments of God, and that we have already
seen by so many goodly protestations, that it was his whole delight to serve
God: yea and that it was too him more dear then Gold and Silver. And how is
it then that he now compares him self unto a lost sheep. For to make plain
this hard point, it is commonly said, that David confesses him self to be a
strayed sheep, yea notwithstanding the great desire that he had to please GOD,
too govern his whole life aright, and yet that he ceased not to err. This
saying is very well verified in him self. For although that this appertains
not unto the whole life of David: yet he had a terrible fall, and was like a
pore lost beast in the sin which he committed with Bethsabe, Vrias wife: For
it seems that he had then forsaken God, and that he was as it were a lost
man. He might then very well say, that he had highly and mightily erred like a
lost sheep. But this might be taken more properly. That David respected not
the time wherein God had called him, and set him in a good way: but rather
respected his own natural estate and condition, and says, O Lord, what am I
of my self, without thou guidest me? Alas what had become of me? In what case
had I been? Where should I have first begun? David then might very well make
here protestation of such his condition as is comman with us. For this is a
general thing amongst us all, that we all go astraye like wild and forlorn
beasts, until such time as GOD repayreth and amendeth us. For in what case
shall GOD find us, when as he choseth us unto him self? do not we swerve
from the way of salvation? We are not only in the mountains and deserts: but
also drowned over head and ears even to the bottomless depthes.

So then, David and we with him may very well say, that we are lost sheep,
until such time as God shows him self to be our Shephearde, and gives us
the grace too follow him. And yet there is another reason which made David to
call him self a lost sheep: and this is the very true meaning, and the most
natural: to wit, because he was deadly pursued of his enemies, and was so
hardly and grievously persecuted by them, as that he was like unto a poor
chased sheep. Who seeing the Woulfe to pursue him fleyeth from him into the
Mountains, thinking there to hide him self. Lo here a poor sheep which
shall escape the throat of the Woulfe: he is so heartily afraid, that if he
find a well, he will sooner leap into it, then too go on any farther: for he
knows not what to do, not what shall become of him: being thus mortally
pursued. And therefore David saying, that he erred like a lost sheep referred
it not unto his sins, to say, O Lord, I have offended, I have strayed from the
way of salvation: but he says, O Lord, I know not what shall become of me.
Here then we now see what the natural meaning of this text is, whereupon we
must chiefly stay our selves. Although the doctrine which I have already
touched be very good and profitable, yet must we have tespect unto the meaning
of David. I have then erred says he, like a lost sheep. Now he says,

O seek the Servant, for I do not forget thy commandments. When as we
shall join these two things together, That David forgot not the
Commandments of God, and that he has erred: we shall find, how greatly he
was given to the serving of God, that he desired it from the bottom of his
heart: and yet was he not without extreme affliction: yea he was so void of
help, as that it seems he could not choose but despair of his saving
health. When then we see such an example, have not we very good occasion to
take courage, although God suffers us many times to be even extreemely
persecuted? For if this came to pass in David who was so excellent a man, as
we have spoken off: Let not us think to be greatlyer privileged then he. But
let us chiefly consider to be patient in our afflictions, seeing that GOD
thereby means to make proof of our faith and patience, and will cause it all
too turn unto our salvation. And this is it which David concludes withal, O
Lord, seek thy servant: signifying, that he stays him self chifely upon
the protection and sauegarde of God. And see how we must order our selves in
this behalf: For if we can stay our selves upon him, when as we shall be
persecuted, and beseech him to seek us, we must not doubt but that he will
make us too feel his help, yea, and that we shall obtain our salvation when
as we shall there seek it.

According unto this holy Doctrine let us prostrate our selves before the
majesty of our good GOD, in acknowledging our offenses, beseeching him, that
it would please him to make us feel them better then heretofore we have
done. And in the mean while that it would also please him to help all our
miseryes, and too give us this sovereign remedy, to wit, to be purged of all
our wicked affections, that the law might reign wholly in us, have full
possession both of our thoughts and desires, and of all whatsoever else there
is in us: and we too be so governed by it, as that forsaking all the things of
this world, and of this present life, we crave and desire none other thing but
to cleave unto our good GOD, and too be wholly conformable unto his holy will.
And although we are now nusseled in a great many of vices and imperfections,
and subject too a great number of calamities: yet for all that, let us know
that we are very happy so long as we shall be under his protection and
sauegarde, looking always for the salvation which he has promised us, until
such time as he has granted us a full inioying thereof, too behold him face
too face in his heavenly kingdom, which now we see here below as it were
in a duskishe Glass. That he will not only etc.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree by Thomas Dawson, for
John Harison and Thomas Man. 1580.


