A TRACT OF THE SOVEREIGN IVDGE OF CONTROVERSIES IN MATTERS OF RELIGION.

By JOHN CAMERON Minister of the Word of God, and Divinity Professor in the
Academie of Montauban.

Translated into English by JOHN VERNEVIL. M. A.

Basilius ad Eustathium medicum epist. quae est 80. ex edit. Paris. 1618.
(...). Let the Scripture given by inspiration of God be Vmpire, and the
sentence of truth shall wholly be given to them, with whom the tenants agreeable
to the holy w(...) shall be found.

OXFORD. Printed by William Turner Printer to the famous University, and are
to be sold by Henry Curteine. 1648.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sr THOMAS LEIGH KNIGHT AND BARONET, AND TO THE
VIRTUOUS and Religious Lady Mary Leigh his dear and loving Consort.
I AM not unmindful of the favors and courtisies ( Right Worll.) received
from your much honored Grandfather Sr Thomas Leigh, (of blessed memory) at my
first coming into England, how in my distress his liberal maintenance
refreshed me: And in all those years that I had the honor to belong unto
you, how gracious and bountiful I found you both: should I silence these your
benefits bestowed on me, and not acknowledge them to the world, my conscience
surely would accuse me of ingratitude, a vice abominable and hateful both to
God and good men Peremptoria siquidem res est ingratitudo, hostis gratiae
inimica salutis* Bernard sermon 2. de septem misericordijs.
. To avoid which, I have presumed to publish, and offer to the world under
both your names this my little translation, of the great and learned Cameron;
not for any hope I have by this, or any greater service to requite your favors
to me, but only to testify that I confess and acknowledge Gods goodness
toward me in finding such a shelter that has received and kept me safe in a
land where I was a stranger. For which your favors toward me, the Lord of
heaven and earth restore you an hundred fold into your bosoms, and give your
Worships grace to see (as your Honorable Grand fathers have done) your
childrens children like Olive plants round about your table.

Receive then this small mite as a token of the bounden service of him, who
incessantly prays God to bless you and your Noble Family with all
spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus.

From the public Library in Oxford this. 30. of Aug. 1628. Your WorPS. most
humbly to command JOHN VERNEVIL

To the Reader.
I present unto your censure this tract of Monsieur Cameron in English; I know
the skill of many for translating out of French to be far better then mine
own: but my request is, that you respect my desire to do good, and not my
imperfections. I hold it a matter altogether impossible to draw a picture fully
to the life: let Poets tell of painters, and of birds deceived by the
exactness of their skill; yet an original ever loses some luster and grace,
though the translatours care be never so great. Howsoever consider I entreat
you, the author of this little tract: for the work of any man is nowadayes
esteemed, as the workman is, and men care most for reading that whose authors
they esteem. For the Author I will say this little: during his natural life
his reputation was great in France, and so great, that all the Jesuits there
did seek, and at last obtained to have him banished, nor was there any other
cause thereof then his great learning, Plantus ^in milite. Act. 3. scena 2. v.
29.
the Jesuits in their conferences being not able to withstand him.

Quoniam aemulare non licet, nunc in^ides. He had his refuge here, where by the
special care of that great favorer of learning K. James (of blessed memory)
he was provided for in Scotland, his native country, but so great was his hearty
love to France, that by the effectual mediatio^ of those honorable Ambassadors
then in France, he gat that envious sentence reversed, which being done he
immediately conveyed himself to Montauban to be professor there, where he
ended his days, to the great loss of Gods Church, and that University. Now
seeing the fervent love that he had in doing good to my own native Country, I
have endeavored (as much as lies in me) to requite his love, and to make his
French work speak English. If this tract be favorably received, and that I
shall perceive my English phrase tollerably to be approved, your kind
acceptance shall encourage me to a greater work: my nature abhors
idleness, and being in such a place, I love to be doing, and to employ my
self, for fear to be worse employed*. Quem diabolus non invenit occupatum
ipse occupat.
Enjoy this as a prodromus, till by your prayers God of his infinite grace and
mercy enable me to end my greater work now in hand. Farewell.

Thine in the Lord JOHN VERNEVIL.

CHAP. 1.
The subtility of those who shun the reformation, and the sincerity of them
who require it.
IT is said that Alcibiades as yet but young in years, but in craft and
subtility already aged, coming on a day to visit Pericles, when one had told
him that he was busy making up the accounts which he was to give of his
office; immediately replied, it was better for Pericles to busy himself, in
seeking the means how he might give no accounts at all, and so went his
ways. This passage has been applauded by many as most sharp and witty. But
there are some, and of those not a few who much esteem the use and necessity
of the council it imports: All bankrupts, pettifoggers, extortioners, and in
a word, the whole rabble of impostors make use thereof, and have recourse unto
it, as to the only sovereign remedy of their despair: and indeed he that
is convinced in his conscience, that knows that he shall come short of his
accounts, and in the proof of his pretended right, it is his safest and
easiest way to avoid the coming to any account, or trial at all. Where
contrariwise, he that has a clear conscience, his reckonings ready, his
cause good, does fly nothing more then such shifts; and desires, and
endeauours above all to be heard thoroughly, fearing least the prescription,
exceptions, and pretenses of cunning wranglers, though he could make use of
them, should darken the equity of his cause, and leave behind it this scruple,
that his cause in the issue of it, will prove like to those other unto which
it has some resemblance in the proceeding. Would to GOD all men in the
controversies of religion, were of the same opinion, and had the same courage,
and true meaning, which human and civil wisdom does suggest to us in our
law suites, that we would be willing to come to an issue. And since we all
agree that our heavenly Father has not left us without a Testament, that we
on both sides, know by what Notaries it has been received, where they have
enrolled it, since we have the law and the testimony, that we would also have
our recourse with a joint consent, to that Testament, to those Notaries, to
their Registers, and say with one and the same voice after the Prophet, To the
law and to the testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them.

Truly God reveals not his will; the Prophets, the Apostles teach it not,
but by his word; we have this word, what can we ask more? would we know
what the judgment of God is, what the testimony of the Prophets, and Apostles
are concerning that doctrine? ought not God himself to declare it? should not
the Prophets and Apostles Publish it? We have this declaration, we have (no
Christian doubts thereof) the authentic copy of this publication, have we
not then what we need, what we seek, and ask so earnestly, to wit a
sentence and a final decree on our controversies? Truly it is not necessary,
that the King, the Secretary, the Court, the Register be all present
wheresoever it is requisite that the Kings will be known, if we have the
order of the Court, we are assured of the Edict and decree. We stand at this
day on these terms, we have not to do with the Jews, neither with the
Turks, who deny the authority, the one of a part, the other of the whole
Scripture. We are Christians, we believe, we all protest that we have in the
Canonical book of the Scripture of the old and new Testament, the declaration
of the will of God. We acknowledge on both sides that whatsoever is there
contained, is the word of God which is able to make us wise unto salvation, and
thoroughly furnished unto all good works. 2 Timoth 3. 1^ 17.
Why do we then so earnestly demand the corporal presence of our judge? why do
we desire that he should give us a Vicar, a substitute, since we have his
decree, and acknowledge that he has pronounced it?

CHAP. 2.
The demand and proposal of those, who desire a holy reformation.
This is the complaint of them, who at this day grieve and sigh; lamenting the
desolation of Israel and Judah, who wish and demand, that as good Josiah caused
the book of the Law to be read before him, 2 Kings 22. 10.
as Esdras, and Nehemiah did the like before the congregation, when they
endeavored to reform the Church, and restore it to her first integrity: so
the like may be practiced at this day. If in Christendom all things be found
conformable to this law in matters of Religion, there will be no need of
changing any thing therein, but to punish rather those unquiet spirits, those
troublesome and schismatic heretics, which trouble and mar by their
novelties the peace of the Church, and repose of the whole world. But if this
conformity be not there to be found, but on the contrary a difference and
disagreeing, why should not Gods truth be preferred before human inventions,
the law before there customs, and the kingdom of Jesus Christ before the
tyranny, and dominion of him, who has usurped both over the living and the
dead, over soul and body, prince and people, an authority in effect wholly
sovereign? And here let every soul in which there is left any touch of
conscience, let every man in whom there is found the least spark of manhood,
remaining in such a division of the Church, in such a disagreeing especially
about things of so great importance, judge which of the two does rather
practice the craft of Alcibiades in shunning and declining, whether they who
demand that their proceedings be examined by the rule of this word, (which we
all avouch to be inspired, dictated, and registered by the spirit of God, or
else those who shun nothing more then the censure of this word, of this
Scripture, so far as to charge it with defects, insufferable even in human
writings, accusing it of obscurity, ambiguity, and imperfections; which truly
are the proprieties of the Oracles of Apollo, of the leaves of Sybil's, but
little agreeable to the the law of the Almighty, the which the kingly Prophet
so much magnifieth as being perfect, Psa. 9. 7. 8.
pure, sure, and giving wisdom to the simple.

CHAP. 3.
Wherein the objections against the foresaid demand are set down, and that
which is framed against the person of those which require it is refuted.
Since then we are brought to this point, that instead of pleading the cause
thoroughly, there is a question made whether we ought to come so far, they
stand much upon the quality of the accuser, they conteste against the
sufficiency of the Judge, to whom he appeals. We are constrained first of
all to examine the equity or injustice of this manner of proceeding.

And first as touching the quality of the accusers, they term them new
start-vps, they ask them what calling they have thereunto, by what authority
they have made so bold an attempt as to protest they desire the reformation of
the Church.

The thing then objected to them is noveltie and rashness. But both of these
objections are but a recrimination, the which cannot be verified, but that
first their accusation be convinced of untruth, and therefore ought not,
neither can it be received, before that point of their accusation be cleared.

They undertake to prove that the doctrine of our Lord and of the Apostles has
been altered and changed in that Church which terms it self Catholic:
they urge that every other doctrine is to be rejected, no other admitted but
that alone. They protest then, not that they will bring in, but that their
meaning is to banish novelties, for which cause Noveltie, cannot be objected
unto them, so long as it cannot be proved that they are innovatours: which is
the chief point of the controversy: the question being not here of the
Nouelty of the persons but of that of faith and doctrine, according to which we
ought to judge of the persons, and not of it according to the persons. Tertull.
Prisc^s ad haeret: cap. 3. ex personis probamus fidem, an ex fide personas?
As learnedly Tertullian.

Seeing then that the sum of their accusations consist, in this that they
accuse the Church, falsely called Catholic, to have innovated, so long as it
does not appear, whether their accusation be true or no, novelty cannot be
objected to them. As for the rashness of the accusation, no more can it be
objected unto them, until that the accusation be retorted by a direct and
just defense: for even as in an estate and commonwealth, every man is admitted
to accuse in case of high treason, and none is rejected, but upon a manifest
falsity of his accusation, neither is he accounted to accuse rashly, who
accuses truly: so in the Church, whosoever accuses of high treason against
God, is to be heard without objecting unto him rashness, until it be proved
that his accusation is false: In an army, in a besieged town, when there is
question of treason, no advise whatsoever is neglected, but they rather duly
weigh and consider, not so much from whom it proceeds, as the importance of
it, the accusers are not punished, if their accusation be not found false; but
if it be true they are applauded, rewarded, advanced, and often promoted in the
offices, and places of the accused. In the Church of God, in matter of
conscience we ought not to stop any man's mouth, but to convince, or satisfy
the heart and conscience; such was the practice of the Apostolical Church. The
Fathers have so carried themselves toward Heretics, yea S Austustine
himself, speaking of the Manicheans, Aug. concr. epist Man. cap. 4. Basil. de
Sp. S. c. 17.
is of this opinion. And if any of the Ancients have used perscription in any
such case, it has been in matters that were not properly of the essence of
faith: or if the doctrine was quaestioned, then have they to do with them,
Tertul. praescr. cap^ 7.
who grounded not themselves especially upon the Scripture, but wrested
according as they listed, some certain pieces of it, forcing them to their
purpose, and as it were by torture, making them to confess what they never
knew. And therefore the same Fathers called the^ Sucifugas Scripturarum, men
who shun the light of the Scripture: Tertul. de res. car. c. 47.
yea in those times prescription became them well. It was impossible that then
there should be such a declining and falling from the truth. The mystery of
iniquity, which had already begun to be conceived in the times of the
Apostles, was yet in the cradle. Our condition at this day is otherwise, who
are come unto the last times, who reckon a thousand and so many hundred years
since the flourishing and happy times of the Apostles. During which so long
space of time this mystery should in probability be well grown. We see the
most flourishing Churches, in times past planted by the Apostles, now brought
into desolation, and we cannot now call to witness the memory of men.

CHAP. 4.
Wherein are proposed the allegations against the sufficiency of the Judge, to
whom those who desire a reformation do appeal.
BUT for all this they call in doubt the sufficiency of the Judge, before whom
the accusers commence their suite, to wit, God speaking in the Scriptures, or
by the Scriptures.

1 They doubt whether he can be Judge considered after that manner, because,
say they every Judge ought to speak, Eight reasons wherefore God cannot be
Judge.
now God speaking in the Scripture, is as though he did not speak at all, the
Scripture having need it self to be propounded, and applied by some other.

2 And besides, the words of a Judge ought to be clear, and intelligible, and
this written word is obscure as much as may be.

3 Thirdly, the Scripture is ambiguous and subject to diverse interpretations,
whereas the decrees of a Judge ought to be certain and positive.

4 Fourthly, the Scripture is defective, and imperfect, and therefore cannot be
extended, nor applied to the decision of our controversies.

5 Fifthly, the resolution of a Judge ought to make them agree, who refer
themselves to him, whereas it is seen what discord there is, even amongst
those who would end these variances by the Scriptures.

6 Sixthly, the Heretics themselves make use of the Scriptures, whereas the
sentence of the Judge, cannot advantage the party condemned by him.

7 Seaventhly, if God speaking in, or by, the Scripture were the Judge, to what
end then serve the Councels?

8 Finally, if we had no other determination then that of the Scriptures, we
must needs always live in uncertainty: for the weakness and deceitfulness
of man's understanding considered, who amongst so great a multitude, and in such
a discord of those, who take upon the^ to have the gift of the holy Ghost,
could know and discern who has it? Who amidst such a number of those who
think they have it, and are deceived in their opinion can assure himself that
he has it? what then, do they refuse to be Judged? by no means in apperance,
but they would have the Church to be judge; the truth is that when that comes
to the vpshot, we find that this Church is themselves; who would be both
judges and parties, as shall be more plainly shown hereafter.

CHAP. 5.
The proposal of the means of nullity against the foresaid allegations, and
the verifying of the first means against the first and second allegation.
NOW let us consider their arguments alleged against the sufficiency of the
judge before whom they are summoned, which if they are not, 1 Contrary to their
own design. 2. to the truth. 3. If they do not tend to the subversion of
Christian Religion: the accusers refuse not to accept of them. But if they be
found incompatible, 1. with the cause for the defense of which they are
alleged, 2. with the truth, 3. with the authority of Christian Religion; No
body will condemn the accusers of false dealing, if they keep themselves to
their first citation and appeal.

But we are confident that all these means of nullity may The eight reasons
retorted against the adversary.
easily be verified: and that we may proceed in order, let us begin with
the first, and let us consider all these reasons, one after another, if they do
not oppose that cause in favor of which they are produced.

1 And as for the first, if God speaking in the Scriptures, or by the
Scriptures is as if he speak not at all, under a color that the Scripture is
dombe, and giving no sound, ought we not upon the same reason to say that the
Fathers speaking in their writings, the Church speaking in the Canons of the
Counsels, the Pope in his decrees, and decretalls, in his breefes and in his
bulls and indulgences: it were all one as if the Fathers, Church, and Pope
speak not at all? And ought not the writings of the Fathers, the Canons of the
Councels, the decrees and decretals, the briefes, bulls, and indulgences be
propounded and applied? nay and that by such who are not qualified for judges,
to wit the particular or Ecclesiastical persons who may err, as not having the
promise of infallibility. Every one a part, as they are in their pulpitt's, in
their states, or less solemn exhortations proposing the traditions of the
Fathers, the Canons of the Councels, the decrees and constitutions of the
Popes, their breefes, bulls and indulgences.

This first reason then drawn from the nature of the Scripture that it is
dumb, that it has need to be propounded and applied, cannot be admitted,
unless they will upon the same grounds annihilate the authority of the
Fathers, Councels, Popes, in whose words the very pretended defects are to be
found, as plainly ^ppeareth.

2 And for the second allegation touching the obscurity of the Scripture, it
cannot be maintained, but it must be withal averred, that all the proofs
drawn from this word are likewise obscure and consequently that the Romish
Religion cannot be gathered from the Scripture, but by guesses and conjectures:
So that all the proofs drawn from this Scripture, to maintain the Doctrine of
the Romish Church, shall be mere conjectures and guesses: And are they not to
blame then upon this reckoning, not to bind those that accuse the Romish Church
of revolt, to keep themselves to the judge before whom they have made their
appeal? seeing he speaks so obscurely on the accusers side, that he will
never justify his accusation, neither condemn the party accused, who being in
possession, whereas the accuser is the plaintiff, if the evidences by which he
pretends to verify his accusation be obscure, and intricate, ought rather
oblige him to produce them, then oppose or hinder that he should make use of
them. For he that accuses, and for proof of his accusation, alleges
reasons too hard to be vnvnderstood, that he may seem to speak Welsh, or
Irish, both iustifies the party accused and makes himself worthy to be laughed
at.

CHAP. 6.
The verification of the first means of Nullitie against the third, and fourth
allegation.
3 But (if as by the third allegation it seems) the Scripture be ambiguous.
and capable of diverse interpretations, wherefore and with what reason is it,
that the Doctors that term themselves Catholics do make more account, of
one expression of Scripture, then of another, grounding themselves either upon
the circumstances of the very text, which is expounded, or upon some other
passage of the Scripture, the sense whereof is clear, manifest and certain,
and not simply upon the authority of the Church?

If the Scripture be as they say, a nose of wax, Theramenes buskin, a shoe for
both feet, a wethercock which turns with the wind: wherefore do they refute
by Scripture the interpretations, nay, rather the false glosses of heretics?
Wherefore do they not barely allege unto them the authority of the Church?
Verily according to their reckoning, for the prooueing of transubstantiation,
they need no more urge the words of the Scripture, hoc est corpus meum,
neither to say that they must be taken as they sound, as being words of a last
will and testament, seeing that this passage being a part of the Scripture, is
according to the nature of the Scripture (if their allegation be true)
ambiguous and capable of diverse interpretations: and therefore they ought not
to believe transubstantiation by reason of this place of Scripture, but because
it has pleased the Church so to interpret it: and so the belief of the Church
of Rome will not be grounded upon the Scripture, nor ruled according to it;
but quite contrary, the sense of the Scripture, is ruled and grounded upon the
knowledge of the Church; so that the foundation is builded upon the house, and
the building is the level and the square.

And to conclude, how comes it to pass that they say that the Scripture
proves so distinctly, so clearly, so evidently the pretended authority of the
Church, that they wonder how those that do but read the Scripture can admit it,
if so be that the Scripture be ambiguous, and of a double meaning as has
been pretended by the third allegation.

4 Touching the fourth defect objected against the Scripture, to wit that it is
imperfect, and does not sufficiently furnish us with reasons, for to prove or
refute what is to be believed, in matters of controversy betwixt us. If this
objection be received, how have the Doctors of the Church, which is called
Catholic, undertaken to prove all the points of the Romish Religion by the
Scripture? Have they taken upon them rashly a thing impossible? would they show
themselves in this sophisters and cavilling disputers, seeking in the Scripture
that which is not there to be found and proving a truth by a lie? or are there
some points of doctrine believed in the Church termed Catholic, which are not
contained in the Scripture? who amongst them all dare undertake to make a
catalogue of any such points? what may those points of doctrine be, that are
not handled in the Scripture, for being silent in which, the Scripture is
termed imperfect?

They are not points touching the Trinity, the incarnation of the Son of God,
the redemption of mankind, or of faith in Jesus Christ, of hope, charity and
repentance, of the necessity and practice of good works, of life eternal, of
Baptism, of the preaching of the word, of the holy supper; these points and
those that depend on them are without doubt retained in the Scripture.

What then can these articles of faith be, of which the Prophets, the
Apostles, nay God himself has spoken in the Scripture? Is it the article of
the popes authority, not only now to excommunitate, but also to depose Kings?
his authority of dispe^cing with marriages, with which God dispenceth not in his
word? to make eating of flesh in Lent (a thing of it self indifferent) to be
a sin? and that an incestious marriage be not incestious, or else the article
of his imperial dominion so sovereign and supreme that although he should
lead whole troops of silly souls into hell, none may presume to say unto him
my Lord why do you so? and of so large extent that it reaches unto the souls
both of the living and the dead? Or are they the articles of worshipping of
Images, of invocation of Saints, of the fire of purgatory, as hot as that of
hell, of works of supererogation, of merit ex congruo and ex co^digno, that
Jesus Christ has sacrificed himself upon earth twice, to wit, when he
celebrated the holy Supper with his disciples, and not once alone upon the
cross, that divine service ought to be said in an unknown tongue, that Christ
has not saved by his death the little children which dye without baptism. And
if there be any other article of this sort of which the holy Ghost has made no
mention, and the Prophets, and Apostles have written nothing. No the holy Ghost
has dictated, the Prophets and Apostles have written the clean contrary, That
the temporal authority of Kings is immediately from God. Romans 13. 1. 2. Cor. 4.
5.
That every man is subject to, and not above the law of God. That the very
Apostles are the servants, but not the lords of the Church. Apoc. 14. 13.
That the souls of them which dye in Christ rest from their labors. Romans 10.
14.
That we must not call on him in whom we have not believed. That we must not
bow down to images. Exodus 20. Luc. 17. 10. Heb. 9. and 10. cb.
That when we have done all we can, we are unprofitable servants. That Christ
has not offered himself oftentimes, but once. That the use of an unknown
tongue in the Church is a curse. 1. Cor. 14. 21. Mat. 1^. 1^,
That Christ received the little Children, yea before baptism.

CHAP. 7.
A verifying of the first means of nullity against the fifth and sixth
^llegation.
AND for the fifth reproach cast upon the Scripture, to wit, that those who
make profession to end their controversies by its determination, are
disagreeing in opinion, if this consideration should make that God speaking in
the Scripture or by the Scriptures, were not a competent Judge to determine our
controversies, it would follow also from thence that neither the Church should
be our Judge, since in this respect there is no difference. For in the times of
the Primitive Church, both Arrians and Orthodoxes, Donatistes and Catholics,
did pretend to follow the judgment of the Church. The Arrians did reject the
Council of Nice, required a new Council: yea many Arrians in effect protested
that they would hold themselves to the Council of Nice: so that by this
account the Church it self shall not be the Judge, if from the discord of
them, who profess to refer themselves to the decision of a Judge, we shall
conclude the insufficiency of the Judge.

Finally amongst the Doctors, who call themselves Catholics, and protest all
with one full consent to submit themselves to the judgment of the Church, what
jarres? what contentions are there? The Angelical D S Thomas Discord amongst
the Romish Doctors.
holds that the Cross is to be worshipped with a religious worship, to this
purpose he brings the authority of the Church: and proves that the image is
to be worshipped with the very Tho. 2a 2ae qu. 103. art. 3. and 3. q 25. art.
40. Bellar. lib. 2. de magin. c: 20. 2^
same worship which is due to the same thing represented by the Image.
Bellarmine is not of the same opinion, assigning a lower degree of worship to
the Image, then to the thing whereof it is an Image, and for strengthening of
his opinion he also alleges the authority of the Church. wherefore then cast
they this reproach rather on the sacred word, then the Church? And whereas in
the sixth place, they endeavor to prove that, God speaking in the Scripture,
cannot be judge of our differencies, under a color that Heretics do challenge
and attribute to themselves the Scripture, by the same reason they conclude
also that neither the Church shall be Judge: for heretics make Council. Cal^
Act. 1.
use of the authority of the Church as of a cloak, Cite the Fathers, the
Councels, the traditions of the Church. But if it be replied, that this is for
show only and in Sophistical manner; the answer also is easy, and at hand, to
wit they do the like in alleging the Scripture: therefore things stand upon
the very same terms, were it not that some though they dare not speak, yet
do think that the Scripture indeed favors Heretics, which were all one
as to imagine that God by his word does cover (as with a cloak) the devils
lies, which were as impious to think, as blasphemous to speak.

CHAP. 8.
The verification of the first means of Nullity against the 7. and 8.
allegation.
AND concerning that which is demanded in the seventh place, for what serve
Councels if Scripture can reconcile us? do not they see they make way to
another counterdemaund no less urgent, to wit, for what serve the Councels if
the Church be our Judge? they cannot here replye that the Councels make this
Church, which is the Judge that they require: for then it may be objected that
the Church is without a judge save only during the time of a Council, and that
once expired (or not begun) there shall be no means to resolve the doubts
of conscience. And who shall call this Council? shall the Emperor and the
Kings? but their thoughts are otherwise distracted, neither do they agree
amongst themselves, and though they should take the business to heart, and to
that end should agree, have not those of Rome stripped them of their privilege
of calling a Council, as heretofore they have done? Or shall the Pope? he
fears too much those assemblies, he knows very well what affronts have been
given to his predecessors in them, and what hazard they ran even in the last
Council of Trent, notwithstanding all their canvassing, and underhand dealing,
and that the holy Ghost was sent thither by post from Rome. Furthermore the
Council cannot be held always, neither can every one be there present to
hear it speak viuavoce. Amid'st all those difficulties what shall become of
doubts and disputes? who shall resolve them? who shall determine them in the
mean while? how shall the conscience by this means have always a Judge to
whom she may have recourse to be resolved? And now in the Church which
terms it self Catholic who shall be Judge in our Controversies? shall it
be the Council of Trent? but no Judge will be admitted that speaks not
viuavoce, and henceforth in this respect the Council of Trent, and all other
Councels are as dumb as the Scripture: they are cited, they are wrested to
diverse senses. If this question then touching the use of a Council (to which
we shall answer directly hereafter) does force vt to renounce the Judgment of
God speaking in the Scripture, it will also force them to renounce the
Judgment of the Church.

Finally the last allegation touching the uncertainty of humane judgment when
we are to judge who has the spirit, or whether one has it himself or no,
amongst so great a number who disagreeing one from another do all
notwithstanding equally lay claim to the gift of the holy spirit. If this
allegation take place, it will also cause that no recourse can be had to the
authority and judgment of the Church, for if it be so, that (according to the
allegation) it cannot be known who has the spirit, or who has it not,
because of the weakness of human judgment, and the multitude and discord
of pretenders; how shall it be known who are those who make the Catholic
Church or not? Truly every man that cannot assure himself that he has the
spirit, which alone inspireth true wisdom, ought also to doubt whether he be
not a fool, and ignorant, when question is made of judging of such things
which belong to the spirit. And since it belongs not to fools to judge who
are wise men, every one being according to this last allegation, bound to doubt
that he is a fool, as being destitute of the spirit; no man by the same reason
can judge which is the assembly of those who are truly wise; no man (the
incertitude of his judgment considered, if this allegation has place, in such
a multitude, variety and discord of those who usurp as propper unto themselves
that title of the Church, pretending all that of right it belongs unto them)
can make any certain choice, or cull out those on whom in truth it is to be
conferred.

CHAP. 9.
The verification of the second means of nullity against the first allegation.
IT is then very manifest that all these allegations are inco^patible with the
intent of those who alleged them, but forall this they will darken, and weaken
the right of the cause against which they are alleged, if we do not also show
their falsitie, and impertinencie, which is the second means of nullity that
we have opposed against them.

To begin then with the first, it is an infinite wrong that the written word
of the living God is called a dead and dumb letter, that God speaking in this
fashion should be accounted not to speak at all, under color that he uses
not a voice, the which cannot be admitted in the divine nature, which is not
necessary amongst men, but for to carry, and conveigh by the ear to the heart
the conceptions of the mind, and together with them the knowledge of those
things whereof they are the image: which being done by another means, as by
writing, the lively voice is no word necessary. He therefore spoke very
wittily who first called books dumb masters, at once endeavoring to
express what they were in regard of the sound, and what in regard of the
virtue and efficacy, of expressing and teaching, to wit, dumb, if we respect
the sound, but eloquent and powerful, if we regard what they express, and
teach* we hear not at this day the voice of Demosthenes nor of Cicero,
nevertheless when we read their writings it seems unto us that we hear
them. The instructions of an Ambassador, the testament of a Father, the
sentence of a Judge, the letter of a friend, the authentic coppie of a
contract, do they not express the pleasure of the King, the will of the
Father, of the Judge, of a frtend, of such as have made any contract after the
same manner as the vocal word and lively voice? And shall not we make the
same account, of the instructions, of the Testament, of the sentence, of the
letters, of the authentic coppie of the contract, which our King has given
to his Ambassadors, our heavenly Father has left to us his children, the
Judge of the whole world has pronounced, the bridegroom has written to his
spouse, and which the mediator between God and men the Lord Jesus has sealed
with his blood? John. 5. 46.
For had ye believed Moses (says the Lord) ye would have believed me, and
nevertheless Moses then spoke not, Luke. 16. 29. v. 31.
but in and by his writings. They have Moses and the Prophets, said Abraham to
the rich glutton, if they hear not Moses and the Prophets, speaking of the
rich man's brethren, neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the
dead. And yet who doubts but that in those days Moses and the Prophets were
not living in the world, nor spoke unto the world any other way, but in and by
their writings: so true it is that he who imparts to us his mind by writing,
does speak and converse with us, albeit we hear not his voice. And therefore
since we have, as we acknowledge on both sides, the writings not only of Moses
and the Prophets, but also of the Evangelists and Apostles, Why should not we
hearken unto Moses and the Prophets, unto the Evangelists and Apostles? why
shall we say, under a pretext that they are dead, that they speak no more? Do
they not speak all at this day in the same manner as Moses and the Prophets
did when Abraham willed that we should give ear unto them? And since it is
most true that the Scripture is given by inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3. 16. 2.
Pet. 1. 10.
that it is not of private interpretation, why should not we receive it with
the the same reverence, which we would yield unto it, if we should hear him
delivering it by word of mouth unto the Prophets and Apostles? the letter and
the word change not the signification, neither the force and efficacy of it,
like as the voice and sound (with men of understanding adds little or nothing
unto it. But yet if we so much desire the sound and noise of the voice, let us
hear this word propounded, let us hear it preached, let us hear it red. But
as we hear the Crier and Sargeants proclaim the ordinances, and decrees of
the Court, when they put them in execution, without attributing (for all that)
unto them the title and honor of Judges: yea if we find but the coppie of them
fixed in our absence on our doors, we read it with reverence and readily obey
it, so that there is no need of the personal presence of the Judge, who is
sufficiently enough present, when he speaks unto us by his decree: Let us
then at least, bear the same respect toward the celestial Judge and his
holy decree, which we do toward an earthly Judge, toward human ordinances,
although we have but the copy of it, let us read it with humility, let us obey
it with zeal, let us not require that the invisible should make himself
otherwise visible unto us, that the dead should rise from the grave; yea let us
rather meditate on this truth, we have Moses, we have the Prophets, if we
hear not them (to wit) speaking in their writings, we should not a jot sooner
be persuaded, if they should rise again from the dead and speak unto us.

CHAP. 10.
The verification of the second means of Nullity against the the second
allegation.
WITH as little reason do they accuse the Scripture of obscurity: for if they
speak of the matter handled in the Scriptures, How the Scripture is obscure.
truly it surmounteth human sense and understanding in what manner soever it
be considered, either as it is proposed in the Scripture, or published in the
Church, it being altogether impossible to prove it by demonstrations, or to
set it down by way of conclusions, and principles as in other sciences: But
this obscurity is easily resolved by the light of the spirit, which wanting in
the heart, it is no more possible to judge of the truth, whether it be
considered as written and delivered in the Scripture, or heard, as preached by
the Church, the^ it is possible for a blind man to judge of colors, and of the
light of the sun: or a foolish and mad man of true wisdom. Whence it
appears, that it is not the sentence of an external Judge which can order
this rebellion of human understanding against the truth of God, seeing
question is made, of convincing the conscience which is the proper work of God
leading by the force of his spirit every thought captive under the obedience of
Christ. 2. Cor. 10. 5.
As neither it is the authority of the earthly Judge in civil causes, which
can convince the party in his conscience, but the acknowledgement and
feeling that he has in his soul, of the equity and justice of the sentence,
of the which as long as it remains unknown unto him he cannot be
satisfied, though he may be constrained externally to obey it.

In matter therefore of Religion, when men go not about to constrain, What
kind of Judge requisite for the Church.
but to persuade, not to stop the mouth by violence, but to convince the
heart; no question is to be made in this case of having an external Judge
determining by definitive sentence, but rather of an internal Doctor
persuading the heart. John 6. 44.
For no man comes to me (says our Savior) except the Father draw him,
alleging to this purpose the Scripture speaking of the Prophets, and saying
that they shall be all taught of God. Isaiah 54. 1^.
But if they speak not of the obscurity of the matter which is handled in the
Scripture, but of that of the phrase and manner of speaking and of that of the
words used by the holy spirit in expressing of it, without doubt they accuse
the holy spirit either of inability, or unwillingness to express himself
intelligibly. But neither the one nor the other can be said of him, without
detracting either from his wisdom, or his goodness. Certainly that law of which
David speaks which he magnifieth so much, for it is light that he calls it a
lantern to his feet, Psalm. 119. v. 105. Psalm. 19.
and a light unto his path, making wise the simple, was a written law, was the
Scripture, which gives by this reckoning understanding not only to the
Prophets and great ones, but also to the most simple and ignorant, this was the
Scripture of which the Apostle speaks when he says that whatsoever things
have been written before time have been written for our learning: Romans 15. 4.
and therefore by the same reason clearly and plainly, there being no greater
enemy to learning then obscurity. It was the Scripture which he termed to be
given by inspiration of God, 2. Tim. 1. 19.
and profitable to teach and instruct; how can this be if it be obscure?
likewise he says, that Timothy had known the holy Scriptures from his child
hood nay (...) from his very infancy. do we use to read dark, obscure
authors unto little children? It was the Scripture which the Apostle Saint
Peter calls a light that shines in a dark place. 2. Pet. 1. 19.
And what difference is there between darkness and light, a lantern and
obscurity? And to be breife, it was the scripture, the reading of which has
been so much recommended, by the Ancient Fathers; namely, by Saint Chrysostom
whose exhortation so patheticall and pithy, Chris^st. he^. 3. de Laz.
so often reiterated and inculcated show plainly that this abuse of not reading
the Scriptures, under a color of their obscurity, did long ago in his time
begin to creep into the Church, but was neither received nor approved by it as
now it is.

And here it may be some will say unto us that it cannot be denied, Objection
for the obscurity of the Scripture. Answer.
but the Scripture is obscure, otherwise to what end serve so many
commentaries, homelies, and sermons? But the answer is very easy that we deny
not that the Scripture is in many places very obscure, God having so ordained
it of his infinite wisdom, for to beat down the presumption of man, and to
rouse up his laziness to a holy study, and diligent reading of it; as S^
Augustine has very well observed. But we say with the same Father, That in
those things that are most plainly set down in the Scripture are contained
all things which concern faith and good manners. For as touching what is over,
and above that, the whole militant Church were it united in one, were not able
to expound all the obscure places in the Scripture, otherwise she would not
have been, so uncharitable as not to have taken care to have furnished her
children with an ample and authenticke conmentary, which might make all the
Scripture clear and without obscurity; And as touching preaching and
commentaries, they serve not always to illustrate, and explain, but
oftentimes to delate and amplify, and when they do illustrate, they do it not
by any light borrowed elsewhere then from the Scripture itself, interpreting
the Scriptures by the Scriptures themselves following therein the Council of
the Fathers, and the practice of the Levites, of whom it is written that they
did read in the book of the law of God expounding it, Nehem. 8. 8.
and rendering the true sense of it, causing it to be understood by the
Scripture. So that we way judge of the sense of that which is obscure, by the
sense of that which is clear, and likewise discern whether the interpretation
be agreeable to the place of the Scriptures, by that which goes before, and
follows after, whereas in a place that is difficult, to speak properly, when
the interpretation of it is given cannot be received but upon credit, and with
relation to the authority of the interpretors, because in such a case we
cannot see the correspondence that is between the Text and the commentary, the
words and the sense, which cannot be said of good and whole some interpretation
of the Scripture which therefore ought not to be condemned of obscurity.

CHAP. 11.
The verification of the second means of Nullity against the third and fourth
allegation*
The third accusation of ambiguitie is as unjust as the two former; for if the
Scripture had been ambiguous, and capable of diverse interpretations, how had
it bin possible for the Apostle S^ Paul to convince the Jews by the
Scriptures? can one by any saying having an ambiguous and double meaning, force
the understanding and the conscience of an obdurate and obstinate enemy? how
could the Jews of Berea examine by the Scripture the doctrine of the same
Apostle S. Paul? That which is ambiguous, and may be bent too and fro can it
serve for a rule? the question not being of a Lesbian rule which is rather
ruled then does rule, and measured, then it self a measure, which is bowed and
bended whither soever we list, but of a certain and constant rule which is
always the same. And how did our Lord employ, not only his authority, as the
son of God, but the Scripture it self, when he would prove the resurrection
of the dead against the Sadduces, and so pregnantly that even the Devil
himself with all his sophistry could not answer the argument, shall we think
he proved a truth which he undertook to clear, and put out of all doubt by a
passage, the sense whereof was doubtful and uncertain? And what, (for we also
allege the Fathers) are not both Athanasius and S. Augustine of this opinion?
that by a due consideration had of what goes before, and what follows after,
and by the consent and agreement it has with the Principal scope of the
matter which is there treated of, the Scriptures are to be interpreted against
heretics. How could it be shown by the same Scriptures which is yet daily
practiced that a false and heretical interpretation does not agree to the
Scripture? And finally is it in conscience seemly in calling the Scriptures
ambiguous, to brand them, and disgrace them so far, as to fasten upon them
the mark of Satan's Oracles? If they had been such; if Tertullian had believed
them to be such, the heretics had never given them occasion to call them, he
himself had never called them, Lucifugas Scripturarum, such as shun and fly
the Scripture as the oule or batte does the clear sunshine.

The fourth accusation of the imperfection of the Scripture is noe less
grevious, and unjust: for since the Scripture has been ordained of God to
make men wise unto salvation, ^. Timoth. 3. 15. ^7.
and perfect unto every good work. It must without doubt contain all doctrine
necessary to salvation, otherwise it could not attain its end. And since
Scripture it self does promise this so exact and perfect doctrine, either its
witness is not of God, or what it testifies of it self is true. Nay which is
more, God has expressly prohibited to add to it, or to diminish any thing
from it. And if this has had place in the old Testament, shall it not in the
new which is much more full and perfect? it is not to be believed. Let us then
adore, as Tertullian speaks, the fullness of the Scriptures, and let us not
hear (as Athanasius speaks) neither receive any thing besides or above the^
in that which concerns the doctrine of faith. For touching the policy, and
ceremonies used in the Church; it is another matter, we avouch that the
Fathers did not think themselves bound to give an account of them by the
Scripture. But a great part of those ceremonies used in their times has bin
quite abolished, so that they are no longer in use, no not in the Romish
Church, which notwithstanding does glory so much for keeping and observing of
traditions approved by antiquity, and received for Apostolical.

CHAP. 12.
The verification of the second means of nullity against the fifth allegation.
TOuching the fifth allegation that the Scripture cannot be the rule, seeing it
cannot put an end to the dissentions of them, who make profession to keep
themselves strictly unto it, is also wonderfully perverse. For question is not
made of such a rule, as unto which, all those should truly and indeed conform
themselves, who make a show so to do, neither of finding such a Judge, as all
they who profess to yield, and refer themselves to his judgment, should in
effect perform it: so long as the Church shall be militant here on earth, such
a rule, such a Judge will not be found. But the question is of finding a rule,
of finding a Judge, to whom whosoever shall submit himself, to which whosoever
shall conform himself, shall not disagree from those who do the like?
Otherwise albeit that passion, and malice hinder not that men may seem to hold
themselves to one certain rule, of which the doctrine is evident and plain,
for to disguise the business and color over a bad cause these vices
notwithstanding will not suffer us in truth to conform our selves thereunto,
as is seen in the example of the heretics above alleged, who did protest to
keep themselves to the Council of Nice, and to the traditions of the Fathers.
Moreover we do not seek a rule to which whosoever conformeth himself does it
wholly in all points. For it is well known that the Fathers did conform
themselves to the pattern of the Scripture, to the consent of the Church, and
yet which of them has done it so exactly? all of them by reason of human
infirmity, disagreing one with another, and oftentimes from themselves. He that
shall say, that therefore God speaking in the scripture is not Judge, by the
same reason should be forced to conclude, that neither the Church it self is
Judge. But the question is of finding a Judge, a rule which might cause
agreement at least in the Principal points, amongst all those who sincerely
desire the knowledge of truth.

There were betwixt the Christians and the Jews great controversies, they
protested both the one and the other that the Scripture was the rule. And St
Paul that he taught nothing but what the Prophets had foretold. And the Jews
would receive no other doctrine, but that of Moses and the Prophets: ceased he
therefore to convince the Jews by the Scriptures, and apply them as the rule
against them? And under color that the Jews boasting themselves in Moses
writings, agreed not with the Lords, who made as much or more reckoning of
them, did he forbear to tell them, John. 5. 46. 47.
had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me: but
if ye believe not his writings how shall ye believe my words? and in the verse
immediately going before. v. 45*
Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father, there is one that will
accuse you, even Moses in whom you trust.

CHAP. 13.
The verifying of the second means of Nullity against the sixth allegation.
BUT if heretics for answer unto the sixth accusation, lay claim to the
Scripture, it is not in effect and indeed but only in show. and therefore as
those who make some false Demonstrations in the Mathematics, although they
make use of principles of the science, are notwithstanding refuted and
convinced by the same principles, and therefore their error is no ways
preiudicious to the authority and certainty of the Mathematics: even so the
heretics, albeit for to cloak their heresy, they teere in pieces the
Scripture, and wrest it to their sense, ought nevertheless to be convinced,
no otherwise, then by the same Scriptures of which the Lord has left unto us a
notable example in his person, when being tempted by Satan who applied and used
against him the scripture, he repelled the temptation by the same scripture:
the holy Fathers also did they leave of to beat down heresy, even so far
as to put it to death, by this sword of the spirit, albeit that heresy also in
show made use of it. Truly the heretics forge their heresy first in their
heads, and then afterward seek it in the Scripture, Tertul. de resur. car.
cap. 3. Vt de Scripturis solis quaestiones suas sistant stare non poterunt.
which favors them so little, that if their controversies were to be
determined by it, they would not subsist, as very well said Tertullian, who had
never suffered himself to be carried away to the vain fancies of Montanus, if
he had firmly held this his Maxim.

CHAP. 14.
The verifying of the second means of Nullity against the seventh allegation.
AS for the Councels if we lived in the times of the Apostles, we should
think it very expedient to entreat them to assemble themselves in a Council
to determine our controversies: Their quality, the authority of their charge,
or rather the extraordinary gifts, and the particular assistance of the holy
Ghost, giving them this advantage of being both able and willing to judge
infalliblie; human ignorance would not blind their eyes that they could not
see the truth, and the fear of a Pope, of an Emperor, of Kings, would not
hinder them to utter it. But we stand not now at this day, on such terms, this
infallibility is no where to be found, there are no more Prophets, no
Evangelists but only as they exhibit themselves to us in their writings: every
leader of the Church taken a part, is subject to err, and all united together
in one body, bring with them their portion of infirmity, the weakness of
humane nature, passion, particular interest may intermingle themselves into
their consultations, and so hoodwinke their eyes that they cannot see the
truth, or so tie their tongues that they cannot utter it. Witness the truth
of this the history of the Council of Trent, * set forth by those who were
engaged more then ordinary to cover its shame, And. Duellij orationes in
Concilio Tride^tino habitae. Examen Concilij Trident: Innocentio Gentileto
authore.
avowed and evidently received in this Kingdom of France, to strengthen the
opposition which has bin always framed against it, and to uphold the liberty
of the French Church, a history which none has been able to disprove to this
day.

But here it may be said, has not then the Lord in vain promised his
assistance, if we should yet doubt of the infallibility of the determinations
of the Councels? See the instructions and letters of the Kings of France and
their Ambassadors with the letters of the Emperors and Princes of Germany.
But esp^cially read the history of the Council of Trent by Pietro S^ane.
God forbid, for is it not doubted, nay is it not formally denied that
particular Synodes are infallible? Is it not avouched that they have erred, and
yet the promise of the Lord remains still true? And it will avail nothing to
reply here, that the promise was not made to particular Councels, but to the
general which are called Oecumenicall. For the Lord has promised to be as well
in themid'st of two or three gathered together in his name, as of a whole
multitude. If this promise hinders not, but two or three may err, how shall
it oblige us to judge better of a multitude? what then the Lord shall not he
keep his promise, and shall not he be justified when he speaks? nay, let
every man be declared a liar, that the Lord may be acknowledged faithful and
true: for he has promised not to a multitude only, but also to two or three
the assistance of his spirit in their consultations, to wit, if they be
gathered together in his name, if they seek him in truth. But who can
discern who are they; if not by the holiness of their constitutions, which if
it be not found in them, we are not bound to believe that they were assembled
in the name of Christ, nor consequently that they have been made pertakers of
the benefit of such an excellent promise. Saint Augustine well knew this truth
when he affirmed that the Counsels even those which are general may be
corrected and reformed.

To what good then serve the Councels? truly oftentimes they are so far from
being good, that they are pernicious: for if the number of those which are
good be the less without doubt the multitude will carry it, and it will be
as the Council of the four hundred Prophets and one, holden in the presence
of Iehosaphat, and Ahab, where the 400 evil prophets crushed the one good, and
carried it notwithstanding all the resistance he could make. For which cause
the Religious wisdom of holy Athanasius cannot sufficiently be praised,
opposing himself against them, who required Synodes under pretense of
reforming the faith, in alleging unto them that we have the Scripture more
proper for this purpose then any other means whatsoever, yea that because he
doubted least the multitude of the worser part might sway the balance. In the
time of Gregory Nazianzen things were come to such a height of corruption,
that being summoned by Procopius in the Emperors name to come to a Synod,
Epist. ^5. Quo^^^m nu^lius Concil^j finem l^tum and faustum vi^i.
he excused himself saying, that he never saw any good issue of a synod.
But when a Council may be held composed of men well red in the Scripture,
zealous of the glory of God, lovers of the peace of the Church, there is no
doubt but such an assembly may bring forth much good, because it might clear,
that which is difficult, not by it is own authority, but by it is sufficiency.
Even as when a window is opened by a strong dextrous hand, which was shut up
before; the more weak and unable who could not open it, do see the sun,
perceive the opening, not because of any authority of him that opened it, but
by reason of his strength, and dexterity manifesting it self by a visible and
sensible effect. But such Councels we may rather wish then look for. The
deluge of vices which has overflowed Christendom having drawn upon us this
horrible judgment. Such was that first Council of Nice, that took the
Scripture only for the rule and square of it is judgment, and refused not to
submit it self to the touchstone and trial, as S^ Athanasius witnesses,
proposing to other Councels, or rather conventicles, the example of this
Councels modesty to make them blush with shame and confound their pride.

And indeed it was a remarkable thing, that the Fathers protested that they
would not use the authority of the Council of Nice against the Arrians, but of
the scripture, upon which the Council of Nice is founded, what shall we then
conclude, but that we ought to approve of the good Counsels, receive their
ordinances with reverence, not because they could not err, but if so they have
not erred, and argue in this manner against Heretics, when matter of right is
called in question. The Council has so concluded according to the Scripture,
therefore it is true: and not after this manner. The Council has so
concluded, therefore it is so. But in matter of fact and touching history, to
judge what is that which is universally believed and received, and by the
greater part, we may well conclude from the determination of an Oecumenicall
Council, that it is believed and received generally: And therefore the
Counsels also are good for this purpose to stop the mouth of Heretics, who
might pretend the consent of the Church, and by such a protestation give some
scandal to the weaker, which by this means may easily be taken away.

Truly if the Councels had thought that their consultatio^s should be approved,
because of their authority simply; and not much more rather, for the truth of
them, and their conformity with the Scriptures, they had never inserted in
their acts the places of Scripture, the reasons on which they grounded
themselves, they had never framed us, a man may say, a verbal process of all
that had passed, but they would have contented themselves to have inserted the
Canons only without any further declaration, but not proceeding after this
manner, they would give us a reason of their deliberation, and recommend
themselves famous, not by the usurpation of a sovereign authority, but by a
declaration and exposition of the truth, that so our faith might not be
grounded upon humane authority, but upon that of the living God.

And truly to what end is the ceremony of laying the bible upon the table in a
Council; is it not to declare that it is authority is ruled by a Law? and as a
Judge in a politic estate, who has the Princes Law for his rule, ought to
judge according to that law, and is accountable for his judgment: so are the
Councels to determine according to the Scripture, and are bound to make
apparent unto the conscience, as much as lies in them, that they have judged
according unto it: but some may say, Councels at lest are subordinate Judges.
Be it so; but we seek a Sovereign Judge, a Judge from whom it is not
lawful to appeal, an infallible Judge. This authority, this privilege cannot
be given to Councels. We seek a Judge that is always on bench giving
audience, a Judge to whom we may at all times have recourse, and such Councels
cannot be.

CHAP. 15.
The verifying of the second means of Nullity against the eight allegation by
declaring the impertinasy thereof.
THe last point remains to be cleared, to wit, whether the uncertainty of
humane judgment can cause that God speaking in the Scripture should not be
fit to be our Judge, since a man cannot know, neither who has, nor whether he
himself has the holy spirit, or not, And here first of all could we answer
that touching the matter in hand, the question is not whether we can know
immediately, or as the School speaks a priori, who has the holy Ghost: but
only who speaks according to the Scriptures, which being resolved, by
conferring the Scriptures, with that which is proposed, we may easily
conclude, if passion and malice darken not the understanding who proposes the
words of the holy Ghost, and by this means discern a posteriori as they say
who has the spirit, seeing that in regard of Pastors and Doctors none preach
the word of the spirit but those to whom the spirit has suggested them, how
wicked and detestable soever otherwise they may be. So that the question is
brought to matter of fact, to wit; who proposes that which is contained in
the Scripture, which question is cleared in examining the Doctrine proposed by
the Scripture; as the proportion of a building is known by applying of the
square and level. For example, the Jews of Boerea did not directly and a
priori inquire whether Saint Paul when he preached unto them was inspired of
the holy spirit, or no; it had been an impossible thing for them, seeing it is
the property of God alone to be the searcher of hearts. But they made inquiry
for all that whether Saint Paul did speak according to the Scriptures, and
having by conferring of Saint Paul's doctrine with the Scriptures, discovered
the conformity, and how they answered the one to the other, they judged truly,
and as indeed it was, to wit, that Saint Paul spoke not of himself, but by the
holy spirit. Yea the Ancients themselves, having to do with heretics who made
show to hold the Scripture for their rule, have not refused to dispute before a
Pagan Judge, who although by reason of his unbelief he was not capable to
judge whether of two parties maintained the truth, pronounced nevertheless and
very happily which of the two concluded most conformably to the Scripture,
which both the one and the other alleged for their purpose, but the same
suffices us at this day in our controversies: for if it be apparent who speak
according to the Scriptures, no man who makes profession of Christianity
doubting of the Scripture, the conclusion will be plain and evident, that
whosoever he be, speaks according to truth, and by the spirit of truth: There
is much difference between believing the Principles of Christian Religion, and
judging who teach most conformably to those principles. To the first, faith and
the illumination of the holy spirit, are absolutely necessary: for the second,
common sense is sufficient. To believe that the Scripture is true, when it
teaches us that there is but one God, that the Father is God, the Son God,
and the holy Ghost also, that the Father is not the Son nor the holy Ghost,
neither the one nor the other, for this faith only is required. But to infer
from thence that the nature of God is one in number, that the persons of the
Trinity are distinct, yet not divided, that they communicate in one and the
same nature, for this I say common sense alone suffices, which cannot deny the
consequent, the truth of the antecedent once granted, which without all doubt
cannot be comprehended but by faith. It is then in vain to ask who shall
judge of the consequences, as if a man having learned in a history how many
companies and how many soldiers in every company were in an army, how many
troops of horse, and how many horsemen in every troop, one should demand who
shall judge whether the number of the soldiers of which the army did consist
be rightly collected from thence: In like manner if we can prove by the
Scripture that, that which Christ gave to his disciples, was bread broken, and
if we prove by the same Scripture that the body of Christ is not broken in the
Eucharist, and that yet much less the bread broken is Christ's body, to dema^d
here who shall judge whether a man may infer from hence that the Lord gave
not us externally his own body in the Eucharist is all one as to ask, who has
common sense. Likewise, when the Apostle says, that we are saved by grace,
through faith, and that not of our selves, Ephesians. 2. 8* 9.
it is the gift of God, not of works least any man should Boast, If it be
asked here who shall judge, whether it can be gathered from hence, that we are
not saved by the merit of our works, but by faith, wholly relying upon this
grace, without having merited it our selves by any works of ours? is not this
to ask how a man might know that he is in his senses? But if the consequence
be so obscure, that it is hard to judge of it, this is an argument that there
is no consequence at all: the nature of which is such, that in a manner it
forces our understanding to yield unto it, and to allow of it, albeit we had
studied in no other logic then that of nature.

CHAP. 16.
The verifying of the second means of Nullity against the eight allegation by
declaring the untruth thereof.
BUT if we proceed so far as to demand how we may know, whether the
Scripture be the copy of the declared will of God, since a man cannot know,
neither who has, nor whether he himself has the spirit of God or no; the
answer is very easy, he who knows not whether he has the spirit or no,
belongs not to Christ; and therefore it is not strange if he knows not the
voice of Christ; but all those who belong to Christ are made partakers of his
spirit. Romans 8. 9. v. 14. 15. 16.
If any man has not the spirit of Christ he is none of his. As many as are
led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God, they have not received
the spirit of bondage again to fear, but the spirit of adoption which cries
Abba Father in their hearts.

The spirit it self bears witness to their spirit, Ephesians. 1. 13. 14.
that they are the children of God. They are sealed until the redemption of
the purchased possession, he is unto them a spirit of wisdom and revelation:
John 10. 3. 4. 5.
They are the sheep of Christ, they hear and know the voice of their
shepherd. They follow him, 1. Cor. 2. ^ 4. 15. 16.
and the voice of a stranger they will not follow but will fly from him, for
they know not his voice. The Father drives them to Christ, they are taught of
God, they have learned of the Father, 1. John 2. 27.
they are spiritual, and therefore comprehend the things that are of God,
because the spirit has revealed the^ unto them, and they are spiritually
discerned. They have received the anointing by the holy spirit and know all
things: 2. Cor. 3. 3. Ephesians. 3. 17. 1. Cor. 16. 19. Luke 1. 78.
God has written his laws in their hearts. Christ dwells there by faith. Their
bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost. And those who are adorned and
enriched so sumptuously, can they be ignorant of the excellency of the
diamond, and the magnificencie of the riches which they possess? Those who are
enlightened with such a light, upon whom the Lord causes the day to spring
from on high to shine, and the light of his countenance to airse, to whom he is
the sun and buckler, the sun of righteousness, bearing health under his
wings, whose eyes he has enlightened, can they doubt whether they walk in
his light?

Shall the natural man by his reason comprehend that he discourses, and the
spiritual man shall not he discern by the spirit, that he has the spirit?

And here some man may say unto us; But how many may be found who boast, nay
who think verily they have the spirit, and yet are grossly deceived; how many
have the spirit, and yet err oftentimes in their judgments? and indeed it is
so: but is it not either a strange perversity, or indiscretio^, to infer from
thence that none can know, that none can judge and discern assuredly to
salvation, the spiritual things which God has revealed outwardly to his by
his word, and inwardly by his spirit? For do we not see amongst men how many
there are who glory and deceive themselves with a false opinion of wisdom,
being indeed imprudent and foolish, and yet whosoever would conclude from
thence, that he who is truly wise, cannot know that he is so; should bring
into the world not that of the Academiques, but even the Pyrronian suspense of
judgment. If then the boasting and vanity of a fool, cannot prejudice the
assured knowledge, which he who is wise can, and ought to have of wisdom; no
more can the false persuasions of hypocrites which proceed from the illusio^
of Satan, shake the certainty of that assurance which proceeds from the sense
and feeling of the spirit dwelling in the heart of the spiritual man, and
giving as we have said, testimony to his spirit. Yea the conformity of his
motions with the word of the Scripture, assures and strengthens him, and
puts a difference between the sense and feeling he has, and that which
arises from the false illusion of Satan, which has no other rule then it
self. From the same fountain either of malice or vnadvisednesse it proceeds
that under pretense that those who have received the spirit do err sometimes,
they would conclude, that in that which is necessary to salvation they cannot
pass any certain judgment: for the wisest in the knowledge of worldly
businesses may offend against the rules of wisdom, and yet who will deny for
all this but they can give advise and sure counsel. We say, sure, according
to the rules of wisdom: For no man can answer for the event which is
oftentimes contrary to the wisdom of Counsel and favors rash attempts.
The learned are ignorant of many things, but not of such without which they
cannot deserve that name. As then the prudent differ not from fools in this
that they never commit any follies, but in this that their follies are not
gross, are not ordinary, and as the difference that is between the learned and
the ignorant co^sists in that which is the Principal in the Science which he
professes. The ignorant on the contrary is either ignorant of all, or knows
very little, and even that little which he knows to speak properly he
knows not. So the difference that is between the man spiritually wise, and
him that is ignorant according to the spirit, it is not in this that the
Spiritual man never, but in that he erres not grossly and ordinarily: Not in
that he knows all, but in that he knows all that which is necessary in his
profession, whereas he that is spiritually foolish and ignorant, erres almost
always, erres ordinarily, is ignorant of that which is necessary that he
should know for the making of himself such as he professes himself to be.
And even as there is a great disproportion between fools and wisemen in the
ordinary course and carriage of their lives; between the learned and ignorant
in the knowledge of good arts, and yet all the wise in that kind are not
equally wise, nor all the learned equally learned, nay in that very humane and
secular wisdom, and learning, there is no one perfectly wise, perfectly
learned: so great is the difference between those whom God has enlightened
with his knowledge, and those whom the eyes of their understanding the God of
this world has blinded, and yet there is no one amongst them all, who has
attained to the highest degree of perfection.

We conclude then, that as those that belong not to the Lord, cannot assure
themselves of his spirit, and by consequent cannot discern his word unto
salvation: so all those that are his, do feel the efficacy of his spirit in
their hearts, even as they feel and find in themselves by experience the use
of reason; and judge by the spirit of spiritual things proposed in the word,
after the same manner as by reason, they judge of things that can be
comprehended by it. It suffices us to have proved that the faithful have an
assured and certain rule in the Scripture.

CHAP. 17.
The verifying of the third means of nullity against the allegations.
And by these reasons we think we have made good the two first means of
Nullity proposed against the eight allegations; It remains that we verify
the third, to wit, that they tend to the subversion of Christian Religion.

To come then to the point, let vt first of all consider that their aim is to
prove that a Christian can have no assurance of his Religion of that which he
ought to believe, by the Scripture, because it is dumb, obscure, ambiguous,
imperfect, which cannot assure those who depend on it, and may be alleged in
favor of heretics. If that detestable opinion be once engrafted in the
heart, as it is set forth and maintained by word, and writing, what will become
I pray you of the authority of the Church, which is grounded upon the
Scripture? if the foundation of it be so falty, is it not to be feared that
the building will sink? If a Christian cannot, yea ought not to ground
himself upon the Scripture by reason of these pretended imperfections, with
what confidence shall he ground himself upon the authority of the Church,
which has no other foundation, then this foundation so imperfect, if the
foresaid allegations be true? But if the one and the other proppe of faith
fail, this of the scripture, and consequently that of the authority of the
Church grounded on the Scripture, (as of necessity when the foundation is
undermined, those that lean upon the wall must fall together with the wall)
what will become of the authority, of the assurance of Christian Religion? The
right of the Church is called in question, and she, either as a daughter
produces the scripture, the copy of the Testament of her Father, or as a
spouse brings forth the Scripture, the contract of her marriage, and this
Testament is found dumb, obscure, ambiguous, of a double meaning, being not
able to clear the night of the Church, nay which may be employed against her.
In this case what shall be the foundation? what the title? what the proofs of
the right of the Church? will they not be found (if we believe the allegations)
to be dumb, ambiguous, obscure, imperfect proofs? and consequently shall not
the right, instead of being confirmed, become invalide and of no force? And who
will not judge that the Church proceeds not fairly attributing to her self so
great authority, and maintaining it by proofs fo defective, or who will
believe that the same is the true Church, the true people of God, who show a
Testament, a covenant of God, co^tracted with her, which she confesses to be
set down in dumb words, obscure, ambiguous, applyable to every sense, and
which may be produced and urged against her self?

How will the Atheists laugh at this? and how, alas! will the consciences of
them be shaken, that believe and receive this opinion of the obscurity,
ambiguity, and insufficiency of the Scriptures?

Let us consider in the second place that their aim is to cast all Christians
into incertainty; striving to prove by these allegations that a man in what
concerns Religion ought to mistrust his own judgment, which being once
granted, how shall a man know whether he deceiues not himself in believing
that there is a Church? Here the Scripture cannot succor or help: for it is
presupposed that it cannot afford any certainty: It is laid for a foundation,
that a Christian hearing, reading, meditating on the Scripture may coozen and
deceive himself. Neither can a man in this straight have recourse to the
testimony of the holy Ghost; for the allegation presupposes, that it cannot be
known neither who has, neither whether a man himself has the holy spirit or
no. And as for the authority of the Church, it cannot be alleged, for
question may be made whether there be any Church at all. As then to him who
should doubt whether there ought to be a Pope in the world, it would seem
strange and far from the purpose to allege the testimony of the Pope, for to
persuade him that there ought to be one: Even so when we are to prove, that
there is a Church, it is in vain to allege the testimony of the Church. If
then Christian Religion has no foundation either in the Scripture, or in the
testimony of the holy Ghost, or in the authority of the Church, as it follows
from the allegation, where shall she seek, where shall she find whereupon
to uphold her self? shall it be in Philosophy? there much less; for if a
Christian man cannot judge whether there be a Church by the spirit; as not
being able to assure himself whether he has the spirit, much less able
shall he be to do it by his reason, which without the spirit is stark blind
in spiritual things.

Let us in the third place consider that in the disputes touching the marks
and notes of the Church, it is questioned what they are? one is of one opinion,
another of another, whence may a certain knowledge of them be had? shall it
be from the Scripture? but the allegation presupposes that it is impossible:
shall it be from the Church? never the nearer: for it so little appears which
is the Church, that it is controversed what are her marks by which she is
known.

Let us in the fourth place consider, (that grant we had found the marks of
the Church, according to the allegation which casts men into incertitude,) it
could not be discerned to what congregation to apply them, amongst so many and
diverse assemblies, who challenge them: for it is supposed as granted according
to the allegation, that the Scripture cannot here guide us, that we may
deceive our selves in making the choice: and the testimony of the Church can as
little help us, if first of all it be not presupposed that it has the marks
of the Church, which is the point in question: for we seek in what Church the
marks of the Church are to be found: and to rely herein upon the testimony of
the Church does presuppose that we know already in what Church the marks of
the Church are found.

Let us in the fifth place consider that according to the allegations there is
no means how a man converted to the Church, can be assured of his Religion:
For if he has not been convinced by lawful arguments, neither his
profession, which followed the conviction of his conscience shall be lawful.
It is very certain that if the foundation of his faith who has been
converted, be the authority of the Church, the foundation of his conversion
has not been lawful. for there was no means to persuade him, that the
Church has any such authority; in alleging to him the testimony of the
Church. And the allegation of Scripture, and of reason according to their
supposition, is not a lawful means to resolve the conscience. Having bin then
brought to acknowledge the authority of the Church founded upon these
arguments, it cannot be but weak and unlawful; and consequently the belief
of all that he has believed, as depending upon the authority which he gives
unto the Church. And indeed if such a one whom we would convert does question
the authority of the Church, shall we prove unto him that whereof he doubts,
by alleging unto him that whereof he makes likewise doubt? the argument then
of his conversion to the acknowledgment of the Church cannot have been the
authority of the Church. If then no man can be assured of the foundation of
his conversion, no more neither can he be which is builded upon the
foundation.

In the sixth place let us observe that the Church which is called Catholic
never speaks by word of mouth, they are the particulars that are her Heralds.
It may be demanded then by what means a man may be assured that they
discharge their place faithfully, since they may err in proposing doctrine
contrary to the meaning of the Church? This cannot be by the Scripture: for
according to the allegation, truth and falsehood cannot be discerned by it; no,
nor by the testimony of the Church; for he speaks not but by particular men,
of whom it is doubted whether they have faithfully reported the determination
of the Church.

In the Seventh place let us consider, that if the authority of the Church be
the foundation of faith, every one shall believe because his companion has
believed: and so christian religion shall be made ridiculous: for seeing the
Church is a congregation of persons in which every one grounds his faith upon
the authority of the whole congregation of which they are Members, it will
necessarily follow, that every one of them shall believe apart because all have
believed together.

In the eight place let us weigh this horrible inconvenience, that we shall not
believe the mysteries of the Trinit, of the incarnation of the redemption of
mankind, but by hearsay, because our Ancestors, our Parents, our fellow
burgesses, have believed so; and shall not believe that they have been the
Church of God, but because they have left this testimony of themselves, which
the Jews may usurp with the like appearance of right, if we renounce the
authority of Scriptures.

Now have we verified this last means of Nullity not to incense any, (God is
our witness) but to show if it be possible, into what, and how many execrable
absurdities some amongst them unadvisedly precipitate themselves, who by the
means of these allegations endeavor to draw us from the judgment of God
speaking in the Scripture, to the judgment of men pretending the title of the
Church being most certain that he who urged principally this business, if we
way be judge of him according to his writings aimed especially to lay the
fou^datio^ of Atheism, not that his intent was to overthrow the Romish
Religion. He was a French man and a lover of public peace, he did know that
so to maintain it, it behooved that the most welcome and the most approved
Religion was to be maintained. We think it not strange, that he should have
commended in public the Romish Religion: from thence he had his means: But
we are extremely displeased, that he durst testify by his writings his
contempt, and little respect of all Religion.

Furthermore as we have proved the iniquity of the judgment which the Doctors
who call themselves Catholics pass on the Scripture: so we hope that it
will be easy to see their assigneme^t of a judge in sending us to the Church,
is either illusiue or impossible; illusiue, if by the Church they understand
themselves: for since they are our opposite parties, they cannot be our
judges. Impossible if by the Church they understand the mystical body of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom only notwithstanding the promises have been made;
For who can distinctly point out the members of that body but he alone who
is the head? And who can then assemble them? And if this be impossible, how
shall that Church be the judge which we require? A speaking Judge, a well know
Judge, to whom all may have their recourse, by whom all may be resolved. And
therefore we persist in our demand that we may be remitted to answer before
that unsuspected Judge, and acknowledged of all parties, to wit, God speaking
in the Scriptures.

Let us conclude then with Optatus Mileuitanus; Optatus Episcopus Mileuitanus
contra Parmenianum lib. 5. Tomo. 2. Bibliothaec. patrum. page 393. columna. 1.
editione Parisiensi 1575. Nemo vobis credat, nemo nobis: omnes contensiosi
homines sumus, Quaerendi sunt judices ^^i Christiani, de vtraque part dari non
possunt, deforis quaerendus est judex. si Paganus, non potest nos^e Christiana
secreta, si Iudaeus, inimicus est Christiani baptismatis. Ergo in terris de hac
re nullum poterit reperiri iudicium: de coelo quaerendus est iudex sed vt quid
pulsamus ad coelum, cum habeamus hic in Evangelio Testamentum? Quia hoc loco
recte possunt terrena coelestibus comparari: tale est, quod qu^uis hominum
habens numerosos filios. His quamdiu pater praesens est, ipse imperat singulis:
non est adhuc necessarium testamentum. Sic and Christus, quamdiu praesens in
terris fuit (quamuis nec modo desit) pro tempore quicquid necessarium erat,
Apostolis imperavit Sed quomodo terrenus pater cum se in confinio senserit
mortis, timens ne post mortem ^uam rupta pace, litigent frattes, adhibitis
testibus voluntatem suam de pectore morituro transfert in tabulas diu
duraturas. Et si fuerit inter fratres contentio nata, non itur ad tumulum, sed
quaeritur testamentum. Et qui in tumulo quiescit, tacitis de tabulis loquitur
viuus. Is; cuius est testamentum in caelo est. Ergo voluntas eius, velut in
testamento, sic in Evangelio inquiratur.
Let no body believe you, let no body believe us, for indeed we are opposite
parties. We must seek then Judges; if we take them from among Christians;
they can be neither of the one nor the other party, they must be sought then
without If we call a Pagan, he knows not Christian mysteries; if a Jew, he
is an enemy of Christian Baptism. We cannot then find on earth any Judge of
this business, we mnst then seek a Judge from heaven. But why knock we at
heavens gate, since we have the TESTAMENT in the Gospel? for here we may
compare terrestrial things with celestial: it is as if a man had many
children; whilst he is with them he governs and commands every one of
them; his Testament is not as yet necessary. But as the terrestrial father
finding himself nere his end, and fearing that after his death, the bond of
peace being broken, contentions and debates may arise amongst the brothers;
calling witnesses, signeth in tabls to endure for ever, that which he has
within his dying heart, that if there happen any strife between the brothers;
it shall not be needful to go to the grave, but that the Testament be sought for
in the dumb tables, from whence, he that rests quietly in his grave, ^^eakes
lively; The testator is in heaven: let us search then his will in the Gospel
as in his testament.

For according to the saying of Chrysostom, Homil in Ps 95. (...) 3. p. (...)
Duca^^ 16^1. (...)
If any thing be said without the Scripture, the spirit of the hearer halteth,
now assenting, anon doubting; sometimes rejecting the words as friuilous* and
presently receiving the same again as probable: But when the testimony of Gods
word is produced out of the Scripture, i^ strengthens as well the discourse of
the speaker, as the spirit of (...) And would it not be very absurd* says the
same Father, not to trust another in a matter of monye, but to account, and
^^ll it on's self: and nevertheless when the determining of th^se so weighty
matters is in hand, to suffer himself to be drawn as it were by force, and
inconsiderately, to another man's opinion; especially having an exact scale,
rule, and square, to wit, the declaration of the holy Scriptures? And therefore
I adjure, and pray you all, that you leave that which seems Good to this man
or to that man, and that ye inquire of the Scriptures concerning these things.
(...) 13. in ^ epist. ad (...) finem ex ed^io^ Com^liona^ 84* (...)


Galat. 6. v. 16. As man^ as walk according to this rule, peace be on them,
and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. FINIS.

