A SPIRITVALL COMBAT: A TRIAL OF A FAITHFVLL SOVLE OR CONSOLATION IN
TEMPTATION.

Written in French by I. P. CAMVS Bishope of Belley, and translated into
English by M. C. P. of the Eng. Coll. of Doway.

AT DOWAY, By the widow of MARK WYON, at the sign of the Phoenix.

M. DC. XXXII.

(...) riers. There is a grant given of a hiden Manna: but to such as fight,
as fight lawfully, as overcome. There is a blessing, a crown, a crown of life
promised: but after trial by temptation. Heaven is our Land of Promis, yet if
we be not fedd with some consolation we run hazard to fail in the way.

This book, a SPIRITVALL COMBAT; A TRIAL OF A FAITHFVLL SOVLE; or, A
CONSOLATION IN TEMPTATION; (for which of the three is most proper, the Author
makes doubt) seems voluntarily and without constraint to refer unto all
these. As it exhibites a SPIRITVALL COMBAT, we may learn the posture, the
defense, the comportment of a Spiritual Combatant; in a word, to fight, to
fight lawfully, to overcome, to bear away the hidden Manna. As it expresses A
TRIAL OF A FAITHFVLL SOVLE, we may discover in it, our own defectes, our
disordered fighting, our weakness, want of courage; thence endeavor to correct;
to order; and as it conteynes CONSOLATION, to revive, solace, and reinforce our
decaying courage. This is the whole scope and end. And, MADAME, though I know,
that what is here in precept, is your Honors in practice; nor can I doubt, but
that your noble, obedient, and virtuous Daughters, knowing S. James his
counsel, did then make provision against temptation, when hearing the divine
inuitations, and seeing his goodness, they inclyned their ear to his
Evangelical Counsels, forgott their people, friends, favorites, fathers
Family, to become Spouses to that heavenly King, who coueted their beauty, to
walk amongst the lilies of chastity in the forsaken ways of the Heavenly
Jerusalem. Yet can I never think, that too much water can be brought to the
extinguishing of so common a flame, or too much skill atchiued to fight with
three so powrefull, and guilefull enemies, the world, the flesh, and the
Devil. Your Honor will voutchsafe to patronise this poor piece, and propose
it to your pious childrens viewes. I will not dare so much to distract you in
your more serious affairs, as to inuit you to become a spectatrix of this
Battle, since there is in it no feate you already know not, yet this I dare
promis, that if leisure permit you to cast an eye upon it, you shall not fail
to draw comfort from it, while you speculate that in the advice of a Pious and
learned Bishope, which you have so long, frequently, and happily practiced;
such approbation giving assurance; such assurance dilating, and as it were,
blessing your mind: a mind full of prime nobility, pure Religion, solid
piety, prudence, candor, and native goodness. A pen that had a design to
praise, could not but joy to address upon so rich a subject, where the most
flourishing rethoricke would fall short of a due expression: where nobility
wonders to see it self got to the top of perfection: perfection joys to be
inshrined in so goodly a case, seated in so noble a heart. Where, in fine, even
envy it self finds not what to dispraise, with any specious show of truth.
But what I cannot speak, my strife shall be not to spoil. I would not my
pronenesse to please, (not seconded with performance,) should offend the
respect I bear, and homage I desire to do, to virtue in your Honor, which, I
doubt not, will engage some more able pen to register it in a fixed monime^t
for Posterity. While I, living in admiration of what I have seen, but cannot
say, may be numbered amongst

\Your Honors obseruant and best wishing servants MILES CAR.

To the Reader.
THE little stars which do occur to the Reader all through the book, are
put to mark out the places where the Author alluded to Scripture, yet rarely
used the precise words thereof, and therefore could not so well be put in a diverse
letter. The book was written to one afflicted with temptations of infidelity
or blasphemy, but may be applied to any other temptation.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
First part.
Chap. 1. THe Pastour's Duty. Page 1. Chap. 2. Prayer to God for a soul in
temptation. p. 9. Chap. 3. An encouragement. p. 14. Chap. 4. The profit of
temptation. p. 19. Chap. 5. The estate of a soul in temptation. p. 24. Chap.
6. Happy estate, and sign of Gods favor. p. 31. Chap. 7. An wholesome Fear.
p. 39. Chap. 8. To doubt and to consent are incompatible. p. 44. Chap. 9. That
in the temptation we are to fear the fault and not the pain. p. 46. Chap. 10.
Grief for Peace lost. p. 52. Chap. 11. A lenitiue. p. 57. Chap. 12. God's
assistance in temptation. p. 60. Chap. 13. Profit drawn from temptation. p.
65. Chap. 14. Temptation glorious. p. 68 Chap. 15. The Idea's which are in the
mind or before it. p. 73. Chap. 16. Temptation is atryall. p. 78. Chap. 17. A
sleight of selfeloue in temptation. p. 86. Chap. 18. Distrust of ones self and
confidence in God. p. 93. Chap. 19. Of Patience. p. 102. Chap. 20. That a
moderate co^plainte is no sign of impatience. p. 107. Chap. 21. The pain of
temptation is a participation of our Saviors passion. p. 112. Chap. 22. How
honorable this Trial is. p. 117. Chap. 23. It is one of the Marks of
Election. p. 124. Chap. 24. Temptation does humble us. p. 129. Chap. 25. It
crowns us. p. 132. Chap. 26. By it we are holilie Chastised, p. 135. Chap. 27.
God prone to assiste the tempted. p. 139. Chap. 28. Against unjust co^plaintes.
p. 147.
The second part.
Chap. 1. THat we are to despise certain temptations. Page 158. Chap. 2. That
temptation augments virtue. p. 171. Chap. 3. Prayer, a good remedy against
temptations. p. 178. Chap. 4. The word of God another Antidote. p. 185. Chap.
5. That melancholy is to be avoided. p. 188. Chap. 6. That we are in no wise
to omit the ordinary exercises of our vocation. p. 193. Chap. 7. Aspirations
in the presence of God. p. 204. Chap. 8. The difference betwixt Meditation and
Contemplation. p. 212. Chap. 9. The facility of Contemplation. p. 221. Chap.
10. An Act of simple Contemplation a sovereign remedy against temptation. p.
236. Chap. 11. An act of Contemplation. p. 246. Chap. 12. A Practice of this
Act. p. 255. Chap. 13. An Elevation toward the top of the Spirit. p. 262.
Chap. 14. A general abstraction. p. 270. Chap. 15. Against general
temptations. p. 272. Chap. 16. An Exhortation to spiritual valor, in
imitation of JACOBS wrestling. p. 282.
FINIS.
A SPIRITVALL COMBAT OR A TRIAL OF A FAITHFVLL SOVLE BY TEMPTATION. THE FIRST
PART.
The Pastour's Duty.
CHAP. I.
THE Prince of the Apostles commands us by God's order, to be continually
ready to render an account of our Faith, to whosoever shall demand it; * Could
I then, o Theopiste, turn a deaf ear to your friendly inuitation, without
violating this divine ordinance, and infringing brotherly charity which we owe
to every one, as the great Apostle said, since God has commended our neighbor
to every one of us; * and has put down in his law, that we should love them
as over selves? * And seeing by Gods providence I was ordained to be one of the
Pastors of his Church, am I not obliged by my state and condition, to
contribute to the necessities of my brethren, * unless I would be liable to
the reproach, and expect the sad effect of the dreadful threats, which the
divine zeal, thunders out by the mouth of one of his Prophets: woe be to the
Pastors, who feed themselves; who eat the flesh, and are covered with the
woole of their flock; who suck the marrow and drink the milk, and yet
nourish them not: They do not strengthen that which is weak; cure not that
which is sick; reioyne not that which is broken; reduce not what is strayed;
they seek not that which is lost; so that the sheep were scattered, and
exposed to the rage of the rauiuous beasts. But behold I live, says our Lord,
and I will exact my flock at their hands. * And my hand upon them shall take
vengance of their blood. * And behold, says he by the organe of another
Trumpet, how my people are led away captive, because they wanted knowledge,
*the knowledge of Saints * which does reclaim from the slavery of sin, and
enlarge us with that precious liberty, which does cast off the heavy yoke of
sin, and which is the true liberty of the children of God. * Now to whom
does it belong to communicate to others this knowledge of the God of knowledge,
but to those who are called the salt of the earth, *and the light of the world,
* who together with the holy Ghost, received the knowledge of the voice, * by
the imposition of hands in their ministry; and whose lips keep the
depositum of the divine knowledge, who are to be a law, and a Rule of life to
their subjects, and to the souls of whom they are liable to give an account?
Shall it ever be said, that the Samaritane powered his wine and oil, into the
wounds of the hurtman, * and performed even works of supererogation, to save
his life; and that yet the Priest and Leuite shall pass without pity, not
casting an eye of mercy upon him? * He, says the beloved Disciple of our
Savior, who is possessed of good things, and seeing his brother in necessity,
shutts his bowels of mercy upon him, with what face can he affirm, that the
Charity of God is in him? * No, says he going on, whosoever says he loves
God, and yet takes no thought for the necessity (he understands spiritual and
temporal.) Of his neighbor, is a liar, and the truth of God does not inhabit
his soul. * Love one another, says the Apostle, to all Christians, with a
brotherly, and mutual charity, * and bear one another burden, and so you
shall fulfill the law of CHRIST, * reputing your selves each others members, or
rather members of JESUS CHRIST; and that you do but compose one mystical body
with him. But it does principally apertaine to the Heads of the People, *
which are the Pastors, and who have the bands of Charity and perfection * for
the portion and honorable part of their inheritance, to watch over the
necessity of the souls committed to their trust, as the she herds who were
first of all advertised by the Angels of the birth of our redeemour; because
during the dead of the night they were watchful over their flocks. Blessed is
that servant, who shall be found wakeing in the day of the coming of the great
Master: * and who shall be able to say with him of the Gospel: behold five
talents profit, which I have made out of the five which thou gave me to use:
* and with Job, I have been the foot of the lamb, and the eye of the blind:
* and with the Doctor of the Gentiles: Who is infirm, with whom, by
compassion, I become not infirm? * Who are those little ones asking for bread,
to whom I have not communicated what I have learnt without envy or fiction, in
simplicity of heart? *

Prayer to God for a soul in temptation.
CHAP. II.
OIESVS my Lord! can I have the heart to see my brother in tribulation without
bearing a part of his pains, since I clearly discover that thou thy self art
together with him in that anguish which does trouble him, with intention to
deliver him from it, and crown him for it with Glory? Art thou not
continually near unto those who have their hearts shutt, and do inuoke thy
holy name? * Art not thou he who does save the humble of heart? * o what a hight
of happiness is it to be Coadiutour, and Cooperatour with thee, * in this good
work? what am I not able to do together with thy help, * verily I can do
all things, not I, but thy grace within me. Woe be unto me if I Euangelise not,
* if I retain verity prisoner in Injustice, * if I hold my peace, when there
is question of Sion, * and of the good of a soul, redeemed with the
inestimable price of thy precious blood: If I become a dume dog, which either
cannot or will not open his mouth; * If my tongue be not a pen, or my pen a
tongue, to direct in thy ways, the footsteps of such as want direction. *
Alas most amiable Savior! Lo THEOP. poor THEOPIST whom thou love, * and
who I know loves thee, with an unfeigned Charity, and a true affection: *
THEOPIST my dear brother in thy holy Spirit, is not only sick, but even
suffers violence, it is thy part to make answer for him, * since being united
unto thee, as a vinebranch to its stock; as a member to its head, * thou
bear part in his afflictions, as in the times of Saul, whom thou made a
PAVLE, thou did resent the persequution of thy Faithful. That which does
most torment him, is the knowledge he has of his own frayletie, and a fear
to offend thee, in this great tempest which the enemy of his salvation has
sturd up against his Faith. He is driven to the maine sea: being weatherbeaten
he dreads ship-wrake: he cries out unto thee, save me o Lord, I perish * thou
who sauest those which hope in thee * how long will thou be forgetful of him,
o Lord, how long will thou turn thy favorable face from him? * thou who do
command the sea and the winds. * And who in the twingling of an eye, do turn
the most desperate storm, into a plasant calm? * O God increase his Faith, *
purify his heart with that virtue * Restore him the joy of thy salvation, * and
with thy principal spirit confirm him. * This is the prayer, my dear THEO,
which I make upon your affliction. It is the balm which I power into your
wound, following therein the Apostles counsel, who will have us pray over him
that is sad. * weep with him that is soerowfull. * And me thinks, I hear I
know not what secret voice give me assurance, that this infirmity shall not
be to death, but that the glory of God shall be thereby more manifested in you.
* And if with patience you expect his blessed pleasure, you shall shortly see
the splendor of his divine face shine upon you.

An encouragement.
CHAP. III.
ATTEND therefore Gods pleasure; be courageous. Let your heart rise as a
palm tree against that which does oppress it; sustain this assault. * What
does he know who is not tempted? Blessed is he who suffers temptation, for
being once tried, he shall receive the crown of life. * Patience works
probatio^, begets Hope, and such a hope as is not confounded: For by patience
we possess our selves in Peace. * Say to the pusilanimous; lift up your
dejected minds, * says the Prophet. Tell them, that they are to hope even
against all hope. * And that when they conceive they are lost, they are nearer
to their salvation then they can believe. * Loose not then your confidence,
THEOPISTE, since so great a reward is promised unto it. * Give care unto your
sweet Savior, who cries unto you; be confident, for I have overcome the world.
* And what virtue is it which gives us victory over the world? The Apostle
makes answer, it is our Faith. * But alas, say you THEOPISTE, This is that
which. I want, this is my desease: and you say unto me, be well. From that
quarter war is waged against me, and your counsel is, live in Peace. That is
the evil which does afflict me, and you say unto me, o man of little faith, why
do thou fear? * It is not I that say thus unto you THEOPISTE, it is our
Savior himself, the very words of whose Testament you use. It is his Apostle
that assures you, that virtue is perfected in infirmity; * that even from its
own infirmity it gains new strength: and oftentimes when we apprehend we have
lost all, we win all. For God is faithful and never tempts us in evil. He
permits us not to be tempted above our strength. * Contrariwise, he makes us
draw profit from our tribulation: * and find out our salvation in the midst of
our enemies. * When we think that our virtue does fail us, and that the light
of our eyes has forsaken us; * he serves us as a Pillar of fire in palpable
darkness, and makes a light shine amongst the obscurities, to those that are
of a right heart. * That which you repute a serpent taken by the tail upon a
soudaine, is in our hand a flourishing rod, and a rod of direction in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Believe it THEOPISTE, either am I a very badde Prophet, or
else this temptation against Faith which does afflict you, will more affright
the^ hurt you: for all the temptations which do not please, cannot hurt, * as
a Father of the Church says. Contrariwise, if you will please to follow my
counsel and advise, with as much confidence as God has given you freedom to
reveal your cause, and discover unto me the ways and feelings of your
interior man, I doubt not but you will draw confusion upon the house of
NABVCHODONOSOR; * cut of HOLOPHERNES his head with his own sword; * and with
the dint of a stone from a slinge, beat down that proud PHILISTIAN, who would
out-braue the army of your good desires. *

The profit of Temptation.
CHAP. IV.
I Dare promise my self, that as DAVID found bitterness in Peace; * so
contrariwise you shall meet with sweetness in this war. And that
honie-combes shall not only spring out of rocks to you, * but even out of the
Lion's jaws which you think is about to devour you, * according to SAMSON'S
Emblem: That you shall draw fresh water out of the midst of this brinish sea,
as veins thereof are found in the bosom of the Ocea^: and that one day you
shall sing with the Psalmist; it was good for me, o Lord, to have been humbled
by thy hand, to the end I might learn thy iustifications. * Then shall you
know, that that affliction, which gives you the same blows in matter of Faith,
which the Angel of Satan gave S. PAVL in point of dishonestly, * shall have
the like effect in you, as the waters of the Deluge in the Ark of Noah. And
what effect had they in it? Marry they lanched it from the shore, they bore it
up toward Heaven: brought it safe at length to the top of the highest
Armenian Mountains? * I would say hereby, that this trouble, in lieu of
depressing, shall exalte your faith: and that this essay of your valor, shall
purge and purify your Faith as gold in the Crurible *, and shall give it a
deeper color; and perhaps, whereas she now creepes upon the earth, (amidst
shades, Enigma's, Mirrours, * fantomes and imaginary shapes) her youth being
renewed like unto the Eagle *, she shall become cleare-sighted, resembling that
bird, which, without shutting her eyelides, can fix the aples of her eyes upon
the brightest sun beams. Yea may it not be, that after my, Theopiste have
once read this Practice, or spiritual Combat (and when I say Practice, my
meaning is that that which is read should be practiced) he shall hear with the
theife upon the Cross (who seeing himself with in two fingars breath of
ship-wrake, received yet pardon from the King of mercy, in these few words)
amen amen, I say unto thee, this day thou shall be with me in Paradise? * Which
was accomplished even in Hell, or in Abraham's bosom, whither this good theife
discending, saw the glorious and triumphant soul of our Savior, who defeated
Death, and blunted the sharp point of the sting of Hell, * while he bore away
the spoils, and ledd Captivity captive after him. * ITHEOP. my belief is,
that we shall not die, but live; * and that if we do firmly and constantly
believe, floodes of waters of life *, running to eternity, * shall issue out of
our breasts. * This blessed Hope is surely lodged in my bosom. *

The estate of a soul in temptation.
CHAP. V.
BUT before I begin to dress your wound, which seems to me more daunting then
dangerous, I must behold it nearer. You are, say you, for some time past so
vexed with thoughts of blasphemy and infidelity, that all your wisdom is
defeated in this hot assault, and the malignitie of the sore, surpassing all
the remedies, you apprehend your wound incurable. You have had recourse to the
seeing, to the Prophets, and to the Angels of God, to be delivered by their
assistance, from the Monsters, and perils which are found in the way of Rage,
or rather in the way of this rage of infernal furies, which seem to stand
with open jaws ready to swallow you up. You have run from living to dead
Oracles, that is, you have betook your self to pious books, especially those
which do treat of temptations; and of the means to put them to flight, or to
vanquish them. As the PHILOTHEE of our B. Father: the Spiritual works of
Grenado: Point, ALVEREZ; RODRIGVEZ; and the like. And as great fires are
enkindled by the same wind which does extinguish little weak ones; so you
apprehend that your grief gathers strength from the very means which you use
either to lessen or loose it. Following your Directours Counsel, you have
multiplied the herb Borith, which is that whereof the Fullers make use, to
take spotts out of cloth: I mean, you have had recurse to the sacred exercises
of Penance and mortification, knowing that a contrite and humble heart * is the
greatest present which can be offered unto God. You have extraordinarily
frequented the use of prayer, reading spiritualitie, of the Sacraments of
Confession and the Euchariste, with due attention to the word of God; being all
of them sovereign Antidotes to strengthen assaulted Faith. In a word, there is
no practice of devotion, whether counseled by writing, or word of mouth;
whether inspired, or found out by your own understanding being opened by
vexation, which you have not employed, opportunely, importunely, to make those
horrible thoughts vanish away, which like a brood of vipers, do threaten
their parents death, according to that which the Psalmist says of him who has
conceived iniquity, engendered grief, and brought forth injustice. To what
Saints did you not make vows to be delivered of those importune motions which
keep a continual bussing in the Temple of your heart, which being consecrated
unto God by Piety that reigns therein, ought only to be adorned with
Sanctity, not admitting any thing that is profane or defiled, since the Temple
of the City of God, had a privilege that it should not be disturbed with any
of those loathsome beasts. What violent endeauours have you not used, like
another ABRAHAM, to drive away those rauinous birds from above your interior
sacrifices? How often have you taken your heart, as it were, in both your hands,
to force it to produce Acts of a lively Faith, and quickened with Charity, to
repelle the fiery darts, of the midday-Diuell, who does dazzle your eyes with
his execrable illusio^s? Me thinks I see my Theopiste vseing all kind of
defense in this skrimish, employing, as it were, his whole man upon it,
inuokeing Heaven and earth to this succor, Heaven which seems to be Brass to
him, and the earth iron: and God pitiful and rich in mercy, becomes cruel
and inexorable to him. Being thus abandoned, he is burdensome to himself: his
sins (as he thinks) multiplied beyond number, do oppress him as a heavy
load. Even Giants would groan under so many waters of anguish. And his
greatest torture is the very same which affected Job, who complained of
nothing so much, as to find himself contrary to God, even while God himself,
(a thing far from his conceit) called him just, vpwaight, and a man full of a
chaste fear.

Happy estate, and sign of Gods favor.
CHAP. VI.
MY dear THEOPISTE, the ey which sees all things, sees not it self, so blind
we are in our own deeds! Whence Phicitions and Advocates do rather refer
their own deseases and suites to the judgment of some other of the same
professions, then to their own directions. I do not wonder, that the ways of
of God which are Mercy, Truth and Judgment, are as far beyond our reach and
capacity, as the Heaven is distant from the earth: And if the thoughts of our
imaginations be so different, since in that which you now propose unto me,
the opinion which I constantly embrace of you is so far different from your
own, and that which you term Gods Justice, Rigor, and abondoning of you, I
consider as Gods Grace, Benignity, Bounty and Mercy to your soul. O my dearest
THEOPIST, if you knew the gift of God, * his hand which now seems so heavy
unto you, would appear light; and you would perceive that that sweet and
favorable hand, does sustain you by the right hand, and does lead you in the
way of his will, to conduct you to his Glory. These temptations which do essay
and affray you, and which you take for torents that do violently bear away
your Faith, are to me as so many honorable argument, of your loyalty: and your
wounds, in this good Combat of Faith as the Apostle calls it, appear in mine
eyes so many glorious marks; and even this also, unless I deceive my self,
will be the judgment of all those that love and setue God, and who have any
experience in this interior commotion and Combat, which is raised not against
flesh and blood, but against the powers of darkness, and spiritual malice.
You curse, and I bless it, and though I would curse it, yet should it be no
more in my power, then it was in Balaam's to fasten his imprecations upon the
Army of Israel. Why, are we ignorant, that he, who like unto your self, does
range himself in the discipline of God, is to prepare his soul against
temptation * as the wise man said: and the Angel to the good Tobie; because
thou wast aggreable to God, it was necessary (mark this word) that temptation
should try thee. * Who knows not that the trees which are most shaken with
the winds, do spread their roots more deeply into the ground: that incense
does not smell but when it is burnt: that the Vine is not fruitful unless it
be pruned: that a soldiers valor does only appear in dangerous exploites:
nor does virtue show its solidity but by resisting its contrary. Take courage,
THEOPISTE, thou walk in good company. No saint does serve for a lively
stone in the celestial City, which was not squared cut, carved, in the
quarrie of this world by temptation. And the Saint of Saints was he not
tempted in the desert? Yea and that in all things, as says his great Apostle,
even to that great abandoning, whereof he complains, and with a loud voice
cries out upon the Cross. And the same Apostle, speaking of the members of his
mystical body, to wit, the faithful, says he not (after the great wonders
of Faith which he racounts in the eleaue^th chapter of his Epistle to the
Hebrews) some were stoned, others hewed, all were tempted, and many put to
death by diverse sorts of punishments, or banished and dispersed into diverse
parts of the world, forsaken, afflicted, tormented, wandering in deserts, and
mountains, and rockie dens, the world being unworthy of their presence: and
by their sundry tribulations they bore testimony to Faith, and gave a trial
of their fidelity. You apprehend, peradventure, THEOPISTE, that I flatter your
grief and that to assuage it by the leuitiue of consolation, I use these
discourses more delightful then true, and that mine aim is to inchante that
Aspe * with pleasing passages, which notwithstanding you apprehend does kill
you, and does extinguish the light of your faith with her could poison, and the
fervor of your first Charity. * But in very deed, THEOPISTE, I do not
proceed with you in spirit of guile, but speak out of the abundance of my
heart* and according to the true sense of my soul. A sense so true and solid,
that all the holy Scripture, which is the word of Truth, of Truth and of life
everlasting, * is all full of it, nor are pious books furnished with any other
instructions upon the matter of temptations. Which, I assure my self, you will
be constraind to confess unto me, if allaying for a while, the tumult of your
heart, and silencing the noise of your disquiete, you would call to mind the
precepts of our B. F. in the fourth part of his Philothee. For what he speaks
there of temptations in general, ought and may easily be applied to yours in
particular. And if my ignorance dare add any thing to so great an Oracle, I
beseech your humility to arm her self with patience, to read what I am
about to put down.

An wholesome Fear.
CHAP. VII.
You think you are lost; and I hold that you walk in the way of salvation.
You repute your self an Ethnike, worse then an Infidele: and I admire your
Faith: you apprehend your self defeated: and I sing, not your victory: (For
all victory proceeds from the God of Hosts) but the victory of the Triumph
of Gods Mercy in you. You never saw your self, say you, so feeble in point of
Faith: and I never saw you so constant in it. It is true in deed that your
adversary like unto a roreing Lion, does roame about, endeavoring to make you
his prey: marry the resistance you make against him by the force of Faith, *
does make me justly believe, that grace superaboundeth, where you deem sin
does abound. * For you have to do with an enemy, whom JESUS CHRIST by his
death, did so weaken, that he can gain no advantage against us but by our own
disloyalty and dasterdlinesse: all the feelings which he can raise up in us,
not being able to form any sin at all without our consent. So that as from
Grace, which is never awanting, all our succor comes, so from our selves alone
is our ruin. * Which when it arriues, we are not so much to accuse the enemies
force, as our own malice. But you fear, say you, to fall by consent, and that
force of the Tempest driueing your frail vessel against the shelues, you may
suffer shipwrake in Faith, * which is the most deplorable that can be suffered
in spiritual life. While I for my part dare assure you, that he is blessed who
fears continually: * for he that fears to offend God, does truly love his
Law, * and his Faith. This fear of our Lord, does drive away sin, * and
permits it not to reign in the soul. * DAVID terms it the ferme Pillar and
firmament of the mind. * Who knows not, that it is the will of God that we
should work our salvation in Fear and Trembling? * O Lord, said DAVID, pierce
my flesh with the nails of thy Fear, and make me to dread thy judgments. *
I should be exceeding sorry, THEOPISTE, that this Fear should forsake your
heart; and I should intertayne a far worse opinion of your desease, if your
pulse did not beat so hard. That which makes you sorrowful, glads me, what
afflictes you, comforts me: what you, conceive to be signs of death, are to
me, marks of life in you.

To doubt and to consent are incompatible.
CHAP. VIII.
YOu stand in fear, THEOPISTE, that your consent should follow your sense or
feeling: and I, hold according to all Divinity, a far better warranty then
your apprehensions, that it is as impossible to join a doubt and a consent
together, as a certain with an uncertain thing: For consent does presuppose
so full and absolute aggreement and yielding up of it self, and so constant a
determination, that it leaves no doubt at all behind it. The Archer that has a
shaking hand, hardly ever hits the white. The aim, to be level and straight,
must also be stiddie and constant. The surest sign that we consent not, is to
doubt that we consent. So that, the same thing which does trouble you, does
free and clear my judgment of all doubt. Thus your blinding Egiptian fogges,
are to me a light, as to the Israelite. The dark cloud which does incompasse
you, is to me a Pillar of fire, * for its light a fire, for strength a pillar.
I would to God that you had either my eyes, or at least would credit my words,
you should presently be cured.

That in the temptation we are to fear the fault and not the pain.
CHAP. IX.
But happily it is the too inordinate desire of health that delays the cure.
Fire is fallen upon them, * says the Psalmist speaking of the children of
Israel, nor have they seen the sun. * Nothing does so much hinder a man to
discern the light of reason, as the heat of a violent passion which is never
without smoke. THEOPISTE, I do a little doubt me, that in this tribulation
which does afflict you, you do more fly the Pain then the Fault; or at
least, that you fear and fly not the Fault, but by reason of the Pain,
which follows it, as the inseparable shadow of this unfortunate body. This
peraduentures is the root of your evil. God will be loved for his ownesake:
Not for the reward which he promises (otherwise the reward would be loved as
God, and God as the reward). He will have us to abstain from sin, not so
much for the fear of his Justice, as for fear to offend his goodness. Thence,
it may be, he leaves you to be tempered and seasoned in this temptation. By
means of it, he urges you on by frightes, to thend that being gotten to a
higher degree of Charity, this stern and servile fear, may give place to
filial fear. And then this yoke shall rott away, that is, shall burst, by the
application and force of that heavenly oil * following the terms of one of
the Prophets. Lay your hand upon a good, not an erroneous conscience, and upon
an unfeigned Faith * and tell me in words of Truth, * THEOPISTE, whether I have
not put my fingar upon your sore, and touched you to the quick? For the
knowledge which I have of the goodness of your soul, makes me, as I conceive,
clearly see, that this fear causes you to run up and down searching for
Dittanie to draw out of your thigh, or rather out of your heart, the arrow of
temptation, the smarte whereof, does more trouble you, then any ferme belief
you have of fault committed. But tell me then in simplicity of heart, my dear
THEOPISTE, if it be not as I say, or rather, as I conjecture, since like unto
NABVCHODONOSOR, you will have me not only to interpret, but even to arreade,
your dreams and thoughts. For lo, Physicians do only cure the deseases
they know, nor do they know them, but by a true relation which the patient
makes of the state he feels himself in. Those little duplicities, those
windings, that spiritual cunning, those couertures which we sometimes make use
of, while we treat in matter of conscience, with those to whom we have trusted
the government of our soul, are often cause, that the temptations which would
but pass through our heart, do put themselves in garrisons, and withal
falling into mutiny, do stir up reuoults, seditions and tumults.

But blessed be God, Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, Father of Mercies, and
God of all consolation who comforts us in all our troubles. * Benediction,
light, wisdom, tha^ksgiuing, honor, virtue, and strength be to God, who has
given you courage, as to another Acan, to glorify him, * and to confess unto
him your own injustice against your self. A great part of health is to wish
to be well. This makes us courageously use all convenient kinds of remedies. It
is a great stepp to goodness, to desire to become good: for grace, whereby we are
made such, is never awanting to those who have a will fruitfully to receive it,
and carefully to manage it. Such may I esteem you, my dear THEOPISTE, since
for so many years you have made profession of piety, and given the testimony
of a good life, that you desire to be devout.

Grief for Peace lost.
CHAP. X.
ALas, and this it is the^, that draws so many sobbs from your breast, such a
world of sighs from your mouth, and such floods of tears from your eyes,
while you think of the fair weather that is past, wherein you fought with such
courage and alacrity. * Ah, say you, the crown of my head is fallen, woe be
to me, for I have offended. * And my misfortune is that I know not mine own
misery. * Hence I lift up my hands toward the heavens, and say, o Lord from
my secret sins cleanse me, and from other men's spare thy servant. o Sion! o
wishfull peace of my heart! when I think of thee, mine eyes become fou^taines,
and the aples of mine eyes swime therein! I ran so well, ay me! what is this
that holds me? * What troublesome Remora stopps the ship of my affections,
which sailed under full sails upon the Sea of Grace and spiritual delights?
What scorching wind has dried up those pleasing fountains * out of which I
drew water of life wherewith I quenched my thirst. While God dilated my heart
with sweet affections, I ran without pain within the compass of thy ways.
* While he covered me, or rather environed me with his good pleasure, as with a
buckler, * I contemned the attempts of mine enemy. O who will reduce me to the
same estate, in which I was in times past, while I washed the feet of mine
affections in the butter, * of co^solations; and while to me, from the Rock of
Faith, flowed floodes of oil *. O how my gold is obscured, or rather, turned
black! how my redd color is changed! * No, let me be called no more Noemi,
but Mara, since my soul is filled with bitterness. * O God what stumbling block
is laid to cross my way, who walked toward thee so directly: and whereas
nothing but holy words of praise, honor, and benediction, issued out of my
mouth, and rose up in thy sight, like unto the smoke of incense; * while my
tongue did only meditate thy justice, and my lips thy glory; * whence is it,
that mine interior does open its mouth against the Heavens, * and like to the
wells of the Abisse, vomits out no other thing, but a smoke of blasphemy and
impiety, which does dim the stars, and deprive me of light? THEOPISTE, do
not you lie to the Holy Ghost, as did ANANIAS and SAPHIRA. Tell the truth. Are
not these your vexatio^s and anguishes? Are not these the groneings, or rather
the roreings of your heart? But alas! why do you thus wrongfully change
judgment into Absinth, * honey into Gaul; and mistake the heavenly dew and
Manna for hayle?

A lenitiue.
CHAP. XI.
BE comforted, and I say again, be comforted, * to speak with ISAYE; for what
you apprehend chastisements, are caresses. Be it that the tempest is great,
must we therefore loose courage, and forsake the stern? Though even the whall,
had swallowed you up with JONAS; though the knife were put to your throat *;
though God should even kill you, ought you yet for all that to leave of to hope
in him? * I rejoice in my sufferances for CHRIST *, said the Apostle; and
delight in mine infirmities, to the end that the virtue of my master may
remain in me. * And what is this virtue but Patience? I but, will you say, I
suffer not for JESUS CHRIST, as did his vessel of Election, but against
JESUS CHRIST, so that I am one of the devils martyrs. Why, though the devil
should martyr and torment you, as he did JOB, and saint PAVLE, by the di^uine
permission, who told you yet that the torments which proceed from the devil,
are suffered for the devil, and not for JESUS CHRIST? who knows not, that it
is the cause, not the suffera^ces which makes the martyrdom? Now the mark and
seal of a good sufferance, is patience joined to Charity. He that suffers
without this, though he should give his body to be burnt, should only advance
his own damnation. Beware then, o THEOPISTE, least by your impatience, you
spoil the work of God in you, which can never come to its full perfection,
but by patience. * Why, do you think that patience is merely useful to
sustain exterior crosses and vexations? and that its employment does not also
concern the interior? As though, forsooth, invisible enemies were not as much
to be feared as visible ones; and we our selves were not as dangerous to our
selves, as any other? If you know not this, you are but yet a freshman in the
spiritual warfare: But if you be not ignorant of the truth of it, when do you
think you can make better use of this Weapon, then in the present occurrence?

God's assistance in temptation.
CHAP. XII.
BUT give me leave, o man, not of little Faith, * but of little courage, a little
to raise up thy heart, without making it swell, like a balowne, with the wind
of any presumption, and to tell you, that according to the proverb, you cry
before you be hurt, and imitating the Prophet, you cry out that your belly
aketh, * and that death is in the potage, * Without any just cause. For I
beseech you, what is it that does affright, and so desperately terrify you? It
is, say you, that I continually am haunted with a blasphemous spirit, wherewith
mine eye is troubled, my soul, and my belly, * that is, my soul and my
body; my whole man. Alas, do you not discover, that there is nothing there
but the the shadow of death, not death it self? And with a very grain of
confidence in God, are you not able to walk in the midst of the region of the
shadow of death, without fearing any wisfortune? * Is it possible that you
do not perceive God his assistance therein; or at least, that you hear not
the voice of him who says unto you, walking upon those angry waves, It Is I,
fear not? * For who can doubt, but that since the beginning of your Combat,
your soul waighed down to the very depth of desolation, had descended into
the lower parts of the earth, if God had not been your aid? * Do you not
discern that you resemble children, who fearing masked-men, ru^ne into their
mothers lap: and to chickens which hide themselves under the Henns wings,
when they epsy the kites approach? For I pray you, the remedies which you
seek all up and drown, to appease your pain, what other thing is it then to
say unto God, under the shadow of thy wings I will still hope, till iniquity
shall be past by. * And he, though you perceive it not, will hide you with his
wings and Feathers, * or rather, with the protection of his countenance, will
save you from the molestation of men *. This divine Savior does lock you up
in the closet of his sacred wounds. He registers your name in his hands, * Nor
shall all the world be able to raze it out. He does place and lodge you in his
open side, as a dove in the hole of a wall *. But you perceive him not, you see
him not, and which is worse, you believe him not. Yet so it is, my dear
THEOPISTE, and when the assistance of Grace shall have opened your eyes, you
will say with JACOB: our Lord was truly with me in my tribulation, and I knew
it not. * That which I took for the gate of Hell, was the gate of Heaven.

Profit drawn from Temptation.
CHAP. XIII.
I Will tell you, THEOPISTE, marry upon condition that vanity shall not enter
into your heart (for that devil would be hardlier dispossessed, then he who
does now torment you) If God have given me any insight at all in your
interior, now it is your acceptable time, now are your days of salvation. *
And if any had cured you, you were to sue them, to make them restore your
sickness unto you. It is the time of fight; and consequently the time of
victory and Triumph. Are you ignorant, that none is to be crowned but such as
have lawfully fought? * It is a time of booty, and of dividing the spoils of
the enemy *. Naie further; It is the harvest time of Faith, which you think
is bet down and spoiled in you. Who knows not, that those that sow in
tears, do reap in joy a plentious crope? If you will believe me, you shall
not only find God's assistance in your tribulation, but as the text of the
Psalmist says in express terms, you shall draw it from the very tribulation
*. And you shall turn your grief upon your adversaries head, and shall cast
his iniquity in his teeth. * And as the wild bore does whet and sharpen his
tuskes against the rock, so may you edge your virtue against the rock of
temptation, and make it more vigorous. This you shall perform, if imitating
IVDITH, you offer up in the temple all HOLOFERNES his moueables; if with ACAN
you throw into the fire execrable things: and bury the Idols with JACOB: for
by this means those abominations of desolation being detested you may turn
those impure and profane vessels to ornaments of the Tabernacle? and with the
Wood of Hiram, and gold of Orphir brought out of an Idolatrous land, you may
raise the building of the Temple of God. So true it is, that, to those who do
love and fear God, all things do cooperate to good. * And that which is their
food, is an others poison and death.

Temptation glorious.
CHAP. XIV.
I Will yet go much further, and will speak (may it be to Gods glory) more
aduantagiously in your behalf, by aduertising you that the temptation, which
makes head against you, is not a Combat of Apprentises, the devil never being
accustomed to use this kind of battery, but against the most perfect souls. It
is his principal and last piece wherewith he does ordinarily assault those
that are near unto their death, as being his most rough and violent engine.
What a grace is it THEOPISTE, that God permits you to meet with this most
dangerous encounter, before your forces fall into decay, while you are yet
vigorous * and in perfect health. And while the Ama^dtree does not yet
blossom, nor the pitcher is not yet broken upon the banks of the fountain, *
That is, to use the wiseman's manner of speech, before your old age? How much
more rough and perilous is that onset in the pa^ges of death, where it is so
full of danger to sleep in the shadow of sin * and while the devil does
use the extreamitie of his fury, finding the time short * in which he is to
win or loose us for ever. Now we have a fair and fit time, both to fight and
bear away the victory, by the assistance of the Saints of Heaven and of
Earth. Marry in this Deluge of many waters, * in this periode of life, how
much more are temptations to be dreaded?

Further, what an honor is it for you to be used not like a
fresh-water-soldier, but like a tried Champio^, in a battle where none are
admitted to fight, but old beaten soldiers, and who are most skillful in
handling spiritual weapons. The blast of those winds do only toss the
talest and strongest trees. These thunderbolts do only blast the topps of the
highest mountains: and it is a sign that the devil, whose, force as S.
HIEROME says, is in his Reins, * which he fills with illusions, * says
DAVID, and who hitts us in the flank as ELEAZAR did Anthiochus his Elephant, I
would say, by sensuality, the weaker part of man; it is a sign, I say, that
you Were too hard for him there, since that he makes head against the superior
part of your soul, resembling in that a General, laying seige to a town, who
dispairing to make a breach, or take it by skaling the walls, by reason of the
breadth of the ditch, and thicknsse of the walls and Bastions, plants his
Ordonnance, against the tops of the steeples, wageing war against
weather-cokes. And do not I see plainly, that your Ghostly enemy, has got
but a poor advantage against your Faith by this temptation, while he does
rather assure it by your apprehensio^s, then shake it? All that he can do, is
but to make demonstration of his despair and despite, in tormenting you so
much the more temporally, by how much he perceaues his feeble attempt to fall
short of tormenting you eternally.

The Idea's whcih are in the mind or before it.
CHAP. XV.
HOwbeit I hold younot so little experie^ced, in interior skirmishes, as that
you know not sufficiently, (when any respit gives you leave to breath, and to
make reflection on that which does pass in you) that all the Idea's which
appear unto you, and which indeed are so hideous and horrible, that I will
not stayne this paper with them, do but only beseige your heart, they have not
got entry into it. I add further, not so much to comfort you, as to testify
the Truth, that they are not inhabitants of your heart; nor can they any more
come out of it, then they, can enter into it, and yet much less are they able
to penetrate it. I had need of a clear and facile similitude, to make you
plainly conceive what I say unto you. There is nothing more clear or more
familiar then the glass of a Mirror. Thence will I draw it. Behold this
glass then, it does naturally represent the thing which is opposite unto it,
yet is not the thing in the glass, but only before it: say the like of your
heart. It is a glass, where the devil by his hellish guiles, ca^ represent all
that is hideous, infamous, or abominable in Hell; but the Will alone has power
to open the Gate, and to permit those execrable things entry. Let the devil
therefore make as many mimicke and antike faces as he list: Let him form, in
presence of our heart, all the lascivious representations he can possibly: Let
him buze in the ear of our interior, all the blasphemies and detestable
impieties that can be imagined. As our understanding is not infected by the
knowledge it has of the greatest evils in the world; and as our ear makes us
not guilty of the impieties and blasphemies, more stinking then an open grave
* which we hear proceed from the mouth of the wicked: so the most blasphemous
thought, and horrible infidelity cannot attainte us, so long as they displease
us; and that the Devil does pronounce them without the gate of our heart, nay
eue^ within our heart, yet without our hearts consent. Yea contrariwise, if we
do valiantly repulse them; or if we suffer this interior humiliation before
God with Patience, saying unto him; behold my humility and deliver me, * there
is noe master of spiritualitie that teaches us not, that it serves for a
whetstone, to sharpen and edge the virtue which is assaulted by temptation: and
that God in those times, is so much nearer unto us, by how much we conceive him
further of: and that we do never make so happy progress in virtue as in
those circumstances, not unlike unto the storms which force the ship to
sail extraordinarily fast toward the port for which it is bound, and drive it
even into the Haven.

Temptation is a trial.
CHAP. XVI.
THis will seem hard of belief unto you, being in the trouble which you are,
which does darken your judgment, and hinder you clearly to discover this
truth: but if you consider how the Ore-men sit with their backs turned toward
the place to which they row, you will not find it strange, that God by means
of the fire and water of tribulation, does conduct you to refreshing: * and
that that which you take for an horrible imperfection, yea the very top of
imperfections, does maynely advance you to perfection. Through how many
cleansings and fornaces are metalls to pass, before they be fully purified,
and brought to their true use? And before corn be eatable under what a number
of flayles, vanns, milstones, siues must it pass? What handling and working
must it undergo to make it fit to be employed? Would you not say that one
spoyld it? And if the effect were not familiarly known, who would not doubt of
the cause thereof? When we read the daunting temptations of a S. PAVLE, a S.
ANTONIE, a S. HIEROME, a S. BENEDICT, a S. FRANCIS, a S. CATHARINE OF SIENNA,
of a B. ANGELVS OF FOLIGNY, and of many others, wholly Seraphicall souls, who
will not cry out with DAVID: o Lord thy friends are exceedingly honored *
(another version, has, afflicted, because to be afflicted for Justice sake, is
an honorable and happy thing) their principality was assured by tribulations,
that is to say, the dominion which their Reason has over their appetite. * But
if we do thoroughly examine the exe^ples of those great Sainte's temptations,
and how the divine grace which did assiste them in their Combats brought them
off, laden with victorious palms and Laurells, we shall learn that then they
were in their probation, and if one might say so, between the hammar and the
anuile; and that the great Potter holding them in his hand, made them of
vessels of ignominy, vessels of honor, and delivered them from the disgrace
which they feared. That of S. CATHARINE OF SIENNA especially, which our Blessed
Father handled so delicatly in the 4. Chapter of the 4. part of his Philothee,
being well pondered, will serve you THEOPISTE, as I conceive, yea and unless I
be deceived, will suffice you, to power into your wound the precious balm of
a solid consolation. I inuit you therefore frequently to consider it, and
though at the first it seem bitter, like to the Prophets volume, yet if you
once confidently believe it, you shall find it as sweet as the honiecombe. But
if you desire to cast an eye upon, or rather profoundly to meditate Saint
PAVLE'S temptation, imagining it to be the same which does afflict you,
doubtless you shall thereby exceedingly ease your pain. For if the fire did
exercise so absolute an actiuitie upon green wood, what will it do upon dry
wood? And if Satan durst buffet so chaste and virginal a body, whose purity
did mount eue^ to the third Heaven, what dare not his temeritie attempt upon
your weaker mind? Again, those great exe^ples of the Apostles, those children
of the Thunder; and all the exemples which are contained in holy write, will
have great force and power in your belief: for all that which is written, is
written for our instruction, to the end that by the Hope and consolation of holy
Scriptures our Faith may be confirmed. Who, in your opinion, were further from
Faith, then the Centurion, the Cananie, the Hemorroisse? and yet the Son of
God, with his own mouth does extolle their faith even to the Heavens: tells
the one of them, that his Faith has saved him; * the other, that his Faith is
great; * and protests that the faith of the first, does surpass all those of
Israel. And yet after all this you go vex and trouble your self with
illusions, with thoughts of blasphemy and infidelity which do mortally
torment you, and even in that name, rather proceeding from the devil the^ from
your self, as I dare pronounce with as much assurance, as assured truth. That
impudent Tempter durst tell the Son of God that he would bestow Kingdoms
upon him, if falling down before him, he would adore him: he durst persuade
him to throw himself headlong down, and demand of him, for a proof that he
was the Son of God, that he would change one substance into another. If the
like fantomes pass through your spirit, is it any thing strange, or to be
wondered at? Do you think that he dreades the servant more then the Master?
the members more then the head? you are too delicate and dainty a soldier, if
you seek to be deuoyd of sufferances, under a Captain who is nayld to the
Cross? and whose triumphant crown of glory is all composed of thorns?

A sleight of selfeloue in temptation.
CHAP. XVII.
I But, reply you, as many Crosses, as many tribulations as you please,
provided always that I offend not God, that I loose not his grace, that I
stray not from the way of Glory. My daily prayer to God is, that he reclaim
my feet from sinful ways, and that I may keep his law, * which without.
Faith I cannot do, nor without it fight a good combat, and bear away the
crown of Justice. * O who will confirm my feet for ever in the paths of
Paradise, * so that they may not decline to the right or left hand, since God
does conduct the just man through straight ways, and thereby shows him his
Kingdom.

Shall I tell you, THE OPISTE, this is not your discourse, it is the very
language of self-love; let him strive as much as he will to cover himself
with the skines of pretextes, and conterfeit the hands of ESAV, I discover him
by his JACOBS voice. Let this self-will disguise and veil it self as much as
it will, yet though I be not a Prophet, I will easily discrie this IEROBAM'S
wife through her clokes and dissimulations, albeit you your self in whom she
speaks, be deceived in her. Howbeit God opens my eyes to discover her, and to
advertise you to be wary of her treachery. She is like unto those wandering
nightly fires, or flashes, which in lieu of guiding such as walk in
darkness, do lead them, (if they be so wise as to follow) into marrish
places, and dangerous cliffes. Stand upon your guard, watch and pray, * shut not
your eye in the shadow of death, * least your enemy may prevail against you.
* But who will bestow upon you some of that purifying water, to separate the
true metal from its dross and scumme? Who will open your eyes to discern
the causelesnesse of your complaint. Take for your ey-salue the clay of
humility, and you shall see clearly: humble your self before God, and
acknowledge from your very heart that he knows better what is be hoofefull for
you, then your self; and protest unto him, that in life and death; in time of
Peace, and time of war; in honor and disgrace, you will be constantly his;
and that having once embraced him by the holy Faith of the Church, and
according to the saying of the Prophet, espoused him in this virtue for ever,
* you will forsake him for no creature * no, nor yet for the forces and powers
of Hell. * But is it possible that you perceive not that it is the pain and
sufferance which you fly, and whereof you complain; and that the importunity
of those horrible thoughts, which do but skirmish about you, not vanquish you,
do rather trouble you with the pain thereof, then any fault which you commit?
And there it is that self-love does thoroughly play his part, and does
subtillie deceive you, making you apprehend that you fear to offend God, and
to loose the sight of the star of salvation, holy Faith, whereas in very
deed, it is the thornie sting of your anguish, which does vex you, and
depriues you of the sweet repose which you tasted before that trouble; the
calm which you enjoyed before that tempest; and that delightful peace passing
all understanding, which had formerly been your Saboth of delights. This being
now discovered, take that self-love, that child of Babylon, and dash him
against the rock * of God's most holy will: yet take not hold of the firebrand
where it is most hot; look not upon your temptation as a thing suggested by
the wicked Spirit; but as permitted by your sweet Savior for your probation,
and your greater glory. Receive it as a Cross that has nothing that is
amiable in it, but only the the hand that sent it. As a LIA, whom JACOB did
merely receive upon considetation that she was LABAN'S daughter. Take this
serpent by the tail, that is, by the end, and it will become a miraculous
rod, as that of MOSES. O no, we must never to look upon our temporal or
spiritual afflictions, whether they be interior or exterior out of the hand
of God, otherwise they will be insupportable unto us: for as we are able to do
all things with him; * so without him, we are nether able to do, or suffer any
thing at all.

Distrust of ones self and confidence in God.
CHAP. XVIII.
THis self-loue being always accompayned with some secret presumption, is
consequently always blind. And indeed what greater blindness can befall us,
then to think, that of our selves we are able to do any thing, in things that
are above us, and which pass the bounds of nature? Be not wise, that is,
presumptuous, in things that are above you, * says SOLOMON, but stand in
fear: And the great Apostle; do not affect high senses, but acco^modate your
self to the lowest.* I have not walked in great and wonderful ways, that are
above me: my thoughts have been abated, and my soul humbled * says the
royal Prophet. I beseech you, THEOPISTE, whence does this fear of loosing
faith proceed, but from the opinion that you have, that it depends in some
measure of you, albeit you are not ignorant, that it is an infused light, a
pure gift of grace, descending from the Father of lights * a splendor which
has shun upon you, without your merit; otherwise, says the Apostle, grace
were not grace. * Whence then does this fear possess your mind? As though,
forsooth, Gods hands were shortened and weakened. * And as though he were less
merciful in conseruing his gifts, then in bestowing them. If the wiseman
assure us that none can be continent (this is understood of infused not
acquired continency, which even Pagans have practiced after an heroical
manner,) but by a special grace from God, * can we be so vain as think, that
Faith can be conserved without the same grace? Let us go therefore with
confidence to the Throne of that Grace, that we may obtain by God's mercy *
the conservation of our Faith, not trusting in our selves, and in our own
endeavors, as did PHARAO in his troops of horses and Chariotes: * for commonly
they are confounded who put their confidence in their own virtue, * in the
strengh of their horse, or legs, * nothing being so diligently recommended
unto us in holy writ, as the distrust of our selves, (who are but a mere
vanity) and to place our whole confidence in God. Place thy thoughts upon
God, says DAVID, and thou shall not be tossed in uncertainties. * He that hopes
in God, is never confounded, though a whole army make head against him, yet
shall he not loose his assurance and resolution. * He, says the Apostle, who
has recourse, to this constant hope, has a most sovereign solace, a most
solid support. * If at any time, says S. HIEROME to his devout EVSTOCIVM,
the devils assault you, and upon these assaults, your thoughts say unto you,
what shall we do? ELIZEVS will make you answer. Fear not; we have more
friends then foes: and praying for you, he will say; o Lord open this Maids
eyes, and make her see: and then you shall discover a fiery chariote
descending upon you, which taking you up, as another ELIAS, will make you sing
with joy: My soul has been delivered out of the fowlers snares, as a bird
that escapes, and flies away from the springs which are set to catch her. In
the like air, S. CHRYSOSTOM comforting a soul laid at by temptations, says
unto her, give ear to JESUS CHRIST saying; you shall be afflicted in the
world, yet loose not for all that your confidence. And with what reasons does
he encourage her? by the promise of his grace and assistance: have assurance,
for I have over come the world. * Hearken to him who promises us to lighten
our burden, by putting himself into the yoke with us. He will not suffer us
to be vanquished by the temptation, since he does promise us that we shall draw
profit from it, and that he will not permit it to pass our strength. If we on
our part contribute what is ours, a little Patience, courage, acknowledgement of
his assistance; when all shall be despared of, according to humane reason, he
will make us victorious. * For who can resist the will of God? And if he be
for us, who will be able to va^quish us? let us therefore put our trust in him,
since he has made us such promises, and we expect so ample recompense from him.
Let us call to mind that a reed became as strong as a pillar in our Saviors
hand: and out of his hand, the pillars of the temple became a as reed of the
desert, * which plainly appears in the example of S. PETER, who putting
confidence in himself had so lamentable a fall, and rising up again after
that fall, went so courageously to death, placeing his whole trust in his
Masters grace. Sotrue it is that those who confide in our Lord, are no more
shaken by temptations, then the mountains of Sion! * Their feet are confirmed
upon the rock. * They are elevated upon a hgh rock, * where they have built
their Abode, an abode which does resist the winds and weather * of
temptation: For as a tempest does manifest the Pilots skill, says S. BASILE;
wrestling, the wrastlers strength; fighting, the Capitaines valor; so does
temptation demonstrate what confidence the Christian does repose in the divine
goodness.

Of Patience.
CHAP. XIX.
EXAMINE further, THEOPISTE whether your complaints may not proceed from want
of patience, and rather be issues of your weakness then of the force of the
temptation. For as passion does often make us apprehend injury that is done
unto us, far greater the^ indeed it is: so impatience makes us so weak, that
a small burden does over load us, and makes us cry out with those cowardly
Discouerers of the Land of Promis, that that Contry deuoures its inhabitants,
and that there are none but Gia^ts who live in it. Contrariwise, Patience
accompaigned with courage, finds all things supportable; and being assisted
with the grace and love of God, she suffers all, she endures all, * and though
she be even ouerset with the heavy load of calamity, yet does she never say,
it is enough, knowing well that the light and passing moments of tribulation,
do work an eternal weight of glory in us. In this sort a patient soul does
out-braue temptations, and remaynes unshaken amidst assaults, as a Rock that
rises with a sharp tope out of the midst of the Ocean, and is not moved with
the angry billows, which are dashed in pieces at its foot. Make head against
the devil says S. JAMES, and he will fly from you. * He resembles those
cowardly curres, which bark more then they bite: and as the great S. ANTONIE
said, (so Saint ATHANASIVS remarkes upon his life) sets only upon fainte
hearts, and flies the resolute: a true wolf, which dare only devour the
innocent lamb, but dare not meddle with mastines. Hereupon S. GREGORY in this
moralls says, that in the holy Scripture he is tearned MARMICALEON, that is to
say Formica-leo, for as much as to weak hearts like pismires, he is cruel,
arrogant, violent as though he were a Lion: but to brave and Lion-like spirits,
he is as vile and co^temptible as a Pismire. Which the same S. ANTHONY did
frequently obbraide him withal in the desert, while he alone (if one may be
said to be alone who has God in his compagnie) domineered over so many legions
of wicked Spirits; and by a heavenly generousnesse (like to that of SAMSON
mowing down the Philistians) defied all Hell; S. EPHREM considering a soul of
this temper, compares her to an Anuyle, which though it be continually beaten,
yet does it not buge an inch out of the place where it is once set. It remains
immouable. And in steed of being made hollow like to a stone under the drops
of water, it becomes harder and more solid. He that complains under the
assault of temption, (unlike to a Laurell-tree which being burnt crakes not)
resembles an empty Caske; knock upon it, and it redounds vastly; which the
full Piece does not: If he were replemished with grace and virtue; his tune
would be grateful; and he would imitate ISAYE who says, Our strength is to be
placed in Hope and silence.

That a moderate complainte is no sign of impatience.
CHAP. XX.
HOwbeit, I do in no wise affirm, THEOPISTE (that I may not augment your
temptation by scruples, and so add affliction to affliction *) that you offend
in groaning under the burden which does press you down: for we have even seen
the Mirror of Patience, the good JOB, testifying a dolourous sense of grief
in many words. The grief were to too miserable, that were deprived of speech,
and prohibited to complain. The very Son of God, Pattern of all virtues,
gave testimony of sadness in his annoyes: and uttered words that had appearance
of complaints: as that his soul was sorrowful even unto death: and those
which he took in so high a strain upon the Cross. As for the kingly
Prophet, he so frequently, all through his Divine Psalms, groans under the
load of his miseries, as do also all the rest of the Prophets, especially
JEREMY, that none can deny their plaintes, without affected blindness, nor
yet blame the^ without rashness. As it happens therefore, to those who are full
of interior consolations, that at unawares, and even against their will, some
secret voice does escape from them, whereby one may gather the excess of their
delight, and abundance of their joy: * so how worthy is his co^plainte to be
pardoned, who, as JOB said, being oppressed with thoughts which do torture
his heart, * does give thereby testimony, that an interior grief has seized
upon his heart? Saint ANTONIE that famous Champion, said well unto our Savior;
where wast thou, o my master, while I sustained so rough assaults? Do thou so
abandone those that serve thee? And our Savior said unto him, I stood at thy
right hand, a spectatour of thy valor and loyalty, encouraging the one,
crowning the other. Saint PAVLE will have us to weep over the dead in a
mediocritie. * And I am confident, that moderate and modest co^plaintes are
pardonable in a violent affliction. Marry we must be careful to put a door of
circumspection to our lips, * least we might commit excess offensive to the
Divine Providence, as though it did only walk at pleasure upon the celestial
valtes, without consideration of that co^cernes us: For if without it, the
least bird does not fly in the air, nor does one heir fall from our head, *
how much more will it shine in things appertayning to our eternal salvation?
JOB is highly commended in the holy scripture, for that in all the rude essays
of his Patience, one only word did not escape out of his mouth, which could be
imputed to him for sin. O how faithful is that soul who can say with the
Psalmist, I have not opened my mouth because it is thou, o Lord, who workest in
me what thy holy pleasure is. Then shall my wound be healed, when it shall be
thy blessed pleasure to say the word. Mean while I will kiss thy always
merciful hand, yea eue^ when it afflictes us; because thou do never visit
but for the conservation of our soul.

The pain of temptation is a participation of our Saviors passion.
CHAP. XXI.
THus we are to suffer, my dear THEOPISTE, not only with patience, but with
love too, (love an inseperable companion of joy, and both of them daughters of
a good will) the labors and pains of contradictions and Crosses, as well
interior as exterior: calling to mind that he (who suffered for the sinners
of contradiction in himself, least we might chance to fail in courage.) Was
to pass through many contradictions, even to the dying of his garments in the
purple of his own precious blood to enter into his own glory? * This is
properly the Cross which our Savior commands us to take up and follow him, *
and it is in those sufferances that the true imitation of the passion of our
Redeemour consists, and that touching of his Cross, * which the Apostle
commends unto us. And by how much these pains are greater, by so much more
lively do they represent, and so much more conformity they have, with those
of JESUS CHRIST. For which cause the great Apostle exhorts us, to have the same
feeling in our anguishes, which the Son of God had. * And what feeling had
he, but to bathe himself in the Baptism of his blood? * waighing nothing so
much in all his sufferances, as well those of body as of soul, as the holy
will of his father, to whom he was made obedient unto death, and the death of
the Cross. * Such ought our disposition to be in all our afflictions, of what
nature soever they be, esteeming them as a fountain of JACOB wherein we are to
wash our uncleanness: * or rather as an excellent and noble estate, since that
by means of them, provided that we be in grace, we suffer in quality of our
crucified Saviors members, not in fancy but in truth; not following our own
choice, but as it shall please God almighty, whom we are constantly resolved
inuiolably to follow even to death, through the midst of these contradictions,
though they were eue^ to continue to the last gasp of our life. It was in this
generous disposition, that the great Apostle with an invincible and heroycall
courage, gave assurance, that all the creatures should not be able to separate
him from the Charity of God. And though at certain times, moved by the
contradictions which he felt in his mortal body betwixt the laws of his
members, and those of his spirit, * this motion made him desire to see his
soul delivered out of the prison of his body, * yet was it not out of any
desire he had to descend from this Cross, * as he himself assures us in many
passages, where he shows his indifferency to live or to dye: but it was a
sacred sallie of his love, which as fire, did continually make toward its
Center (and his Center was the bosom of God) there was all his desire, * and
his delightful rest for ever and ever.

How honorable this Trial is.
CHAP. XXII.
But what an honor is it to us, THEOPISTE, that God by temptations does daigne
to put us to trial, thereby to make us worthy of himself! * Is it not a
special grace done to a soldier, when his Captain, out of the good opinion
which he has of his judgment and valor, sends him out to discover the
enemy? and though this honor be attended by danger, yet so far is he from
co^playning, that of the contrary, he reputes it a singular obligation, and an
argument of his Capitaines Favor. Shall we be less acknowledging of God's
favors, since faith assures us, that he nether tempts, nor permits us to be
tempted, but only to make manifest whether we love him or no? * as the sacred
Oracle speaks in the book of Deuteronomie. God and the devil tempts
diversely, says saint AMBROSE, the one to distroye, the other to crown us;
nor indeed is God's temptation any other thing but a trial of our fidelity,
according to the Psalmist: prove me, o Lord, and tempt me, burn my reins and
my heart: * So was the Patriarch ABRAHAM tempted, so proved, and found obedient.
* All this life is but the Nouishappe of the next, and a continual essay of
our consta^cie. The La^be shall one day say to the Elect, receiving the^ into
his eternal marriages; these are those who remained constant in my service
through all their temptations. * This caused JOB to affirm that all our life
was but a warfare upon earth, * or as S. HIEROME notes upon the Ebrew text, a
temptation upon the earth. * Whence we are taught, faith that good Father, that
if we pretend the crowns of Glory, we are to have no other employment here
below but to fight. * O how wonderful great is God's mercy, says the Doctor
with the golden mouth, to treat us in temptations like to a Physician, who by
a light pain, remedies a greater, curing a hot feeuer with a little hungar and
thrist. Certes temptation is equally profitable to the virtuous and vicious,
working increase of grace in those; and moueing these to purge themselves of
crime, and by the help of Penance to obtain pardon thereof. * And least that
you may be troubled to read, that sometimes God does tempt us, * sometimes he
does te^pt no man, * as though the devil only did tempt, being thereupon
called, HE THAT TEMPTS, * S. AUGUSTINE will teach us by a clear distinction,
that there is a main difference, betwixt the temptation of deceauing, and that
of proving, the one being from the devil alone, the other, from God; * who, as
S. BASILE writing to Chilon, says, by such sufferances proves the fidelity of
his servants. * Which if they do not only endure with patience, says S.
CHRYSOSTOM, but further, become even thankful to him that permits them, then
they asce^d to a certain degree of force and courage, which makes them
exceeding agreeable in the sight of God. * As long as we wander in the
pilgrimage of this life, says S. AUGUSTINE upon the Psalms, we can never be
without temptation, since even our spiritual profit depends thereof, none
knowing his own strength and ability, unless he be tempted: nor ca^ any be
crowned but for victory; nor be victorious but by fight; nor fight unless
Temptation assail him. * It is impossible, says S. HIEROME, upon S. MATTHEW,
that a soul should not be tempted; whence in our Lord's Prayer we petition
unto him, that he lead us not into temptation, * not that we refuse it, but we
beg grace to be able to resist it. * I would not otherwise propose this
truth unto you, but in the testimonies of so many great personages who taught
others justice, and for that cause doc shine like stars in the firmament of
Eternities, * to the end that their undeniable authorities might captiuate your
judgment, and that this doctrine clothed in their sweet terms, might with
more facility and felicity flow into your belief.

It is one of the Marks of Election.
CHAP. XXIII.
THEOPISTE, hold for certain, that to be one of the Elect above, you must be
tempted here below; for such as are not approved, are reproved: those that are
not marked with the letter Tau, made in form of a Cross, have no part in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Ah. what an happiness it is, to be burnt, cut, carved,
mangled here below, according to S. AUGUSTINES wish, to enter into that
heavenly repose. Take a good heart, if we be here afflicted for a while, it is
to draw many good dispositions into us. I dare be bold to auerre, that one my
confide^tly range temptation amongst the Marks of Election. At the least,
certain it is, that it is a sure sign of our fidelity, to stand constant,
like the good Angels, in this storm, and keep our Principality, * that is,
to conserve the Empire of our Reason. No No, says S. HIEROME, writing to
EVSTOCHIVM, the devil never troubles himself with te^pting infideles,
vagabonds, and such as are swallowed up by sin, he setts only at those that
stand right, and are in grace with God; His cheer, according to ABACVC, is
choice; He will none but the daintiest bitts to please his palate. Lo how he
setts upon JOB to destroy him: and haueing slain IVDAS, he begins to sift and
essay the rest of the Apostles? * Our adversary, says S. GREGORY in his
moralls, does bandie so much the more violently against us, by how much we more
resolutely resist him: those that he accounts his own, he works not upon;
but the more a heart reiectes him, the more he essays to make himself master
of his afflictions, * rese^bling in this the mastiue, which barks only at
strangers, never at those of the same family. O God what a consolation it
ought to be to the poor soul, amidst the assaults of the devils malignant
suggestions, who, by being a stranger to that infernal Cerberus, does surely
discern her self to be one of God's family! Esteem it the fullness of your
joy, says Saint JAMES, to fall into many temptations. * And does not S. PAVLE
repute his temptations his glory, saying that he does glory in the hope he
has therein to be the child of God. Yes, for as the Potters clay is hardened by
the fire: so a good man is perfected by temptation, *says the wiseman, his
heart being tried by our Lord like unto gold or silver in the Crusible. * O God,
says the Psalmist, thou have tried us, as silver is tried in the fire!* And
the Prophet ZACARIE says, that temptation works the same effect in a just
man, that fire, in gold or silver, * purifying the one from dross, and the
other from tin *says ISAYE. It is a quick fire of coals, says S.
AUGUSTINE, where the gold severed from the dross shines: but the refuse is
consumed. The just is made stronger thereby, but the sinner perishes therein.
*If you prune a Cipresse-tree it dies. Yet the Gospel teaches us that the
vine is to be pruned, that it may become more fruitful.

Temptation does humble us.
CHAP. XXIV.
ARE we not then, THEOPISTE, to be accounted in some sort enemies of our own
good, if we fly temptations, or complain of them, since that, if we have as
much resolution and courage for our part, as we shall have assistance from God,
we may draw so fair advantages from them? Will you for your consolation, that
I point out some of them in passing by? Peace, the mother of abundance, does
ordinarily make us swell with a secret pride, which while it does insolently
raise us above our selves, we forget our selves, and turn ungrateful: but in
the trouble of wars, in the anguish which temptation causes; we enter into
our selves; acknowledge our own weakness; and learn that every man is a pure
vanity, * and that all his strength is a shadow and a fantome. S. AMBROSE and
Saint AUGUSTINE iumpe in the proof of this truth, in the example of Saint
PETER, who was taught by his fall, how low a rate he was to put upon his own
forces, while temptation cured his desease, presumption. Happy temptation,
which makes so excellent a virtue, Humility, spring up in a soul, to which
salvation is promised in so many places of holy scripture! Saint PAVLE,
vessel of Election, a vessel of massiue gold adorned with precious stones,
does confess that thesting of temptation served him for a counterpoise, least
his mind might have been wafted away by some blast of complace^ce, caused by
the multitude of his revelations.

It crowns us.
CHAP. XXV.
HOW! can we ever hope that any crown shall ouershade our head, unless it be
composed by the hand of temptation? Which caused S. AMBROSE to say, that such
as fear to be tempted, fear to be crowned,* for in the same instant in which
they are fighting their Prize with temptation, their garland is wrought, which
is to girt and adorn their victorious head. Was not IOSEPHES temptation the
proof of his virtue? was not the injury of his imprisoneme^t, the crown of
his chastity?* He is sold by his brothers, a rough temptation; Marry it is to
reign in Egypt: how great a recompense? When God permits us to be tempted,
says CASSIAN, it is a sign, that he intends to strengthen our virtue, and
that he calls us out to victories and triumphs. * For if Capitaines of this
world do liberally reward their soldiers in their return from battle,
distributing amongst them the spoils of the vanquished enemy: * how much more
plentiful shall their reward be, who have suffered in Gods cause, and in his
power have overcome temptations? Certes they shall have the same with the
Angels who threw down the devils, since men are to repair the ruins of the
Heavenly Jerusalem. But what is that? Verily no humane heart can conceive it,
like as no eye has seen, nor ear has heard it. * We know only by the
Apostle writing unto the Romans, that the pleasures which pass, can enter
into no comparison with the glory which shall be revealed unto us in Heaven. *
And to the Corinthians, that those moments of labor do work in us, above
measure exceedingly an eternal weight of glory, * of a wondrous hight.

By it we are holilie Chastised.
CHAP. XXVI.
HOw unjustly then should we think that we are forsaken of God, when
temptations do oppress us, since Charity does then specially press us; and
that the heavenly rays do beat upon our foreheades? For though we feel the
smarte of his rod, yet who knows not that he treates us lick a Father, who
does not chastise his child, but for the love he bears him, and the desire he
has to bring him to goodness? So far is it, says S. CHRYSOSTOM, from
being a sign that we are forsaken by God, that it is even a peculiar mark of
his love and care, for by that means he will rouse us up out of our drousie,
and languishing neglect, to make us more diligent in his service. * For on the
other side, is it not he who cries out unto us, come unto me o you that are
laden and oppressed, and I will refresh you? * We are sensible indeed that
one of his hands does weigh a little heavy upon us: but we also see, if we
please, the other streched out to support and help us. Though the just man be
even waighed down under his burden, yet shall he not be oppressed, says the
Psalmist, because our Lord does hold him up with one of his hands. O how worthy
to be loved and adored is this hand in the distribution of afflictions, which
it sends us, since by them he opens our understanding and makes us know the
true good? * How good it is for me, o Lord, says the divine Psalmist, that
thou have humbled me? * and again, we have rejoiced in the days of our
humiliation, and when we were taken by calamity. With great reason did this
great King speak in this sort, because the rough times, when he was persecuted
by SAVL, ABSALON, and SEMEI, were far more aduantagious unto him, then his
times of prosperity, wherein he was cast down into so gross faults, that he
stood in need of the great mercy * of God to cleanse him. A violent sickness,
says the wiseman, brings the soul to sobriety, * and wisdoms arrival is
acco^pagned with the rod, and correction. * This made JEREMY say; thou have
chastised me, o Lord, and I have been brought under the yoke like unto a
young bull. * This is the gall, by which the Angel restored TOBIE his sight;
and by the dirt of this humiliation, the Son of God cured the borne-blind.

God prone to assiste the tempted.
CHAP. XXVII.
IF it please you, THEOPISTE, maturely and holily to po^der these
considerations, I dare assure you, you shall appcase your frightes, and cease
your plaints. Verily be a complainte as just as it will, yet it is always to
be suspected of daintiness: for it is an undoubted truth, that God who is
faithful in his promises, does never permit us to be tempted beyond our
strength, but makes us even from the temptation it self, raise new forces to
oppose the temptation. Hence we gather by a necessary consequence, that such as
do yeald themselves up, made not such resistance as they were able: and when
they endeavor out of their frailty to plead their sins excuse * one may
stop their mouth * by saying, that iniquity has lied to it self * as those
wicked wretches did, whom the wiseman brings in, saying that the Sun of
Justice has not enlightened them; * and that God having cultiuated the vine of
their interior, in every necessary sort, it is their own only naughtiness,
which makes branbles spring from their heart in lieu of grapes. * And if before
the tribunal of the divine Justice they were so audacious as to cover their
fault with the cloak of the infirmity of their flesh, * how many Saints
would rise up in Judgment against them, making them clearly fee by their
example, that with a less measure of grace, they vanquished greater
temptations, then those to which their cowerdise rendered up themselves. No no,
God does never deny his helping hand to such as perform their duty. * He is
good to those that are of a right heart. * He who watches over Israel, never
sleeps. * If during the tempest he seem sometimes to slumber, he infallibly
awakes in time of need: for he does opportunely come in to our aid, in time
of tribulation. * True it is, he does now and then, let us come to
extreamities, to essay our valor and Patience. He expected till Israel was
come betwixt the sea and the sword; but to make them way through them, he
swallowed up PHARAO with his chariots and army. He reduced JOB to terms that
strike temerous and feeble souls with dread, yet he sent the storm according
to the ship; the wind with proportion to the sails. Why, if it please him
to kill us that he may raise us again, as he permitted LAZARUS to die, to
bestow a new life upon him: if he will carry us down to Hell, and bring us
back again, * who has right to ask him why he does so? * do we not know
that he keeps the keys of death and Hell? that is able to draw back whom he
pleases from deaths door, * and from the Abisses below; to deliver our soul
out of the claws of death; to wipe the tears from our eyes; and to warrant
our foot from falling; * by his power to bear away our souls out of Hell *
to effect that its depth devour us not * and that the mouth of the infernal
Abisses be not wide open to swallow us up. * Who is able to declare the power
of our Lord? Our aid then and sufficie^cie, yea more then sufficiency
proceeds from him, but our destruction from our selves, * because we loose
courage like to the children of Ephraim, who shot meruellous well at Butts, yet
fled from the face of the enemy, with whom they were to fight. * We loose
Patience, and leave God, thinking, though falsely, that he has left us:
whereas the Psalmist assures us, that those who expect God, shall not be
frustrated in their expectation. * And ABACVC, though he stay long, yet leave
not to expect, for coming he will come; that is speedily, and he will not
delay. * Nor is he indeed long ere he come to our succor, but our patience is
too short, our hope too weak. O if we had those sacred promises deepelye
engraven in our hearts, to wit, that God saues those that hope in him: * that he
is their Protector: * their Redeemour: * that he does protecte under the
shelter of his wings such as put their confidence in him: * that those that do
rely upon him, do never fall into confusion, should we ever then lean upon
the stem of the Reed * of our own frayltie? we should not, as JOB says,
go about to borrow assistance from our own misery, * knowing well that they
who put their confidence in their horse men and Chariottes, * that is, in their
own endeavors, are commonly confounded * but never those who do inuoke the
name of our Lord: for he takes pleasure in abating the pride of the most
valiant; and in bestowing strength and victory on the most weak. * Behold my
humility, o God, that is, mine infirmity, said DAVID, and deliver me! * Verily
such as repose all their confidence in God, do take for their strength the
wings of an Eagle, and take a flight from which they never fall. *

Against unjust complaints.
CHAP. XXVIII.
I Must yet, THEOPISTE, have about with our natural daintiness. Our
self-love makes us so feeling in the sense of our greeues, that we conceive
continually that we have no companions eequall to us in misery, and by an
imaginary valor we fall down under the evil which does presently press us.
We imagine that any other would be more supportable unto us. It seems to me,
that by the plaintes which you make of your present evil, which is more
importune then painful (and which by your speaking of it you augment, while
you represent it unto your mind, as one of the most horrible monsters of Hell)
you would make us believe, that all other corporal or spiritual scourges, are
but shadows, and silken whipes, in comparion of this spirit of blasphemy and
impiety which does lay seige to your heart. And upon this ground, you persuade
your self that those that are tempted with despair, hatred, jealousy,
ambition, envy, deshonesty: that such as are afflicted in their bodies with
sickness, whose pains are sharp and pinching; or horrible ulcers: whether in
their goods of Fortune by an extreme poverty; or in their honor, by calumny,
shame, infamy: In a word, that JOB tempted in all these kinds, and seated upon
the dunghill, as upon the Throne of Misery, had nothing that came near to
those daunting representations of Athisme, and Infidelity which do affright
you. You do instantly beseech God, that he would send you all other sorts of
temptation and tribulation, so you may be delivered of this. Whereas I, my
dear THEOPISTE, must needs tell you, that necessarily either you or I are
wonderfully mistake in this business. For my part, I apprehend your temptation
the lightest in the world, nor would I assure you that the insta^ces which you
make to God to have it changed, are deuoyed of rashness. How do you know that
you should not be defeated by some others, whereas I see you stand to this with
your weapons in your hand? Put the case the others were less, which yet I do
not easily believe, who gave you yet assurance, that he that resistes greater
temptations, will be also found invincible in lesser? How many ships do we
see perish even in the Haven: and sink in a little river, after they have
performed a long voyage, and sustained the furious blasts of the angry tempest?
Saint PETER does brave and brag, and dare fight against whole troops of
soldiers: and at the voice of a poor chamber-mayde he abiures his Master.
SAMSON prostrates the Philistians and Lions, yet sleeps in the lap of a
perfidious woman who cuts his hair, and thereby depriving him of strength, puts
him into his enemies power. But I discover sufficiently what is the matter;
that which is present is pressing; and you, forsooth, must have pains and
temptations of your own chooseing, and those also changable at your pleasure.
As though it were in the power of the beseiged, to prescribe laws to the
beseigers and to command them lay their battery first to such a side; and then
to transporte it to another, which is a merely ridiculous humor. You must not
think to bear your deseases, temptations, and other afflictions, as soldiers
carry their muskets, now on one shouldier and then on another for their greater
ease: for such as they befall us without our election, such we must be content
to bear them. One of the most famous amongst the Stoickes said of old, that if
all men were to put their calamities upon a heap, and that afterward an
equal distribution were to be made to all, there would not one be found, who
would not demand his own affliction again. For though we conceive our selves
never fo much tortured with the evil we endure, yet there are others in the
world who are incomparably more afflicted, Alas, THEOPISTE, where are your
thoughts, when you do not only wish for an other Cross, but eue^ dare to
dema^de it of God, as though you were wiser then that eternal wisdom, to
discern what is most convenient for you? O what a presumption, how blind an
inco^sideration, what an immortification is this what irresignation, what
self-love! No, my THEOPISTE, no, not as thou will, but as God will: his will
not yours be done. * Tell him in a quite contrary tune: yes, Eternal Father,
be it so, since so it has been found pleasing in thy blessed sight. * And like
as the Ethiopian Ruby never shines so bright as when it is steeped in vinegar;
so what ever contradictions, reluctations, and violence you suffer in your
will, while you make this Act of resignation, yet omit not to perform it, and
to make that fair rose spring out of the midst of so many thorns.

THE SECOND PART.
HItherto, THEOPISTE, I have discoursed with you, rather as with a sound then a
sick man, or as with one that plains without a cause. Howbeit I cannot but
take compassion of your evil, and without flattery, rather dress your wound
by annoynting then lanceing it; rather by lenitiues, then by the fire and
flame, S. PAVLE commanding us to weep with those that weep, and to be all to
all, that we may gain all to JESUS CHRIST*. Wherefore, though I could make you
clearly see, that you are rather sick by imagination or in imagination, then
in very deed and in your will: yet least I might attristate you, or exasperate
and renew your grief, I will frame my judgment to your opinion, imitating the
Prophet, who shortened himself upon the widows child to restore him to life.
To an imaginary sore I will apply true remedies. Take here then such as the
Heavens suggest unto me for your consolation.

That we are to despise certain temptations.
CHAP. I.
Lo here a pill which I assure my self will seem to you a little too
rigorous, and bitter, but if you have but the heart and stomach to take it
down, I dare promise my self, you will perceive a speedy and wonderful
effect in it, and be notably comforted thereby. Marry you must take it down
without chewing it; you must shut your eyes when you take this potion. Shall I
tell you in a word what this so sovereign an Antidote is? it is contempt. I,
contempt, THEOPISTE, for since your spiritual Directour has so often told you
(founding the botome of your conscience, while you reveal your cause unto him,
* and lay open unto him the windings of your heart) that in all those thoughts
which seemed so horrible unto you, there was more pain then fault, if you
desire to free your self from the formar, as by Gods grace you are from the
second, nothing can with more facility or expedition deliver you from it, then
the contempt of those suggestio^s of the devil. For be the devil as srtong as
he will (and JOB assures us that there is no earthly power in any sort to be
compared to his) yet since our Savior JESUS CHRIST bound him, he is able to
overcome none but such as deliver up their weapons into his hands, as S.
AUGUSTINE in one of his Sermons does teach us, and like to a mastiue, he can
only bite such as of their own free accord put them selves into his mouth,
though indeed he have liberty to bark at all the world. Let him cry then, let
him knock, beat, snarle, keep a coil at the gate of our heart: unless our
consent open him the door, he can never enter. And hereupon they are convinced
of imprudence who permit one to come in to them, whom they know for a theife,
and one that comes to rob them. He that knows, says S. LAVRENCE JUSTINIAN,
that the wine which is presented unto him is impoysoned, is he not deuoyd of
all reason, if without all compulsion he drink it? But mark the slight: The
devil imitates the fisherman, who coueres the point of his hook with a
bait, to the end that the greedy fish may swallow it down, without perceauing
the ambush which is laid to catch him. He resembles the Serpents, whereof the
Prophet makes mention, which under the fair dugges they show, hide a
venomous, milk, which they freely communicate to any that will suck it. But
be the venime of temptation as near unto us as it will, yet can it never hurt
us, unless it be joined unto the free and deliberate consent of our will,
according to that infallible Maxim, that no man does hurt, or is hurt but by
himself. The devil may beat the steel as long as he list, and by
temptation, may beat sparkles of fire upon our heart, yet if he want the match
of our consent, he shall never be able to set our inward house on fire. Though
the temptation should continue all the days of our life, says our B. F. in
his Philophee, yet shall it never defile us with sin: yea, I add, that if we
fight valiantly, it serves for matter to many crowns. But call you that
fighting valie^tly, will you reply, to contemn the charge the enemy makes upon
us? yes, THEOPISTE, it is in my opinion one of the greatest feats of valor.
For contempt of the enemy is a sign of assurance, and the first step to
victory, is to be confident of it. Those that are doubtful and disamayed, in,
or before the Combat, come hardly ever happily off. Notwithstanding the
advantage which Goliath had in greatness, yet the little DAVID being confident
in God, does despise his brauadoes, and hopes as well to see an end of him, as
of the Lions and Bears which formarly he had slain. And again, I will
discover unto you a stratageme it is this. The devil, though feeble, and damned
to the deep pit of Hell, yet comes not an inch short of his ancient pride,
but esteems himself as strong and powerful as he was, when he made the
reuoult against his Creator, and strove to become like to the Highest, so that
he can in no wise endure to be despised, but flies from those that fight with
that weapon, as from such as assault him upon that side where he is the
weakest, and where (as did ELEAZAR, who struck the Elephant of Antiochus in
the flancke) one may easily reach him a deep and deadly blow. And that the
thing goes as I deliver it you, frame a judgment by our Saviors temptation in
the desert: As long as our Savior daigned to make him answer, measuring, as
it were, his own greatness with his adversaries force, he doubles his blows,
and waxes hotter in the fight: but as soon as these words of contempt, begone
Satan, proceeded out of the Redeemours mouth as thunder and lightning; he slid
away with confusion and shame, and shortly forsook the field. Further, what
reason have you, THEOPISTE, to treat those importune thoughts which molest
and toil you, otherwise, then in terms of contempt. Eagles you know,
according to the old Proverb, disdain to fly at Flies. And he that would
employ his best endeavors, and put himself into a sweat, to drive away, and
keep those little troublesome creatures off his face, would more move his
spectatours to laughter then to pity. Such, doubtless, is the unprofitable,
I will not say, the ridiculous imployme^t of many, who by continual clamours
and complaints, and if I might so say, by force of arms, think to drive away
their evil thoughts, uttering now and then such strange speeches, and making
such mouths and faces, that such as see and know their desease, do rather
mock then pity them. In this point they are not altogether unlike to that
old Emperor, who shutt himself up in his Chamber, and exercised himself in
catching flies, while it was conceived that he was employed in more serious
affairs. Let, therefore, THEOPISTE, those curres bawle at you, without ever
taking notice of their barking, and you shall see, they will hold their peace.
If you irritate them, they will bark and bawle louder. Give those crows leave
to croake, without driueing at them with clodds and stowes, as an ancient
Poet speaks. Imitate him, who in the Summer time walks in a dustie way,
where the wind makes the dust rise from under his feet. He shutts his eyes:
holds on his way, without troubling himself with the allaying of all this
dust: otherwise, it were to follow and fight with his own shadow, and feyned
fantomes: to strive to measure the air, and weigh the fire. * An endeavor as
fruitless as foolish. Follow ALEXANDER'S way, who with one twarte blow cut
the Gordian knotte which he could not loose: so by a powrefull disdain you
shall more easily deliver your self out of the snares and netts which the
enemy has set to catch you, then ever you can disengage your self by a
violent winding and turning. S. JOHN CLIMACVS brings in to this purpose, the
story of an old Munke, who for many years together having been tempted with
blasphemy, and endured incredible panges in this trial, he discovered
himself to a neighboring Hermit to have some counsel and consolation from
him: He had no other, then that which I prescribe unto you, that is, absolutely
to contemn all his illusio^s. In the interim, the Hermit who was a beaten and
experienced soldier in that kind of war, took upon him all the sins which
the tempted person apprehended he had commit; whereupon he received such
consolation, that upon the first act of contempt which he made according to
counsel, the devil forsook him quite, nor was he afterward disquieted with
the like thoughts.

That temptation augments virtue.
CHAP. II.
But if the terror which does possess you (and which I would term vain, if
I did not know that even servile fear is a grace of God) does not permit you
to contemn an enemy which you dread, and whose assaults are so terrible unto
you, make this consideration a rampire to your breaches, and like unto the
fabulous Giant, let your overthrow redouble your forces, representing unto
your mind that that which fightes against virtue, defeates it not, yea, that
opposition contributes force and groth unto it. Why, would you ever fall into
that opinion as to think, that the virtue of Chastity should consiste in
being wholly insensible, like unto a stone or a block. I cannot persuade my
self that your judgment can give credit to a thought so absurd. In what then
does this fair virtue consiste? do not you see that it consistes in a perfect
resistance of all that is contrary to purity: whereupon it is compared to the
white and dainty Lilie, which grows amidst the black and rough thorns? Do
you not see, that Gardiners fetch pinckes, sweet Marierome, and other
odoriferous flowers, out of stinking dung hills. Roses do smell far more
fragrantly being set near unto the strong sauered garlike. We must make the
like conceit of Faith, nothing does drive it fo far in, nor imprint it more
deeply in our heart, then the temptations of blasphemy and infidelity: For as
fire is never so hot, as when it is exceeding cold, so is our Faith never so
closely united unto God, as when it is violently opposed. We resemble sheep
who run all close together on a heap, and make toward their shepherd, as
soon as they perceive the wolf draw near: for as soon as we apprehend that
the enemy goes about to bereave us of the precious treasure of our Faith, which
is the grownd of our eternal salvation, we cast our selves into the lap, or
bosom of the Prince of Good Pastors, and the Bishope of our souls. * This
moved S. LEO to say, that without temptation virtue cannot be reduced into Act.
For there is no Faith without trouble, and agitation; No Charity without the
sting of sensuality; no fight without an adversary; no victory without
fight; nor crown without victory. This is a thing of great consolation, if
you can well understand and Practice it, THEOPISTE: For thence you may learn
to make progress in virtue, by means of that very thing which seems
opposite unto it, since it is true, according to the doctrine of S.
BONAVENTVRE, that by the resistance which we make against temptation, we make a
great step in the virtue wherein it strives to hinder us. This is manifest in
S. BENNET, S. FRANCIS, S. THOMAS OF AQVINE, whom God voutsafed to favor with
the gift of a perfect Continency and purity, for that they had by heroical
Acts subdued motions contrary to honesty. The like happens, says the same
Doctor, to those that are tempted in matter of Faith: for if they behave
themselves like the brave Soldiers of JESUS CHRIST, * the end of their Combat
is always accompaigned with extraordinary lights and notions, which are, as
certain rewards of their fidelity. So does light rise and increase to the
just, * and in the midst of the darkness, a sple^dour does shine to those that
are of a right heart. * In this sort Patience did dilate it self in JOB'S heart,
(whereof he is a perfect pattern): and in sequall thereof, the goods, which by
the Divine permission, were take from him by a violent hand, were restored him
to the double. Judge your self then, THEOPISTE, whether I had not great reason
to tell you above, that you did reject your own good, when you begged to be
delivered of temptation. Your sick heart does loath this delightful manna: and
your craysie judgment, makes little esteem of the wishfull Land of Promis,
which God makes flow with the honey and milk of his benedictions.

Prayer, a good remedy against Temptations.
CHAP. III.
BUT I see plainly, that in vain I persuade you to remain upon this happy
Cross: and that you are resolved to stay at the otherside of Iourdaine,
togeither with those two inconsiderate Tribes: well then, I must provide a
lodging for you there, squared out by the line of distribution. * Do you
apprehend your back too weak to support so heavy a burden? have recourse to
prayer, according to the Counsel of S. JAMES, Is any sorrowful amongst you?
Let him pray. * And according to that of S. PAVLE, that to resist the devils
assaults, we are to put on the armor of God, which he calls frequent, and in
a manner, continual Prayer. * Yea, even following our Saviors own Counsel;
who wills his Apostles to pray least they may enter into temptation. And in the
form of Prayer which he taught us, does he not order us to pray, that we be
not led into temptation? * Cassian does advertise us, that this verse of the
Psalmist, which the Church orders to be said before every hour of the divine
Office, Intend into my aid o God, Lord make haste to help me, * has a
peculiar force to drive away temptations and distractions in our Prayers. As
also that other, let our Lord rise up, and his enemies shall be dispersed. *
The many prayers also, which DAVID made to be succored in his temptations:
Lord forsake me not for ever. * Let thy mercy comfort me. * My dejected eyes
say unto thee, when will thou comfort me? restore me the joy of thy salvation,
and with thy principale spirit confirm me. * Thou who have promised to deliver
them from pain, who shall call upon thee in time of tribulation. * Mine eyes
are always turned toward our Lord, that he may pull my feet out of the gyues
and snares. * I suffer violence, o Lord, make answer for me. * Rise o great
God, rise up, why do thou sleep? do not reject me for ever. * Why do thou
turn thy face from my poverty and affliction? * Take thy sword and buckler,
and come in to my succor. * Say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. * How long,
alas, will thou forget me, and turn from me thy heavenly countenance? * How
long shall my enemies have advantage over me? * Cast thine eyes upon, and give
ear unto me o Lord. * Enlighten mine eyes, least I may sleep in the shadow
of death. * I have listed up mine eyes toward the mountains, whence I am to
have succor, which I expect of that Lord who made Heaven and earth. * To thee
it is, o great Lord, that I lift up my eyes, who do inhabit the Heavens. *
Alas, do not chastise me in thy fury, correct me not in thine angar. * And a
number of others the like eleuations of of mind, which the Psalmist breathes
out in so many passages of his heavenly Canticles. Whereby we are taught, that
Prayer is the tower of DAVID, an Armory wherein are all sorts of armor against
the assaults of temptation, so that we always conclude over prayers in those
words of perfect resignation: Let thy will, o Lord, be done, not mine. * Be it
done in earth, as it is in Heaven. * Be it done according to thy blessed
pleasure, not according to my guste or liking. For if we desire that God should
do our will, is it not most reasonable, that we should submit our selves unto
his? And that we should repute him our sovereign law, * put down in the
beginning of our book, * and engraven in the midst of our heart. We do often
ask and receive not, because we ask amiss. * And God who is good, does
sometimes out of Love deny us that, which, if he were offended with us, he
would grant us. S. PAVLE petitioned to be freed from that shameful temptation
which did afflict him; but was answered, that grace did suffice him, because
his virtue was perfected in infirmity. * So that he was heard in one sense, and
not in another. Let us therefore ask what we ought, and as we ought, and Gods
promise will never fail us. For his Truth remains forever, and his word
passes not.

The word of God another Antidote.
CHAP. IV.
BEsides Prayer, there is yet another weapon, very powrefull against
temptations, especially that with which you are afflicted. THEOPISTE, it is the
sword of the Holy Ghost, the word of God, * whether it be heard (for faith is
by hearing, and hearing by the word of Christ) * read, or spoken: for its
redounding is the voice of thunder which does dau^t the accursed spirits. The
trial of this remedy was made by our Saviors temptation in the desert, who
repelled the Tempters darts with the words of life, life everlasting. * The
Author of it, is S. HIEROME writing to his EVSTOCHIVM, delivering her very
particular and ample documents touching it; S. GREGORY in his Moralls; S.
BASILE in his short Rules; and CASSIAN in his twenty two Conference: all who,
with one consent, do advise us to store our selves with sacred darts, opposite
to the vices which temptation does suggest, as with so many sharp arrows
quiuered up in our memory, where of we may make use in time of need to beat
down all the enemies plots by a constant and courageous co^ter-batterie.
Howbeit I must ingeniouslie confess, this remedy is not so common, nor is it
useful for every one, but such as are conversant in holy write, or books of
spiritualitie. And indeed, THEOPISTE, I speak to you as to one that knows the
law, * as S. PAVLE says, that you may make use of this weapon, in this your
extreamitie, according to the skill you have thereat. All the Holy Fathers hold
it sovereign. Hence DAVID said, that the arrows of God, that is, of his word,
were sharp headed, powerful above his works, and fit to beat down the
enemies of the King of Glory.*

That melancholy is to be avoided.
CHAP. V.
BUT I perceive the tempest of your mind requiers, that I should sound and
search your wound yet deeper, and press and pry with more diligence into your
sore. O God, THEOPISTE, take-heade least that bitterness of mind which does
possess you, proceeding, from the smart of your evil endured with melancholy
and impatience, may be worse then the temptation it self. It is a remedy
which nature without the help of Grace can apply unto it self: while yet in
lieu of disengaging it self it inueigles it self; in lieu of curing, it
impoysones its wou^d; in lieu of lightening it makes its own burden more
unwieldy. In vain, THEOPISTE, in vain do you strive to build your interior
house upon a solid and sure foundation, unless God put his hand to the work;
If God keep not the City of your soul, in vain do you stand sentinel, in
vain you walk the round of the walls. * Unless that strong armed keep the
Fort, you are never to hope for Peace. * If he awake not, if he speak not, the
storm will not cease, * the calm will not come. * If you think to find out
the means in your self whereby to conserve your Faith against the powers of
darkness, * you seek for birds in the sea, fishes on the dry land; you
look to find out fountains of living water in broken cisternes; and in
Nature, fruits not to be found in her garden; effects that are beyond her
reach. Yes, for Faith being infused into our heart, by a divine and
supernatural way, she will not be stayed there By humane means, nor by our
endeavors and strife alone. If you think by your own endeavors to quite your
self of the assaults which are made against you, you shall never be freed
from them: because this buckler, is not of a temper strong enough, nor is this
armor proof. The more that you drink of the water of your Cisterne, * the
more you demand, the more you are inflamed, the more your thirst is augmented:
and your mela^cholie will increase by the very means you use to remove and put
it away. It is as oil cast into the fire, which in steed of extinguishing,
does kindle it. Have recourse therefore to God in this behalf; in him you
shall find Peace, and repose: for he assures us that his yoke is sweet and
his burden light. * But that I may no further dilate my self upon this remedy,
I refer you, not to the bare reading, but to the diligent and faithful
practice of the eleauenth and twelueth Chapter of the fourth part of our B. F.
his Philothee, where he speaks of unquietness and saddesse; There you shall
find sovereign receptes for your desease; and in the storm wherein you are
tossed, the Seagalls calm; In fine, that Peace of God which passes all
understanding, and all humane conceit.

That we are in no wise to omit the ordinary exercises of our vocation.
CHAP. VI.
ABOVE all things, THEOPISTE, be ware that this affliction of mind which does
cross you, do not delay you, as an importune Remora, in the course of your
navigations, that is, in the exercises of your vocation. For as the Crampe-fish,
having taken down the fishers bait, sends out by the line, such a mu^nesse
into his arm, that he is forced to let all go: so the Angel of darkness, who
strives still, as the Proverb goes, to fish in troubled waters, perceauing him
self not able to staggar a soul by temptation, takes pleasure at least, to
put him out of the rack or path of his duty, casting wood on his bread, *
as well as snares in his way, * that he may forget to eat that, or at least
stumble at this. He thinks he gaynes not a little, when he delays us, if not
to do what is good, at least to do it well. It is a great step to victory,
to have disrancked the enemies troops. He will at least accoaste and incumber
us, if he cannot retire and make us return backewards. For the guilefull
villain knows full well, that not to advance in the way of God, is to
recoyle; and that upon JACOB'S ladder, all ascend or descend, none stay
lingering upon it. He strives to stope the mouth of our Canon, if he cannot
carry it away. He is content to make our defense unprofitable. He will
presently after make a new charge upon us; and will have an easy victory over
us, if he find us disarmed and disordered. Wherefore I do very earnestly
exhort you, THEOPISTE, that, (be your pensiveness, apprehension, dolor and
distress, which this temptation brings upon you, never so great) you grow not
slack and careless in any of your spiritual exercises, or any exterior
imployme^t appertayning to your state and condition. In this you will not only
give a laudable testimony of your courage and skill, but even of your love and
loyalty toward God, showing that the waters of annoyes cannot extinguish, nor
the torrents of water bear away that heavenly flame, * It is an easy task
for the least of mortals to steer the ship in fair and calm weather: but
in rough storms, the master Pilote, has his hands full to guide the stern.
This lawful employment will work two good effects in you at once; for it
will frustrate your adversary in his plott, which was to withdraw you from
your ordinary course and proceedings, in the functions and actions of the
vocation to which God has called you: and it will withal serve to diuerte
your mind, that the grief which does afflict, may not seem so sensible unto
you. I will add a third advantage: It is, that as flies do not sit upon
running waters, nor can find good footing upon a smooth glass: so does
temptation get but small footing in a soul that is well employed, and who
flies idleness. This is the most general Counsel, that those great Masters
of spiritualitie of the old time, delivered unto their disciples, to avoid the
surprises of their mortal enemy, to wit, so to dispose of themselves, that
they might always be found in some laudable exercise. CASSIAN, S. AUGUSTINE
speaking to his brethren in the desert, S. HIEROME in his epistles, S. BERNARD
in sundry places, do urge nothing so much, as the flight of idleness and
carelessness, which the wiseman names the Mistres, and worker of all evil. If
you will believe me, THEOPISTE, in lieu of loosing courage, you shall renew
your fervor, calling to mind your first Charity. * You shall imitate those
sick men, who eat rather by reason the^ appetite, to co^serue their strength,
and more vigourously sustain the desease that hanges upon the^. In the end,
says DAVID, the patience of the poor does not perish. Be ware that the heat
of this temptation put you not out of your way; run without intermission for
the prize which is proposed unto you, but run so that you may bear it away.
* Follow not that unfortunate Hermes-fire of your suggestion, which will seduce
and misleade you: Imitate the faithful dog which continually follows his
master, giving no ear to their hola's and cries who meet him on the way. In a
word keep your self still in action, and the enemy will not know how to
catch you. The serpe^ts of temptations, and the pensiveness which does
accompaignie the^, resemble serpents and toades, which desire rather to live in
standing and stinking pooles, then in clear and running rivers. Contrariwise,
as in time of war, one is far more vigilant and stands more upon his guard,
then in the repose of a constant Peace, when each one walks in confidence. So
in the Co^bate in which you now fight, double your exercises of piety, give
your self more frequently to Prayer, to works of mercy, to reading spiritual
books, to mortifications; go more often to the Sacraments of Penance, and
the holy Euchariste. And although you be forced to practice all these things
without guste, without feeling, and as you conceive, without fervor; yea even
with auersion, repugnance, co^tradiction, loathsomenesse, and a certain
violence of mind, yet omit not to continue them: for as the most renowned
valor does appear in the greatest dangers; so the most generous fidelity,
does show itself in those difficulties, no otherwise then the strongest wine
does grow in the most rockie ground, and such as are most exposed to the heat
of the Sun at moonetyde. But how is it possible, will you say, that I should
produce so ferme acts of Faith, while I hardly think I have any faith at all?
No, THEOPISTE, no, you are not deprived of Faith. A man in a swoone is not
dead. His heart beats still, though his poulse be very weak and slow. Under
a great heap of hot ashes, there is yet some hot coal, and so much the more
hot, as it is more closely covered. Fire that is shut up in an Oven is far
more active, then that which flies in the open air. The water of the fountain
does spring up so much the higher, by how much it is restraynd in a strayter
conduite. And is it not written, that out of the belly of him that shall
believe, living waters shall flow, * and waters that shall run to life
everlasting. * And if you desire to be further instructed in the practice
which I propose unto you, I refer you to our B. F. in his 14. and 15. Chap.
of the 4. Part of his Philothee.

Aspirations in the presence of God.
CHAP. VII.
BUT if you be not yet wholly possessed with dryness, repugnances, and
distemper of mind, here it is that you must recollect and call together all
your interior forces, as the king in the Gospel, who raised all the forces
he could possibly, to go out to meet him, who was about to set upon his
Co^trie. * And you are to make all the acts of lively Faith that you are able,
either by word of mouth, or at least in heart: For these will be as so many
contermines, which will frustrate and spoil all the enemies works: And will
fortify your heart against the assaults which blasphemous thoughts shall make
against your faith. O what an honor it is for you, to have God a Spectatour in
this your Combat, who looks down upon you from the highest heaven, as he did
of old upon S. STEPHEN in the shower of stones. Is it not in this occurre^ce,
that you are to encourage your self with the kingly Prophet: I consider God
present, and at my right hand, what is it that can shake me? * Our Lord is with
me as a valiant Champion, and thereby all those that do persequute me, and do
rise up against me shall be abated and confounded. * O God, said DAVID, place
me near unto thee, and then let them fight who list against me. * If thou be
with me, says the divine Apostle, who can be against me? * Now as stars do
not only look down upon the earth, but also do dart down upon it diverse
influences; so the eyes of God are not merely cast upon us, as JOB says, as
one man beholds another; but, as the scripture does teach us, they do infuse a
certain force into us * which makes us become valourous against our enemies:
So we read of SAMSON, who overthrew the Philistians while the spirit of God
did assiste him. This supply of courage does also appear in humane valor:
For what do soldiers perform, when they have the honor to fight in presence
of their Prince, do they not lend belowes about them, even beyond their force?
Yet are they ordinarily moved thereto by humane respects, and vanity too often
is their motive. * What then ought not a truly faithful and generous soul
do for an Eternity? Is she not in this behalf to imitate the Angels of
light, who threw down to Hell those of darkness in that great battle which
was fought in Heaven, by that word which testified their inviolable alleagance:
WHO IS AS GOD, who is as God? In like manner when those legions of wicked
thoughts of infidelity, abomination, and blasphemy shall discover themselves
to your thoughts, and as importune Drones shall buze about your heart, you are
but to make this protestation: WHO IS AS GOD? Who is like unto our Lord God who
does inhabit the heavens above, and does lend a favorable ey to things below?
* Thence proceeded those sacred eiaculations, which we see in many passages
of holy Scripture, holy Saints made in like occurrences. JOSEPH being tempted
protests that he will not offend his Master. SUSANNA also resistes temptation,
out of the apprehension she had of Gods presence. S. PAVLE: I live in the Faith
of the Son of God who has loved me, and who gave himself for me. * S.
BLANDINE being drawn to martyrdom, used no other words then that she was a
Christian, and dyed in that holy protestation. S. PETER MARTYR being wounded to
death, and left upon the place by the Murderers, had yet leisure to write these
words upon a stome with his fingar dipped in his own blood, I BELIEVE. * And
Saint TERESA drawing near unto death, said sometimes; at the least Lord, I
die a child of thy Church: making thereby a brief profession of her Faith,
whereof she made use, as of a fiery sword, to drive away all illusio^s
contrary to her belief, and entire loyalty. Thus it is, that those that are
faithful in Love, * do exercise themselves against the assaults of the
midday devil. * For the rest, I will assure you, that those who by interior
or exterior acts of Faith, do make head against the temptations of the
spirit of infidelity, do soudainely dashe all his designs, and do what he
can, they frustrate his atte^pts: For like as a Maid can never be married
while she says, No because it is the consent that ties the knot of marriage;
so temptation can never cast a soul into sin, and by sin, marry her to
death and Hell, * till free will yeald it self up to so loose a disloyalty,
as to forsake the Creator for the Creature, and the living fountain, for a
dry Cisterne.

The difference betwixt Meditation and Contemplation.
CHAP. VIII.
NOw these acts of Faith, whereof I have spoken, THEOPISTE, are produced in
this life, which the Misticalls term Active, by means of vocal Prayer, if
they be exterior; or by Meditation if they be interior. But if you desire to
make them equal in vigor and force to their excellency; as darts, by how
much they are sharper, by so much they are the more penetrating, I will yet
furnish you with other means, which are, in my judgment, two of the most
forceable remedies that are to be found, not only to disperse and repel those
troublesome temptations, but even to draw so great a riches out of them, that
you will be constrained to crieout with that Ancient, we had been lost, if we
had not been lost. Both of the^ shall be taken out of the box of
Contemplation, the use of which, does Wonderfully refine Faith, as it does also
inflame Charity, but in two different degrees. For the first shall be drawn
out of simple, the other out of eminent Contemplation. And this being said, I
have no more to say unto you, but only to leave you in the hands of God
almighty, and with MOSES, to the kiss of our Lord. * You are already,
sufficiently instructed in spiritual affairs, to discern the difference
betwixt Meditation and Contemplation: yet to renew in you the memory thereof,
you may please to look what our B. F. says of it, according to his ordinary,
that is excellently, in the 6. book of his Theotime. I will say only that
which is absolutely necessary, for the clearing and illustrating of that which
I am about to tell you. Meditation, which is no other thing, then the groaning
or murmuring of the Dove, * a mystical ruminating, * or recogitating, * whereof
frequent mention is made in holy Scripture, is made by an attentive
consideration, or interior discourse, which tends to move and excitate the
soul to holy affections and resolutions. To this purpose, it does bend, apply
and employ all the faculties of the soul, replenishing the Memory with the
presence of God, and with the points which she is about to examine: The
understanding, with discourse, reasons, and intelligible species: The will,
with aspirations, resolutions, affections: The Imagination, with figures and
Idea's, following that which the Philosopher does teach us: that he that does
meditate is to frame unto himself Idea's or Images: So that Meditation does
sound and examine, the truth of things, or hidden mysteries by peacemeale,
making, as it were, an anatomy of them, imitating therein the Fisher and
fowler, the one whereof, does beat the feilds and bushes; the other, the rivers,
to find out their game: or else to one that is eating, who turns and chewes the
meat in his mouth, before he be fed with it. Its game and food, are the
diverse Acts, which the powers and faculties of the soul do produce which is
never done without labor and pain, though indeed that pain is solaced by
Charity. For he that loves, labors not; or if he labor, he loves that
beloved labor, by reason of the Object which is the dear cause thereof. All
JACOBS labors seemd light to him, by reason of the love and affection he bore
to the beautiful RACHEL. It fares not so with Contemplation; for it resembles
drinking, a flowing action, sweet and easy: It is made in unity, not in
multiplicitie; It leaves the actiuitie of MARTHA to meditation, and takes to it
self MARIE'S best part, which shall never be taken from her. * It is a simple,
singular, and lovely look, cast upon any Truth or Mystery; yet a look, which
in its one only simple, and naked Act, does comprehend in emine^cie, virtue,
and substance, all that great variety of Acts, which Meditation does produce:
This, does exercise the Powers distinctly and separately: that does unite and
gather them together into one point, reduces them to that unity, which is
held so famous amongst the Mystical Divines: to that one necessary thing, *
praised by our Saviors own mouth: to that one ey, * to that only hair,
which does wound the Spouse his heart. An act so excellent, that it may be
termed the quintessence of all spiritual extractions. An act, which, like as
the herb Dodecatheon, conteynes in it self the virtue of all the other
simples, so it comprehends all the force and vigor of all the other Acts,
which the soul is able to produce in the life called Active. It is a known
thing, that Empirikes by means of fire, are accustomed to draw all the essence
of the medcines which they co^pose into a little water or powder, so that by
little things in appearance, they work wonderful effects. The same may be said
of the Act of Contemplatio^ in spiritual life, one only, has more force,
then a great many squised out, with a great deal of beating of the brain, and
breaking of the head, by meditation, wherein many are deceived, as well
spiritual Directours as the directed, those, many times, loading, ouerloading
and oppressing these, with such a multiplicitie of Acts, Methodes, Aduises,
and exercises, that the too great variety of remedies does very often augment
the desease which they strive to cure.

The facility of Contemplation.
CHAP. IX.
BUT every one, will you say, is not capable of CONTEMPLATION; the very word
does affright you, THEOPISTE, because it is not so common as MEDITATION; yet I
can assure you, the thing it self is far more facile more familiar, and more
usual then you imagine. Yes, THEOPISTE, for do you not esteem it an easier
thing, to behold simply, that is, with a simple and interior look, some
Truth, or mystery, then to think of it; and again, to think of it simply,
more facile then to frame a multiplicity of discourses upon it; so many acts
of the understanding, Will, Memory, Preludes, Points, Affections, Resolution,
Thanks giuings, oblations, demands, Preparations, Inuocations, Compositions of
Place, Representations, with all that great and combersome train, whereof the
instructions for Meditation are full: for before you can beat all this into a
gross or shalowe brain, you shall spend many a fair year, and often times,
after a great deal of pains taken, you prevail nothing but weary his
brain, and breed in him a disgust of devotion, that I may say no worse. I say
not this, as conceauing these precepts not to be good, and all these Acts
profitable, proper, necessary, especially to beginers in spiritual life; for
who knows not, that meditation is the forerunner, and as it were, the Aurora
of the light day of Contemplation; and in some sort a necessary means,
considering the course of nature? O God, be it far from my heart to blame those
Acts, not only of the three powers of the soul (especially since even,
according to all Divinity, eternal beatitude does consiste in those of the
understanding and will, which are to know, and to love) but also those of the
passions subject to reason's lore, and interior sense, as the Imagination and
the rest. I know further, thanks be to God, that such as would omit, or leave
them off, contrary to the Rules which are prescribed by Spiritual men upon
this subject, would fall into a certain Idleness as blameworthy, as that
silence, that holy Rest is laudable which the Spiritualistes have in such
esteem. But I affirm that excess in every thing is to be cut of; and like as
too much salt or suggar spoil the meats wherein they are put, (where as
otherwise, the use of them in a mediocrity, is excellent, the wiseman to this
effect aduiseing us, that me take honey moderately, least that the stomach
being ouercharged with it, may render it, not being able to retain it;) So is
it an Advise of the best Masters in Spirituality, to cut short, in Meditation,
the discourses of the understanding and curious Speculations, which do savor
rather of study, then of the spirit of Prayer; yea even not to multiply the
acts of the will so excessiuely: for he that eats too much meat, disgests it
not: and oftentimes those that make so many aspiratio^s, Eleuations, affections
Resolutions, stifeled with the multiplicity, know not which to take or stick
to: and making a number of good pourposes, they perform none at all. They
embrace much and hold little. One affection or two well chewed well tasted; one
or two resolutions well engraven, deeply imprinted upon the soul, In my
opinion, make a man come from his meditations, better disposed, and more
resolute to do well, then when the mind knows not at which end to begin to
put in execution those pourposes, which it rather beheld superficially as in a
confused heap, then perfectly relish. The Archer that beholds many marks at
once, rarely hits any. But here is not the place wherein I am to enlarge my
self upon this point, which I have already done, in a Direction which I made
and published touching mental Prayer. I will only make use of this digression
to prove what I have undertaken, to wit, that it is easier to Co^template, then
to meditate; and that more do conte^plate, (though they reflect not of it)
then do meditate, as we see by experience. Tell some simple and vulgar
person, that God became man for our sake, or some other Article of the Creed,
he will believe it simply, and humbly and sweetly will embrace and assent to
that mystery of our Faith. Go when you have done this, and make him make a
Meditation upon it, according to the long methodes which many Directours
deliver. Let Us, for example, upon Christmas day, tell a soul that believes
simply, and adores JESUS borne of the blessed Virgin, that she should place her
self in the presence of the little JESUS; that she should frame in her
imagination the ma^ger of Bethlo^ together with the ox, the Ass, hay, straw,
the Blessed Virgin, S. JOSEPH, the night, the cold season, the stable open one
every side to the wind and weather, the child quaking with cold, lying all
along upon the litter, swadled in poor cloutes, adored by his holy mother, his
foster-father, the Angels Pastors etc. Tell her further, that she is to inuoke
the divine grace, to make her preludes, her preparatory prayers. From thence,
make her pass on to her three points of Consideration. Show her how she is to
amplify and enlarge her reasons and discourses, by looking upon, waighing and
examining all; the causes, the effects, the time, place, persons, all the
circumstances, actions, words, etc. The^ teach her, how she is to move
herself to good affections out of her discourse and reasoning, affections of
all sorts of love; Compassion, Fear, Joy, Grief, Mercy Co^punction, etc.
Instruct her how out of these affections she is to form Resolutions. Yet
further, give her a model of thanksgiving, unions and the rest. In fine
speak to her touching attentions, Actual, habitual, vertuall: of
distractions, of want of guste, of lights, visio^s, with a number of other
terms. Do you not plainly discover that in steed of giving her the wings
of a dove to fly, you lay a load upon her, under which she is not able to
stir, while she knows not at what end to begin a work so confused. So that
having at once more to do then she is able, she does less then she ought. But
if omitting all this, you would move her to believe in simplicity of heart,
that JESUS CHRIST was borne of the virgin MARIE, * (as we have in our Creed)
having, as she has the habit of Faith, this simple Act is easy unto her. Wish
her to love him who by this his birth gave himself unto her, * and in
himself, whom he gave without reserve; all things, * you will find her moved,
with this excess of Charity, * freely to offer up her self to him, and
perceive her to be, as it were, in the very same disposition, which caused the
Divine Apostle to say, I live in the Faith of JESUS CHRIST; who has loved me
even unto death, and the death of the Cross. * Now, in your advise, is not
this simple and loving aspect a kind of Co^templation, since it is made without
discourse, and without that multiplicitie of Acts, or rather agitations of the
understanding, and will? Hence it is, that simple persons are sometimes more
capable of devotion, then curious, active, reslecting, and penetrating wits,
who make a great deal more brute, but yeald less fruit. Endeavor far more,
yet perform less. Who think you, has more fruition of the Sun, the
Rustike who has a clear sight to behold and consider its beams and
brightness; or the Philosopher, who is short sighted, yet is able to discourse
of the motions, influences and effects, of that great light? What man, in his
right wits, will not prefer the Rustike before the Philosopher in that
consideration? Say the like of him who discourses very much in Meditation,
and yet has far less taste and light in heavenly things, though he towle a
number of Idea's about his imagination, his memory, his understanding, he
falls far short notwithstanding, of the sweet and delightful knowledge which
springs from the simple and amiable attention of Contemplation. Yet do I
ingeniously confess, that this kind of simple contemplation in simple souls,
which forerunns meditation, is but unpolished, rude, and accompayned with much
imperfection. And that that which follows a long exercise and practice of
Meditation, is far more complete and high: because the soul being persuaded
to heavenly Love, by force of so many considerations, ratiocinations,
affections, aspirations, resolutions, and other acts of Meditation, does with
much more facility, light and heat, fall into simple acts of Contemplation,
having so frequently and so attentively beholden tasted and acknowledged a good
Truth, or a true Good; and thereupon is inclyned to that love which does unite
the heart to God, and thence is called the band of perfection. * Yet this does
in no sort prejudice the proposition which I made, to wit, that it was easier
to contemplate then to meditate, whether we understand that rude and unpolished
Co^templation, which forerun's, or that subtle and accomplished, which
follows the long use of Meditation.

An Act of simple Contemplation a sovereign remedy against temptation.
CHAP. X.
BUT what am I to infer out of all this, THEOPISTE? Marry, that if by many
Acts of Faith, taken out of the Storehouse of Meditation, you cannot drive
away the thoughts of infidelity which do trouble and disturb you, you
should have recourse to the Act of Contemplatio^, which is more efficacious,
and less forced; more powerful against your adversary; more comfortable to
your soul: and fitter to fortify her in the virtue which temptation strives
to shake. It is a simple and pure act, deuoyd of all composition of discourse
and Idea's or if it have any mixture of any, they are so subtle and delicate,
that they can hardly be perceived at all. For it happens often by the industry
of that wicked man who ouersowes cockle amongst the good corn, * that the same
acts, which one would make use of to repulse the darts of temptation, do more
incumber then comfort the mind, and do rather inueigle then illustrate it. Be
they fair and easy, be they violent and rough, they do often times equally
hurt, while the Devil does change cures into poison, and wounds us with our
own weapons. Vinegar and honey, though contrary in taste, yet agree in this
effect, that they both inflame the wound into which they are powered. Even
touching and rubing of a sore does venime it. To dispute against a temptation
is to irritate it. To endeavor to drive it away by force of arms, is to stope
its departure. To strive to put it out of the memory, is to engraue it therein.
Beelzebub Prince of Flies, never coming so thick upon us, as when we often
strike him off. If you will believe me therefore, you shall not weary your
mind, by producing incessantly Acts of Faith to repelle those assaults, but
you shall practice the counsel of our Blessed Father in the 7. Cap. of the 4.
Part. of this Philothee, you shall use diuersious; and fair and softely
taking, and turning the ey of your mind off the dreadful face of the
temptation, you shall simply and lovingly place it upon the truth and assurance
of the divine Goodness, and this loving aspect, being an act of lively Faith,
quickened and informed by charity; and with all produced in contemplation with
great facility and simplicity, will serve you for an impenitrable buckler,
against all the darts which temptation shall send out against your fidelity. O
who is able to express unto you how efficacious this simple aspect is, when it
is accompaigned by Love, and how dreadful it is to the Devils, since it makes
the soul as terrible unto them, as an Army rancked and put in battle array:
because her powers and faculties being united in this contemplative act, are
far more strong, then when they use their actiuitie in Meditation distinctly
and separately. The old Cha^pions in wrestling, when they would exercise
themselves therein, came naked upon the Theater, and anointed their bodies with
oil, that their antagonists might catch no hold of them. And whereas
temptation, whereof we now speak, is a spiritual wrestling against the Angel
of darkness, by how much more naked the soul shall be stripped of all
representations and acts, and recollected in her self, drawing all her forces
into the unity of her Spirit, more vigorous shall she be, and less hold shall
she afford to her enemy. DAVID when he was to go out to meet GOLIATH, put off
SAVLES armor, which did load and hinder him more, then it was seruicable unto
him: and with a poor sling, and a stone, slew that dreadful Giant, who in his
brauadoes threatened to make him haulkes meat. I do not affirm that the
Acts of Meditation are not good weapons, weapons, as S. PAVLE says, of our
spiritual warefare, able to overthrow the enemy. * But as it happens often,
that those that are ouerburthened with too heavy armor, do fall down under
the weight of them, and are less able and active in the fight, the^ though
they were but armed with light armor; so in spiritual Combats, the
multiplicitie of acts contrary to the vice wherewith we are tempted, do more
oppress then succor the soul: and with the simple act of Contemplation it
gives a more victorious blow, then with the variety of others. All those little
Acts, are like unto the dew dropes or perles, which the nighte's freshness,
upon the Aurora's approach, does spread over the face of the earth, wherewith it
is but superficially watered: but the act of Contemplation resembles a full
flood, which ouerflowing it is ba^kes, does thoroughly water the whole feilds,
and sinkes even into the tree roots. The Father of a possessed person, as S.
MARK does teach us in his Gospel, brought his son unto our Savior,
beseeching him to deliver his child from the wicked spirit, which did torment
him, and said unto him: I believe o Lord, help mine incredulity. This word of
Faith, inuoking the Divine assistance, invited our Sauiour's sweetness to be
merciful unto him. If you could but once, THE OPISTE, recollect all the powers
of your soul in the unity of your spirit, and with a louly and loving aspect
express before God this only word, I believe, with as much heat of the will,
as light of the understanding, I doubt not but either this Spirit of Blasphemy
would depart from you, or if by the Divine permission, he should persiste to
persecute you, it would be to bring the very virtue which he seeks to
ruinate, to a greater perfection in you. Exercise your self therefore with care
and attention in this interior recollection, and in this act of simple
Contemplation, which is that eye of the dove washed in the milk of meekness,
and mourneing over the floodes of afflictions, and you shall see, God will
restore you your wished Peace, and will place you in a plentiful and deep
repose, * calling you into the holes of the rock, into the holow places of the
wall.

An act of Contemplation.
CHAP. XI.
But what is this holow place? Marry Contemplation, but in a higher degree
then the former, and which does extend it self, not to the hight of passive
Contemplation (which depends not of him that does plant and water, but of the
only mercy of God, * who gives that grace to whom he pleases, the Spirit
being free to blow whet it will, * a hight, which I will in no sort strive to
touch, THEOPISTE) but such an one as will bear you up upon the wings of the
Dove, * that is, of Grace, to the highest point, to which that active
Contemplatio^ can raise a truly faithful soul, and one that is holily
inamoured of the sovereign good. *Now which is this high point, this supreme
degree, but that, whereof the divine S. DENIS the Areopagite, the Apostle of
France, speaks in these terms to the Bishope of Ephesus, TIMOTHEE in the
first Chap. of his book of mystical Divinity? As for you, my dear Timothee,
applying your self with an attentive and recollected study, to mystical
speculations, forsake both sense, and intellectual operations, all sensible
and intelligible things, all things that are, and those that are not too: and
after an unknown manner raise up your self (words that do point out an
active Co^templation, proceeding from our own endeavors assisted by Gods
grace, without which we are able to do nothing) raise up your self, as much
as you can possibly to his union, who is beyond all essence and knowledge: for
being disintangled from your-selfe, and all things, all which you have forsaken
and cleared your self of, with a purely free issue, you shall be carried up to
the super-essentiall raye of the divine darknesses. * Hitherto are the words of
this great Saint, whom all the mystical divines behold as their light. Words
of gold, and which would not only merit to be written in marble, but upon the
hearts of all those that make profession of a spiritual and contemplative life.
Here is no place to explicate them; I do but only represent them to your eye,
or rather to your mind THEOPISTE, to th'e^d that you might note, by the way,
the high and inaccessible covert or hole, where you are to take up your refuge,
if your desire with the dove, to save your self from the Hawks tallon, which
by the temptation of infidelity, does so eagerly pursue you. You shall find out
this refuge, if, during the storm, renou^cing all the operations of your sense
and reason, of the inferior and superior part of the soul, as well sensitive
as reasonable, you retire and betake your self into your inmost chamber, the
Center, bottom, point and unity of your Spirit, into the essence of your soul
(for all these terms signify the same thing amongst the mystical Divines.)
And there in the high silence and repose of all your exterior and interior
faculties you be quiet and see that God is God* you taste and see how sweet
he is. * And if in a close union you adheare to him by a lively faith: this
adhesion will make you one same spirit with him, according to that of the
Apostle, he that adheares unto God, is made one spirit with him. * Thus shall
you imitate the shells of the Sea, which that they may not be the billows
game, cleave to the Rock, as soon as they perceive the tempest approach,
remaining there immovable and unvariable: and you shall cleave to God; you
shall hold him and not let him go, like to the Spouse in the Canticles you
shall tie your self to the pillar and firmament of Truth, * the holy Church
which does propose unto us his oracles: a pillar, against which all the Gates
and Powers of Hell, shall never be able to prevail. * This is that secret to
you, * or rather which is in you, whereof the Prophet speaks, whither you may
retire your self near unto God; who is present to the most inward corner of
your heart, as all the Contemplatiues hold, in a most peculiar manner. This is
the covert of his countenance, under which we may shelter our selves from the
violence of contradictions and temptations, no otherwise then little sucking
children, who do thrust into, and hide themselves in their mothers bosom when
any thing fears them. This is the den where DAVID, persecuted by SAVLE hid
himself; and where his very enemy fell into his power. This it that great City
of Refuge, that Sanctuary, where you may free your self from your invisible
enemies; and where they are not permitted entry. This is that high place, that
sharp top of the Rock where the Eagles build their nest, * as JOB says.
And that most high and sublime refuge, whereof the Psalmist makes mention, to
which no evil come nor shall any scourg approach. It Is the Desert where the
woman in the Apocalipse saved her self, least the dragon should have devoured
her fruit. These are the wings of the dove, which the Psalmist wishes for, to
fly up to his rest. * It is in this high degree of Contemplation, that he
compares himself to a Pelicane in the wilderness, a night crow in the house,
and to a sparow solitary in the house top.

A Practice of this Act.
CHAP. XII.
YOu will perhaps ask me what that happy shelter is, that you may spring away
toward it, as a Heart dead run by the hounds, his breath and legs failing
him, who ru^s himself into some thick Grove, as into an vnpregnable Fort, or
into some holow den in the side of some high Rock, according to the
Psalmists song, that the high mountains are for the Heart's, the rock a
refuge for the Iechins. * I did point it you out in S. DENIS, his words,
THEOPISTE, which if you find somewhat obscure, I will here a little illustrate
them by an explication fitted to your purpose. Know then, that if all the
remedies which I have prescribed, be not able to work the cure: and if you
find not your heart delivered of disquiete by the diverse considerations, and
practice of so many virtues, and different Acts, you are to imitate the
Prophet JEREMY: The solitary shall sit, and hold his peace, and afterward he
shall rise above himself. Endeavor then, following this advise, to settle your
thoughts entering into your self: and to hold your peace; that is, to silence
all the noise of your exterior or interior senses, of all your passions: to
deprive your imagination of all the shapes of created things; to stripe your
memory of all the Idea's of creatures and sciences: not to permit your
understanding to discourse, no not to appease the motions, and boylings of the
will which is to sing to God the Hymn of sacred silence, in the Jerusalem, or
City of Peace of our heart: to throw down upon the ground, or rather to throw
out all natural light, admitting only into the Sanctuary of the bottom of
our soul, the simple, abstract, pure, universal ray of a lively Faith; exempt
from all discourse, representations, and acts: and in this loving submission
or assenting quiet of mind, in this settled attention, in this inward union; by
so much the stronger, as it is less perceived; so much more exquisite, as it
is less sensible; keep your self near unto God: cast your self into this
sacred blindness, clearer-sighted then all sight: into this night, which is
brighter then the day: into this darkness clearer the^ the light: into that
resplendant cloud, so much celebrated by the mistikes; and as another MAGDALENE
set at our Saviors feet, remain inuariable and immovable, without ever
regarding the spoils which the temptation seems to make in all the parts of
your soul, whether it be sensitive or reasonable, so it be inferior to the
highest point of your spirit. For as long as that shall say no, let the flesh
be moved, let the devil rage, you can never be vanquished. God can take you up
by this hair out of these troubles, as well as the Angel took ABACVC by one
of his: and as long as this hair remaynes entire, you shall never loose your
interior strength. And though we apprehend that the inferior portion of our
reasonable part, is disloyal and impious, yet fear not, the highest point of
your spirit, like another MOSES, is with God in the clouds, upon the top of
the mountain, he will appease his wroth against Israel, who below, eats,
danceth, plays, and then adores the golden Calfe. Though all your senses,
passions, and powers, should be troubled and disordered by temptation, and as
it were, should live in a kind of impiety and idolatry, so that you stick and
adheare to God in the top of your spirit, it is enough to warrant you from
his wrath, and the dread of his Justice. And though you seem to be forsaken of
God upon this Cross, and that malice seems to be consummated in you, that is,
accomplished in a highest degree, yet as long as in the botome of your heart,
you are able to say unto God, o heavenly Father I commend my poor soul into
thy hands, * you are still in good estate. Your lot is assured in such hands, *
out of which no power can bear you away by force, * till by your free consent,
you take your self out of them, God never forsaking any but such as forsake
him.

An Elevation toward the top of the Spirit.
CHAP. XIII.
THe wiseman says, that it is in vain to set snares for birds already
flying, * because a man is not able to force them from the wing: and indeed we
never read that the bird of Paradise is caught, nor is she ever found in
earth, but when death makes her tumble down: for having no feet, she keeps
continually in the open air, where she does feed and repose. The same may be
said of souls, which do soar above all sensible and intelligible things, yea
even beyond themselfes, toward God. In vain do the devils set trappes for
them: while their eyes still turned and set upon God, do never sleep, the
sleep of the death of sin. * The little flies once inueigled in the Spiders
netts, stick therein: the great ones do burst and break them. Temptations are
true Spiders-webbs, which do scarcely ever catch those souls, which do soar
above created things, and which entertayne thoughts of God, more dearly then
all other thoughts, and are more sensible of his touches, then all other
feelings. Thunders, winds, storms, hayle, rain, and the rest of the
impressions of the air, do only beat upon the midst, and the foot of the
Mountain Olympus, whose top enioyes so constant and continual a calm, that
that which one writes therein in the dust, remaynes still in the same estate,
never being touched with the least breath of wind. And though the midst and
lowest part of our soul be weather-beaten with the te^pests and storms of
temptation, yet it is in our power, with the assistance of God's grace, to
maintain the top of it in a constant peace and serenitie, by so much the
greater, by how much it is less known, and by so much more solid, by how
much it is less sensible. In two parts of the Tabernacle of the Iewe's Temple,
there was nothing seen but fire, flames, flesh, blood, sacryficed victimes,
sacryfices; nothing heard, but the brute of beasts which were slaughtered, and
the harmony, of the heavenly Hymns and praises: But in the SANCTA SANCTORVM,
nothing was felt but parfumes; and the High Priest, who alone carried them
thither, adored God only in a high silence. It is into this misterious silence
of the Sanctuary of the botome of your heart that I inuit you to enter,
THEOPISTE, never taking notice of the noyce and rustling outrages of your
interior powers and faculties: and in this sort you shall find out that so
much desired Peace, termed best * by the wiseman. When a town is beseiged, at
the first the inhabitants make sallies to free themselves, till the enemy force
them in; and then they conteyne themselves within the compass of the walls:
But if the town come to be taken by assault, they retire and betake
themselves into the Castle; which being also taken, they imprisone themselves
in the du^geon, where they come to reasonable terms of composition. We are to
proceed in like manner in our temptations. First we are to use sensible Acts
to raise the Seige: but finding the enemy too violent and strong, we are to
retire our selves into our interior, yea, in case the appetire and Powers
suffer violence, we may shutt our selves up in the very botome of our soul,
where full and absolute Consent does reside) and heart, whence the wiseman says
life does proceed, * and never depart or render up that place till we accord
an honorable composition, to wit, that our Sovereign be not offended. It is
better to fall innocent, then criminal to live, says an ancient Father. And
does not holy write say, what better were a man to gain the whole world, and
loose his own soul * for an Eternity. Certes this retireing of our selves,
into the bottom or inmost room of our soul, makes us resemble the Tortis,
who is, as it were, impregnable, while she keeps her self within her shell,
and the Irchine, which cannot be bitt by a dog, nor taken by the bare hand of
a man, being as a cheshnut upon the tree, beset on every side with pricks.
The devil knows not where to catch hold on us in this happy estate, nor
where to hitt us: for having renounced sense, humane Reason, and all created
things, he knows not how to assault us, while we leave no place or footing to
his illusions. Happy is the soul that is come to this degree: for one may
affirm of her, that God has raised her a Horn of salvation in his house,
where freed from the hands of her enemies, she may live deuoyd of fear, in
sanctity and Justice. And which is yet more remarkable, he makes her draw
adua^tages from her enemies, from all that hate her; and profit from her
temptations and tribulations.

A general abstraction.
CHAP. XIV.
MAKE haste, THEOPISTE, to enter in* this Repose. * But by what gate are you to
enter: by a mental abstraction from all that is created, and all that can be
any impeachment to the union of our soul with God. Then it is that you are to
imitate the Commanders of the Army of Israel, who having made their garments
and weapons a troop of testimonies, and placed IEHV upon them, they proclaimed
him King, and cried, live IEHV, IEHV is King. When you shall have turned the old
man out of his vicious habites, and shall have renounced all the impressions of
sense and reason, then, in that entire humane ignorance, you shall meet with
the obscure brightness, or bright obscurity of Faith, which will appear unto
you, as a Pillar of bright and light fire; a pillar in strength, in truth a
light, and burning in Charity. This eminent degree of Active Contemplation,
does not behold God in any affirmation or negation, as the Misticalls speak,
nor yet in any particular species, but as an universal Object elevated above
every created knowledge and capacity. In which respect, this practice would be
soueraignely good against your temptation, which being only general, would be
much more efficaciouslie repelled by this general aspect, then by any one in
particular.

Against general temptations.
CHAP. XV.
FOr I must here tell you for your consolation, that in matter of temptations,
the most universal are the least to be dreaded. For as in good Philosophy,
the arguments that conclude too much, conclud nothing at all: so excessive
suggestions do fill the soul tempted with such a horror and distaste, that
they never get admitta^ce, since the soul cannot be carried so soudenlie to
such an extreamitie. Whereas particular ones which come with a less noise; do
run like water into the interior, and as oil into the bones, * that is, in
a sort insensibly and imperceptibly. The bait is quicklier swallowed down,
then the hook that is hid under it, is thought of. We gather Aspalata
delightful to the ey, without ever thinking of the Ask that lies under it,
whose sting is mortal. This will be more easily conceived in an example. You
are tempted in general against all that faith does teach us, and there is no
kind of abominable Idea to this effect, no kind of brutish infidelity, of
execrable blasphemy, of detestable impiety, which the wicked spirit does not
represent unto your heart, to bring you to Athisme. Lo the Picture of your
affliction! But do you not also discover the folly, and foolerie of the devil
therein, as malignant and mischeeuous as he is? do you not perceive that that
which you esteem force and violence, is mere want of force, and infirmity in
him, who used so little flight and guile in laying his snares. For your soul
conceauing an incomparable horror against such like illusions, falls into the
other extremity, and, though imperceptibly, (which is admirable, and indeed is
the work of the fingar of God * in you) dives deeper, and takes better root
in faith, which that hellish Feind strives to root up, or shake. Whereas, if
the temptation were against some one article of our belief, as against the
real presence of the body and blood of the Son of God in the Eucharist; of
the Trinity of persons in unity of Essence; or the like, doubtless his
battery were more to be feared: for like as in an ALARVM if one link or ring
break the whole is spoiled; so taking away one Article of the Catholic Faith,
we fail in the whole, that is, we forsake universality which makes the true
Catholic, and consequently the whole frame does threaten ruin. At the Seige
of a town, though it be environed rownd about, to prevent the entry of any
succor; yet is battery laid only to one side of it, where the breach being
made as great as they desire, the assault is given, and unless good
resistance and oppositio^ be made, the falls town into the beseigers hands,
who entering only that way, and not over all the walls at once, make
themselves notwithstanding Masters of the town. The devil our sworn enemy,
does co^tinuallie lay seige unto our heart, and roaes about it, like a Roaring
lion seeking his prey. * But to make himself Master, he mist his mark in
assaulting us so generally, without making a particular breach, whereby he was
to enter. This is it that makes me judge, that the temptation which does
assault you. THEOPISTE, being too general, is but a false ALARVM which the
enemy gives rather to trouble your inward repose and quiet, then any hope
which he conceaues to overthrow, or reduce you to the Abisse of misery. Take a
good heart therefore, and say with the Psalmist, that though all the forces of
Hell should make head against you, yet would you not fear; though a million of
companies inco^passed you, yet would you not dread, because God does rise up to
succor and save you. Unite your self unto him in the high point of
Contemplation which I have discovered unto you, and keep your self there
without all discourse, without all reflection upon your self, without framing
any particular act, in a profound and general silence. For it was in the
universal Peace and silence of all the universe, and in the midst of a dark
night, that the Omnipotent WORD came from Heaven to earth to unite himself to
our nature, * to enlighten every man coming into this world * and to illuminate
those who were in darkness and in the Region of the shadow of death, * And with
what torch, but the torch of Faith, whereby he makes our darkness lightsome? I
remember, THEOPISTE, I made once a little spiritual treatise, or EXERCISE OF
LIVELY FAITH, which might, as I conceive, not a little comfort you, and more
amply instruct you, touching this act of Contemplation, which I have marked you
out for your last refuge. I made you this Paraclese or Consolation, being at
our villemond, where I am detayned this winter, to distribute the word of God.
After my return to my Residence, I will look out that writing from amongst
the papers of my Study, where it lies buried, and I will make a copy of it be
taken, to send you. Mean while, make use of the instructions which are
contained herein, not only in the temptation which does presently press you,
but in all the rest that may chance to assault you after you shall be delivered
of this. For these precepts, which for the most part, I have gathered out of
the aduises of that blessed Prelate FRANCIS DE SALES of holy and happy memory
our most honored Father and Directour, may be applied, not only to the
temptations of blasphemy and infidelititie, but even to all other temptations,
for that these endeavors are not so tied to particularities, as that they do
not also descend to generalities: being of the number of those Antidotes which
are termed universal.

An Exhortation to spiritual valor, in imitation of JACOBS wrestling.
CHAP. XVI.
IN conclusion, I must make the Apostolic trumpet sound in your ears, fight,
I, fight, THEOPISTE, as a good and faithful servant of JESUS CHRIST. * Fight
generously, ma^ly, incessantly, that by that good Combat you may conserve your
Faith, and obtain the crown of Justice. * Our whole life is a warfare, a
temptation. Sweet and gentle calmes are blowe^ over by rough storms. In the
world as on the Sea, the still and calm day, is most doubted, most subject to
rain. The Calm of the mind is still essayed by some rebellion, that so
standing always upon our guard, temptation may not surprise us. * Does the
greatness of your adversary astonish you? call to mind that JACOB'S antagonist
was yet stronger. An Angel at liberty, must needs exceed those Angels of
darkness, who be laden with their chains. Yet at IABOC'S well, the Pacriarke
held the Angel play; and though he came halting away, yet victory and
benediction was his. Be courageous and the like will befall you. And though you
have not a like adversary, yet like JACOB, you fight by God's permission, a
try all of your fidelity: you fight in the night of Faith, which is environed
with types, enigma's, clouds. At IABOC'S well, signifying that you are to
cleanse your self from all natural lights and reasons, all sensible and
intellectual know ledge, to betake your self naked and pure to the top of
the Spirit, without all the forms and shapes of terreane things, where lively
and pure Faith keeps her Residence. JACOB never quitted his hold, till the
Angel blessed him, and the day began to break. So are you inseparably to hold
God, till the rays of his countenance begin to shine upon you. * And till he
restore the joy of his Salvation. * Thus shall you become a true Israelite,
victorious, and seeing God. * Be not troubled that humane reason in you comes
off halting, you shall walk hereafter upon a right leg, the Divine
revelation, wherein consistes the essence of Faith: An essence by so much the
more pure, by how much it admitts less of the mixture of natural light and
experience. For Faith does loose its merit, says S. GREGORY, where
experience has place, being says the Apostle, of invisible things and such as
appear not. * If you desire to be armed with the Armor of God to defeat the
Devil, throw away, with DAVID, SAVLS armor, stripe your self of humane
reason, and sense. We are not only to wrestle against flesh and blood, but
Powers and principalities also; against the Governor of the world and wordly
darkness; against the highest and most subtle malice of our mortal enemy. * The
armor of God therefore is necessary for us, to stand constant: to stand
immovable like unto the Mont-Sion. * And to this end we are to retire our
selves into the very topp of our Spirit, where God does soueraignely rain. He
that remaynes there under the wings of the Highest, shall infallibly be
delivered out of the Fowlers snare; and under that shelter, shall sing to God
the song of his delivery, adoring this Mercy in the 30. 90. and 123. ps. or in
the Canticle of our B. La. ZACHARY. SIMEON. But above all, be sure to keep
your self in this learned ignorance, and Adhearing only faithfully to the
prime and universal Truth, which is God, banish from you heart all manner of
curiosity in point of Faith. Protest with the Apostle, that you will know
nothing here below, but JESUS CHRIST. * Stand fermely, least the enemy bereave
you of your crown. Forsake the foul and troubled waters of Egypt, to drink
of the pure source. Sacryfice your ISAAC, your natural light, upon the top
of this mountain. Repose peaceably in him WHO IS. Be not separated from his
Charity, and your faith is in assurance. CHRIST has revealed a faithful
promise by the mouth of his beloved disciples: whosoever shall remain
faithful till death, shall be rewarded with a crown of life.

FINIS.

