BRITAIN, OR A CHOROGRAPHICALL DESCRIPTION OF THE MOST flourishing Kingdoms,
ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND, and the Islands adjoining, out of the depth of
ANTIQVITIE: BEAVTIFIED WITH MAPPES OF THE several Shires of ENGLAND: Written
first in Latin by William Camden CLARENCEUX K. of A.

Translated newly into English by Philemon Holland Doctor in Physic: Finally,
revised, amended, and enlarged with sundry Additions by the said Author.

LONDON, Printed by F. K. R. Y. and I. L. for GEORGE LATHAM. 1637.

BRITANNIA.
SI jactare licet magnorum munera diuum,
Sibique veris fas placere dotibus;
Cur mihi non videar fortunatissima tellus?
Digna est malis, bona quae parum novit sua.
Vltima lanigeris animosa est India lucis,
Suis superbus est Arabs odoribus.
Thuriferis gaudet Panchaia dives arenis;
Ibera flumen terra jactat aureum.
Aegypto faciunt animos septem ostia Nili,
Laudata Rheni vina tollunt accola^.
Laeta nec uberibus sibi displicet Africa glebis;
Haec portubus superbit, illa mercibus:
At mihi nec fontes, nec ditia flumina desunt,
Sulcive pingues, prata nec ridentia.
Foeta viris, foecunda feris, foecunda metallis;
Ne glorier, quod ambiens largas opes
Porrigit Oceanus, neu quod nec amicius ulla,
Coelum, nec aura dulcius spirat plaga.
Serus in occiduas mihi Phoebus conditur undas,
Sororque noctes blanda ducit lucidas.
Possem ego laudati contemnere vellera Baetis.
Vbi villus albis mollior bidentibus?
Et tua non nequeam miracula temnere Memphi.
Verum illa major, justiorque gloria,
Quod Latiis, quod sum celebrata Britannia Grails,
Orbem vetustas quod vocarit alterum.
For the easier reading of the English-Saxon words in this Book, I thought
good to prefixe here the Characters of the English Saxon Alphabet.
A a b b c c d d E E e e f f g g h h i i l l m m n n o o p p q q r r S S s s t
t u u w X X x x y y AE AE ae ae TH Th th th th th and and that that
PVELIVS OVIDIVS NASO. Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos
Ducit; and immemores non sinit esse sui.
BRITAIN, OR A CHOROGRAPHICALL DESCRIPTION OF THE MOST flourishing Kingdoms,
ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND, and the Islands adjoining, out of the depth of
ANTIQVITIE: BEAVTIFIED WITH MAPPES OF THE several Shires of ENGLAND: Written
first in Latin by William Camden CLARENCEUX K. of A.

Translated newly into English by Philemon Holland Doctor in Physic: Finally,
revised, amended, and enlarged with sundry Additions by the said Author.

LONDON, Printed by F. K. R. Y. and I. L. for GEORGE LATHAM. 1637.

SERENISSIMO POTENTISSIMOQVE PRINCIPI IACOBO, BRITANNIAE MAGNAE, FRANCIAE, ET
HIBERNIAE REGI, FIDEI PROPVGNATORI, AD AETERNITATEM BRITANNICI NOMINIS
IMPERIIQVE NATO.

PERPETVAE PACIS FVNDATORI, PVBLICAE SECVRITATIS AVTHORI GVILIELMVS CAMDENVS
MAIESTATI EIVS DEVOTISSIMVS D. D. CONSECRATQVE.

THE AVTHOR TO The Reader.
I Hope it shall be to no discredit, if I now use again by way of Preface,
the same words with a few more, that I used twenty four years since, in the
first edition of this work. Abraham Ortelius the worthy restorer of Ancient
Geographic arriving here in England, about thirty four years past, dealt
earnestly with me that I would illustrate this Isle of BRITAIN, or (as he
said) that I would restore antiquity to Britain, and Britain to his
antiquity; which was, as I understood, that I would renew ancientrie,
enlighten obscurity, clear doubts, and recall home Verity by way of
recovery, which the negligence of writers and credulity of the common sort had
in a manner prescribed and utterly banished from amongst us. A painful matter
I assure you, and more than difficult; wherein what toil is to be taken, as no
man thinks, so no man believes but he that has made the trial.
Nevertheless how much the difficulty discouraged me from it, so much the
glory of my country encouraged me to undertake it. So while at one and the same
time I was fearful to undergo the burden, and yet desirous to do some
service to my Country, I found two different affections, Fear, and Boldness;
I know not how, conjoined in me. Notwithstanding by the most gracious direction
of the ALMIGHTY, taking INDVSTRY for my consort, I adventured upon it, and with
all my study, care, cogitation, continual meditation, pain, and travail I
employed my self thereunto when I had any spare time. I made search after the
Etymology of Britain and the first Inhabitants timorously, neither in so
doubtful a matter have I affirmed ought confidently. For I am not ignorant
that the first originals of nations are obscure by reason of their profound
antiquity, as things which are seen very deep and far remote: like as the
courses, the reaches, the confluencies, and the out-lets of great rivers are
well known, yet their first fountains and heads lie commonly unknown. I have
succinctly run over the Romans government in Britain, and the inundation of
foreign people thereinto, what they were, and from whence they came: I have
traced out the ancient divisions of these Kingdoms, I have summarily specified
the states, and judicial Courts of the same.

In the several Counties I have compendiously set down the limits (and yet
not exactly by perch and pole to breed questions) what is the nature of the
soil, which were places of greatest antiquity, who have been the Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts, Barons, and some of the most signal, and ancient
families therein (for who can particulate all?) What I have performed, I leave
to men of judgment. But time the most sound and sincere witness will give the
truest information, when envy which persecuteth the living, shall have her
mouth stopped. Thus much give me leave to say, that I have in no wise neglected
such things as are most material to search, and sift out the Truth. I have
attained to some skill of the most ancient British and English-Saxon tongues: I
have travailed over all England for the most part, I have conferred with most
skillful observers in each country, I have studiously read over our own
country writers, old and new, all Greek and Latin authors which have once
made mention of Britain. I have had conference with learned men in other parts
of Christendom: I have been diligent in the Records of this Realm. I have
looked into most Libraries, Registers, and memorials of Churches, Cities, and
Corporations, I have pored upon many an old Roll, and Evidence: and produced
their testimony (as beyond all exception) when the cause required, in their
very own words (although barbarous they be) that the honor of verity might in
no wise be impeached,

For all this I may be censured unadvised, and scant modest who being but of
the lowest form in the school of Antiquity, where I might well have lurked
in obscurity, have adventured as a scribler upon the stage in this learned age
amidst the diversities of relishes both in wit and judgment. But to tell the
truth unfainedly, the love of my Country which comprisseth all love in it, and
has endeared me unto it, the glory of the British name, the advice of some
judicious friends has overmastred my modesty, and (wild I, nild I,) has
enforced me against mine own judgment to undergo this burden too heavy for me,
and so thrust me forth into the worlds view. For I see judgments, prejudices,
censures, reprehensions, obtrectations, detractions, affronts, and confronts,
as it were, in battle array to environ me on every side: some there are which
wholly contemn and avile this study of Antiquity as a back-looking
curiosity; whose authority as I do not utterly vilefie, so I do not overprize
or admire their judgment. Neither am I destitute of reasons whereby I might
approve this my purpose to well bred and well meaning men which tender the
glory of their native Country: and moreover could give them to understand that
in the study of Antiquity, (which is always accompanied with dignity, and
has a certain resemblance with eternity) there is a sweet food of the mind
well befitting such as are of honest and noble disposition. If any there be
which are desirous to be strangers in their own soil, and forrainers in their
own City, they may so continue and therein flatter themselves. For such like I
have not written these lines, nor taken these pains. Some there be who may
object the silly web of my style, and rough hewed form of my writing. Verily I
acknowledge it, neither have I waied every word in Goldsmiths scales, as Vario
commanded, neither purposed I to pick flowers out of the gardens of Eloquence.
But why should they object this, when as Cicero the father of Eloquence denies
that this kind of argument can (...), that is, be flourished out, and as
Pomponius Mela said, is incapable of all Eloquent speech.

Many happily will insult over me for that I have adventured to hunt after the
originals of names by conjectures, who if they proceed on to reject all
conjectures, I fear me a great part of liberal learning and humane knowledge
will be utterly outcast into banishment. For the edge of our understanding is
so blunt that we are of necessity enforced to prosecute many matters in all
professions conjecturally. In Physic (...), (...), (...), which are nothing
else but conjectures, have their place, and stand in good steed, likewise in
Rhetoric, Civil Law, and other arts they are admitted and allowed. And
whereas conjectures are certain detections of things unknown, and as Fabius
terms them, directions of reason to verity, I have always thought that they
were to be accounted among the skuppers wherewith TIME works and draws
VERITY out of Democritus his deep dungeon. But if these men may be induced to
attribute ought to conjectures, I doubt not but my modesty and moderation in
conjecturing may withal purchase my pardon; Plato in his Cratilus commands
that we recall the originals of names to the barbarous tongues (for so he called
al but Greek) as being most ancient. I thereupon in Etymologies and my
conjectures have made recourse to the British, or Welsh tongue (so they now
call it) as being the same which the Primitive and most ancient Inhabitants of
this land used, and to the English-Saxons tongue which our Progenitors the
English spoke. He commands that the name be consonant to the nature of the
thing, and the nature thereof to the name, if they be herein dissonant, I admit
them not. In things, says he, there is (...), (...), (...): that is, but I
cannot aptly express them, A sound, a form, and color, if these discover not
themselves in the name I reject the conjecture. As for obscure Etymologies, far
fetched hardly wrested, and which may be drawn diversely; I have vouchsafed
them no place it this work, finally I have been so sparing and cautelously
forecasting in my conjectures that if I be not thought (...), that is, Happily
adventurous, I shall not seem (...), that is, Presumptuously audacious. And
albeit I have once or twice framed two conjectures in one and the same name,
yet I forget not in the mean time that UNITY is consecrated unto VERITY.

There are some peradventure which apprehend it disdainfully and offensively
that I have not remembered this or that family, when as it was not my purpose to
mention any but such as were more notable, nor all them truly (for their names
would fill whole volumes) but such as happened in my way according to the method
I proposed to my self; And with Gods grace I may have a more convenient
occasion to deserve well of the Nobility and Gentry. But happily they will be
most offended herein who have least deserved of their conutry, or overvallew
themselves most, or whose Gentry may be but newly blossomed. Of whom yet I
protest I would not offend any, and therefore desire and hope their noble
natures will not take it offensively upon such causeless apprehensions.

Others will call me in question for that I have commended some persons now
living; yet I have done it sparingly, and that out of an assurance of verity,
out of the common consent and voice of such as can well judge of worth, and
from no base flattery. By these sparing commendations such as are commended may
be lessoned that their deportments may be answerable, and that they preserve
and daily increase the same. Succeeding ages, which I respect more than the
present, will render to every man his right whatsoever is now scribled in
papers. In the mean time I wish them to remember, that to praise good men is
but to show a light of direction as out of a watch tower to posterity. True is
that saying of Symmachus. Imitation is encouraged with the seemly praises of
the good, and imitating virtue is cherished by the example of others honor. If
any say that I have sought occasion to commend some one or other, I confess
it. Neither is well-meaning without leasing to be blamed among the good, and
well deserving, friends are not to be forgotten. Howsoever Virtue and Glory
has always opposites, and men usually envy the present, and reverence what
is past; yet God forbid that we should be so partially injurious as to think
our times under most worthy Princes to be barrein of praiseworthy persons. As
for such as malign the praise of the good, I fear me least in their own
guiltiness they may apply the dispraise of the bad to themselves. As for my
self I sensibly understand that which Pliny intimated to Tacitus in like
case. There will be great offense, and slender thanks, for albeit in the
looseness of the world, there is much more to be discommended than commended;
yet if you commend you shall be taxed as oversparing; if you discommend you
shall be censured as overlavish, although you do the one most completely, and
the other most moderatly.

Some will blame me for that I have omitted this and that town and Castle, as
though I purposed to mention any but such as were most notorious, and mentioned
by ancient authors. Neither verily were it worth the labor once to name them,
when as beside the naked name there is nothing memorable. Truly it was my
project and purpose to seek, rake out, and free from darkness such places as
Caesar, Tacitus, Ptolomy, Antonine the Emperor, Notitia Provinciarum, and other
antique writers have specified and TIME has overcast with mist and darkness by
extinguishing, altering, and corrupting their old true names. In searching and
seeking after these, as I will not avouch uncertainties so I do not conceal
probabilities. That I have not found out every one although I have sought after
them with painful and chargeable inquiery let it be no imputation to me, as
it is not to a Spadiard that works in Mines, who while he finds and
follows the maine veins, sees not the hidden small fillets; or that I may
use that which Columella did. As it is the commendation of a good Huntsman to
find game in a wide wood so it is no imputation if he has not caught all, and
likewise to me, Some things are to be left to the inquisitive diligence of
others, Neither, as a learned man said, he teaches well which teaches all. An
other age, and other men may daily find out more. It is enough for me to have
begun, and I have gained as much as I look for, if I shall draw others into
this argument, whether they undertake a new work or amend this.

There are certain, as I hear who take it impatiently that I have mentioned
some of the most famous Monasteries and their founders. I am sorry to hear it,
and with their good favor will say thus much, They may take it as impatiently,
and peradventure would have us forget that our ancestors were, and we are of
the Christian profession when as there are not extant any other more
conspicuous, and certain Monuments, of their piety, and zealous devotion
toward God. Neither were there any other seed-gardens from whence Christian
Religion, and good learning were propagated over this Isle, howbeit in corrupt
ages some weeds grew out overranckly.

Mathematicians will accuse me as though I had wholly missed the mark in the
Cosmographical dimentions of longitude, and latitude. Yet hear me I pray you.
I have carefully co^ferred the Local tables new and old, Manuscript, and
printed, of Oxford and Cambridge, and King Henry the Fifth. In the latitude
they do not vary much from Ptolomy, but agree well together, neither do I
thereupon imagine with Stadius, that the globe of the earth is removed from his
center, therefore I have relied upon them. But in the Longitude there is no
accord, no consent at all. What should I then do? When as therefore the
modern navigators have observed that there is no variation of the Compass at
the Isles of Asores, I have thence begun with them, the account of Longitude as
from the first Meridian, which yet I have not precisely measured.

As for obscurity, fables, extravagant digressions I trust there is no cause
to sue out my pardon. There will be no obscurity but to them which have not
sipped the first elements of Antiquity, and our histories: upon fables I have
no ways relied, and that I might not digress extravagantly. I have had often
recourse to the title of my book (as Pliny advises) and eftsoons demanded of
my self why I took pen in hand. Many have found a defect in this work that
Mappes were not adjoined, which do allure the eyes by pleasant portr^iture,
and are the best directions in Geographicall studies, especially when the light
of learning is adjoined to the speechless delineations. Yet my ability could
not compass it, which by the means and cost of George Bishop, and John Norton
is now performed out of the labors of Christopher Saxton, and John Norden,
most skillful Chorographers.

But least I should run at random in my Preface. To accomplish this work the
whole maine of my Industry has been employed for many years with a firm
settled study of the truth, and sincere antique faithfulness to the glory of
God and my country. I have done dishonor to no nation, have descanted upon no
man's name, I have impaired no man's reputation, I have impeached no man's credit,
no not Geffrey of Monmouth whose history (which I would gladly support) is
held suspected amongst the judicious. Neither have I assumed upon my self any
persuasion of knowledge, but only that I have been desirous to know much. And
so I right willingly acknowledge that I may err much, neither will I sooth and
smoth my errors. Who shooting all day long does always hit the mark? Many
matters in these studies are raked under deceitful ashes. There may be some
escapes from memory, for who does so comprehend particularities, in the
treasury of his memory, that he can utter them at his pleasure? There may be
mistakings in regard of my unskilfulnes, for who is so skillful that struggling
with TIME in the foggie dark sea of Antiquity, may not run upon rocks? It may
be that I have been misled by the credit of authors and others whom I took to
be most true, and worthy of credit. Neither is there verily (as Pliny says)
any easier slipping from truth, then when a grave Author warranteth an
untruth. Others may be more skillful and more exactly observe the
particularities of the places where they are conversant, If they, or any other
whosoever, will advertise me wherein I am mistaken, I will amend it with
manifold thanks, if I have unwitting omitted ought, I will supply it, if I
have not fully explicated any point, upon their better information I will more
clear it, if it proceed from good meaning, and not from a spirit of
contradiction and quarelling, which do not befit such as are well bred, and
affect the truth. Mean while let your kind courtesy, my industry, the common
love of our common mother our native Country, the ancient honor of the British
name obtain so much upon their entreaty, that I may utter my judgment without
prejudice to others, that I may proceed in that course that others have
formerly done in the like argument, and that you would pardon my errors upon my
acknowledgement, which may be as well hoped as requested, from good indifferent
and reasonable men; so I pass not for the unreasonable, and worser sort which
gnaw upon all at tables, carp in conventicles, envy, back-bite, slander, and
detract. For I have learned of the Comicall Poet, that slander is the treasure
of fools which they carry in their tongues, and I know for certainty that Envy
is seated (I will say it although Envy stood at my elbow) in none but in
degenerous, unnoble, and base minds. The honest good and noble natures as they
detest envy, so they cannot envy. As for my self, and this work, I do most
humbly submit it to the censure of the godly honest and learned with all
respective reverence of whom if it be not approved, I hope in regard of my
professed love to our native Country, that it may be excused. Farewell.

TERENTIANVS MAVRVS.
Books receive their doom according to the Readers capacity.



AD LECTOREM.
MAgna per immensum celebrata Britannia mundum
Imperio, populo, rege beata suo,
Nunc prodit, renovata novis, ornata figuris:
Auctior illa tibi, notior illa tibi.
Camdeni liber est, satis est dixisse, scienti:
Camdenum nescis? perlege, notus erit.
GVILIELMVS SYDLEIVS Eques auratur.

Ad amicum suum Guil. Camdenum Georgii Buc Equitis aurati Reg. Sp. C.
Heptastichon.
SI quam describis terram Camdene Britannam,
Tam graphice, tanta cura, gravitate, fideque;
Heroum velles Britonum res scribere gestas,
(Hac etenim sola neglecti in part jacemus)
Historiae poter at conferri nulla Britannae.
Hoc tibi restat opus, vel non hoc fiet in aevo,
Secula quod binos phoenices nulla tulere.
Ad Guil. Camdenum, Edw. Grant Sacrae Theologiae Doctor.
ERgone priscorum lustras monumenta virorum,
Vt possis facili contexere singula filo,
Quae latuere diu caecis immersa tenebris,
Antiquata usu, priscum sumptura nitorem?
Vnde Britannorum nomen? quo coeperit ortu?
Incola quis primus celebres habitaverit oras?
In quavis regione doces, quaecunque vetustae
Sunt urbes, quae vera simul Comitumque Ducumque
Stemmata: quae terrae dotes: quis limes agrorum,
Ordine perspicuo perstringis singula plene.
Egregium moliris opus, vel judice Momo,
Quod semper praesens, quod postera praedicet aetas;
Te patriae stimulavit amor, te docta vetustas
Excitat, ut cunctis patriae spatieris in agris:
Multi multa canunt, tu multum scribere tentas,
Hoc multo multos superas, qui multa tulerunt.
Tu Camdenus eris seros celebrandus in annos:
Ergo age, quo tendis gressu, patriamque venusta,
Ne labor iste tuus desit cupientibus ista.
In antiquam Guilielmi Camdeni Britanniam.
DE te deque tuo libro dum scribere carmen
Men's congesta velit, meritasque intexere lauds,
Insonuit mea Musa mihi, quid carmina quaeris?
Sit scripsisse satis, quod scripsit Horatius olim:
Hic meret era liber Sosiis, hic and mare transit,
Et longum noto scriptori prorogat aeuum.
I. W. Genesis

In postremam Guilielmi Camdeni Antiquitatum editionem, Epigramma. G. Ga.
SEmentem sterili quoties tellure recondit,
Luditur optata fruge colonus iners.
Ventifugae nunquam dominus ditescit arenae;
Pinguis at irriguo flumine terra beat.
Foecundum facunde solum Camdene secasti,
Illud and ingenii nobile flumen aquat.
Atque ut opima solet jacto cum semine gleba
Parturit innumeris granula adaucta modis:
Sic toties cusus tibi qui fuit ante libellus,
Cultior antiquo prodiit ecce liber.
Heu nusquam tanto respondent arua colono,
Cujus ab ingenio prominet his genius?
Sum animum. Cum te hinc discedere jusserit aetas
Vt quaeras trita pascua laeta via;
Semper Camdenus simul atque Britannia vivent:
Longaeuus nequit hic, dum manet illa, mori.
In Guilielmi Camdeni Britanniam.
NEscia pene sui, generisque oblita prioris,
Anglia cum jacuit semisepulta situ,
O quis, ait, tantum aut animis, aut art valebit,
Vindice qui tractet vulnera nostra manu?
Camdenus patriae lugentis imagine motus
Ingenium, artem, animos versat: opemque tulit:
Mortua restituit veteris cognomina gentis,
Mortis and eripuit se patriamque metu.
Aeternum per te, Camdene, Britannia vivit,
Cumque tua aeternum, tu quoque gente manes.
G. Carleton.

Ad eundem.
QVae vix nota sibi fuit ante Britannia, utrique
Nunc Camdene, orbi munere nota tuo est,
Ignotaeque velut fuerat non ulla cupido,
Sic modo sic notam mundus uterque cupit.
Sed tamen incassum: nimia nam dote superba
Indignum nullum non sui amoris habet.
Ianus Gruterus I.C.

Camdeno suo Britannia.
CLarus ut Eoas sol quando adverberat arces
Et procul invisis ferit astra liventia flammis
Nox petit Oceanum, vultusque enascitur orbi;
Sic Camdene tuum jubar ut fulgere per Anglos
Seu Phoebi coepit, nox fugit, and hispida dudum,
Multumque heu squallens radiare Britannia coepi,
Non mea nunc Thetis cum deserit alba profundum
Gratior exurgit, pallentes murice vivo
Instaurata genas, pigro nec sydus ab Orco,
Nec dux astrorum de vertice vesper Olympi,
Illa ego quam lima repolita Britannia mira
Fromispicii explicatio.
Mi Camdene tua, nova nunc magno Insula ponto:
" Illa ego rupe super scuto horrida, and horrida gaeso,
" Hinc pelagi numen, dea spicea visitur illinc,
" Piscosus vallo Nereus, and classibus armat,
" Atque Ceres flavos spargit sua sertaper agros,
" Saxea deinde strues, and quae depicta videmus
" Front libri, veluti fervens a fontibus unda,
" Et surgens pyramid, nostrae miracula monstrant
" Telluris, liber nequit (fas) omnia vester:
Exero nunc vultus exhaustos ante ruinis,
Et nunc flore meo marcores pello vietos,
Verum erit illa dies cum quae micat Anglia forsa^
Nebula quaeretur, cinere occultata, situque,
Atque alios lychnos dabit: Id Camdene negat^
Historicum vincendo Chaos, qui noris abunde:
Haec tibi prisca, redux, tuaque usque Britannia canto.
Edmundus Bolton.

In Britanniam denuo illustratam Ioh. Stradlingus.
INsula in Oceano quondam notissima, caecis
Delituit tenebris vix been nota sibi.
Ingenii (Camdene) tui radiante tenebras
Lumine (seu fugiunt nubila sole) fugas.
Sic rediviva viget, nec qua patet illa latere
Tu potes: Illam tu, te celebrem illa facit.
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...):
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
H. Cuffius.

Ad Guilielmum Camdenum, Britanniam Historica veritate denuo illustrantem.
CAMDENE, laus est invidenda, praeclarum
Audire civem, patriae que servire.
Autoritati, and gloriae perenanti.
CAMDENE, dum decus Britanniae campu^
In aeviternae provehis fagax Famae,
Nitore regio stiloque praeclaro:
Praeclarus inde civis audis, and jure.
Quid? non decore modo Britanniam mactus,
Honor mactus ipse and gloriae punctis:
Sed hunc and illum luce tua reples mundum:
Vt, quae sibi vix nota erat prius terra,
Vtramque nunc domum pulsaverit Solis.
CAMDENE, laudis hoc tuae est. Et extensum
Quo latius volat Britanniae nomen:
CAMDENE, augustior tanto tibi sacro
Adorea in Memoriae exstabit altari.
Tam nominis cari est litasse regnorum
Famae, inclytasque protulisse virtutes.
Caspar Dornavius. D.

In Britanniam redivivam Ri. Parker Caio-Gonvil. carmen congratulatorium.
SAlve, gratae redis (memoranda Britannia) terris
Quam juvat e tenebris exiliisse tuis:
Fallor? an antiquo mutatus sistor in orb?
Aut te dum relego, secla priora lego?
Fallor? an Arthuros, Egbertos, Cassibelinos
Cerno redivivos ducere castra sua?
Fallor? an hic acies saevae certare solebant?
Hic Offa, hic rigidus tendere Penda solet?
Festino nimium. Quae qualia, quantaque cerno
Surgere sacra Deo, moenia, templa, domus?
Queis hic Normannis donari praedia legi?
Vnde sequens soboles nomen and omen habet.
Sed quot cerno domus orbatas stirpe vetusta?
Heu quas dilapidant alea, vina, Venus?
Vt vidi, ut dolui, novus ut nunc sedibus hospes
Diceret: haec mea sunt, ito coloni vetus.
Quis Genius talem (veneranda Britannia) nobis
Esse velit reducem? quo duce tanta refers?
Scilicet hoc debes Camdeno: agnosco parentem,
Et Genium, cujus te tibi reddit amor.
Foelix ipse suo libro: foelicior ipsa
Praeconem talem laudis habere tuae.
Plus loquar, an sileam? video tantum instar in ipso.
Quas Musas vocitem? sed (mea musa) sile.
Parcus amor loquitur: major stupefactus adegit
Mirari hoc tacit, nec scio solus, opus:
In Britanniam a Guil. Camdene illustratam F. Aderb. Carmen.
PIctus atrox Hebridas, glacialem Scotus Hibernem
Moverat, Attacotus Vararim, Saxoque, Visurgim
Conjunctis armis, animisque excindere gentes,
Subruere eximias cumulatis cladibus urbes,
Atque Britannorum nomen demergere bellis.
Vt tamen emergant quae sunt immersa ruinis,
Et decus antiquum rediviva Britannia cernat,
Ecce vetustatem Camdenius eruit omnem,
Magnarum rerum scrutatus magna sepulchra,
Submovit cineres, nigrantes dispulit umbras:
Inque prius retro studiis se contulit aevum;
Contulit atque decus patriaeque sibique labor.
In antiquam Camdeni Britanniam. H. N. L. (...).
PRisca Britannorum delevit nomina Tempus
Antiquas urbes exitioque dedit.
Cuncta triumphato Camdenus tempore reddit,
Ingenio priscum restituitque decus.
Ingenio cedat Tempus, cedatque vetustas:
Ingenium majus Tempore robur habet.
Ad eundem.
ERrabat quaerens Antiqua Britannia lumen,
At, Camdene, tuam vivit ut illa domum:
Invenit lumen, mansit, cupiensque poliri;
Hospes ait mihi sis, qui mihi lumen eris.
I. W*

In praise of the Translator.
CAmden unto the learned did discover,
What Holland to the Whol-land does recite;
Who can but read an English Author over,
May thereby reap much profit with delight,
Viewing the manners, laws, rites situation,
Of his own native soil, explained so well;
With all can be desired of British Nation,
That now Great Britain has no Parralell:
So richly decked, that her fair beauteous blaze,
By matchless Art of thine industrious spirit,
Adornes the World, like Phoebus golden rays.
Thou and thy works eternal fame do merit
Anagr.
Thou Onli-homland-help in admiration,
Like that rare Lady beth (...) Mothe^ (...) now (...) Georg^ Berkl^
Phoenix cause of this translation.
THOMAS MERIELL Master of Arts.

Son of the Translator.
WHat Camden wrote for profit and delight,
Of British Isles, of blessings which have store,
In Latian language, for each learned sprite,
To reap such fruits as pass Peruvian ore
This Holland has at suit of learned Dame,
With pains, transfused into our vulgar speech
His care of common good, deserves that fame,
Which unto late posterity shall reach.
Wherefore all worthy wights which do take pleasure,
To know the stories of their Country sweet,
Ought kindly to accept this so great treasure;
And yield those thanks to the Author which are meet.
I like his Pen and judgment eke no less,
For making choice of such a Patroness.
HENRY STANFORD Master of Arts.

In honor of the Translator.
THe PEN unspoild, though worn beyond a Pen,
The HAND unwearied, though with toil oppressed:
The HEAD diseased for ease of Englishmen,
(Yet still hold out) in motion here do rest.
They rest in motion; restless nest is that;
Yet that is the rest thy Pen, thy Hand, thy Head
Dear HOLLAND has; which all (untir'd) translate
The greatest Volumes, greatest Brains have bred.
Life being so short as from the Birth to Beer
Is but a span; all times may well admire
How so much may be only written here,
Where toil makes that short life more soon expire.
Had I an Angels tongue, or else a Pen
Made of his Pinion (might I judge of thee)
I should so speak and write that Gods and Men
Should see a Miracle of thee through me.
For, NATVRE works but still to hold her state;
And for that work alone neglects all:
But thy works do her power in thee abate,
For others good; that is supernatural.
So thou art a Miracle of Men, for Men;
Yet if this Miracle be thought untrue
To thy good HEART, from thy Head, Hand, and Pen
Give what is right, and then all is but due.
To count the Volumes most voluminous,
Which thou translated have with care (past care)
And Art (past Art) were but superfluous:
For, all do know them, since they famous are.
NATVRES great Secretary thou did teach
To speak such English, as (though he be high
In cloudy-matter) English eyes may reach,
His highest Pitch: that tries the Eagles eye.
The Roman most renowned Historian
Trajans great MASTER^ Moralls (boundless books)
Smooth Tranquil, and the rugged Ammian,
Thou made as smooth to speak, as Venus looks.
And, for thy last, (but so it cannot be
If life do last, for still thou will be doing)
Here is a WORK translated now by thee,
For which we long the Learned have been wooing.
In this, through thee, we see (as in a Glass)
The wrinckled Face of grave ANTIQVITIE:
Thy passing Author here himself does pass
Over whom thou raign'st while he does subject lie.
Camden, whose Fame nor Seas, nor Lands can bound
(Yet they best know him farthest from our ken;
For, English least do know his voices sound)
Is made more famous by thy famous Pen
For, now the English knows his worthiness:
His Countrymen now see him as he is:
Before, they at his virtue could but guess;
And guess by Artlesse Aims, that often miss.
Yet, Man of Art, behold! for all this All
How thou art subject (that deseru'st to reign
In all men's loves) to hate of great and small,
That to be learned alone, take envious pain;
Who seek, for Knowledge only to be known:
("For, who know most, are known still most of all)
They deem Wit, Folly; that to all is shown;
And Goodness, Badnesse hold, if general.
Who knows the voice of Envy, theirs do know;
For, Envy speaks but only by their tongues,
Who being a devil speaks (she cares not how)
By borrowed Organs which to them belongs.
Alas poor Snakes! (base Envies Instruments)
Poor in your Wit, and way-ward in your Will)
Ye little learn, so, hate the Ornaments
Of Art in greater Wits of lesser skill.
Did ye not doubt your own defect of Wit
You would all Arts should still be shown to all*
And let the best Wit make best use of it,
For Wits renown, and letters liberal.
Yea, you would wish the Babylonian tower
Were yet to build, while all one tongue impart*
That so, sole Wit might be Arts Governor,
Not tongues, that are the Essence of no Art.
But were ye good, and would all Good should know.
Who Envy this more learned, lesse-envious man,
You would the frankest praise on him bestow
That makes th'unlearn'd a learned Historian.
Shall English be so poor, and rudely-base
As not be able (through mere penury)
To tell what French has said with gallant grace,
And most tongues else of less facunditie?
God shield it should; and Heaven foresend that we
Should so debase our own dear mother tongue*
That shows our thoughts (how ever high they be)
With higher terms, and el^quence among,
Then, let me muzzle those so d^gged mouths
That byte and bark at what they should defend:
They lies do love, that hidden would have Truths:
And he is Virtues foe that is Errors friend.
But, kind Philemon, let thine active Muse
Still mount above these base detracting spirits:
Look not so low as Snakes that men abuse,
And highest Fame shall crown thy lowest merits.
Go forward (maugre backward Envies ^rabs,
That still go back) thy pains give others pleasure:
They play proud Miriams part, thou Ionada^s*
They skant our learnings lists, thou giv'st us measure.
This Camdens-Britaine, that on wings of Art
Flies over the World, known least where most it ough^,
There thy free Pen to all does it impart,
And make them learned that almost are untaugh^.
For, Camden (whose all time out-wearing fame,
Since he the learned has so often gladded)
Has, by thy Pen, now multiplied his Name:
For, now to Camdens Britain, Holland's added
Then, pregnant HOLLAND, Britain fertile mak^*
With learnings compost; till the croppe of Art
Be ready for our neighbors Sith, and Rake,
That have less skill, than will to take our part*
So shall this soil (when thou art soil or sand)
Call Camdens-Britaine, Hollands richest land*
The unfaired honourer of thee and thine endeavors. JOHN DAVI^S of Hereford.

BRITAIN.
BRITAIN or BRITANNIE, which also is ALBION, named in Greek (...), (...),
(...), (...), (...), the most famous Island, without comparison of the whole
world; severed from the continent of Europe, by the interflowing of the Ocean,
lies against Germany and France trianglewise; by reason of three Promontories
shooting out into diverse parts: to wit, BELERIUM, i. the Cape of S. Burien in
Corwall, Westward; CANTIUM, i. the Fore-land of Kent, into the East; and
TARVISIUM or ORCAS, i. the point of Catnesse in Scotland, Northward. On the
West side, whereas Ireland is seated, VERGIVIUS, i. the Western Ocean,
breaks in; From the North, it has the most vast and wide Hyperborean sea
beating upon it; On the East, where it coasteth upon Germany, enforced sore it
is with the Germane sea; and Southward, as it lies opposite to France, with
the British. Disjoined from those neighbour-countries all about by a convenient
distance every way, fitted with commodious and open havens, for traffic with
the universal world, and to the general good, as it were, of mankind,
thrusting it self forward with great desire from all parts into the sea. See
in KENT.
For between the said Fore-land of Kent and Calais in France it so advances
it self, and the sea is so straighted, that some think the land there was
pierced through, and received the seas into it, which before-time had been
excluded: For the maintenance of which their conceit, they allege both Virgil
in that verse of his, Et penitus toto divisos orb Britannos:
And Britans people quite disjoined from all the world besides.
Because Britain, says Servius Honoratus, was in times past joined to the
maine. And also Claudian, who in imitation of him wrote thus: -- Nostra deducta
Britannia mundo.
Britain, a land, which severed is from this our [Roman] world.
Cer^es, that the outward face and fashion of this globe of Earth has been
with the inundation of Noah's flood, as also by other causes altered; that some
mountains thereby increased in height, many places higher than others, settled
low, and became even plains and valleys; that waterie washes were dried up,
and dry grounds turned to be standing waters; yea, and that certain Islands
have been violently broken off from the firm land, carries some likelihood
of truth. But whether the same be true indeed, or whether there were any
Islands at all before the Deluge, it is not my purpose here to argue; neither
take I pleasure, without good advisement, of Gods works to give my doom. That
the providence of God has ordained diverse things to one and the same end, who
knows not? and verily, that parcels of the earth dispersed here and there
within the sea, serve no less to adorn the world, than lakes spread upon the
earth and hills raised aloft, as well Divines as Philosophers have always held.

Livius and Fabius Rusticus have likened the form hereof unto a Scutula
^hlongae.
long dish or Bipenni. See the Annotations of Sir. Hen. Savil^, knight, upon
this place in T^citu^.
two edged axe, and so is it shapen indeed toward the South, as says Tacitus,
whereupon the fame went of the whole. But Northward, that huge and enorme tract
of ground running beyond unto the furthermost point, grows narrow and sharp
like a wedge, So large, and of such exceeding greatness in circuit, they in
old time took it to be, The Panegyricke Oration pronounced unto Co^stantius,
and untruly entitled unto Maximian.
that Caesar, he who first of all the Romans, discovered it, wrote, How he had
found out another world; supposing the same so great, as that it seemed to
contain within it the Ocean, and not to be compassed about therewith: and
Julius Solinus Polyhistor has left in writing, that for the largeness thereof
it deserves Well near the name of a second world. Howbeit, this age of ours
has now at length by many and sundry voyages, found out in some sort the true
dimension and just compass of the whole Isle, For, from the point Tarvision
unto the cape Belerium, the reaches and crooked turnings of the sea-banks along
the West considered, there are reckoned much about DCCCXII miles: from thence,
keeping the sea side, as it bends Southward until you come to the Fore-land
of Kent, CCCXX miles: whence coasting by the Germane sea, with crooked creeks
and inlets for DCCIIII miles, it reaches to the foresaid point Tarvisium: so
that by this reckoning the whole Island takes in compass MDCCCXXXVI miles.
Which measure as it comes far short of Plinies, so is it also somewhat
less than Caesar's. As for Schitinius Chius, I have no reason once to name him,
who having in Apollonius among other wonders told us strange tales of fruits
growing in Britain without kernels, and of grapes without stone and seed, has
bounded it within the precinct of CCC stadia and no more. Much better yet has
Dionysius After in his Description of the world, reported of the British Islands
that is to say, Britain and Ireland in this wise, (...)
(...).
Now, for their greatness verily, exceeding large they are;
And seek through Islands all, none may with British Isles compare.
And toget^^^ with him, Aristides and other Greek writers accord, who by way
of excellenc^ (...) truly called Britain for the greatness thereof (...),
that is, The great IN (...).

Now, they that have more curiously compared the spaces of heaven above,
together with the tracts of earth beneath, place Britain under the 8. Climate,
and include it within the 18. and 26 Parallel. They think also the longest day
there, to be 18. Aequinoctiall hours and an half. But the Cape of Cornwall,
respecting the convexitie of the earth, they describe to be situate 16 degrees
and 50 scruples from the furthest point West: the longitude likewise of the
Fore-land in Kent, to be 21. degrees; as for the latitude, in the south-coast
they measure it by 50 degrees, and that of Catnesse Northward. by 59 and 40
scruples over. So that, according to this site, Britain is seated as well for
air as soil, in a right fruitful and most mild place. The air so kind and
temperate, that not only the Summers be not excessive hot, by reason of
continual gentle winds that abate their heat (which as they refresh the
fruits of the earth, so they yield a most wholesome and pleasing contentment both
to man and beast) but the Winters also are passing mild: For, the rain
falling often with still showers, (to say nothing of the air it self somewhat
thick and gross) dissolveth the rigor of the cold so; and withal the sea
which compasses it, with moderate warmth does comfort the land in such wise,
as that the cold with us is much more remiss than in some parts of France and
Italy. Whereupon it is, that Minutius Foelix, proving that God by his
providence has a special regard of the several parts of the world as well as
of the whole, says, That Britain though it want other whiles the aspect of
the Sun, yet refreshed it is with the warmth of the sea flowing round about
it. Neither need you to marvel at his speech, concerning the warmth of the
sea. The seas, quoth Cicero, stirred to and fro with the winds, ^e natura
Deorum, lib. 2.
do so wax warm, that a man may easily perceive, within that world of Waters
there is enclosed a certain heat. To the temperatenesse also of this Island
Cescenius Getulicus a very ancient Poet seems to have respect, when he
versified thus of Britain; Non Illic Aries verno ferit era cornu,
Probus in Virgilij G^^gie.
Gnosia nec Gemini praecedunt cornua Tauri,
Sicca Lycaonius resupinat plaustra Boots.
The Aries.
RAM unkindly smites not there, in Spring, the air with horn,
Nor Gemini.
TWINS, the horned Taurus.
BULL of Crete, untimely go beforn,
Where DRIVER, Boots, otherwise called Arctophylax.
hight Arctophylax, does his dry waine up-turn.
Caesar likewise writes thus; The places in Britain be more temperate (by
reason that the weather is not so cold) than in France. Semblably Cornelius
Tacitus; No extremity there is of cold: and he adds moreover, and says,
The soil, setting aside the Olive, the Vine, and the rest, which are Usually
grow in hotter counries.
proper to warmer countries, takes all kind of grain, and bears it in
abundance: it ripeneth slowly, but comes up quickly: the cause of both, is
one and the same, to wit, the overmuch moisture of ground and air. For the
air, as Strabo writes, is subject rather to showers of rain, than to snow.
Howbeit, the ground enriched so with all sorts of corn, that Orpheus has
reported it to be the very seat of Ladi^ Ceres: for, that which we read in his
Poem thus, -- (...)
(...), --
-- Lo, here, the stately hauls
Of Ceres Queen. --
is meant of this our Island: yea, and it has been the very barn, garner,
and storehouse of victuals of the West Empire; Zosimus. Eustachius (...).
from whence the Romans were wont yearly to transport into Germany, with a
fleet of 800. vessels bigger than barges, great store of corn, for the
maintenance of their armies, which there defended the Frontiers. But lest I
should seem to exceed overmuch in the praise of my native country, hear in
stead of me, that ancient Orator, who with open mouth resoundeth out the
commendations thereof, in this manner: O happy Britain, and more fortunate
than all other lands beside, Panegyrie to Constantius.
which first saw Constantine Emperor! for good cause has nature endowed
thee with all the blessed gifts of air and soil; wherein there is neither
excessive cold of Winter, nor extreme heat of Summer; wherein there is so great
plenty of grain, that it serves sufficiently both for bread and drink:
wherein the forests are without savage beasts, and the ground void of noisome
serpents. Contrariwise, an infinite multitude there is of tame cattle with
udders strutting full of milk, and laden with fleeces: and verily, (that
which for the use of our life we much esteemed) the days there are very long,
and the nights never want some light, whiles those utmost plains by the sea
side cast and raise no shadows on high, and the aspect both of sky and
stars passes beyond the bound of the night, yea the very Sun it self,
which unto us seems for to set, appears there, only to pass along and go
aside.

Hearken also, if it please you, to another Orator speaking unto Constantius
the father of Constantine the Great in this wise: Panegyri^, to Constantius.
And, I assure you, no small damage was it to the Commonweal, as to lose the
bare name only of BRITAIN, so to forgo a land so plentiful in corn, so
rich in pasturage, so full of mines and veins of metal, so gainefull in
tributes and revenewes so accommodated with many havens, and for circuit, so
large and spacious.

Moreover, the singular love and motherly affection of Nature to this Island, a
Poet of good antiquity has by way of a speech made unto Britain lively
expressed thus, in this Epigram, which some have judged not unworthy to be
divulged.

Tu nimio nec stricta gelu, nec sydere fervens,
Clementi coelo temperieque places,
Cum pareret Natura parens, varioque favore
Divideret dotes omnibus una locis,
Seposuit potiora tibi, matreque professa,
Insula sis foelix, plenaque pacis, ait.
Quicquid amat luxus, quicquid desiderat usus,
Ex te proveniet, vel aliunde tibi.
For air, so mild and temperate right pleasing is thy seat;
Where reigns neither chilling cold, nor yet excessive heat.
What time Dame Nature brought things forth, and of her only grace,
Bestowed her favors manifold and gifts on every place;
Like mother kind, the better part aside for thee she laid;
Oh, happy Island may thou be and full of peace, she said:
What ever vain excess affects, what may man's need content,
Shall come from thee, or else to thee, from other lands be sent.
Fortunate Islands.
This plentiful abundance, these goodly pleasures of Britain, have persuaded
some, that those fortunate Islands, wherein all things, as Poets write, do
still flourish as in a perpetual Spring tide, In his Commentaries upon
Lycophron.
were sometime here with us. For, this, does one Isacius Tzetzes a Greek
Author of no small credit, affirm, and our ancestors seem to have believed
the same as a certain truth. For, what time as Pope Clement the sixth, as we
read in Robert of Aevsburie, 1344.
had elected Lewis of Spain, to be the Prince of those fortunate Islands, and
for to aid and assist him, mustered soldiers in France and Italy; our
countrymen were verily persuaded, That he was chosen Prince of Brit^ine, and
that all the said preparation was for Britain, as one, says he, of the
fortunate Islands. Yea and even those most prudent personages themselves, our
Legier Ambassadors there, with the Pope, were so deeply settled in this
opinion, that forthwith they withdrew themselves from Rome, and hastened with
all speed into England, there to certify their countrymen and friends of the
matter. Neither will any man now judge otherwise, who thoroughly knows the
blessed estate and happy wealth of Britain. For Nature took a pleasure in
the framing thereof, and seems to have made it as a second world, sequestered
from the other, to delight mankind withal, yea and curiously depainted it of
purpose, as it were a certain portraict, to represent a singular beauty, and
for the ornament of the universal world: with so gallant and glittering
variety, with so pleasant a show are the beholders eyes delighted, which way
soever they glance. To say nothing of the Inhabitants, whose bodies are of an
excellent good constitution, their demeanor right courteous, their natures as
gentle, and their courage most hardy and valiant, whose manhood by exploits
achieved both at home and abroad, is famously renowned through the whole world.

The first Inhabitants: and reason of the Name.
But who were the most ancient and the very first Inhabitants of this Isle, as
also, from whence this word Britan had the original derivation, sundry
opinions one after another have risen; and many we have seen, who being
uncertain in this point, have seemed to put down the certain resolution
thereof. Neither can we hope to attain unto any certainty herein, more than
all other nations, which) setting those aside that have their original
avouched unto them out of holy Scripture) as well as we, touching their point,
abide in great darkness, error and ignorance. And how, to speak truly, can
it otherwise be? considering that the truth, after so many revolutions of ages
and times, could not choose but be deeply hidden. For the first inhabitours of
countries had other cares and thoughts to busy and trouble their heads, than
to deliver their beginnings unto posterity. And say, they had been most
willing so to do, yet possibly could they not, seeing their life was so
uncivil, so rude, so full of wars, and therefore void of all literature;
which keeping company with a civil life, by peace and repose, is only able
to preserve the memory of things, and to make over the same to the succeeding
ages. Moreover the Druidae, who being in the old time the Priests of the
Britans and Gauls, were supposed to have known all that was past; and the
Bardi, that used to resound in song all valors and noble acts, thought it not
lawful to write and book any thing. But admit they had recorded ought; in so
long continuance of time, in so many and so great turnings and overturnings of
States, doubtless the same had been utterly lost, seeing that the very
stones, pyramides, obelisks, and other memorable monuments, thought to be more
durable than brass, have yielded long ago to the iniquity of time. Howbeit,
in the ages soon after following, there wanted not such as desired gladly to
supply these defects; and when they could not declare the truth indeed, yet
at least way for delectation, they labored to bring forth narrations, devised
of purpose, with certain pleasant variety to give contentment, and delivered
their several opinions, each one after his own conceit and capacity,
touching the original of Nations and their names. Unto which, as, there were
many, who neglecting further search into the truth, quickly yielded
connivence; so, the most sort delighted with the sweetness of the Deviser, as
readily gave credence.

But, to let pass all the rest, one Geffrey Ap Arthur, of Monmouth among us
(whom I would not pronounce in this behalf liable to this suspicion) in the
reign of K. Henry the Second, published an History of Britain, and that out
of the British tongue, as he says himself: wherein he writes, That Brutus a
Trojane borne, the son of Silvius, nephew of Ascanius, and in a third degree
nephew to that great Aeneas descended from supreme Jupiter, (for the goddess
Venus* bare him) whose birth cost his mother her life, and who by chance slew
his own father in hunting, (a thing that the wise Magi had foretold) fled his
country and went into Greece; where he delivered out of thraldom the progeny
of Helenus K. Priamus son, vanquished King Pandrasus, wedded his daughter,
and accompanied with a remnant of Trojans, fell upon the Island Leogetia: where
by the Oracle of Diana, he was advised to go into this Western Isle. From
thence through the Streights of Gebraltar, where he escaped the Mer-maydes, and
afterward through the Tuskan sea, he came as far as to Aquitaine, Brute.
Aquitaine, in a pight battle defeated Golfarius the Pict, King of Aquitaine,
together with twelve Princes of Gaul; and after he had built the city Vrbem
Turonum.
Tours (as witnesses Homer) and made spoil of Gaul, passed over sea into
this Island inhabited of Giants, In the year of the world, 2855. Before the
Nativitie of Christ, 1108.
whom when he had conquered, together with Gogmagog the hugest of them all,
according to his own name he called it Britain, in the year of the world
2855: before the first Olympiad 334. years; and before the nativitie of Christ
1108. Thus far Geffrey [of Monmouth]. Yet others there be, that fetch the
name of Britain from some other causes. Sir Thomas Eliot, by degree a
worshipful Knight, and a man of singular learning, draws it from the Greek
fountain, to wit, (...), a term that the Athenians gave to their public
Finances or Revenues. Humfrey Lhuyd, reputed by our countrymen, for knowledge
of Antiquity, to carry, after a sort, with him all the credit and authority,
refers it confidently to the British word PRID-CAIN, that is to say, a pure
white form. Pomponius Laetus reports, that the Britons out of Armorica in
France, gave it that name. Goropius Becanus says, that the Danes sought here
to plant themselves, and so named it BRIDANIA, that is, Free Dania. Others
derive it from PRVTENIA, a region in Germany. Bodine supposes, that it took
the name of BRETTA the Spanish word, which signifies Earth: and Forcatulus, of
BRITHIN, which, as we read in Athenaeus, the Greeks used for drink. Others
bring it from the BRVTII in Italy, whom the Graecians called (...). As for
those smatterers in Grammar, who keep a babbling and prating that Britain
should carry that name, of British manners, let them be packing.

These are all the opinions (to my knowledge) that have been received touching
the name of Britain. But herein, as we cannot but smile at the fictions of
strangers, so the devices coined by our own countrymen pass not current with
general allowance. And verily, in these and such like cases, an easier matter
it is to impeach the false, than to teach and maintain a truth. For besides
this, that it were an absurdity to seek the reason of this name in a foreign
language; the general consent of all Historiographers of better note, does
confute Laetus; who with one accord deliver unto us, that those Armorica
Britons departed hence, and so from us carried the name with them. Again,
Britain flourished under this name many hundred years before the names of
Dania and Prutenia came up, But what does the word Britannia to do with the
Spaniards Bretta? which I doubt, whether it be Spanish or no: and why should
this Island be so termed, rather than other Land? That the drink called
Brithin was ever in use among our countrymen, can hardly be proved: and to give
name to our nation of the Greeks drink, were ridiculous. As for those Brutii
in Italy, whom as Strabo witnesses, the Lucans called (...), as one would say,
traitorous fugitives, it can never be prooved, that they like runnagates ran
hither into Britain. But to come now to our own countrimens conjectures.
Eliots (...) seems not probable; seeing that word was proper to the
Athenians; and considering the Greeks called this Isle (...), not (...), Lhuyds
Prid-Cain for the Britan, seems not only too far fetched, but also
over-hardly streined: to say nothing, how that word, Cain, came from the
Latins Candidum, and so crept into the provincial language of the Britains.

But as touching those reports of Brutus; were they true, certain, and
undoubted, there is no cause why any man should bestow farther study and labor
in searching out the beginning of the Britains: The thing is dispatched to our
hand, and the searchers of Antiquity are eased of their troublesome and
painful travel. For mine own part, it is not my intent, I assure you, to
discredit and confute that story which goes of him, for the upholding whereof,
(I call Truth to record) I have from time to time streined to the height, all
that little wit of mine. For that were, to strive with the stream and current
of time; and to struggle against an opinion commonly and long since received.
How then may I, a man of so mean parts, and small reckoning, be so bold, as to
sit in examination of a matter so important, and thereof definitively to
determine? Well, I refer the matter full and whole to the Senate of
Antiquarians, for to be decided. Let every man, for me, judge as it pleases
him; and of what opinion soever the Reader shall be of, verily I will not make
it a point much material.

And yet I see (that I may tell you so much aforehand, being as I am a plain
honest and diligent searcher after the truth) how men most judicious and
passing well learned, go about diverse ways to extenuate the credit of this
narration; and so often as I stand in defense thereof, to come upon me fiercely
with these and such like arguments. First, grounding their reason upon the
time, they protest and say, that all is but fabulous (with reservation only of
the Sacred History) whatsoever is reported to have been done before the first
Olympias, to wit, the year 770. before the birth of Christ: like as these
reports of Brutus, which are before the said time 300. years and more. And
this they aver by the authority of Varro, the most learned writer of all the
Romans: who as he named the first age immediately after man's creation unto the
Deluge, Censorium.
(...), that is, uncertain, by reason of the ignorance thereof, so he termed
the second, even from the said Deluge unto the first Olympias, (...), that is
to say, The Fabulous Time or Age.
Fabulous: because in that time there is related nothing else (for the most
part) but tales, even among the Greeks and Latins, learned nations; much more
then among the Barbarous and unlettered, such as in those days they were in
all this tract, every one. Then they allege, that for the confirmation of this
matter in question, the authority of sufficient writers, (which to the
knowledge of things past makes most, and is all in all) is altogether
defective. Now, those they call sufficient writers, whose antiquity and
learning the greater it is, so is their credit the better accepted, who all of
them, like as the ancient Britains themselves (by their saying) knew not so
much as the name of Brutus. Caesar, say they, sixteen hundred years since, as
he testifies of himself, By all the inquiry that he could make, found no
more but this, that the in land part of Britain was inhabited by those, who,
said they, were borne in the very Island; and the maritime coasts by such as
from out of At this day called Nether-lands, or Low countries of Germany.
Belgium passed over thither. Tacitus also, a thousand and four hundred years
ago, who searched diligently into these particulars, wrote thus, What manner
of men the first inhabitants of Britain were, borne in the land or brought in,
as among barbarous people it is not certainly known. Gildas, being himself a
wise and learned Britain, who lived a thousand years since, has not one word
of this Brutus, and doubts whether the old Britains had any records or
writings, whereby they might convey unto posterity, their own beginning and
History; professing that he wrote, by the relation which he had from
beyond sea, and not by any direction out of the writings of his own country,
or any records left by writers: which if there were ever any at all, either the
enemies had burnt them, or else they were carried away far off in some fleet
of exiled persons, and so not extant. Ninius also, disciple of Eluodugus,
taking in hand to write a Chronicle, eight hundred years ago, complains
that the great Masters and Doctors of Britain, had no skill, and left no
memorial in writing: confessing, that himself gathered whatsoever he wrote
out of the Annals and Chronicles of the holy Fathers. To these they adjoyne
Beda, William of Malmesburie, and as many as wrote eleven hundred and
threescore years since, who seem not once to have heard of Brutus his name; so
silent are they of him in all their own writings.

Hereupon they have noted, that the name of that Brutus was never heard of in
the world, before that in a barbarous age, and amid the thickest clouds of
ignorance, one Hunibald a bald writer, fabled and feined, That Francio a
Trojane, King Priams son, was the founder of the French Nation. Hence they
collect, that when our countrymen heard once how the Frenchmen their
neighbors drew their line from the Trojanes, they thought it a foul
dishonor, that those should outgoe them in nobility of Stock, whom they
matched every way in manhood and proesse. Therefore, that Geffrey Ap Arthur of
Monmouth, four hundred years ago, was the first, as they think, that to
gratify our Britans produced unto them this Brutus, descended from the gods,
by birth also a Trojane, to be the author of the British Nation. And before
that time verily not one man, as they say, made any mention at all of the said
Brutus.

They add thus much moreover, that about the same time, the Scottish writers
falsely devised Scota the Egyptian Pharaoes daughter to be the Foundresse of
their nation. Then also it was, that some misspending their wit and time, yea
and offering violent abuse unto the truth, forged out of their own brains, for
the Irish, their Hiberus; for the Danes, their Danus; for the Brabanders, their
Brabo; for the Goths, their Gothus; and for the Saxons, their Saxo; as it were
the Stock-fathers of the said nations. But seeing that in this our age, which
has escaped out of those dark mists of fatal ignorance, the French have
renounced their Francio as a counterfeit Progenitor: (Whereas the Frenchmen,
quoth Turnibus a right learned man, stand highly upon their descent from the
Trojanes, they do it in emulation of the Romans, whom they seeing to bear
themselves proud of that Pedigree and noble stock, would needs take unto
themselves also the like reputation:) And for that the Scots, such as be of the
wiser sort, have cast off their Scota; and truth it self has chased away
Hiberus, Danus, Brabo, and the rest of these counterfeit Demigods, and
Worthies of the same stamp: Why the Britans should so much stick unto their
Brutus, as the name-giver of their Island, and to the Trojane original, they
greatly wonder: as who would say, before the destruction of Troy, (which
happened in the thousand year or there about after Noah's flood) there had
been no Britains here: and as if there had not lived many valorous men
before Agamemnon.

Furthermore, they avouch, that very many out of the grave Senate of great
Clerks, by name, Boccace, Vives, Hadr. J^nius. Polydore, Buchanan, Vigneier,
Genebrard, Molinaeus, Bodine, and other men of deep judgment, agree jointly
in one verdict, and deny, that ever there was any such in the world as this
Brutus: also, that learned men of our own country, as many, acknowledge him
not, but reject him as a mere counterfeit. He flourished in the year 1440.
Among whom, they produce, first John of Weathamsted, Abbat of S. Albanes, a
most judicious man; who in his Granarie wrote of this point long since in this
manner: According to other histories, which in the judgment of some are of more
credit, the whole Discourse of this Brutus is rather Poetical than
historical, and, for diverse reasons, built upon opinion more than truth
indeed. First, because their is no where mention made in the Roman stories,
either of killing the father, or of the said birth, or yet of putting away the
son. Secondly, for that, after sundry authors, Ascanius begat no such son
who had for his proper name Sylvius: for, according unto them, he begat but one
only son, and that was Iulus, from whom the house of Iulii afterward took
their beginning etc. And thirdly, Sylvius Posthumus, whom perhaps Geffrey
means, was the son of Aeneas by his wife Lavinia; and he begetting his
son Aeneas in the eight and thirtieeh year of his reign, ended the course
of his life by natural death. The Kingdom therefore, now called England, was
not heretofore, as many will have it, named Britain of Brutus the son of
Sylvius. Wherefore, it is in their opinion a vain piece of work, and
ridiculous enough, to challenge noble blood, and yet to want a probable ground
of their challenge. For it is not manhood only, that ennobleth a nation; the
mind it is also with perfect understanding, and nothing else, that gains
gentilitie to a man. And therefore Seneca writes thus, in his Epist. 44.
Epistles out of Plato* That there is no King but he came from slaves, and no
slave but he descended of Kings. Wherefore, to conclude, let this suffice the
Britains from the beginning of their Nobility, that they be courageous and
valiant in fight, that they subdue their enemies on every side, and that they
utterly refuse the yoke of servitude.

In a second rank they place William of Newborough a writer of much greater
authority, who too too sharply charged Geffrey the Compiler of the British
history, for his untruth, so soon as ever it came forth, in these words: A
certain writer quoth he, in these our days has risen up, who devises
foolish fictions and tales of the Britains, and in a vain humor of his own,
extolleth them far above the valorous Macedonians and Romans both: he has to
name Geffrey, and is surnamed Arthurius, for that the tales of Arthur taken out
of the Britains old fables, and augmented by inventions of his own, with a
new color of Latin speech laid over them, he has invested into the goodly
title of an History. who also has adventured farther, and divulged under the
name of authentike prophesies, grounded upon an undoubted truth, the deceitful
conjectures and foredeemings of one Merline, whereunto he added verily a great
deal of his own, whiles he did the same into Latin. And a little after:
Moreover, in his book which he entituleth, The Britans History; how
malapertly and shamelesly he does in manner nothing but lie, there is no man
that reads the said book can doubt, unless he have no knowledge at all of
ancient histories. For, he that has not learned the truth of things indeed,
admits without discretion and judgment the vanity of fables. I forbear to
speak, what great matter tha^ fellow has forged of the Britans acts, before
the Empire, and coming in of Julius Caesar, or else being by others invented,
has put them down as authentike. In so much, as Giraldus Cambrensis, Descript.
Cambriae. c. 7.
who both lived and wrote at the same time, made no doubt to term it, The
fabulous story of Geffrey. Others there be, who in this narration of Brutus,
laugh at the foolish Topographie set down by this Geffrey; as also how falsely
he has produced Homer as a witness: yea, and they would persuade us, that it
is wholly patched up of untunable discords and jarring absurdities. They note
besides, that his writings, together with his Merlins prophesies, are (among
other books prohibited) forbidden by the church of Rome to be published. Some
again do observe thus much; how these tha^ most of all admire Brutus, are
very doubtful and waver to and fro about their (...). He, say they, that
takes upon him the name and person of Gildas, and (...) brief glos^es to
Ninius, devises first, that this Brutus was a Consul of Rome; then, that he
was the son of Silvius, and lastly, of one Hessicio. And there wants not
(as I have heard say) a certain Count-Palatine, who (...) needs have our
Brutus to be called Brotus, because, forsooth, in his birth he was the cause of
his mothers death, as if (...) sounded so much in Greek. In the judgment of
others, they should have left the Original of Britains as probable, if they
had fathered their progeny, either upon Brito the Centaure, whom Hinginus
mentions; Bretanus.
or that Bretanus, of whose daughter Celtice, Parthenius Nicaeus a very ancient
author, writes that Hercules begat Celtus, the father of the Celtae, and from
whom Hesychius deriveth the word Britain.

As for these observations and judgments of other men, which I have recited, I
beseech you, let no man commence action against me, a plain meaning man, and
an ingenuous student of the truth, as though I impeached that narration of
Brutus; forasmuch as it has been always (I hope) lawful for every man in
such like matters, both to think what he will, and also to relate what others
have thought. For mine own part, let Brutus be taken for the father, and
founder of the British nation; I will not be of a contrary mind. Let the
Britains resolve still of their original, to have proceeded from the Trojans
(into which stock, as I will hereafter prove, they may truly ingraffe
themselves) I will not gain-stand it. I wot full well, that Nations in old time
for their original, had recourse unto Hercules, and in later ages, to the
Trojans. Let Antiquity herein be pardoned, Livius.
if by entermingling falsities and truths, humane matters and divine together,
it make the first beginnings of nations and cities more noble, sacred, and of
greater majesty: seeing that, as Pliny writes, Even falsely to claim and
challenge descents from famous personages, implies in some sort a love of
virtue. As for my self, I willingly acknowledge with Varro, the best learned
of all Romans, Augustinus d^ Civitate Dei. lib. 3. cap. 4.
such originals as these, fetched from the gods, to be profitable; that
valorous men may believe, although untruly, that they are descended from the
gods, and thereby the mind of man assuredly persuaded of some divine race, may
presume to enterprise great matters more boldly, act the same more resolutely,
and upon the very security thereof, perform all more happily. By which words
nevertheless, S. Augustine gathers, that the said most learned Varro
confesses (although not stoutly nor confidently, yet covertly) that these
opinions are altogether truthlesse.

Forasmuch then, as all writers are not of one and the same mind, as touching
the very name and the first inhabitants of Britain, and I fear me greatly,
that no man is able to fetch out the truth, so deeply plunged within the
winding revolutions of so many ages, let the Reader of his candor and
humanity, pardon me also among others, if modestly and without the prejudice
of any man, I likewise interpose my conjecture; not upon any mind I have
contentiously to wrangle, (be that far from me) but in my desire to search
out the truth; which has wholly possessed me and brought to this point, that
in the question now in hand, I had rather ask forgiveness for my fault (if
there be any) than commit no fault at all. Howbeit, to the end that the reason
of this name, may if it be possible, more easily and with better success
appear, I will endeavor first (as I may) to find out the most ancient
Inhabitours of the Island, albeit they lie so hidden in the utmost nooke and
secretest closer of Antiquity, as it were in a most thick wood, where no
pathwaies are to be seen, that very small hope there is or none at all, to
fetch those things back again with all my diligence, which oblivion has so
long removed out of the sight of our ancestors.

But to seek for this matter farther off, and to omit Caesar, with Diodorus
and others, who would have the Britans to be (...)
borne of themselves in the very land and mere (...)
Aborigines; that is, Homelings and not foreign brought in: who also imagined,
that men in the beginning sprang out of the earth, like unto mushroomes and
todstooles: we are taught out of the sacred History penned by Moses, that
after the Deluge, Sem, Cham, and Japhet, the three sons of Noe, having
multiplied their issue in great number, departed asunder from the mountains of
Armenia, where the Arc had rested, into diverse parts and quarters of the
earth, and so, propagated the nations throughout the wide world. That some of
their posterity came to this Isle after the families were by little and little
spread and dispersed abroad, both reason it self, and also the authority of
Theophilus Antiochenus, do jointly prove. When as, says he, in old time,
there were few men in Arabia and Chaldaea, after the division of tongues they
increased and multiplied more and more. Hereupon some departed toward the
East, some gat them to the spacious and open main-land: others went forward
into the North, seeking there to seat themselves: neither gave they over to
possess ground every where, until they came as far as to Britain, situate
in the Northern Climates. And Moses himself expressly shows the same,
writing, that the Islands of the Gentiles were by the posterity of Japhet
divided in their Regions. The Islands of Or Nations.
Gentiles the Divines call those, which lie farthest off: and Wolfgangus
Musculus a Theologer, not of the lowest rank, thinks that the nations and
families which came from Japhet first inhabited the Isles of Europe, such as
(says he) be England, Origin. lib. 9. cap. 2.
Sicilie, etc. Now, that Europe fell unto Japet and his progeny, not Divines
only, but Josephus also and others have recorded. For Isidorus, out of an
ancient writer cites this, The nations descended of Iaphet, possess from the
Mountain Taurus Northward, the one half of Asia, and all Europe so far as
to the British Ocean, leaving names both to places and people both: Of which
very many afterward became changed, the rest remain as they were. And we have
seen that blessing of Noe, [ God enlarge Iaphet, Genesis cap. 9.
and let him dwell in the Tents of Sem, and let Chanaan be his servant]
fulfilled in the people of Europe. For, Europe, which, as Pliny says, bred up
a people conqueror of all nations, has triumphed more than once over those
other parts of the world which fell unto Sem and Cham: and in this part has
the offspring of Japhet spread it self far and wide. For of his sons,
Magog begat the Massagets, Javan the Jones, Thubal the Spaniards, and Mesech
the Moschovits. But Gomer his eldest son, in these farthest and remotest
borders of Europe, gave both beginning and name to the Gomerians, (...),
Cimerii, Cumeri, etc.
which were after called Cimbrians and Cimerians. For, the name of Cimbrians or
Cimerians filled in some sort this part of the world: and not only in
Germany, but also in Gaul spread exceeding much. They which now are the Gauls,
were, as Josephus and Zonaras write, called of Gomer, Gomari, Gomeraei and
Gomeritae. From these Gomarians or Gomeraeans of Gaul, I have always thought
that our Britains drew their beginning, and from thence, for a proof of the
said beginning, brought their name: the very proper and peculiar name also of
the i. Welsh men.
Britans, has persuaded me thereunto. For even they call themselves
ordinarily Kumero, Cymro and Kumeri: like as a or Welsh.
British woman Kumeraes, and the tongue it self, Kumeraeg. Neither acknowledge
they any other names: although some there be not of the greatest skill, who
from hence have coined in the former age, these words, Cambri and Cambria. Yea,
and that Grammarian whom Virgil in his Catalects so taunteth and terms the
Britain Thucydides, Quintilian says was a Cimbrian. Lib. 8. cap. 3.
And whence, trow ye, should we think these names proceed, but from that
Gomer, and the Gomerians in Gaul next adjoining? which was the seat of the old
Gomerians. That the Germans came of Aschenaz, the Turks from Togorma, sons of
Gomer, the learned do verily think, because the Jews even at this day call
these, Togormah; like as the former, Aschenas. That the Thracians Jones,
Riphaeans and Moschi, etc. are the posterity of Thirax, Javan, Riphat and
Moschus, no man denies; for that the names sound not unlike: Semblably, that
the Ethiopians were the seed of Chus, and the Egyptians of Misraim, because
they carry the same names in their own languages, no man there is but
grants. Why should not we then confess, that our Britains or Cumerians, are
the very posterity of Gomer, and of Gomer took their denomination? For, the
name accords passing well: and granted it is, that they planted themselves in
the utmost borders of Europe: Which thing also, the very name of Gomer, imposed
first not upon some light occasion, but even by Divine providence and
inspiration, Phil. Melanct.
does signify: For Gomer in the Hebrew tongue, betokens utmost Bordering.
Neither let any man by way of reproach, object unto our Cumeri or Cimbri, what
Sext. Pompeius has written, That thieves in the French tongue are called
Cimbri. For, albeit the Cimbri (among whom it is likely that our Cumeri were,)
living in that courageous and bold age of the world, wherein martial proesse
flourished, wandering (as Possidonius writes), from these marches of Europe,
warred by way of robbery, as far as to the lake Maeotis; yet for all that,
the word Cimbri no more signifies a thief, than Aegyptius, one that is
superstitious, or Chaldaeus, an Astrologer, and Sybarita, a delicate
dainty-mouth. But because those nations were so given, therefore they that are
such bear their names. And in this point agrees right with me, Ad Sexium
Pompeium. Berosus.

Censure upon Berosus.


that singular ornament of learning Joseph Scaliger. Neither let any man
marvel, wherefore I call not Berosus here to take my part, out of whom
writers in these days furnish themselves with so great means. Certes, to
speak my mind at once, the edge of that Berosus his authority, who commonly
goes under that name, is in my account so Blunt and dull, that I together with
the best learned of our age, as namely Volaterran, Vives, Antonius Augustinus,
Melchior Canus, and especially Gaspar Varrerius, think it to be nothing else,
but a ridiculous figment of some crafty foister and juggling deceiver; which
Varrerius in his Censure of Berosus Printed at Rome, is soon able to remove
out of the Readers minds that error of theirs so deeply settled, concerning
this writer.

This is mine opinion and conjecture rather of the Britans original: For in
things of so great Antiquity, a man may more easily proceed by guess, than
upon grounded reason pronounce sentence either way. And verily this their
beginning from Gomer and out of Now France.
Gaul seems more substantial, ancient and true, than that from Brutus and
Troy. Nay, that this sounds rather to a truth, and that our Britains are the
very offspring of the Gaulois, me thinks I am able to prove, by the name,
site, religion, Now Frenchmen.
manners, and language: by all which the most ancient Gauls and Britains have
been, as it were, in some mutual society linked together. And that I may
this do, let me, I pray you, with favorable good leave range abroad for a
while at my pleasure.

As touching the name, THE NAME.
because I have spoken thereof before, thus much only will I repeat, that as
the ancient Gauls are called Gomeraeans, Gomeritae, Gomeri, and by contraction
Cimbri: so likewise our Britains be named Cumeri and Kimbri. Now that the
Gauls were called Gomeri, Josephus and Zonaras (as I said) do jointly prove.
That they were named also Cimbri, may be gathered out of Cicero and Appian.
Those Barbarians whom Marius defeated, Cicero plainly terms Gauls. De
Proconsul.
C. Marius, quoth he, repressed the armies of the Gauls, entering in great
numbers into Italy. But all Historiographers witness, that they were
Cimbrians: and the Habergeon of their King Beleus, dug up at A^x.
Aquae Sextiae, where Marius put them to flight, has showed the same: For
engraven it was with strange letters thus, BELEOS CIMBROS. Forcatulus out of
the Annals of France.
Likewise, that they who under the conduct of Brennus spoiled Now, Castri or
Salona.
Delphi in Greece were Gauls, all writers with one voice and mind agree: and
yet, that these were named Cimbri, 1235.
Appian in his Illyricks does testify: The Celts or Gauls, quoth he, whom they
call Cimbrians. And here will I neither cite the testimony of Lucane, who
calls the hackster, that was hired and sent to kill Marius, a Cimbrian, whom
Livie and others affirm to have been a Gaul; nor allege Plutarch, who
names the Cimbrians, Gallo-scythians, ne yet Reinerius Reineccius an excellent
Historian, who constantly averreth out of Plutarch in his Sertorius, that the
Gauls and Cimbrians used the same language. Neither will I urge and streine to
my purpose that only word of the Cimbrians which remains among authors, and
is produced by Pliny out of Philemon, Morimarusa.
to wit, Morimarusa. i. the dead Sea, although it be mere British: For Mor
with the That is, Welsh.
Britans signifies Sea, and Marw, dead.

Seeing therefore, that these people agreed in the most ancient name, from
whence passed the said name into this Isle, The Site.
but even with the first Inhabitants, out of Gaul, lying so near, and by a
very small straight of sea severed from it? For the world was not altogether
and at once inhabited; but grant we must, that the countries nearer adjoining
unto the mountains of Armenia, (where the Arc rested after the flood, and
from whence mankind was increased) were peopled before others; and namely Asia
the less, and Greece before Italy, Italy before Gaul, and Gaul before
Britain. The consideration whereof is most delectable, Erasmus Michael of
Navigation.
in that the highest Creator, had joined regions, and withal dispersed the
Islands so, as their is no such great distance between any of them, but that
even those which lie farthest off, may from some one near adjoining, be seen
and plainly as it were discerned by the eye. And for no other purpose was this
done; but that the nations when they should over-abound, might discover and
describe some places to pass unto and disburthen themselves; so long, until
the universal world were to the glory of the Creator replenished with
Inhabitants every where. We ought therefore to be persuaded, that the ancient
Gomerians of Gaul (now France) either chased away by the pursuit of others, or
cast out for lessening of the multitude, or else inflamed with a desire to
travel and see far countries, (a thing naturally inbred in men) crossed the
sea and came over first into this Isle, which from the continent they were able
to kenne. And it stands to very good reason also, that every country received
the first Inhabitants from places near bordering, rather than from such as
were most disjoined. For, who would not think, that Cyprus had the first
Inhabitors out of Asia next unto it, Or Candie.
Crete and Sicilie out of Greece neereby, and Corsica out of Italy a neighbor
country: and, not to go far, Zeland out of Germany the nearest unto it, as
also Island out of Norway, rather than from the remote tracts of Tartarie and
Now Barbary.
Mauritania? In like manner, why should not we think that out Britain was
inhabited at first by the Gauls their neighbors, rather than either by the
Trojans or Italians, the Alab^s and Brutians, so far distant and remoove?
Neither do writers fetch the original and infancy (as it were) of the
Britains from any other place, than their neighbor country Gaul. The inner
parts of Britain, says Caesar, is inhabited of them, whom they themselves
report out of their records to have been borne in the Island: the Sea coast,
of those, who upon purpose to make war had passed thither out of Where now
are Holland, Zeland, Flanders, Brabant, Gelderland and Cleve.
Belgium in Gaul, who all in manner carry the names of those cities and States
out of which they came thither, and after they had warred, there remained. For
there were in Britain like as also in Gaul, people named Belgae, Atrebatii,
Parisi, Cenomanni, etc. Semblably Tacitus, Generally, quoth he, if a man
consider all circumstances, it is most likely that the Gauls being
neighbors, peopled the land of Britain next unto them. Yea and Beda, one that
among all our writers favors the truth, At the first, says he, this Island
had those Britains only to inhabit it (from whom also it took the name) who
by report, having sailed out from the tract of Armorica into Britain,
challenged unto themselves the South coasts thereof. Now, he calls the tract
of Armorica, the sea coasts of France.
Gaul, opposite unto our Island. This also seems to make for our purpose,
that Caesar reports, How Divitiacus the Gaul even in his remembrance, held a
good part both of Gaul and also of Britannie under his government; Britains
in Gaul.
as also, (that which is of greatest moment) Pliny among the maritime people,
just over against Britain, near unto the County of Bullen, reckoned the
Britannos, yet in some Copies of Pliny, we read Briannos.
Britains: like as Dionysius after a more ancient writer than he, in these
verses, (...)
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...).
Word for word thus: And verily, that utmost point and angle of this Of Europe.
part,
Inhabit the Iberians, people of haughty heart:
Near Gebraltar, at Hercules his pillars called of old,
Turning up the maine in length, what way the current cold
Of Northern Ocean with strong tides does interflow and swell,
Where Britains, and those fair white folk, the martial Germans dwell.
For these words [ where Britaines] seem to have respect unto those other, [
Turning upon the maine in length] and Eustathius, who did set forth his
Commentaries upon this author, understands it of the Britons in Gaul, in
these words, (...), that is, And of these Britons, the Isles of Britain over
against them took their denomination. Howbeit, Avienus and Stephen in his
book of Cities, Religion.
are of a contrary mind. Moreover the same Religion was of both people
observed; Among the Britains, says Tacitus, there is to be seen in their
ceremonies and superstitious persuasions an apparent conformity with the
Gauls. The Gauls, quoth Solinus, after a detestable manner of sacred rites,
not to the honor but rather to the injury of religion, offered man's flesh in
their sacrifices. That the Britains did the very same, Dio Cassius beside
others reports in his Nero. Both Nations also had their Druidae, as Caesar
and Tacitus very sufficient writers do witness. Concerning which Druidae, let
not the Reader think much to run over this whole passage out of Caesar.
Druidae.
The Druidae are present at all Divine service. The overseers they be of
public and private sacrifices, the interpretours also of their religious rites
and ceremonies. To these a great number of young men do flock for to be
taught, and those do they highly esteem and honor. For lightly they decide
and determine all controversies, as well public as private: And in case any
heinous fact be committed, if there be a murder or manslaughter, if
variance arise about inheritance, if strife about the bounds of lands, they in
their discretion judge of the matter; they appoint rewards, they award
penalties, and punishments, If any either private person, or body politic
stand not to their Decree, they put them by all sacrifices, as excommunicate.
And this among them is the most grievous punishment. They that be thus
interdicted, are reckoned as godless and most wicked persons: All men decline
from them, they avoid both meeting and talking with them for fear of taking
harm by contagion from them. Neither have they the benefits of Law though they
request it, nor be capable of any office, though they sue for it. Moreover, of
all these Druides there is one President, who has the greatest authority
among them. When he is dead, look who excels the rest in worth and
dignity, he succeeds him: But if there be many of equal estimation, chosen
there is one by the voices of the Druides. Sometimes also they fall together by
the ears, and take arms about this place of precedencie. These Druides at one
certain time of the year hold a solemn Session within a consecrated place,
in the marches of the About Chartres.
Carnutes, a country held to be the middle of all France. Hither resort as
unto the term from all parts, as many as have any controversies or suits in
law: and to their judgments and decrees they yield obedience. Their learning
and profession is thought to have been first found and devised in Britain,
and so from thence translated into France: and now also in these days they
that desire more exact knowledge thereof, The Doctrine of the Druida^ found in
Britain.
go thither for the most part, to be instructed therein. The Druides are wont
to be freed from warfare: neither with the rest pay they tribute. Immunitie
they have in exemption, as from war-service, so from all other charges
whatsoever. Thus, many there be who being excited with so great rewards, and
of their own accord meet together at School for to learn, and are thither
sent by their kinsfolk, friends and parents. There by report, they learn by
rote a great number of verses. And so they continue still scholars for
certain years together; neither do they think it lawful to commit what
they learn to writing; whereas otherwise in every thing almost, in public
also and private dealings, they use Greek letters. This order they have taken,
I suppose, for two reasons: because they would not have their doctrine
divulged, nor their scholars by trusting to their written books, to neglect
their own memory a thing incident lightly to most scholars; who presuming
upon the help of writings, useless diligence in learning without book, and
as little in exercising their memory. This one point principally they are
desirous to persuade their scholars, That our souls are immortal, and after
death pass out of one man into another; and by this means they suppose men,
setting behind them all fear of death, are most of all stirred up unto virtue.
Furthermore, concerning the stars and their motion, touching the greatness
of heaven and earth, of the Nature of things, of the power and might of the
immortal Gods, much dispute they make, and as many precepts they give to
youth. Whereupon Lucan in this wise speaks unto them: Et vos barbaricos
ritus, moremque sinistrum
Sacrorum, Druidae, positis repetistis ab armis.
Solis nosse Deos and Caeli sydera vobis
Aut solis nescire datum. Nemora alta remotis
Incolitis lucis. Vobis autoribus, umbras
Non tacitas Erebi seeds, Ditisque profundi
Pallida regna petunt, regit idem spiritus artus
Orb alio: longae, canitis si cognita, vitae
Mors media est. Certe, populi quos despicit Arctos,
Foelices errore suo, quos, ille timorum
Maximus, haud urget laethi metus: inde ruendi
Inferrum men's prona viris, animaeque capaces
Mortis: and ignavum est rediturae parcere vitae.
Ye Priests also hight Druidae, your sacrifices leaw'd
And barbarous rites, which were forlet in wars surceasse, renewed.
Ye only know, or ye alone know not the gods above
And heavenly wights. Among high trees in groves remote, ye love
To dwell, and teach that souls of men their bodies parted fro,
Pass not to silent Erebus where Pluto reign's below,
Among the pale and grisly ghosts: but spirit still the same
Rul's limbs and joints in other world: And death (if that ye frame
Your precepts grounded sure on truth and knowledge) is no more,
Than middle point twixt future life and that which went before.
Certes those Northern people are right happy; whom we see
Persuaded of such vain conceits, wherein they nuzzeled be.
No fear of death which men most dread, can once their stomachs dant,
This makes them so resolute, so bold and valiant:
Upon the pike and sword they run, they pass not to be slain;
It Is cowardice to spare that life, which will return again.
By what name soever these were known to their Celts or Britains, An Oak also
in the British or Welsh tongue is called Derw.
it may seem that this name of Druides came from a Greek primitive head, to
wit, (...), that is, an Oak, for that they held nothing more sacred than the
Misselto of the Oak; whereupon Ovid writes thus: Adviscum Druidae, Druidae,
cantare solebant.
To Misselto go Druidae, go Druidae, they did sing.
as who commonly dwelt within Oke-groves, and celebrated no sacrifice and
divine service without the branches and leaves thereof. Lib. 16. cap. 4.
But this, will Pliny more amply declare in these words of his: The Druidae
(for so they call their Diviners, Wisemen and estate of Clergy) esteem
nothing in the world more sacred then Misselto, and the tree whereupon it
grows, so it be an Oak. Now this you must take by the way; These Priests or
Clergy men choose of purpose such groves for their divine service, as stood
only upon Oaks: Nay they solemnize no sacrifice, nor celebrate any sacred
ceremonies without branches and leaves thereof: so as they may seem well
enough to be thereupon named Dryidae in Greek. And in very deed, whatsoever
they find growing to that tree, beside the own fruit, they esteem it as a
gift sent from heaven, and a sure sign, that the God himself whom they serve,
has chosen that peculiar tree. And no marvel; for Misselto is passing geason,
and hard to be found upon the Oak: But when they meet with it, they gather it
very devoutly, and with many ceremonies. First, they principally observe that
the Moon be just six days old: for upon that day begin they their months
and new years, yea and their several ages, which have their revolutions every
thirty years, because she is thought then to be of great power and force
sufficient, and is not come to her half light or end of her first quarter. It
they call in their Language, All-heale, [for they have an opinion, that it
heals all maladies whatsoever.] Now when they are about to gather it, after
they have duly prepared their sacrifices and festival cheer under the said
tree, they bring thither two young bullocks milke-white, whose horns are then
and not before bound up. This done, the Priest arraied in a surplise or white
vesture, climeth the tree, and with a golden bill cutteth off [the Misselto]
and they beneath receive the same in a white soldiers cassock. Then fall they
to kill the beasts aforesaid for sacrifice, mumbling many oraisons and praying,
That it would please God to bless this gift of his, to their good unto whom
he had vouchsafed to give it. Now this conceit they have of Misselto thus
gathered, that what living creature soever, otherwise barren, drinks thereof,
it will presently thereupon become fruitful; also that it is a sovereign
counterpoison and remedy against all venom. So superstitious are people
oftentimes in such frivolous and foolish toies as these. Heereto accords well
that Diodorus Siculus in the same sense has termed these Priests of the Gauls
(...), Saronidae.
which word, (as they all know, who have skill in the Greek tongue, betokens
Oaks. And Maximus Tyrius writes thus of the Celts, i. the Gauls; That they
worship Jupiter, whose symbol or sign, it the highest Oak. Furthermore, it
may seem to proceed from these Druides, that our Saxons (as we read in
Alfricus) called a Diviner or wise man in their language, Dry.
Dry. Of these if you be willing to learn more, I refer you to Mela,
Lactantius, Eusebius De Praeparatione Evangelica, and the Comedy Aulularia of
Pseudo-Plautus.

Bar^^
The Frenchmen or Gauls, had likewise among their religious persons, the Bardi,
who to the tune of the Harp sung Dities in verse, containing the famous
exploits of brave and noble men. From whence it is that the same Lucan before
cited speaks thus unto them. Vos quoque qui fortes animas, belloque peremptas,
Laudibus in longum, vates, dimittitis avum,
Plurima securi fudistis carmina, Bardi.
And ye the Poets, Bardi called, who knights redoubted prise
Praise-worthie most, that died in the field, and them do eternise;
Poured forth now many a verse in song, and that in careless wise.
And even those also do our Welchmen.
Britans still at this day term by the very same name: For them they call
Bard, who besides the exercise of that function, do especially addict
themselves to the skill of Heraldry, and the drawing of Pedigrees. But whether
the Britains in like manner as the Gauls, believed, That they were descended
from Pluto, we have no record to lead us. Whereas the Gauls did for that That
is, their descent from Pluto.
cause, determine and end all their spaces of times, by reckoning nights and
not days, so as the day might in order follow the night, the very same have
our Britans observed. For, that which the Latins call Septimana, and two
Septimanae, they term with-nos, that is, eight nights, and Pimthec-nos, that
is, fifteen nights.

Likewise both peoples seem to have framed unto themselves, Their Republique
or common wealth.
one and the same form of Common weal and government. For, ruled they were
not by one man's scepter: but right as Gaul, so Britain also had many Kings.
And even as the Gauls in cases of greater weight and danger called an assembly
of the whole nation and elected one chief governor: so did the Britains
also, as it may be gathered out of these words of Caesar, The severaignty of
command, and managing the war, was by a common Counsel granted to
Cassibelinus.
Cassivelaunus.

Neither were these two Nations unlike in manners, customs and ordinances. For
to let this pass, Their Manners.
that both of them were most warlike, and exceedingly given to slaughter:
certain it is, that in joining of battles, and adventuring of dangers, they
were one as forward as the other: as may appear by Strabo, Tacitus, Dio,
Herodian and others. For manners and conditions, says Strabo, the Britans are
in part like to the Gauls: and anon he adds, In fight for the most part they
be fierce and cruel like unto certain Gauls. And Tacitus according with him,
The Britans, says he, that were not vanquished by the Romans, remain such as
the ancient Gauls were. And in another place, Next neighbors to the Gauls and
like unto them be the Britains.

That the Britains fought, armed after the Gaulish fashion, Mela does report.
The Britains in their wars use a number of Chariots as Strabo writes, like as
some of the Gauls.

The manner was of the one people and the other, in time of war to range
their battles apart by several nations, that the distinct valor of them both
might more evidently appear. That the Gauls practiced this, Caesar witnesses
in these words: The Gauls being divided by their sundry cities and states kept
the fourds and passages. Which also Tacitus affirms of the Britains in the
battle of Carattacus, The nations stood by troops and companies before the
fortifications.

The Gauls, says Strabo, were of a docible wit, and apt to learn: as also the
Britains, whose wits Agricola in Tacitus preferred before the stude^ts of
Gaul, as being now curious to attain the eloquence of the Roman language,
whereas they lately rejected the language.

The Gauls, Strabo reports to have been of an ingenuous nature and single
hearted: which Tacitus seems to note and observe in the Britans, writing that
they are ready and willing to endure levies of men and money, and all other
burdens imposed by the Empire, if wrongful insolences herein be forborne.

Caesar reports, that the Gauls upon an unconstant and variable mind that
they carried, loved evermore change and alteration in the government: The
Britains likewise, says Tacitus, were variable, given to factions and siding.
By means of this inconstancy of the Gauls, which Caesar more mildly calls
an Infirmity, so great credulity crept into their minds, that the credulity
of the Gauls grew to be a proverb, and one Poet has written thus thereof: Et
tumidus Galla credulitate fruar:
And full of this conceit will I
Make use of Gauls Credulity.
Neither have our Britans as yet therein degenerated from them, who most
readily give ear even to Old wives tales.
Milesian fables, and either through superstitious hope or like fear do
presently believe most foolish prophesies.

We read in Strabo, that the Gauls grieved exceedingly and took to heart the
abuse which they saw done unto their kindred. That there is the same Sympathy
and fellow feeling in our Britans above all other nations, it is better known
than can be uttered, and rife in every man's mouth.

The Gauls, as Caesar records, according as every one excelled others in
noble birth and wealthy estate, so kept they about them a greater train of
servants and dependants, whom they called Ambacti: Ambacti.
which was the only grace, countenance, and port they carried. Neither know
our British Noblemen or gentry of Wales at this day, any other show of
reputation: From whom, as it is thought, the English have learned to lead
after them so great a retinue of followers and serving men: in which thing they
have not long since out-gone all other in Europe.

That the British buildings were in every respect suitable with those in Gaul,
and compassed round about with woods, Caesar and Strabo do show unto us.

The Gauls, as witnesses Strabo, ware chains of gold, about their necks: and
Bunduica the British Lady, says Xiphilinus, had likewise a golden chain, and
was clad in a garment of sundry colors. And where at this day is that ornament
more in use than in this Isle and among our Britans?

That Britans and Gauls both, adorned their middle finger with a ring Pliny
does report.

The same Strabo makes mention of the Gauls, that they nourished the bush of
their heads; and Caesar testifies that the Britans went with long hair.

It appears in many authors, that the Gauls used certain garments which in
their mother tongue they termed Brachae; Brachae.
that these were also common to our Britains, this verse of Martial does
prove; Quam veteres Brachae Britonis pauperis:
Than Brachae old of Briton poor.
I pass over that which Silius Italicus writes of the Gauls: Quinetiam
ingenio fluxi, sed prima feroces,
Vaniloquum Celtae genus, ac mutabile mentis.
The Gauls though fierce at first, soon yield and hold not out, by kind;
A nation given to vanity of words and change of mind.
Because these qualities are common to most nations, I might add hereto other
particulars, wherein these people have jumped just together: but I fear me
lest malicious evill-willers would wrest them to the detraction and slander of
the said nations. Besides, that saying pleases me exceeding well, All in a
mean and within measure: and the argument perhaps which is drawn from common
manners, may seem not of the greatest validity.

Language.
Now are we come to the language, in which lies the maine strength of this
disputation and the surest proof of peoples original. For no man, I hope,
will deny, that they which join in community of language, concurred also in
one and the same original. And if all the histories that ever were had
miscarried and perished; if no writer had recorded, that we Englishmen are
descended from Germans, the true and natural Scots from the Irish, the Britons
of Armorica in France from our Britans; the society of their tongues would
easily confirm the same: yea and much more easily, than the authority of most
sufficient Historiographers. If therefore I shall prove, that the ancient Gauls
and our Britans used one and the self same language, then the very truth will
of force drive us to confess, that they had also the same beginning. Neither
pass I what Caesar has written, that the Gauls were of diverse languages:
since that Strabo says, They differed only in dialect. They did not all, quoth
he, every where use the same tongue, but somewhat, little though it were, it
varied. But that the language of the old Gauls was all one with the British
(unless happily in variety of dialect), Caesar himself does show, writing that
the manner was of the French or Gauls who desired further knowledge in the
discipline and learning of the Druides, to go over into Britain unto our
Druidae. Now seeing that they had no use of books, it stands to good reason,
that in teaching they spoke the same tongue that the Gauls did. Which Cornelius
Tacitus more plainly affirms; the British speech, says he, and the French
or Gaulish differ not much. Whence it is that Beatus Rhenanus, Gesner,
Hottoman, Peter Daniel, Picardus, and all others that have subscribed and done
honor to venerable antiquity, are all become of this opinion: except some
few who will have the Gauls to have spoken the German language. I have made
use in these words of William Salisburies Glossarie, and another old Manuscript.
But least any man herein should cast dust in our eyes, let us out of authors
gather and confer as many words as we can out of the old Gauls, as it were
ship-planks caught up from a shipwreck (seeing that the said tongue is now
even drowned under the waves of oblivion.) For very many words we shall see not
hardly nor violently strained, but passing easily, and in manner without any
wresting, to agree with our British, both in sound and sense.

Ausonius in this verse of his, Divona.
writing of a fountain at Bordeaux, Divona Seltarum lingua fons addite Divis:
Thou fountain added to the Gods in Gaulish Divona hight.
witnesses, that Divona in the French language signifies, Gods fountain. Now
do our Britains call God, That is* Welchmen.
Dyw, and a Fountain, Vonan: of which is compounded Divonan, and by the Latin
Analogy, and for the verse sake, Divona.

That Jupiter, Tarani^.
whom the Greeks, of Thunder call (...), and the Latins Tonans, that is,
Thunderer was worshipped of the Gauls under the name of Taranis, there be
writers, not a few that have reported. But Taran with the Britains betokens
Thunder. In which signification the Germans seem to have named Jupiter,
Thonder: For Jupiters day or Thursday, they call Thonderdach, which is as much,
as The Thunderers day.

The Gauls had another God, Hesus.
by Lucane named Hesus, and by Lactantius Heus, whom also the Author of Queroli
termed Annubis latrans, that is, Barking Annubis; for that, painted he was in
the form of a Dog: and Huad with our welsh Britains betokens a Dog.

Most certain it is that the Gauls worshipped Mercury under the name of
Teutates, Teutates.
as the Inventors of Arts, and guide of their journeys: And Diw Taith in the
British or Welsh tongue, is as much as the God of Traveling: And that Plato in
his Phaedrus and Philebus calls Mercury Theut, I am not ignorant. Howbeit I
know there be some, who will have Teutates to be the same that the Germans
called Tuisco in Tacitus, Tewsday (...) Tuisday.
and is all one with Mars; as also that we the offspring of Germans name
thereupon Mars day, Tuisday. Concerning these three Gods of the Gauls, take
with you, Lib. 1.
if you please, these three verses of Lucane, Et quibus immitis placatur
sanguine diro
Teutates, horrensque feris altaribus Hesus,
Et Taranis Scythicae non mitior ara Dianae.
And they that use with cursed blood their Idol-gods to please,
Teutates fell, and Hesus grim, whom naught else may appease
But sacrifice of humane flesh: and Taranis likewise,
Worshipped as cursed Diana is, just after Scythicke guise.


That the foul Spirits named Incubi, Dusii.
were of the Gauls termed Dusii, because they practice that filthy uncleanness
of theirs continually, Saint Augustine and Isidorus both do testify: But that
which is continual and daily, the Britains still do express by the word Duth.

Pomponius Mela writes, That the religious women attending upon a certain
God, whom the Gauls worshipped, counted holy votaries of perpetual virginity,
were called of the Gauls, Len^^
Senae, or Lenae rather I would read if I durst. For, such consecrated Virgins,
whom now folk name Nuns, the Britans, as it is an old Glossarie, termed
Leanes: whence a most ancient Nunnery, Lean-minister, now called Lemster, drew
the name.

The Gauls, says Polybius, in their own tongue called their mercenarie
soldiers Gaessatae: Gaessatae.
and at this day the Welsh-Britains do call their hired servants Guessin.

Gessi.
Valiant men were, as Servius says, named of the Gauls Gessi: and Guassdewr
among the Britains imports the same that in Latin, Vir fortis and strenuus,
that is, a valorous and hardy man.

Gessum.
Hitherto may be referred Gessum, which was a weapon proper to the Gauls, as
Pilum to the Romans, and Framea to the Germans. But of this, anon.

Caterva.
As Phalanx was properly the Macedonians Legion, so was Caterva peculiar to the
Gauls, as we may see in Vegetius. Neither is this word grown out of use with
the Britains, who use to call a troop Caturfa, and war Kad, and the strength
of war which lies in a Legion Kaderne, yea and Caterna, as is found in some
Copies of Vegetius.

Cateia.
To this Kad, may well be reduced Cateia, which was a kind of warlike weapon
among the Gauls, as Isidorus reports.

Gessa.
Gessa, a Gaulish weapon, Servius does interpret to be a man's spear, whereunto
the British Cethilou seems to come near, which Ninnius expounds to be as
much as Stakes burnt at the end, and a warlike seed or generation.

The Gauls whom Brennus marched with into Greece, named in their own language
that order of Horse-fight which consists of three horses [in a ranke] as
says Pausanias, Trimarcia.
Trimarcia: For a horse they called Marca: which in that very signification is
mere and British. For Tri signifies three, and March an horse.

Pausanias in the same book records, that the Gauls termed their own
countryshields Thireos: Thireos.
which even to this day the Britans name Tarian.

Caesar has in his Journals or Day-bookes written, as Servius says, That he in
Gaul being caught up of the enemy, and armed as he was carried upon his horse
back, one of his enemies that knew him chanced to meet him, and insulting
over him said, Cedos Caesar: Cetos.
which in the Gauls tongue is as much as Let go Caesar: now, among the Britans
Geduch betokens as much.

Rheda.
Rheda, a Gaulish word, is of the same signification, says Quintilian, that
Caruta, that is, a chariot, or wagon, among the Latins. This word the British
tongue does not now acknowledge: howbeit, that it has been in use among the
Britans, Rhediad for a course, Rhediad.
Rheder to run, and Rhedecfa a race, do plainly show: which words that they
spring from the same stock, no man need to make doubt. And what absurdity
were it from hence to derive Eporedia, a City of the Salassians, which Pliny
writes, took that name of Horse-breakers. Eporedia.


Another kind of wagon a chariot there was, used of both these people, which
by one name they called Covinus, Covinus.
and the driver Covinarius. And albeit this word together with that kind of
wagon it self be quite grown out of use, yet the primitive thereof, as I may
so say, remains still among the Britains: in whose language the word Cowain
signifies to carry or ride in a wagon.

Essedum.
Essendum likewise was a Gaulish wagon or chariot rather, meet for the wars:
which together with Caesar, Propertius attributes to the Britans in this verse,
Essedacaelatis siste Britanna jugis.
Stay there your British charriots with yokes so fair engrav'n.


Circius.
Circius is a wind by name passing well known, unto which Augustus Caesar both
vowed and also built a temple in Gallia. That the word is Gaulish, Phavori^us a
Gaulois borne declares in Agellius. Our Gauls, says he, call the wind blowing
out of their land, and which they find to be most fell and boisterous, by the
name of Circius, of the whirling and whistling, I suppose, that it makes. Of
all winds this is known to be most blustering and violent: now, Cyrch, with the
Britans betokens force and violence, as may be seen in their Letany.

Penninum.
The Pennine Alps, which Caesar calls the highest Alps, had this name
imposed upon them, as Livie writes, not of Annibal Poenus, that is the
Carthaginian, but of that Hill which with the highest top among the Alps the
Mountainers of Gaul consecrated and named Penninus. But Pen with the Britans
even in these days signifies the tops of hills: whence the highest mountains
that we have, to wit, Pen-monmaur, Pendle, Pen Pencoh-cloud, and Pennigent gat
their names. Neither have the high mountains Apennini in Italy their name from
ought else. Apenninus.


The cities and States of Gaul coasting upon the Ocean, were called, as Caesar
writes, Armorica.
after the custom of the Gauls,

Aremoricae: with whom the Britans accord in the same name for the same thing.
For, with them Ar-more, is as much as by the sea, or upon the sea: And in the
very same sense Strabo names them in Greek (...)

In the reign of Dioclesian the Emperor, Bauchadae.
the rural people in Gaul made a commotion. And to the crew of that faction
of theirs they gave the name Baucadae. And among the Britans, Swineheards and
country gnoffs, be called Beichiad.

The inborne thieves of the land, Vargae. Lib. 4. Epist. 6.
the Gauls, says Sidonius, named Vargae: And I have found in the Glossarie of
the Cathedral Church of Lhandaff, that thieves in the British tongue were in
old time known by the name of Veriad.

The Allobrogae, Allobroges.
says that ancient and excellent Scholiast upon Iuvenal, were so named,
because Brogae in French signifies a land or Territory, and Alla, another: As
one would say, Translated out of another place. But Bro in British, is a region
or country, and Allan, without, or external: so that the Etymology in both
tongues, holds very well.

There is an herb like to Plantain called in Gaul Glastrum, says Pliny,
wherewith the Britans died and colored themselves, Glastum. Woad.
as writers testify. This is the herb which we term Woad, and it gives a
blew color: which color at this day, the Britans term Glass. Isatis.
Vi^rum, an herb.

Lutteum in Caesar.

Pomponius Mela corrected.


This was the Greeks Isatis, by the testimony of Pliny, and the Diars, vitrum,
by the authority of Oribasius. Whereby, Pomponius Mela may easily be corrected,
if in stead of Ultro, you put Vitro: where he says thus, Britanni incertum ob
decorem, an ob quid aliud, ultro corpora infecti, that is, whether the Britans
died their bodies with woad for a beautiful show, or in some other respect, it
is uncertain.

The Gallathians who spoke the same language, as S. Hierome witnesses, that
the ancient Gauls did, Co^cus.
had a little shrub called Coccus; of which that deep red skarlet color was
made: and this very color the Britans usually name Coco.

That Brachae were garments common to French and Britains we have showed
before. Brachae.
Diodorus Siculus calls such, unshorne, or undressed and of sundry colors.
And even now adays the Britans term foul and ragged clothes, Brati.

If Laina was an old Gaulish word, Lainae.
as Strabo seems to tell us, when he writes thus, The Gauls weave them
cassocks of thickened wool which they call Lainas; the Britans are not gone far
from them, who in their tongue name wool Glawn.

Bardus in the Gauls tongue signifies a Singer, Bardus.
Festus Pompeius is mine author: and this is a mere British word.

Bardocucullus, Bardocucullu^.
as we are taught out of Martial and others, was the cloak that the Gaulish
Bardi woore. And like as Bard, so the other part also of the foresaid word,
remains whole among the Britans, who call such a cloak, Cucull.

Gaul, Brance.
says Pliny, yielded a kind of Corn of their own, which they called
Brance, and we Sandalum, a grain of the finest and neatest sort. Among the
Britans likewise, meal of the whitest grain is named Guineth Urane.

The herb which the Greeks, of five leaves do call Pentaphyllon, was named
of the Gauls Pempedula, Pempedula.
as shows Apuleius. Now, Pymp in British, is five, and Deilen, a leaf.

As the Gauls by Pymp meant the number of five, so by Petor, four, as we
learn out of Festus: Petoritum.
who shows, that Petoritum was a chariot or wagon of the Gauls, so called of
four wheels: and this word Pedwar in the British tongue signifies four.

Among wooden instruments, Guvia.
Canterium, in English a Leaver, was among the Gauls called Guvia, as Isidorus
writes: and now the same in the British language, is named Gwif.

Betulla, Betulla.
which we call Byrch, Pliny names a Gaulish tree. He would if he lived
now call it the British tree. For it grows most plentifully in Britain, and
in the British tongue is named Bedw.

Wine delayed with water, as we read in Athens, the Gauls called Dercoma: and
among the Britans, Dercoma.
Dwr, betokens water.

And even so, (not to prosecute all that may be said:) in Dioscorides, the
herb Fern, Rati^.
called in Latin Filix, and of the old Gauls, Ratis, is in the British tongue
termed Redin. Scovies.
The Elder tree, in Latin Sambucus, in the old Gaulish Scovies, is in British,
Iscaw. Vetonica.
The herb in Italy, Seratula, in old Gaulish, Vetonica, the Britans and we
do call Betany. That which in Pliny the Latins name Terrae adeps, that is,
the fat of the ground, Marga.
the Gauls Marga, is of the Britans called Marle. The white or bright marle,
named of the Latins Candida Marga, Gliscomarga.
of the Gauls Gliscomarga, might of the Britans be termed Gluismarl: For
Gluys, with them is as much as Bright or shining. A three-footed stool, which
the Latins name Sellula Tripes: the Gauls, as we read in Sulpitius Severus,
Tripetia.
Tripetia, is among the Britans termed Tribet. That which the Latins mean by
Centum pedes, Candetum.
that is, a hundred foot, the Gauls in Columella understand by Candetum, and
the Britans by Cantroed. A Birds bill, in Latin Avis rostrum: the Gauls,
Becco.
as we read in Suetonius, called Becco, and the Britans name Pic.

Galba.
Neither should I be as fancy-full as Goropius, if I reduced Suetonius his
Galba, which signifies exceeding fat, Bulga.
to the British word Galuus, that betokens, passing big: or Bulga in Valerius
Flaccus for a leather Budget, Soldurij.
unto the British Butsiet: or the Soldurij in Caesar, put for men Vowing to die
and live one with another.

Planarat. Taxea. Sithum. Cervisia. Ale, a drink.


Devoted, unto the Britans Sowdiws: or Pliny his Planarat, for a plough, unto
Arat, which in the British tongue signifies a plough: or Isidorus his Taxea
for Lard, unto the Britans Tew, or Diodorus Siculus his drink called Zithum,
unto their Sider, or Cervisia, unto Keirch, that is, Otes, whereof the Britans
in many places make that drink (or rather to Cwrwf) which we in English term
Ale.

That all these were the ancient words of the ancient Gauls, appears
evidently out of those Authors; and you see how fitly they for the most part
agree and accord as it were in consent with our British words, in sound and
sense both.

The Terminations or Ends of places Names.
Hereunto thus much moreover may be added, that seeing the ancient names of
places end with both people in the same termination, to wit, in Dunum, Briva,
Ritum; Durum, Magus, etc. it may be gathered that these were not diverse
nations. And even from hence verily a sound reason may be drawn, that we
Englishmen are sprung from the Germans, for that the later and more modern
names of our towns end in Burrow, Berry, Ham, Steed, Ford, Thorp, and Which,
which carry a just and equal correspondence unto the terminations of the
Dutch towns; Burg, Berg, Heim, Stadt, Furdt, Dorp, and Wic.

Again, the reason of certain old Gaulish words may be so fitly given out of
our British tongue, the property and nature of the thing agreeing also
thereunto, that of necessity we must confess, either they were names imposed
by the Britans, or else the Britans s^ake French. But let it suffice to allege
one or two for all.

The third part of Gaul, says Caesar, they inhabit, who in their own
language be named Celtae, (...).
and in ours Galli, but of the Greeks Callathae. But whence they were called
Celtae and Gallathae the best learned of all the French, could never as yet
tell: But let them consider and see, whether it come not of the British word
Gualt, which even yet among the Britans betokens the hair or bush of the
head, as also Gualtoc, that signifies Comata, Lipsius, de Pronunti^tione. page
96.
that is, with long hair: whereof it may seem that Celtica, Gallathae, and
Galli, are terms mollified by variety of pronuntiation. Now that the Celtae
were called Comati, of their long hair which studiously they cherished, all
learned men do jointly grant: and as for the letters, C. and K. Q. and G. how
should one (considering their force and native sound) put a difference between
them?

That the famous and noble river Garumna.
Carunne in France carries a swelling stream, and as if the waves were angry
and chased, whereupon Poets name it with these attributes, Validus, Aequoreus,
and Rapidus Garumna, that is, the strong, sealike, and swift Garumna, it is so
well known as nothing more: And all that does Garw in the British tongue
import.

The river Arar.
Arar passes mavelous gently, so as by the eye uneth it can be discerned
which way the stream goes, whereupon the Poets give these Epithets unto it,
Araris tardior, and Lentus Arar, that is, Slow and Still Arar. But Ara with the
Britans betokens Still and Slow.

Rhodanus, Rhodanus. Rhos^e.
into which Arar does fall, runs down amain with an exceeding swift, and
violent current: and therefore it is termed, Incitus, Celer, and Praeceps, that
is, swift, quick, running headlong: Which name, Rhodanus, disagreeth not much
from the British Rhedec, that signifies a speediness in running.

That the Hills Montagnes de avergne or Cevennae.
Gebennae run out far into Gaul, Gebennae.
in manner of a long continued ridge, Strabo and others do make mention. And
that Keve^ among our Britains sounds as much as the back or ridge of an
Hill, appears by the British Dictionarie: and I my self have seen a long
chain of hills in Yorke-shire, which the Inhabitants there do call the Kivin.

Considering that stones were in old time errected in Gaul by the high ways
side, at the distance just of every Mile and half.
thousand and five hundred paces: see it also that the Gaul-like Leuca, or
League, contains, as Jornandes writes, just so many paces; and Leach in the
British tongue betokens a Stone, Leuca.
I would have the learned Frenchmen say, whether the said Leuca took not that
name thereof. About the Sea side of that part of France, which was called
Narbonensis, where (as the fabulous report goes) Hercules and Albion fought
together, there lie so many stones every where all abroad, that a man would
verily think it had rained stones there: whereupon writers name it, Stony
Strond, or stony field.
the Stony Strond, and stony field: The French in these days call it Le
Craux. And yet they know not the reason of this name. But Stones in the British
tongue, be termed Craig.

They that heretofore inhabited the maritime tract of Gaul, which is next unto
us, Morini.
were in their own language called Morini: and seeing that the Sea is named
Mor in British, it seems that thereupon they were so termed. For the Britans
call such as dwell upon the Sea coast Morinwyr: like as Aremorica betokens
long since in Gaulish, and now in British, By the Sea side.

Thus Arelate a most famous city of Gaul, Arles. Ar^late.
seated in a moist and waterie soil, may seem to have taken that name of the
very site thereof: For Ar in British signifies Upon, and Laith, Moisture,

Vxellodunum, Cadena^ in Quercy or Yooldun.
says Caesar, was a town having on every side a steep access unto it, and
situate upon an high Hill. But Vchell among the Britains is as much as steep
or lofty, Vxellodunum. Dunum.
and Dunum with the ancient Gauls, betokens a high place or hill: as
Plutarch has taught us out of Clitiphon, in his book of Rivers: and the same
was also in use among the old Britains.

The Promontorie That is, an Harp.
Citharistes, Cytharistes.
Pliny places in Gaul near unto Marsiles, where now is seen the town
Tolon: but if you ask our Welsh Britains, what is Cythara, in their language,
they will tell you by and by Telen.

Again, that no doubt may herein be left behind, seeing it is evident that
the late French tongue is come from the Latin and Germane, yet so as therein
nevertheless there remain very many words still of the old Language: I have
heard of those that be skillful in both tongues, that very many of those French
words, which cannot be reduced, either to the Latin or German Original (and
therefore may be thought of the old Gallique) do come as near unto the
British as is possible. As for example, the French men at this day use Guerir,
and the Britans Guerif for To heal. The French say Guaine, the Britans Gwain,
for a sheath: The French, Derechef, the Britains Derchefu, for again: The
French Camur, the Britains Came, for crooked: the French Bataeu, the Britains
Bad, for a Boad: the French Gourmand, for an over-great-eater, the Britans
Gormod, for Overmuch: the French Baston, the Britans Pastwn, for a staff or
cudgill: the French Accabler, the Britans Cablu, for to oppress: the French
Haure, the Britans Aber, for an Haven: and Comb is still used of both the
nations for a Valley. There are of this sort very many more, which happily the
Reader may distaste, although they serve especially for this purpose now in
hand.

But whereas Tacitus writes, that the people of the Aestii, used the fashions
and habit of the Suevians, but in language came nearer to the Britans, that
makes nothing against my Assertion. For the Languages most remote, in some
points agree. And of late A^gerius Busbequius, Epist. 4.
Embabssadour from the Emperor to the great Turk, has observed many Dutch
and English words in the Biland Ta^rica Chersonessus. Little Tartaria or
Perocopsca.


Hereupon it may be concluded, that the ancient Gauls Inhabitants of the
country now named France, and Britains of this Isle spoke one and the same
language: and by necessary consequence the original of the Britains is to be
reduced unto the Gauls. For we must confess, as I said before, that France or
Gaul was peopled before Britain, as lying nearer unto Armenia: and as it was
plentiful in corn, so, by the testimony of Strabo, more fruitful of men:
Seeing also, that the Gauls sent out and planted their colonies all abroad, in
Italy, Spain, Germany, Thracia and A^ia: much more then by all reason and
congruitie in Britan so near, and no less plenteous than the rest. Neither
can it choose but make for the Britains reputation even in the highest degree,
to have derived their beginning from the ancient Gauls, who in martial
prowess have surpassed all others: with whom the Romans for many years
maintained war, not about superiority in glory, but for the very main chance
of life and living: and who (to use the Poets words rather than mine own) Per
omnem
Invecti Europam, quasi grando Aquilone vel Austro
Importata, gravi passim sonnere tumultu.
Scit Romanus ad huc, and quam Tarpeia videtis
Arx attolentem caput illo in monte superbum;
Pannones, Aemathii norunt, scit Delphica rupes:
Invasions made all Europe through; and like some storm uncouth
Of sudden hail, brought in by force of wind from North or South,
A foul stir kept, with hideous noise, what way thy ever went.
The Romans and their stately Tower, which raised with steep ascent
On Tarpie cliffe does mount aloft, full well this yet do know
Pannonians, Aemathians eke, with Delphick rock also.
And a little after Intravere Asiae fines: prope littora Ponti
In gentem crevere novam, quaetenditur usque
Ad juga Pamphilium, Garamantica sydera contra,
Inter Cappadoces posita and Bythinica regna:
They entered then the Asian bounds, near Pontus shore they go,
And grew there to a nation new, extending close unto
Pamphylian hills, where opposite the Garamants are seen,
Seated the Cappadocians and Bithyne realm between.
Neither must we here pass over in silence those reasons which others have
alleged to prove the Britans first rising from the Gauls. George Buc, a man
both well descended and well learned, observes out of Mekercus, that the
Germans call a French man Wallon: And when the Saxons of Germany came hither,
and heard the Britains speak Gaul-like, they termed them Walli; that is,
Galli, that is to say, Gauls. Buchananus says moreover, that [ Walch] does
not simply among the Germans signify a stranger, but rather in a better sense,
a Gaul. And withal, he notes thus much, that the French at this day do name
that country Galls, which we call Wales: also, that the ancient Scots divided
all the British nations into Gaol, and Galle, that is to say, after his
Interpretation, into the Gallaeci and the Galli.

But if our Britans will needs be descended from the Trojanes, they shall not
verily have me to gainesay them: and yet shall they in mine opinion ascribe
their original to the Trojanes best of all, by the old Gauls. For some say, as
we read in Ammianus, that some few who after the destruction of Troy fled,
possessed themselves of Gaul at that time void and unpeopled. The British
Tongue.
But when we thus consider these languages, we cannot but highly admire and
set forth, the divine goodness of the most high Creator toward our Britains,
the posterity of that ancient Gomer: who although the Romans, Saxons and
Normans have subdued them and triumphed over them, yet hitherto have they
preserved their old name and original language safe and sound: notwithstanding
the Normans sought to abolish the same even by their laws enacted for that
purpose. Insomuch as an old Britan, one of their nobility being demanded of
Henry the second, King of England, what he thought of the Britans power and the
Kings warlike preparation made against them, answered not impertinently after
this manner; Giraldus in his Topography of Wales.
This Nation, quoth he, O King, may now by the assaults of your self and
others be molested, and for the most part destroyed or weakened, like as
heretofore and oftentimes it has been. But, be the displeasure of man what it
will, unless the wrath of God concur withal, it will never be utterly wasted
and consumed, Neither shall any other nation or language else, (as I suppose)
answer in the straight day of judgment before that supreme Judge (for this
angle of the World) what ever may happen furthermore, than the Welsh, that is,
the British nation

THE NAME OF BRITAIN.
But you will say, If Cumero be the primitive name of the Inhabitants, whence
comes Albion, whence comes Britain? which name has so grown in ure that in
some sort it has caused the other to be quite forgotten. But hear, I pray
you, that, whereof I am most assured, because it is most true. As the self
same things, may be considered by diverse circumstances, so they may be called
also by sundry appellations, as Plato teaches in his Cratylus? ^f you run over
all particulars severally both new and old; you shall find, that every nation
was of others called by diverse names, from those that they themselves used.
Thus they that in their native tongue had Israelites to their name, according
to the Greeks were called Hebrews and Jews, and by the Egyptians Huesi, as
witnesses Manetho; because they had Heardmen for their governors. So the
Greeks named them Syrians, who, as Josephus writes, calls themselves
Aramaeans. They that named themselves Chusians, were by the Grecians of their
black faces called Ethiopians. Those which after their own speech were named
Celtae, the Greeks termed Galatae, of their milke-white color, as some would
have it, or of their long bush of hair, as I said erewhile. So, they that
nominated themselves after their own language Teutsch, Numidians and Hellenes,
by the Romans were named Germans, Mauri and Grecians. Even so in those days,
(not to speak of many other), they which in their own Idiome are called
Muselmans, Magier, Czecchi and Besermans, are by all nations in Europe named
Turks, Hungarians, Bohemians, and Tartarians. And even we our selves in
England, called in our natural speech Englishmen, are named by the Welchmen.
Britains, Irishmen and the high-land Scots, Sasson, that is to say, Saxons.
By the same reason we are to deem, that our ancestors, which termed
themselves Cumero, were upon some other cause either by themselves or others,
named Britains: From whence the Greeks framed their (...) and delivered the
same as it were from hand to hand unto the Romans. This ground being laid let
us enquire now into the names of our Island.

As for the name Albion I pass not much, Albion.
considering that the Greeks gave it to this Isle for difference sake, seeing
that all the Islands bordering round about it were called Britanish and
Britains. The Island Britain says Pliny, renowned in the Greek records and
ours both, lies betwixt North and West over against Germany, France and
Spain, but with a great distance between them, they being the greatest parts
by far of all Europe. Britanni^.
Albion it had to name when all the Isles adjacent were called Britannies.
Whereupon Catullus writing against Caesar said thus; Hunc Galliae timent,
timent Britanniae.
Him Gaul does fear, him Britain dreads.
Who also in the same train of verses, calls it the utmost Isle of the West.
And it may seem that this name Albion, Vide Joseph. Scalig in Ca^ul.
sprung from the vanity, the fabulous inventions, and that unconstant levity
of the Greeks in coining of names, which they themselves termed (...). For
seeing they have in fabulous wife named Italy Hesperia of Hesperus the son of
Atlas; France Gallatia of a son of Polyphemus: I cannot otherwise believe,
but that in the same vein also of fabling they called this Island Albion, of
Albion Neptunes son: which thing Perottus and Lilius Giraldus have put down
in writing. Unless a man would derive it rather of (...), which, as Festus
witnesses, in Greek signifies White, whereupon the Alps also have their
appellation. For environed it is with white rocks, which Cicero terms
Mirificas moles, that is, wondrous Piles: and hereof it is that upon the coined
pieces bearing the stamp of Antoninus Pius and Severus, The shape or
pourtraicture of Britain.
Britain is pourtraied sitting upon rocks in woman's habit. And the British
Poets themselves name it Inis wen, that is, The white Isle. To say nothing of
Orpheus in his Argonauticks, (if so be they be his), who called the Island next
unto Hibernia or Irenis, that is, Ireland, which must needs be this of ours,
(...) that is, the white land: and which a few verses before, he may seem to
have named (...), for (...). Fracastorius also writing how that pestilent
day-fever in Britain, which commonly we call the British or English swet,
happened by occasion of the soil, De morbis lan^agrosis lib. 1. Sweating
sickness.
as if the same had stood much upon plaster, supposes that this Island gat
the name Albion of the said plaisterish soil. As for that pretty tale, how
Albion was also called of Albina, one of those thirty daughters of Dioclesian
the King of Syria, which at their very wedding solemnity, slew their husbands,
and being brought hither by ship without rower took possession of this Island
first, and conceived by spirits, brought forth a breed of giants, who can
abide to hear it without indignation, as the most loud lie of some leaud
lossell?

Neither is there any cause wherefore I should so curiously search, why
Britain, in that ancient A Canticle or Sonet. Insula Caeruli.
Parodia against Ventidius Bassus, is named Insula Caeruli, considering that it
is compassed round about with the Ocean, which the Poets call Caerulus, and
Caerulum. Whereupon Claudian of Britain, writes thus: -- Cujus vestigia verrit
Caerulus --
-- Whose feet the Azure Sea
Does sweep. --


I pass over to speak of Aristides, who named it The great, and the furthest
Island. That it was called also Romania, ROMANIA.
Gildas after a sort does intimate, who writes, that subdued it was of the
Romans so, as that the name of Roman servitude stuck to the soil thereof: and
by and by after, so as it might not be counted BRITANIA, but ROMANIA: and one
or two pages after, speaking of the same, The Island, quoth he, keeping indeed
the Roman name, but neither their custom nor law. And prosper Aquitanus in
express words called it the Roman Island: heereto may be referred also thus
much, that when the Statutes of Tacitus and Florianus the Emperors were by
lightning overthrown, the Soothsayers answered out of their learning,
Vopiscusin Florianum.
that an Emperor should arise out of their family, who among other things was
to set presidents over Taprobane, and to send a Proconsull to the Roman Island,
which the learned understand of our Britain, that was a Province Happily,
governed by Presidents. Samothea.
Praesidiall, and never Proconsular, as afterward we will declare. But that
sometime it was named Samothea of Samothes the sixth Son of Iaphet, believe
it who that will, for me. Out of whose shop and forge this comes, I wot full
well: even from Annius Viturbiensis forsooth, who under a goodly title, as the
manner is of crafty retailers, has in the name of Berosus published, and
thrust upon credulous persons his own fictions, and vain inventions.

But touching the name and original of Britain, the truth by reason of the
diverse and sundry wits of men is very doubtful and wavering. In which point,
that I may lawfully interpose mine own conjecture, I will by way of Preface,
beseech our Britains to speak and think favorably of me, that while they are
desirous to learn, they would be willing to pardon, and not debar me of that
course, which Eliot, Leland, Lhuid, and the rest have taken. For if it was
lawful for Humfrey Lhuid a most learned Britain, without any prejudice at all
to Brutus, (nay if he were commended rather for it,) to derive the name of
Britain otherwise, than from Brutus; let it not be imputed as a heinous
offense unto me, who am unwilling to impugn the Story of Brutus, to deduce it
from somewhat else, if I can. And that out of the very British tongue, and from
nothing else, which as it is least mingled with other languages, and withal
most ancient, so in this search it seems greatly to help and further us.
For, ancient tongues are reputed passing necessary, for the searching out of
Originals* and Plato teaches us, That the first names being through the long
continuance of time grown out of use, In his Cratylus.
are preserved in barbarous tongues, as being more ancient than others. And
although those things so far remote from all memory, are over-cast with such
mists and darkness, that the truth seems rather to be wished than hoped
for: yet for all that, will I do my best to trace out the truth, and declare
as briefly as I can, what my judgment is: not minding to put down ought
prejudicial to any man, but most willing, if any one shall bring more probable
matter to welcome and embrace the same. For I affect and love the truth not in
my self more than in another, and in whom soever I shall see it, I will most
willingly and gladly entertain it.

First, by the Readers good leave, I will take this for granted and proved,
that ancient Nations in the beginning, had names of their own: and that
afterward, from these, the Greeks and Latins, by wresting them to the
analogy or proportion of their speech, imposed names upon regions and
countries: to speak more plainly, That people were known by their names,
before regions and places, and that the said regions had their denominations of
the people.

Who can deny that the names of the Jews, Medes, Persians, Scythians, Almans
French or Gauls, Betulians, Saxons, Englishmen, Scots, etc. were before Jewry,
Media, Persia, Scythia, Alamaine, France or Gaul, Betulia, Saxony, England,
Scotland, etc. And who sees not, that these words sprang out of the other? Of
the Sam^ites, Insubres and Belgae, we read that Livie and Caesar first named
the countries themselves Or Samnium.
Samnitium, Insubrium, and Belgium.

Of the Franci in the time of Constantinus Maximus, as is to be seen in his
coins, the place where they were seated took the name of Francia first: and
from the Burgundi Sidonius Appolinaris first framed Burgundy. In the same sort
we must of necessity think, that this our Island Britain, took denomination
from the Inhabitants, or from the Gauls their neighbors: Brit.
That these first Inhabitants were called Brit or Brith, some things induce me
to think: First and foremost, that verse which goes about, under the name of
Sybilla: (...)
(...)
Twixt Brits and Gauls their neighbors rich, in gold that much abound,
The roaring Ocean Sea with blood full filled shall resound.


Moreover, the authority of Martial, Juvenal and Ausonius. Procopius also, who
names this Isle BRITTA. In like manner the old Inscriptions set up by the
Britains themselves, wherein are read, BRITO, BRITONES, BRITTUS. COH. BRITTON.
ORDINIS BRITTON: and at Rome in the Church of Saint Mary the round NATIONE
BRITTO: as also in this which is seen at Amerbachium in Germany, which I will
put down here underneath because it makes mention of Triputium, a place in
Britain, not known.

NVMPHISO NO BRITTON TRIPVTIENO SVB CVRA MO VLPI MALCHI Centurionis*
7. LEG. XXII PO PO FO. BRIT.
The Saxons also themselves called the Britans in their language (...), and
Witichindas the Saxon every where namedth the Britans Britae: so that the word
BRIT is doubtless the primitive, from whence Brito is derived, and from whence
the first glympse of light leading to the word Britain, seems to appear.

Considering now that Nations devised their names of that, wherein they either
excelled others or were known from others: whether in regard of their first
founders honor; as the Jones of Javan, the Israelites of Israel, the
Chananites of Chanaan the son of Cham: or whether in respect of their nature,
conditions, and inclinations; as the Iberi, after the Hebrew Etymology,
because they were miners; the Heneti, for that they were straglers; the
Nomades, because they gave themselves to the breeding and feeding of Cattle;
the Alemans or Germans, for that they were esteemed valiant men; the French or
Frankners, for being free; the Pannonians, for wearing coats with
cloth-sleeves, as Dio conceiteth it: the Ethiopians of their black hue; and the
Albanes, because they were borne with white hair: whereupon, (mark I pray
you) as Solinus says, The color of the hair upon the head gave name unto a
people: Seeing also that our country men, who were (by a name common to them
and their neighbors) called Cimbri and Cumeri, had no mark whereby they might
be distinguished and known from the borderers, better than by that manner of
theirs to paint their bodies: for the most sufficient Authors that be, as
Caesar, Mela, Pliny, and the rest do show, Glass.
that the Britains colored themselves with woade, called in Latin Glastum,
(and Glass at this day with them signifies Blew.) What if I should conjecture,
Britans, whence they took their name. Brith, what it is.
that they were called Britans of their depainted bodies? For, whatsoever is
thus painted and colored, in their ancient country speech, they call Brith.
Neither is there cause why any man should think this Etymology of Britains
to be harsh and absurd; seeing the very words sound alike, and the name also as
an express image represents the thing, which in Etymologies are chiefly
required. For Brith and Brit, do passing well accord: and that word Brith
among the Britans, implies that which the Britans were indeed, to wit,
painted, depainted, died, and colored, as the Latin Poets describe them;
Gyn^getis. lib. 1.
and (...) that is, having their backs pide, or medly colored, as Oppianus
terms them.

Neither will it be impertinent, (as small a matter as it is) to note here,
that as I have observed, in the names, of well near all the most ancient
Britains, there appears some signification of a color: Old Britans names,
drawn from colors.
which no doubt, arose from this kind of painting. The red color is of the
Britains called Coch and Goch, which in my judgment lies couched in these
names, Cogidunus, Argentocoxus, and Segonax. The same Britains call the black
color, Du, which after a sort shows it self in Mandubratius, Cartimandua,
Togodumnus, Bunduica, Cogidunus. The white color is with them named Gwin, the
very prints, as it were, and express tokens of which word, me thinks I see in
Venutius and Immanuentius. Gwellw among them signifies that, which Color
aqueu^ among the Latins does, that is to say, a wan or waterish color: and
this appears evidently in the names of Vellocatus, Caruillius and Suella.
Glass in the British tongue, is as much as Blew, which is seen in the name of
King Cuniglasus. For Gildas interprets it to be all one with Fulvus, or as
some copies have Furvus Lani^, that is, a Lion tawnie, or coal black Butcher.
Aure, which betokens a fair yellow or golden color, bewraieth it self in
Cungetorius and Arviragus. A lively and gallant color is with them called Teg,
which makes some little show in Prasutagus and Carattacus. But if we be
persuaded, that the Britans borrowed the names of mingled colors, together
with the very simple colors themselves of the Romans; for certain it is that
they took from the Romans, Werith, for Viridis, that is, Green: Melin, for
Melinus, that is a Quince yellow color: then if I think that there lies
close some note of the color Prasinus, that is, Leeke-blade green, in
Prasutagus; and of the red vermillon or Sinopre color, called of the Latins
Minium, in the name of Acliminius, King Cinobelinus his son, no man I hope
will stand against me. Moreover Rufina, that most learned British Lady, took
that name of the color Rufus, that is, sad r^d: like as Albane the first
martyr in Britain of Albus, that is, White. And if any one that is skillful in
the old British tongue, would examine the rest of British names, which in the
ancient Writers are not past four or five more in all, we may well suppose,
that he shall find in those names, as few as they be, some signification of a
color. Neither must we omit this observation, that the commonest names at this
day among the Britans, That is, Welsh men.
Gwin, Du, Goch, Lhuid, were imposed upon them, from the white, black, red,
russet, or tawny color. So that now it may be thought no such wonder, that
the whole nation it self, drew the denomination from painting: considering
verily, that they in general painted themselves: and the very Inhabitants,
both in times past, and also in these our days imposed upon themselves their
names, of Colors. But now to the matter, if happily, all this has been beside
the matter.

This also is certain, that in stories a Britain is called in the British
tongue Brithon. I care not for the note of aspiration, seeing that the
Britains (who, as Chrysostom says, In sermon. Pentecost.
had a hissing or lisping pronuntiation) delight in aspirations, which the
Latins have carefully avoided. Now, as Brito came of Brith, so did Britannia
also in my opinion. Britannia, says Isidore, took that name from a word of
the own nation. For what time as the most ancient Greeks (and these were they
that first gave the Island that name) sailing still along the shore, as
Eratosthenes says, either as rovers, or as merchants, travailed unto nations
most remote and disjoined far asunder, and learned either from the
Inhabitants themselves, or else of the Gauls, who spoke the same tongue, TANIA
So as this day the Germans unto the names of countries put to Land^, as
Gelderlandt, Friestlandt, Pomerlandt, etc.
that this nation was called Brith, and Brithon; then they unto the word BRITH
added TANIA: which, as we find in the Greek Glossaries, betokens in Greek, a
region: and thereof they made a compound name (...), that is, the Britons-land,
for which they have written false, (...): But Lucretius and Caesar, the first
Latins that made mention thereof, more truly Britannia. That this is so, I
do the more firmly believe, because that besides our Britain, a man shall
not find, over the face of the whole earth above three countries of any account
and largeness, which end in the termination TANIA: and those verily lying in
this west part of the world, namely, MAVRITANIA, LVSITANIA, and AQVITANIA.
Which names, I doubt not but the Greeks made and delivered to the Latins, as
who first discovered and surveied these lands. For, of Mauri they framed
Mauritania, as one would say, the country of the Mauri, which the homebred
people of that land, as Strabo witnesses, called Numidia: of Lusus the son
of Or Bacchus.
Liber, Lusitania, as it were, the land of Lusius: and Aquitania, perhaps ab
aquis, that is, of waters, as Ivo Carnotensis is of opinion, being a region
seated upon waters: in which sense, as Pliny writes, it was before time named
Armorica, that is, coasting upon the sea. As for Turditania and Bastitania,
names of smaller countries, they may hereto also be reduced, which likewise
were in this western tract, to wit, in Spain, and may seem to signify as
much as the regions of the Turdi and the Basti. Neither is it a strange and new
thing, that a denomination should be compounded, Lib. 1.
of a foreign and a Greek word, put together. Names are compounded, says
Quintilian, either of our own, that is, Latin, and of a strange word put
together, as Biclinium, that is, a room with two beds or two tables: and
contrariwise, as Epitogium, that is, a garment worn upon a gown; Anticato,
that is, a book written against Cato: or of two foreign words joined in one, as
Epirrhedium, a kind of wagon. And this manner of composition is most usual in
the names of countries. Came not Ireland by composition of the Irish word Erin,
and the English word Land? Did not Angleterre, that is, England, grow together
of an English and of a French word? and did not Franclond (for so our Saxons
named Francia or France) proceed from a French and Saxon word? Came not
Poleland likewise from a Polonian word, which among them betokens a plain,
and a Germane? Lastly, was not Danmarch compounded of a Danish word, and the
Duch March, which signifies a bound or limit? But in so plain and evident a
matter I will not use any more words. Neither have we cause to wonder at this
Greek addition TANIA, seeing that S. Hierome in his questions upon Genesis,
proves out of most ancient authors, that the Greeks inhabited along the sea
coasts and Isles of Europe throughout, as far as to this our Island. Let us
read, says he, Varroes books of Antiquities, and those of Sisinius Capito, as
also the Greek writer Phlegon, with the rest of the great learned men, and we
shall see, all the Islands well near and all the sea coasts of the whole
world, yea and the lands near unto the sea, to have been taken up with Greek
Inhabitants, who, as I said before, from the mountains Amanus and Taurus even
to the British Ocean, possessed all the parts along the sea side.

That the Greeks came to Britain.
And verily, that the Greeks arrived in this our region, viewed and considered
well the site and nature thereof, there will be no doubt and question made; if
we observe what Athenaeus has written concerning Phileas Taurominites (of whom
more anon) who was in Britain in the clx. year before Caesar's coming: if we
call to remembrance the Altar with an Inscription, Unto Ulysses, in Greek
letters; and lastly, if we mark what Pytheas before the time of the Romans
time, has delivered in writing as touching the distance of Thule from
Britain. For who had ever discovered unto the Greeks, Britain, Thule, the The
Low countries.
Belgicke countries, and their sea coasts especially, if the Greeks ships had
not entered the British and German Ocean, yea and related the description
thereof unto their Geographers? Had Pytheas, think you, come to the knowledge
of six days sailing beyond Britain, unless some of the Greeks had showed
the same? Who ever told them of Scandia, Burgos, and Nerigon, out of which men
may sail into Thule? And these names seem to have been better known unto the
most ancient Greeks, than either to Pliny or to any Roman. Whereupon Mela
testifies, That Thule was much mentioned and renowned in Greek letters: and
Pliny likewise writes thus; Britain an Island famous in the monuments and
records both of the Greeks and of us. By this means therefore, so many Greek
words have crept into the British, French, and withal, into the Belgicke or
Low Dutch language. And if Lazarus Bayfius, Greek words in the British
Language.
and Budaeus, do make their vant and glory in this, that their Frenchmen have
been of old (...), that is, Lovers and Studious of the Greeks, grounding
their reason upon few (French) words of that Idiome, which retain some marks
and tokens of the Greek tongue: if Hadrian Junius joyeth no less, because in
the Belgicke words there ly covertly Greek Etymologies: then may the Britains
make their boast, in whose language many words there be derived from the
Greeks. Howbeit, Sir Thomas Smith Knight, In his book of English Orthographie.
sometime Secretary to Queen Elizabeth, a man most learned every way, thinks
verily, that this happened thereupon, for that when all Europe besides was much
troubled and shaken with wars, very many of the Greeks flocked hither for
refuge, as it were into a sanctuary.

Thus have you, as touching the Original and name of Britain mine error or
conjecture, whether you will, which if it swerve from the truth, I wish it were
by the truth it self reformed. In this intricate and obscure study of
antiquity, it is thought praiseworthy, somewhat to err: and remember we
should withal, that such things as at the first sight being slightly thought
upon are deemed false, after a better review and further consideration
oftentimes seem true. Now if any man should summon me to appear before the
Tribunal of Verity, I have no other answer at all to make. And as for our
countrymen the Britans, such as be of the learneder sort, I do most earnestly
beseech and desire them to employ all their labor, industry, wit, and
understanding in the searching out hereof, so lgog, until at last, the truth
with her own clear bright beams, may scatter and dissolve all mists of
conjectures whatsoever.

THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF THE BRITAINS.
AS concerning the Britains, what Acts at the first they exploited* what form
of commonwealth they used, after what orders and laws they lived, M. Daniel
Rogers, a very good man, excellently well learned, and my especial friend,
promised in his writings to inform us: but for that he being cut off by
untimelie death, The Manners of Britains.
has performed nothing, take here these few notes as touching their ancient
manners and customs collected word for word out of ancient authors.

Caesar. The Britans use for their money, brazen pieces, or Annulis. Some read,
Laminis, that is, thin plates.
rings of iron duly weighed and tried to a certain just poize. To taste of
hare, hen, and goose, they think it unlawful: howbeit, these they keep for
their delight and pleasure. Of them all, these are most civil and courteous by
far, that dwell in Kent, which is a country altogether lying upon the sea
coast: neither do these Inhabitants differ much in custom from the Gauls.
The Inlanders for the most part sow no corn, but live of milk and flesh; and
clad themselves in skins. But the Britans all in general depaint themselves
with Lute^
wood, that makes a blew color; and hereby they are the more terrible to
their enemies in fight. The hair of their heads they wear long, and shave all
parts of the body, saving the head and upper lip. Ten or twelve of them
together use their wives in common, and especially brethren partake with
brethren, and parents with their children: but look what children they bear,
theirs they are reputed who first married them virgins. In battle for the most
part, they were wont to employ their chariotiers. First these ride about into
all parts of the battle, and fling darts: Essedarii.
and with the very fearful sight of horse, and with the rattling noise of the
wheels, they do most part break the ranks and put them in disarray, and
when they have once wound themselves within the troops of the horsemen, they
alight from their chariots, and fight on foot. The chariot-guiders in the mean
time depart a little out of the medly, and bestow themselves so, that if the
other be overcharged with the multitude of enemies, they may readily and
without let retire in safety. Thus in their battles, they perform the nimble
motion of horsemen, and steadiness of footmen: by daily practice and
experience so ready in their service, that they were wont to stay in the
declivity of a steep hill their horses being in their full carriere, quickly
turn short and moderate their pace, run along the spirepole and beam of the
chariot, rest upon the yoke of and harness of their steeds, and from thence
leap again into the chariots most speedily at their pleasure. These
chariotiers would retire also many times of purpose, and when they had trained
and drawn our men a little way off from their legions, dismount from their
chariots and encounter them on foot, having thereby the vantage of them in
flight. The manner of their Essedaries or Charitiers fight.
Furthermore, they never fought thick and close together, but thin and with
great distance between, having set stations or wards of purpose, so as one
might succor another, receiving the wearied, and putting forth new and fresh
supplies.

Strabo. The Britans be taller of stature than the Gauls: their hair not so
yellow, nor their bodies so well knit and firm. For proof of their talenesse,
I saw my self at Rome very youths and springals, higher by half a foot than
the tallest man. Mary, they had but bad feet to support them. As for all other
lineaments of the body, they showed good making and proportionable feature. For
disposition of nature they partly resemble the Gauls: partly they be more
plain, more rude and barbarous; insomuch that some of them for want of skill,
can make no cheeses, albeit they have plenty of milk: others again, are
altogether ignorant in gardening and planting of orchyards, yea and in other
points of husbandry. Many Lords and Potentates they have among them. In their
wars they use a number of chariots, like as some of the Gauls. Woods stand
them in stead of Cities and towns: for when they have by felling of trees,
mounded and fensed therewith a spacious round plot of ground, there they build
for themselves halles and cottages, and for their cattle set up stals and
folds: but those verily for the present use, and not to serve long.

Caesar likewise. A town, the Britains call some thick wood, which they have
enclosed and fortified with a ditch and rampire, and made for a place of refuge
and retrait, to avoid the incursions of the borderers.

Diodorus Siculus. The Britans live after the manner of the old world. They use
chariots in fight, as the report goes of the ancient Greeks at the Trojane war.
Their houses are for the most part of reed or wood. Their corn they inn and
house with ear and all: threshing out thereof from band to mouth as their need
requires. Fair conditioned people they are, plain and of upright dealing, far
from the subtlety and craft of our men. Their food whereupon they live is
simple, and nothing dainty nor like the full fare of rich men. Their Island is
replenished with people.

Pomponius Mela. Britain brings forth nations and Kings of Nations, but they
be all uncivil, and the farther they are from the continent, the less
acquainted they be with other kind of riches: only in catell and lands they be
wealthy. Their bodies are died with wo^d, whether it be for to make a gallant
show, or for what else, it is uncertain. They pick quarrel, of war at their
pleasure to satisfy their own wills, and so oftentimes molest one another:
but principally upon an ambitious desire of rule and soveraigntie, Glasto vel
vitro. See before.
and an encroaching mind they have to enlarge their own possessions. Their
fight is not only with horse or footmen, but also with wagons and chariots
harnessed and armed after the Gaul-like manner, such as they call Covinos: and
in those they use axeltrees armed at both ends with hooks and sithes.

Cornelius Tacitus. The Britans nearest unto France.
Gallia resemble likewise the Gauls* either because they retain still
somewhat of the race from which they descended, or that in countries butting
one against another the same aspects of the heavens do yield the same
complexion of bodies, But generally, if a man consider all, it is most likely,
the Gauls which lay nearest peopled the land unto them. In their ceremonies
and superstitious perswation, there is to be seen an apparent conformity:
The language differs not much: Like boldness to challenge and set into
dangers: when dangers are come, like fear in refusing: Saving that the Britans
make more show of courage, as being not mollified yet with long peace. For the
Gauls also were once, as we read, redoubted in war, till such time as giving
themselves over to ease and idleness, cowardice crept in, and shipwreck was
made both of manhood and liberty together. And so is it also befallen to those
of the Britans which were subdued of old: The rest remain such as the Gauls
were before. Their strength in the field consists of footmen. Yet some
countries there, make war in wagons also. The greater personage guides the
wagon, his waiters and followers fight out of the same. Heretofore they were
governed by Kings, now they are drawn by petty Princes into Partialities and
Factions: and this is the greatest help we Romans have, against those
puissant Nations, that they have no common counsel. Seldom it chances that
two or three States meet together and concur to repulse the common danger: So,
whilst one by one fights, all are subdued.

In another place. An usual manner it was with the Britans to seek for the
direction of the Gods, by looking into the inwards of beasts: and to make war
under the conduct of women; neither mattereth it whether sex bear rule over
them. Whereupon learned men think Aristotle spoke of the Britains, where he
writes, That certain warlike nations beyond the Celtes, Politic. lib. 2. cap.
7.
were subject to the government of women.

Dio Nicaeus, out of the Epitome of Xiphilinus, as touching the Britans in the
North part of the Island. They till no ground: They live upon prey, venison and
fruits. For of fish, although there is exceeding great plenty thereof, they
will not taste: their abode is in tents, naked and unshod: Wives they use in
common, and the children borne of them they all do foster among them: the
Comminaltie for the most part does govern: most willing they be to practice
robbing. In war, their service is out of Chariots: the horses they have be
little and swift of pace: their footmen run most speedily: whiles they stand,
they be strongest: the armor and weapons that they use, are a shield and
short spear, in the nether part whereof, there hangs a round bell of brass
like an apple, that when it is shaken, they might with the sound terrify and
maskre the enemies: they have daggers also. But principally, they can endure
hunger, cold, and any labor whatsoever. For, sticking fast in the bogs up to
the head many days together, they will live without food; and within the woods
they feed upon the barks and roots of trees. A certain kind of meat they
provide ready for all occasions, whereof if they take but the quantity of a
Bean, they are not wont either to be hungry or thirsty.

Herodian. They know no use at all of garments, but about their belly only and
neck, they wear iron; supposing that to be a goodly ornament, and a proof of
their wealth, like as all other Barbarians esteem of gold. For why? their very
bare bodies they mark with sundry pictures, representing all manner of living
creatures; and therefore it is verily, that they will not be clad, for hiding
(forsooth) that painting of their bodies, Now they are a most warlike nation,
and very greedy of slaughter, content to be armed only with a narrow shield
and a spear, with a sword besides hanging down by their naked bodies.
Unskillful altogether how to use either corslet or helmet, supposing the same
to be an hinderance unto them, as they pass over the bogs and marish grounds:
through the hot vapors arising, from whence the sky and air is there most
part foggie.

The rest of the particulars, The Britans Art Magic.
which are very few, I will lightly gather, and crop here and there. Pliny
writing of Magic: But what should I (quoth he) rehearse these things, in an
art that has passed over the Ocean also, so far, as beyond which, nothing is
to be discovered but air and water? And even at this day verily, it is in
Britain highly honored, where the people are so wholly devoted unto it, and
that with all compliments of ceremonies, as a man would think the Persian
learned all their Magic from them.

The same Pliny* Glastum.
There grows an herb in Gaul like unto Plantine, named Glastum, that is,
Woad, with the juce whereof, the women of Britain, as well married wives, as
their young daughters anoint and die their bodies all over; resembling by that
tincture the color of Aethiopians, in which manner they use at some solemn
feasts and sacrifices to go all naked. Chenerotes. Brants or Soland gecle.
Again, Their is not a daintier dish of meat known in Britain, than are the
Chenerotes, fowls less than wild geese. Also, The Britains were rings on
their middle finger. Likewise, The Britains manured their grounds with Marle
in stead of dung.

That they inammelled or branded themselves (as it were) with certain marks
which Tertullian terms Britannorum stigmata, Their manner of painting.
that is, The Britans marks, Solinus shows: The Country (says he) is partly
peopled with Barbarians, who by the means of artificial incisions of sundry
forms, have from their childhood diverse shapes of beasts incorporate upon
them: and thus having these their marks deeply imprinted within their bodies,
look how a man grows more and more, so do these pictured characters
likewise wax. Neither do these savage Nations repute any thing to signify
their patience, more than by such durable skars to cause their limbs to drink
in much painting and color.

Dio. Andates.
The Britains worshipped as their Goddesses, Andate, that is, Victory and
Adraste.

Caesar and Lucan. The Britans Navigation.
Ships they had, of which the Keeles, the footstocks also, or upright standards
were made of light timber: the rest of the body framed of windings and Oyster
was covered over with leather.

Solinus. How long soever they held on their course under sail, so long the
Saylors forbear to eat. They used a drink made of barley: and so do we at
this day, as Dioscorides writes, Curmi.
who names Curmi wrong for Kwrw, for so the Britains call that, which we
term Ale.

Many of them together had but one wife among them, as Eusebius records in
Evangelica Praeparatione 6.

Plutarch reports, That they lived one hundred and twenty years, for that
the cold and frozen country wherein they dwelt, kept in their natural heat.

But what those ancient times of cruel Tyrants were, The Tyrants of Britain.
whereof Gildas writes, I know not, unless he means them that in this
country took upon them the sway of government against the Romans, and were at
that time called Tyrants: for soon after, he adds thus much out of S.
Hierome: Porphyrie raging in the East-parts as a mad dog against the Church,
annexed thus much to his furious and vain style: Britain (says he) a
Province plentiful of tyrants. Neither will I speak of their ancient
religion, which is not verily to be counted religion, The religion of the
Britans.
but a most lamentable and confused Chaos of Superstitions: For when Satan had
drowned the true doctrine in thick mists of darkness, The ugly specter of
Britain (says that Gildas) were mere Diabolical, exceeding well near in
number those of Egypt: whereof some we do see within or without desert walls,
with deformed lineaments still, carrying stern and grim looks after their
wonted manner.

But, whereas it is gathered, that the Britains were together with Hercules at
the rape of Hesione, and that, out of these verses which they take to be made
by Cornelius Nepos, whiles he describes the marriage of Telamon and Hesione:
-- Et in aurea pocula fusi
Invitant sese pateris plebs mista, Britanni.
Mid cups of gold, a medly sort thus lying all along,
Boll after Boll quaft lustily, and Britans them among.


That is altogether poetical, and I can clearly by good evidences, as it
were, under hand and seal prove, that the author thereof, was not, as the
Germans would have it, Cornelius Nepos, but one Joseph of Excester: who has
made mention of our King Henry the second, and Thomas, Archbishop of
Canterbury.

Brodaeus Miscellan. lib. 3. cap. 4.

Ulysses never in Britain.


Whether Ulysses entered thus far, whose arrival in Caledonia, a certain
altar engraven with Greek letters, as Solinus says, has testified, Brodaeus
makes doubt: and I would judge, that erected it was rather in the honor of
Ulysses, than by Ulysses himself: although they avouch Ulysses to be the very
same Elizza, that was Japhets son. For, apparent it is out of Histories, and
already I have said as much, that the most ancient Greeks undertook long
voyages by sea and land: no marvel then it ought to seem, if their be also
some names and monuments of theirs found in diverse places. And often times they
derived those names, not so much from their own denominations, as from
Worthies, who were held in as much reverence, if not more, among them, as were
either Confessors or Martyrs among Christians. Like as therefore the names of
Saint John, Saint Dominicke, Saint Francis, and infinite other Saints departed,
are imposed upon newfound places, so also that it happened time out of mind with
the Greeks, who will deny? but who among all the worthies, made either more
wandering voyages, or of longer continuance at Sea, than did Ulysses? No marvel
then, if Sailers made vows very often unto him above all others; and unto
those places where they arrived and landed, did consecrate according to their
vows, names from him. Thus Lisbon.
Vlyssippo upon the mouth of the river Tagus took the name: and thus elsewhere
other monuments of Ulysses, Laertes and their companions; which are not
properly to be referred unto Ulysses as the founder: but we must think, that
by the Greeks who discovered strange and foreign coasts, they were dedicated
in the honor of that Worthy, who of all others had traveled and seen most.

Whereas John Tzetzes in his Treatise entitled, Variety of Stories, has
written, that our British Kings bestowed upon that renowned Cato the elder, who
had perpetual conflict with the manners of the Roman people, certain presents
for his virtues sake; let him make good and save his own credit himself: yet
thus much all the world knows, how that Writer is full fraught with fables.

Neither would I have you believe, that Alexander the Great came out of the
East Indies, to Gades, and so forward to Britain, howsoever Cedrenus, maugre
all other Historiographers, King Alexander the Great, never in Britain.
writes thus: (...): that is, And from thence being come unto Phasis, Gades,
and the British nation, and having furnished himself with a thousand hulkes
etc. Of the same stamp is that also which Trithemius reports out of
Hunnibald, that King Bassianus put away his wife, the King of the Orkneys
daughter, in the 284. year before the birth of Christ, and thereupon he with
the aid of the Britains Kings, made war upon Bassianus.

Hannibal never in Britain.
Nor let any man think that Hanniball ever warred in Britain, because we read
thus in Polybius in the Eclogues of his tenth Book (...). Thus much in brief;
now that Hanniball was enclosed within the streights of Britain.

For the place is corrupt, and for (...) it should be read (...), as it is in
Dio, book 42. For in both places there is a speech of the Brutii in Italy.
And yet I may not deny, but that about this time the Greeks came to our Island.
For, Atheraeus in describing out of Moschion a most ancient author, King Hiero
his ship.
that ship of Hiero, at the hugeness and workmanship whereof all men wondered,
reports, that the maine mast thereof was with much ado found by a certain
swineheard in the mountains of Britain, and by Phileas Taurominites the
Mechanic conveied into Sicilie. But I fear, lest the Critics judge that the
true reading here also should be (...) for (...), and likewise understand it
of the Brutian mountain in Italy. Britains with the Cimbri in their
expeditions.


But it seems, that the Britains were entermingled with the Cimbri and the
Gauls in those expeditions which were made into Italy and Greece. For, besides
the name common to them both, it is recorded in a most ancient British Book
entitled Triadum, The books of Triades.
wherein mention is made of three mighty hosts leavied from among the Britans,
That a certain foreign captain leavied a mavelous puissant army from hence,
which having wasted a great part of Europe, at the last sat him down and abode
hard by the Greekish sea (meaning perhaps Gallatia). Brennus.
That Brennus a King so famous in Greek and Latin writers both, was a Britan,
there be that think they can easily prove. For mine own part, thus much only
I know, that his name is not yet grown out of use with the Britans, Brennin.
who in their language call a King Brennin, whether in honorable memory of him
I dare not determine. Certes, that Britomarus the militare captain among them,
Britomarus a Britain.
of whom Florus and Appian speak, was a Britan, the verae name does evince,
which signifies as much, as A great Britan. Neither will I wrey to my purpose
for to make the said Brennus a Britan borne, that place of Strabo, wherein he
writes, That Brennus was by birth a Prausian. Ne yet dare I (whereas Ottho
Frisingensis writes, Lib. 2. cap. 13.
That the Briones, a generation of the Cimbri, seated themselves at the head of
the river Dravus,) change Briones into Britones. And yet what dare not our
Critics do now adays?

But yet truly, to speak my mind once for all: As the Romans for all they
grew to that greatness above others, were not for a long time known, either
to Herodotus or to the Greeks; the Gauls also and the Spaniards for many
years utterly unknown to the old Historiographers: Late ere Britain was
known to the Greeks.
so, of this mind I have always been, that late it was ere the Greeks and
Romans heard of the Britans name. For, that little book, Of the World, which
commonly goes abroad under the name of Aristotle, and makes mention of the
Britans, of Albion and Hierne, is not so ancient as the time wherein Aristotle
lived, but of later days by far, as the best learned men have judged. Polybius
verily, the famous Historian, who accompanying that noble Scipio traveled over
a great part of Europe ccclxx. years or there about before Christ's nativitie,
is the ancient author, as far as I remember, that mentions the Britan Isles,
where he writes: Lib. 3.
Of the utmost Ocean, the Britan Isles, the plenty of tynne, gold and silver in
Spain, old writers with different opinions, have reported much. But they seem
to have been little more than by name may be gathered by this he writes
before in the same book. Whatsoever, says he, between Tanis and Narbo
bends Northward, to this day there is no man knows: and whoever they be,
that either speak or write any thing thereof, they do but dream. And no
less may they seem to do in these days, who in a prodigal humor of
credulity are persuaded, that Himilco being commanded by the State of
Carthage to discover the Western seacoast of Europe, entered into this Isle
many years before that time, seeing we have no records of the said navigation,
but only a verse or two in Festus Avienus. But why it was so late ere Britain
was known, the reason may seem to be, partly the site of the Island so
remote and disjoined from the continent: and in part, for that those old
Britans, then barbarous as all other people in these parts, and living close to
themselves, had no great commerce and traffic with other nations. And surely
in this point Dio is of the same opinion. The ancientest, says he, as well of
Greeks as Romans knew not for certain so much as that there was any Britain
at all: and those of later times after them, made question whether it were the
maine or an Island: and much writing there was pro and contra of both opinions,
by those who verily had no assured knowledge thereof (as who had neither seen
the country nor learned of the native Inhabitants of what nature it was) but
relied only upon bare conjecture every one according to his time and diligence
employed that way. But the first Latin writer to my knowledge, that made
mention of Britain, was Lucretius in these verses concerning the difference of
air: Nam quid Britannum caelum differ putamus,
Et quod in Aegypto est, qua mundi claudicat axis?
For air, what difference is there in Britain Isle think we,
And Egypt land, where Artick pole to stoop men plainly see?


Now that Lucretius lived but a little before Caesar, no man denies: at what
time we are taught out of Caesar himself, that Divitiacus King of the In
France.
Soissons, and the most mighty Prince of all Gaul governed Britain. But this
is to be understood of maritime coasts. For Caesar himself witnesses, that
no part of Britain, save only the seaside, and those countries which lie
against Gaul, was known unto the Gauls. Howbeit, Diodorus Siculus writes,
that Britain had experience of no forreiners rule: for neither Bacchus.
Dionysius, nor Hercules, nor any other Worthy or Demigod have we heard to have
attempted war upon that people. Now Caesar, who for his noble Acts is called
Divus, was the first that subdued the Britans, and forced them to pay a
certain tribute.

Censorinus de Die Natali.
From this time and no further off, must the writer of our History fetch his
beginning, of his work, if he thoroughly weigh with judgment what the learned
Varro has in times past written, and my self already heretofore signified:
Namely, that there be of times three differences: Three times or ages of the
world.
the first from the creation of man unto the Flood or Deluge, which for the
ignorance of those days is called (...), that is Obscure and uncertain:
Uncertain.
the second from the Flood to the first Olympias, (being 3189. years after the
Creation, and 774. before Christ) which in regard of many fabulous narrations
reported in that time, Fabulous.
is named (...), that is, Fabulous: the third from the first Olympias unto our
days, Historical.
and that is termed (...), that is, Historical, because the Acts therein done,
are contained in true Histories. And yet I am not ignorant, that albeit the
learned nations (setting aside the Hebrews) have attained to the knowledge of
nothing before this age, yet the British History of Geffrey, took beginning
three hundred and thirty years before the first Olympias, being a very rude
and ignorant age in these parts, which he called Fabulous. And even from hence,
for fear least the groundwork being ill laid, the rest of the building would
go on no better, because both the present place seems to require it, and
also from it the chief light may arise to the train of the narration ensuing;
let me summarily gathering matter here and there briefly deliver the acts of
the Romans in Britain, not out of feined fables, which were vanity to recite,
and mere folly to believe, but out of the incorrupt and ancient monuments:
wherein, I will not intercept matter of glory and commendation from them, who
shall take in hand to pursue this argument in more ample manner.

ROMANS IN BRITAIN.
WHen Fortitude and Fortune were so agreed, or Gods appointment rather had thus
decreed, Julius Caesar.
that Rome should subdue all the earth, Caius Julius Caesar, having now by
conquests overrun France.
Gaul, to the end, that by a successive train of victories achieved both by
land and sea, Pomponius Sabinus out of Seneca.
he might join those Lands together which nature had severed, (as if the Roman
world would not suffice) cast an eye unto the Ocean; and in the four and
fiftieth year before the incarnation of Christ, endeavored to make a journey
into Britain; either for that in all his Gaulish war, there came underhand
aid from thence, or because the Britains had received the Those about Beauvois
or Beauvosin.
Bellovaci that were run from him, or as Suetonius writes, allured with hope
of the British pearls, the bigness and weight whereof he was wont to peize
and try by his hand; or rather upon an ardent desire of glory: which we must
most easily believe, considering that he rejected the Ambassadors of the
Britains, who having intelligence of his designement, repaired unto him, and
promised to put in hostages, and to become obedient to the Roman Empire.

But his entrance into the Island, I will compendiously set down, even in his
own very words: Considering the coasts, ports, and landing places of Britain,
were not well known unto Caesar, he sent C. Volusenus before with a galley, to
discover what he might; who, having taken what view of the country he could
in five days space, returned. In the mean time, the resolution of Caesar
being made known unto the Britans by merchants, many particular States sent
their Ambassadors to him into Gallia, promising both to put in pledges, and
also to submit themselves unto the Roman Empire. Having then exhorted these to
continue in that mind still, he sent them home back again, and together with
them Comius of Atrebatens.
Arras, a man in those countries of great authority, (for the Those of Arras,
and the territories about it.
Attrebates had before time departed out of Gaul, and planted themselves
there) to persuade the said Cities vnd States to accept of the friendship and
protection of the people of Rome. No sooner was he set a shore, but the
Britains cast him into prison and hung irons upon him. Mean while, Caesar
having gotten together and put in readiness about fourscore ships of burden,
for the transporting of two Legions, and eighteen others besides, which he
appointed for the horsemen, put out to sea from the country of the The coast
of Picardy.
Morini at the third watch, and about the fourth hour of the day arrived upon
the coast, at an unfit landing place: For the hills lay so steep over the
sea, that from the higher ground a dart or javelin might easily be cast upon
the shore beneath. Having therefore at one time both wind and tide with him,
he weighed anchor, and sailed eight miles from that place unto a plain and
open shore, and there he rid at anchor. But the Britains perceiving the
Romans determination, sent their horse and chariots before, and there kept the
Romans from landing. Here the Romans were exceeding much distressed; For, the
ships were so great, that they could not ride near unto the shore, where the
sea was ebb: the soldiers in strange and unknown places, being laden with
heavy armor, were at one instant to leap down of necessity from those tall
ships, withal to stand amid the very billows, and to fight with their
enemies: whereas contrariwise the Britains were perfect in the knowledge of
those places, lightly appointed, as having all parts of their bodies at
liberty, fought either from the dry shore where they had sure footing, or
wading not far into the water. Hereupon the Romans being terrified, behaved
not themselves with the like courage and alacrity as before time. But after
that Caesar had caused the Galleys to be remooved from those hulkes, to be
rowed and laid against the open side of the Britains, and so from thence the
enemy to be beaten back, and displaced with slings, ordinance, and shot of
arrows; the Britans being troubled with the strange form of those Galleys,
the stirring of the Oars, and the unusual kind of their engines, reculed.
Then the Eagle-bearer of the tenth Legion, earnestly beseeching the Gods, that
it might fall out happily for the Legion: Leap down, quoth he, my fellow
soldiers, unless ye will forsake your standerd and betray it into the enemies
hands: For mine own part, I will be sure to do my devoir both to the
commonweal and also to my General: so forthwith he cast himself into the
sea, and began to advance the That is the maine standard.
Eagle against the enemy: then, all the rest followed hard at his heels ( But
if we believe In Caesaribus.
Julian, Caesar himself was the first that came down from his ship). The
fight on both parts was very eager. But the Romans encombred with their heavy
armor and weapons, tossed with the waves, not able to get any firm footing,
and put out of array, were wonderfully troubled; until such time as Caesar had
caused the ship-boats, pinnaces and smaller vessels to be manned with
soldiers; and when he saw need of help sent them to rescue such as were
overcharged. As soon as the Romans got footing on the dry land, they made head
together, charged the Britains and put them to flight: but they were not able
to follow them in chase, for want of the horsemen, that were not arrived in the
Island. The Britains being overthrown in battle, presently dispatched
Ambassadors unto Caesar to treat of peace, and together with them the foresaid
Comius of Arras, whom they had detained bound in prison: and withal, laid the
fault upon the multitude, and excused all by their own ignorance. Caesar soon
pardoned them, and commanded hostages to be delivered unto him: which they
presently performed in part, and gave their word to bring in the rest. Thus was
peace concluded four days after that Caesar was landed in Britain.

At the same time, those eighteen ships which transported the horsemen,
approaching so near the coast of Britanny that they were within view, by reason
of a sudden tempest that arose, were cast upon the west part of the Island:
from whence with much ado they recovered the continent of France. In the same
night also it happened, that the Moon being in the full, and the tides very
high; both the Galleys which were drawn up to the shore, were filled with the
tide, and the ships of burden also that lay at anchor, so shaken with the
tempest, that they became altogether unserviceable. This being known to the
Princes of Britain, when they understood also, that the Romans now wanted
horsemen, shipping, and provision of corn, they rebelled and resolved to cut
off their provision of grain. Caesar suspecting that which fell out indeed,
brought corn daily out of the fields into his camp, and with the timber and
other stuff of those twelve ships which were most weather beaten and
dismembered, repaired the rest. While these things were in action, the seventh
Legion, being sent out to fetch in corn, and busy in reaping* the Britains
suddenly set upon, and so with their horsemen and chariots all at once,
encompassed them round about.

Essedarii, Chariotiers.
The manner of their fight from out of these chariots, is thus, as I related a
little before: First, they ride up and down into all parts, and cast their
darts; and with the very terror of the horses, and rattling of the wheels,
often times disorder the ranks, and when they have wound themselves between
any troops of horsemen, they forsake their chariots, and fight on foot. In the
mean time the guiders of the chariots, drive a little a side out of the
battle, and place their chariots so, as that if the other chance to be
overcharged with the multitude of enemies, they might have an easy passage
unto them again. Thus they performed in all their fights the nimble motion of
horsemen, and the firm stabilitie of footmen: so ready with daily practice and
exercise, that in the declivity of a steep hill, they could stay their horses
in the very full cariere, quickly turn short, and moderate their pace, run
along the beam or spire of the Chariot, stand upon the yoke and harness of
the horses, yea, and from thence whip in a trice into their chariots again. But
by the coming of Caesar to rescue them in so good time, the Romans took heart
afresh, and the Britans stood still, who having conceived good hope to free
themselves for ever, presuming upon the small number of the Roman forces,
together with the scarcity of corn among them, had assembled a great power,
and were come to the camp of Caesar. But he received them even before the
camp with a battle, put them to rout, slew many of them, and burnt their
houses far and near. The same day came messengers from the Britans to Caesar,
entreating peace, which they obtained: upon condition, that they should double
the number of their hostages, whom he commanded to be brought into Gaul. And
straight after, because the In Autumn or September, when days and nights are
equal.
Aequinox was at hand, he put to sea, hoised sail from Britain, and brought
all his ships safe unto the continent of France. And thither, two only of all
the States of Britain sent hostages unto him, the rest neglected it. These
exploits thus performed, upon the relation of Caesar's Letters, the Senate
decreed a solemn procession for the space of twenty days: although he gained
nothing to himself, nor to Rome, but the glory only of an expedition
enterprized. Dio. lib. 39.


The year next ensuing, Caesar having gotten together a great fleet, for what
with ships for convoy of corn and victuals, and what with other private
vessels that every man had built for to serve his own turn, there was 800.
sail and above, and the same manned with five Legions, and 2000. horsemen, he
launched from the port called Near Calais.
Iccius, and landed his forces in that part of the Isle, where he did the
year before. Neither was there an enemy to be seen in the place. For albeit
the Britans had been there assembled with a great power, yet terrified with so
huge a number of ships, they had secretly withdrawn themselves into the upland
country. Here Caesar encamped in a place convenient, and left two cohorts, and
three hundred horsemen as a garrison or guard for his ships. Himself having by
night marched forward twelve miles, espied the enemies: who having gone forward
as far as to the river, began to give battle: but beaten back by the
cavallery, they conveyed themselves into a wood, and there lay hid, as
lodging in a place strongly fortified, both by nature and man's hand. But the
Romans with a Testudo, or targnet-roofe, which they made, and mount that they
raised against their fortifications, took the place, and drove them out of the
woods; neither followed they them with any long pursuit, for they were to
fortify the camp in that very place.

The next day, Caesar divided his forces into three regiments, and sent them
out to pursue the Britains: but straightwaies called them back again, for
that he had intelligence by messengers of such a tempest at sea the night
before, that his navy was sore beaten, run one against another, and cast on
shore. And thereupon himself in person returned to the ships, and with the
labor of ten days haled them all up to land, and enclosed them and his camp
together within one and the same fortification, and so goes to the place from
whence he was returned. Thither also had the Britains assembled themselves
with greater forces, under the conduct of Cassivellaunus or Cassibelinus,
Cassibelinus.
unto whom, in a public counsel of all the Britains, The river Thames.
Upon the farther bank of this river, yea and under the water, they had
covertly stuck sharp stakes, and embattelled themselves with a great power.
But the Romans went and waded over with such violence, notwithstanding they had
but their heads clear above the water, that the enemy was not able to endure
the charge, but left the bank, and betook themselves to flight: not skared,
as Polyaenus writes, at the sight of an

Cassivellaunus having now no courage to contend any longer, retained only
four thousand Charioters with him, and observed the Romans journeys: and so
often as their horsemen went forth and straied out in the fields for forage or
booty, he sent out his chariots, and kept them from ranging all abroad. Mean
while, the Trinobant^
Trinobantes submit themselves unto Caesar, and entreated that he would defend
Mandubratius (whom Eutropius and Beda out of the Fragments of Suetonius now
lost, call Androgorius, and our Britans Androgeus) from the oppression of
Cassivellaunus, and send him unto them to be their sovereign, Of them Caesar
required and received forty hostages, and corn for his army, and therewith
sent Mandubratius. Then the Where i^ Essex and Middlese^ Manduba^ who also
^^nomed A^^drogeus. Now (...) Norfolk Cambrid^ Hunting^ shire.
Cenimagi About Holeshot Silecester
Segontiaci, The H^^^dred of H^^ly upon Thames.
Ancatites, The hu^^dred of (...) and Cais^
Bibroci aad Atrebas.
Cassij, following the example of the Trinobantes yield unto Caesar: By whom he
understood, that Cassivellaunus his town was not far off, fortified with woods
and bogs: which as he assaulted

Whiles these things were a doing, four pety Kings that ruled Kent, to wit
Cingetorix, Carvilius, Taximagulus and Segonais, by a mandate from
Cassivellaunus did set upon the camp where the Romans navy was kept, but by a
sally that the Romans made, they were driven back: and Cingetorix one of the
said Kings was taken prisoner. Then Cassivellaunus, having received so many
losses, and troubled most of all with the revolt of the states, sent
Ambassador to Caesar by Conius of Atrebas.
Arras, tending unto him a surrendry. Whereupon Caesar, being determined to
winter in the continent of France, commanded pledges to be brought unto him,
and imposed a yearly tribute that Britain should pay unto the people of

But Eutropius out of some writings of Suetonius now not extant, adds thus
much moreover. Scaeva one of Caesar's soldiers, with four other fellow
servitours, crossed over sea before, Scaeva.
in a small bark unto a rock near the Island, and by the reflow or ebb of
the Ocean the while, was there left. The Britans many in number set upon the
Romans being but few: howbeit the rest who here and there had been his
companions returned in a ship: Scaeva tarieth behind still undanted,
notwithstanding he was overlaid with darts from every

When Caesar came first into this Isle, (as Cotas, one who then in the camp
had the second place, Athenaem.
has put down in a Greek Commentary of his, concerning the

What time as Caesar, says Seneca, traveled into Britain, and could not
contain his own felicity within the Ocean, he heard that his daughter was
departed this life, drawing with her a train of public calamities, But he
passed over this grief of heart as lightly as he was wont all things else.
Being returned with conquest out of Britain, he dedicated unto Venus genitrix
in her temple, Pliny.
a breast plate made of British pearls. Some of his British prisoners, he
appointed for services in the Theater, and about these rich hangings Servius
Honoratus.
wherein he had woven in colors his victories in Britain. Which the Britans
were wont, being themselves therein wrought, to remove and take away; whereupon
Virgill, Purpureaque intextitollant auleae Britanni.
Let Britans purple Tapestrie rid, wherein themselves are wrought.


Neither were the Britans appointed to the ministeries, and offices only about
the Theater, but also (I note it by the way) to the Emperors Licter, as it
appears manifestly by an antique inscription of this age, wherein there is
made mention of a Decurio, over the British Licter-bearers. Of this victory of
Caesar, an old Poet has thus written: In the Gardens of the Cardinal de
Carpento.
Vis invicta viri reparata class Britannos
Vicit, and hostiles Rheni compescuit undas.
Lo here the man's undaunted heart! with navy rigged new,
He Britans vanquished, and fell waves of Rhene he did subdue.


Hitherto may be referred those verses also of Claudian, touching the valor of
the Romans.

Nec stetit Oceano, remisque ingressa profundum,
Vincendos alio quaesivit in orb Britannos.
In Ocaan rhode it rested not, nor put to sea for naught,
But Britads in their otherworld, for conquest sake it sought.
Moreover Cicero in a certain Poem now lost, which he entitled Quadrigas,
carried Caesar in poetical Chariots of triumph, through the midst of all praise
and commendation, for his acts achieved in Britainc, as Ferrerius of Piemont
persuades us: for thus he writes, Pingam Britanniam coloribus tuis, penecillo
autem meo, that is, I will depaint Britain in your colors, but with mine own
pencill. Howbeit in the judgment of others, he terrified only the Britans
with a fortunate fight, or as Lucane (who nothing favored the house of the
Caesar's) wrote; Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis.
He sought the Britans, and for fear to them his back he showed.


And Tacitus a right grave and substantial author, writes, That he discovered
only, and Horace implies, that he scant touched them at all, when to flatter
Augustus, he says, That the Britain was not meddled withal, in these words:
Intactus Britannus ut descenderet
Sacra catenatus uia:
Or that the Britans heretofore not dealt withal in fight,
Might, chained now, the sacred street descend, in all men's sight.


And Propertius, Te manet invictus Romano Mart Britannus.
The Britans yet unconquered by Romans, stay for thee.


So far it is off, that it should be true which Velleius Paterculus, a
flattering Historian Bis penetrata Britannia a Caesare, that is, twice Caesar
passed through Britain, Dio.
when as he scarce made entry into it: For, many years after this entrance of
Caesar, this Island was left to the free government of their own Kings, and
used their own Laws.

Augustus seems of purpose, and with good advise to have neglected Britain,
* Consilium, as Tacitus says, that is, Policy, or a point of state, happily
because it was thought the best policy, and safest for the State, That the
Roman Empire should be kept, and held within bounds, to wit, the Ocean, the
rivers Ister and Euphrates limits set by nature, to the end it might be a State
Adamantine, ( for so Augustus himself speaks in Julian,) that is,
invincible; and lest, as a ship of exceeding great bulk, it might not possibly
be well governed and managed, but endangered through the own unweldy
hugeness sink anon, and fall down at once, which usually befalls unto
overgreat States: or, as Strabo is of opinion, he despised it, seeing neither
any cause at all of fear, nor hope of much profit from the Britans; and
Fortune at Antium.

Serves iturum Caesarem in ultimos
Orbis Britannos.
Save Caesar now that ready is, a journey long to take,

But after he was come into Gaul, the Britans sent Ambassadors unto him to
crave peace: and verily the British Princes and Potentates, having by
Embassages and dutiful services obtained his amity, dedicated presents and
oblations in the Capitol: and brought the whole Island in a manner to be
familiar unto the Romans, and as it were their own: Strabo.
so as they could endure taxes and imposts, which now are nothing grievous unto
them, raised out of such merchandise and commodities as are shipped to and from
out of Gaul and Britannie: and those be Ivory works; Bits and bridles,
chains and wreathes, Electrina.
vessels of the metal A pale an^ whitish gol^
Electrum and of glass, with other base and common wares of like sort. And
therefore there needs no garrison for that For it would require one Legion at
the least, and some horsemen, if tributes were to be levied from thence: and
the said tributes would but countervaile the charges of maintaining a garrison
there: for of necessity by imposing a tribute, the revenewes coming by tollage
and poundage and such like imposts, would be less: and if any violent course
were used, some peril or other must be looked for. The year following
likewise, Augustus intended a second expedition into Britain, because there was
some variance about the Covenants: but by occasion of some insurrection made in
Spain by the Cantabri and others, that journey was stayed. Neither has any
man reason to believe Landinus, or Servius, or Philargyrus, who have recorded
that Augustus triumph over the Britans, and that out of these verses of Maro.
Bisque triumphatas utroque a littore gentes.
And trophies twain caught by strong hand from diverse enemies hoasts,
And nations twice triumphed of likewise from both the Of East a^ West.
coasts.
Surely, in regard of that surrendry of the Britans, Horace wrote thus; Coelo
tonantem credimus Iovem
Regnare: Presens Divus habebitur
Augustus, adjectis Britannis
Imperio, gravibusque Persis.

For thundering there: but now shall be on earth Augustus here
Reputed God, because he did to Romans Empire gain
Both Britans and fierce Persians, of whom they stood in fear.


Tiberius nothing transported with an inordinate desire of extending the
Empire, Tiberius.
seems to have rested in that Counsel of Augustus; For he brought out a
book written with Augustus his own hand, wherein was contained the whole
wealth and estate of the commonweal, what number as well of Roman Citizens
as Allies were in arms, how many Navies, Kingdoms and Provinces, what
tributes and imposts [belonged to the state] with a resolution annexed thereto
of containing the Empire within the bounds. Which

C. Caligula.
That Caius Caesar cast in his mind to enter this Island, it is certain: but
that by his shittle brain, sudden repentance, and wonderful attempts against
Germany, it came to nothing. For to the end that he might terrify Britain and
Germany (over which he hovered) with the fame of some mighty piece of work,
Suetonius in Caligula,
he made a bridge between Baie and the Piles of Puteoli, three miles, and 600.
paces in length. But having achieved no greater exploit, Adminius.
than taken to his mercy Adminius the son of Cinobellinus King of the
Britans, who being by his father banished had fled over sea with a small power
and train about him, he sent magnificent and glorious letters to Rome, as if
the whole I Will had been yielded up into his hands: warning and wishing the
posts ever and anon,

After this to the Ocean be marches, as if he minded to translate the war
over into Britain: Where even upon the very shore he embattelled his
soldiers: himself took sea in a Galley, and after he had lanched out a
little way from the land, returned again (and then mounting up an high pulpit,
sat him down, gave his soldiers the signal of battle, and commanded the
trumpets to sound: and so on a sudden charged them to gather cockles, mu^kles,
and other small shell fishes, Having gotten these spoils (as one indeed
wanting enemies spoils for to Dio.
he brought some of those cockles, and the other shell fish to Rome, that there
also he might show the booty which he had gotten. In token and memorial of
this brave victory he raised an high turret, out of which, as from a
watchtower, there might blaze all night long, lights and fires for the better
direction of ships at sea in their course. The ruins whereof are sometimes
seen at a low water in the shore of Holland, and by the people there
inhabiting is called Britenhuis. Who also find oftentimes stones engraven with
letters: of which one had these Characters, C. C. P. F. which they (I wot not
how truly) expound thus Caius Caligula Pharum Fecit, that is, Caius Caligula
this Watchtower.
Pharus made. But of this watchtower more at large, I will write in my
discourse British Islands.

Claudius.
Afterward, the inland parts of Britain, wasted rather with Civil wars and
factions, than by the force of the Romans, after sundry overthrowes and
slaughters of both sides, came at the length by little and little under the
subjection of the Romans. For, while the States fought severally one by one,
they were all vanquished: running so one upon another destruction, that until
they fell to utter confusion, they had not in gross, a feeling of the
particular losses that each one sustained. And thus far forth also wrought
ambition in them, that many became false and disloiall, yea, and some fled from
their contrymen, making choice of the Romans protection, swearing Bericus.
Among whom the principal was one Bericus, who moved and persuaded Claudius
the Emperor, to give the attempt upon Britain, which none assaied to do
since the time of Julius Caesar, and which then was up in a broile and
commotion, for that the said Fugitives were not rendered again unto them.
Whereupon he commanded Aulus Plautius, A. Plautius.
at that time Praetor, to go with an Army into Britain: who had much ado to
withdraw the said army out of Gaul, Dio.
as being much discontented to make war without the compass of the world,
and therefore drawing out the A freed servant of Claudius.
Narcissus sent from Claudius, began to mount up into the Tribunal of
Plautius, and to make a speech unto the host the soldiers more incensed with
indignation streightwaies cried all at once, Io. Saturnalia (for the manner is
of Slaves, during the Saturnalia, to celebrate that festival time in the habit
of their Masters) and so presently with willing hearts followed Plautius. The
forces being divided into three parts, for fear lest if they arrived all in
one place, they might be put by their landing; carried back by a gale of wind,
found some trouble in their passage: yet taking heart again, because as they
sailed along, there was seen a fire-drake in the Element shooting from the
East the West, they were conveied over into the Island, and no man stopped
Othorwise to Duobuni, Glocestershire, and O^fordshire.
Bodunni, who were subject to the Or Caticu^^lani, that is, Buckingham^shire,
and Hartfordshire.
Catuellani, he received into his protection: and having left a garrison there,
he went forward to a certain river: but because the Britans thought the
Romans could not possibly pass

This river they soon passed over, as being skillful of such places as would
afford them firm footing, and were passable fords. And the Romans in pursuing
them were in danger. Soon after, when the Germans had swum over a second time
whiles some of them, passed over at a bridge, higher up the river, environing
the Barbarians on every side, they made a great slaughter of them: but when
unadvisedly they followed after the rest, they fell upon blind bogs and lost
many of their men. Hereupon, and for that the Britans by occasion of Togodumnus
his death abated not their courage one whit, but rather prepared themselves
Elephants.
Elephants also were gotten together and prepared. Claudius advertised of these
news, committed the affairs of the City, and the soldiers likewise to the
charge of Vitellius (upon whom, as also upon himself, he had conferred a
Consulship for six months). Then went he down in person by water from Rome to
Ostra, and so from thence sailed to Marshils: and traveling the rest of the
way partly by land and partly by sea came to the Ocean, embarked, crossed the
channel into Britain, and went directly forward to his forces expecting him
by the Thames side. When he had received Now Madon.
Camalodunum the royal seat of Cunobellinus, and many thence he drove, others
upon their yielding he took to mercy. For these acts performed, diverse times
he was styled Imperator, a thing directly against the Romans custom; for,
lawful it is not in one war to assume that name oftener than once. Furthermore,
Claudius disarmed the Britans, and committed as well them to be governed, as
the rest to be subdued, unto Plautius. Himself made speed to That had married
his daughters.
sons in Law, with tidings of this victory, Thus much Dio.

Howbeit Suetonius reports, that part of the Island he took into his hands
upon submission without any battle or bloodshed. Sixteen days or thereabout
himself stayed in Britain: in which time he remitted unto the Gentry and
Nobility of the Britans the confiscation of their goods: For which benefit of
his, they frequented his temple and adored him as a God. Thus returned he to
Rome, in the sixth month after that he went forth from thence.

So great a matter it was and of such consequence to have conquered even so
small Bologne.
Gessoriacum in Gaul, and a most honorable and stately triumph: to the
beholding whereof the governors of Provinces also, yea and certain banished
persons were permitted to come into Rome: a Navall coronet was fixed upon the
looure of the Palace, Pliny.
as it were the ensign of the British sea subdued by him: the Provinces
brought in Crowns of gold, and France.
Gallia Comata one above the rest, waighing 9. pounds: and the hither part of
Spain another of 7. pound weight. He mounted up into the Capitol by the
stairs on his knees, supported and heaued up by his sons in Law on either
side. He entered in triumphing wise the venice Gulf.
Adriaticke sea, embarked in a vessel more like to some exceeding Messalina
was allowed by the Senate the highest place to sit in, as also to ride in a
Carroch, or hanging coach. After this, he set forth triumphall plays and
games, having taken upon him for that purpose the Consular office and
authority. The solemnities were exhibited at once in two Theaters, and many
times when he was gone aside from the sight, others had the charge thereof.
Horse runnings for the prize he promised as many as those days would admit:
Howbeit above ten there were not: for between every course of horses, Bears
were killed, champions performed their devoirs, and choice boys sent for out
of Asia danced the warlike dance in armor. Moreover, upon Valerius Asiaticus,
Julius Silanus, Sidius Geta, and others, in regard of this conquest, he heaped
Triumphall Posidius the Eunuch he bestowed a spear staff without an head:
upon C. Gavius, cheines, bracelets, horse^trappings, and a coronet of gold, as
is to be seen in an ancient marble at Taurinum.

In the mean time Aulus Plautius went on with the relics of this war, and
sped so well in his battles, that Claudius passed a decree, that he should ride
in pety triumph ovant: and when he was entered into the City, himself went to
meet him, giving him the right hand all the way both going and coming.
Vespasian.
And Vespasian even then showed by the destinies, whom Claudius assumed unto
him to bear a part of Vectem. Sueton. in Vespasian. cap. 4.
Wight he subdued. For which worthy exploits, he received triumphall ornaments,
and within a short space two sacerdotall dignities, with a Consulship beside
which he bare the two last months of the year. Titus also served here in
quality of a Tribune under his father, with exceeding commendation for his
industry and valor, (for valiantly he delivered his father when he was
besieged): and no less report of his modest carriage: as appears by a number
of his Images and titles to them annexed, thorowout the Provinces of Germany
and Britain. The rest of the Occurrences which happened in Britain afterward
unto the very latter end of Domitian, Sueton. in Tit. cap. 4.
Tacitus, who best can do it, will declare by his own

P. Ostorius Propraetor.
P. Ostorius Propraetor in Britan was welcomed at his first landing with
troubles and tumults. The enemies ranged all over the Allies country, and used
so much the greater violence, for that they thought the new captain was
unacquainted with the army, (the winter The Nem at Northhampton.
Aufona and the Sabrina. Iceni.
Severn to restrain and hem in the Britons. Which the Iceni first of all
refused, a strong nation and unshaken with battles, Autonas, or Aufonas.
because of their own motion they had sought our alliance and amity. And at
their instigation, the people adjoining chose a place to fight

Cangi. Cheshire (...) as some thi^
Cangi. Whose territory they wasted, harried and spoiled all over: whiles the
enemies durst not show themselves in the field, or if privily by stealth they
attempted to cut off the tail of our army as they marched, they paid for
their craft and deceit. Brigantes. Yorkshire. Lancashire Bishopric Durham,
Westmorla^^ Cumberla^^
Now by this time were the Romans come well near to the sea coast that
looks toward Ireland, when certain troubles and discords sprung up among the
the Brigantes, brought their leader back, being certainly resolved to attempt
no new matters, before he had settled the old. But as for the Brigantes, some
few being put to death that began first to take arms, he pardoned the residue,
and all were quieted. The Southwa^^ as Herefor^^shire, Radnorshire,
Brecknockshire, Monmouthshir^ and Glamganshire. Camalod^num a col^^nie.
Silures could neither by cruelty nor fair means be reclaimed but they would
needs war; and

Then went the Romans from thence against the Silures, who besides their own
stoutnesse trusted much in the strength of Caractacus, Caratacus.
a man whom many dangerous adventures which he had waded through, and as many
prosperous exploits by him achieved, had so lifted up, Ordovice Northwa^^ as
Montgmeryshire Merionetshire, Ca^vanshire, Denbighshire, and Flintshire
Ordovices: and there, joining to him as many as feared our peace, resolves to
hazard the last chance, having chosen a place for the battle, where the
coming in, and going forth, with all things else might be incommodious to us,
but for his very advantageous. Then, against the high hills, and wheresoever
there was any easy passage, and gentle access, he stopped up the way with
heaps of stones raised in manner of a rampire: withal, there ran hard by a
river having a doubtful foord, and the several companies of his Majoru^
nationum^ is, of Na^ons or (...)
best soldiers had taken their standing before the fortifications. Besides all
this, the leaders of every nation went about, exhorted and encouraged Majoru^
Nationum the Nati^^
protested, That this was the day, this the battle, which should begin either
the recovery of their liberty for ever, or else perpetual bondage. And here,
he called upon his ancestors by name, who had chased Caesar the Dictator from
hence, through whose valor they were freed from the Roman axes, and tributes,
and enjoyed still the bodies of their wives, ann children undefiled. As he
uttered these and such like speeches, the general

If my moderation in prosperity had been as great as my nobility and fortune
was, I had come rather as a friend into this City, than a Captive: neither
would you have disdained to receive me with covenants of peace, being a Prince
descended of Noble Progenitors, and

Upon these words Caesar pardoned him, his wife and brethren. And they being
allunbound, did their reverence likewise unto Agrippina, What became of his
daughters, Tacitus?
(who sat a loft not far off in another high seat to be seen) giving her the
like praises and in the same degrees of style as they did the Emperor himself.
Surely a strange and unexampled precedent among all our ancestors, Scipio
showed Siphax: Luc. Paulus Perses, or whosoever else exhibited, conquered Kings

These conquests of Britain, writers have numbered among the most famous
monuments and testimonies of the Romans prowess. And thereupon Seneca writes
thus; Claudius might make his boast that he first vanquished the Britans: for
Julius Caesar did but show them only to the Romans. And in another place,
writing of the same Claudius, Ille Britannos
Vltra noti
Littora Ponti,

Scuta Brigantes,
Dare Romuleis
Colla catenis
Iussit, and ipsum
Nova Romanae
Iura securis
Tremere Oceanum.
The Britans, those, that seated are beyond the known seacoast,

To yield their necks in Roman chains as captive to be led,
And even the Ocean this new power of Roman axe to dread.
And Seneca the Tragic poet in his Octavia, versified in this manner
concerning Claudius, Cuique Britanni
Terga dedere, ducibus nostris
Ante ignoti jurisque sui.
And unto whom the Britans showed their backs, who er'st unknown
To all our Captains lived by laws and customs of their own.
And in the same tragedy, for that he had passed over the Thames, En qui orae
Tamisis primus posuit jugum
Ignota tantis classibus texit freta:
Interque gentes barbaras tutus fuit,
Et soeva maria; conjugis scelere -- Occidit.
Behold, who first the mouth and coast of Thamis, did subdew
And spread with mighty fleets those Firths, the like that never never knew:
With nations rude, in raging seas, who lived safe and sound,
By wicked hand of cursed wife his death at home he found.


Semblably Egesippus, says thus of Claudius, Witness here is Britain, which
liing ROMAN WORLD. For if we search into the truth, the whole army it self is
comprised within the Empire of the Romans: upon which the Roman valor, having
gone forward still beyond the Ocean, has sought for it self another world,
and in Britain an Island remote from the confines of Lands has found out for
a self another possession. To conclude, they who are denied the benefit, not
only of the free burgesie of Rome, but in manner also of all converse with
men, are directed and awarded thither, there to dwell as persons banished out
of the world. The Ocean now has reined up his bounds: For the Romans know how
to seek into his inward And Josephus in the person of Titus, speaks thus to
the Jews: What greater wall and bar than the Ocean? wherewith the Britans
being fensed and enclosed, do yet adore the Romans forces.

Moreover, as touching this argument, that renowned Joseph Scaliger, in his
Catalects, has saved and freed from rust and mouldinesse certain verses of a
most learned Poet though unknown: which, because they are not every where to
be found, I will not think much of my paints to put down: for they are as
good as good may be. Antonius Delrio reads otherwise in some places: the
diverse readings therefore, I have here set to.
informed me: Ausonius nunquam tellus violata triumphis.
Ictatuo, Caesar, fulmine procubuit.
Oceanusque tuas ultra se Prospicit, that is, sees before him.
respicit a^as,
Qui finis mundo est Nunc, now. Or before,
non erit imperio.
That Land whose honor never felt, by Roman triumph, wrong
By dint la^e of thy thunderbolt, o Caesar, lay along:
The Ocean sees prospicit if respicit, behind.
beyond it self thine altars, to adore,
Non. if Nun^, read thus.
That, will That will be now thine Empires bound, which was of world before.
not bound their Empire, now, which did the world before.
Victa prius nulli, jam jam spectata triumph^,
Illibata tuos gens jacet in titulos.
Fabula visa diu, medioque reconditaponto
Libera victori jam modo colla dedit.
Euphrates Ortus, Rhenus recluserat.
incluserit Arctos;
Oceanus medium venit in imperium.
A people erst untouched, unfoil'd, and conquered of none,
Late seen in triumph, to thy style has title added one:
Though but a tale long time, as hid in mid-sea past all view,
To Victors yoke now yielded neck, that never bondage knew.
How ever Rhene shuts up the North, Euphrates Eastern land,
It skils not, now that the Ocean sea is whole at thy command.
Libera non hostem, non passa Britannia Regem,
Aeternum nostro quae procul orb jacet;
Foelix adversis, and sort oppressa secunda
Communis nobis, and tibi, Caesar, erit.
Britain most free, which enemy and Monarch never felt,
Far dissite from this world of ours, wherein we ever dwelt;
An happy state in adverse times, but won in prosperous days,
Sall be, o Caesar, common now to thee and us always.
Ultima cingebat Tibris tua, Romule, Regna:
Hic tibi finis erat, religiose Numa.
Et tua, Dive, tuum sacrata potentia coelo
Extremum citra constitit Oceanum.
At nunc Oceanus geminos interluit orbs
Pars est imperij, terminus ante fuit,
Thy Kingdoms all, o Romulus, Tibris sometime did bound

And even thy power right sacred now, and heavenly though it be,
O Caesar, stayed within precinct of thine own Ocean sea:
But now the Ocean interflow^s two worlds, by double shore,
And parcel of our Empire is, which was the bound before.
Mars pater, and nostrae gentis tutela Quirine,
Et magno positus Caesar uterque Polo.
Cernitis ignotos Latia sub lege Britannos,

Vltima cesserunt adaperto claustra Profundo
Et jam Romano Cingitur.
cingimur Oceano.
O father Mars o Romulus, Protector of our race,
And Caesar's both, late defied, in heaven who have your place.
The Britans erst unknown, ye see the Latian laws embrace
And short of our large Seignory the Sun turns in his race.
The furthest frontiers soon gave way, when seas once opened were
The Roman Ocean now it is, wherein enclosed we are.
Opponis frustra rapidum Germania Rhenum,
Euphrates prodest nil tibi, Parthe fugax.
Oceanus jam terga dedit, nec pervius ulli
Caesareos fasces, imperiumque tulit.
In vain opposest thou for fence, swift Rhene, o Germany
Euphrates (Parthian) boots thee naught, thou that in fight do fly.
For the Ocean is already fled, which passable to none
Has now the Caesar's government, and Romes rule undergone.
Illa procul nostro semota, exclusaque coelo,
Semoto.
Alluitur nostra victa Britannia aqua,
Semota, and vasto disjuncta Britannia Ponto
Cinctaque inaccessis horrida littoribus:
Quam fallax aestu circuit Oceanus.
Quam fallax aestu circuit Oceanus.
Brumalem sortita Polum.
plagam: qua frigida semper
Praefulget stellis Arctos in occiduis.

Subdidit insueto colla premenda jugo
Aspice, confundit populos imper via tellus,
Conjunctum, est quod adhuc orbis, and orbis erat,
That Britain from our clime far set and thence excluded quite,
Conquered of late is washed yet, with water ours by right.
Britain, I say, far set apart, and by vast sea disjoined,
Walled with inaccessible banks and craggy clifts behind;
Which father Nereus fensed had with billows most invincible
And Ocean likewise compassed with ebs and flows as fallible.

Where cold North-Beare shines always bright with stars that never set
Even at thy sight and first approach o Caesar soon subdued,
Submitted has her neck to bear strange yoke of servitude.
Behold, the earth unpassable of nations makes commixtion,
What heretofore was world and world is now conjoined in one.
Now let Tacitus proceed in his Story. Until this time all went well with
Ostorius: but

A. Didius Avitus Gallus Propretor.
But Caesar having intelligence of his Lieutenants death, lest the Province
should be destitute of a governor, appointed A. Didius in his place. He
being thither come with great

About this time Claudius departed this life: and Nero succeeded him in the
Empire, one who had no heart at all to attempt any thing in warfare: Nero.
nay he was minded once to withdraw the forces out of Britain: Neither gave he
over that intent of his but only for shame, Venutius.
Venutius a very expert man above the rest in military affairs, borne under
the state of the Or happily, Brigantes.
Iugantes, long time trusty to us, and defended by the Romans power, having to
wife Queen Cartismandua, by occasion soon after of a divorce, and then of
open war between them, rebelled also against us, and proceeded to plain
hostility. At the first, the quarrel was only between them two: until
Cartismandua by policy and craft had intercepted the brother, and near
kinsmen of Venutius. Whereupon our enemies, kindled with rage, and pricked
forward with an ignominous indignity, lest they should be brought under the
yoke of a woman's government, with a strong power of choice youth, by force of
arms invaded her kingdom, which was foreseen by us: and thereupon were
cohorts sent to aid her, and they fought a hot battle: The beginning whereof
was doubtful, but the end

After Didius Avicus, Verannius Propretor.
there succeeded Verannius, who having with small rodes spoiled the Silures,
was hindered by death, for warring any farther: a man while he lived carrying a
great name of precise severitie, but in his last will he showed himself
manifestly ambitious. For after much flattering of Nero, he added this, That he
would have subdued the Province unto his obedience, if he had lived the next
two years.

Paulus Suetonius Propretor.
one in martial skill, and opinion of the people (which suffers no man
without a concurrent) striving to match Corbule; desirous to equal the honor
which he won in recovering Armenia, by subduing the enemies that stood out in
this country. And therefore he makes all the preparation he can to invade
the Isle of Anglesey.
Mona, peopled with strong Inhabitants, and a receptacle of traitorous
fugitives. To this purpose he builds flat botom vessels, for the shalowes
and uncertain landing places. Thus the footmen passed over: and then followed
the horsemen by the foord, or if the waters were any thing high, by swimming
they put the horses over. Against them Druidae.
The Druidae likewise round about them, lifting up their hands to heaven, and
pouring out deadly and cursing prayers, with this so strange and unco^th sight,
amazed the soldiers so, as they stood still as stocks and stirred not a foot,
as if they would expose their bodies to receive all wounds presented unto them.
But afterward, being encouraged by their Captain, and animating one another,
that they should not fear a flock of women and frantic people, they
displaied their ensigns and advanced forward. Down they went with such as
encountered them and thrust them within their own fires. This done they planted
garrisons in their towns, and cut down their woods and groves consecrated to
their execrable superstitions. Vicis alias victis, that is over the vanquished.
For they accounted it lawful, to offer sacrifies upon

As Suetonius was busy in these actions, news came unto him that the Province
was suddenly revolted. Prasutagus.
Prasutagus King of the Iceni, in wealth surpassing all others, had set down in
his will Caesar with two of his daughters to be his heirs; supposing by this
kind of flattery to curry favor, and to make his kingdom and house most
secured from all injuries. Which fell out far otherwise: in so much as his
kingdom by Centurions, his house by slaves were spoiled and reputed lawful
booties. Boodicia, (...) also is name^ Boaducia Boudicia, V^^adica, and
Bunduica.
And to begin withal, his wife Boadicia was whipped, and his daughters
defloured. The chiefest of the Iceni, as if the whole country had been given
them by way of gift, are turned out of their ancient inheritances, and the
Kings kinsfolk come over to serve, if the Britains would fall to reckon
themselves? Thus Germany had shaken

With these and such inducements, inciting and quickening one another, they take
arms under the conduct of Boodicia a Lady of the royal blood (for in matter
of government in chief the Britains make no distinction of sex) having
stirred up the Trinobants to Rebellion, and as many as yet, not broken to the
yoke of servitude, had in secret conspiracies vowed to recover and resume their
liberty, bearing a most bitter hatred against the old soldiers. For those who
newly brought into the Colonie Camalodunum, The Colony Camalodunum, that is,
Maldon.
thrust the ancient Inhabitants out of their houses, disseized them of their
Lands, Livings, calling them captives and See Viphilinus in Nero.
than profit. Amid these occurrences, the image of victory set up in the
Camalodunum, fell down without any apparent causes, and turned backward, as if
it would give place to the enemies. And certain women distempered with some
fanaticall fury, went singing by way of prophecy, that destruction was at
hand. And strange noises abroad were heard into their Counsel Happily, the Firth
of Famesa.
there, a sign foretelling the subversion of that Colonie. Furthermore, the
Ocean bloody in show, and the shapes of men's bodies left after an ebb, as the
Britans construed favorably to feed their own hopes, so the old soldiers
interpreted to the increase of their fear. But because Suetonius was far off,
they craved help of Catus Derianus the Procurator: who sent unto them not
passing two hundred, and those but badly armed: and within the town the number
of soldiers which was not great, trusted to the fence of the Temple. And by
reason that those among them, which being privy to the secret co^spiracie
aforesaid, troubled their designments, hindered them, they had neither made
trench or rampire before the town, nor sent away their old folk, and women,
keeping the lusty young men only, and so being Paetilius Cerealis.
the Britans it their train of victory, encountering Petelius Cerealis
Lieutenant of the ninth Legion, as he was coming with aid, put the legion to
flight and slew all the footmen. Cerealis himself with the Cavallery escaped
to the camp, and saved himself within the fortifications. Upon which
overthrow, and in regard of the provincial peoples hatred, driven through the
avarice of the Romans to take arms, Catus the Procurator passed over in great
haste for fear, into Gaul. But Suetonius with constant resolution, passing
through the midst of his enemies, went to Londinium, a town verily by the name
that it carried of a Colony, nothing famous, London.
provision of necessaries most of all other frequented. Being thither come, he
stood doubtful whether to choose it for the seat of war or no. And considering
well the small number of soldiers that he had, Commeatuum.
and by good proofs taught how Petilius paid for his rashness, he determined
with the damage of one town to save all the rest whole. Verulam near to (...)
Albans.
Verulamium: because the Barbarians leaving the castles and forts of garrison
soldiers, made spoil of the richest and fattest: and carrying their pillage
into some place of safety, Militar or milita^
as men glad of booty, went on still to such as were of note and mark above
the rest. And thus to the number of seventie thousand Roman citizens and
associats together, by true report, Deserent tutum, or (...) fendentil^ tutum,
the whiles the fendants stood no^ with safe^ upon the^ guard.
were known to have been slain in those places before named. For there was no
taking

Now by this time Suetonius having with him the fourteenth Legion with the old
soldiers, of the twentieth, and the auxiliaries from the parts next adjoining,
was well near ten thousand strong, when he resolved to lay aside all further
delays, and to try the chance of a main battle. And so he chooses a place
with a narrow entrance like a gullet, Vexillari
and enclosed behind with a wood: being well assured, that he had no enemies
but in front, and that the plain lay open without fear of ambush The
Legionarie soldiers therefore, being marshalled in thick ranks, and

Boodicia, having her daughters before her in a chariot, ever as she came to
any several nation (for it was the custom verily of the Britans to make war
under the conduct of women) protested and told them, that she was come then,
not as a Lady descended of so noble progenitors, to make either Kingdom or
riches her quarrel, but as one of the common people, in revenge of her
liberty lost, her body sore whipped, and her daughters chastity assailed by
unclean handling: That the Romans lust and concupiscence, was grown to such a
pass, that they spared

Neither could Suetonius himself, in so great an extremity, hold his tongue:
For although he presumed and trusted much upon valor, Sonor Sonores is, the
(...) noises.
yet enterlaced he exhortations and prayers. That was in their way, and made
head against them. The residue showed their backs, and had much

After this, the whole army being rallied together, kept the field still, and
lay encamped for to end the residue of the war: and Caesar augmented their
forces by sending out of Germany two thousand Legionarie soldiers, eight
cohorts of auxiliaries, and a thousand horsemen: by whose coming, they of the
ninth Legion, had their companies supplied, and made up with the Legioners. The
cohorts and cornets of horse, were appointed to lodge in new wintering places:
and all those nations of the enemies, which were either doubtful or known
adversaries, were wasted with fire and sword. But nothing distressed them so
much as famine, being negligent in sowing of corn, by reason that of all ages
they were given to war: for that also they

To see therefore in what state Britain stood, Polycletus one of Neroes freed
men was sent: for, good hope he had, that by his authority there should not
only be wrought a perfect agreement Petronius Turpilianus, Propretor.
who now was newly out of his Consulship, Trebellius Maximus Propretor.
coloring a lazy and idle life with the honest name of peace, after he had
dared and done no more* but composed former troubles and debates, delivered the
charge of the province unto Trebellius Maximus.

But he, a man unfit for action, and altogether unexpert in war-service, by a
kind of courteous and mild regiment entertained the country in quiet. For now
the Britains also had learned the good manners, not rudely to repulse the
sugared assaults of flattering vices; and the disturbance of civil dissentions
coming between, ministered a lawful excuse for his doing nothing. But much
discord arose among them whiles the soldier, accustomed to warfare, waxt
wanton with ease, and grew to be mutinous: and he for his niggardly sparing and

Vectias Bolanus Propraetor.
Otho and Vitellius grew hot, Vectius Bolanus was by Vitellius sent to succeed
him. Neither troubled he Britanny with any discipline. The same default
continued still against the enemies, and the like licentiousness in the camp:
saving only that Bolanus a good honest harmless man, and not odious for
committing any crime, had won himself love and good will in lieu of
obedience: and albeit Vitellius sent for aids out of Britanny, yet Bolanus made
no have, for that Britain was never quiet enough. As for the Island, that great
favor and reputation in warlike affairs, which Vespasian had gotten, being
Lieutenant there of the second Legion under Claudius, did easily win it unto
him, yet not without some stir of the other Legions: wherein many centurions
and soldiers who had

For all this civil war, no quarrel nor mutinies there were in the Britain
army. And to say a truth, during all the troubles of civil wars, no Legions
behaved themselves more harmless, either because they were far off and
severed by the Ocean, or for that they were taught by continual service and
soulderie, to hate the rather all hostility and dealing with enemies. Howbeit
by means of these dissentions and rumors still of civil war, the Britains
took heart and rebelled, through the procurement of Venusius: who besides a
natural fierceness of courage, and hatred of the Roman name, was incensed
particularly by private Cartismandua.
This Carthismandua was Queen of the Brigantes, of high and noble linag, who
upon the delivery of King Caractacus whom she took by fraud and sent to
furnish and set out the triumph of Claudius (that glorious spectacle, I mean
in manner of a triumph, wherein Caractacus was showed) had won favor with the
Romans and greatly increased her strength. Whereupon ensued wealth: of wealth
and prosperity riotous and incontinent life: in so much, that casting off
Venusius her husband, and intercepting his kinsfolk, she joined her self in
marriage with Vellocatus his harnesse-bearer, and crowned him King: which foul
fact was the overthrow immediately of her house. The good will of the country
went generally with the lawful husband: but the Queens intemperate affections
were peremptory and violent in maintaining

Now when as the state of Rome City, Vespasian Emperor. Jul. Agrico Lieutenant
over the twentieth Legion.
was for Vespasian governed by Mutianus, he made Julius Agricola who was gone
to side with Vespasian, and had behaved himself with great integrity and
courage, Lieutenant of the two and twentieth Legion in Britanny, a Legion which
slowly had sworn allegiance to Vespasian, In which province his predecessor
by made them dutiful soldiers. And albeit that Vectius Bolanus Lieutenant
General of Britannie

But when as Vespasian recovered together with the rest of the world, Britanny
also; brave captains, good soldiers were sent, and the enemies hope was
greatly abated. For straightwaies Petilius Cerialis struck a terror into them,
Petilius Cerealis Propraetor.
by invading at his first entry the Brigantes, thought to be the most populous
state of the whole Province. Many battles were fought, and some bloody: And the
greatest of the Brigantes he either conquered or wasted.

And whereas Cerialis would doubtless have dimmed the diligence and fame of
another successor, Julius Frontinus Propraetor.
Julius Frontinus a great man sustained also as he might, after such a
predecessor that weighty charge with reputation and credit: who subdued the
puissant and warlike people of the Silures, where he had beside the virtue of
the enemy, struggled with the streights and difficult places.

In this estate Agricola found the Province, and the wars thus far proceeded
in, when as about the midst of summer he passed the seas: Jul. Agricola
Propraetor.
at what time the soldiers, as if the season were past, attended an end for
that year of their service, and the enemy occasions to begin for to hurt. The
Ordovices a little before he entered the land, had hewed almost wholly in pieces
a wing which lay in their borders. Upon which beginning the country being
awaked, as men

Then Agricola, although the Summer was spent, and the bands lay dispersed in
the Province, and his soldiers had fully presumed of rest for that year,
which hindered much, and crossed directly his undertaking of war, most men
also being of opinion, rather to keep and assure the places suspected, all
this notwithstanding, resolved fully to encounter the danger: having gathered
therefore the ensigns of the Legions, and some few Auxiliaries, because the
Ordovices durst not descend into indifferent ground, himself before the
voward, to give others like courage in the like danger, led up in battell-ray
to encounter the enemy. And having slaughtered almost the whole nation,
knowing full well that fame must with instance be followed, Anglesey.
Mona, from the possession whereof, as before I have rehearsed, Paullinus was
revoked by the general rebellion of Britannie: But as in purposes not resolved
on before, ships being wanting, the policy and resolutenesse of the captain
devised a passage over. For he commanded the most choice of the Aid-souldiers,
to whom all the foords and shallowes were known, and who after the usual
practice of their country, were able in swimming to govern all at once
themselves, their armor and horses, laying aside their carriage, to put over
at once, and suddenly invade them. Which thing so amazed the enemy, attending
for a fleet, for shipping, for tide, that they surely believed nothing could
be hard or invincible to men that came so minded to war. Whereupon they humbly
entreated for peace, and yielded the Island. Thus Agricola

Neither abused Agricola the prosperous proceeding of his affairs to vanity or
braving in speeches, as to term it an exploit or a conquest, thus to have
kept in order persons subdued before: or to bedeck with laurel his letters of
advertisement, but by stopping and suppressing the fame he augmented it the
more: whiles men began to discourse, upon what great presumptions of future
success, he should make so light an account of such great actions already
performed, as not to speak a word of them.

Now as touching civil government: Agricola knowing right well the disposition
and mind of the Province, taught also by the experience of others, that arms
avail little to settle

At this time died Vespasian, unto whom for these victories of the leaders, and
his own virtue under Claudius, Valerius Flaccus before his Poem thus
speaks;
Fama, Caledonius post quam tua carbasa vexit
Oceanus, Phrygios prius indignatus Iulos.
And thou, for seas discovery whose fame did more appear,
Since time thy ships with sails full spread in Northern Ocean were,
Which of the Trojan Julii erst did scorn the sails to bear.
But when that Noble Titus, THE LOVELY Deareling AND JOY OF THE WORLD succeeded
his father, Titus Emperor.
Agricola when summer was once come, assembling his army together, those
soldiers of his who in marching behaved themselves in modest sort he
commended, the loose and dissolute straglers he checked. The places for
pitching the camp he designed himself; the friths he sounded, and the
thickets he proved first in his own person: not suffering in the mean season
any corner in the enemies country to be quiet: but wasting and spoiling

The winter ensuing was spent in most profitable and politic devises. For,
whereas the Britains were rude and dispersed, and therefore prone upon every
occasion to war, he to induce them by pleasures unto quietness and rest,
exhorted them in private, and helped them in Tau Firth. Twede as some think^
Taus. Which thing so terrified the enemies; and needing no help of their
neighbors, the enemies assaulting sometimes, but in vain, without

The fourth summer was spent in perusing, and ordering that which he had
overrun. And if the valiant minds of the armies, and glory of the Roman name,
could have permitted or accepted it so, The Fir^h of Dunbritson.
they needed not to have sought other limit of Britain. For, Glotta and
Bodotria two arms of two contrary seas, shooting a mighty way into the land,
are only divided a sunder by a narrow partition of ground: Edenborough Irith.
which passage was guarded and fortified then with garrison and castle: so that
the Romans were absolute Lords of all on this side, having cast out the enemy,
as it were, into another Island.

The fifth year of the war, Agricola first taking sea there, went over, and
subdued with many and prosperous conflicts nations before that time unknown:
and he furnished with forces, that part of Britannie, Ireland.
which lies against Ireland, more in hope, than for fear. For Ireland,

About this time died Titus, who for these valiant Acts exploited by Agricola,
was the fifteenth ^ime named Imperator, as Xiphilinus writes, and an ancient
piece of coin witnesses with him. Then Agricola under Domitian in the summer
which began the sixth year of his office, because a general rising in arms
of all the farther Nations, beyond Bodotria was feared, and passages were all
beset with a power of the enemies, manned a fleet to search the Creeks and
Harboroughes of that ample region, which lies beyond it. Which being by
Agricola then first taken, and employed as a part of his strength, followed
after a long, and made a goodly brave show, while at one time war both by sea
and land went forward. And often it so chanced, that the horseman, footman, and
sea-souldier met, and made merry in the

The same summer, a cohort of Vsipians, levied in Germany, and sent over into
Britan, committed a heinous and memorable Act. Those about Zutphen.
For having slain a Centurion, and certain soldiers intermingled among other
manciples, and set over them for direction of discipline, they fled and
embarked themselves in three pinnaces, compelling by force the Masters of the
said vessels, to execute their charge: and only one doing his office, the other
two being suspected, and thereupon slain, this strange going out, and putting
to sea, the fact as yet not noised abroad, was gazed and wondered at:
afterward being driven uncertainly hither and thither, and having Britain is
s^iled round about.
then as the lot lighted. Thus after they had floated round about Britain, and
lost their vessels for lack of government, they were intercepted first by the
Suevians, then by Frisians, as Pirates and Rovers. Now, some of them there were,
that being bought by merchants as slaves, and by change of Masters brought to
our side of the river grew into a name by giving first notice of so great and
so rare an adventure.

In the beginning of Summer, Agricola was deeply touched with a grievous
mischance that happened in his own house: for, he lost his own Son about a
year old. Which unfortunate hap, he neither bare out, as most of these great
men do in the like case, vaine-gloriously, nor Gran^bani.
where the enemies were lodged before. For the Britans nothing danted with the
event of the former battle, and attending for nothing else but revenge or
servitude, and being taught at length, that common danger must be repelled
with concord, by embassages and league made, had raised the power of all their
Cities and States together. And now by this time there were entered into the
field, the view being taken, above Galgacus
seeing the multitude thus assembled hotly to demand battle, is said to have
used this speech unto them: When I view and consider the causes of this war,
and our present necessity, I have reason, me seems, to presume, that this
day, and this your agreeing consent, will give a happy beginning to the
freedom of the whole Island. For, both have we all hitherto lived Trinobantes.
Gods have delivered, mewd up as it were and fettered, into our hands. Let

This speech they cheerfully received, as well with a song after their
barbarous m^^^ner, as with confused acclamations and dissonant noises. And as
the companies clustered together and glittering armor appeared, whiles the
boldest advanced forward, and withal, the ranks were putting themselves in
array; Agricola, albeit his soldiers were glad of that day, and scarce with
words could be withheld, supposing it best to say somewhat, encouraged them

Fellow soldiers and companions in arms: Your faithful service and diligence
these 8. years so painfully showed, by the virtue and fortune of the Roman
Empire, has conquered red Britanny. In so many journies, in so many battles,
we were of necessity to show our selves either valiant against the enemy, or
patient and laborious almost above and against nature it self. In which
exploits we have hitherto borne our selves both, so that neither desired I
better soldiers, nor you other Captain. Insomuch as we have exceeded the
limits, I, of my predecessor, and you of yours. To the end of Britannie we
have found, not by fame and report, but we are with our arms and pavillions
really invested thereof. Britain I say, is found and subdued. In marching, when
the passage over bogs, mountains and rivers toiled you out, how often have I
heard every valiant soldier say, when will the enemy present himself? when
shall we fight? Lo, they are now put up out of their holes, and hither they
are come.

As Agricola was yet speaking, the soldiers gave great tokens of fervencie,
and when he had ended, seconded the speech with a joyful applause, and ran
straightwaies to their weapons. Agricola seeing them sufficiently animated, and
rushing furiously forward, ordered his men in this manner. With the auxiliary
footmen being eight thousand, he fortified the middle battle:

In the first encounter before the joining, both sides discharged and threw:
Wherein the Britans both employing art, and showing resolution with their great
swords and little targuets a voided our shot, or shook them off; darting
withal great store of theirs against us: till at length Agricola spying his
vantage, exhorted three Batavian cohorts, and two of the Tungrians to press
forward and bring the matter to handy strokes and dint of sword: a thing, which
they in respect of long service were able readily to perform: and contrariwise
to the enemy prejudicial and hurtful, by reason of their small bucklers and
huge swords, For the

In the mean time, the troops of the horsemen began to flee: and the
charriotters mingled themselves with the battle of the footmen: who albeit
they had lately terrified others, were now distressed themselves, by the
unevenness of the ground, and thick ranks of their enemies. Neither was the
form of this fight, like a loose skirmish of horsemen to and fro. But Now
calle^ Anguse, as some think.
Horrestians: where receiving hostages he commanded the Admiral of his navy
to sail about Some read, Rhutupensis, which is supposed to be Richborow near
Sandwitch.

Britain is for certain avouched to be an Island. The Islands Orkneys.


Trutulensis, from whence it departed, and coasting along the nearest side of
Britain returned thither again. Then and never before, the Roman fleet having
doubled the point of the utmost sea discovered and reported, Britan to be an
Island, and withal found out and subdued the Isles of Orkney, before that time
never known, which Orosius and as many writers as follow him ascribe falsely
unto Claudius. This state of affairs in Britain Agricola signified by letter
without any amplifying terms, to Domitian: who after his manner, with a
cheerful countenance and grieved heart, received the news: being inwardly
pricked, to think that his late counterfeit triumph of Germany, wherein
certain slaves bought and by night came to the palace as he was willed. Where,
being admitted to the Princes presence,

Salustius Lucullus Lieutenant General over Britain. Arviragus the Britain.
Agricola had for his successor, as others think, Cn. Trebellius, but, as I
take it, Salustius Lucullus, whom Domitian straight after slew, because he
suffered certain spears of a new fashion to be called Luculleae. At which time
also, Arviragus flourished in this Island, and not in the days of Claudius, as
Geffrey of Monmouth dreameth. For these verses of Juvenall are to be
understood of Domitian: -- Omen habes magni clarique triumphi:
Regem aliquem capies, aut de temone Britanno
Excidet The old scholiast upon Juvenal calls him Arbila.
Arviragus --
A powerful osse and sign thou have, presaging triumph great:
Some King (sure (thou shall prisoner take in chase or battle heat:
Or else Arviragus shall lose his British royal seat.
There flourished likewise at Rome Claudia Rufina, Rufina, a British dame.
a British dame, passing well learned, and withal as beautiful, whom Martial
commends in these verses; Claudia caeruleis cum sit Rufina Britannis
Edita, cur By the like phrase in another Epigram he says, Abderitane pectora
plebis habet; speaking of a doltish and gross headed fellow.
Latiae pectora plebis habet?
Quale decus formae? Romanam credere matres
Italides possunt, Atthides esse suam.
Since from blew Britans Claudia Rufina does descend,
How comes a learned Latian breast her person to commend?
How beautiful! Italian dames may her a Roman make:
And Attick wives again full well, her for their daughter take.
This was, as John Bale and Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury have
written, the very same woman, of whom S. Paul makes mention in his latter
Epistle to Timothy) neither is the computation of times repugnant, howsoever
others be of a contrary opinion.

Thus under the Empire of Domitian, when that farther part thereof, as being
rough and unfruitful, Britain become a Province. Britain a Presidiall
Province.
was left unto the barbarous Britans, this hither side was reduced full and
whole into the form of a province: Which was not governed by any Consular
Governed under Emperors, with garrisons lying in it.
Praesidialis, and appropriate to the Caesar's: as being a province annexed unto
the Roman Empire after the division of Provinces ordained by Augustus, and had
Propretors of their own. Afterward when as Constantinus Maximus had set down
a new form of Commonweal, under a Prefect or Provost of Pretors degree of
Gaul, there was set over it a vicegerent, and together with him in matters of
war the Comes, here, as much as a Lieutenant General. What legions served in
Britain.

Dio. ^5.


Count or Earl of Britan, an Earl or Count of the Saxony coast by Britan: and
a Duke or General of Britan, besides Presidents, Auditors or Receivers and
such others. Moreover out of those 29. Legions, which the Romans had appointed
through their Imperial government, three of them lay in garrison to restrain
that Province, to wit, the second Legion Augusta, the sixth Legion and the
twentieth victrix. But this is meant of the time of Severus: For before, we
learn out of Authors, that other Legions there were, and more in number. And
although Strabo writes that there was need of no more than one band of
soldiers, to the keeping of Britain in subjection, yet in the reign of
Claudius there were placed here, the second Legion Augusta, the ninth Legion
Hispaniensis, and the fourteenth named Gemina Martia victrix. Yea and about the
time of Vespasian, Josephus shows, that four Legions served in this Island:
Britain, says he, is compassed about with the Ocean, and almost as big as
our world. The Romans there inhabiting, have brought it under their dominion,
and four Legions do keep in subjection an Island, peopled with so great a
multitude. The beginning of Cities. The Roman yoke.
And doubtless, the standing guards and Camps of Legions and Roman Rowardus in
Protribunal.
For, Provinces had Propretors, Lieutenants, Presidents, Pretors and
Proconsuls. Every city also and State had their municipall magistrates. The
Praetor proclaimed yearly solemn sessions and Assizes, at which he determined
the waightier causes sitting aloft upon a high Tribunal seat, and guarded with
his Lictors about him proudly executed he his jurisdiction:

This yoke of the Romans although it were grievous, yet comfortable it proved
and a saving health unto them: for that healthsome light of Jesus Christ shone
withal upon the Britans, whereof more hereafter, and the brightness of that
most glorious Empire, chased away all savage barbarism from the Britans minds,
like as from other nations whom it had subdued. For Rome, as says Rutilius.


Foedere communi vivere cuncta facit:
Compassed the world with triumphs bringing laws;
And all to live in common league does cause.
And in another place speaking unto the same Rome most truly and in right
elegant verses; Fecisti patriam diversis gentibus unam.
Profuit injustis te dominante capi.
Dumque offers victis proprii consortia juris,
Vrbem fecisti quod prius orbis erat.

Happy it was for lawless folk, that they by thee were tamed.
For offering use, to them subdued, of thine own proper lore,
One civil state rhou made of that, which was wild world before.
For, to say nothing of the rest of the Provinces, the Romans having brought
over Colonies hither, and reduced the natural inhabitants of the Island unto
the society of civil life, by training them up in the liberal Arts, and by
sending them into Gaul for to learn perfectly the laws of the Romans
(whereupon Juvenal Gallia causidicos docui facunda Britannos,
Gaul eloquent of Britans has good pleading lawyers made.)
governed them with their laws, and framed them to good manners and behavior,
so as in their diet and apparel they were not inferior to any other Provinces:
The Roman^ works in Britain.
they furnished them also with goodly houses and stately buildings, in such
sort, that the relics and rubbish of their ruins do cause the beholders
now, exceedingly to admire the same: and the common sort of people do plainly
say, these Roman works were made by Giants, whom in the North parts they use
to call in their vulgar tongue Eatons, for Heathens (if I be not deceived) or
Ethnicks. The Picts wall. Highwaies made by the Romans.
Certes, they are works of exceeding great admiration, and sumptuous
magnificence: but especially the Picts wall, whereof I will write more in due
place: and those Causeies throughout the whole land, a wonderful piece of
work, what with dreining and drying up the meres in

The ways, Galen. lib. 9. cap. 8. Metho. medend.
quoth he, Trajanus repaired, by paving with stone, or raising with banks cast
up such pieces of them as were moist and myrie; by stocking up and ridding such
as were rough and overgrowne with bushes and briers: by making bridges over
rivers that could not be But now adays these of ours, being dismembered, as it
were, and cut one piece from another in some places, by reason that the country
people dig out gravel from thence, and scarcely to be seen; yet elsewhere,
leading through pastures and by-grounds out of the rode way, the banks are so
high, that evidently they show themselves.

These causeies or Street-waies, the Romans called Vias Consulares, Regias,
Praetorias, Militares, Publicas, cursus publicos, and Actus, as it is to be
seen in Ulpian and Julius Frontinus. Ammianus Marcellinus terms them Aggeres
itinerarios and publicos: Sidonius Apollinaris, Aggeres, and Tellures
inaggeratas: Beda and the latter writers, Stratas, that is Streets.

Our Chronicles, doubtless herein deceived, do hold, that there were but
only four such causeies as these: of which, the first was Watling-streete, so
called of one Vitellian, I wot not what he was,) who had the charge thereof
(and indeed the Britans named Vitellian, in their tongue Guetalin) and
Werlam-street, for that it went through Verolamium, which elsewhere also, the
people dwelling near unto it, named, and Ridge-way. The second they commonly
call Ikemildstreet, because it began in the Icenes country: The third, the
Fosse, for that (as men think) it was fensed on both sides with a ditch: and
the fourth Ermin-street, by a German word, of Mercury (whom as I am informed
by John obsopoeus) a great learned man) under the name of Ermisul, that is, the
Column of Mercury, the Germans our ancient progenitors, worshipped.

Now, that Mercury had the charge of ways, his name (...) among the Greeks,
may show sufficiently: as also his Statues with four sides, called in old time
Hermae, which were set every where upon high ways. It has been generally
thought, that one Mulmutius (I know not what he should be) many hundred years
before the birth governed Britain, several ways were enjoined, and far
distant places (by the purveyors commandment) that the country should carry
from the nearest standing camps, or wintering places, to those that were far
off, and out of the way: And the Britans complained, as the same Tacitus
writes, That the Romans wore out, and consumed their bodies and hands, in
clearing of woods, and paving the Fens, with a thousand stripes and reproachful
indignities. And so we read in ancient records, That in the days of Honorius
and Arcadius, there were made in Britain certain beaten high ways from sea to
sea. That this was the Romans work, Beda witnesses: The Romans inhabited (
says he) About the making of such causeys and high ways, the Romans were wont
to exercise their soldiers, and the common multitude, lest being idle, they
should grow factious, and affect alteration in the Sat. The Romans, as
Isodorus writes, made Causeys in sundry places, almost through the world, both
for the direction of journeys, and also because the people should not be idle:
and to the making and paving of such causeys, prisoners were many times
condemned, as may be gathered out of Suetonius, in the life of Caius. And there
are to be seen in Spain, the Causeys called Salamantica or Argentea, as also
in France certain Rode ways, called Viae militares, paved by the Romans; to
say nothing, of the way Appia, P^mpeia, Valeria, and others in Italy.

Sueton in Octavius.
A long these Causeys and high ways, Augustus placed young men at first, as
posts within small distances one from another: and afterward swift wagons, to
give notice with all speed, and out of hand, what was doing in every place.
Near, or upon these A Mansion.
and wayfaring persons to abide and rest in, A Mutation.
as also Mutations; For so they called in that age, the places where strangers,
as they journied, did change their posthorses, draught beasts, or wagons. He
therefore that seeks not about these Rode ways for those places, which are
mentioned in the Itinerarie of Antoninus, shall no doubt miss the truth, and
wander out of the way.

Neither, think much of your labor, in this place to note, that the Emperors
erected at every miles end, along these Cawsies certain little pillars or
Columns, with numerall Sidonius Apollinaris, writes thus: Antiquus tibi nec
teratur agger;
Cujus per spatium satis vetustis,
Nomen Caesareum viret columnis.
That ancient cawsey, do not decay,
Where on good old pillars along the way,
The Caesar's name stands fresh for aie.


Near also unto these high ways, Varr. lib. de lingua Latin.
on both sides were Tombs and Sepulchers, with Inscriptions graved upon them in
memorial of brave and noble men, that the passengers Code of Theodosius title,
Codex Theodosij. The Laws S. Edward.
de Itinere muniendo, that is, Of making and mending ways, They all were
willing upon a good and profitable devotion, who could do best, and make most
speed in this business. Furthermore, in our own ancient laws, there is
mention made, de pace quatuor Cheminorum, that is, Viar^m sub majori judicio,
that is, Touching the peace of the four Rhode-waies in some higher Court.

Under the reign of Nerva, Nerva Trajanus.
the writers have discontinued the Story of Britannie. But in the time of
Trajane, the Britans may seem to have revolted and rebelled: and evident it is
out of Spartianus, Adrianus, Emperor. Jul. Severus, Propraetor*
that subdued then they were. Moreover, while Adrian Spartianu^.
and the Romans fourscore miles in length: laying the foundation thereof
within For which expedition of his, Florus the Poet played upon him, thus: Ego
nolo Caesar esse
Ambulare per Britannos,
Scythicas pati pruinas.
I will in no wise Caesar be,
To walk along in Britanie
The Scythicke frosts to feel and see.


Unto whom, Adrianus wrote back in this wise:
Ambulare per tabernas,
Latitare per popinas,
Culices pati rotundos.
And I will never Florus be,
To walk from shop to shop, as he;
To l^rke in Tavernes secretly,
And there to feel the round wine fly.


Cl. Priscus Licinius, Propretor of Britannie.
At this time M.F. CL. PRISCVS LICINIVS, was the Propraetor of Britannie, and
employed in the Journey of Jurie with Hadrian; as appears by this antique
Inscription in a broken marble.

M.F. CL. PRISCO.
ICINIO. ITALICO. LEGATO. AVGVSTORVM
PR. PR. PROVE. CAPPADOCIAE
PR. PR. PROVE. BRITANNIAE LEG. AVG.
--
--
--
LEG. IIII. GALLICIAE. PRAEF. COH. IIII. LINGONVM. VEXILLO. MIL.
ORNATO. A. DIVO. HADRIANO. IN EXPEDITIONE IVDAIC.
Q. CASSIVS. DOMITIVS. PALVMB US.
Antoninus Pius, Emperor.
Under Antoninus Pius (by whose ordinance as many as were in the Roman world,
became Citizens of Rome) this war brake out again into a light fire, which
he so quenched by driving the barbarous Britans further off, under the conduct
of Lollius Vrbicus Lieutenant, Lollius Vrbicus Propretor. Capitolinus.
Pausanius in Arcadicis.
and by making another wall of turfe, that thereupon he was surnamed
BRITANNICUS: and he deserved singular commendation, for that he had fined the
Brigates with the loss of one part of their Lands, who had infested with
roades Genounia, a neighbor province under the protection and allegiance of
the Romans. And at this time, as we collect out of Jabolenus, Sejus Saturnius
was Archigubernus of the Navy in Britannie: Digest. lib. 36. Archigubernus.
But whether by this title, he were an Admiral

Antoninus Philosophus, Emperor. Calphurnius Agricola, Propretor.
But the Britans, giving occasions still of quarrels and wars, one after
another began a commotion under Antoninus Philosophus: for the appeasing
whereof, Calphurnius Agricola was sent, and seems to have ended the same with
fortunate success. Which commendation for the dispatching of this war,
Fronto, for Roman eloquence comparable to the best, and second to none, would
needs give unto Antoninus the Emperor. For albeit he sitting still, and
holding his Court in the very palace of Rome, gave out only his commission and
warrant for to make this war, yet he protests, that like unto the Pilot
sitting at the helm to steer a galley, Eumenius Capitolinus.
he deserved the glory of the whole course and sailing in that voyage.

Commodus Emperor.
Whiles Commodus was Emperor, Britannie, was all of a Garboile, full of
wars, and seditious troubles. For the barbarous Britans, having passed over
the wall, made great waste, and hewed in pieces the Romans, both Captain and
Soldier. For the repressing of which rebels, Vlpius Marcellus Propretor.
Vlpius Marcellus was sent: who had so fortunate an hand in taming their
audacious stomachs, that his prowess was soon defaced, and depraved with
envy, and himself called back. This Captain was of all others most
vigilant: and being desirous that the rest about him might be as watchful,
Xiphilinus out of Dio.
he wrote every evening xij. tables throughout, such as commonly are made of
the Linden-tree wood: and commanded one

Of whose temperance thus much also is reported: And albeit otherwise his
nature was able to resist sleep, yet that he might do it the better, he
brought to pass by fasting and abstinence. But when he, I say, was called
back, all licentious wantonness brake into the Camp, and the forces in
Britanny, letting the raines loose of military discipline, became unruly, and
refused the command and government of Commodus, although by some of his
flatterers he was styled Britannicus. Moreover, they that served in Britanny
suborned and sent a thousand and five hundred of their own rank into Italy
against Perrennius, a man that not only carried an outward show and
countenance, but of all the Emperors minions could indeed do most with him:
accusing Helvius Pertinax Propretor.
lost his head, and was proclaimed a traitor to his country. Howbeit these
seditious stirs Helvius Pertinax repressed, not without great danger, being
himself almost slain, and for certain, left for dead among those that were
slain.

Now when Britanny was in peaceable estate, Clodius Albinus Propretor
Capitolinus. Junius Severu Propretor. Christian Religion in Britanny. K.
Lucius.
Clodius Albinus received it from Commodus, and withal, afterward for his
worthy exploits in Britanny the name of Caesareus: but soon after, because in
a public assembly he had made an invective against

At which very time, the thick mists of superstition being scattered (not
under M. Aurelius and L. Verus Emperors, as Beda writes but under Commodus,
when Eleutherus was Bishop of Rome) the heavenly light and brightness of
Christianity, by the means of King Lucius shone upon this Island. Which
Prince, (as we find in the ancient Mattyrol^^giis.
reports and lives of Martyrs, usually read in the Church) admiring the
integrity and holy life of the Christians, made petition unto Eleutherus the
Pope, by the mediation of Elvan and Meduan, two Britans, that both himself and
his subjects might be instructed in christian religion. Then sent he hither
forthwith, Fugatius and Donaitanus, two holy men, with letters, which at this
day be extant, and (as very many are persuaded) is surnamed Lever Maur, that
is, [a Prince] of great glory, for the Faith which in his time came. Now for
those that call these matters of King Lucius into question (as many do in
these days) as if there had been at that time no King in Britanny, which they
suppose was full and whole reduced into a province before, I wish them to call
to remembrance thus much, That the Romans by ancient custom had in their
provinces Kings as the instruments of bondage; that the Britans even then,
refused to obey Commodus; and that themselves possessed and Capitolinus.
and that Antoninus Pius a few years before, having ended war, permitted
Kingdoms to by ruled by their own Kings, and provinces by their own
Lieutenants General, or Governors. Against the Jews. cap. 7.
Comites. What should let then, but that Lucius might be King over that part of
the Island, unto which the Romans forces never came? And verily, that which
Tertullian has put down, who wrote much about those days, if we thoroughly
weigh his words, and the time, may very aptly be referred to the Britans
conversion unto Christ: Those places, quoth he, among the Britans, which
yielded the Romans no access, are now subdued unto Christ: and somewhat after,
Britanny is enclosed within the compass of the Ocean. The nation of the Mauri,
and the barbarous Getulians are beset by the Romans, for fear they

But our Ecclesiastical writers who have employed both time and diligence in
the consideration of this point endeavor and labor to prove, and that out of
ancient authors Bale. Matthew Parker, John Fox.
sailed out of Gaul into Britanny, and that Claudia Rufina the wife of Aulus
Pudens, which woman, as it is credibly thought, S. Paul names in his latter
Epistle to Timothy, and whom the Poet Martial so highly commends, was a
Britan borne. They cite also the testimony of Dorotheus, who commonly goes
under the name of the Bishop of Tire, who in his Synopsis has recorded, that
Simon Zelotes, after he had travailed through Mauritania, was at last slain
and buried in Britanny: as also that Aristobulus, whom S. Paul mentions in
his Epistle to the Romans, was Brutij in Italy.
they report likewise upon the authority of Simeon that great Metaphrast, and
of the Greeks The same that Calendar or Almanac with us.
Menology, that S. Peter came hither and spread abroad the light of Gods word:
out of Sophronius also and Theodoret that S. Paul after his second imprisonment
in Rome, visited this our country. Whereupon Venantius Fortunatus if he may be
believed as a Poet, writes thus of him, unless he speaks of his doctrine.
Transiit Oceanum, and qua facit Insula portum
Quasque Britannus habet terras, quasque ultima Thule.
Passed over Seas, where any Isle makes either port or bay,
And lands, so far as Britans coast or cape of Thule lay.
But to this purpose makes especially that which erewhile I alleged out of
Tertullian; as also that which Origin records, How the Britans with one
consent embraced the Faith, and made way themselves unto God by means of the
Druidae, who always did beat upon this article of belief, 4. Upon Ezechiel.
That there was but one God. And verily of great moment and importance is that
with me, that Gildas writes, after he had mentioned the rebellion of
Boodicia, Under Nero.
and treated of the revenge thereof, Mean while, quoth he, Christ, that true
Sun, shining with his most glittering brightness upon the universal world,
not from the temporal sky and firmament, but even from the highest cope of
heaven, exceeding all times, vouchsafed first, his beams, that is to say, his
precepts and doctrine in the time as we Chrysostom likewise, (to note so much
by the way) writes of the Christian religion in this Island, as follows: The
British Islands seated without this sea, and within the very Ocean, have felt
the power of the word (for even there also be Churches founded, and altars
erected) of that word, I say, which is planted in the souls, and now also in
the lips of all people. And the same Chrysostom in another place: In a Sermon
upon the Pentecost. Epitaph, of Marcella, Widow.
How often have folk in Britanny fed of man's flesh? but now with fasting they
refresh the soul. Likewise S. Hierome; The Britan divided from our world, if
he proceed in religion, leaving the western parts toward the Suns setting,
will seek Jerusalem, a City known unto him by fame only, and relation of
scriptures. But now pass we forward from the Church

When Commodus was slain, Pertinax being called to the Empire, sent presently
Albinus again over into Britanny. But after that Pertinax within eight hundred
and two days was made away, Pertinax Emperor. Severus Emperor.
Didius Iulianus, (who likewise was within a while killed) at Rome, Pescennius
Niger in Syria, Clodius Albinus in Britanny, and Septimius Severus in Pannonia,
all together at once take upon them the soverainty of the Empire. Severus being
next unto Rome, hastneth first to Rome, and, with consent of the soldiers and
Senate, proclaimed Emperor, straightwaies (because he would not leave an enemy
behind at his back) craftily creates Albinus, Albinus Emperor.
Caesar: this Albinus, chief commander of the forces in Britanny and Gaul,
and having stamped money with his image upon it, set up his statutes, and
conferred upon him the honorable dignity of a Afterward Constantinople.
Bizantium after 3. years siege he forced and won: the Adiabenes, Arabians
and other nations he brought to his subjection. Albinus: but seeing his secret
practices took not effect, he openly proclaims him Traitor, and an enemy
to the State, and with all the speed he could make, hasteneth into Gaul
against him: where Albinus with the choice and chief strength of the British
army made head near unto Lugdunum.
Lions. The Albinians fought most valiantly, in so much as Severus himself,
throwing from him his purple robe, began with his men to fly. But when the
said British forces, as if now the victory had been in their hands, displaied
their ranks in thinner arraies, and ran furiously upon their enemies

Upon this, Severus (having alone the Soveraigntie of the whole world) sent
first Heraclianus to seize upon Britain, Herculianus* Propraetor. Virius
Lupus, Propraetor. Digest. lib. 28. Tit. 6.

Who inhabited the counttey now Northumberland.


and to rule it: when Virius Lupus, as Propraetor and Lieutenant ( whom Vlpian
the Civil Lawyer names Praesident of Britain) who, Maeatae, with a great
sum of money, after he had recovered some few prisoners, considering that
the Caledonians kept not their word, who had promised to keep under the said
Maeatae. And being not able after many losses and calamities sustained, to
repress the sudden rodes, and assaults made by the enemies, of necessity he
sent for Severus himself: who gladly and thankefully taking hold of this good
occasion, to withdraw and weane his sons (given to licentious rioting) from
the delightsome pleasures of Rome-Citie, and therewith to augment his own
style with the addition of Britannicus: albeit, he was above threescore years
of age, and gowtie besides, fully Britannicus bare it, as appears by his
coins. Howbeit, the Britans afterward (having: Let none escape your bloody
hands, but be they sure to die,
Spare not the very babes unborne, in mothers womb that lie.


These rebels when he had in some sort repressed by the help of his own
forces, he A troubled state of Common weal I found in every place: but, I
leave it now in peace and quietness, even among the Britans. His body here was
in military sort carried forth by his soldiers, bestowed in a funeral fire,
and honored with a solemn justing, and running at Tilt, performed by his own
soldiers and sons. I might peradventure be censured for my vanity, if I
should relate in this place the prodigies that went Thou have been all, now be
a God: but after what manner he was canonized a God, I will not think much of
mine own pain, to annex hereunto, considering that the knowledge thereof may
delight the reader also.

The Apotheosis, or Deification of the Emperor.
A Custom the Romans have, to consecrate those Emperors that die, their
Sons or Successors surviving. And whosoever are in this wise honored, be
canonized and registered in the Roll of their Divi, that is, Gods. Now, during
this complement, they hold a general mourning through the whole city, and the
same mixed with a festival solemnity. Herodian.
after the Princes death, they bury the body honorably, and with sumptuous
funerals, according to the manner of other men: But withal, they frame an
image of wax, resembling in all points the party deceased, and lay the same
openly at the entry of the palace, upon a most ample and stately bed of Ivorie,
erected on high, and covered with cloth of gold. And verily, that image lies
with a palish and wan color like unto a sick man: About the bed on both
sides, there sit a great part of the day, the whole body of the Senate on the
right hand, arraied in their blacks: and on the left hand certain Dames and
Ladies, who are by the place and dignity of the husbands, or parents
worshipful. And there is not one of them seen to wear any gold about them,
nor to be adorned with jewels, but clad in white and slender garments, they
represent mourners. This do they for seven days together: during which (...).
Over this frame there stood another somewhat less: howbeit, in form and
furniture very like unto the former, with windows and doors standing open. And
so a third and fourth turret, smaller every one than that next beneath it, and
others likewise still one after another, until you come to the last and
utmost, which is the least and highest of all the rest. The manner of this
whole building a man may well compare to these Phari, which give light by fire
in the night time, and direct ships at sea in their course to safe harbors.
The hearse then being mounted up into the second tabernacle, they get together
spices and odours of all sorts, likewise all the sweet smelling fruits, herbs
juices and liquors, that the whole world can yield, and thereon pour the same
forth

Antoninus Caracalla the son of Severus, Antoninus Caracalla.
pursued the relics of the war by his

From this time forward, Nonius Philippus Propr^^tor.
writers have in long silence passed over the affairs of Britain: For
Alexander Severus was not slain, as some would have it, in Sicila a town of
Britain, but in Gaul. This certain evidence only have we out of an antique
stone, that Nonnius Philippus was here Propretor under Gordianus the younger.

Whiles Gallienus the Emperor gave himself over to all manner of riotousnesse,
the State of Rome either through the careless managing of affairs, Gallienus
Emperor.
or by some inclination of the Destinies lay dismembered as it were, and maimed
in all parts: and a heavy rent there was and revolt of this Province from the
Roman Captain. Panegyric unto Constantius. Thirty Tyrants.
For thirty tyrants there were who in diverse places usurped rule and dominion:
among whom Lollianus Victorinus, Posthumus, the Tetrici and Marius bare
sovereign sway, as I suppose, in this Island: For their coins are here in
great abundance dug up daily.

Under Aurelian, that notable bibber Bonosus, Bonosus.
a Britan borne entered upon the Empire together with Proculus, who claimed to
himself all Britain, Spain, and Now, La^guedoc Provance and Daulphine.
Braccata Gallia, which provinces Florianus had for two months governed, but
being in a There hangs a tankard, and not a man.

Howbeit Probus was welcomed into Britain with new troubles and commotions:
For one, Probus Emperor. Zosimus.
whom Probus himself, induced by the commendation of his familiar friend
Victorinus Maurus, had promoted to an office of state, practiced a revolt. For
which he fell out by way of expostulation with Victorinus, who having gotten
leave to depart unto the said party, and feining that he fled and was escaped
from the Emperor, being kindly entertained of the tyrant slew him in the night
and returned to Probus, and therewith was the province rid of these broiles.
But who this tyrant was no man has related: Laelianus Emperor. Burgundia^ and
Vanda in Britain
Howbeit, he may seem to be that Cl. Corn. Laelianus, whose Probus sent hither
the Burgundians and Vandals whom he had subdued, and granted them places to
inhabit: who afterward, so often as any one went about to raise sedition,
stood the Romans in good stead. Now, whereas Vopiscus writes, that Probus
permitted the Britans to have vines, there is a right learned man that fears
lest he have inconsideratly put this down in writing, as if this land were
unfit for vineyards: and yet it has vines, and for certain it is known, that
it had very many. In regard of so many tyrants Hierome. Carus and Carinus
Emperors.
Porphyrie, who lived in this age, cried out in these terms, Britain a
fertile Province of tyrants.

After this, Carus Augustus the Emperor allotted by decree this our country,
together with Gaul, Spain and Illyricum unto his son Carinus. That he warred
here, some there be that slightly indeed, but how truly I wot not, gather out
of these verses of Nemesianus; Nec taceam quae nuper bella sub Arcto,
Foelici Carine manu confeceris, ipso
Pene prior genitore Deo:
Neither may I the wars in silence hide
Dispatched of late with happy hand in North,
By thee, Carine, thy Father Deifi'd,
Who do well nere surpass in works of worth.
Under Dioclesian, Carausius a Menapian borne, a man of very base parentage,
howbeit inventive and active withal, who for his valor showed in battles at
sea became renowned, was ordained Captain of Dioclesian and Maximian Emperors.
Bononium Galliae.
Bologne in Gaul to put back and drive away the Saxons and Frankners that
troubled the seas. This Carausius having at first from time to time taken many
of the Barbarians prisoners, and yet neither brought in all the booty and
pillage into the Emperors treasury, nor made restitution of goods unto
Carausius Emperor.
Whereof he having certain intelligence, took upon him the Imperial
ensigns, and seized Britan into his own hands, withdrew the Navy that lay in
defense of Gaul, built many ships after the Roman manner, adjoined to himself
the Roman Legion, kept out the companies of foreign soldiers, assembled and
drew together the French Merchants to muster, fortified Bologne with a
garrison, conveied away, and took to his own use the public revenewes of
Britan The Thebane Legion.
some there were who in the very voyage suffered death gloriously for Christ's
sake: but when he was come to the seaside, being skared partly for want of
sea-souldiers, and partly with the rage of the British Ocean, stayed there; and
having made a fained peace with Carausius, yielded unto him the rule of the
Island, considering he was taken to be the meeter man, both to command, and
also to defend the Inhabitants against the warlike nations. Hereupon it is,
that we have seen in the silver coins of Of the Augusti, that is Emperors.
Batavia, and had secretly under hand sent aid unto Carausius: whom he
surprised on such a sudden, Now Holland.
that he forced them to submission. In this mean while, Carausius governed
Britain with incorrupt and unstained reputation, and in exceeding great peace:
against the Barbarians, as writes Ninnius the disciple of Elvodugus, he
reedified the wall between the mouths of Cluda and Carunus, and fortified the
same with 7. castles, and built a round house of polished stone upon the bank
of the river Carun, which took name of him, erecting therewith a triumphall
arch in remembrance of victory. Howbeit Buchanan thinks verily it was the
Temple of Terminus, as we will write in Scotland.

When Dioclesian and Maximian, as well to keep that which was won, as to
recover what was lost, had taken to them Constantius Chlorus, and Maximianus
Galerius to be Caesar's: Constantius having levied and enrolled an army, came
with great speed, and sooner then all men thought to Bologne in France, which
also is called Gessoriacum, a town that Carausius had fortified with strong
garrison; and they The Panegyric of Eumenius.
And whiles he rigged and prepared both here and elsewhere an Armada for the
recoverie of Britain, he rid Batavia which was held by the Francks, from all
enemies, and translated many of them into the Roman nations, for to till their

In this mean time Allectus a familiar friend of Carausius, who under him had
the government of the State, C. Allectus, Emperor.
slew him by a treacherous wile, and put upon himself the Imperial purple
roabe. Which when Constantius heard* he having manned and armed diverse fleets,
drove Allectus to such doubtful terms, as being altogether void of counsel,
and to seek what to do, he found then, and never before, that he was not
fenced with the Ocean, but enclosed within it. And withal, hoyzing up sail in
a tempestuous weather, and troubled sea, by means of a mist which overspread
the sea, he passed by the enemies fleet unawares to them, which was placed at
the Isle of Wight, in espiall and ambush to discoved, and intercept him: and no
sooner were his forces

By this victory was the Province recovered, after it had been, by usurpation,
held seven years or there about, under Carausius, and three under Allectus.
Whereupon Eumenius unto Constantius, writes thus; O brave victory of much
importance, And a little after, unto the same Constantius: Britain is
recovered so, as that those nations also which adjoyne unto the bounds of the
same Island, become obedient to your will and pleasure.

In the last years of Dioclesian and Maximian, when as the East Church had
been Persecution in Britain.
Albanus of S. Alban.
Uerlam; Julius and Aaron of Isca, a city called otherwise Near Saint Albans
in Monmouth shire.
Caer Leon, etc. of whom I will write in their proper place. For then the
Church obtained victory with most honorable, and happy triumph, when as with
ten years massacres it could not be vanquished.

When Dioclesian and Maximinian gave over their Empire, they elected that
Constantius Chlorus for Emperor, Constantius Chlorus, Emperor.
who until that time had ruled the State, under the Baronius, in his
Ecclesiastical History.
in Britain. For so, together with that great Historiographer Baronius, the
common opinion of all other writers with one consent, bears witness: unless
it be one or two Greek authors of late time, and those dissenting one from the
other, and a right learned man, grounding upon a Helena.
for to mary Theodora his daughter. This is that Helena, which in antike
Inscription is called Venerable, and right devout Empress.
VENERABILIS and PIISSIMA AUGUSTA, and for Christian piety, for clensing
Jerusalem of Idols, for building a goodly Church in the place where our Lord
suffered, and for finding the Saving Cross of Christ, is so highly commended
of Ecclesiastical writers. And yet both Jews and Gentiles termed her by way
of ignominy and reproach Inn keeper or Hostess.
Stabularia; because she (a most godly Princess) sought out the crib or
manger wherein Christ was borne, and in the place where stood that hostelry, Of
the death of Theodosius.
founded a Church. Hereupon S. Ambrose: They say that this Lady was at first an
Inholder or Hostess, etc. Well, this good hostess Helena, hastened to
Jerusalem and sought out the place of our Lords passion, and made so diligent
search for the Lords crib: This good Eusebius.
And verily no less praise and commendation goes of her husband Constantius
for his piety and moderation; A man, who having utterly rejected the
superstition of the ungodly, in worshipping diverse gods, willingly of himself
acknowledged one God, the Ruler of all things. Whereupon, to try the faith and
belief in God of his own Courtiers, he put it to their free choice, either
to sacrifice unto those gods, and so to stay with him, or else to refuse and
depart: But those that would depart rather than renounce and forsake their
faith to God, he kept with him still: casting off all the rest, who he
supposed would prove disloiall unto him, seeing they had abandoned their
belief Those in Albanie, in the North of Scotland.
Caledonians and the Picts died at York, leaving behind him his son
Constantine Emperor, his successor and Caesar elect.

Some few days before the death of Constantius, his son Constantius rode
from Rome to York on post horses: and the rest which were kept at the charges
of the State, See Suidas, why he was called Poor.
he maimed and lamed all the way as he went, because no man should pursue
him, and there he received his fathers last breath. Whereupon an ancient Orator
spoke thus unto him: Thou entredst this sacred place not as a competitor of the
Empire, but as heir apparent and ordained already, Constantine the Great,
Emperor.
and forthwith that fathers house of thine saw thee, the lawful successor.
For, there was no doubt but that the inheritance duly belonged Yet for all
that, constrained in manner by the soldiers, and especially by the means of
Erocus King of the Almanes, (who by way of aid accompanied him) advanced he
was to the Imperial dignity. Panegyric oration unto Constantine the Great.
The soldiers regarding rather the public good of the commonwealth, than
following his affections, invested him in the purple roabe, weeping and setting
spurs to his horse, because he would avoid the endeavor of the army that
called so instantly upon him, etc: but the felicity of the commonwealth
overcame his modesty. And hereof it is, that the Panegyrist cries out in these
words; O fortunate Britain and more happy now than all other lands, that have
the first sight of Constantine Caesar!

And now Caesar at his very entrance, having first pursued the relics of that
war, which his father had begun against the Caledonians and other Picts, and
set upon those Britans more remote, and the Inhabitants of the Islands lying
there, the witnesses as one said of the Suns setting, some of them he subdued
by force and arms, Gelasius Cizicenus lib. 1. Act. Council. Nicaen. cap. 3.
and there were besides of them, whom of open enemies he made his friends, and
of old adversaries his very familiars. Afterward, having vanquished the
Frankners in Batavia, and that with so great glory, that he stamped certain
golden pieces of coin, (whereof I have seen one) with the Image of a woman
sitting under a Trophee, and leaning with one hand upon a crossebow or a brake,
with this subscription, FRANCIA: and this writing about it, GAVDIVM ROMANORVM:
Having also overthrown the Barbarians in Germany, won unto him the German and
French Nations: and levied soldiers out of Britain, By instinct of the divine
power, with great magnanimity, and the help of his own army, at one time in
the behalf of the Common wealth, he was by lawful war revenged as well of
the Tyrant himself, as of his whole faction.

Howbeit, that he returned again into Italy, Eusebius implies in these words:
Constantine, quoth he, passed over to the Britans enclosed on every side within
the banks of the Ocean: whom when he had overcome, he began to compass in
his mind other parts of the world, to the end he might come in time to succor
those that wanted help. And in another place: After he had furnished his army
with mild and modest instructions of piety, he invaded Britain, that he might
likewise instruct those who dwell environed round about with the waves of the
Ocean bounding the Suns setting, as it were with his coasts. And of Britan are
these verses of Optatianus Porphyrius unto Constantine, to be understood: Omnis
ab Arctois plaga finibus horrida Cauro,
Pacis amat cana and comperta perennia jura,

Resque gerit virtute tuas, populosque feroces
Propellit, ceditque lubens tibi debita rata,
Et tua victores sors accipit hinc tibi fortes,
Teque duce invictae sustollunt signa cohortes.
From Northern bounds, the land throughout where bleak North-west winds blown
Lov's laws of peace right ancient, and ever during known:
Pressed always in their loyalty for service in thy right,
With valiant and courageous heart, does all thy battles fight.
Thus, Nations fierce it drives to rout, and does in chase pursue,

Victors from hence most valorous, thy lot it is to have,
And under thee unfoiled bands, advance their ensigns brave.


About this time as evidently appears by the Code of Theodosius, Pacatianus
Vicegeren^ of Britain in the thirteenth yea^ of Constantine the Great.
Pacatianus was the Vicarius of Britain: for by this time the Province had no
more Propraetors nor Lieutenants, but in stead thereof was a Vicar substituted.

This Emperor Constantine, was right happy for very many praises, and those (I
assure you) most justly deserved: for he not only set the Roman Empire in free
estate, but also having scattered the thick cloud of Superstition, let in the
true light of Christ, by setting open the Temples to the true God, and shutting
them against the false. Gildas.
who in the time of trouble and danger had hidden themselves in woods, deserts,
and secret caves, being come abroad in open sight, reedifie the Churches
ruinate to the very ground, the Temple of holy Martyrs they found, build,
finish, and erect, as it were, the banners of victory in every place,
celebrate festival holy days, and with pure heart and mouth also, perform
their sacred solemnities. And thereupon he is renowned under these titles.
IMPERATOR FORTISSIMUS AC BEATISSIMUS, PIISSIMVS. Most valiant and blessed
Emperor. Most pious. Happy. Redeemer of Rome City. Founder of Peace.
Restorer of Rome City, and the whole world. Great. Most great. Invincible.
Most invincible. Also, Who fortified the Roman Empire with the reverend Faith
of the Christians. Sacred. Of sacred Memory; Of Divine memory, etc. And he
was the first Emperor, as far as I could ever to this time observe, who in
coins of money and public works, was honored with this Inscription, DOMINUS
NOSTER, that is, Our Lord. Although I know full well, that Dioclesian was the
first after Caligula, who suffered himself openly to be called LORD.

Howbeit, in this so worthy an Emperor, his politic wisdom was wanting in
this point, that he made the way for barbarous people, into Britain, Germany,
and Gaul. For when he had subdued the northern Nations, so, as that now he
stood in

The Roman civil government in Britain, under the latter Emperors. As L L.
chief Justices, Grand Seneschals, or high Stewards.
Seeing moreover, that Constantine altered the form of the Roman government,
it shall not be impertinent in this very place to note summarily, in what sort
Britain was ruled under him, and afterward in the next succeeding ages. He
ordained four Praetorium, to wit, of the East, of Illyricum, of Italy, and of
Gaul: two Magistros Militum. Vicar of Britain.
Leaders or Commanders of the Forces, the one of footmen, the other of horsemen
in the West, whom they termed Praesentales.

For civil government there ruled Britain, the Prefect of the Praetorium, or
Grand Seneschall in Gaul, and under him the Vicar General of Britain, who
was his Vicegerent, and honored with the title Spectabilis, that is, notable
or remarkable. Him obeyed respectively to the number of the Provinces, two
Consular Deputies, and three Presidents, who had the hearing of civil, and
criminal causes.

For military affairs, there ruled the Leader, or Commander of the footmen in
the West: at whose disposition, were the Comes.
Count or Lieutenant of Britain; the Spectabiles.
Spectabiles, that is, Remarkable.

Comes of Britain.
The Count Lieutenant of Britain, seems to have ruled the inland parts of
the Island: who had with him seven companies of footmen, and nine cornets or
troops of horsemen.

Comes of the Saxon shore.
The Count or Lieutenant of the Saxon coast, namely, who defended the maritime
parts, against the Saxons, and is named by Ammianus, Comes maritimi tractus,
that is, Lieutenant of the Maritime tract, for defense of the Sea coast, had
seven companies of footmen, two guidons of horsemen, the second Legion, and one
cohort.

Duke of Britain.
The General of Britan, who defended the Marches or Frontiers against the
Barbarians,

Besides all these, Comes sacrarum Largitionum, that is, The Receiver of the
Emperors Finances or public revenues, had under him in Britain, the
Rational or Auditor of the sums and revenues of Britain: the Resembling the
Lord Treasurer.
Provost of the Augustian, that is, Emperors Treasures in Britain, and the
Procurator of the Gynegium or Draperie in Britain, in which the clothes of the
Prince, and soldiers were woven. The Comes rerum privatarum: as one would say,
Keeper of the privy purse. Constantine the Emperor.
Count also of private Revenues had his Rational, or Auditour of private State
in Britain: to say nothing of the sword, Fence School, Procurator in
Britain, (whereof an old Inscription makes mention,) and of other officers of
an inferior degree.

When Constantine was dead, Britain fell unto his Son Constantine: who
Constans, Emperor.
was slain by his brother Constans. With which victory he was so puffed up,
that he seized Britain, and the rest of the Provinces into his own hands, and
with his brother Constantius came into this Island. And thereupon Julius
Firmicus, not that Pagane the Astrologer, but the Christian, speaks in this
wise unto them: Ye have in Winter time (a thing that never was done before,
nor shall be again) subdued under your oars the swelling and raging billows
of the British Ocean. The waves now of the sea, unto this time well near
unknown unto us, have trembled, and the Britains were sore afraid to see the
unexpected face of the Emperor. What would ye more? the very Elements as
vanquished, have given place unto your virtues.

This Constans it was that called a Council to Sardica, against the A^ians:
unto which there assembled three hundred Bishops, Athanasius in Apolog. 2.
and among them the Bishops of Britain; who having condemned the Heretics,
and established the Nicaene Creed, by their voices and judgments, approved the
innocence of Athanasius. But this Prince being youthful, Magnentius called
also Taporus.
cast behind him all care of the Empire, and became drowned in pleasures: and
thereby growing grievous to the Provincials, and nothing acceptable to his
soldiers, was by Magnentius, Comitem.
captain of the Iovij and Herculij, as he hunted, beset in a town called
Saint Helens, and there killed; fulfilling thereby a prophecy, which was, That
he should end his life in his grandmothers lap, of whom that town indeed took
the name.

This Magnentius having a Britan to his Father, but borne among the Laeti, a
people in France, when he had now slain Constans, invested himself in France
into Obeliske, erected in the birque or shew-place.

Interea Taporo Romam vastante Tyranno, Angelus Roch^.


Mean while that Tyrant Taporus of Rome did havocke make,
The Emperors.
Augustus gift unplaced lay, none would it undertake.
At this time, the General of all the warre-forces throughout Britain, was
Gratianus surnamed Funarius, the father of Ualentinian the Emperor. And called
he was Funarius, Gratianus Funarius. Am. Marcellinus.
for that being yet but a stripling, or young springall, as he went about with
a rope to sell, he gave not ground to five soldiers that did set upon him, and
assaied with all their force to snatch the same from him. This Gratianus being
returned to his own home, and discharged of his military oath, was fined by
Constantius in the confiscation, and loss of his goods, because he was
reported to have lodged Magnentius,

When Magnentius was dead and gone, Britain submitted it self to the
government of Constantius: Constantius. Paulus Catena.
and forthwith was hither sent Paulus the Notarie a Spaniard borne, one verily
under a smooth countenance lying secret and close, but exceeding subtle to
devise and find out all the casts and wily means to endanger men: That he
might bring certain martial and military men within danger who had conspired
with Magnentius, when as they could not choose nor make resistance, after he had
outragiously come over them in manner Ammianus Marcellinus, lib. 14.
yea, and undoing a great number, imprisoning such as were free borne, and
grieving their bodies with bonds, yea, and bruising some of them with manacles,
and all, by patching and piecing many crimes together laid to their charge,
which were as false as might be. Whereupon was committed so wicked an act as
branded the days of Constantius with a perpetual note of infamy. Martin,
Vicar of Britain.
There was one Martin that ruled those provinces as Vicar of Vicegerent; who
grievously lamenting the miseries, and calamities of the innocent, and
beseeching the said Paulus oftentimes, that the guiltless might be spared,
when he saw that he could not prevail, threatened to depart, to the end, that
this malicious inquisitor, and persecutor, at

Paulus, supposing hereby, that his trade decayed, (as he was a vengible
fellow in linking matters together, whereupon he came to be surnamed Catena,
that is, a Chain) drew in the said Vicar himself, (who still maintained the
defense of those whom he had tendered and spared,) to have his part in common
perils: And he went very near to bring him also prisoner bound, with
tribunes, and many others, before the Emperors privy Counsel. At which
extremity of mischief so imminent, he being thoroughly provoked, caught up a
dagger, and assaulteth the same Paulus: but because his right hand failed him,
so that he was not able to give him a deadly wound, he stabbed himself into
the side with the What torturing Instrument this Eculeus was, seen in Carolus
Sigonius. De Iudiciis lib. 3. cap 17.
Paulus, all embrued with blood, returned into the Princes Court: bringing many
with him over-laden with chains, as being men dejected, and plunged into
miserable calamity, and heavy plight. At whose coming the rackes were made
ready: the executioner prepared drags and tortures: and of them many were
proscribed, and outlawed, some banished, and other suffered punishment by sword.
At length himself also under Julian being burnt quick, by the judgment of
God the Revenger of such outrageous cruelty, paid most justly for his deserts.

After this when as in Britain, Ammianus Marcellinus is mine Author,) upon the
by the rodes of Scots and Picts, (savage nations) the places near bordering
upon them, appointed for the Frontiers, were forraied, and the provinces
wearied with calamities past, that came so thick one in the neck of another,
and put in frightfull perplexity. Julian whom Constantius had declared to be
Caesar, and colleague in the Empire, wintering about Paris, and distracted with
sundry cares, feared to go and aid the provincial people beyond sea, as we
reported that Constantius beforetime had done, lest he should leave Gaul
without a governor: considering withal, that the Alamans were even then also
incited, and set upon cruelty and hostility; thought good therefore it was to
send over into these parts, for to compose and settle all matters, one
Lupicinus, Lupicinus, Magister Armorum.
Master at that time of the Armor: a warlike Now Bulgarians.
Maesians, the foresaid General in the heart of Winter, came to Bologne: and
there having gotten shipping, and embarked all his soldiers, observing a good
gale of a forewind, Rhutupiae. London.
arrived at Rhutupiae, a place over against Bologne, and so set forward to
London: that, from thence after counsel taken, according to the quality of
his business, he might hasten the sooner to give battle.

Under this Constantius, who mightily favored the Arians, their heresy crept
into Britain, The heresy of Arius.
wherein from the first years of the great Constantine, a sweet concent and
harmony of Christ the head, and his members had continued, until such time,
as that deadly and perfidious Arianisme, Gildas.
like to a pestiferous Serpent from the other side of the sea, In favor of
these Arians, Sulpitius Severus.
Constantius summoned four hundred Bishops of the West Church, to Ariminum:
for whom the Emperor, by his commandment, allowed corn and victuals. These
calls Hilarious, The Bishops of the Provinces of Britain, in an Epistle unto
the Bishops.
But that was thought of the Aquitanes, French, and Britains, an unseemely
thing: refusing therefore that allowance out of the Emperors coffers, they
chose rather to live at

After this, when Constantius was departed this world, Julianus that Apostata,
who had taken upon him the title of Augustus against Constantius, first drove
out Palladius, who had been master of Offices, into Britain, and sent away
Alphius, who had governed Britan as Deputy Lieutenant, Julian the Emperor. Am.
Marcellinus.
to reedifie Jerusalem: but fearful round balls of flaming fire breaking
forth near unto the foundations, skarred him from that enterprise, and many a
thousand of Jews who wrestled in vain against the decree of God, were
overwhelmed with the ruins. This dissolute Or Emperor.
Augustus, and in his beard

When Valentinian the Emperor steered the helm of the Roman Empire,
Valentinian Emperor.
what time as through the whole world the trumpets resounded nothing but the
warlike Al, Arm, the Picts, Saxons, Scots and Attacots vexed the Britans with
continual troubles and annoyances. Fraomarius then King of the Almanes was
translated hither, and by commission made Tribune or Marshall over a band of
the Almanes, for number and power in those days highly renowned, Ammianus
Marcellinus lib. 27. and 28.
to repress the incursions of those barbarous nations. Nevertheless Britain
was through the general conspiracy of those Barbarians This place of the text
is happily corrupted.
sent back Proventusides in post, minding to crave the puissant help of an
army. For, they avouched than the urgent necessary occasions required so much.
At the last, so many and so fearful calamities were by daily rumors reported
as touching the same Island, that Theodosius was elected, and Theodosius.
a man of approved skill in warlike affairs most fortunately achieved, who
having levied and gotten unto him a courageous company of young gallants, to
furnish as well Legions as cohorts, put himself in his journey, with a brave
show of confidence leading the way. Picts. Scots. Attacots.
At the same time the Picts divided into two nations the Dicalidones and
Vecturiones, the Attacots likewise a warlike people, and the Scots, ranging in
diverse parts did much mischief where they went. As for the cohorts of Gaul,
the Frankners and Saxons confining upon them, brake out and made rodes where
ever they could either by land or sea, and what with driving booties, with
firing towns, and killing poor captives, made foul work there. To stay these
woeful miseries, if prosperous fortune would have given leave, this most
vigorous and valiant Captain intending a voyage to the utmost Called the
sleeve.
streit ebbing and flowing, where the water is wont to swell on high with
terrible tides, and again to fall down flat and lie like even plains without
any harm of sailer or passenger, Ribchester. by Sandwich, or Richborow.
from thence having sailed and leasurely crossed the said sea, he arrived as
Rhutupiae a quiet rode and harbor over against it: From whence after that the
Batavians, Heruli, Iovij and Victores, (companies confident of their strength
and power who followed) were come, he departed: and marching toward London, an
old London called Augusta.
which the posterity called Augusta* having divided his troops into sundry
parts he set upon those companies of roving and robbing enemies, even when
they were heavy laden with booty and pillage. And having quickly discomfited
those that drove before them their prisoners bound, and cattle, he forced them
to forgo the prey, which the most miserable tributaries had lost. In the end,
after full restitution made of all, save only some small parcels bestowed upon
his wearied soldiers, he entered most joyfully into the city, over set before
with distresses and calamities, but now suddenly refreshed; so far forth as
hope of recovery, and safety might effect: and there being raised up with this
luckie hand, to adventure greater exploits, and yet casting with himself
projects promising Civilis.
called for Civilis by name, (who was to rule Britain as Deputy,) to be sent
unto him; a man of a very quick hasty nature, but a precise keeper of Justice
and righteousness: Dulcitius.
a redoubted Captain, and right skillful in feats of arms. Afterward,
having gotten heart, and courage to him, he went from Augusta, which in old
time they called Londinum, well appointed with industrious, and considerate
soldiers, and so brought exceeding great succor to the ruinate, and troubled
estate of the Britains, gaining before hand all places every where for his
advantage to forelay the Barbarians in ambush, and giving commandment of no
service to the very common soldiers, but he would himself cheerfully take
the first assay thereof. In this sort performing as well the offices of an
active and hardy soldier, as the careful charge of a right noble General,
having discomfited and put to flight diverse nations, whom insolent pride fed
with security incited, and set on fire to assail and invade the Roman Empire,
he having laid the foundation of quiet peace for Valentine stirs up sedition
in Britain.
brother to the wife of that pestilent Maximinus, first Deputy Lieutenant, and
after President, for some notable offense banished into Britain; who being
impatient of rest like a noisome beast rose up in co^motion against Theodosius,
practicing mischievous plots and an insurrection, upon a certain swelling
pride and envy, for that he perceived him alone able to withstand his
horrible designs. Howbeit, casting all about for many means both secret and
apert, whiles the puffing humor of his infinite, and unsatiable desire still
Valentia. Areani.
it both had a lawful governor to rule it, and afterward also was called
VALENTIA, for the Princes will and pleasure. The Areans a kind of men
instituted by those of ancient times (concerning whom I have related in the
Acts of Constans the Emperor) fallen by little and little unto vices, he
removed from their stations, as being openly convict that they were allured by
great receipts, or promise at least ways of much reward, to have diverse times
discovered unto the Barbarians whatsoever was done or debated among us. For,
this indeed was their charge, to run to and fro by long journeies, to intimate
and make known unto our Captains all sturs that the people near adjoining
were For these deeds of his so bravely achieved, in honor of him, there was an
image set up, resembling a man of arms on horseback, as Symmachus gives us
to understand, speaking to his son Theodosius the Emperor in this wise. The
author, quoth he, of your kindred and stock, Captain General sometime in
Afrik and Britain both, was among other And Claudian in his commendation with
full pen wrote poetically thus; Ille Caledoniis posuit qui castra pruinis,
Qui medio Libyae sub casside pertulit aestus.
Terribilis Mauro, debellatorque Britanni
Littoris, ac pariter Boreae vastator and Austri.
Quid rigor aeternus? Caeli quid sydera prosunt?
Ignotumque fretum? maduerunt Saxone fuso
Orcades, incaluit Pictorum sanguine Thule,
Scotorum cumulos flevit glacialis Hiberne.

And in his harness, Liby heats endured day by day:
The black Mores eke who terrified, and conquered British coast,
Who North and South subdued alike, and wasted with his host,
What did the lasting cold to them and frosty climats gain,
Or seas unknown? embrued all with blood of Saxons slain
The Orkneis were, with Pictish blood well heated Thule was,
And y^^e Ireland, Scots by heaps bewailed with Out-alas.
In another place likewise of the same Prince. -- Quem littus adustae

Ille leves Mauros, nec falso nomine Pictos
Edomuit, Scotumque vago mucrone sequutus
Fregit Hyperboreas remit audacibus undas;
Et geminis fulgens utroque sub axe trophaeis
Tethyos alternas refluas calcavit arenas.
Of whom the scorched Libyan coast does stand in deadly fear,
And Thule, where no passage was for ships their sail to bear.
The nimble Mores he it was that tamed, and Picts likewise subdued,
The Picts, I say, by right so called: and when he had pursued

With venterous ores he brake: and so in two fold trophies brave
All glittering under both the poles he marched to and fro
The sands upon, where either sea by turns does ebb and flow.
And concerning him Pacatus Drepanus: What should I speak, quoth he, of the
Scot, driven back again by him unto his fennes and bogs? Gratianus Emperor.
The Saxon consumed with battles at sea, etc. After him, Gratian took upon him
the Empire, who also proclaimed Theodosius, Maximus the Tyrant. Zosimus.
Orosius.
his concurrent, and withal descended in right line from Co^stantinus the
Great, who also had before time been General over the army in Britan, was so
highly discontented, that he took upon him the purple roabe: or as Orosius
reports, was against his will by the soldiers saluted Emperor; a valiant
man, virtuous, and worthy of the title of Emperor.
Augustus, but that against his allegiance, he had by way of tyranny and
usurpation attained to the place. Who at the first courageously vanquished the
Picts and Scots, Prosper. Tyro.
that used to make many inrodes into the Province: afterward with all the
flower and strength well near of British forces, arrived in the mouth of
Treviris. Gregorius. Toronensis.
Triers (whereupon styled he was by the name of Trevericus Imperator) and
spreading, as Gildas says, his wings the one as far as to Spain, the other
into Italy, with the terror only of his name, levied tributes and pensions for
soldiers pay, of the most fell and savage nations in Germany. Against whom
Gratianus having led an army, after five days skirmishing, being forsaken of
his own soldiers, and put to flight, sent Saint Ambrose Ambassador to treat
for peace: which he obtained indeed; but the same full of treacherous guile.
For, Cedrenus.
Maximus suborned, and sent underhand one Andragathius, riding in a close
litter or carroch, with a rumor spread abroad, that therein rode the wife of
Gratian. Unto Zosimus.
Theodosius Augustus, who governed in the East, at the requests or mandates
rather of his Ambassadors, acknowledged him Emperor, and exhibited his Image
unto the Alexandrines for to be seen in public place. And now having by
violence, and extortion entered upon the estates of all men, with the utter
undoing Priscillianists. Sulpitius Severus.
and false doctrine in the Synod, or Council of Bordeaux, and appealing unto
him, he condemned to death; although Martin that most holy Bishop of Turonum.
Tourain or Tours, most humbly besought to forbear shedding the blood of those
poor wretches: avouching that it was sufficient to deprive such as were judged
heretics, and put them out of their Churches, by the definitive sentence of
Bishops: and that it was a strange and unexampled heinous deed, that a secular
Judge should determine causes of the Church. And these were the first, that
being executed by the civil sword, left a foul and dangerous president DD.
NN. MAG. C. MAXIMO, ET FL.
UICTORI, PIIS, FELICIBVS, SEMPER
AVGVSTIS. Bono Reip.
B. R. NATIS.
To our Great Lords, C. Maximus and Fl, Victor, Pious,
Happy, Always Augusti, borne for the good of the Commonwealth.


Mean while Nannius and Quintinus, Masters in military skill, unto whom
Maximus Sulpitius Alexander.
and the custody of Gaul, gave the Frankners, who annoied Gaul with their
incursions, a mighty great overthrow, and forced them to give hostages, and
deliver into their hands the Authors of the war. As for Valentinian, he
earnestly besought Theodosius, to succor him dispoiled of his Zonaras.
That no marvel it is, if a seditious servant became superior to that Lord,
who casts off the true Lord indeed. For Valentinian was corrupted with
Arianisme. Howbeit, wearied at length with his importunate prayers, he sets
forward in warlike manner against Maximus, who in the same time abode in
Aquileia, very secure and fearlesse. For he had beforehand fortified the
streits between the mountains with garrisons, and the havens with shipping, so
that with great alacrity, and much confidence at the first he welcomed
Theodosius with one battle before Syscia in Pannonia: Zosimus.
and afterward most valiantly received him with another, Sisseg.
under the leading of his brother Marcellus; but Non erat iste locus: merito
tamen aucta recenti,
Nona inter claras Aquileia cieberis urbes
Itala ad Illyricos objecta colonia montes,
Moenibus and portu celeberrima: sed magis illud
Eminet, extremo quod te sub tempore legit,
Solverat exacto cui justa piacula lustro

Foelix qui tanti spectatrix laeta Triumphi,
Or, ^udisti*
Punisti Ansonio Rutupinum Mart Latronem.
This was no place of name: but since that fresh desert gave grace,
Thou Aquileia of cities fair, shall be the ninth in place,
A Colonie Italian, against hills Illyrian set,
For strong walls, and commodious haven right well renowned: but yet
This passes all the rest, that he his choice of thee, did make
Against his latter days, who did revengement justly take
Of Maximus: a base campe-Squire that sometimes known to be,

Right happy thou, of Triumph such that had the joyful sight,
Killing this Robber British, or of Britain.
Rhutupine by maine Italian might.


Andragathus, whose state was now most desperate, cast himself from shipboard
headlong into the Sea. Victor the son of Maximus, was in France defeated,
taken prisoner, and slain. But those Britans, who took part with Maximus, as
some writers do record, forcibly invaded Armorica in France, and there planted
themselves. Now Theodosius presently after his victory, entered Rome with his
Son Honorius in triumph, and published an Edict to this effect: No man so
hardy, as to challenge or claim that honor, which the bold Tyrant had
granted: but that such presumption And Valentinian, in these words; All
judgments and awards whatsoever, that Maximus the most wicked and detestable
Tyrant that ever was, has given forth to be promulged and enacted, we reverse
and condemn. But Saint Ambrose in his funeral Sermon of Theodosius, cries
out in these terms: That Eugenius and Maximus, by their woeful example, do
testify in hell, what a heavy thing it is to bear arms against their
natural Princes. To speak in a word, this victory was held to be so worthy
and memorable, that the Romans from thence forward, Procopius.
solemnized that day every year, as festival.

There succeeded Theodosius in the West Empire his son Honorius, Honorius,
Emperor.
a child ten against the invasion of Picts, Scots, and Vandals. And hereof it
is, that Britain Me quoque vicinis pereuntem gentibus, inquit,
Munivit Stilicho, totam quum Scotus Hibernem
Movit, and infesto spumavit remige Thetis.
Illius effectum curis, ne bella timorem
Scotica, nec Pictum tremerem, ne littore toto
Prospicerem dubiis venientem Saxona ventis.
And me likewise at hand, quoth she, to perish, in despite
Of neighbor Nations Stilicho protected against their might,
What time the Scots all Ireland moved, offensive arms to take,
And with the stroke of enemies ores, the Sea much foam did make.
He brought to pass, (his care was such) that I the Scottish war
Should fear no more, nor dread the Picts, ne yet ken from a far,
(Along the shore whiles I look still when wavering winds will turn)
The Saxons coming under sail, my coasts to spoil and burn.


And thus for that time Britain seemed safe enough from any danger of enemies.
For in another place, that Poet writes thus: -- Domito quod Saxona, Thetis
Mitior, aut fracto Secura Britannia Picto.
What either seas more quiet now, that Saxons conquered are,
Or Britain become secure, since Picts subdued were.


And when Alaricus King of the Goths, hovered about Rome, seeking means to
assault and spoil it, that Legion which in the marches kept Station against
the Barbarians was called from hence, as Claudian signifies, when he reckons
up the aids sent for from all parts.

Venit and extremis legio praetenta Britannis,
Quae Scoto dat fraena truci, ferroque notatas
Perlegit Or, exangues.
exanimes Picto moriente figuras.
The Legion also came which did for British frontiers lie
In garrison, that curbs fell Scots, and does pursue with eye
Those yron-brent marks in Picts now seen, all bloudlesse as they die.
Fastidius. Genadius. Chrysanthus. Niephorus.
In these days flourished Fastidius a Bishop of Britain, and wrote books of
divine learning, I assure you. Chrysanth^s likewise the son of Bishop
Martian, who having been a Consular deputy in Italy under Theodosius, and made
Lieutenant, or Deputy.
Uicar of Britan, deserved that praise and admiration for his good mannaging of
the commonweal that he was against his will enstalled at Constantinople
Bishop of the Novatians, who having made a schism in that Church, and calling
themselves Pure.
Cathari, had Bishops apart of their own and sectaries, who stoutly but
impiously denied, that such as after baptism received, fell by relapse into
sin, could not return again and be saved. Tripartite History.
was wont to reserve nothing for himself but two loaves of bread only on the
Lords day.

When as now the Roman Empire began to decline and decay, and barbarous Nations
every way made foul havocke of the provinces all over the Continent; the
British arms fearing least the flame of their neighbors fire might flash out
and catch hold likewise of them; supposing also that they stood in need of some
General and Sovereign commander, to expel the Barbarians, addressed
themselves to the election of Emperors. Marcus, Emperor.
First therefore, they enthronized in the royal seat Marcus, and him they
obeyed, as one that in these parts bare the chief sovereignty. But afterward
having made Gratian, Emperor.
because his carriage was not answerable unto theirs, they bring forth and set
up Gratian, countryman of their own: him they crowned and arraied in the
regal purple, and him they dutifully attended upon, as their Prince. Howbeit
upon a mislike that they took to him also, at four months end, they deprive
him of his Empire, take away his life, Constantine, Emperor.
and made over the Sovereignty of State to one Constantine, a Valence.
Valentia in France he manfully defended against the puissance of Honorius
Augustus the Roman Emperor: the Rhene which long before had been neglected, he
fortified with a garrison: Upon the Alps, as well Monte Genebre, or Mont Cen^^.
Cottiae and Monte Mojore de S. Bernardo
Peninae, as those toward the Montag^^ ^i Carrara and Lunigiana, in the County
of Tendar.
maritime coasts, where ever there was any passage, Constantina, and ordained
therein, that the assemblies for Assizes of 7. Carragoca.
Caesar Augusta, and committing the charge of all matters within Spain to
Gerontius, came speedily without intermission of journey to his father. When
they had met together, after many days, Constantinus seeing no fear of any
danger from Italy, gave himself wholly to gluttony and belli-cheere, and so
advises his son to return into Spain. But when he had sent his forces to
march before, whiles he abode still with his father, news came out of Spain,
that Maximus one of his vassals and followers was by Gerontius set up and
advanced to the Empire; and having about him a strong power and retinue of
barbarous nations prepared to come against them. Whereat they being affrighted,
Constans and Decimius Rusticus, who of the Master of Offices was now become the
Prefect, having Nicephorus. Callistus.
and last of all perished himself. Constantinus being very straightly shut up,
and withal utterly dejected and cast down with the unfortunate fight of
Edobeccus, after he had been beleaguerd four months, and reigned likewise
four years, laid away his purple habit, entered into a Church, and took the
orders of priesthood, and soon after, having surrendered Arles, was led captive
into Italy, and there beheaded, together with a son of his, whom he had
named As one would say, Heir apparent.
Nobilissimus, and a brother called Sebastian. From that time returned
Britain, under the Empire of Honorius, and was refreshed a while, through the
wisdom and prowess of Victorinus, who then ruled the Province, and repressed
the outroades of Picts and Scots. In commendation of whom, Victorinus Rector or
Ruler of Britain.
in Rutilius Claudius, are these verses extant, answerable in worth to

Conscius Oceanus virtutum, conscia Thule,
Et quaecunque ferox arva Britannus arat.
Qua Praefectorum vicibus frenata potestas
Perpetuum magni foenus amoris habet.
Extremum pars illa quidem discessit in orbem,
Sed tanquam medio rector in orb fuit.
Plus palmae est illos inter vol^isse placere,
Inter quos minor est displicuisse pudor.
The Ocean maine his virtues knows, and Thule witness will,
And all the fertile fields likewise, that Britans fierce do till.
Where ever Rulers power by turns successive bridled is,
Of much good love continual increase he does not miss.
That part indeed divided was from all the world beside,
And yet as if in mids thereof it were, he did it guide.
The greater prise and praise it is to seek there for to please,
Where to control less fear it were, less bashment to displease.
When Rome was forced by Alaricus, Honorius calls Victorinus home with his
army: and forthwith the Britans took arms, and engaging themselves into danger
for the safety of themselves, freed their own cities and States from the
barbarous people, that waited all opportunities to annoy them. Semblably, that
whole maritime tract of Bretagne, little Britain, or Llydaw.
Armorica, and the rest of the Gaulois Provinces, accompanied the Britans, and
in like manner delivered themselves, casting out the Roman Presidents, and
setting up a certain proper commonwealth at their own pleasure. This revolt
and rebellion of Britain, Zosimus.
together with the French Provinces happened in the time that Constantine usurped
the Kingdom, considering that the Barbarians, taking advantage of his
negligence Histor. Miscel.
and obtained at his hands, that a Legion should be sent to their rescue and
succor. Which being come over hither, defeated and overthrew a great number of
the enemies, chased the rest out of the marches of the Province, Edinburgh,
unto Cluid, which stood them in small or no stead. For by occasion that the
said Legion was called back to the defense of France, the barbarous enemies
return, break down with ease the frontier bounds, and in all kind of outrage
and cruelty in every place carry, harrie, and make havocke of all. Then were
dispatched a second time in lamentable sort Ambassadors, with their garments
rent, and heads covered with sand (mark the manner of it) for to crave aid of
the Romans: unto whom, by the commandment of Valentinian the Third, were
appointed certain regiments of soldiers, Gallio Ravennas.
conducted by Gallio of Ravenna, which most valiantly vanquished the
Barbarians, and in some sort gave comfort to the poor distressed and afflicted
Province. Gildas.
and that of stone (not as the other) at the public charges of the State, and
with private men's purses together, joining with them the miserable Inhabitants,
after the wonted manner of building, to wit, traversing along the land Between
the mouth of Tine and Elen.
from one Sea to another, between those cities which happily were placed there
for fear of enemies; to the fearful people they gave good instructions, and
exhortations to play the men, and left unto them paternes, showing them how to
make armor and weapons. Upon the coast also of the Ocean, in the tract of the
South country, what way they had ships (because even from that side also they
stood in fear of those barbarous and savage beasts) they planted turrets, and
bulwarks with convenient spaces distant one from another, yielding far and
fair prospect into the sea: and so the Romans gave them a final farewell,

Now was the State every where in a most woeful and pitious plight to see unto:
to see the Empire drooping with extreme age, lay along maimed, dismembered, and
as it were, benumbed in all the limbs and parts thereof: the Church likewise
most grievously assailed by Heretics (who amid the burning broiles of war,
cast and Sigebert (...)
to the prejudice of Gods mere grace, That we might attain to perfect
righteousness by our own works. One Timothy also, impiously disputed among
the Britains, Anno 428.
against the divine and humane nature both, in Christ.

Now also was the Roman Empire in Britain, come to her full and final period,
to wit, the four hundredth, seventie, and sixth year after Caesar's first
entry: The English-Saxon-Chronicle.
what time, in the reign of Valentinian the Third, the Romans having
transported their forces with the foresaid Gallion, for the defense of France,
and buried their treasure within the ground, left Britain bereft of her youth,
wasted with so many musters and At this time, by reason of the Romans
weakness, the strength of Britain was utterly spent, and brought to naught.
And our Historiographer of Malmesburie: When the Tyrants had left none in the
country, but half Barbarians; none in the cities and towns, but such as
wholly gave themselves to belly-cheere: Britain destitute of all protection by
her vigorous young men, bereaved of all exercise and practice of good arts,
became exposed, for a long time, to the greedy, and gaping jaws of Nations
confining upon her. For, straightwaies, by the incursions of Scots and Picts,
many a man was slain, villages burnt, cities undermined and subverted, and
throughout all laid wast with fire and sword. The Islanders in great Yei called
Gaul.
purposed to go to Rome for to crave aid. But as Nicephorus truly wrote,
Valentinian the Third, was not only unable to recover Britain, Spain, and
France, provinces plucked away from his Empire already, but also lost Afric
beside. Not without just cause therefore Gildas in this age cried out thus:
Britain was dispoiled of all her armed men, her military forces, her Rulers
(cruel though they were,) and of a mighty number of her stout and courageous
youths. For, besides those whom that Usurper Maximus, and the last Constantine
led away with them, it appears evidently by antike Inscriptions, Notitia
Provinciarum, that these companies underwritten served the Romans in war, here
and there dispersed over their Provinces, which also were from time to time
evermore supplied out of Britain.

Ala Britannica Milliaria.
Ala IIII Britonum in Aegypto.
Cohors Prima Aeliae Britonum.
Cohors III. Britonum.
Cohors VII. Britonum.
Cohors XXVI. Britonum in Armenia.
Britanniciani sub Magistro peditum.
inter auxilia Palatina.

Exculcatores jun. Britan.
Britones cum Magistro Equitum Galliarum,
Invicti Iuniores Britones intra Hispanias.
Britones Seniores in Illyrico.
Hereupon, no marvel it is, if Britain exhausted daily with so many, and so
great levies of soldiers, lay exposed unto the Barbarians, and hereby proves
that sentence of Tacitus true; There is no strength in the Roman armies, but it
is of foreign strangers.

In writing of these matters, concerning the Romans government in Britain,
which continued (as I said) CCCCLXXVI. years, or much there about, whiles I
consider How the Britans are descended from the Trojans.
how many sent hither to negotiate either their own business, or the affairs of
the Empire, who joining in marriage with Britans, both planted themselves, and
also begat children here (For, Wheresoever the Roman wins, says Seneca,
there he woneth, and inhabiteth:) I enter often times into this cogitation, That
The people of Auergne in France.
Arverni, who drawing their descent, from Trojan.
Ilian blood, have named themselves, the Romans brethren; or the Mamertines,
Burgundians.
Hedui, and the rest, who grounding upon a fabulous original, have fathered
themselves upon the Trojans. For Rome, that common Mother (as he says) called
those her Citizens, Quos domuit, nexuque pio longinqua revinxit:
Whom she subdued, and by a gracious knot,
United people far dissite and remote.


And meet it is we should believe, that the Britans and Romans in so many ages,
by a blessed and joyful mutual ingraffing, Tacit. Histor. lib. 4.
as it were, have grown into one stock and nation: seeing, that the Those of
Colein, and thereabout.
Ubij in Germany within 28. years after that a Colonie was planted, where now
Colein is, made answer as touching the Roman Inhabitants there, in this wise:
This is the natural Country, as well to those that being conveied hither in
times past, are conjoined with us by marriages, as to their offspring. Neither
can we think you so unreasonable, as to wish us for to kill our parents,
brethren, and children. If the Ubij and Romans in so small a time became
parents, brethren, and children one to another, Ammian. Marcellin. sib. 28.
what should we judge of Britans and Romans linked and conjoined so many years
together? What also may we say of the Burgundians, who for that Romania, and
Insulae Romana, that is, The Roman Isle.

Thus much have I set down summarily, and in compendious manner gathered out
of the ancient monuments of Antiquity, rejecting all fabulous fictions, as
touching the Romans Regiment in Britain, their Lieutenants, Propretours,
Presidents, Deputies.
Vicars, and Regents.
Rectors. But more exactly and fully, [might I have done it] if Ausonius had
performed his promise, and that come unto our hands: who said, he would reckon
up such, as Aut Italum populos Aquilonigenasque Britannos
Praefecturarum titulo tenuere secundo.
That ruled Nations Italike, and North-bred Britans all,
Entitled with happy style, Lieutenants General.


But seeing it is agreed upon among all learned men, that there arises very
much light to the illustration of ancient Histories, out of ancient Coins, I
have thought good in this place to exhibit unto the Reader certain pieces of
money, as well of those Britains, who first came under subjection of the
Romans, as of Roman Emperors; such especially as appurtaine to Britain, and
those out of the Cabinet of the right Worshipful Sir Robert Cotton of
Conington Knight, who has from all





CONIECTVRES AS Touching the British Coins.
TO the Britans Coins, the portracts whereof I have here showed, you look
happily, that I should adjoyne some brief notes also. But what to adjoyne of
such things as the revolution of so many ages past, has altogether overcast

That the old Britans used brass money, or rings, or else plates of iron tried
to a certain just weight, I have declared already before, out of Caesar: and
there be, who aver, that they have seen some of these found in little
pitchers. Besides these, found there are otherwhiles Nicolaus Fabricius
Pierescius, a right noble young Gentleman of Provance in France, one for such
antiquities, and old Medals or pieces of money, passing skillful, and of
judicious insight, very lately had showed me the like found in France.

The first, is a coin of Cunobelinus, who flourished in the days of Augustus
and Tiberius: wherein, if I deceive not my self, are engraven the heads of
two-faced Ianus: peradventure, because even at that time Britain began to cast
off, and leave their barbarous rudeness. For we read, how Ianus was the
first, that changed barbarous manners into civil behavior, and therefore was
depainted with two foreheads, to signify, that he had of one shape made
another.

TASCIA.
which word among the Britans, betokens a Tribute Penye, as Master David
Powell, a man most skillful in the British language has informed me: and is
derived perhaps of the Latin, Taxatio. For, the Britans acknowledge not X. for
their letter. And by the same reason the Inscription of MONETA, is seen often
times in pieces of Roman money.

In like manner, the third is a Coin of the same Cunobelinus, Camalodunum, See
in Essex.
which was the Royal city and seat of Cunobelinus.

The fourth with VER, See in Hartford-shire.
may be thought a coin of the Verlamians.

The fifth again, is one of Cunobelinus his pieces.

The sixth, because it gives no light by letters, I wot not what to make of it.

The seventh, a Coin of Cunobelinus, having this Inscription, TASC. NOVANEL,
with a woman's head; whether it should imply a tribute piece of the Trinovants,
over whom he was ruler, I cannot avow on the other side, Apollo with his Harp,
and Cunobelin puts me in remembrance of that, which elsewhere I have
observed God Belinus: God Belinus.
namely, that the Ancient Inhabitants of France.
Gauls in old time worshipped Apollo under the name of Belinus: which
Dioscorides also does confirm, writing in plain and express terms, that the
herb Henbane.
Apollinaris, with the juce whereof the Gauls were wont to anoint their
arrows, is in the Gauls tongue, called Belinuntia. So that, upon this I may
be bold in some sort to conject, that the name of Cunobelinus, as also of
Cassibelinus, is drawn from the worship of Apollo, like as the names of
Phoebitius and Delphidius. If not rather, Apollo for his bush of yellow hair,
is named in Greek, (...) in Latin, Flavus, that is, yellow: so likewise among
the Britans, and Gauls, Belin. For that which is yellow, in Welsh.
British speech they call, Melin, Belin, and Felin: and for the same cause,
that ancient Belinus, Cunobelinus, and Cassibelinus, who also goes under the
name of Cassivelaunus, may seem to be so named, Cuno.
as one would say, Yellow Princes. For that Cuno is a name of dignity, the
Welchmen.
Britans confess, and a thing which is especial and principal, they term at
this day, Cynoc. Cungetorix, Cunobelinus, Cuneglasus, Vitrei coloris.
Cuneda, and Cunedagius, Princes names among the Britans; like as Cyngetorix,
Convictolitanus, and Conetodunus, among the ancient Gauls, do after a sort
make good and declare. Neither am I ignorant that Gildas has translated
Cuneglasus, in Latin, Lanionemfulvum vel furvum, that is, A Lion tawney, or
dark hued Butcher: whom others have interpreted, Principem Caeruleum, sive
vitrei coloris, that is, A Prince blew, or of a bluish, or woad-colour: like
as Cuneda, that is, A good Prince. That the Germans Koning, and our King, came
from Cuno, I dare not yet suppose. Let it suffice, by these my sundry guesses,
to have thus dallied, lest I lay open my self to the scorn of others.

The eighth, with a chariot horse, and a wheel or shield underneath, having in
the reverse BODVO; may seem to be a Coin of the Nation called Or Dabuni,
Glocestershire, and Oxfordshire.
Boduni: or else of the Queen Bodicia, who is diversely named Voadicia, and
Bunduica.

The ninth, wherein is represented an horseman, with spear and Caratacus,
whose praises Tacitus highly extolleth.

Of Arras.
under an horseman, is the Inscription REX, and on the other COM, both I and
some others are pleased with this conceit, that it was a coin of Connius Or
Gallena, that is, Wallengford.
Attrebatensis whom Caesar mentions.

The eleventh, which does represent a little half moon with this Inscription,
REX CALL, is not much unlike the name of that most famous and frequented
City, Callena.

The twelfth has a winged head with this word ATEVLA: Victory expressed. But,
that Victory should be in the British tongue called Ateula, Victoria. Andate.
I never yet could find. Mary, that they named Victory, Andata, I have out of
Dio reported already: and whether the same were Andrata, worshipped Those of
the County of Beaufort.
Vocontij in Gaul, let some other say, for I dare not.

Here also may you behold the thirteenth, In Octagono.
with this word DIAS, in an eight-angled figure, and an horse on the contrary
side: the fourteenth with a swine, and these letters VANOC, the head also of a
goddess, happily Venus; or else Venutius whom Tacitus speaks of. The
fifteenth, with an head and helmet upon it, and this Inscription, DVRNACO:
People of Anjou or Angiers.
and whether that were Dumnacus a Prince of the Andes whom Caesar does mention,
I wot not. The sixteenth with an horse, and this word ORCETI. The seventeenth
with the image of Augustus and TASCIA; and on the reverse a bull boaking with

We have seen besides one other coin with the flying horse Pegasus, and CAMV:
on the back part whereof, the form of a man with an helmet and shield, within
standing corn, and CVNO: another, with an horse ill favouredly portraied, and
EISV, peradventure for ISVRII, and on the back side, an ear of corn: also
another Solidurij. Caesar Comment.
For so the ancient French named men devoted to die in behalf of others: Whose
condition was this, that look unto whose friendship they had betaken
themselves, they should together with them enjoy all the comforts and himself,
Soldiers.
would refuse to die. Now whether from these, those soldiers Soldiers,
Soldates, Soldados, etc. I had rather others should think than my self
determine: although for mine own part, I would more willingly subscribe to
this opinion, that in these later and more modern times, they were termed
Solidarij, for distinction sake, for those, who served

Whether all these kinds of coin went commonly current as money, from one to
another and in ordinary traffic and exchange, or were stamped at the first
apart, for some special use and purpose, is a question debated among the
learned. But in few words, take here my conjecture, if I may be so bold to
interpose the same. Considering that Caesar had appointed what Custom or
Impost the Britans should pay yearly, and whereas under Augustus they endured
those Strabo.
to wit, for Sativis.
Corne-grounds, Plant-plots, Groves or Parks, Pasturage of greater and smaller
beasts: as being subdued now to obey as subjects, and not to serve as slaves: I
have been of opinion, that those pieces of money were stamped at first for that
use; namely, for greater beasts, with an horse; for smaller with a swine; for
woods with a tree; for Appian.
corne-fields with an ear of corn: as in Verlamians, which carries the
Inscription VERV. As for those with the head of a man or woman, they may seem
stamped for the Tribute Pol-silver.
Capitatio, which was personal and imposed upon the poll or person of every
one: of women from the twelfth, of men, from the fourteenth year of their age.
Which imposition Bunduica or Bodicia a Queen of the Britans complains of
unto her people in these words; Ye do both graze and also plough for the
Romans, yea, ye pay an yearly tribute in respect of your very bodies. Numisma
Census, Numisma Census.
and Hesichius expounds (...) Census, is a kind of personal money paid for
every poll. And the more steadfastly believe I this, for that in some there is
expressed the Mint-master marking money with TASCIA, which among the Britans
betokens a Tribute-Denier. Howbeit I deny not, but that afterward these
passed promiscuously as money from one to another.

Now, whether these tribute pieces were coined by the Romans, or the
Provincial people, or their Kings, seeing that the whole world was taxed by
Augustus, I may not easily affirm. Conjecture I may that they were stamped by
the British Kings, considering that Britain from the time of Julius Caesar
unto Claudius days, used their Dio writes: and withal, seeing that they
represent the images and titles of British Princes. For, the Romans by a
received custom had Kings in their Provinces as instruments to bring the
people into servitude* who being now become, as it were, the Romans fellows
and associates, by little and little were framed, (a thing usual with persons
conquered) to their fashions, and so, as it seems, began after the Roman
manner both to stamp money at a certain The manner, says he, among the Romans
was, that money should be coined by the Emperors, in regard of Tribute or Tax,
and not to remain always the same, and after one sort, but according to the
rise and fall of the said tributes, differ But diverse learned men accord not in
this point with Baronius.

NOTES UPON THE ROMAN COINS.
THE first Roman Emperor after [Iulius] Caesar, that earnestly set his mind
upon the conquest of Britain, was Claudius: and he having put over sea hither
with an army, brought the South-part thereof into the form of a Province: At
which very time, this first piece of money may seem to be stamped, which
carries this abbreviated Inscription, TI CLAVD. CAES. AVG. P. M. TR. P. VIIII.
IMP, XVI. that is to say, Tiberius Dio. Cassius.
Augustus Pontifex Maximus, that is, High Priest, Tribunitia potestate IX. that
is, In Tribunes authority the ninth time, Imperator XVI. that is, sixteen
times Imperator. But to explain these titles once for all, ye shall
understand, That after Julius Caesar, who laid the foundation of the Roman
Monarchy, and Octavius Caesares, and Augusti, as though they far surpassed the
nature of men. For such things as be of sacred Majesty, are named Augustae:
also, termed they were Pontifices Maximi, or High Priests, for that they were
consecrated in all kinds of Priesthood, and overseers of all Sacrifices and
religious ceremonies. They usurped likewise the Tribunitian power and
authority Imperatores, because their command and rule was most large, and
under that name Imperatores, so often as they had achieved any worthy exploit in
battle, either in their own persons, or by their Captains. But whereas in
the reverse of this piece of money, there is to be seen a triumphall Arch, with
the portrait of an horseman between two trophies, and this title, DE BRITAN. I
would judge, that thereby is meant a twofold victory obtained, in the ninth
year of Claudius his Empire, according to the number, that shows his
Tribunitian authority renewed.

The Emperor.
Augustus, out of this Inscription, TI. CLAVD. CAES. AVG. GER. TR. P. XII. IMP.
XIIX. we are taught, that in the twelfth year of his reign, he, for a
victory won in Britan was with joyful acclamations saluted, Imperator, the
eighteenth time: and at the same instant that the Colonie Camalodunum was
thither brought, which is signified expressly by an Or Ploughman.
husbandman imprinted upon it, with a The Romans (says Servius) when they were
about to found and build cities, being girt and clad after the Gabine fashion,
that is to say, with one part of their gown covering the head, and the other
tucked up, yoked on the right hand, a Bull, and within forth a Cow, and held
the crooked plough tail bending inward, so as all the clods of the earth might
fall inward. And thus having made a furrow, they did set out the places for
walls, holding up the plough fro the ground, where the gates should be.

Claudius, whose piece of coin the third is with Greek Characters, was by
virtue of an act of Senate, adorned with the surname That he might appease
Germany, But what should be the meaning of an half ship in this coin, with
this Inscription, Metropolis Etiminij Regis? Certes, I cannot for certain
affirm who that Etiminius was, unless a man list to imagine him to have been
the very same Adiminius, King Cunobelinus son, of whom Suetonius reports,
That he ran away unto C. Caligula.

Secunda Augusta, Sexta victrix, and Vicessima Victrix, which served in
Britain, Anno Christi 120. For then was he Consul the third time.

The fifth and sixth, which are the coins of Antoninus Pius, carrying
Antoninus Pius, Pater Patriae, Tribunitia potestate, Consul tertium: and in
their reverse, the one having Britain sitting upon rocks with a military
Ensign, a spear and a shield; the other, the self same Britain, sitting
upon a globe; seem to have been stamped by the Province Britain, in honor
of Antoninus Pius, when he began his Empire in the year of Christ 140. As for
that military habit of the Province Britan, it signifies, That Britan in
those days flourished in glory of martial prowess: like as that
Cornu-copiae, betokening plenty of all things: that also which Sieilie coined,
has the like figure with an ear of corn, in token of fruitfulness:
semblably that which Mauritania stamped has a portraict or personage, holding
two spears with an horse, to show the glory of that Province in good
horsemanship and chivalrie. Hitherto also is Antoninus, but

The seventh piece of money, stamped by Commodus, shows no Victory, with a
branch of the Date-tree, holding a shield, and sitting upon the shield of the
Britans vanquished, with this inscription, VICTORIA BRITANNICA.

The eighth, which is a coin of Caracalla, and set here not in the Ingentem
quercum decisis undique ramis
Constituit tumulo, fulgentia que induit arma
Mezenti ducis exuvias, tibi magne trophaeum
Bellipotens: aptat roranteis sanguine cristas,
Telaque trunca viri.
A mighty Oak, the boughs whereof were shred from every side,
Upon an hill he pight, whereon he goodly armor tide
Duke Mezence spoils, a trophee brave, o mighty Mars, to thee,
And fits thereto his crests which yet with gore blood dropping be,
The truncheons of that Knight also --




Or Usurpers.
Tyrants. Others will him to be Cl. Aelianus, one of the six Tyrants under
Dioclesian. Or Usurper.
Tyrant in Britain, under the Emperor Probus, of whom Zosimus made mention,
but suppressed his name, and of whom I have written before. Surely, in what
time soever he lived, we suppose that in Britain he was named Augustus,
considering his pieces of money be found in this Island only, Others read
Laelianus.
carrying this Inscription, IMPERATOR CL. AELIANVS PIUS FOELIX AUGUSTUS. In the
reverse, there is to be read, VICTORIA AVGVSTI, which

Imperator Caius Carausius Pius Foelix Augustus, and in the backside thereof,
PAX AVGVSTI, seems to have been stamped at the very time when he had
quieted the British Sea, which by reason of rovers was so dangerous.

A kind of coin.
Quartarius, stamped at London; others, The Questor, that is, Treasurer of
London.

Pecuniam Londini, that is, that the said money was stamped at London.

Flavia Helena, a British Lady borne, as our histories report, and as that
most excellent Historiographer Baronius does Maxentius, and received these
Titles, Fundator quietis, that is, The founder of quietness: and Liberator
Orbis, that is, The Deliverer of the world, having procured security to the
State and commonweal, had this piece stamped in honor of him at Triers, as
appears by the Letters S. TR. that is, Treveris.
Signata Treviris, that is to say, coined at Triers.

Flavius Canstantinus Maximus Augustus, the great ornament of The glory of the
Army, to currie favor with the soldiers, in whose choice in those days, and
not at the dispose of the Emperor, was the sovereign rule and government.

Constantinus the younger, Son of that Constantinus Maximus, Nobilis Caesar, a
title that was wont to be given to the Heirs apparent, or elect Successors of
the Empire. By the edifice thereon, and these words, PROVIDENTIAE CAESS. we
understand, that he together with his brother, built some public work, like
as by these letters P. LON. that this piece of money was coined at London.

This coin carrying the Inscription, Dominus noster Magnentius Pius Foelix
Augustus, may seem to have been stamped by Magnentius, who had a Britan to
his father: as also to win the favor of Our LORDS AVGVSTI, do argue there
were then two Augusti, or Emperors. And as for that Inscription, VOTIS V.
MVLTIS X. it betokens, that the people at that time did nuncupate their vows
in these terms, That the Emperor might flourish 5. years, and by dupling the
said number of 5. with lucky acclamations prayed for many Panegyric oration of
Nazarus, as follows: The Solemnized every fifth year.
Quinquennall feasts and solemnities of the most blessed and happy Caesar's,
hold us wholly possessed with joys; but in the appointed revolutions of ten
years, our hastening vows and swift hopes have now rested. The letters P. AR.
do show that this denier was stamped at Arles.
Arelate.

Constantius having defeated Magnentius, and recovered Britain,

In honor of Valentinian, when he had set upright again the Valentia, this
piece was coined at Antiochia, as may be gathered out of the small letters

Denier of Gratianus, I can think of nothing to say more, save only that which
erewhile I noted upon that of Magnentius.

Magnus Maximus was by the British army created Augustus, and his son likewise
Flavius Victor named Caesar, to grace

Honorius, I have nothing to observe, but that by this Inscription, AVGGG.
there were at the same time three Emperors.
Augusti: namely after the year of Grace 420. when as Honorius ruled as
Emperor in the west, Theodosius the younger in the East, and with them
Constantius, by Honorius nominated Augustus, who had vanquished our
Constantine, elected in hope of that fortunate name. As for that Inscription
CONOB, it signifies, that it

I could annex hereunto many more pieces of Roman money, for infinite store of
them is every where found among us in the ruins of cities and towns
subverted, D. 1. c. de auri pub. proscent L. 12. 13. C. The de suscept. praepos.
in treasure coffers, or vaults hidden in that age, as also in funerall-pots
and pitchers. And how it came Constitutions of Princes, that it was forbidden
to melt such ancient coins.

Having now already represented these antike pieces, as well of British as
Roman money in their own forms, I think it also profitable for the Reader to
insert in this very place a chorographicall table or map of Britain, (seeing
it has sometime been a Province of the Romans) with the ancient names of
places* and although Non indignemur mortalia corpora solvi,
Cernimus exemplis oppida posse mori.
Why fret should we that mortal men to death do subject lie?
Examples daily show that towns and cities great may die.


THE DOVVN-FALL OR DESTRVCTION OF BRITAIN.
WHen as Britain now was abandoned of the Roman garrisons, there ensued an
universal and utter confusion, full of woeful miseries and calamities, what
with barbarous nations of the one side making incursions and invasions, what
with the native Inhabitants raising tumultuous uprores on the other, whiles
every man catches at the They lived in fear 40. years or thereabout. For,
Vortigern then King, stood in great dread of the Picts and Scots: Troubled sore
also he was with the violence of Romans, that remained here, and no less
stood he in fear of Ambrosius Aurelius or Aureleanus, who during the conflict
of these tempestuous troubles, wherein his parents that had worn the Imperial
purple roabe, were slain, survived them. Gilda.
Hereupon, the Saxons, whom Vortigern had called forth of Germany to aid him,
made bloody and deadly war against those friends that invited and entertained
them: insomuch as after many variable and doubtful events of war they wholly
disseised the poor wretched Britains Saxons called forth into Britain.
and their ancient native seat and habitation.

But this most lamentable ruin and downfall of Britain, Gildas the Britain,
who lived within a little while after, all full of tears shall with his
piteous pen depaint or deplore rather unto you. As the Romans were returning,
quoth he, to their own home, there show themselves avie, Carroghes. Scitick
vale.
out of their carroghes, wherein they passed over the The Irish sea.
Sciticke vale, and as it were, at high noone. Sun. and in fervent heat,
issuing from out of most narrow holes and caves, whole swarms of duskish
vermin, to wit, a number of hideous highland Scots and Picts in flocks, This
Gildas here in the Manuscript Copies of France is named Querulis as the right
worrhy Barnabas Brisonius has reported unto me.
for manners and conditions in some respect different; but sorting well enough
in one and the same greedy desire of bloodshed: Who having intelligence that
the Roman associats and Maintainers of the Britans were returned home, with
utter disclaiming In some Copies, AGITIVS, in other Equitius Cos. without any
number.
Whereupon the distressed remains of them send their missive letters again
unto Aetius a power-able man in the Roman state, in this tune; To * AETIVS
THRICE CONSVLL.
THE GROANS OF BRITANS.


The Barbarians drive us back to the sea: The sea again puts us back

Yet obtain they no succor at all for those their distresses. Mean while in
this wandering and declining condition of theirs, most notorious and horrible
famine oppresses them, which forced many of them without delay, to yield
themselves into the hands of those cruel spoilers and robbers, that they might
have some food (were it never so little) to comfort and refresh their poor
hungry souls: but with others it never wrought so much, but they chose rather
to withstand and rise against them continually, The help of God is at hand
when man's help fails. Thus for a while rested our enemies from their
boldness; but yet our countrymen gave not over their wickedness: The enemies,
I say, retired from the people, but the people did not retire themselves from
their wickedness. For, an usual manner it ever was of this nation (like as it
is at this day also) to show themselves feeble in repressing the enemies
forces, but strong enough to civil wars, and to undergo the burdens of
sin, etc. Certainly it is hard, that there Kings anointed.
Kings were anointed not by God, but by such as were known more cruel than
the rest: and soon after, the same were murdered by their own anointers,
without due examination of the truth, and others more fierce and cruel
elected. Now if any one of these Kings seemed more mild than other, and
somewhat better inclined to the Truth, upon him as the the subverter of
Britain the hatred and Insomuch as, apparently (even as now a Pestilence.
and feels not the whip. For lo, a pestilent contagion bringing much
mortality falls heavily upon the foolish people; which in a short space,
when the enemies sword was gone destroyed so great a multitude of them, as that
the living were not able to bury the dead. Neither verily were they the better
for it, that the saying of Esaias the Prophet might in them also be fulfilled:
And God calls them, quoth he, to sorrow and mourning, to baldness and
sackcloth; but behold, they fell to killing of calves, to slaying of rams: Lo,
they went to eating and drinking, and said withal, Let us eat and drink, for
to morrow we shall die. Saxons received into Britain.
odious both to God and man, should be let into this Island, as one would say,
wolves into the sheep-folds, to repulse, forsooth, and beat back the Northern
nations. Than which, I assure you, nothing was ever devised and practiced more
pernicious, nothing more unhappy unto this land. O mist of sense and grossest
understanding that ever was! O desperate dullness and blind blockishnesse of
mind! Those whom in their absence they were inclined and

Then rushed forth out of the barbarous Germany.
Lionesses den a Kennell of whelps in three Vessels, called in her language
Cyulae, Ciulae.
that is, Keeles, and in our Latin tongue, Longae naves, under full sail,
carried with the wind of lucky sure presaging auguries, whereby fore-prophesied
it was unto them, that for 300. years they should possess and hold that land
as their country, unto which they directed their course: and for an hundred
and twenty, that is, the one moity of the said space, oftentimes waste and
depopulate the same. These being put Germany.
the Lioness, finding that their first setting foot and marching forward sped
well, sends likewise a greater rabble of worrying freebooters, which being
arrived here in Flotes conjoined themselves with the former misbegotten crew.
From hence it is, that the shoot-grifts of iniquity, the root of bitterness,
and virulent plants due to our deserts sprout and put forth in our soil,
proudly bud, branch and leaf. Well, these barbarous Saxons thus admitted into
the Island, obtain allowance of victuals and wages, as for douty soldiers,
and such as would endure hard service and much hazard (for so they falsely bear
men in hand) Epimenia.
monthly wages was not well paid them, devising of purpose colorable occasions
of quarrel, protesting and threatening, that unless they might feel more
munificence powered and heaped upon them, they would with the breach of covenant
spoil and waste the whole Island throughout. And without further delay they
second these threats with very deeds, (for the cause of deserved revenge for
precedent wickedness, was still nourished)

When we shall read these reports, let us not be offended and displeased with
good Gildas, for his bitter invectives against either the vices of his own
contrymen the Britans, or the inhumane outrages of the barbarous enemies, or
the insatiable cruelty

BRITANS OF ARMORICA.
Gildas.
DVring this most woeful, desperate, and lamentable tempestuous season, some
poor remains of Britains, being found in the mountains, were killed up by
whole heaps; others, pined with famine, came and yielded themselves unto the
enemies, upon composition to serve them as Bondslaves for ever, so they might
not be killed out of hand, which was reputed a most high favor, and especial
grace. There were also that went over sea into strange lands* singing under
their spread sails with a howling and wailing note, in stead of the Mariners A
song at their first setting out.
Celeusma, after this manner: Thou have given us [O Lord] as sheep to be
devoured, and scattering us among the heathen. Others again remained still in
their own country, albeit in fearful estate, betaking themselves (but yet
continually suspecting the worst) to high Bretagne, or little Britain.
to woods, and thick grown forests, yea, to the rocks of the sea. Of those
who passed beyond sea, no doubt were they who for to save their lives, went
over in great number to Or Welchmen.
Armorica in France, and were kindly received of the Armoricans. That this is
true, besides the community of language, (the same in manner with that of our
Or Welchmen.
Britans) and to say nothing of other authors, who all accord in this point;
he who lived nearest unto that age, and was borne even in Armorica, and wrote
the life of S. Wingual of the Confessor, sufficiently does prove. An
offspring, says he, of the Britans embarked in Flotes, arrived in this land,
on this side the British sea, what time as the barbarous nation of the Saxons
fierce in arms, and uncivil in manners, possessed their native and
mother-soile. Then, I say, this dear offspring seated themselves close within
this nooke and secret corner. In which place Howbeit, our writers report, that
our Britans long before this time, settled themselves in this coast. For, he of
Malmesburie writes thus: Constantinus Maximus being saluted by the Army,
Emperor, having proclaimed an Expedition into the higher lands, brought Cod.
Theod. lib. 7. Tit. 20.
Let the old soldiers according to our Precept enter upon the vacant lands,
and hold them for ever freely. Ninnius likewise: Maximus the Emperor who slew
Gratian, would not send home again those soldiers which he had And he that
has annexed brief notes upon Ninnius, fableth besides in this manner: The
Armorican Britans which are beyond sea, going forth from hence with Maximus the
tyrant in his expedition, when as they could not return, wasted the west-parts
of Gaul, even to the very bare soil: and when they had married their wives
and daughters, did cut out all their tongues, for fear lest the succeeding
progeny should learn their mother-language: whereupon we also call them in
our tongue, Lhet vydion, that is, half silent or tongue-tied, because they
speak confusedly. The authority of these writers herein I cannot in any wise
contradict; yet I am of opinion rather, that the children of those old
soldiers gladly afterward received these Britans that fled out of their
country. Picardie, and who in some copies are named Brinani. For if any man
out of the fourth book of Strabo his Geographie, do with Volaterane think,
that Britain was a city of Gaul, let him but look into the Greek Book,
and he will soon inform himself, that he spoke of the Island Britain, and
not of a city. As for that verse out of Dionysius, which before I have
alleged, some would rather understand it with Stephanus of our Britans, than
with Eustathius of the Armoricans, especially seeing that Festus Avienus, a
writer verily of good antiquity, has translated it thus: Britain.
Britannis,
Flavaque caesariem Germania porrigit ora.
Britain the North-west winds too near,
And yellow haired Germany her front does forward bear.


Neither let any man think that the Britannicians mentioned in the book
Notitia, Britanniciani.
came from hence, who in truth were certain cohorts only of soldiers
enrolled out of this our Britain.

Before the arrival of our Britans, Armorica.
this country was at first called, Armorica, that is, situate by the sea side:
and afterward in the same sense, Llydaw, in the British tongue, that is,
coasting upon the sea, and thence in Latin by our writers living in the Happily,
Lexo vij in Pliny. Zonaras. Procopius terms them Arborici: and another
calls the country, Corn^ Galliae.
Letavia. From when I suppose, were those Leti whom Zosimus names in Gaul,
when he notes, that Magnentius the Tyrant, was borne among the Leti in France,
and had a Britan to his father. These Armoricans when as that Constantine
elected for the names sake became Emperor, and the barbarous nations overran
Gaul, having cast out the Roman garrisons, instituted a commonwealth among
themselves. But Valentian the younger by the means of Aetius, and at the
intercession of Saint German, reclaimed them to allegiance. At which very time,
it seems that Exuperantius governed them. Of whom Claudius Rutillius writes
thus: Cujus Aremoricas Pater Exuperantius or as

Leges restituit, libertatemque reducit,
Et servos famulis non sinit essesuis.
Whose Sire Exuperantius the coasts to sea that reach
Now after discontinuance long in love of peace does teach:
He sets the laws again in force, reduces liberty,
And suffers them unto his folk no more as slaves to be.
Out of which verses, I wot not whether Aegidius Maserius has made some
collection, when he wrote, That the Britans were servants under the Armoricans
and against them errected a freedom. The first mention to my knowledge of
Britans in Armorica, was in the year of our salvation 461. about the thirtith
year after that the Anglo-Saxons were called out of Germany into our Britan.
For then, Mansuetus a Bishop of the Britans, among other Bishops of France and
Armorica, subscribed to the first Council of Tours. In the ninth year after,
these new Inhabitants of France, seeing the West-Gothes to seize into their
hands the most fertile territories of Anjou and Poictou, Vis^gothes.
encountered them, and were a bar that the Goths possessed not themselves
Sid^^. Appollinar.
he had given counsel to set upon the Britans dwelling over the river Ligeris.
Loire, and to divide France between the Goths and Burgundians. These Britans
were a kind of people witty and subtle, warlike, tumultuous, and in regard of
their valor, Anno 470.
number, and association, stubborn: in which terms Sidonius Apollinaris
complains of them unto Riothimus his friend, for so himself calls him (but
Jornandes names him King of the Britans) who afterward being sent for by
Anthemius, came with a power of 12. thousand men to aid the Romans, but before
Britannia Armorica, and of the French wri^ers.
Frankners Britannia Cismarina, that is, Britan on this side the sea: and
thereupon, I. Scaliger versified thus: Vicit Aremoricas animosa Britannia
gentes,
Et dedit imposito nomina prisca jugo.
The nations Aremorican stout Britan overcame,
And with the yoke of servitude gave them her ancient name.
For, they turned the edge of their weapons upon those their friends that gave
them Venett^sis.
as appears evidently both by other testimonies, and also by these words of
Regalis Bishop of Vennes as touching himself and his: We living, says he, in
captivity under the Britans are subject to a grievous and heavy yoke.
Moreover, in the times succeeding, Gregor. Tur^^. lib. 10. cap. 9.
they courageously maintained themselves and their estates: First under petty
Kings, afterward under Counts and Dukes against the French; albeit as Glaber
Rodolphus writes; Their only wealth was immunitie from paiments to the
public Treasury, and plenty of milk: Also 500. years since, William of
Malmesbury wrote thus of them: A kind of people they are needy and poor in
their own country; otherwise also with foraine money waged, and purchasing a
laborious and painful life. If they be well paid, they refuse not so much as
to serve in civil war one against another without all regard

BRITANS OF WALES AND CORNWALES.
THe rest of the Britans, who pitifully distressed in their own native country
were put to seek for their country, were overlaied with so great Constantine
a Tyrant among the Amphiballus a sacred vesture hairie on both sides. An old
Glossarie. Aurelius Conanus, when also was called Caninus. V.c. in an old
book. Vortipor.
Danmonij, albeit he had sworn in express words before God and the company
of holy Saints,

that he would perform the office of a good Prince, yet in two Churches under
the sacred vesture of an Abbat, flew two children of the blood royal, together
with their Fosters, two right valiant men: and many years before having put
away his lawful wife, was foulie defiled with a number of foul filthy
adulteries.

Aurelius Conanus, wallowing in the mire of Parricidies and adulteries, hating
the peace of his country, is left alone as a tree withering in the open field:
whose father and brethren

Vortiporius tyrant of the Southwales, as Caermarden shire, Pembrooke shire,
and Cardigan shire. Cuneglasus.
Dimetae, the ungratious son of a good father, like to a Panther in manners,
so variably spotted with vices of diverse sorts: when his head was now waxen
hoary and gray, sitting in his throne full of craft and guile, and the same
defiled with Paricidies, or murders of his own kindred, and with adulteries
beside, cast off his own wife, (and filthily abused her daughter unawares, and
unwitting) yea, and he took also her life away.

Cuneglasus, in the Roman tongue, Lanio fulvus, that is, the Lion tawney
Butcher, a Bear sitting and riding upon many, the driver of that chariot which
holds the Bear, a contemner of God, an oppressor of the Clergy, fighting
against God with grievous sins, and warring upon man with material armor,
and weapons, turned away his wife, provoked the

Maglocunus, Magoeunus.
Dragon of the Isles, the deposer of many Tyrants out of Kingdom and life
both, the most forward in all mischief: for power and malicious wickedness
together, greater then many more: a large giver, but a more prodigal, and
profuse sinner: stronger in arms, higher also than all the Potentates of
Britain, as well in royal dominion, as in the stature and lineaments of his
person. In his youthful days with sword and fire, he brought to destruction
his Uncle by the mothers side, (being then King) together with many right hardy
and redoubted servitours. After that fantasy of a violent course of rule
according to his desire was gone, upon a remorse of conscience for his sins,
vowed to be a professed But I must leave the report of these things to History
writers, who hitherto have falsely set down, that these Tyrants succeeded one
after another: whereas in truth as we may perceive by Gildas, who speaks unto
them severally, and personally one by one, they all at once, and the very same
time usurped tyranny in diverse quarters of the Island.

Cornwalis. Britwales. Welsh. Walli.
to those parts (I mean) which now we call Wales, and Cornwall. The
Inhabitants of the one the Saxons named (...), of the other (...), like as
those in Gaul, Galweales; For Walsh with them signifies strange and foreign:
whence also the Wallons in the low Countries, and the Vallachians upon the
river Danubium.
Dunow had their names.

The Britwales, Welchmen.
or Welshmen, a very warlike nation, for many years defended their liberty
under pettie-kings: and albeit they were secluded from the English-Saxons by a
Ditch or Trench which King Offa cast, (a wonderful piece of work) yet At the
length in the reign of Edward the First, Statute of Wales.
as he writes of himself, The Divine providence which in the own dispose is
never deceived, among other good gifts dispensed by it, and with which it has
vouchsafed our Kingdom of England to be adorned, has converted now full,
wholly, and entirely (of her good grace) the Land of Wales with the Inhabitants
thereof (subject before time unto to us by fealty and service) into our proper
dominion, and without any let or bar whatsoever, Howbeit in the age next
ensuing, they could no way be induced to undergo the yoke of subjection,
neither could the quarrels by any means possibly be taken up, nor the most
deadly hatred between the two nations extinguished, until that King Henry the
seventh, who descended of them, assisted the oppressed Welchmen.
Britans with his gracious hand, and King Henry the Eighth, admitted them unto
the same condition of Laws and Liberties, that the English enjoy. Since which
time, yea and very often also before, the Kings of England have had trial of
their constant fidelity, and loyal allegiance. As for those Cornwallians,
although they

Let this suffice that has been said, touching the Britans and Romans: but
since we treat of the Inhabitants, we may not in this place omit, (although we
have heretofore spoken thereof already) that which Lib. 1.
Zosimus reports; How that Probus the Emperor, sent over into Britain the
Vandals and Burgundians, whom he had overcome, who having seated themselves
here, stood the Romans in good stead, as often as any one raised tumult and
sedition. But where they were planted, I know not, unless it were in
Cambridge-shire. For, Gervase of Tilbury makes mention of an Vandelsbury, and
says, it was the work of the Vandals.

Neither let any man surmize, that in the days of Constantius the Poeni had
their abode here, grounding upon these words of Eumenius the Rhetorician: [
Except perhaps no greater ruin had fallen upon Britain, and borne it down,
than if it had been drenched throughout, and overwhelmed with the overflowing
of the Ocean: which being delivered from the most deep gulf [Poenorum] began
to appear and show it self at the view and sight of the Romans.] For, in the
old Copy belonging sometime to Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, and afterward to
the right honorable Baron Burghly, Lord high Treasurer of England, we read [
Poenarum gurgitibus] that is, The gulfes of punishments, and not Poenorum
gurgitib. For he seems to speak of the calamities and miseries wherewith

Whereas Agathias in the second book of his Histories, has these words,
Hunnica natio Britones sunt, that is, The Britons are a nation of the Hunnes: I
would have no man hereby raise a slander upon the Britans, or think them to
be issued from the savage cruel Hunnes. For, long since Francis Pithaeus a
very learned man, has averred unto me, and now of late I. Lewenclaius, a
right worthy Historian, published in writing, that in a Greek Copy it is
read, (...), and not Britones.

PICTS.
NOw let us come to the other Inhabitants of Britain, and first unto the
Picts, PICTS.
whom for Antiquity next unto Britains, the Historiographers have accounted
the second. Hector Boethius deriveth these from the Agathyrsti: Pomponius
Laetus, Aventinus and others from the Germans: some from the Pictones in
France, and Beda from the Scythians. It happened, says he, that the nations of
the Picts came in long Galleys or Keeles.
ships, and those not many, out of Scythia, (as the report goes) into Ireland:
and of the Scots whom they found there, requested (but in vain) a place of
habitation: by whose persuasion they went into Britain, and inhabited the
Northern parts thereof, and that was about Picts came from no other place at
all, but were very natural Britains themselves, even the right progeny of
the most ancient Britains: those Britans, I mean, and none other, who before
the coming in of the Romans, were seated in the North part of the Island, and
of those who afterward, casting off the yoke of bondage (as they are a nation
most impatient of servilitie) repaired unto these in the North. Like as when
the Saxons overran the Isle, those Britains which would not forgo their
liberty, conveied themselves into the Western parts of the Island, full of
craggie hills, as Wales and Cornwall: even so, doubtless, when the Roman war
grew hot, the Britains lest they should undergo servitude, (which is Their
manners and demeanor.
that I seek to countenance a lie, carrying likelihood and probability of a
truth, me thinks I am able to prove, that the Picts were very Britans indeed,
by the demeanor, name, and language of the Picts, wherein we shall see they
agreed passing well with Britains.

And to let pass among other reasons, that neither the Picts, according to
Beda, nor the Britans, as Tacitus writes, made by any distinction of sex for
government in chief, or excluded women from bearing scepter, that custom of
painting, and staining themselves with colors, was common to both nations. As
touching the Britans, we have prooved it before: and for the Picts, Claudian
proves it for us, who -- Nec falso nomine Pictos
Edomuit. --
The Picts he tamed
So truly named.


And in another place, -- Ferroque notatas
Perlegit exanimes Picto moriente figuras:
-- And does peruse with eye
Those iron-brent marks in Picts well seen all bloudlesse, as they die.


Which Isidore does show more plainly: Their name.
The Nation of the Picts (says he) have a name drawn even from their bodies,
for that by the artificial pricking therein of small holes with Shall we
think now, that these Picts were Germans, who never used this manner of
painting? or the Agathyrsi of Thracia, so far distant from hence; or rather
the very Britans themselves? seeing they were in the self same Isle, and
retained the same guise, and fashion of painting.

Neither are those barbarous people, who so long time made such incursions out
of the Forest Caledonia, and from that farthest Northern coast found the
Romans work, otherwise called than Britans, of the ancient writers, Dio,
Herodian, Vopiscus, and others. Semblably, Tacitus who describes at large the
wars of Agricola, his wives Father, in this utmost coast of Britain, calls
the Inhabitants by no other name than Britans, and Britans of Now Albanie.
Caledonia: whereas notwithstanding, our later Writers have recorded, that the
Picts, new comers hither, were arrived there ten years before; a thing that
I would have you to note, considering that Tacitus in that age knew not of them
at all. Neither would those Roman Emperors, who warred Picts or Scots) they
would (no doubt) have been known by the titles of PICTICVS and SCOTICVS in
their coins and inscriptions. Tacitus guesseth by their deep yellow bush of
hair, and their large limbs, that they had their beginning out of Germany:
but straightwaies after, and more truly he attributes all to the climate, and
positure of the heaven, which yields unto bodies their complexion and
feature. Under the North Pole are nations bred and fostered, big and tall of
body, of color brown, with hair of head even, and straight, and the same
ruddie. In like manner, that the Caledones, (without all question Britans) were
the self same nation of the Picts, the Panegyric Author after a sort does
intimate, writing thus: The woods of the Caledones, and of other Picts, etc. as
if the Caledones also, had been none other but the Picts. And that those
Caledonians were Britans borne. Martial in this verse of his, implies: Quinte
Caledonios Ovidi visure Britnnos:
Quint Ovide, Britans Caledon, thou that do mind to see.


Ausonius likewise, who shows withal that they were painted, while he
compares their color unto green moss, distinguished with gravel between, in
this wise: -- Viridem distinguit glarea muscum;
Tota Caledonijs talis pictura Britannis:
-- Like to green moss with gravel rewes between,
The Britans Caledonian are all be painted seen.


But, as these for a long time were no otherwise known than by the name of
Britans, and that, by reason of their depainted bodies: so afterward, about
the time of Maximian and Dioclesian, (neither before that, find we the name of
Picts in any writers) when Britain had so long been a Province, that the
Inhabitants had learned the provincial Latin tongue, then (it seems) began
they to be called Picts, for distinction sake, that they might be known from
them that were confederate with the Romans, Picts, if it were not because they
depainted themselves? Now if any one there be, who believes not, that our
Britans used the prouincial Latin tongue, little knows he certainly how
earnestly the Romans labored, that the Provinces might speak Latin, neither
sees he what a number of Latin words is crept into the British language: that
I may not urge the authority of Tacitus, who says, that in the Domitians time
the Britans affected very much the eloquence of the Latin tongue. And as
touching the name of Picts, the authority of Flavius Vegetius may soon clear
this doubt, who shows (after a sort) that the Britans used the word [ Pict]
in the very same sense, for a thing that is colored, Lib. 4. cap. 37.
as the Latins do. For, he writes, that the Britans called these light
Pinnaces they should call the people PICTI, who were painted with sundry
colors, and with

This also makes for us, that the Northern Picts, whom Saint Columbane by
preaching the word, and by his good example brought unto Christianity, as in
the ancient English Annals, named, (...), as one would say, Britan Picts.

The cause whereof we draw not many proofs from the language, is this, for
that of the Picts tongue, Their Language.
there can scarce one word be gathered out of Authors: yet it seems to be the
same that the British. Beda wrote, that the Roman wall made against the
incursions of the Picts, began in a place, which in the Picts Language is
called, Penuahel: and Pengwall, among the Britans expressly signifies, The
beginning or head Moreover, throughout all that tract of the Island, which the
Picts held longest (and that was the East part of Scotland) the names of most
places do savor of a British original: as for example, Morria, Marnia, for
that they be countries adjoining to the sea, coming of the British word Mor,
that is, Sea. Aberden, Aberlothnet, Aberdore, Aberneith, that is, the mouth of
Den, of Lothnet, of Door and Neith, from the British word, Aber, which
signifies the mouth of a river. Strathbolgi, Strathdee, Strathearn, that is,
The Dale or Vale of Bolgi, Dee, and Earne, coming of Strath, which in the
British tongue betokens, a Valley. Yea, and the chief seat of the Picts,
does acknowledge no other original than a British, I mean Edinburgh, which
Ptolomy calls Castrum alatum, that is, the winged Castle. For Aden, in
British is, a Wing. Neither Baidij, which is as much in the Britan language (as
I have often said) as Depainted. Out of these premises verily, we may without
any absurdity conclude, That the Picts Language, and the British differed not,
and therefore the nations were not diverse; howsoever Beda speaks of the Picts
and Britans tongues, as if they were distinct one from the other; in which
place, he may be thought to have meant their sundry Dialects.

Neither is there cause why any man should marvel, that the Picts wrought so
much mischief, and gave so many overthrowes unto their countrymen the
Britans, considering that we see at this day in Ireland, those which are
within the English Paulus Diaconus, the Goths, Hypogothes, Gepidians, and
Vandals, varying their names only, and speaking one and the selfsame
language, encountered often times one another in open field with Banner
displayed; even so did the Picts and Britans, especially when these Britans
were become the Roman allies. These were the reasons, such as they be, that
took hold of me, and induced me in a manner, to think the Picts a remnant
of the Britans: but perhaps the authority of Beda weighs down all this; and
therefore, if ye think so good, let the tradition of so reverend a man,
grounded upon the relation of others, prevail and take

These Picts Ammianus Marcellinus divides into Dicalidonians, and Vecturiones.
I would rather read Deucalidonians, and do think they were planted about the
Western coasts of Scotland, where the Deucalidonian Sea breaks in. And
albeit I have beeene of opinion, that these were so called, as if a man would
say, Black Caledonians, Dical^dinij. Vecturiones.
for Dee in the British tongue, signifies Black) like as the Irish now adays
term the Scots of that tract, Duf Allibawn, that is, Black Scots, and so the
Britans called the rovers and pirates, which out of these parts did much scath
at sea, Yllu du, that is, the black army: yet now, me thinks we may guess,
(for guesses are free) that they took that name from their situation. For
Debeu Caledonij, betokens the Caledonians dwelling on the right hand, that
is, Westward; like as the other Picts, who Vecturiones, by a word happily drawn
from Chwithic, which in the British tongue, signifies, Left; and these some
think are corruptly called in Ptolome^, Vernicones. And an old Saxon fragment
seems to give them the name of (...), for so they term an enemie-nation to
the Britans: whereas the ancient Angles, or English called the Picts
themselves, Pehits and Peohtas. And hereupon it is that we read every
Whitkindus, Pehiti, for Picti.

The manners of the Picts.
The manners of these ancient and barbarous Britans, who afterward came to be
named Picts, I have heretofore described out of Dio, and Herodian. It remains
now, that I go on with my web, and weave thus much to it: namely, that in
the declining state of the Empire, when the Romans somewhat unadvisedly, and
without good forecast enrolled cohorts of the Barbarians, Blondus.
certain of these Picts, (when all was in quietness and peace) were taken
into the military service of the Romans by Honorius, Honoriaci.
and therefore termed Honoriaci, who under that Tyrant Constantine (elected in
hope of so fortunate a name) having set open the fortified entries of the
Pyraenean hills, let Barbarians into Spain. In the end, when first by
themselves, and afterward Bid.
by Columbanus a Scot of Ireland, a Monk likewise of passing great holiness,
in the year 565. who taught them, whence soever he learned it, to celebrate
the feast of Easter, Reckoning the said day.
betweeee the fourteenth day of the Moon in March, unto the twentieth, but
always upon the Lords day, as also to use another manner of tonsure, or
shaving their Picts brought his own subjects with much ado unto the Roman
observance. In which age very many Picts with great devotion, as the days were
then, frequented the Chapels and Shrines of Saints at Rome, and among others
he that is mentioned in the Antiquities of Saint Peter's Church there, Asterius
Comes. Pictorum.
in these words [ASTERIVS COMES PICTORVM ET SYRA CVM SVIS VOTVM SOLVERE] that
is, Asterius a Count or Earl of the Picts, and Syra with their family
performed their vows. At length, by the Scots that infested them out of
Ireland, they were made to stoop, and after so daunted, as that about the year
of Franci, that is, French.

Whereas the Panegyric author, gives some inkling, that Britain before
Caesar's time used to skirmish with their enemies the Picts and Irish, half
naked men, he seems to speak after the manner of the time wherein he
lived: but surely in those days, there were none known in Britain by the
name of Picts.

Also, whereas Sidonius Apollinaris in his Panegyric to his wives Father
poetically -- Victricia Caesar
Signa Caledonios transvexit ad usque Britannos,
Fuderit and quanquam Scotum and cum Saxone Pictum:
In train of Conquest Caesar still his ensigns even as far
As Britain Caledonian advanced: and though no bar
Staid him, but that the Scots and Picts, with Saxons he subdued, etc.


I cannot choose but with another Poet, cry out in this wise: -- Sit nulla
fides augentibus omnia Musis:
These Poets love to overreach,
Believe them not, when so they teach.


For, Caesar who is prodigal in his own praise, would never have concealed
these exploits, if he had ever performed them. But these men seem not unlike
to those good, honest, and learned writers in our age, who whiles they patch
together an history of Caesar, write forsooth, how he subdued the Franks in
Gaul, and the English

That the Pictones of Gaul, Pictones.
and our Picts were both one Nation, I dare not with Ioannes Picardus avouch,
seeing the names of the Pictones in Gaul was even in Caesar's time very ri^e
and much spoken of, and for that our Picts were never called Pictones: yet am I
not ignorant, how in one only place of the Panegyrist among all the rest,
through the negligence of the copier, there was foisted in Pictonum, in stead
of Pictorum.


AMong the people of Britain, after Picts, the SCOTTISH Nation by good right
challenge the next place: concerning whom, before I speak ought, for fear
lest evil willers, and frowardly peevish, should calumniously misconsture
those allegations, which I, simply, ingenuously, and in all honest meaning,
shall here cite out of ancient writers as touching Scots, I must certify the
High-land men. For, the rest which are of civil behavior, and be seated in
the East part thereof, albeit they bear now the name of Scottish-men, yet are
they nothing less than Scots, but descended from the same Germane original,
that we English men are. And this, neither can they choose but confess, nor we
but acknowledge, being as they are, teamed by those above said, High-land men.
Sassones, as well as we; and using as they do the same language with us, to
wit, the English-Saxon, different only in Dialect, a most assured argument

The beginning and Etymology of the Scottish Nation, like as of other neighbor
nations round about, is so full of obscurity, and lies over-spred under the
mist of darkness, in such sort, that even Buchanan himself, though otherwise
a man of Scota that supposed and counterfeit daughter of the Egyptian King
Pharaoh, Scota, King Pharaohs daughter.
wedded (forsooth) unto Gaithelus, the son of Cecrops founder of Athens. But,
as this conceit arising from the unskilfulnesse of Antiquity, is of the
better sort of ingenuous Scots rejected: so, that other opinion of later days,
drawn without all sense from a Greek fountain, that Scots should be so
called, as it were, (...), that is, Obscure, I utterly disallow and condemn,
as a device of envious persons, to the slanderous reproach of a famous and
Flower gatherer, the name of an History. Lib. 9. cap. 2.
Florilegus, namely, that Scots were so called, because they came of a confused
mingle-mangle of diverse nations: And yet I cannot but marvel, whence Isidorus
had this: The Scots (says he) take their name in their own proper tongue of
their painted bodies, for that they are marked with sharp iron pricks, and
ink, and so receive the print of sundry shapes. Which also Rabanus Maurus, in
the very same words (doubtless out of him) does testify in his Geographie to
Ludovicus ^ius the Emperor, which is to be seen in the Library

But seeing that Scotland it self has of her own people such as might very
well fetch their beginning from the inmost record of Antiquity, and thereby
best of all advance the glory of their Country, in case they would wholly set
their minds, and bestow their careful diligence for a time in this argument; I
will point only with my finger to the fountains, from whence happily they may
draw the truth; and lay before them certain observations, which I would wish
them to mark, and consider more diligently: for, my self will in this matter
play the Skeptic, and affirm nothing. And first, touching their original;
and then, of the place from whence they removed, Ireland the native Country of
the Scots.
as shall in due place be proved, they passed into Britan, and what time as
they were first known unto writers by this name, seated they were in Ireland.
For, Claudian the Poet has written of their irruptions into Britain, in these
verses: -- Totam cum Scotus Hibernem
Movit, and infesto spumavit remige Thetis:
What time the Scots all Ireland stirred offensive arms to take,
And with maine stroke of enemies ores, the sea much foam did make.


And also in another place; Scotorum cumulos flevit glacialis Hiberne:
And frozen Ireland, heaps of Scots bewailed with many a tear.


Orosius likewise writes thus; Ireland is peopled with Scottish Nations. Gildas
calls Scots, Irish Spoilers. And Beda; The Scots that inhabit Ireland, an
Isle next unto Britain: as also elsewhere. Yea, and in the days of Charles
the Great, Eginhardus in express words, calls Ireland, The Isle of Scots.
Moreover, Giraldus Cambrensis; That the Scottish nation (says he) is descended
out of Ireland, the affinity as well of their Language, as of their apparel,
of their weapons also, and of their manners even to this day do sufficiently
prove. But now to come unto the points which I would have the Scots thoroughly
to weigh.

For as much as they which are right and natural Scots, acknowledge not this
name Gaiothel, or Gaithel, and G^el.
but otherwise call themselves Gaoithel, Gael, and Albin; seeing also, that
very many people have other names given unto them by their neighbors, than
they use themselves, whereby often times there is a secret light given unto
nations of their descent: as for example; the Inhabitants of the lower
Pannonia, who term themselves Magier, are in Dutch named Hungari, for that
they came first of the Huns: they that border upon the Forest Hercynia, among
themselves are called Czechi, but by others Bohemi, because they descended from
the Burbonnois.
Boij in Gaul: the Inhabitants of Afric, who having also a peculiar name
among themselves, are by the Spaniards termed Alarbes, for that they be
Arabians: the Irish, who call themselves Erinach, are by our Welchmen.
Britans named Gwidhil: considering also, that as well those Irish, and these
Welchmen.
Britans, gave no other name to us English men, then Sassons, because were are
descended from the Saxons; I would have the learned Scottish men first to
consider, whether they might not be called of their neighbors, as one would
say, Scythae. For, even as the Flemings and other Netherlanders, express by
this one word, Scutten, both the Scythians and Scots; so it has been observed
out of our British writers, that they named both Scythians and Scots, Y-Scot.
Ninnius also expressly calls the Britans that inhabit Ireland, Scythians: and
the narrow sea, through which they passed over out of Ireland into Britain,
^allis Scythica.
Gildas names, Vallem Scythicam, that is, The Scythian Vale. For so has the
copy printed at Paris, where others without all sense read, Stythicam Vallem*
Moreover, King Alfred, who seven hundred years past translated Scotos] into [
Scyttan] and our Countrymen, who dwell next to Scotland, use to call them, not
by the name of Scots, In Hypodigmate.
but Scyttes, and Scettes. For, like as ( Walsingham is mine author) the same
people be called Getae, Getici, Gothi, Gothici; so, from one and the same
original, Scythae, Scitici, Scoti, Scoeici, take their names.

Scythia, let them here advise well upon it. Surely, both Lib. 6.
Diodorus Siculus, and also Lib. 4.
Strabo, compare the first Britans inhabiting Ireland, (which is the native
country indeed of the wild Irish, and those that be right Scots) with the
Scythians for their savage nature. Besides, they drink blood out of the wounds
of men slain: they establish leagues among themselves, by drinking one
another blood; and suppose, that the greater number of slaughters they commit,
the more honor they win: and so did the Scythians in old time. To this we may
add, that these [wild] Scots, like as the Scythians, had for Sagittarios, that
is, Archers. And learned men there be, that think hereupon both nations had
this name given unto them, for their skill in shooting. Neither may this seem
strange, that diverse nations carried the same names, by occasion of the same
manners: as they who have travailed all over the West Indies, do write, that
all strange, and hardy men that do so much mischief with bow and arrows
throughout all India, Caribes. Benzo. lib. 2.
and the Isles thereof; are by one name called Caribes, although they be of
diverse nations.

Now, that these Scots came out of Scythia, the Irish Historiographers
themselves do report: For Nemethus the Scythian, and long after him, Delas,
one of Eluodugus, has plainly written thus: In the fourth age of the world
(that space I mean which was between the building of Salomons Temple, and the
captivity of Babylon) the Scythians possessed themselves of Ireland. And
hereto accords the authority of later writers, to wit, of Cisnerus in his
preface to Crantzius; Tom. 1. page 37.
and of Reinerus Reineccius, who writes thus: There remains yet the nation
of the Scots in Britain, sprung from the Scythians, etc. And yet I verily
doubt, although the Getae were a Scythicke nation, whether the Poet Propertius
means those Irish of ours, in writing thus: Hibernique Getae, Pictoque
Britannia curru.



But the Scots should lose part of their honor and dignity, Whence the Scots
came into Ireland.
unless they be brought out of Spain into Ireland. For, both they themselves,
and their Historiographers labor to prove with all their might and maine; and
good reason, (I assure you) have they so to do. Scythians in Spain.
Unless therefore we find Scythians in Spain, all our labor is lost. And
that Scythians have been in Spain (to say nothing of a promontorie or point
among the Cantabri, called Scythicum next unto Ireland, and how that Strabo
writes, that the Those of Biscay, and there about. Concani.
Cantabri and Scythians sorted well together in their deportment) Silius
Italicus a Spaniard borne, does most plainly declare: for by these Concani, a
nation of Cantabria, were begotten of the Massagetae, that is, Scythians.

Et quae Massagetem monstrans feritate parentem, Lib. 3.

Cornipedis fusa satiaris Concane vena.
And ye your Parents Massagets in fierceness that do show,
Hight Concani, drink horses blood, as it from vein does flow.
And after some few verses between, he proves, that the Russians, and
Tartarians.
Sarmotae, whom all men confess to have been Scythians, built the City
Susana in Spain, whiles he sings in this note: Capanillo.
Sarmaticos attollens Susana muros:
Susana, with high Sarmatian walls. Luceni.

Those about Luca.
Lucensians of Spain) like as of those Concani, the Gangani of Ireland. For
the Lucensij and Concani in Cantabria, were neighbor nations, even as the
Luceni and Gangani in that coast of Ireland opposite to Spain. Now if any man
demand of me, what those Scythians were which came into Spain. Verily I know
not, unless Germans in Spain.
And I could wish that the Scots themselves would enter into a more serious and
deep consideration of this point. But, that the Germans long ago entered into
Spain; beside Pliny, who calls the Oretani in Spain, Germans, Seneca which
was a Spaniard borne will inform us. The mountain Pyrenaeus (says he)
stopped not the passage of the Germans; De consolatione ed Albinum lib. 4. cap.
12.
the levitie of men made shift to enter through places scant passable, and
unknown. And that the Germans were called Scythians, we gather not only out
of Ephorus and Strabo, who termed all the nations in the North, Scythians, but
also out of Pliny. The name of Scythians (quoth he) extends it self far
and wide every way, even to the Samaritans Aventinus also witnesses, that
Germans were by the Hungarians called Scythae and Scythulae. And to derive
descent from a Scythian stock, cannot be thought any ways dishonorable,
seeing that the Scythians, as they are most ancient, so they have been the
Conquerours of most Nations, themselves always invincible, and never subject
to the Empire of others. Neither must we forget in this place that the Cauci
and Menapij, ranged among the most famous Nations of Germany, are by Ptolomee
placed in Ireland under the same names, and in the very same vicinitie one to
the other: so that by all likelihood, they derived from the same Germans, both
their name, and also their descent.

If the Scots have not their original from these, I would they pondred with
themselves, Vassaeus.
for out of those parts they will needs have it, that they came into Ireland.
If they demand, who those Barbarians were? I doubt not but they will be of the
same mind with me, that they were Germans. For during the reign of Gallienus
the Emperor, the Germans dwelling in the farthest parts (says Orosius) of
Germany, spoiled and held Spain in subjection: and who should those remote
Germans be, unless they were mere Scythians? but Aurelius Victor, whom
Andrew Schot has published, called those Germans Or Fankners.
Frankes. But seeing those Frankes and Germans, inhabiting the farthest parts
of Germany, putting to sea from thence, sailed in their heat and fury far
into the Ocean, and as Nazarius says unto Constantine, Orasius lib. 7.
and as barbarous nations, warred among themselves, and made havocke of all:
Gallycia and Biscay. But I leave these overtures unto others for to pry
further into: let it be sufficient for me, that I have been but willing only
to remoove this cloud out of the way.

But I beseech the learned Scots in this place to consider here, how it comes
to pass, that the Irish being the ancient forefathers and Progenitors of the
Scots, yea, and the Scots themselves, bear them highly of this, that they be
called Gael and Gaiothel, and their Language Gaiothlac, as also why they named
that part of Britain, which they first possessed, Argathel? Whence can they
say, that these names sprang? From the Gallaeci in Spain, from whom very many,
no doubt, flitted over into Ireland, Gaiothel to proceed from the Goths, as
likely as Catholonia did in Spain? Here should they have drawn arguments from
the affinity, between the Gothicke Language, and the Irish: which The Scots
came in the fourth age of the world out of Spain into Ireland: and part of
them who still remained there, uses as yet the same Language, and are called
Navarrians: how truly (I say) he has delivered this, let others speak. And
here I omit David Chambres the Scotish-man, who has been informed by certain
Jesuits, that the Scottish tongue is used in East India. I am afraid lest that
country so far remote as it is, made the credulous man bold, not to make a
lie, but to tell a lie.

They are (says he) of a flaming deep yellow, died with saffron; they buckle
upon their feet a pair of Broges made of raw and untanned leather up to their
ankles; their knees, thighs, and calves of their legs are all bare; their
garments high in the neck, straight made, and of sundry colors, coming
scarce down to their hammes; the sleeves cover the upper points of their arms
and no more; their soldiers coats of color green, edged with a red fringe;
their belts hanging down from the shoulder; the lappets of their ears hidden
under the curled Flagella crinium.
glibbes and locks of hair lying all over them, (For so a man may very That
is, the Redshanks.
Scots and Irish wear) they use also hooked Spears, which Gildas terms,
Vncinata tela, and axes to fling from them. Upon Horace, De art Poetica.
They wore likewise strait bodied coats ( as says Porphyrio) fitted close to
their breasts, without girdles. If this be not for all the world the very
right apparel of the wild Irish-Scots, let themselves be Judges. I would
withal, they did consider these words of Giraldus Cambrensis, in his first
book of The Institution of a Prince. When Maximus (says he) was passed out of
Britain into Gaul, with the whole power of men, forces, and armor, that the
Island could make, and all to seize into his hands the Empire, Gratian and
Valentinian brethren, and partners in the Empire, shipped over these Goths, (a
Nation hardy and valiant in feats of arms, being also either confederate Now,
who these Goths were, let others show, and peradventure out of Procopius, they
may find some light; Lib. 2. de bell^ Gothorum.
in whom we read, That Belisarius, when the Goths And we likewise permit the
Goths to have unto themselves Britain a far better country than Sicilie,
and in ancient time subject to the Roman Empire: For, meet it is, that they
who first have bestowed benefits, should either reap condign thanks again,
or receive good turns reciprocally. To this also may seem to be referred,
that the Scots write, How Fergusius the Scot, accompanied Alaricke the Goth in
the sacking of Rome: that Irenicus likewise reports, How Gensricke King of
the Vandals came over unto Scotland and Britain: Lib. 6. cap. 25
as also, that which Cambrensis delivers unto us, (but whence himself had
it, I know not) namely, how the Gaideli, that is to say, the Scots, drew both
their descent, and also their name from the Vandals, who were all Neither can
it be any disparagement at all to the name and nation of the Scots, to
acknowledge themselves the offspring of the Goths, seeing that the most
puissant Kings of Spain, think it an honor to fetch their pedigree from
hence; and the noblest houses in all Italy, either draw indeed, or else
falsify their lineall descent from the Goths. The Emperor himself Charles
the fifth, would often times give out, and that in good earnest; that all the
Nobility of Europe came out of Scandia, and from the stock of the Goths. But
these

Diodorus Si^ulus.
Now, to end all in a word, I would have the learned Scots to consider
seriously, whether they were of those most ancient Britans Inhabitants of
Ireland (For, certain it is that Britans in times past inhabited Ireland) and
called Scythae or Scoti, because they suited so well with Scythians in manners:
or Scythians indeed, such as came out of Scandia or Scythia, unto whom the
Gallaeci, Franci, or Germans driven out of Spain, and Goths or Vandals came
afterward, what time as Spain with most hot and bloody wars was all in
combustion: or rather a mishmash of sundry nations as one would say, gathered
out of all tongues. An Dom. 77. Scot.
And Florilegus (whencesoever he gathered it); From Picts and Irish, quoth he,
the Scots took their beginning, as people compounded of diverse nations: For
that is called Scot, which from sundry things grows into one heap. Like as
the Almanes (by the testimony of Asinius Quadratus) carried that name, Almans.
Agath. lib. 1.
because they came of a commixture of diverse men. Neither may any man think it
strange, that so many nations in old time flowed into Ireland, considering the
site of that Island in the very midst between Britan and Spain, and lying
open so conveniently upon the French sea: seeing also it appears most
certainly upon record, in the best

When the Scots came into Britain.
Touching the time when the name of Scots became first famous, there is some
question; and Buchanan a right good Poet, has herein commenced an action
against Humfrie Lhuid as good an Antiquarie: Because the said Lhuid averreth,
that the name of Scots can no where be picked out of Authors before the time of
Constantine the Great; he falls upon the man, is ready to take him by the
throat, and with two silly arguments goes about to give them the deadly stab;
the one out of the Panegyrist, the other grounded upon a bare conjecture.
Because we find in the old Panegyrist, that Britain in Caesar's time was wont
to be troubled with Irish enemies; therefore, the Scots as then were seated in
Britain: but no man before him ever said, that so much as those Irish had then
any settled place, much less, that they were Scots. No The Britans those that
seated are beyond the known seacoast
And Brigants with blew painted shields, he forced with his host;
To yield their necks in Roman chains are captives to be led,
And even the Ocean this new power of Roman ax to dread.
Ille Britannos Vltra noti Littora Ponti Et caeruleos Scuta Brigantes Dare
Romuleis Colla Catenis Iussit, etc. reads Scoto-Brigantes, and straightwaies
exclaimeth, that the Scots are now beholden unto him for their original. But
to this his opinion I cannot yield assent, though As also for their Etymology
in his notes upon Eusebius Chronology. See them.
who in many things have always for his learning honored and admired the man.
For, this conjecture arises not from the diverse readings in books, but out of
his own brain: and the sense may bear, either [ Caeruleos Scuta Brigantes]
as it is in all books, or [ Caeruleos cute Brigantes] that is, the Brigantes
with blue died skins, as that most learned Hadrian Iunius reads it. But
Buchanan, who had rather disport himself sweetly in his own conceit and the
witty invention of one other, than to judge aright with the usual and
approoved reading of that place, gives a mavelous applause to this
conjecture. First, because authors do not record that the Britans painted their
shields; Then, for that Seneca called them Scoto-Brigantes Scoto-Brigantes?
when he calls them blew, and says they were subdued by Claudius, does he not
sufficiently distinguish them from the other Brigantes? But that observation of
his touching Britans and Brigantes, as if they were diverse nations, does scarce
favor of a Poets head, which could not be ignorant of that poetical figure,
and manner of speaking, wherein a part is used for the whole, and contrariwise.
Wherefore, seeing these things make nothing to his cause, I will second
Buchanan They make That is, Ireland. See in Ireland and before. Lib. 5. cap. 15.
Scotland to quake, which is beholden to no land for any thing: before them,
Saxony trembles, that for Marshes is inaccessible.But hear you me, this
author shall stand behind in the rereward, for he lived after Constantines
days, as may be gathered out of his own writings: neither can it be prooved
out of him, that the Scots dwelt in Britain, no more than out of that verse of
Sidonius which erewhile I alleged. Yea mary, but there is another reason of
more weight and moment indeed, which M. John Crag, a right famous and learned
man, found by most exquisite and curious

But surely, if I may be so bold as to interpose my self in this question,
among so great Scholars: so far as I have been able to observe, the first
time that ever the Scottish nation became named in authors, was whiles
Aurelianus was Emperor. For Pophyrie, who then wrote against the Christians,
as Unto Cre^iphon against Pelagians.
Saint Jerome informs us, mentioned them in these words: Neither Britain, a
fertile Province of tyrants, nor the Scottish nations, together with the
barbarous people round about, as far as to the Ocean, At which time verily,
or somewhat before, those that are well seen in Antiquities have noted, that
the names of the most potent nations of French and Almanes, were not heard of
before the time of Gallienus the Emperor.

It is no assured truth therefore, which some write, That the name and Kingdom
of the Scots flourished in Britain many hundred years before the birth of
Christ. But hearken to Girald, who will tell you the just time: When Great
O-Nel (says he) held the Monarchy of Ireland, six sons of Mured King of
Vlster, seized upon the North parts of Britain. Hereupon from them was there a
nation propagated, which by a peculiar name called, Scotica, that is, Scottish,
inhabiteth that part even to this day. And that this befell Whiles Lagerius the
son of that O-Nel reigned over the Irish, Patrick (the Apostle of the
Irish-men) came into Ireland, much about the year after Christ's nativitie 430.
So as it may seem, this happened near the days of Honorius Emperor.
Augustus. For then, whereas before time, ranging up and down without any
certain The Irish spoilers return home, minding shortly to come back again.
And much about this time, Beda. lib. 1. ca. 1.
some think that Reuda, (whom Bid mentions) either by force and arms, or
through favor planted himself in this Island, upon an arm of the river Cluid
Northward. And of this Captain Reuda (says he) the Dalreudini, even For, in
their tongue, Dal, signifies a part: and others think, that from this Reuda it
was, that we called the Irish-Scots, Redshanks. It is thought also, that the
same Simon Brech, whom the Scots avouch to be the founder of their nation,
flourished in these days. Sinbrech in truth was the name of the man, which is
as much to say, as Sin, with the freckled face, as we read in Fordon. And
peradventure the same Brech he was, who about the time of S. Patricke, together
with Thuibai, Mac-lei, and Auspac, Scots, infested Britain, as we read in the
life of Saint Carantoc.

But why the High-land Scots living in Britain, call that country which they
inhabit, Alban and Albin.
Alban, and Albin, and the Irish name it Allabany, were a question for an
ingenuous Allabany, may not have it in some token of the ancient Albion: or
whether it came of whiteness, which they call Ban, and therefore may import as
much in Scottish, as Ellan-Ban, that is, a white Island: or whether it be
derived of Ireland, which the Irish Poets name Banne; so that Allabanny, may
sound as much, as another Ireland, or a second Ireland. For, Historiographers
were wont to call Ireland, Scotland the greater, and the Kingdom of the Scots
in Britain, Scotland the less. Moreover, seeing these Scots in their own
language term themselves Albin, Albin. Albinus.
whereupon Blondus called the Scots, Albienses, or Albinenses, and Buchanan,
Albini, let Critics consider, whether that in Saint Jerome, where he
inveigheth against a certain Pelagian, a Scot Albinum for Alpinum, when he
takes him up in these terms; The Albine Dog.
The great and corpulent Alpine dog; and who is able to do more harm with his
heels, than his teeth: for he has his offspring of the Scottish nation, near
neighbors to the Britans: of whom also in another place, he said, that he was
full fatned with Scottish pottage and brewesse. Of Alpine dogs, I never
remember that I have read ought; but that Scottish dogs were in much request at
Rome in those days, Symmachus shows unto us, Seven Scottish Dogs there were
(says he) the day going before the Games, which in Rome they wondered at so, as
they thought they were brought thither in yron-grated Cages.

But after that the Scots were come into Britain, and had joined themselves
unto the Picts, albeit they never ceased to vex the Britans with skirmishes
and in-roades, Lib. 1 cap. ult.
against the Princes of Northumberland; until at one and the same time, they
had made such a slaughter of the Picts, that few or none of them were left
alive: and withal the Kingdom of Northumberland, what with civil dissentions
and invasions of the Danes, sore shaken and weakened, fell at once to the
ground. For then, all the Northern tract of Britain, became subject to them,
and took their name, together with that hithermore country on this side
Cluid, Bid.
and Edinburgh Frith. For, that it also was a parcel of the Kingdom of
Northumberland, and possessed by the English-Saxons, no man Lowland men, as one
would say, of the Lower-countrey, are the very offspring of the English-Saxons,
and do speak English. But they that dwell in the West coast, named Highland
men, as it were, of the upper country, be mere Scots, and speak Irish, as I
have said before: and none are so deadly enemies, as they be unto Lowland men,
which use the English tongue as we do.

Ammianus Marcellinus writes, that together with the Scots, ATTACOTTI, a
warlike people, did much mischief unto Britain; and those Humfrey Lhuid,
guesseth, (how truly I know not) to have been also of the Scottish nation.
Attacotti.
Saint Jerome tells us plainly, that they were a British people. For he
writes, that when he was a very youth, Lib. 2. contra Iovianum.
( while Julian as it seems was Emperor) he saw in Gaul the Attacots, a
British nation, feed of man's flesh, who when they found in the Forests herds
of swine, flocks of neat and other cattle, were wont to cut off the buttockes
of their heard-men, and keepers, the dugs also and paps of the women, and
account the same the only dainties in the world. For, so according to the true
Manuscript copies we are to read in this place, Attacotti [and not Scoti with
Erasmus] who acknowledges this text to be corrupted: Although I must needs
confess, that in one Manuscript we read Attigotti, in another Catacotti, and
in a third Cattiti. Neither can this passage be any ways understood as the
vulgar sort take it, of the Scots: considering that Saint Jerome treating there
of the sundry orders and manners of diverse nations, begins the next sentence
following in this wise: The nation of the Scots has no proper wives of their
own, etc. In another place also, where Saint Jerome makes mention of the
Attacotti, Erasmus puts down for them, Azoti. These Attacoti, as appears
by the book called Notitiae, served under the Romans in their wars, in the
very decaying and declining state Attecotti Iuniores Gallicani, and Attecotti
Honoriani Seniores: also, within Italy, Attecotti Honoriani Iuniores. By this
addition Honoriani, they seem to be of the number of those Barbarians, whom
Honorius the Emperor entertained, and to no small damage of the Empire
enrolled as soldiers to serve in his wars.

Among these nations also, which made rodes and invasions into Britain, John
Caius, a man much exercised with cares and endeavors of the best kind, and one
who has passing well deserved of our Commonwealth of learning, reckons the
Ambrones.
Ambrones, for that he red in Gildas, where he writes of Picts and Scots,
thus: Those former enemies, like Ambrones, Wolves, even enraged for extreme
hunger, with dry jaws leaping over the sheepfold whiles the shepherd is out
of the way, being carried with the wings of ores and arms of rowers, set
forward also with sails helped with gales of wind, break through This good
meaning old man thought of that which he had read in Festus, namely, that the
Ambrones, together with the Cimbri, flocked by numbers into Italy: and being
busied about another matter, it was quite out of his head, that [ Ambro] as
Isidorus notes, does signify, a Devourer. Neither does Gildas use that word
in any other sense, nor Geffrey of Monmouth, who called the Saxons also,
Ambrones: nor any other Ambrones than these, could my self hitherto ever find
in ancient Writers, to have invaded Britain.


WHen as now the Roman Empire under Valentinian the younger did more than
decline, and Britain being exhaust through so many levies of all able men,
Anglo-Saxons.
and abandoned of the Roman garrisons, could no longer withstand the force of
Scots and Picts; Vortigern, whom the Britans had made their Sovereign and
chief Governor, Who also is called Guortigern.
or who (as others think) had usurped the Monarchy, to the end that he might
establish his imperial rule, and recover the State falling to ruin: (much
Ciules (for so they called their Flat-boats or Pinnaces) arrive in Britain,
and after they had in one or two battles gotten the victory against the Picts
and Scots, became very much renowned: and seeing the Britans still relying
upon their manhood and Guortigern (says Ninnius) by the advice of Hengist,
sent for Octha and Ebissa to come and aid him: who being embarked in 40.
Cyules or Pinnaces, and sailing about the Picts coasts wasted the Isles called
Orkney Isles.
Orcades, yea and got many Isles and Countries beyond the Mare Fresicum.
Frith, as far as to the confines of the Picts. But at length, after they had
begun to fall in love with the Lands, the civil fashions, and riches of
Britain, presuming upon the weakness of the Inhabitants, and making the default
of pay, and want of victuals their quarrel, they entered into league with the
Picts, and raised a most bloody and mortal war against the Britans, who
Aurelius Ambrosius. Gildas calls him, Ambrosius Aurelianus.
their fields they harrie, their cities they raze, and after many doubtful
events of battle, fought against those two bulwarks of war, Aurelius
Ambrosius, who here took upon him to wear the purple roabe, wherein his
parents were killed, and that warlike Arture, they disseize the Britans of the
more fruitful part of the Isle, and drive them out of their ancient
possessions. At which time, to speak all in a word, the most miserable
Inhabitants suffered whatsoever either conqueror might dare, or the conquered
fear. For, supplies of aid flocked together daily out of Germany, which
still should renew war upon war against the wearied Britans: to wit,
Saxons, Iutes, (for so must we read, and not Vites) and Angles, who by these
proper

Howbeit, first will I add hereto that which Witichindus, being himself both
a Saxon borne, and also a writer of good antiquity; has related, as touching
the coming in of the Saxons. Britain (says he) being by Vespasian the
Emperor long since reduced among Provinces, and under the vassalage of the
Romans, standing them in stead, and serving to good use a long time, became
assailed by their neighbour-nations: for that it seemed destitute, and
abandoned of the Romans help. For, the people of Rome, after that the Emperor
Happily, Martian.
Martial was by his soldiers killed, being sore tired out with foreign
wars, was not able to assist their friends with supply of accustomed aides.
Yet nevertheless, Brets, for Britans.
Brets out-toiled, and over-tired by the many incursions of their enemies,
hearing the fame of those victories which ye have valorously achieved, have
sent us suppliants unto you, craving For, the performance hereof required no
great labor: the enemies who had long since heard of the Saxons, were Picts.
Pehits: against whom, the Saxons whiles they maintain wars, received of the
Brets all things necessary. They abode therefore in that country a good while,
making use in civil sort of the Brets friendship reciprocally. But so soon as
the Chieftaines of the army saw the country to be large and fertile, and
withal the hands of the Inhabitans slow to practice feats of arms: and
considered therewith, that themselves, and the greatest part of the Saxons, had
no certain place to seat themselves in, they send over to call unto them a
greater power and more forces. Thus having concluded peace with the Scots and
Pehits, they rise all together in common against the Brets, drive them out of
the country, and divide the Thus much Witichindus.

The original and Etymology of the Saxons, like as of other nations, not
only Monks ignorant, as they were, in learned antiquity, but also latter
Writers, being men of some exact and exquisite judgment, have enwrapped with
forged and fained fables, Some derive them and their name from Saxo, the son
of Negnon, and brother of Vandalus others from their stony nature: some from
the remains of the Macedonian army; others of certain knives, whereupon was
made that rhyme in Engelhusius: Quippe brevis gladius apud illos Saxa vocatur,

For, Sax, with them, and Short-sword, is the same,
From whence it is thought, the Saxon took his name.


But Crantzius deriveth them from the Catti in Germany: and that learned
Capnio from the Phrygians. Of these, let every man follow which he likes best:
For, such conjectural opinions as these, I will not labor to disproove.
Howbeit, that conceit of the best learned Germans may seem worthy of
acceptance, Saxons, from the Sacae in Asia.
and to be preferred before the rest, who suppose that the Saxons descended
from the Sacae, a most noble Nation, and of much worth in Asia, and so called,
as one would say, Sacosones, that is, the sons of the Sacae: and that out of
Scythia, or Sarmaria Tartarie.
Asiatica, they came in companies by little and little, together with the
Getae, Suevi, Daci, and others into Europe. Neither is this opinion of theirs
improbable, which fetches the Saxons out of Lib. 11. Mela^cthon Cisnerus.
wherein mankind was first created and multiplied: for, besides that Strabo
writes, how those Sacae (as before time the Cimerij) made invasions into
countries which lay far off, and termed a part of Armenia after their own
name Sacacena: Ptolomee also places the Sassones, Suevians, Massagetes and
Daci in that part of Scythia: and Cisner observes, that these Nations retained
the same vicinitie or neighborhood in a manner in Europe, which was among them
in former times when they were in Asia.

Neither is it less probable, Michael N^ander.
that our Saxons descended from these Sacae or Sassones in Asia, (call them
whether you will) than the Germans from those Germans in Persia, of whom
Herodotus makes mention: which they themselves after a sort do Fader, Mother,
Tutchter, Band, and such like, are at this day found in the Persian tongue, in
the same sense as we use, Father, Mother, Brother, Daughter, and Bond. But when
the Saxons began first to be of any name in the world, they had their abode in
Cimbrica Chersonesus, which we now call Denmark, wherein Ptolomee places
them, who was the first author (as far as I find) that mention them. For, we
should not indeed read, Saxones, (as it is in some books) but more truly,
Axones, people of Gaul.
Axones, in that verse of Lucan: -- Longisque leves Axones in armis:



Out of this Cimbrica Chersonesus in the time of Dioclesian, they (with the
Frankes their neighbors) troubled our coasts and the seas with Piracie, in so
much as for the defense of the country, and to repel them, the Romans made
Carausius their General. Afterward they having passed over the river Elbe.
Zosimus.
Albis, part of them by little and little gat footing within the seat and
territory of the Suevians, where now is the Franci, so now they became clepid
Saxons: those Nations I mean, which inhabit Iutland, Sleswicke, Holst,
Ditmarse, the Bishopric of Breme, the county of Oldenburgh, both East and
West Frisland, and Holland. For the nation of the Saxons, Ethelward, Son to
King Adulph in the fourth degree, flourished the year 950.
(as Fabius Quaestor Ethelward, himself descended of the Saxons royal blood,
writes) was wholly all that upon the seacoast, from the river Rhene unto the
city Donia, and which now is commonly called Dane-Marc. Which author* (that I
may acknowledge by whom I have profited) master Thomas Allen of Oxford an
excellent man, and one endued with very many singular Arts, first found out,
and of his courtesy imparted the same unto me, with many others.

Out of this Maritime tract, the Saxons fleshed now with the slaughter of many
Romans, brake many times into the Romans provinces, and for a great while
annoied this Island, until Hengist himself came: Who out of Batavia or
Holland, sailed into Britain, and built that Castle of Leiden in Holland, as
not only the Hollanders Annals do testify, but also that noble Ianus Dousa,
a man of excellent wit and learning: who of that Castle, versifieth thus: Quem
circinato maenium ut ambitu,
Ode 2. of Leiden.
Sic arcuatis fornicibus novum
Putatur Hengistus Britanno
Orb redux posuisse victor.
Which Hengist, by report, when he
Returned from Britain with victory,
Built new with walls in compass round,
And on vaults arched under ground.


The Iutae, who had that name (as many think) from the Gutes, Getes, or Goths
(for in a manuscript book, we read Geatun) did for certain inhabit the upper
part of Cimbrica Chersonesus, Spartianus Trebellius Pollio Capitolinus, etc.
which still the Danes call Iuitland: descended happily of those Guttae, whom
Ptolomee has placed in Scandia, whose habitation this day is called Gothland.
But take heed you think not with Iornandes, that this was the native country
of those Goths, who with victorious conquests overran all Europe: Alias,
Danubius Don^w.
Ister fast by Pontus Marmajore.
Euxinus, and were before time called Getae.

Angles, or Englishmen.
But, in what place the Angles were seated, it is a question, neither are all
men of one opinion. Most authors place them in Westphalia, where Engern
stands, and where the Suevians, whom Tacitus and Ptolomee make mention of,
had their abode; whom I am willing to believe, if we speak of the age of
Tacitus: but I suppose, that from thence they came down to the tract by the
sea side. Others seek for them in Pomerania, where the town Angloen
flourishes. But seeing these reach into the more inland parts of Germany far
from our seas, surely we must seek for some other seat of our Angles or
Englishmen: Lib. 1. cap. 15.
which Beda willed me to look for between The Angles (quoth he) came out of
that country which is called Angulus, and is reported from that time to lie
waste, between the Provinces of the Saxons and Iutarum. So reads the
Manuscript, and not Vit^r^m.
Iutes. Now seeing that between Iuitland and Holsatia the ancient country of
the Saxons, there is a little Province in the Kingdom of Dania, named at this
day Angel, Angel in Denmark, the seat of the English, or Angles.
beneath the city Flemsburg, which Lindebergius in his Epistles calls Little
Anglia: I dare affirm, that now at length, I have found the place of our
ancestors habitation, and that from thence the Angles came into this Island. And
to aver this the more confidently, I have good warrant from the authority of
that ancient writer Ethelwardus, whose words be these: Old Anglia is sited
between the Saxons and the Giots: they have a capital town, which (in the
Saxon tongue) is named Sleswic: but the Danes call it Haithby. In which very
place, Ptolomee seems to set the Saxons. So that a Poet of the middle time,
sung not untunably in this manner: -- Saxonia protulit Anglos,

That Englishmen from Saxons draw descent,
Their color Fair.
white and tongue make evident.


Of these Angles, some part having passed forward into the inmore quarters of
Germany, being blended with the Longobards and the Suevians went, as far as
Italy, and are thought to have left their footing in Engelheim, the native
country of Charles the Great, Ingolstad, Engleburg, Englerute in Germany, and
Angleria in Italy. But what the reason or Etymology is of the name, I dare
not definitively pronounce. Away with that Angulus the son of Humblus: and with
Queen Angela, whom foolish Angulus, that is, An angle or corner; as if it were
a corner of the world, as some building upon that stale verse, seem to hold:
Anglia terra ferax, and fertilis angulus orbis,
Insula praedives, quae toto vix eget orb:
England a fruitful angle, is without the world so wide,
An Island rich, that has small need of all the world beside.


Neither does Goropius his conjecture deserve credit, but rather a smile, which
deriveth Anglos, that is, Englishmen, from Angle, that is, A fishing rod, or a
Fishhooke; because (says he) they hooked all unto them, and were, as we say,
Good Anglers. De bello Gothico. lib. 4.
of Engelbert, Englehard, and such like Dutch names, may see perhaps the
original of Angli also. Moreover, it may seem out of Procopius, that the
Frisones likewise came with others into Britain. The text whole as it lies
(for that the book is not commonly extant in print) I will not think much
here to set down, even as Franciscus Pithaeus a singular good man, and in all
sorts of Antiquity most skillful, has exemplified it unto me, out of the
Kings Library in Paris: (...), The Island Britain, three most populous nations
do inhabit, which have every one their several King to rule them: and these
Nations be called Angili, Frisones, and after the name of the very Island,
Britones. Now they seem to be so great a multitude of people, that every year
a mighty number of them, with their wives and children, flit from thence unto
the Franks: and they give them entertainment in that part of their Land, which
seems most desert above the rest: and hereupon men say, they challenge unto
themselves the very Island. And verily, not long since, when the King of the
Franks, sent certain of his people in Embassage

These are the people of Germany, that planted themselves in Britain, who,
that they became one nation, Saxons, Angles, and Iutes one nation.
and were called by one general name, one while Saxons another while,
Englishmen, and English-Saxons, for difference of those that are in Germany,
may be gathered most truly, out of Gildas, Beda, Saint Boniface, Paulus
Diaconus, and others: but most commonly in Latin, Angli, Gens Anglica; and in
their tongue, to the same sense, Engla theod.

About the time when they were admitted into Britain by Vortigern, writers do
not agree: Anglo-Saxons, when they came into Britain.
but to omit others, Bid and those that follow him, make this computation of
those most confused times.

In the one and thirtieth year of Theodosius the younger, and of Christ 430.
The Britans pitiously crave aid, but in vain, of or Aetius.
Aetius the third time Consul, for that they were sore oppressed by the Picts
and Scots.

Under Valentinian the third, Saint German once or twice came into Britain
against the Pelagians, and after he had powered out his prayers unto God, led an
army [of Britans] against the Picts and Saxons, and gained the victory.

In the first year of Martianus, and the year of our Lord 449, the nation of
the English-Saxons arrive in Britain.

But seeing it appears for certain by the or Register. Fasti Consulares.
Calendar of the Consuls, that the third Consulship of Aetius fell out to be in
the 39. year of the said Theodosius, and after the birth of Christ 446. as
also by the best and most approoved authors, that Saint German died in the
year of Grace 435: justly we may suspect, that those numbers in Beda were
corrupted, and that the Saxons had footing given them here, before the year of
our Lord 449. For otherwise, how could it be, that S. German, who departed this
life An. Do. 435, should conduct the Britans against the Saxons, when as they
were not yet come? Ninnius also writes, that Saint German returned out of
Britain into his Baronius.
who received the Saxons into Britain: so that of necessity their coming in
was before the year of our Lord 435, which was the year wherein Saint German
ended his life. In like manner, in the second year after that Leo Magnus was
created Bishop of Rome, which was in the year of Christ 443, Prosper Tyro who
then lived, writes, that Britain after sundry overthrowes, was brought in
subjection to the Saxons, so that they doubtless must needs come in before
that time, namely, the year of Christ 449. But to take away all scruples, and
clear all doubts in this point, this one note of computation adjoined unto
some copies of Ninnius, which is unto me in stead of all, may suffice.

From the Consulship of the two Gemini, Read Fusius.
Rufus and Rubellius, unto Stilico the Consul, are 373. years.

Item, from Stilico unto Valentinian the son of Placidia, and to the reign of
Vortigern, be 28. years.

From the reign of Vortigern unto the or battle.
discord of Guitolin and Ambrose, are 12. years. Which battle is Guoloppum,
that is, Cathguoloph.

Now Vortigern held the Kingdom of Britain when Theodosius and Valentinian
were Consuls: and in the fourth year of his reign, the Saxons came into
Britain, and were entertained by Vortigern, when Foelix and Taurus were
Consuls.

From the year wherein the Saxons came into Britain, and were received by
Vortigern, unto Elsewhere Decius Paulinus.
Decius Valerianus, are 69. years.

By casting therefore the account thus, the coming in of the English Saxons
into Britain, was in the 21. year of Theodosius the younger: and this comes
nearest to the computation of Bid, in the year of our salvation 428. For then
Foelix and Taurus bare their Consulship: and so all circumstances of persons
and times do well cohere. This moreover I think good to tell you of, although
I will not take upon me to be a Critic, that in most copies of Gildas, whence
Beda had that note of Etius, we read Agitio 111. Consuli, in others without
adjection of number, Aegitio: and in one, Aequitio Cos. But to this day never
could I see in the Register and Calendar of Consuls, any Consul of that name:
unless we might think that he was some Consul extraordinary.

Well, what time soever it was that they came in, they made good proof of
their singular valor and wisdom with all. For in a short space, their State,
for number, for good customs and ordinances, The Saxons conquest.
for lands and territories grew to that height, that it became most wealthy
and puissant, yea, and their conquest in some sort full and absolute. For all
the conquered, except some few, whom in the Western tract the Gildas.
(as other prophesies of that kind) which the Saxon Prophets foretold, when as
they spread their sails for this Island, That they should inhabit here 300.

This nation of the Saxons, The Saxons Manners.
was generally most warlike and martial, For courage of mind, strength of
body, enduring of labor and travel, reputed of all the Germans most valiant,
as says Zosimus. Most feared of the Romans, because their invasions were
sudden, as Marcellinus reports: Terrible for hardiness and agilitie, as
says Orosius. Saxony is a region (by reason of Marshes) inaccessible, and
environed with combersome countries, and unpassable. Which things although they
may make them more secure for as Egysippus records of them. In imitation of
whom, Isidorus writes thus: The Nation of the Saxons seated upon the coasts of
the Ocean sea, and among unpassable Marshes, is for valor and nimblenesse
meet for service: and thereupon they took their name, as being a kind of
people stout, hardy, and most valiant, yea and redoubted above all other for
piracie. Lib. 9 cap. 2. Originum.
Men they are for their tall stature, the good feature of their limbs, and
framing of their lineaments, conspicuous and notable. Whereupon Witichindus the
Monk, writes thus of them; The Franks had these men in admiration for Clad
they were in soldiers cassocks, and weaponed with long spears) they trusted
upon their little bucklers, and wore great knives or skeins at their backs.
Howbeit, before time they used to shave their hair off, hard by the head to
the very skin, unless it were round about the crown, and to wear a plate
about their head, as Sidonius Apollinaris teaches us in these verses: Istic
Saxona carulum videmus
Adsuetum ante salo, solum timere;

Non contenta suos tenere morsus,
Altat lamina marginem comarum.
Et sic crinibus ad cutem recissis,
Decrescit caput, additurque vultus.
The Saxons there in watcher clad, we see
On land a fraid, who erst at sea were bold;
Whose bush of hairs about the crown that be
Plates not content to keep their wonted hold
Raise up in tufts, when all the rest is pold:

Their face seems full, their heads but small and thin.


As for their apparel, you may understand what it was out of these words of
Paulus Diaconus, as touching the Longobards. Their garments were large, and
loose, and most of all linen, such as the English Saxons are wont to wear,
trimmed and set out with very broad gards or welts purfled and embroydered
with sundry colors. Most skillful sea men they were, as who a long time lived
as Pirates, so that being accustomed to the The Saxons shores or coasts.
as far as to Spain, that there were both Captains and soldiers appointed
all along the shores of both Countries to restrain their rovings and
depredations, who thereupon were called Counts or Earls of the Saxon shore
along Britain and France. And heereto tend these verses of Sidonius
Apollinaris: Quin and Aremoricus piratam Saxona tractus,
Sperabat Comites littoris Saxonici.
cui pelle salum sulcare Britannum
Ludus, and assuto glaucum mare findere lembo.
The tract also that lies the Sea so near,
Hight Armoricke, did Saxon pirate Sperabat, for timebat.
fear:
Whose sport it is with leather-stitched boat,
Of British Sea to cut the waves afloat.


Yea and that which more is, within Gaul near unto Armorica, they seized into
their hands and held a long time the Country about the Baieux.
Baiocasses, as is to be seen in Gregorius Turonensis, who termed them
Saxones Baiocassinos, like as the common sort, Sesnes Bessins.

But with how great cruelty they committed outraies along these shores, hear
if it please you, Saxones Baiocassini.
Sidonius himself. The Messenger, (says he) with whom we spent some time in
talk, whiles for your sake we held him with us, constantly affirmed, that you
of late sounded Lib. 8. Epist. ad Namantium.
and performing the part in your own person sometime of a soldier, and
sometimes of a mariner, bestirred your self up and down the winding shores of
the Ocean, to affront the Ciuli.
flat bottom barks of the Saxons: Of whom as many rowers as you see, so many
Archpirats you may think you beheld: They all of them together, so command,
obey, teach, and learn to rob and steal; that even now also you have greatest
cause to be warned, and to be most heedfull and wary of them. There is no
enemy so cruel as this. He sets upon others at unwares, himself slips
away as warily: He sets at naught such as encounter him; he brings to
naught those that take no heed to him: whom he courseth, he surely overtaketh;
when he flies he is sure to escape. To this service, shipwracks inure him,
they terrify him not. Not only skillful they are in the dangers of sea, but
also familiarly acquainted in some sort By hanging them indifferently one with
another.
dolorous torment (a custom the more lamentable, because it is superstitious)
and among the number of such as are gathered together to die, for to disperse
the equity of lot, together with the iniquity of death.

With such vows they bind themselves, with such sacrifices they pay their
vows, and not so much purified by such sacrifices, as polluted with
sacrilegies, the bloody and abominable Hitherto also may be referred that,
which we collect of the fragment of an ancient History in Isodorus. The Saxons
trust to their fly-boats and not to their strength, better appointed for flight
than for fight. As also this testimony of Salvianus, who then lived, writing
thus of Barbarous nations. The Alani are a people vicious and unclean, but not
so perfidious. The Franks be given to lying, howbeit full of hospitality and
kind to strangers. The Saxons in cruelty outrageous, yet for chastity to be
honored. But so firm and resolute they were, (if I may be allowed to give it
so good a term) that they would choose rather to kill themselves, and cast away
their lives wilfully, than be mocked and laughed to skorne. And hereupon it
was, that when Lib. 2. Epist. 4^.
they by strangling themselves prevented all hope of showing bloody sport and
pastime unto the people. Of whom Symmachus himself writes thus: The band or
company of Saxons is lessened by death. For, when as the private guard

Moreover, this nation of the Saxons was very much addicted to superstition,
and for that cause when they were to consult of weighty and important matters,
beside Soothsaying by inspection of beasts entrails, they observed especially
the neighing of horses, as presaging things to come. And thence perhaps it is,
that the Dukes of Saxony in ancient time gave the horse in their Arms. But
why our first Progenitors Hengistus and Horsa, An horse the badge or
cognizance of the Saxons.
took their names of an horse, (for both their names in the Saxon tongue do
signify, an horse,) surely I know not, unless it were for a lucky osse and
foretoken Virgil.

Bello armantur equi, Bella haec armenta minantur:
For war our horses armed are,
These beasts also do threaten war.
They used also casting and drawing of lots very much; for, they did cut down
a branch from some tree that bare fruit, and slived or cleft the same into
slips and twigs, and when they had distinguished them with certain marks, These
ceremonies Adam Bremensis ascribes to the Saxons which Tacitus attributes to
the Suevians.
they skattered them at haphazard upon a white garment. Straight ways, if the
consultation were public, the Priest; if private, the goodman of the house,
after prayers first unto the Gods, looking up to heaven, took each of them up
three times, and having lifted them up, they

To try out the event and issue of wars, they were wont to set a prisoner of
that nation against which they denounced war, and a man chosen out of their
own countrymen, to fight together a combat, each of them with the weapon used
in their country; and so to guess by him that was victour, which nation
should go away with victory. Above all other Gods they worshipped Mercury,
whom they called Wooden, whose favor they procured by sacrificing unto him men
alive; and to him they consecrated the fourth day of the week, The Saxons Gods.
whereupon we call it at this day, Wednesday: like as the sixth unto Venus,
whom they named Frea or Frico, whence we name that day Friday: Wednesday.
Friday. Tuesday.
even as we do Tuesday of Tuisco, the stocke-father of the German or Dutch They
had a Goddess also named Eoster, unto whom they sacrificed in the month of
April: and hence it comes, says De temporibus. Eoster a goddess.
Beda, that they called April, Eoster, monath, and we still name the feast of
the Resurrection, Easter; but rather as I think of the rising of Christ, which
our progenitors called East, as we do now that part whence the Sun rises. In
general (as says Tacitus) the English and other neighbour-nations worshipped
Herthus, that is, Dame Earth, for a Goddess, and they had an opinion, that she
intermediated in humane affairs, and relieved the people. And even with us in
these days, that word Earth is in use, Herthus, a goddess.
but grown out of use with Germans, who in stead of Earth, say, Arden. Of
these superstitions that foresaid Ethelward writes thus; respectively Earth.
So grievously seduced are the unbeleevers of the North, that unto this very
day, the Danes, Normanes and Suevians, worship Woodan as their Lord: and in
another place; The Barbarous people honored Woodan as their God, and the
Painims offered sacrifice unto him, that they might be victorious and valorous.

But more fully Adam Bremensis sets these things down. In a temple, says
he (called in their vulgar and native speech Vbsola) which is made altogether
of gold, the people worship the statues of three Gods: in such manner as that,
Thor, the mightiest of them has only a throne, Thursday has name from this
Thor.
or bed: on either hand of him Woodan and Fricco hold their places. And thus
much they signify. Thor, say they, bears rule in the air, as who governs
thunder and lightning, winds, showers, fair weather, corn and fruits of the
earth. The second, which is Woodan, that is, stronger, makes wars and
ministers manly valor against enemies, Ingenti Priapo.
viril member. Woodan they engrave armed, like as with us they use to cut and
express Mars. And they seem to represent Thor, with the scepter of Jupiter.
But these errors, the truth of Christian religion has at length chased quite
away. After that these nations above said, had now gotten sure footing in the
possession of Britain, they divided it into seven kingdoms, and established an
Heptarchie: A Monarchy always in the Englishmens Heptarchie. Lib. 2. cap.
5.^96.
In which notwithstanding, the prince that had the greatest power, King of the
English nation: So that in this very Heptarchie it may seem there was always
a Monarchy. After this, Augustine, whom commonly they call the Apostle of the
English men, being sent hither by Gregory the great, Augustine the Englishmens
Apostle. Englishmen converted to the faith. Lib. 2. cap. 1.
having abolished these monstrous abominations of heathenish impiety, with
most happy success planting Christ in their hearts, converted them to the
Christian faith. But for what cause and upon what occasion, this Gregory was
so diligent and careful for the salvation of this English nation, Venerable
Beda has by tradition of his forefathers recounted unto us in these words: The
report goes, that on a certain day, when upon the coming of merchants lately
arrived, great store of wares was Englishmen.
Angli: And well may they so be named, quoth he, for Angelike faces they have:
and meet it is that such should be fellow-heires with Angels in heaven. But
what is the name of that Province from whence these were brought? Answer was
returned, that the Inhabitants of the said province were cleped Hol-Deir^^esse.
DEIRI: DEIRI, quoth he, They are in deed De ira eruti, that is delivered from
ire and wrath, and called to the mercy of Christ. How call you the King of
that province, said he? Answer was given, that his name was Aelle: Then he
alluding to the name, said, That Allelu-jah should be sung in those parts, to
the praise of God the Creator. Coming therefore to the Bishop of the Roman

Concerning this conversion, the same Gregory the Great writes thus: Behold,
Christ.
he has now entered already into the hearts of all nations, in manner, that
are: Behold, in one faith he has conjoined the limits of East and west:
Behold, I say, the very British tongue, which could naught else but rudely bray
Barbarous words, long since began in the land of God to resound the Hebrew
Allelu-jah. And in his Epistle to Augustine himself: Who is able here In an
old fragment also written in that age, thus we read: Augustine upon one day of
Christ's Nativitie, which with the universal glory of the Englishmen is for
ever celebrated, did regenerate by lively Baptism above ten thousand men,
besides an innumerable multitude of women and young children. The River Swale
in Yorkshire. Beda reports all this of Paulinus Archbishop of York and not
of Augustine.
But, what a number of Priests, and other holy orders besides, could be
sufficient to wash such a sort of people? Having hallowed and blessed therefore
the river called in English Swale, the Archbishop (Augustine) commanded by the
voice of Criers

No sooner was the name of Christ preached, The Religion of the Englishmen.
but the English presently with such fervent zeal and devotion consecrated
themselves unto Christ, that they took incredible pains in propagating
Christianity, in celebrating divine service, performing all functions and
duties of piety, building Churches and endowing them with rich livings, so
that there was not another region in all Christendom that could make reckoning
of more monasteries richly endowed: Yea, and diverse Kings there were that
preferred a religious and monastical life before their Crown and Kingdom. So
many holy men also this land brought forth, which for their most firm
profession of

Furthermore, The learning of Englishmen.
they applied their minds to the bringing in again of the better kind of arts
and sciences, and sowed the seeds of Divinity and good literature throughout
all Germany, by the means of Winifridus, Willebrodus, and others, which a
German Poet shows in these verses: Haec tamen Arctois laus est aeterna
Britannis,

Illa bonas arts and Graiae munera linguae,
Stellarumque vias, and magni sydera coeli,
Observans, iterum turbatis intulit oris.
Quin se religio multum debere Britannis,
Servata, and late circum dispersa fatetur:
Quis nomen Winfride tuum, quis munera nescit?
Te duce, Germanis pietas se vera, fidesque
Insinuans coepit ritus abolere profanos.
Quid non Alcuino facunda Lutetia debes?

Barbariemque procul, solus depellere coepit.
Quid? tibi divinumque Bedam, doctissimus olim
Dum varias unus been qui cognoverat arts,
Debemus.
Yet this immortal praise is due to Britain, Northern Isle,
That when the world was overrun and wasted all the while
By Pannonik invasions, it did reduce in ure
Those troubled countries, with good arts: also with knowledge pure
Of Greek tongue: and observing still the stars in spacious sky,
And planets with their wandering ways, taught them Astronomy.

The world much bound to Britain is, and to her helpful hand.
Thy name and gifts, o Winifride, who knows not? since by thee
The way was made in Germany; where faith and piety
First setting foot began to chase all rites profane away:
What ow I not to Alcuine now? may eloquent Paris say,
Who happily went there in hand alone to plant a new,
Good arts and thence all barbarism to banish far from view.
And unto thee for worthy Bid we are beholden much,
The only man for sundry arts, his learned skill was such.


Britain twice Schoole-mistris of France.
Peter Ramus says moreover, that Britain was twice Schole-mistris to France,
meaning, by the Druida^ and Alcuinus, whose industry Charles the Great used
especially in erecting the Universitie of Paris.

The flitting back again of Anglo-Saxons into Germany.
They brought also into Germany military knowledge of Arms, as well as
learning and religion: yea, and, which you will marvel at, if we may believe
these words of Eginhardus, they gave unto those Saxons their first Original,
who now inhabit the Haduloha: what time as Theodericus King of the Franks
warring upon Hirminfridus Duke of the Thuringers his Daughters husband, cruelly
with fire and sword wasted their land. Now when as they had in two pight fields
already, tried the doubtful fortune of battle, with lamentable slaughter of
their people and uncertain victory, Theoderich disappointed of his hope to be
Master of the field, dispatched Ambassadors unto the Saxons, whose Duke was
Hadugato: who having heard the cause of their Theodoricus. By means of which
forces valiantly fighting now with him, as it were, for their liberty and
native country, he overcame his enemies: and when he spoiled the natural
Inhabitants, killed them up, and in manner left not one alive, their land
according to his promise he set out and appointed for the Conquerours to
possess, who dividing the same by casting lots, seeing many of them were
slain in the wars, and that by reason of their fewness the whole country
could not be occupied and peopled by them, part of it, that especially which
lies Eastward, they made over to coloners and new Inhabitants, to every one
according as by lot it fell out, to be holden and tilled for a certain rent
and tribute: All the rest they themselves possessed. On the Southside verily,
these

For a long time the State and Empire of the Saxons flourished exceeding well
under the foresaid Heptarchie, until those Kingdoms bruised and impaired one
of another with civil wars, came all in the end to be subjest unto the
West Saxons. England.
should be called (...), that is, England: whereupon in Latin it was named
Anglia, taking denomination of the Angles, as being of those three nations
most in number, and of greatest prowess. For they kept in their possession the
Kingdom of Northumberland, About the year, 800.
and Mercia, very great and large countries, together with East-England:
whereas the offspring of the Jutes held Kent only, and the Isle of Wight: The
Saxons East-sex, South-sex, and West-sex, a small English, Of whom, Theod. that
is, a Nation.
long before this they were generally throughout called English, and in their
own language Englatheod, Anglcynne Engl-cynn, and Englisc-mon: albeit every
Kingdom therein, had a special name of the own by it self. And this
appears for The History of the English-Nation. Yea, and in that Heptarchie,
those Princes that overruled the rest, were styled Gentis Anglorum Reges, that
is, Kings of the English nation: At this time, the name of Britain, lay
forgotten and grown quite out of use among the Inhabitants of this Island:
remaining only in books, and not taken up in common speech. And hereupo^ it is,
Epist. to Zachary the Pope.
that Boniface the bishop of Mentz, descended from hence, called this our
country, Saxony beyond the Sea. Howbeit, K. Eadred, about the year of our
Lord, 948. used in some Charters and Patents the name and title of King of
Great Britain: like as Edgar in the year, 970. bare this style also, The
Monarch of all whole Albion.



NAMES OF ENGLISH-SAXONS.
MY purpose was, even here to have set down the orderly succession of the
Porphyrius de Theolog. Ph^.
reason, and signification of the ancient English names. Not that my meaning is
to interpret every name severally, (for, that were a piece of work very
laborious) neither can such barbarous names, in which there lies couched great
significancie, succinct brevitie, and some ambiguitie, be easily delivered in
another tongue. But considering that most of them be compounded, and that of
few simples: I will

AEL, Ael. ^al. etc.
EAL, and AL, in names compounded, like as (...) in Greek compositions,
signifies, Al, or Wholly. Hereupon Aelwin, is as much, as Wholly, or Fully
Victor. Albert, All, bright and dread, wholly dread or reverend. Alfred,
Altogether Pacificall, or peaceful. Whereunto in some sort are correspondent,
in Greek, Pammachius, Pancratius, Pamphilius, etc.

Vlf.
which with variety of Dialect, is pronounced, Vlf, Wolph, Hulph, Hilp, Helfe,
and in these days Help, carries in it a signification of Help or Aid: as
for example, Aelfwin, that is, a victorious aid: Aelfwold, a helpful
Governor. Aelfgiva, she that gives help: according to which are these Greek
names, Boethius, Symmachus, Epicurus.

ARD, Ard*
betokens natural disposition or towardness: as Godard, is as much, as
Divine towardliness or inclination, Reinard, Sincere disposition, Giffard, a
frank and liberal nature: Bernard, a filial and sonne-like affection.

ATHEL, Athel, and Ethel.
Adel, and Ethel import Noble. Thus Aethelred, that is, Noble in counsel;
Aethelard, a noble nature or disposition: Aethelbert, famously Noble:
Ethelward, a noble Tutor or Protector.

Bert.
the same that with us at this day, Bright, and in Latin, Illustris, and
clarus, that is, Splendent, and clear: so, Ecbert, that is, Bright and shining
for ever: Sigbert, a splendent conqueror: as also, she whom the Germans
named, Bertha, the Greek called Eudoxia, as Luitprandus witnesses. And of
this sort were Phaedrus, Epiphanius, Photius, Lampridius, among the Greeks;
Fulgentius and Illustrius, etc. among the Latins.

Bald.
BALD, with the people of the North parts, is the same that Audax in Latin,
that is, Bold, as Jornandes shows: a word, that yet is not grown out of use.
So Baldwin, and by inversion Winbald, is the same, that, Bold Victour:
Ethelbald, Nobly bold: Eadbald, Happily bold. Unto which are consonant,
Thraseas, Thrasimachus, and Thrasibulus, in Greek, etc.

Ken, and Kin.
KEN, and KIN, import, Kinsfolk, as Kinulph, an help to Kinsfolk: Kinhelm, a
Defender of his kin: Kinburg, a defense to kindred: Kinric, powerful in or to
kinsfolk.

Cuth.
CVTH, bears with it a signification of skill and cunning: so, Cuthwin, that
is, a skillful or politic Conqueror: Cuthred, a learned counselor:
Cuthbert, Notable

Ead.
EAD in the compounds, and Eeadig, in simple words, shows as much as
Happiness, and Blessedness. Thus Eadward, is all one with, Happy Savior, or
preserver: Eadulph, Blessed help: Eadgar, happy power: Eadwin, Fortunate
Conqueror: Of which there is some resemblance, in the Greek names, Macarius
and Eupolemus: in the Latin also, Faustus, Fortunatus, Faelicianus, etc.

Fred.
FRED, sounds all one with peace, for, so our ancestors called Sanctuaries,
Fredstole, that is, the seats of peace. Thus Frederic, is as much as Powerable,
or wealthy in peace; Winfred, Victorious peace: Reinfred, Sincere peace.

Gisle.
GISLE, among the English Saxons betokens a pledge or hostage, as Eredgisle,
Gislebert, a notable or famous pledge: like as in Greek, Homerus.

Hold.
HOLD, in the old Glossaries, like as Would also, is interpreted, Governor, or
chief Lieutenant: although in other places, it signifies, LOVE; as Holdlic,
Lovely, or Amiable.

Helm.
HELM, is as much as Defense. Thus, Eadhelm, Happy defense: Sighelm, Victorious
defense: Berthelm, Notable, or famous defense: even as these Greek names,
Amyntas, Boethius, etc.

Hare, and Here.
HARE, and Here, as they are diversely pronounced, betokened both an Army, and
also a Lord: so, Harhold, that is, the Ruler of an Army: Hareman, A Principal
or Herebert, Excellent in an army: Herwin, a Victorious army, or Conqueror
of an Host: not unlike to those Greek names, Stratocles, Polemarchus,
Hegesistratus, etc.

Hild.
HILD, in Alfricks Grammar is expounded, Lord, and Lady: thus Hildebert,
betokens a famous or brave Lord: Mathild, a Virgin Lady: and in the same
sense is Wiga found. Wiga.


Leod.
LEOD, that is to say, People: thus, Leodgar, is one mighty with the people.

Leof.
LEOF, signifies, Love: thus, Leofwin, He that wins love: Leofstan, Most
dear or best beloved: like as in Greek, Agapetus, Erasmus, Erastus, Philo;
and in Latin, Amatus, and Amandus.

Mund.
MVND, betokens, Peace: whereof our Lawyers-terme Mundbreach comes, that is
to say, Breach of peace: so, Eadmund, is Happy peace: Aethelmund, Noble peace:
Aelmund, Wholly peaceable, or Make-peace: whereunto are well near equivalent
these names, Irenaeus, and Hesychius in Greek: Lenis, Pacatus, Sedatus,
Tranquillus, in Latin.

Rad, Red, and Rod.
RAN, RAR, and ROD, differing in Dialect, imply, Counsel: as Conrad, Powerful,
or skillful in counsel. Etheldred, a noble Counselor. Rodbert, notable for
counsel: and in sense not unlike to Eubulus, Thrasibulus, in Greek.

Ric.
RIC, signifies, Potent, Rich, and Valiant, as Fortunatus in these verses has
taught us: Hilperice potens, si interpres barbarus adsit,
Adjutor, fortis, hoc quoque nomen habet:
O Hilpericke so mighty thou, (stood here th'expounder by
Of bar'brous words) an helper strong, eke does this name imply.
Like as Alfric, Al or wholly powerful: Athelric, Nobly valiant, or mighty.
Unto which Polycrates, Crato, and Plutarch^s, Opimius also in Latin.

SI^, Sig.
usually among them, was put for Victory, whereupon, Sigbert, Renowned or
glorious for victory; Sigward, a victorious Protector: Sigard, Victorious
towardness. And to the same sense in manner, Nicocles, Nicomachus, and
Nicander with the Greeks: Victor, Victorinus, Vincentius, etc. among the
Latins.

STAN, Stan.
was among those old Forefathers of ours, a termination of the Superlative
degree, as, Athelstan, that is, Most noble: Betstan, best: Leefstan, most liefe
or dear: Wistan, most wise: Dunstan, most high.

WI, Wi.
the same that Holy, as Wimund, holy or sacred peace: Wibert, Famous, or
renowned Alwi, All holy: like as in Greek, Hierocles, Hieronymus, Hosius, etc.

WILLI, Willi.
and Vili, among English Saxons, as Billi at this day, among the Germans
carried a signification of Many: as Willielm, a defender to many: Wildred,
Honored, or reverend of many: Wilfred, Peace to very many. To which in sense
and signification accord, Polymacus, Polycrates, Polyphilus, etc.

WOULD, Would.
and Wald, betokened with them a Ruler or Governor: Hence comes Bellewold,
An excellent Governor: Ethelwold, a noble Ruler: Herwald, and by inversion,
Waldher, the Governor or Ruler of an Army.

But lay a straw here, for in a trifling matter, others as well as my self,
may think

But, of greater moment peradventure it will be, if I here commit to writing
(if so be these papers be marked to long life) what we have seen: namely, that
as Egbert commanded this hither part of Britain, and which was his own
possession, to be named England: so now after 800. years, or there about,
come and gone; even whiles we are perusing this work, The name of Britain
brought into use again.
King JAMES invested in the Monarchy of the whole Isle, by the propitious
favor and grace of God, in the right of his own inheritance, and with the
general applause of all good men; to the end that this said Isle, which is one
entire thing in it self, encircled within one compass of the Ocean; in his
own person, under one Imperial Crown, and Diadem, in one community of
Language,

THE DANES.
Da-hen.
) Andrew Velleius a Dane and a very great scholar, fetches their original
from the Dahae, a people of Scythia, and from Marc, a word which should
signify not a limit but a Region: Our country man Ethelward was fully
persuaded, that the name arose from the City of Donia. For mine own part, I
always thought, that they sprung from the Danciones, (whom Ptolomee places in
Scandia, and who by change of one letter, in some copies be named Dauciones)
and from thence voided themselves into the desert and forsaken seat of the
English, to wit, into Cimbrica Chersonesus: until that Jonas Jacobus
Venusinus, a most learned man, right judicious, and passing well seen Sinus
Codanus or Codanonia, that is, the Baltish sea, or Oost sea; where Pomponius
Mela made mention in this very tract. Which names pronounced somewhat grossly
by the Northern people, Cadan and Cdononum, Mela forged and fashioned upon the
Latin anvill, into Codanum and Codanonia: like as the posterity after him,
Gdanum have coined out with a Dansk; of Clodonaeus, Lodovic, of Cnutus,
Canutus. And yet before the days of Justinian the Emperor, about the year of
our redemption 570. the world took no knowledge of their name. For then, begun
they to rove upon the coasts of France and England, and were by the writers,
that penned in Latin the histories of England, Winccinga.
named Winccingi, for that they practiced Piracie: for Wiccinga, in the Saxon
tongue, as Alfricus witnesses, does signify a Pirat that runs from creek
to creek: also Pagani, that is, Painims, because as yet they were not become
Christians: but the Angles themselves in their language, termed them Deniscan,
and often times Heathon-m^n, as one would say, Ethnicks. Of these Danes listen
to D^^.
Dudo of Saint Quintins, an author of good antiquity, out of the Library of
John The Danes swarmed from out of Scanza, that is, Scandia, like bees out of
an hive, in manifold diversity and barbarous manner, after they had in heat,
lascivious lust, and wantonness engendered an innumerable offspring. Who after
they were grown to ripeness of years falling to hot contention for goods and
lands with their fathers, and grandfathers, yea and often times among
themselves; when they once overflowed and grew so populous that they could have
no room sufficient for to inhabit in the place, wherein they presently dwelt:
having gathered together by lot a multitude of youth and springals, after a
most ancient custom, were thrust out into foreign Realms, to conquer unto
themselves lands by dint of sword, wherein they might live.

The Religion of the Danes. Hereupon peradventure we have our Thursday so
called.
But in the full performance of dicharging those that should be thus sent out,
and in mustering up their armies, they sacrificed unto THVR, whom they
worshipped in old time as their Lord; for whom they killed not any sheep, oxen
or other cattle, but offered men's blood: Thinking that to be the most precious
Burnt offering.
holocaust and sacrifice of all others, because when the Priest by casting lots
had predestined who should die, they were all at once deadly smitten upon the
head with ox yokes: and when every one that was chosen by lot had his brains
dashed out, at one several stroke, laid along he was on the ground, and
sought out there was with narrow prying the fiber, that is to say, the vein of
the heart on the left side, and having after their manner drawn out the blood
thereof and stricken it upon the heads of their friends, speedily they hoise up
sails, and thinking that they please their God with such an act, Moreover,
there is another manner, or rather a most foul and detestable superstition,
Lib. 1.
which the Danes used in pacifying their Gods, and this does Ditmarus the
Bishop, who was of greater antiquity somewhat than Dudo, in these words
describe. But because I have heard strange, and wonderful things of the
ancient Sacrifices that the Danes and Normans used, I will not over pass the
same. There is in these parts a place, and the chief it is of this kindome,
called Lederum, in a province named Selon: where every ninth year in the
month of Januarie, after the time in which we celebrate the Theophania.
Nativitie of our Lord, they all assemble together, and there they kill and
sacrifice unto their Gods ninety and nine men, and as many horses, with dogs
and cocks for the hauks, which the Gods sent them, certainly persuading
themselves, as I said

The waste and spoil that the Danes made.
About the time of Egbert, in the year of Christ, 800. they first landed on our
seacoasts: afterward with such tumults and hurliburlies as never the like was
heard of, having for many years made foul havoc over all England, razing
cities, firing Churches, and wasting countries, they let out the raines loose
to all barbarous cruelty, driving, harrying, spoiling, and turning all upside
down where ever they went. Thus after they had killed the Kings of the
Mercians and East Angles, seized upon their Kingdoms, with a great part of the
Kingdom of Northumberland. Then was there a tribute called, Dangelt, imposed
upon the poor people, for the repressing of their robberies and outrages: and
that you may know what manner of imposition this was, The payment of Dangelt
was at the first ordained for Pirates. For by sore annoying the country, they
went on, Dangelt.
and did what they could to waste it utterly. And verily to keep down their
insolency, it was enacted, that Dangelt should yearly be paid, that is,
twelve pence out of Or demame.
Demesies of those Churches, wheresoever they lay, paying nothing at all in
such a contribution as this, because they trusted more in the prayers of the
Church, than in their defense by force of arms.

But when as now they assail and set upon Otherwise called, Alured.
Aelfred King of the West Saxons, he one while by retiring and giving them
ground, otherwhiles by preassing hard upon them with his victorious forces, not
only did put them back from his own country; but also having slain a
Danish-petty-king of the Mercians, expelled them in manner, quite out of all
Mercia: and his son Edward the elder following in train of his fathers 1012.
constrained the Englishmen to redeem their peace yearly with a great sum of
money: and so insolently they bare themselves, that the Englishmen Cut in his
coins.
Sueno King of the Danes, provoked with this slaughter of his people, invaded
England with a puissant army, and having in a furious and enraged mood made
much spoil, he put Etheldred to flight, subdued the whole Kingdom, and left
the same unto his son Canutus: who having encountered in many cruel and
sharp battles, and those with variable fortune fought, The Danes afflicted
England 200. years, and reign about 20.
with Etheldred now returned, and his son Edmund surnamed Iron-side, had two
of his sons succeeded after him, to wit, Harald a bastard, and Hardy-Knout.
Edward the Confessor.
Canutus the Hardy: After they were dead, and the Danish yoke The Confessor,
the son of Etheldred by his second wife, recovered the Crown and royal
Dignity. Now began England to take breath again: but soon after, as says
the Poet, -- Mores rebus cessere secundis,
Prosperity perverted manners.


The Priests were idle, drowsy, and unlearned, the people given to riot and
loose life: they grew also through rest to be lither, discipline lay, as it
were, dead, the commonwealth sick, as one would say, of an infinite sort of
vices, lay in consumption and pined away: but pride above all, whose waiting
maid is destruction, was come to a Gervasius Of Canterbury.
Dorobornensis, of that time speaks They fell so fast to commit wickedness,
that to be ignorant of any sinful crimes, was held to be a crime. All which
most evidently foreshewed destruction. The Englishmen of those times, as
William of Malmesburie writes, went lightly appointed with their garments,
reaching but to the mid knee, their heads shorn, their beards shaven, but the
upper lip uncut, where the mustaches grew continually, wearing massy bracelets
of gold about their arms, carrying marks upon their skin: pounced in, of
sundry colors: The Clergy contenting themselves, with trivial literature,
could scarsly back and hew out the words of the Sacrament.

THE NORMANS.
LIke as in ancient times out of that East coast of Germany (in respect of us)
which tends Northward, the Franks first, and then the Saxons, grievously
annoied both France, Gaul, and Britain, with their depredations, so that in
the end, the one became Lords of Britain, the other of France: even so in
these later days ensuing, the Danes first, and afterward the Normans
succeeding in their place, from out of the same coast did the like. As if it

Nordmanni. Nord-l^udi. Hel^^ldus.
These Normans were so called of the Northern quarter or climate from whence
they came for, Normans be nothing else but Men of the North: in which sense
also they are named Nordleudi, that is, a Northern people (for, a mixed nation
they were of the most valiant Norvegians, Suedens, and Danes.) In the time of
Charles the Great, they practiced roving and piracie, in such cruel manner
about Frisia, Belgia, England, Ireland, and France, that when the said Charles
the Great saw their roving ships in the Mediterranean sea, he shed tears
abundantly, and with a grievous deep sigh said: Heavy I am at the heart that
in my life time they durst once come upon this coast: The book of Sangall
concerning the Acts of Charles the Great.
and I foresee what mischief they will work hereafter to my posterity: Yea,
and in the public Processions, and Letanies of Churches, this afterward was
added to the rest: From the race of Normans, Good Lord deliver us. They drove
the French to that extremity, that King Charles the Calvus.
Bald, was forced to give unto Hasting a Norman Archpirate, the Earldom of
Charters for to assuage the man's fury: King Charles the Crassus.
Gross, granted unto Godfrey the Norman a part of Normandy.
Neustria, with his daughter also in marriage. But afterward, by force, and
arms they seated themselves near unto the mouth of the river Sein, in a
country which before time was corruptly called Neustria, Neustria.
because it had been a parcel of Westrasia: For, so the writers of the middle
time named that which the Germans used to call Westen-rijch, that is, the
West-kingdome: Loyre, and Seine: Which took the name of Normandy afterward
of them, as it were the region of Northern men, when King Charles the simple
had confirmed it unto their Prince Rou.
Rollo, whose Godfather he was at his Baptism, to be held in Fee by homage,
and withal bestowed upon him his daughter in marriage.

At which time, as we read in an old Manuscript belonging to the Monastery of
Angiers, Charles, surnamed The Fool.
Stultus, gave Normandy to Rollo, and his daughter Gista with it: This Rollo
daigned not to kiss the foot of Charles, and when his friends about him
admonished him to kiss the Kings foot as his homager, for the receipt of so
great NO BY GOD: Bigod.
The King then and his Courtiers deriding him, and corruptly repeating his
speech, called him Bigod, whereupon the Normans be at this day called Bigodi.
Hence also peradventure it is, that the Frenchmen even still use to call
hypocrites, and superstitious folk, Bigod.

This Rollo, who being baptized received therewith the name of Robert, some
writers report to have become a Christian but in show and color only; others,
upon good deliberation and in earnest: and they add moreover, that he was
warned so to do by God in a dream: which I pray you give me leave, (being a
man for all this, that doateth not upon dreams) to relate without suspicion of
vanity, from the credit The Leprosy Baptism.
Laver of Regeneration, wherewith being once cleansed, he should ascend up the
hill, that is, attain unto high honor, and heaven it self.

This Rollo begat William surnamed Longa spata.
Long-espee, Dukes of Normandy.
of the long sword which he used to wear: and William begat Richard, the first
of that name. Whose son, and nephew by his son carrying both his name,
succeeded after him in the Duchy of Normandy: but when Richard the third was
dead without issue, his brother Robert was Duke in his stead, who of his
concubine begat that William, whom we commonly name The Conqueror, and the
Bastard. All these were every one for their noble acts, achieved both at home
and abroad, most renowned Princes. Now whiles Edward the holy, surnamed
CONFESSOR, King of England, and the last of the Saxons line, departed out of
this world unto his heavenly country, to the great miss and loss of his
people, who being the son of Lady Emma cosen to William, and daughter to
Richard, the first of that name, Duke of Normandy, whiles he remained in
Normandy banished, had promised unto him, Domu^ regia Major.
that he should succeed after him in the Crown of England. But Harold the
son of Godwin, and Great Master or Steward of King Edwards house, usurped the
Kingdom: whom to dispossess, his brother Or Tostre.
Tosto of one side, and the Normans of the other, did what they could, and left
no stone unturned: But Tosto and Harold King of Norway, whom Tosto had drawn to
take part with him in this war, Normans. 10^6.
and so obtained a bloody victory, behold, within nine days after the said
WILLIAM surnamed the Bastard, Duke of Normandy, taking hold of the promises of
King Edward late deceased, and presuming of his adoption and near alliance,
having levied a great army, arrived in England among the South Saxons. Against
whom Harold forthwith advanced, albeit his soldiers were sore wearied, and his
power by the former battle much empaired. And not far from Hastings they
encounter and join battle: where Harold engaging himself into the midst of
the medley, and fighting manfully lost his life with a great number of
Englishmen left The Charter of William Conqueror.
he was solemnly inaugurated King, as unto whom, by his own saying, The
Kingdom was by Gods providence appointed, and by virtue of a gift from his
Lord and Cosen King Edward the Glorious, granted: and after some few lines the
story runs on and says, that the most beauteous King Edward had by adoption
ordained him his heir in the Kingdom of England. The History of Saint
Stephens Abbey at Cane in Normandy.
And if we list to believe the History of Saint Stephens in Caen of Normandy,
at his last breath he uttered these words: The Regal And a little after: I
ordain no man heir of the Kingdom of England, but I commend the same to the
eternal Creator, whose I am, and in whose hands are all things. For I became
not possessed of so great honor by any hereditary right, but by a terrible
conflict, and with much effusion of blood I took it from that perjured King
Harold, and after I had either slain or put to flight his favorers, and
adherents, I subdued it under my Dominion.

But why do I so briefly run over this so great alteration of the English
state? Have therefore, if you think not much to read it, what my self with no
curious pen, (happily with as little study and premeditation, howbeit according
to the truth of the History) wrote, when being but young, not well advised nor
of sufficiency

When Edward the Confessor was now without issue departed this life, The
Normans conquest.
the Nobles and people of the land were in doubtful care distracted about the
setting up of a new King in his place. Edgar, surnamed Aetheling, King Edmund
Iron side his nephews nephew by a son only of all the issue male of the
Saxons line remained alive, unto whom by right of Hungary.
Pannonia, and the son of Agathra daughter to the Emperor Henry the third,
who was in so remote a country farther off, than that he could conveniently
assist the young Gentleman either with aid or counsel: in these regards he
was less affected of the Englishmen, who desired nothing more than to have a
King, (as it were) out of their own body: And therefore, all of them for the
most part had their eyes fixed with much respect upon Harold Goodwins son, a
man for his good parts as well in war as peace very glorious. For albeit he
was of noble parentage but by one side: and his father time, he was vexed at
the heart that England which he had in conceit and hope already swallowed 60.
rovers-ships, wastes the Isle of Wight, and annoyeth the seacoast of Kent:
but terrified at the coming of the Kings navy, he set up sail and directing
his course toward the more remote parts of England, landeth in Lincolneshire,
and there harrieth the Country: where Edwin and Morcar give him battle: but
being discomfited and put to flight, into Scotland he goes, from thence to
renew his forces and so to war A Comet.
there was seen about a sevennight together a blazing star of an hideous and
fearful form, which turned men's minds already troubled and perplexed, (as it
falls out in a turbulent time) to the forefeeling of some unluckie events.
But Harold carried an heedfull eye to all parts of his kingdom, and the south
coast he fortified with garrisons. Malcolm.
Less fear he had from Scotland and Tosto, because Mil. Calumbus.
Malcolme King of the Scots was more disquieted with civil dissensions. Mean
while, William much busted in his mind about England, casting about what course
to take, ever and anon communicated with his Captains about the point; whom
he saw cheerful, and full of forward hopes: though it were, yet seemed it
not so necessary, but exceeding dangerous: beside, the Normans Filius Osberni.
although William Fitzosbern, a man in high favor with the Duke and as
gracious among the people, endeavored what he could to effect it: yea, and to
draw others by his own example, promised to set out forty tall ships of his
own proper charges toward this war. Duke William then, seeing he could not
bring this about in a public meeting, goes another way to work. The
wealthiest men that were he sends for, severally one by one to repair unto
him: he speaks them fair, and requires them to contribute somewhat toward
this war. They then, as if they had strived avie who should help their
Prince most, promise largely: and when that which they promised Andium.
Anjou, Pictonum.
Poictou, Cenomannorum.
Maine and Bononiae.
Bulloigne, and unto them he promises fair Lands and possessions in England.
Philip also the French King he goes unto, and solliciteth: voluntarily
promising in case he aided him, to become his vassal and leege man, and for
England to take the oath of fealty unto him. But it being thought nothing good
for the state of France, that the Duke of Normandy, who already was not so
pliable and obedient to the French King as he ought, should be bettered in his
state by the addition of England (for, the power of neighbor potentates is
always suspected of Princes) so far was the King from yielding any help, that
he dissuaded When days and nights be of a length: about the eleventh day of
September.
Aequinox was near: Whiles he thus devises with himself, driven he was (upon
an unexpected necessity of new war) to call back his army; for, Harold
surnamed the Durus.
Hard and Harfager, king of Norway, who had practiced piracie in the North
parts of Britain, and already subdued the Isles of Orknes, being by Tosto
solicited and called forth in hope of the Kingdom of England, arrived within
the mouth of 500. flibotes or thereabout, where Tosto also came and joined his
own fleet. When they had a good while forraged and spoiled the country here,
they weighed anchor, and sailing along the coast of Yorkshire, put into Humbre,
and there began to commit outrages with all manner of hostility. For the
repressing of whom, the two Earls Edwin and Morcar led forth a power of
soldiers, whom they had raised suddenly and in tumultuary haste: but they not
able to abide the violent charge of the Norwegians, fled for the most part as
fast as they could, and together with the Earls made shift to escape: howbeit,
many of them passing over the river Ouse, were swallowed up with the waves
thereof. The Norwegian^ ^hen, go in hand to lay siege unto the City of York,
which straight ways they get by surrender, hostages being given on both sides.
But after some few days, King Stanford bridge near York.
by report, made good for a time against the whole army of the Englishmen, and
held out so long until he was shot through with a dart, and died: after this
continued the battle a good while within the very camp, fought with equal
valor, and indifferent fortune on both sides: But in the end, the Norwegians
were disarraied and scattered, and in the midst of the battle Harold himself
King of the Norwegians, and Tosto, with the greater part of the Army lost
their lives. Upon this Victory, there fell unto King Harold an exceeding rich
booty, a great mass both of gold and silver, and that huge Armado, except
twenty small Barques only, which he granted unto Paul Earl of Orkney and
Olave greater terror into the Normans, than if he should be levying and
enrolling of a new Army, 14. October.
before the Ides of October; he would bid him battle: and this day upon a
credulous error, he had assured himself would be fortunate unto him, because
it was his birth day. All the night ensuing, the Englishmen spent in licentious
revels, in riotous excess of banqueting, and in clamorous noises: But the
Normans bestowed the same in prayers and vows for the safety of the army, and
for victory. The next morning by day light they embattell themselves on both
sides: Harold placed in the vant-guard, the Kentish men with their bills Or
heavy Axes.
and halberts, (for by an old custom the front of the battle was due to
them:) and in the rereguard himself took place with his brother, and those of
middle England with the Londoners. Of the Normans vaward Roger of Montgomerie,
and William Fitz-osberne had the leading: the same consisted of horsemen out of
Anjou, Perch, and little Britain, the Botesca^les.
Edwin and Morcar plotted secretly to usurp the Imperial rule and dignity
for themselves: but the Bishops, Prelates, and others, who were terrified with
the flashing thunderbolts of the Popes curse, thought best to yield, and not by
doubtful battle to provoke the Conquerours heavy indignation against them:
nor to strive against God, who now for the sins of the people calling for
vengeance, had delivered England, as it were into the hands of the Norman.
William all this while fortifying the Town of Hastings, Berkhamsted do meet
the Norman Conqueror, (who made them many and large promises:) and having
given hostages, committed themselves to his protection, and submitted. Then
forthwith speedeth he to London, where being received with great and joyful
acclamations, he was saluted King: for the solemnizing of his Coronation, which
he appointed should be on Christmas day, he made all the preparation that might
be, and mean while bent his whole mind, and all his thoughts to the settling
of the State.

Now was the period and revolution of the English-Saxons Empire in Britain
come about, which was determined within the compass of 607. years, and a
notable alteration and change made in the Kingdom of England: which some lay
upon the base a varice of the Magistrates, and the superstitious laziness of
the Prelates: others impute to that Comet or blazing Star, and the powerable
influence of celestial bodies: some again made God the Author thereof, who in
his secret judgments, and those never unjust, disposes of Kingdoms. Others
also there were, who looked into nearer secondarie causes, and they found a
great want and lack of wisdom in King Edward, in that whiles under a goodly
show and pretext

WHat an insolent and bloody victory this was, the Monks that write of it,
have declamed with full mouth: neither is it to be doubed, but in this
Victory, (as it happens in other) wickedness took head and bare the full sway.
William the Conqueror, in token as it were of a Trophee for this conquest,
abrogated some part of the ancient positive laws of England, brought in some
Customs of Normandy. and by virtue of a decree, commanded, That all causes
should be pleaded in the French tongue. The English he thrust out of their
ancient Inheritances, assigned their lands Hoc Normannorum Guilielmum nosce
Patronum,
The Normans Patron William know, by this stamp that you see:
And on the other: Hoc Anglis signo Regem fatearis eundem:
By this, a King to Englishmen, acknowledge him to be.


The seal of William. Conqueror.
Moreover, as William of Malmesburie does report, In imitation of Caesar's
policy, who expelled the Germans, (lying hidden within that huge forest
Ardenna, and by many asallie from thence annoying his army) not by the help
of his own Romans, but by the Gauls his confederates: to this end, that
whiles strangers and aliens killed one another, himself might triumph with
their bloodshed: the very same course, I say, did William take with the
English men. For, against certain of them, who upon the first battle of that
unfortunate man Harold were fled into Denmark and Ireland, and returned with a
puissant army in the third year after, he opposed mere English forces and an
English general; permitting the Normans to sit still and keep holiday:
foreseeing hereby and providing for his own great easement, whether of them
soever should have the better. Neither was he in this point And in another
place: Having undermined and quite overthrown the power of the Laimen, he
provided by a sure and irrevocable edict, to suffer no Monk or Clerk of the
English Nation, to endeavor for to get any dignity; much disagreeing herein
from the clemency and gentleness of King Cnuto in times past, who gave unto
those that he conquered, all their honors entire. And hence it came to pass,
that when he was once dead, the natural Inhabitants of the country upon
light occasions fell to driving out of strangers, and recovered unto themselves
their ancient right and freedom.

When he had brought this to pass, above all things he labored to turn away
Adelbert Archbishop of Hamburgh as his Instrument. For, Adam Bremensis writes
thus: Between Suen and the Bastard there was continual strife about England,
although our Bishop being greased in the hand with Williams bribes, would have
concluded a firm peace betwixt the Kings. Which may seem also to have been
established: for, since that time, England Tilburie writes; When the renowned
Conqueror of England King William, had subdued the farther coasts of this
Island, under his dominion, and thoroughly tamed the stomachs and hearts of
rebels by terrible examples, lest that from thenceforth they should
licentiously run into error and commit trespass, he determined to reduce his
subjects under the obedience of positive, and written Laws. Having therefore
all the laws of England laid before him, according to the Tripartite Division,
whereby they Merchenlag, Denelag, and Westsex-enlag, when he had rejected some
of them, and allowed of others, he adjoined thereto those Laws of Normandy.
Neustria beyond the seas, which seemed most effectual to preserve the peace
of his Kingdom. Afterward, as mine Author Ingulphus says, who flourished in
those days, He commanded every Inhabitant of England to do him homage, and to
swear fealty to him against all men: He took the survey and description of
the whole Land, neither was there an Hide of England through, but he knew both
the value, and the owner thereof; there was neither plash nor place, but set it
was in the Kings Roll: and the rent, revenue, and profit thereof, the very
tenure of possession, and possessour himself was made known to the King,
according to the credit and true relation of certain Taxers, who being chosen
out of every country, did put down in writing the territory properly
belonging thereto. And this Roll was called, the Domesday. I have been more
willing to make mention of this book, because it is to be cited and alleged
often times hereafter: which book also, it pleases me to name, Gulielmi
librum Censualem, that is, Domesday-booke.
The Tax-booke of William: Angliae Notitiam, that is, The Notice of England:
Angliae commentarios Censuales, that is, The Tax Register, or Sessing book of
England: and Angliae Lustrum, that is, the Survey of England.

But whereas Polydore Virgill writes, how William that Conqueror, first
brought in the Trial or Judgment of A Jurie of twelve.
twelve men, there is nothing more untrue. For, Neighborhood; these are bound
by oath to pronounce and, deliver up their Verdict, As touching the fact.
de facto: they hear the counsel pleading in courts on both sides before the
Bench or Tribunal, and the disposition of witnesses: then taking with them the
evidences of both parties, they are shut up together; and kept from meat,
drink, and fire, (unless happily some one of them be in danger of death
thereby) so long until, they be all agreed of the fact: which when they have
pronounced before the Judge, he, according to right and law gives his
definitive sentence. For, this manner of trial our most sage and wise
Ancestors have thought the best to find out the truth, to avoid corruption,
and cut off all partiality

Now, The warlike prowess of the Normans.
as touching martial prowess, how much the Normans excelled therein, let
others tell: this may suffice for me to have said thus much, that being planted
among most warlike nations, they always saved themseves, not by obsequious
baseness, but by force of arms, and founded most noble Kingdoms in England,
and Sicilie. For Tancrede, nephew unto Richard the second of that name, Duke of
Normandy, and his posterity, achieved brave exploits in Italy, and having
compelled the Sarazens to fly out of Sicilie, erected a Kingdom there.
Whereupon the Sicilian Historiographer does freely acknowledge, that the
Sicilians are beholden unto the Normans, for that themselves remain still in
their native soil, live in freedom, and Th. Fazel. in the sixth book of the
latter Decad.
Likewise in the holy Land their martial prowess has been seen with singular
commendation. Hence it is also, that Roger Hoveden writes in these terms;
Bold France having made trial once of the Normans warfare, durst not peep
out: Fierce England being conquered, yielded as captive unto them: Rich Apulia
falling to the lot of their possession flourished a fresh: Famous Jerusalem,
and renowned Antioch were both subdued by them. And ever since their coming,
England as well for martial honor having their fidelity in great esteem,
applied himself especially to their familiarity, commending their love unto
his son after him: and a long time since, they were the Yeomen of the said
Emperors guard, called by Nicetes Choniata, Inglini Bipenniferj, that is,
English Halberdiers or Bill men, and by Curopalata, Barangi. These attended
upon the Emperor in every place, carrying Polaxes or Halberds upon their
shoulders: which they took up, and held upright whenever the Emperor
Chalcondilas.
they in the English tongue, prayed for his long life. As for that blot
wherewith Chalcondilas has besmutted our nation, for having wives in common,
the truth it self washes it clean away, and represseth the overlashing
vanity of the Grecian. For, as says that most learned man, and my singular
good friend Ortelius in this very matter, those things be not always true,
which by every one are given out of all whatsoever. Well, these are the nations
that seated themselves in Britain, whereof remain the Britans, Saxons, or
English men, and Normans intermingled with them: the Scots also in the North:
whereupon came the two Kingdoms in this Island, to wit, England and Scotland,
long time divided, but most happily now in the most mighty Prince King James,
under one Imperial Diadem

Touching the Flemings, which flocked hither four hundred years since, and by
permission of the Kings, received a place in Wales to inhabit, it is not
requisite to speak of them now, In Pembroke shire.
elsewhere I will treat of that matter. But let us conclude this argument with
Seneca. By these, it is manifest that nothing has continued in the same place,
Of consolation to Albina.
wherein it had the first beginning. There is a daily stirring and mooving to
and fro of mankind: some change or other there is every day in so great a
revolution of this world. New foundations of Cities are laid: New names of
nations spring up, whereas the old are either grown out of use, or altered by
the coming in of a mightier. And considering that all these nations which have
broken into Britain, were Northern as all the rest, Nicephorus.
wrote Nicephorus, Like as terrors oftentimes are sent from heaven by God upon
men, as lightning, fire, and tempestuous showers; oftentimes from the earth, as
open gapings of the ground, and Earthquakes; often from the air, as
whirlewinds and extraordinary storms: so, these terrors of the Northern and
Hyporborean parts, God keeps by him in store, to send them forth for some
punishment, when, and among whom, it pleases him in his divine providence.

THE DIVISION OF BRITAIN.
How countries are divided.
NOw let us address our selves to the Division of Britain. Countries are
divided by Geographers, either Naturally, according to the course of rivers,
and interpose of mountains: or Nationally, according as the people inhabit
them: or Diversely and Civilly, according to the wills and jurisdiction of
Princes. But forasmuch as we shall treat here and there throughout the whole
work, of the first and second kinds, that third (which is civil and politic)
seems properly pertinent to this place. Which yet is overcast with so dark a
mist, through the iniquity of former times, that much easier it is in this
case to confute what is false, than to find out the truth.

Our Historiographers will needs have that division of Britain to be most
ancient, whereby they divide it into Loegria, Cambria, and Albania, that is, to
speak more plainly, into England, Wales, and Scotland. But I would think this
division to be of a newer and later edition, both because it is threefold; for
it seems to have risen of

The most ancient division of Britain in the opinion of many learned men is
that, Cap. 6.
Mathematical Construction, where he threatens the Parallels: namely, into
Britain the GREAT, and the LESS. But by their leave, Britan Great and Small.
as great learned men as they be, they themselves shall see, if it please them
to examine thoroughly and exactly in that place, the proportion of distance from
the Equator, and compare the same with his Geographicall Descriptions, that
he calls this our Island there, Britain the GREAT, and Ireland, Britain
the LESS. Howbeit some of our later writers named the hither part of this
Island toward the South, GREAT, and that farther part Northward, the LESS: the
Inhabitants whereof in times past, were distinguished into MAIATAE, and
CALEDONII, that is to say, into the habitation of the Champian, or Plains, and
the Mountainers: as now, the Scots are divided into Hechtlandmen, and
Lawlandmen. But for as much Britain the Higher, and the Lower.
at the first they made this hither part reduced already into a Province,
twofold, to wit, the LOVVER, and the HIGHER, as it is gathered out of Dio.
For, the hither or nearer part of England, together with Wales, he terms the
HIGHER, the farther and Northern part the LOVVER. Which thing the very seats,
and abiding places of the Legions in Dio do prove. The second Legion Augusta,
ich kept at Caerleon in Wales, and the twentieth surnamed Victrix, which
remained at Chester or Deva, he places in the Higher Britain: but the Sixth
Legion Victrix, that was resident at York, served, as he writes, in the Lower
Britain. This division I would suppose, Albinus General of the British
forces, who had usurped the Empire, and therewith reformed, and set in order
the State of Britain, divided the government of the Province in two parts,
between two Prefects, or Governors.

After this, the Romans did set out the Province of Britain into three parts,
as is to be seen out of a manuscript of Sextus Rufus: Tripartite Britain.
namely, into MAXIMA CAESARIENSIS, BRITANNIA PRIMA, and BRITANNIA SECVNDA.
Which, I take it, I have found out by the Bishops, and their ancient Diocesses.
Lucius the Pope, in Gratian, Did. 80. cap. 1.
insinuates thus much, that the Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions of the
Christians, followed the Jurisdictions of the Roman Magistrates, and that
Archbishops had The Cities and places (says he) in which Primats ought to sit
and rule, were appointed not by the Modern, but long before the coming of
Christ: to the Primats of which Cities etc. the Gentile also appealed in
matters of greater importance. And in those very cities after Christ's coming,
the Apostles and their Successors placed Patriarks, or Primats, unto whom the
affairs of the Bishops, and greater causes ought to be preferred. Whereas
therefore, Britain had in old time three Archbishops, to wit, of London, of
York, and Caerleon in Southwales, I suppose, that the Province which now we
call of Canterbury, (for thither the Sea of London was translated) made
BRITANNIA PRIMA: Wales under the Chester.
City of Caer Leon, was BRITANNIA SECVNDA: and the Province of York,

In the age next ensuing, when the form of the Roman Empire was daily
changing, either through ambition, that more men might attain to places of
honor, or the wary forecast of the Emperors, that the power of their
Presidents which grew over great might be taken down and abridged, they
divided Britain into five parts, to wit, BRITANNIA PRIMA, SECVNDA, MAXIMA
CAESARIENSIS, VALENTIA and FLAVIA CAESARIENSIS. Britain in five parts.
VALENTIA seems to have been the northerly part of Maxi^^ Caesariensis, which
being usurped and held by the Picts and Scots, Theodosius General under Valens
the Emperor recovered out their hands, and in honor of him named it Valentia,
which Marcellinus shows more plainly in these words* The Province now
recovered, Lib. 28.
which was fallen into the enemies hands, he restored to the former state, in
such sort, as by his own procuring it had both a lawful governor, and was also
afterward called, VALENTIA, at the pleasure of the Prince. Now that the son of
this Theodosius, (who being created Emperor was named Flavius Theodosius, and
altered very many things in the Empire) added Flavia, we may very well
conjecture, for that before Flavius we read no where of BRITANNIA FLAVIA.
Wherefore to make up this matter in few words, All the south coast which of one
side lies between the British sea, and the river Thames with the Severn sea on
the other side, was called BRITANNIA PRIMA. BRITANNIA SECVNDA, was that which
now is Wales. FLAVIA CAESARIENSIS, reaches from Thames to Humber. MAXIMA
CAESARIENSIS, from Humber to the river of Tine, or the wall of Severus.
VALENTIA from Tine to the wall or rampire near Edinburgh, which the Scots call
Gramesdike, and was the utmost limit of the Roman Empire in this Island, when
this last division was in use.

And now I cannot choose but note some want of judgment in certain men, who
otherwise being very learned, do reckon Scotland in this account, which some
of Maxima Caesariensis, and others, Britannia Secunda: As if (forsooth) the
Romans neglected not that part of the Island, lying under a cold climate, and
reckoned here those Provinces only, which they governed by Consular
Lieutenants, and Presidents: for Maxima Caesariensis, and Valentia were ruled
by Consular Lieutenants; Britannia Prima, Secunda, and Flavia, by Presidents.

Now if any man would have me render a reason of this my division, and accuse
me as a false bounderer and surveior, let him hear in brief, what has
induced me to this opinion. Having observed thus much, that the Romans always
called those Provinces PRIMAS, which lay nighest to Rome: as Germania Prima,
Belgica Prima, Lugdunensis Prima, Aquitania Prima, Panninia Prima; all which
lay nearer to Rome, than those that were named, Secundae: and that these
Primae, were by the finer sort of writers, Superiores, or higher: the Secundae,
Inferiores, or Lower: I resolved, that the South-part of our Island, and nearer
to Rome, was Britannia Prima. By the same reason seeing the Provinces Secundae
(as they call them) were more remote from Rome, I supposed Wales was the
Britannia Secunda. Moreover, having noted this also, that in the decaying State
of their Empire, those Provinces only had Consular Magistrates, which lay
against the enemies, not only in Gaul, but also in Afric, as appears in
the book of Notices: also, that in the said Book, Valentia with us, and
Maxima Caesariensis be accounted Consular Provinces; I have judged them being
next and exposed to the Scots and Picts, to lie in those places which I have
spoken of. I can do no other but guess, that Flavia Caesariensis here, was in
the midst between them all, and Giraldus Cambrensis, is just of the same
opinion with me. And thus much of the Divisions of Britain under the Romans.

Afterward, when the Barbarians made invasion on every side, and civil war
daily increased among the Britans, the Island, as bereft of all life and
vigor, lay for a time languishing and forlorn, without any show at all of
government. But at length that part which inclines to the North became two
Kingdoms, to wit, of the Scots and the Picts, and the Romans Pentarchie, or
five portions, in this hither part became in process of time the Heptarchie,
or seven Kingdoms, of the Saxons. For, they divided the whole Province of the
Romans, (setting Wales aside, which the remnant of Kent, Southsex,
East-England, Westsex, The Saxons Heptarchie or seven Kingdoms.
Northumberland, Eastsex, and Mercia.

But what this Heptarchie of the English-Saxons was, and what their names were
in those days, in this chorographical table here adjoined you may (if you
please) behold.

Considering that in a Chorographicall Table or Map, by reason of so narrow a
room, those Regions or Counties which these Kingdoms contained, could not
well and handsomely be described: In this other Table here, rather than by
heaping many words together, I think good to propose, and set down the same,
that the Reader may once for all have a view of them.
The Saxons Heptarchie.

1 The Kingdom of KENT contained the County of Kent. 2 The Kingdom of SUSSEX,
or Southern Saxons, contained the Counties of Suthsex. Suthrey. 3 The Kingdom
of EAST-ENGLAND, or East Angles, contained the Counties of Norfolk. Suthfolke.
Cambridge shire, with the Isle of Ely.
4 The Kingdom of WESTSEX, or West-Angles, contained the Counties of Cornwall.
Devonshire. Dorsetshire. Somersetshire. Wiltshire. Southampton. Berkshire.
Lancaster. York. Durham. Cumberland. Westmorland. Northumberland, and the
Countries of Scotland to Edenburgh-frith.
6 The Kingdom of EASTSEX, or East Saxons, contained the Counties of Essex.
Middlesex, and part of Hertfordshire.
7 The Kingdom of MERCIA, contained the Counties of Gloucester shire.
Herefordshire. Worcestershire. Warwickshire. Leicestershire. Rotlandshire.
Northamptonshire. Lincolneshire. Huntingdonshire. Bedfordshire.
Buckinghamshire. Oxenfordshire. Staffordshire. Derbieshire. Salop or
Shropshire. Nottinghamshire. Chester, or Cheshire. The other part of
Hertfordshire.

YEt was not England when the Heptarchie flourished, thus divided into
Counties, England divided into Shires or Counties.
but into certain small regions with their Hides, which out of an old fragment
that I had of Francis Tate a gentleman, most conversant in the Antiquity of
our Law, I have here put down. But it contains that country only, which
lies on this side Humber.

Myrcna contains 30000. An Hide, as some think, is so much land, as one
plough can ear in one year: as others think, 4. yard-lands.
Hides. Woken-setna 7000. hides. Westerna 7000. hides. Pec-setna 1200. hides.
Elmed-setna 600. hides. Lindes-farona 7000. hides. Suth-Gyrwa 600. hides.
North-Gyrwa 600. hides. East-Wixna 300. hides. West-Wixna 600. hides. Spalda
600. hides. Wigesta 900. hides. Herefinna 1200. hides. Sweordora 300. hides.
Eyfla 300. hides. Wicca 300. hides. Wight-gora 600, hides. Nox gaga 5000.
hides. Oht gaga 2000. hides. Hwynca 7000. hides. Ciltern-setna 4000. hides.
Hendrica 3000. hides. Vnecung-ga 1200. hides. Aroseatna 600. hides. Fearfinga
300. hides. Belmiga 600. hides. Witherigga 600. hides. East-willa 600. hides.
West-willa 600. hides. East-Engle 30000. hides. East-Sexena 7000. hides.
Cant-warena 15000. hides. Suth-Sexena 7000. hides. West-Sexena 100000. hides.
Although some of these names may at the first sight be discovered, yet others
of them a man shall hardly pick out although he study upon them: and they
require one I profess it, of much sharper wit and quicker insight than my
self, to guess what they should mean.

Aelfred he is named in pieces of Coin: also Alured, in our English Chronicles.
Afterward, when Aelfred was sole Monarch, like as the Germans our ancestors,
as Tacitus witnesses, kept courts and ministered justice in every Territory
and town, Hundred men out of the the Common people as companions and assistants
to perform this function: even so, to use the words of ingulphus of Crowland,
He first divided England into Counties, for that the neighbor Inhabitants
after the example, and under color of the Danes committed outrages and
robberies. Besides, he caused the Counties to be parted into Centuries,
Hundreds.
that is Hundreds, and Decimes, that is Tithings: and commandded withal that
every Homeling or natural Inhabitant should be in some one Hundred and
Tithing. He divided also the governors of the Provinces, who before were
called Vice-Domini, that is, Vice-Lords, into two offices, to wit, Judges, now
Justices, and Vice-Comites, that is, Sheriffs, which still retain the same
name. By whose care and industry, peace so much flourished within short space
through the whole Province, that had a wayfaring Which our Historiographer of
Malmesburie will declare unto you more at large. By occasion, says he, and
example of the Barbarians, that is, Danes, the proper and natural Inhabitants
also were very greedy of spoil, so that no man could pass to and fro in
safety, without weapons for his defense. Aelfred therefore ordained Centuries,
which they term Hundreds, and Decimes, which they call Tithings, that every
English m living under law, as a liege subject, should be within one Hundred
and Tithing, or another. And if a man were accused of any transgression, he
should bring in straightwaies some one out of the same Hundred and Tithing,
that would be bound for his Wapentaks, Tithings and Lathes.
whiles there was no man that durst take the^ away. But these Hundreds be in
some places of the realm called Wapentaches: if you would know the reason
thereof, I will tell you it out of the laws of Edward the Confessor. When a man
received the government of a Wapentach, upon a certain day appointed in the
place where they were wont to assemble, all the elder sort met together and
expected him: and as he alighted from his horse, rose up unto him and did him
reverence. Then he, setting his spear upright, received of them all, according
to the custom, a covenant of Association. For, as many as came, with their
spears touched his spear, and thus they assured themselves by touching of
weapons, in peaceable manner. For, arms in English they call (...), and (...)
is as much as to confirm or establish: as if this were a comfirmation of
weapons: or, Wepentac, is the touching of weapons. For (...) sounds as much,
as arms, (...) is touching. There were besides, other governments and
jurisdictions above Wepantaches which they called (...), for that this was the
third part of a Province. And the rulers over those were termed (...). Before
these officers were brought those causes that could not be determined, in the
Wapentachs. And so, that which the Englishmen named a Hundred, these termed a
Wapentach. And that which in English they called three or four Hundreds, these
named (...). Howbeit in some Provinces they called that (...), which these
term Trihing: Leth.
and that which could not be decided and ended in a (...), was brought into the
Schyre.

Shires.
either Conventus or Pagos, we by a peculiar term name Shires, of (...) a
Saxon word, which signifies, to part or divide: and at the first division,
were there in all but thirty two. For, in the year after Christ's nativitie
1016. whiles Etheldred reigned, the Chronicle of Malmesburie reports there
was no more: For, thus writes he in the life of the said Etheldred. The Danes
at this time when there be reckoned in England thirty two Shires, invaded 16.
of them. And in those days, according to the variety of laws these counties
or shires were divided. The division of England according to the Laws.
For the laws of England were distinguished into three sorts: to wit, those of
the West Saxons which they called West-Saxenlage: those of the Danes, named
Denelage, and those of the Mercians, termed Merchenlage. Kent, Sussex, Suthrie,
Berkshire, Hantshire or Southampton, Wiltshire, Sommersetshire, Dorsetshire,
and Denshire. To the Danes law appertained 15. The manuscript book of S.
Edmund.
Counties, namely, Yorkshire, Darbyshire, Nottinghamshire, Leicestershire,
Lincolnshire, Northamptonshire, Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Hertfordshire,
Essex, Middlesex, Northfolk, Suffolk, Cambridgeshire, Huntingdonshire. The
eight remaining, followed the law of the Mercians: there were, Glocestershire,
Worcestershire, Herefordshire, Warwickshire, Oxenfordshire, Cheshire, Salop or
Shropshire, and Staffordshire. But when William the First made a survey and
taxed this Kingdom, there were reckoned, as we read in Polychronicon, xxxvj.
shires or counties: and yet the public D^omesday book.
record, in which Wales divided into Shires.
the number of 39. shires, which we have at this day. Unto which are adjoined
since 13. more in Wales: whereof six were in the time of Edward the First, the
rest Henry the Eighth ordained by Parliamentarie authority.

In these Shires there is appointed in troublesome times by the Prince, a
Prefect or Aelfred, who appointed in every County certain Custodes or Keepers
of the Kingdom: whom Henry the Third afterward did set up and restore again,
naming them Capitaines. For he in the fiftieth year of his reign, Held a
Parliament as John or, London. 897. Math. Westmonast.
of London writes, wherein this wholesome ordinance was enacted, that in every
County there should be made at the Kings charge, one Captain, who with the
With good forecast this was done verily by this Prince: but whether Canutus the
Dane did more wisely, who in his Monarchy erected a Tetrarchie, let our
Politicians and Statists dispute. For he, (Hermandus the Archdeacon is mine
Author) being a prudent Prince, He flourished in the year, 1070.
and watchful every way, dividing the care of his Kingdom into four parts,
ordained Tetrarchs, such as he had found to be most faithful and trusty. The
charge of the greatest portion, to wit, Westsex, he took upon himself; of
Mercia.
Mircha, which was the second portion, he committed to one Edrich; the third,
For this instruction I am beholden to the diligence of Francis Thinn, a man,
who with exceeding great commendation has traveled very much in this Study
of Antiquities.

Sheriff of the Shire.
Now every year, some one of the Gentlemen Inhabitants, is made ruler of the
county wherein he dwells, whom we call in Latin Vicecomitem, as one would
say, the Deputy of the Comes or Earl, and in our tongue Sheriff, that is,
the Reeve of the shire, who also may well be termed the Treasurer of the Shire
or Province. For, it is his duty, to gather the common moneys and profits of
the Prince in his County, to collect and bring into the Exchequer all fines
imposed, even by distreining: to be attendant Twelve men.
and make relation thereof and give in their verdict to the Judges (for Judges
with us sit upon the right only of a cause and not upon the fact) to see
condemned persons executed, and to examine and determine certain smaller
actions. Justices of peace.
Moreover, there be ordained in every Shire, and that by the institution of
Edward the Third, certain Justices of peace, who examine Murders, Felonies,
and Trespasses, as they call them, yea and many other delinquences. Furthermore,
the King sends yearly into every Shire of England two Justices, to give
Judgment of prisoners, Justices of Assizes.
and that I may use the Lawyers term, to deliver the Goal. Of whom, more
hereafter in the Treatise of Judicial courts and Judgment seats.

As touching Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, when the Bishops of Rome had
assigned several Churches to several Priests, England divided into Parishes.
and laid parishes unto them, Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury, about the
year of our Redemption 636. began first to divide England into parishes, as
we read in the History of Canterbury. But now has England two provinces,
and accordingly two Archbishops: to wit, the Archbishop of Canterbury Primate
and Metropolitan of all England, and the Archbishop of York. Bishops.
Under these are twenty five Bishops: to the Archbishop of Canterbury are
subject twenty two, to the Archbishop of York, the other three. Now what
Bishoprics these be, with the shires and Diocesses that are at this day under
their jurisdiction, that godly, and right reverend father Matthew Parker,
[late] Archbishop

IN THE PROVINCE OF CANTERBVRIE.
THe Bishopric of Canterbury together with that of Rochester contains
under it Kent it self. The Bishopric of London has under it Essex,
Middlesex, and part of Hertfordshire. The Bishopric of Chichester has
belonging unto it Sussex. The Bishopric of Winchester compriseth Southhampton
shire, Surry, and the Isle of Wight, Gernsey also and Iersey, Islands lying
against Normandy. The Bishopric of

IN THE PROVINCE OF YORK.


Numbered also there are parish-churches under Bishops, 9284: of which 3845, be
Appropriat, as I find in a Catalogue exhibited unto King James, which here I
have put down underneath. Now, Appropriat Churches those are called, which by
the Popes authority coming between, with consent of the King and the Bishop
of the Diocese were upon certain conditions tied, or as the form runs, of
our Law, united, unto Monasteries, Bishoprics, Colleges and Hospitals,
endowed with small lands, either for that the said Churches were built with in
their Lordships and lands, or granted by the Lords of the said lands. Which
Churches afterward when the Abbaies and Monasteries were suppressed, became
Lay Fees, to the great damage of the Church.

DIOECESES. Parish-Churches. Churches Of Canterbury. 257 140 Of London. 623
189 Of Winchester. 362 131 Of Coventrie and Lichfield. 557 250 Of Sarisburie.
248 109 Of Bath and Wels. 388 160 Of Lincoln. 1255 577 Of Peter-burgh. 293 91
Of Exceter. 604 239 Of Gloucester. 267 125 In the Province of Canterbury in the
Diocese, Of Hereford. 313 166 Of Norwich. 1121 385 Of Elie. 141 75 Of
Rochester. 98 36 Of Chichester. 250 112 Of Oxford, 195 88 Of Worcester. 241 76
Of Bristoll. 236 64 Of S. David's. 308 120 Of Bangor. 107 36 Of Lhandaffe. 177
98 Of S. Asaph. 121 19 Peculiar, in the Province of Canterbury. 57 14 The
sum of the Province of Canterbury. 8^19 3303 Of York. 581 336 Of Durham.
135 87 In the Province of York, Of Chester. 256 101 Of Carlisle. 93 18 The
sum of the Province of York. 1065 592 The total Sum in both Provinces
9284 3845

Howbeit, in the book of Thomas Wolsey Cardinal, digested and written in



There were also, in the reign of Henry the Eight (I hope without offense I
may speak the truth) many religious places, Monuments of our forefathers
piety and devotion, to the honor of God, the propagation of Christian faith
and good learning, and also for the relief and maintenance of the poor and
impotent, Monasteries or Abbaies.
to wit, Monasteries or Clement the seventh, forty were suppressed by
Cardinal Wolseies means, who then had begun to found two Colleges, one at
Oxenford, the other at Ipswich: straight ways, about the xxxvj. year of the
reign of the said Henry the Eight, a sudden flood (as it were) breaking
through the banks with a maine stream, fell upon the Ecclesiastical State of
England; which whiles the world stood amazed, and England groned thereat, bare
down and utterly overthrew the greatest part of the Clergy, together with
their most goodly and beautiful houses. For, that leave which the Pope granted
to the Cardinal; the King with assent of the Parliament took to himself.
Whereupon, in the year of our Lord, 1536. all religious houses every one,
together with all An hundred Priories of Monks Aliens, King Henry the Fifth,
had dissolved before.
together with Colleges, Chanteries and Hospitals were left to the dispose and
pleasure of the King. At which time, the religious houses remaining, in number
605. were surveied, valued or taxed. Colleges there were, besides those in the
Universities, 90. Hospitals 110. Chan^eries and free Chapels 2374. All which
for the most part, shortly after were every where pulled down, their revenues
sold and made away, and those goods and riches which the Christian piety of
the English nation

THE STATES AND DEGREES of England.
AS touching the division of our Commonwealth, it consists, of a King or
Monarch, Noblemen or Gentry, Citizens, Freeborn, whom we call, Yeomen, and
Artisans or Handicraftsmen.

The King
whom our ancestors [the English-Saxons] called Coning and Gynin^, (in which
name is implied a signification both of power and skill) and we name
contractly, King, has sovereign power and absolute command among us, neither
holds he his Empire in vassalage, not receives his investure or c^stalling
of another, ^e yet acknowledges any superior but God alone: and as one said,
All verily are under him, and himself under none, but God only* Also, he has
very many rights of Majesty peculiar to himself, (the learned Lawyers term
them, Sacra sacrorum, that is Sacred, and Individua; that is, inseparable,
because they cannot be severed: and the common sort Royal prerogatives) which
they to me, Bracton. lib. 1. cap. 8.
The flowers of his Crown, in which respect they affirm that the regal
material Crown is adorned with flowers. Some of these, His watchful care
defends the state of all, his painful labor maintains the rest of all,
Seneca.
his spadious industry upholdeth the de^ights of all, and his busy employment
affords case to all. But these are points of a lo^^ier discourse, and not of
the argument now in hand.

The Prince.
The second or next to the King, is his first begotten son: who, like as among
Princeps Iuventutis, that is, Prince of the youth; and afterward (as flattery
did increase) styled by the name of Caesar, Nobilis Caesar.
Noble Caesar, and the Caesar Nobilissimus.
most Noble: so, with our Ancestors the English-Saxons, he was named in their
tongue, Aetheling, that is, Noble, and in Latin Clito, of the Greek word,
(...), that is, Glorious or Excellent (see how that age affected the Greek
Language.) And hereupon, of that Eadgar, the last heir male of the English
blood royal, this old said saw is yet rife in every man's mouth, (...). And in
the ancient latin Patents and Charters of the Kings we read often times, Ego
E. vel Ae. Clyto, Regis filius: But this addition Clyto, I have observed to be
given even to all the Kings sons. After the Norman The Kings son, and, The
first begotten of the King of England, until that Edward the first summoned
unto the high Court of Parliament his son Edward, by the name of Prince of
Wales, and Earl of Chester; unto whom he granted afterward, the Dukedom also
of Aquitain: like as the same Prince, being now King Edward the Second, called
unto the Parliament his young son Edward, not full ten years old, by the
title of Earl of Chester, and of Flint. But the said Edward, having now
attained to the Crown, and being Edward the Third, created Edward his son, a
most valiant and renowned man of war, Duke of Cornwall. Since Dux Cornubiae
natus.
Duke of Cornwall at the hour of his birth. And soon after, he adorned the
same son by solemn investure and creation, with the title of Prince of
Wales. And gave the Principality of Wales in these words, To be held of him and
his heirs Kings of England. And as the declared or elect Successors of the
Roman Empire, (as I said even now) were named Caesares, of the Greekish Empire,
Lords.
Despotae; of the Kingdom of France, Dolphins, and of Spain, Infants: so from
thence forward, the Heirs apparent of the Kingdom of England, were entitled,
Princes of Wales. And this title continued unto the days of Henry the Eight,
when Wales was fully united to the Kingdom of England.

But now, whereas the Kingdoms of Britain formerly divided, are by the happy
good luck, and rightful title of the most mighty Prince, King James grown
into one; Lovely Joy and Dearling of Britain, is styled, PRINCE OF GREAT
BRITAIN: who, as he is borne thus to the greatest hopes, so all Britain from
one end to the other, prays uncessantly from the very heart, that God would
vouchsafe to bless him with the greatest virtues, and continuance of honor,
that he may by many degrees, and that most happily exceed our hope, surpass
the noble Acts of his Progenitors, yea, and outlive their years. As for our
Nobility, or Gentry, it is divided into Superior, and Inferior. The
Superior or chief Noblemen we call, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and Barons:
which have received these titles from the Kings of this Realm for their Virtue
and Prowess.

A Duke.
DVKE, is the chief title of honor among us next after PRINCE. This was a
Aelius Verus the Emperor, those who governed the Limits and Borders, were
first named Duces, and this degree in the days of Constantine was inferior to
that of Comites. After the Roman government was here in this Island abolished,
this title also remained as a name of office: and those among us, who in old
Charters, during the Saxons time, Dukes.
are so many of them called Duces, were named in the English tongue only
Ealdermen: and the very same, that were named Duces, they called also, Earls.
Comites. As for example, that William the Conqueror of England, whom most
call Duke of Normandy, William of Malmsburie, terms Comes, or Earl of
Normandy. But, as well Duke as Earl, were names of charge and office, as
appears by In this point especially is a Princes regal Clemency fully
commended, that thorowout the whole people there be sought out honest and
vigilant persons; neither is it meet to commit hand over head, unto every man
a judiciarie Dignity, unless his faithfulness This title of Duke, began to be
a title of honor under Otho the Great, about the year 970. For he, to bind
more streitly, and nearer unto him, martial and politic men, endowed them
with Regalities and Roialties, as he termed them. Sigonius Regni Italici lib.
5.
And these Roialties were either Dignities, or Lands in fee. Dignities were
these, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Capitaines, Valvasors, Valvasines. Later it
was ere it came to be an Hereditarie title in France: and not before the time
of Philip the third King of France, who granted, that from thence forth, they
should be called, Dukes of Britain, who before time Dukes and Earls. But in
England, in the time of the Normans, seeing the Norman Kings themselves were
Dukes of Normandy, for a great while they adorned none with this honor: nor
before that Edward the Third created Edward his son, Duke of Cornwall, by a
wreath upon his head, a ring on his finger, Afterward a golden rod or verger
was used.
and a silver verge or rod: like as the Dukes of Normandy were in times past
created by a Sword, and Banner delivered unto them: afterward, by girding the
Sword of the Duchy, and a circlet of gold, garnished with little golden Roses
in the top. And the same King Edward the Third, created in a Parliament his two
sons, Lionel Duke of Clarence, and John Duke of Lancaster, by the girding of
a Sword, and setting upon their heads a furred chapeau, or cap, with a circlet
or Coronet of gold, pearl, and a Charter delivered unto From which time there
have been many hereditary Dukes among us, created one after another, with
these or such like words in their Charter or Patent: We give and grant the
Name, Title, State, Style, Place, Seat, Pre-eminence, Honor, Authority, and
Dignity of a Duke, to N. and by the cincture of a Sword, and imposition of a
Cap and Coronet of gold upon his head, as also by delivering unto him a verge
of gold, we do really invest.

A MARQVESSE, that is, if you consider the very nature of the word, a Governor
of the Marches, Marquestes.
has the next placec of honor, after a Duke. This Title came to us but of
late days, and was not bestowed upon any one, before the time of King Richard
the Second: For, he made his minion Robert Vere, who was highly in his Lord
Marchers, and not Marquesses (as now we term them. Henceforth they were
created by the King, by cincture of the Sword, and the imposition of the Cap of
honor and dignity, with the Coronet, as also by delivery of a Charter or
writing. Neither will I think it much to relate here, that which is found
recorded in the An. 4. Henri^. 4.
Parliament Rols. When John de Beaufort, from being Earl of Sommerset, was by
Richard the Second created Marquess Dorset, and afterward by Henry the
Fourth, deprived of that title; what time as the Commons of England made humble
suit in Parliament to the King, that he would restore unto him the title of
Marquess which he had lost: he opposed himself against that petition, and
openly said, That it was a new dignity, and altogether unknown to; and
therefore he neither craved it, nor in any wise would accept of it.

Earls, called in Latin, Comites, are ranged in the third place, and may
seem to have come unto us from our Ancestors the Germans: For, they in times
past, as Cornelius Tacitus writes, had their Comites, Who should always give
attendance upon their Princes, and be at hand in matters of counsel and
authority. But others think, that they came from the Romans to us, as also to
the Franks, or French. For, the Emperors, Caesaris Comitatus: and then those
whose counsel they used in war and peace, were termed Comites: whence it is
that in ancient Inscriptions, we find oftentimes COMITI IMPP. And in few
years the name of Comes, grew so rife, that it was given to all Officers and
Magistrates that observed or gave attendance upon the said sacred or privy
Counsel, or that came out of it: and from hence afterward the name extended to
all those which were the Provosts or Overseers of any matters of state. In
paratitlis ad Codicem.
And Suidas defines Comes, to be The ruler of the people, as Cuiacius has
taught us: who also teaches us, that before Constantine Comes was not in use,
to signify any honor. But he, when he altered the form of the Roman Empire
by new distinctions, and endeavored to oblige many unto him with his benefits,
and them to advance unto honor, ordained first the title of Comes without any
function or government at all, to be a title of dignity: and this Comes had a
certain power and privilege, for to accompany the Prince, not only when he
went abroad, but in his palace also, in his privy chamber, and secret rooms,
to have liberty likewise to be present at his Table, and private speeches. And
hereupon it is, that we read thus in Epiphanius, (...), that is, Who so
obtained of the King, the Dignity of Comites. At length, to them which were
beholden unto him for this honorable preferment, he granted other dignities
with charge: and again, upon those that were in place of Magistracy, and
Comes Domesticorum, L. Great Master of the Household; Comes sacrarum
largitionum, L. High Treasurer; Comes sacrae vestis, Master of the Wardrobe;
Comes Stabuli, Master of the Horse; Comes Thesauri, Treasurer; Comes Orientis,
Lieutenant of the East; Comes Britanniae, Comes Africae, etc. Herehence it
came, that ever since the name of Comes, imported Dignity, and authority, or
government, at the first temporary, afterward for term of life. Moreover, in
process of time, when the Empire of the Romans became rent into many
kingdoms, this title yet was retained: and our English-Saxons, called them in
Latin, Comites, and Consules, whom in their own language, they named (...),
and the very same Eorlas, that is, Honorable, as Ethelward writes, by which
name somewhat mollified, they are called of us at this day, Earls. And verily
for a long time, P. Pithaeus in Memorab. Campaniae.
they were known by this name simply: at length, with addition also of the
place over which they were put in authority. Neither as yet descended this
honor to the next heir by inheritance. Where, by the way thus much I note,
that the first hereditarie Earls in France, were the Earls of Britain. But
when William of Normandy had made conquest of this Land, and seated himself in
the absolute government of this Kingdom, Earls began to be Feudall,
Hereditarie, and Patrimoniall, that is, By fee, or Tenure by service, by
inheritance, and by Lands, who also, as it appears in An authentical record
of the Exchequer.
Doomesday-booke, were simply without any addition at Comes Hugo, Comes Alanus,
Comes Rogerus; Earl Hugh, Earl Alan, Earl Roger, etc. Afterward, as we may
see in ancient Charters, Earls were created with the name of a place joined
unto them, and the third penny of the Shire was assigned unto them. As for
example, Mawd the Empress, daughter and heir to K. Henry the First, created
an Earl in these words, as appears in the very Charter which I have: I Mawd,
daughter of K. Henry, and Lady of the Englishmen, do give and grant unto
Geffrey de Magnavil for his service, or Maundevil.
and to his heirs after him by right of inheritance to be Earl of Essex, and
to have the third penny out of the Sheriffs Court, issuing out of all pleas,
as an Earl should have through his County in all things. And this is the most
ancient Charter that hitherto I have seen, of an Earls creation, Likewise
Henry the Second, Know ye, that we have made Hugh Bigod, Earl of Norfolk, to
wit, of the third penny of Norwic, and Norfolc, as freely as any Earl of
England holds his County. Which words, an old book of Battle Abbey
expounds thus: An usual and ancient custom it was throughout all England,
that the Earls should have the third penny to themselves of the Provinces,
Semblably, another book without name, more plainly: The Shire or County has
the name of the Earl or Count, or else contrariwise, the Count of the County.
And Count or Earl he is, because he receives the third part of those things,
that accrue or arise, by plea in every County or Shire: But all Earls reap
not these fruits, but those to whom the King has granted them by right of
inheritance, or in their own persons. And hereupon Polydore Virgil writes
truly, and according to the manner of our age. It is a custom in England,
says he, that the titles of Earldomes be given at the Princes pleasure, even
without possession of those places, from whence the very titles are taken. And
therefore the King is wont to give unto them, that possess

Earls were created in old time without any complement or ceremony at all,
but only by delivering unto them a Charter. Under Stephen who usurped the
kingdom, during the heat of civil war, many also took upon them the titles
of Earls, whom the History of Waverlew Church, and others of that age calls
Pseudo-Comites, that is, counterfeit Earls, and Comites imaginarios, that is,
Earls in conceit, whiles it reports unto us, that Henry the Second deposed
them. And King John, was the first by my observation, Cincture of the sword.
that used in creating of them, the cincture of a sword. For Roger of Hoveden
writes thus: King John upon the day of his Coronation girded William
Penbrochiae, in another place.
Strigulia, and Geffrey Fitz-Peter with the sword of the Earldome of Essex: who
albeit they had been called Earls before and governed their Shires, yet were
they not girt with the sword of an Earldome: and upon that day they waited at
the Kings table, wearing those swords by their sides. In the age next ensuing,
there came up the imposition of a chaplet cap, with a Circlet of gold, that now
is turned into a coronet with rays or points only, and with a robe of estate.
Which three, to wit, a sword with a girdle, a cap or chaplet with a coronet,
and a mantle or robe of estate, are by three several Earls borne before him,
that is to be created Earl: and betwixt two Earls arraied also in their robes
of estate, brought he is in his Surcoat unto the King sitting in his throne,
where kneeling down This same T. we erect, create, const^^ute, make, appoint,
and ordain Earl of S. and we give and grant unto him the name, title, state,
style, honor, authority, and dignity of the Earl S. and into it by the
cincture of a sword really do invest: Then is the robe or mantell of estate
done upon him by the King: the sword hung about his neck, the cap with the
Coronet put upon his head, and the said Charter of his creation being read
before, delivered into his hand. But these matters are beside my purpose. Now,
whereas it is grown to be a custom, that he which is to be created Earl, if
he were not a Baron before, should be made a Baron first; it is a new ceremony
come up of late days, and put in use, since the time of King Henry the Eight.
But among Earls, most honorable are they by many degrees, Counts Palatine:
For, as this term Palatine was a name common to all them that had offices in
the Kings palace; Count Palatine.
so Count Palatine was a title of dignity conferred upon him that before had
been an Officer Palatine, with a certain royal authority to sit in judgment
within his own Territory. As for the Earl Marshall of England: King Richard
the second gave that title first to Thomas Mowbray Earl of Nottingham, whereas
before they were simply styled Marshals of England and after the banishment of
Mowbray, he granted to T. Holland Duke of Surrey substituted Earl Marshall in
his place, Pithaus.
that he should carry a rod of gold enamelled black at both ends, when as
before they used one of wood.

Vicounts.
next follow in order VICECOMITES, whom we call Vicounts: An old name this is
of an office, but a new title of dignity, not heard of with us before Henry
the Sixth days, who conferred that title upon ^. Lord Beaumont. In the rank
of the superior or chief Nobility, Barons.
BARONS have the next place. And although I am not ignorant, what the learned
do write of this words signification in Tullie, yet willingly will I accord to
the opinion of Isidore and of an old Grammarian, who will have Barons to
signify, hired soldiers. For, that place in Hirtius so well known,
Alexandria, seems clearly to prove the same: and this it is. They came
running together to defend Cassius; for, he was wont always to have about him
Barons, and a great many chosen soldiers weaponed, from which the rest are
severed apart. Neither dissenteth from this, the old Glossarie with Latin
before Greek, which interprets Baro, by (...) that is, a man. And throughout
the laws of the Longobards, Baro is used for Vir, that is, a man. And for the
Etymologies of this word which some have forged, I like the^ not. The French
Heralts deduce Barons from the French tongue, as one would say, Par-hommes,
that is, men of equal dignity: our English Lawyers would have them to be as
much, as Robora belli, that is, the strength of war, Banner heirs, that is,
Lord-bearing Banners. Isidorus says, they are so termed, as a man should say,
(...) that is, grave or weighty. In Parergis. See Goldastus, page 14.
Alciatus deriveth them of Berones, an ancient people in Spain, who were, as
he says, in times past, waged soldiers. But that derivation out of the German
tongue is the better, wherein Bar betokens Free, and him that is his own man,
and at liberty. When this name first came into this Island I know not for
certain. The Britains do not acknowledge it for theirs. In the English Saxon
Laws it is no where to be seen; nor found in the Saxon Glossarie of Alfricus
among the Vocables or terms of honor; where, Dominus is translated Laford,
which we have contracted short into Lord. The Danes called their Free-Lords,
such as these Barons be at this day, Thani, Lords.
as Andreas Velleius witnesses. Howbeit, in Burgundy the use of the name has
been of great antiquity: For, Gregory Turonensis writes thus, The Barons of
Burgundy as well Bishops as other Leudes, etc. In a fragment of the laws of
Canatus King of Englishmen and Danes, About the year, 580.
was the first mention made of a Baron with us, so far as ever I could hitherto
observe: and yet therein, according to the variety of copies we read
indifferently these terms, Vironis, Baronis, and Thani. But that a Baron is
meant thereby, evident it is out of the Laws of William the Conqueror, into
which those ordinances of Canutus are in the Normans tongue translated under
the name of Baro: and lo what the very words are: Exercitualia vero, etc. That
is, Let the Heriots or Relevies be so moderate, as that they may be tolerable.
Of an N^riots or Relevies.
as decent it is, eight horses, four with saddles, and four without saddles:
four Helmets, and four shirts of male: eight lances or spears, and as many
shields, four swords, and withal 200. mauces of gold. Of a Viron or Baron to
the King, who is next unto him, four horses, two with saddles, and two without
saddles, two swords, four spears and as many targets, Happily, Mancusae, that
is, 30. deniers.
one helmet, and one coat of mauile, and with fifty mauces of gold.

Also in the first time of the Normans, Valvasores and Thani were ranged in
degree of honor, next after Earls and Barons: and the Valvasores of the
better sort, if we may believe those that write de Feudis, Many Thanes in
England, in the Conquerours time.
were the very same that now Barons are. So that the name [ Baro] may seem to
be one of those, which time, by little and little has mollified and made of
better esteem. Neither was it as yet a term of great To all my Barons as well
French as English, Greeting, etc. Yea even Citizens of better note were called
Barons. For, the Citizens of Warwick, in Doomesday book, were named Barons:
likewise, Citizens of London; and the Inhabitants of the Cinque Ports enjoyed
the same name. But, some few years after, like as at Rome in times past, they
chose Senators for their worth in wealth: so were they with us counted Barons,
who held lands of their own by a whole For, that was the value of one entire
Baronie: and they that had lands and revenues to this worth, were wont to be
summoned unto the Parliament. And it seemed to be a dignity with a
jurisdiction: which the Court Barons, Court-Barons.
as they term them, in some sort do prove: yea and the very multitude that
was of these Barons persuaded me, to think them Free-heires, and especially,
if they had Castles of their own. For then, they Jumped Just with the
definition of that most famous Civilian Baldus, who defines him to be a Baron,
whosoever had a mere and subordinate rule in some castle, by the grant of the
Prince. And all they, as some would have it, that held Baronies, seem to have
claimed unto themselves this honor: so that, Math. Paris. page 1262.
as diverse learned in our laws are of opinion, a Baron and a Baronie, a Count
or Earl and a County, a Duke and a Duchy, were Conjugata: that is, terms
as one would say, yoked together. Certes, in those days, Henry the Third
reckoned Baronage of England.
ever since that King Henry the Third, out of so great a number, which was
seditious and turbulent, called the very best, by writ or summon, unto the high
Court of Parliament. For he (out of a writer I speak of good antiquity) after
many troubles and enormous vexations, between the King himself, and Simon of
Mont-fort with other Barons raised, and after appeased, did decree and ordain,
that all those Earls and Barons of the Realm of England, unto whom the King
himself vouchsafed But- that which he began a little before his death, Edward
the First and his successor, constantly observed, and continued. Hereupon,
they only were accounted Barons of the kingdom, whom the Kings had cited by
virtue of such writs of Summons, as they term them, unto the Parliament. And
it is noted, that the said prudent King Edward the First, summoned always
those of ancient families that were most wise to his- Parliaments, but omitted
their sons after their death, if they were not answerable to their parents in
understanding. Barons were not created by Patent until such time as King
Richard the Second created John Beauchamp de Holt Baron of Kiderminster
Chevalier; for the Common law does not acknowledge Baron to be a name of
dignity. And they that be in this wise created, are called Barons of the
Parliament, Barons of the Realm, and Barons of honor, for difference of them,
who yet according to that old form of Barons, be commonly called Barons, as
those of Burford, of Walton; and those who were Barons unto the Count-Palatines
of Chester and Pembroch, who were Barons in fee

These our Parliamentarie Barons carry not the bare name only, as those of
France and Germany, but be all borne Peers of the Realm of England, Nobles,
Great States and Counselors: and called they are by the King in these words*
To treat of the high affairs of the kingdom, and thereof to give their
counsel. They have also immunities and privileges of their own, namely that
in criminal causes they are not to have their trial but by a Jury of their
Peers: that they be not put to their oath, but their protestation upon their
Honor is sufficient: that they be not empanelled upon a Jury of twelve men for
enquest de facto. No supplicavit can be granted against them. A Capias cannot
be sued out against them: Neither does an Essoine lie against them: with very
many other, Bishops, Barons.

Abbats, Barons of the Parliament.


which I leave unto Lawyers, who are to handle these and such like. Besides
Barons also of the kingdom, and Parliament: even as in our Grandfathers days,
these Abbats and Priors following: The Abbat of Glastenburie. The Abbat of S.
Augustines in Canterbury. The Abbat of S. Peter in Westminster. The Abbat of S.
Albans. The Abbat of S. Edmonds-Bury. The Abbat of Peterburgh. The Abbat of S.
John of Colchester. The Abbat of Evesham. The Abbat of Winchelcomb. The Abbat
of Crouland. The Abbat of Battle. The Abbat of Reding. The Abbat of Abindon.
The Abbat of Waltham holy Cross. The Abbat of Shrewsburie or Salop. The Abbat
of Sircester. The Abbat of S. Peter's in Gloucester. The Abbat of Bardeney. The
Abbat of S. Bennets of Hulme. The Abbat of Thorney. The Abbat of Ramsey. The
Abbat of Hyde. The Abbat of Malmesburie. The Abbat of S. Marie in York. The
Abbat of Selbey.
The Prior of Coventrie. The Prior of The order of S. John at Jerusalem, who
commonly is called Master of S. John's Knights, and would be counted the first
and chief Baron of England.


Unto whom, as still unto the Bishops, By right and custom it appurtained, as
to Peers of the Kingdom, to be with the rest of the Peers personally present
at all parliaments whatsoever, For, William the first, (a thing that the
Churchmen of that time complained of, but those in the age ensuing counted
their greatest honor) ordained Bishoprics and Abbaies, Matthew. Paris.
which held Baronies in pure and perpetual Alm^s, and until that time were
free from all secular service, to be under military or Knights service,
enrolling every Bishopric and Abbay at his will and pleasure, and appointing
how many soldiers he would have every of them to find for him and his
successors, in the time of hostility and war. From that time ever since
those Ecclesiastical persons enjoyed all the immunities that the Barons of the
Kingdom did, save only that they were not to be judged by their Peers. For
considering that according to the Canons of Fact. But whether this be a clear
point in law or no, I refer me to skillful Lawyers.

Vavasors.
Vavasors or Valvasors in old time, stood in the next rank after Barons: whom
the Lawyers derive from Valvae, that is, leaved dootes* And this dignity
seems to have come unto us from the French: For when they had sovereign rule
in Italy, they called those Valvasores who of a Duke, Marquess, Earl or
Captain, had received the charge over some part of their people: and as
Butelere the civil Lawyer says, had power to chastise in the highest degree,
but not the Liberty of faires and mercates. Signius.
and if ever there were such long since by little and little, it ceased and
ended. For, in Chaucers time it was not great, seeing that of his Franklin a
good yeoman or Freeholder, he writes but thus: A Sheriff had he been and a
C^ntour,
Was no where such a worthy Vavasour.


Nobles of an inferior rank. Knights.
Inferior nobles are Knights, Esquires, and those which usually are called
Generosi and Gentlemen.

Knights, who of our English Lawyers be termed also in Latin Milites, and in
all nations well near besides, took their name of Horses: for the Italians
call them Cavellieni, the Frenchmen, Chevaliers, the Germans Reiters, and our
Britans in Wales Margogh, all of riding. Englishmen only term them Knights*
by a word that in the old English language, as also of the German, signifies
indifferently a servitor or minister, and a lusty young man. Hereupon it
comes, that in the Old written Gospels translated into the English tongue,
we read, for Christ's Disciples, Christ's Leorning Cnyhts, and else where for a
Client or Vassal, Incnyght: and Bracton our ancient civil Rad^nights, that is
to say, serving horsemen: who held their lands with this condition, that they
should serve their Lords on horsbacke: and so by cutting off a piece of the
name, as our delight is to speak short, I thought long since, that this name
of Knights remained with us. But whence it came, that our countrymen should in
penning of laws, and in all writings since the Normans conquest term those
Knights in Latin, Milites, I can hardly see. And yet I am not ignorant, that in
the declining time of the Roman Empire, Wherefore Knights be called in Latin
Milites.
the Denomination of Milites, that is, Soldiers, was transferred unto those
that conversing near about the Princes person bare any of the greater offices
in the Princes Court or train. But if I have any sight Feudatarij, that is,
Tenants in Fee, were here called Milites, that is, Knights: as for example,
Milites Regis etc. The Kings Knights, Knights of the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Knights of Earl Roger of Earl Hugh etc. For that they received those lands or
manors of them with this condition to serve for them in the wars, and to yield
them fealty and homage: whereas others who served for pay were simply called
Solidarij and Servientes, Solidarij.
that is, Soldiers and Servitors. But these, call them Milites or Equites,
whether you will, are with us of four distinct sorts: The most honorable and
of greatest dignity be those of the Order of S. George, or of the Garter: In a
second degree are Banerets: in a third rank, Bath: and in a fourth place,
those who simply in our tongue, be called Knights, in Latin Equites aurati, or
Milites, without any condition at all. Of S. Georges Knights, I will write in
due place, when I am come to Windsor. Of the rest thus much briefly at this
time.

Banerets, whom others term untruely Baronets, have their name of a Banner:
For, Banerets.
granted it was unto them in regard of their martial virtue and prowess, to
use a four square ensign or Banner, as well as Barons: whereupon some call
them and that truly Equites Vexillarij, that is, Knights-Banerets, and the
Germans, Banner-heires. The antiquity of these Knights Banerets, I cannot
fetch from before the time of King Edward the Third, when Englishmen were
renowned for Chivalrie: so that Fars. 2. Pat. 15.8.3. m. 22. and 23.
Men at the Banner, (which may seem all one) and of Men at arms. And I have
seen a Charter of King Edward the Third, by which he advanced John Coupland to
the State of a Baneret, because in a battle fought at Durham he had taken
prisoner David the Second, Hominum ad vexillum.
King of the Scots; and it runs in these words: Being willing to reward the
said John, Hominum ad arma.
who took David de Bruis prisoner, and frankly delivered him unto us; for the
deserts of his honest and valiant service, in such sort as others may take
example by this president to do us faithful service in time to come; we have
promoted the said John to Worth the remembrance it is, to set down here out
of Froissard the very manner and form, whereby John Chandos a brave and noble
warrior in his time was made a Baneret. What time as Edward Prince of Wales,
says he, was to fight a field in the behalf of Peter King of Castile against
Henry the Bastard and the Frenchmen, John Chandos came unto the Prince and
delivered into his hands his own Banner folded and rolled up, with these words:
My Lord, this is my Banner, may it please you to unfold and display it, that I
may advance it into the field this day. For, Bear your self manfully, and
give proof what a Knight you are. Having thus received the Banner, to his
companies he went with a cheerful heart: My fellow soldiers, quoth he,
Behold there is my Banner and yours, in case ye defend it

Concerning Knights of the Bath, in all my readings hitherto, I could find no
greater Antiquity thereof, Knights of the Bathe.
than this, that they were in use among the ancient French: and that Henry the
Fourth King of England, that day whereon he was crowned in the Tower of
London, dubbed 46. Esquiers Knights, who the night before had watched and
bathed: unto every one of whom, he gave green side coats reaching down to
their ankles, with streit sleeves, and furred with minivere: also, they they
wore upon their left shoulder two cordons of white silk with tassels thereto
hanging down. These in former times were wont to be created, and selected out
of the flower of Nobility (which had not before taken the degree of
Knighthood) at the coronation of Kings and Queens, and at their marriages:
sometimes also, when their Knight overthwart, and commands therewith two
elder Knights to put on the Spurs, who in times past were wont

Now as touching those Knights, who simply without any addition be called,
Knights, Knights.
and howsoever they are in order ranged last, yet by institution they be first,
and of greatest Antiquity. For, as the Romans, a gowned nation, gave unto them
that were entering into man's estate, a virile and plain gown, without welt or
guard: The manner was not for any one to take arms in hand, De moribus
Germanorum.
before the State allowed him as sufficient for Martial service. And then, in
the very assembly of Counsel, either some one of the Princes, or the father of
the young man, or one of his kinsfolk furnish him with a shield and a javelin.
This with them stands in stead of a virile gown, this is the first honor
done to youth: before this they seem to be but part of a private house, but
now within a while members of the Commonweal.

And seeing that such military young men, they termed in their language (as we
in Knechts, from them I deem, the original both of name and institution also,
ought to be fetched. This was the first, and most simple manner of creating a
Knight, this the Lombards, this the Frankes, this our countrymen, all descended
out of Germany in old time used. Lib. 1. cap. 22.
Paulus Diaconus reports thus; among the Lombards, This is the Custom, that
the Kings son dineth not with his father, unless he receive Arms before
from some King of a foreign nation. The Annals of France record, that the
Kings of the Franks, gave arms unto their sons, and to others, and girded
them with a sword: yea, and our Aelfred, as William of Malmesburie witnesses,
when he dubbed Athelstan his nephew, Knight, being a child of great hope, gave
him a scarlet He that was to be consecrated unto lawful warfare, should the
evening before, with a contrite heart, make confession of his sins unto the
Bishop, Abbat, Monk, or Priest, and being absolved, give himself to prayer,
and lodge all night in the Church, and when he was to hear divine service the
morrow after, offer his sword upon the Altar: and after the Gospel, the Priest
was to pu^ the sword first hallowed upon the Knights neck, with his
Benediction, and so when he had heard Mass again, and received the
Sacrament, he became a lawful Knight. Neither A solemn Custom was taken up
and used, that the very day when any one was to be honored with the girdle of
knighthood, he should solemnly go to Church, and by laying and offering his
Sword upon the Altar, vow himself (as it were) by making a solemn profession,
to the service of the Altar, that is to say, promise perpetual service, and
obsequious duty unto the Lord. Peter also of Blois, writes thus: At this day
young Knights, Epist. 94.
and soldiers receive their Swords from the Altar, that they (says he) it is
turned clean contrary. For, in these days since they are become adorned with
the Knights cincture, presently they arise against the Anointed of the Lord,
and rage upon the patrimony of Christ crucified. And as for this ceremony,
that they would be girt with a Sword, it may seem no doubt to have proceeded
from the military discipline of the Romans; because as they denied it
unlawful to fight with their enemy before they were bound to their military
oath, by a drawn sword: even so, our Forefathers thought they might not go to
warfare lawfully, before they were An. 1102. a Canon passed, That no Abbats
should dubbe Knights: which some notwithstanding expound thus, That Abbats
should grant no lands of the Church to be held, by Knights service, or in
Knights fee, or service.

Afterward, Kings were wont to send their sons unto the neighbor Princes to
receive Knighthood at their hands: thus, was our K. Henry the Second, sent
unto David King of the Scots, and Malcolme King of Scots unto our Henry the
Second, Military or Virile arms: for, these terms and phrases they used in
that age for the creation of a Knight. Then it was also, that besides the sword
and girdle, gilt spurs were added for more ornament; whereupon at this day,
they are called in Latin, Equites aurati. Moreover, they had the privilege to
wear and use a signet: for before they were dubbed knights, (as I gather out
of Abendon Book) it was not lawful to use a seal: Which writing (quoth he)
Richard Earl of Chester purposed to sign with the seal of his mother
Ermentrud, considering that all Letters which he directed (for as yet he had
not Been dubbed Knight.
taken the Military girdle) were made up and closed within his mothers signet.
In the age ensuing, knights (as it may be well collected) were made by their
wealth, and state of living: Others say 100.
680. akers of land, claimed as their right, the ornaments and badges of
knighthood: Nay rather under Henry the Third, they were compelled after a sort
to be knights, as many as in revenues of their lands might dispend fifteen
pounds by the year: so as now it seemed a title of burden, rather than of
honor. In the year 1256. there went out an edict from the King, by virtue
whereof, commandment was given, and proclamation made throughout the Realm,
that whosoever had fifteen pounds in land and above, should be dight in his
arms, and endowed with knighthood: to the end that England as well as Italy
might be strengthened with Chivalrie: and they that would not, or were not able
to maintain the honor of knighthood, should fine for it, and pay a piece of
money. Hence it is, that in the For respit of Knighthood, A. de N.I.H. etc.
Also such like presentiments from the Jurors, or sworn Enquest, as this R. de
S. Lawrence holds an entire and whole Fee, is at full age, and not yet
Knight, therefore in Misericordia, that is, To be fined at the Kings pleasure.
To this time and after, unless I fail in mine observation, in the Briefes and
Instruments our law when twelve men, or Jurers are named, before whom there
passes trial or proof de facto, that is, of a fact, they be called,
Milites, that is, Knights, who have a complete Fee, and those Milites gladio
cincti, that is, Knights with cincture of sword, who by the King are girded
with the belt of knighthood. At which time when the King was to create knights,
as the said Matthew Paris writes, he sat gloriously in his seat of estate,
arraied in cloth Bawdkin, and crowned with his Crown of gold, and to every
Knight he allowed or gave 100. shillings, for his Complements.
harnessements. And not only the King, but also Earls in those days created
Knights. For the same author reports, How the Earl of Gloucester invested
with a military girdle his brother William, after he had proclaimed a
Turneament. Simon likewise de Montefort Earl of Gilbert de Clare: Like as in
France, (a thing that evidently appears by the Patent or Instrument of
Ennoblishment.
Nobilitation) he that has obtained such letters of Nobilitationis.
Ennoblishment, is enabled to be dubbed Knight, and receive the girdle of
knighthood at any Knights hand that he will himself. But since that time, has
no man with us been created Knight, but either by the King himself, or the
Kings eldest son, warranted before by authority received from his father, or
else by the Kings Lieutenant, or Deputy General in the Camp, and that in
consideration either of some valiant acts achieved, or exploits to be
performed abroad in arms: or else of wisdom and policy at home. And verily
a most prudent and wise order was this, that our That [Knight] was a name of
dignity, but so was not Baron. For in old time a Baron (if he were not of this
order of Knighthood) was written simply by his Christian, or fore-name, and the
proper name of his family, without any addition, unless it were of Dominus, a
term fitting Knights also. And this name of Knight may seem to have been an
honorable additament to the highest dignity, when Kings, Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, and Barons, requested to have the dignity, and name together. Here it
likes me well to insert, what Matthew Florilegus has written concerning the
creation of Knights in the time of Edward the First. The King (quoth he) for to
augment and make a goodly show of his expedition 300. young gallants, the Sons
of Earls, Barons, and Knights, purple liveries, fine silk Scarfes, Roabes
most richly embroidered with gold, were plentifully bestowed among them,
according as was befitting each one: And because the Kings Palace, (large
though it were) was streited of room, for so great a multitude assembled, they
cut down the apple trees about the people by the means of steeds of service,
no otherwise than upon the high Altar girt his But in our days, he that
receives the dignity of a Knight, kneeleth down, and then the King or Queen.
King with his sword drawn, slightly smites him upon the shoulder, speaking
unto him these words withal, in French, Sois Chevalier au nom de Dieu, that
is, Be thou Knight in the name of God: and afterward he says moreover,
Avances Chevalier, that is, Arise Sir Knight. As for all things else
appurtaining to this order, namely, what an excellent and glorious degree this
of knighthood was esteemed with our Ancestors, how noble a reward to brave
minded men, such as desired glory and honor, it was reputed, how carefully
they kept faith and troth, considering it was sufficient, if they undertook or
promised ought as faithful Knights or upon the faith of a Knight, how far they
were from base gain Priests.
Ecclesiastical order, all the Ecclesiastical ornaments, book, chalice, and
such like are taken away. Let the curious also enquire, whether those knights
were truly by some termed Knights Bachelars, or whether Bachelars were of a
middle The names of Knights, In dorso Pat. 51. H. 3.
of Bachelars, and of Valects of the Earl of Gocester, and of others.
Whereupon there be that would have Bachelars so called, as one would say,
Bas-Chevaliers, that is, knights of low degree: although other derive that name
from the French verb Battailer, which signifies to combat or fight it out.
Withal, let them weigh and consider, whether these dignities of knighthood in
times past so glorious, (as long as they were more rare, and bestowed only as
the reward of virtue) may not be vilified, when it becomes common, and lies
prostitute (as it were) to the ambitious humor of every one. Whereof in the
like case Aemilius Probus complained long since among the Romans.

Esquires.
Next in degree after these Knights, are Esquires, termed in Latin, Armigeri,
that is, Costrels, or Bearers of Arms: the same that Scutiferi, that is,
Shield-bearers, and Homines ad arma, that is, Men at Arms: the Goths called
them Schilpor, all of carrying the shield: as in old time among the Romans,
such as were named Scutarii, who took that name either of their Escutcheons of
arms, which they bare as Ensigns of their descent, or because they were
armour-bearers to Princes, or to the better sort of the Nobility. For, in
times past every Knight had two of these waighting upon him: they carried his
Morrion and shield, as inseparable companions, they stuck close unto him,
because of the said Knight their Lord they held certain lands in Escutage,
like as the knight himself of the King by knights service. But now a days,
there be five distinct Esses.
SS. and (in former times) upon their heels a pair of white spurs silvered:
whereupon at this day in the West part of the Kingdom, they be called
White-spurres, for distinction

Gentlemen, Gentlemen.
or the common sort of Nobility be they, that either are descended of
worshipful parentage, or raised up from the base condition of people, for
their virtue or wealth.

Citizens or Burgesses, Citizens.
be such as in their own several city execute any public office, and by
election have a room in our High Court of Parliament.

Yeomen, Yeomen.
are they whom some call, Freeborn, or Freeholders, and our law terms,
Homines Legales, that is, Lawful men, and who of Free-hands may dispend forty
shillings

Lastly, Craftsmen, Artisans, or Workmen, be they that labor for hire, and
namely, such as sit at work, Mechanicke Artificers, Smiths, Carpenters, etc.
Which were termed of the Romans, Capite censi, as one would say, Taxed or
reckoned by the poll, and Proletarii.

LAW COURTS OF ENGLAND.
AS touching the Tribunals, or Courts of Justice of England, there Parliament.
and the same borrowed out of French, The Parliament. The Anglo-Saxons our
ancestors termed it, (...), that is, An assembly of the wise, and (...), that
is, A Counsel, and (...), of the Greek word Synodus, that is, A great Synod
or meeting. The Latin writers of that, and the ensuing age called it, Commune
Concilium, Curiam altissimam, Generale placitum, Curiam magnam, Magnatum
Conventum, Praesentiam Regis, Praelatorum, Procerumque, collectorum, Commune
totius Regni Concilium, etc. The Common council, The Highest court, The
General Plea, The Great court, The meeting of States, The Presence of the
King, Prelates and Peers assembled together, The Public Council of the whole
Kingdom, etc. And like as the General Council of all Etolia is named by
Livie PANAETOLIUM, so this may well be termed PANANGLIUM. For it consists of
the King, the Clergy, the superior Nobles, the elect Knights and Burgesses; or
to speak more significantly after the Lawyers phrase, of the King, the Lords
Spiritual, and Temporal, and the Commons, which States represent the body of
all England. It is not held at set and certain times, but summoned by the King
at his pleasure, so often as consultation is to be had of high affairs and
urgent matters, that the Common weal may sustain no damage; at his will alone
it is dissolved.

The next Court after this, The Kings Court.
in the days presently following the Normans coming, and some good while
after, was, The Court of the King himself; and the same kept in the Kings
house or Palace, and accompanying the King whither so ever he retired or went
in progress. For, in the Kings Palace, a place there was for the Chancellor
and clerks, such as were employed about writs or processes, and the seal: for
Judges also that handled The Lawyers of the Palace, and John of Salisburie, The
Court Lawyers. But beside these and above them all, was one appointed for
administration of Justice, Iustitia Angliae, The Justice of England; Prima
Iustitia, The principal Justice; The Iusticer of England, and chief Iusticer
of England, who, with a yearly pension of a thousand Marks, was ordained by a
Commission or Charter running in these terms; The King, to all Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, Sheriffs, Forresters, and all other
liege and faithful people of England, greeting. Whereas for the preservation
of our selves, and the peace of our Kingdom, and for the ministering of
Justice, to all and every person of our Realm, we have ordained our beloved
and trusty Philip Basset, Chief Iusticer of England, so long as it shall
please us; we charge you upon the faith and allegiance that ye owe unto us,
and do straightly enjoyne you, that in all things which concern the office of
our foresaid Iusticeship, and the preservation of our peace, and Kingdom, ye
be

But when as in the reign of Henry the Third, enacted it was that the Common
Pleas of the Subjects should not follow the Kings Court, but be held in some
certain place: within a while after, the Chancerie and the Court of the Pleas
of the Crown, together with the Exchequer, were translated from the Kings
Court, and established in certain places apart by themselves: as some, I know
not how truly, have reported.

Having premised by way of Preface thus much, I will proceed to write briefly

Kings Bench.
The Kings Bench, so called because the Kings were wont there to sit as
Presidents in proper person, handles the pleas of the Crown, and many other
matters which pertain to the King, and the Weal public: and withal it
sifteth and examineth

Common Pleas.
The common Pleas has that name because in it are debated the common Pleas
between Subject and Subject, according to our law, which they call common.
Herein give judgment, The chief Justice of the common Pleas, with four
Justices assistants or more. Officers attendant there be, The Keeper of the
Brieffes or writs, Three Protonotaries, and inferior Ministers very many.

Exchequer.
The Exchequer took that name of a board or table whereat they sat. For, thus
writes Gervase of Tilburie, who lived in the year 1160. The Exchequer is a
four And a little after. This Court, by report, began from the very Conquest
of the Realm, and was erected by King William: howbeit the reason and
proportion thereof, taken from the Exchequer beyond Sea. In this are all causes
heard which belong unto the Kings treasury. Judges therein, be The Lord
Treasurer of England, The Chancellor of the Exchequer, The Lord chief Baron,
with three or four other Barons of the Exchequer. The servitours and Ministers
to this Court are, The Kings Remembrancer, The Lord Treasurers Remembrancer, In
the Receipt, these be the Officers: Two Chamberlains, a vice Treasurer, Clerk
of the Tallies, Clerk of the Pels, Tellers four, Ioyners of Tallies two,
Deputy Chamberlaines two: The Clerk for Tallies, The Keeper of the Treasury,
Messengers or Pursevants ordinary four: Scribes two, etc. The Officers
likewise of the Tenths and first Fruits belong to this Court, who were
ordained, when as the Popes authority was banished and abolished, and an act
passed, by which it was provided that the Tenths, and First fruits of
Churchmens Benefices should be paid unto the King.

Beside these three Kings Courts for law, Justices Itinerant.
to cut off delays, to ease the subject also of travel and charges; King
Henry the Second sent some of these Judges Justices Itinerant, and commonly
Justices in Air. These determined and gave judgment, as well of the Pleas of
the Crown, as the Common Pleas, within those Counties whereunto they were
assigned. For, the said King, as Matthew Paris says, By the counsel of his
son and the Bishops together, appointed Justices to six parts of the
Kingdom: in every part three, who should swear to keep and maintain the
right belonging to every man, sincerely and uncorruptly. But this ordinance
vanished at length under Edward the Third: Howbeit, within a while after by
Parliamentary authority, it was in some sort revived. For the Counties being
divided into certain Circuits, as we Iusticiarii Gaolae deliberandae, that
is, Justices for Goal deliverie: as also to take Recognisances of Assizes of
new Deseisine, etc. whereof they be named Justices of the Assizes, to end and
dispatch controversies depending, and grown to an issue in the foresaid
principal Kings Courts, between plaintiffes and defendants, and that, by
their Peers, as the custom is: whence they are commonly called Justices of
Nisi prius, which name they took of the writs sent unto the Sheriff, which
have in them these two words, Nisi Prius, that is, Unless before, etc.

The Star Chamber or the Court rather of Kings Counsel, Star-Chambe
wherein are discussed and handled criminal matters, perjuries, cousenages,
fraud, deceit, riots or excess, etc. This Court in regard of time is right
ancient, and for dignity most honorable. For it seems that it may claim
antiquity ever since the first time that Subject appealed unto their
Sovereigns, and the Kings Council was erected. Now, the Judges of this Court
are persons right Honorable, and of greatest reputation, even the Kings Privy
Counselors. As for the name of Star Chamber, it took it from the time that
this Counsel was appointed at Westminster in a Chamber there anciently
garnished, and beautified with Stars: For we read in the Records of Edward
the Third, Counseil en la Chamber des Estoilles, pres de la Receipt al
Westminster, that is The Counsel But the Authority thereof, that most sage
and wise Prince Henry the Seventh, by authority of Parliament so augmented and
established, that some are of opinion, though untruely, he was the first
founder of it. The Judges here, are The Lord Chancellor of England, The Lord
Treasurer of England, The Lord President of the Kings Counsel, The Lord Keeper
of the Privy Seal, and all Counselors of the State, as well Ecclesiastical as
Temporal: and out of the Barons of the Parliament, those whom the King will
call: The two chief Justices of the Benches, or in their absence two other
Judges. The Officers herein are these, The Clerk of the Counsel, The Clerk
of writs and process of the Counsel in the Star Chamber, etc. And causes here
are debated and decided not by Peers according to our common Law, but after
the course of Civil Law.

The Court of Wards and Liveries has the name of Pupils or Wards, Court of
(...)
whose causes it handles; was first instituted by Henry the Eighth; whereas
in former times their causes were heard in the Chancerie and Exchequer. For, by
an old Ordinance derived out of Normandy, and not from Henry the Third (as
some do write) when a man is deceased, Who holds possessions or Lands of the
King in chief by Knights service, as well the heir as his whole patrimony
and revenues are in the Kings power, tuition, and protection, until he be full
one and twenty years of age, and until by virtue of The Supravisor, or
Surveior of Liveries, The Attorney general of the Court, The general
Receiver, The Auditour, The Clerk of the Liveries, The Clerk of the Court,
Forty Fedaries, and a Messenger.

There have sprung up also in these later times, two other Courts, to wit, Of
reforming Errors: whereof the first is, to correct Errors in the Exchequer,
the other to amend errors committed in the Kings Bench. The Judges in the
former of these twain, are the Lord Chancellor, and Lord Treasurer of England,
with others of the The Justices of the Common Pleas, and the Barons of the
Exchequer.

Admirals Court.
The Admirals Court handles Sea matters. In this are reckoned the Lord
Admiral of England, his Lieutenant, and a Judge: two Scribes, a Sergeant of
the Court, and the Vice-Admirals of England. Now proceed we to the Courts of
Equity.

Chancerie.
The Chancerie drew that name from a Chancellor: which name under the ancient
Roman Emperors, was not of so great esteem and dignity, as we learn out
of Vopiscus. But now adays a name it is of highest honor, and Chancellors are
advanced to the highest pitch of civil Dignity. Whose name Cassiodorus
fetches from cross grates or lattesses, because they examined matters, within
Socratum. that is, the place of Judgment. Epist. 6. lib. 11.
places severed apart enclosed Cancelli. Regard, says he to a Chancellor what
name you bear: It cannot be hidden which you do within Lattesses. For you
keep your gates lightsome; your bars open, and your doors transparent as
windows. Whereby, it is very evident, that he sat within grates, where he was
to be seen on every side, and thereof it may be thought he took that name.
But, considering it was his part, being as it were the Princes mouth, eye, and
ear, to strike and dash out with crosse-lines lattise like, those letters,
Commissions, Warrants, and Decrees passed against law and right, or
prejudicial to the comon-wealth, which not improperly they termed to cancel,
some think the name of Chancellor came from this Cancelling: and in a
Glossarie of latter time thus we read, A Chancellor is he whose Office is, to
look into and peruse the writings and answers of the Emperor: to cancel what
Neither is that true, which Polydore Virgil writes, namely, that William the
Conqueror instituted a College or fellowship of Scribes, to write letters
pattents etc. and named the Master of that Society, Chancellor: considering it
is plain and manifest that Chancellors were in England before the Normans
Conquest. How great the dignity and authority of the Chancellor is at this
day, it is better known than I can declare: but of what credit it was in old
time, have here in a word or two out of a writer of good antiquity. Robert
Fitz. Stephen, who lived under Henry the Second.
The dignity of the Chancellor of England is this, He is reputed the second
person in the Realm, and next unto the King; with the one side of the Kings
Seal, (whereof by his Office he has the Keeping) he may sign his own
injunctions, to dispose and order the Kings Chapel as he likes, to receive
The form and manner of ordaining a Chancellor, (for that also I will note) was
in the time of King Henry the Second, by hanging the great Seal of England
about the neck of the Chancellor elect. But in King Henry the Sixth days,
this was the order of it, according to the notes I took out of the Records.
When the place of the Lord Chancellor of England is Howbeit at this day one
Seal and no more is delivered unto Lord Chancellor of England, and as
assessors or assistants to him, twelve Masters of the Chancerie: whereof the
chief and principal is the Keeper of the Rolls belonging There belong also to
this Court very many Officers, of whom some attend especially upon the Kings
Seal, namely, The Clerk of the Crown, The Clerk of the Hanaper, The Sealer,
The Chauff-wax, The Controller of the Hanaper, Cursitours twenty four, A
Clerk for the writs of Sub-poena. Others are attendant upon Bills of complaint
there exhibited, to wit, A Protonotarie, six Clerks, or Atturnies of the
Court, and a Register. There belong also thereto the Clekes of the Petty Bag,
The Clerk of Presentations, The Clerk of Faculties, The Clerk for
examination of Letters Patents, The Clerk for dimissions, etc.

There is another Court also derived out of the Kings Privy Counsel, Court of
Requests.
called The which gives hearing likewise, as in the Chancerie, to causes
between private persons, but such as before are presented unto the Prince, or
his Privy Counsel, as also to others. In this are employed certain Masters
of the Requests, and a Clerk or Register, with two Atturneys or three. But as
touching those Counsels held in the Marches of Wales and in the North parts,
we will speak with the leave of God in their due place.

As for Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Courts there be two principal;
Ecclesiastical Courts. See the Antiquity of the British Church. Court of the
Arches.
to wit, The Synod, which is called The Convocation of the Clergy, and is
always kept with the Parliament: and the Provincial Synods in both Provinces.

The Court of the Arches: wherein sits as Judge the Deane of the Arches. He
is called Deane, for that he has jurisdiction in xiij. Parishes of London,
exempt from the Bishop of London, which number makes a Deanrie; and Deane of
the Arches, because the principal of his Churches is, S. Mary's Church in
London, the tower, steeple or lantern whereof is beautifully built of arched
work. He has to do with appeals of all men within the Province of
Canterbury. Advocates there be in this Court xvj. or more, at the pleasure of
the Archbishop, all Doctors of the Law; two Registers, and ten Proctours.

The Court of Audience, Court of Audience.
which entertaineth the complaints, causes and appeals of them in that
Province.

Prerogative Court, in which the Commissarie sits upon Inheritances fallen
either by the Intestate, or by will and testament.

The Court of Faculties, Court of Faculties.
wherein there is appointed a chief President, who hears and considers of
their grievances and requests that are petitioners for some moderation and
easement of the Ecclesiastical law, sometimes over-strict and rigorous; and a
Register beside, who records the Dispensations granted.

The Court of Peculiars, which deals in certain Parishes exempt from the
Bishops Guicciardine in his Description of the Neatherlands has given me a
precedent hereof to follow.

Here in this place my purpose was to have interserted somewhat, (so far
forth especially as concerned antiquity) as touching the chief Magistrates,
and highest Offices of England, as namely, The Lord Chancellor aforesaid, The
Lord Treasurer, The President of the Counsel, The Lord Keeper of the Privy
Seal, The Lord high Chamberlain, The Lord high Constable, The Mareschall, and
Seneschal or Steward of the Kings household, But understanding that others were
in hand with these matters, so far am I from preventing them, that right
willingly I shall impart even to them, whatsoever in this behalf I have
observed.

Under what Sign in heaven Britain lies.
Some man perhaps here looks, that I should out of Astrologicall rules, add
to to the rest, under what Sign and Planet our Britain is seated. And verily
I will say somewhat to satisfy the Curious; for in those learned errors I
have, I may tell you, in my youth taken some pains: although the Conjecturers
of Astrologers touching this point are so diverse, that the very diversity may
seem to weaken the thing it self, and leave no place for the truth. M.
Manilius an ancient Poet in this verse of his, seems to intimate, that
Capricorn here bears rule in Britain: Tu Capricorn regis quicquid sub
Sole cadente
Expositum.
Thou Capricorn do govern all,
That lies to Sun at his downfall.


Ptolomee, Albumazar, and Cardane, do make Aries our Tutelar Sign; Johannes
de Muris, the Planet Saturn: The Friar Perscrutator, Esquidus and Henry
Silen, the Moon; for that, as they say, it is in the seventh Climate. Roger of
Hereford, Thomas of Ravenna, Philologus, and Hispalensis, are of opinion Pisces
govern us; and last of all Schonerus, and Pitatus, (see how they all disagree)
have with no better reason than the rest, subjected us unto Gemini.

Now will I, by Gods assistance, make my perambulation through the Provinces
The order or Method of the work ensuing.
In the several discourses of every of them, I will declare as plainly, and
as briefly as I can, who were their ancient Inhabitants; what is the reason of
their names; how they are bounded; what is the nature of the soil; what places
of antiquity, and good account are therein; what Dukes likewise, or Earls
have been in each one since the Norman Conquest: And in this succession of
Earls, to confess frankly, by whom I have taken profit, I do willingly and
justly acknowledge that Thomas Talbot a most diligent Clerk in the Records of
the Tower, a man of singular skill in our antiquities, has given me much
light.

And begin I will at the farthest parts in the West, that is to say, at
Cornwall, and so pass over the other countries in order, imitating herein
Strabo, Ptolomee, and the most ancient Geographers, who always begin their
description in the Western countries, as being first from the Meridian.

DANMONII.
DVNMONII, Ptolomee, DAMNONII, or (as we find in some other copies,) more
truly DANMONII. Which name, Moina; may seem to come of the dwelling there
under hills. For, their habitation all over this Country is somewhat low, and in
valleys: which manner of dwelling is called in the Welsh.
British tongue Dan-munith: in which sense also the Province next adjoining, in
like respect is at this day named by the Welchmen.
Britans Duffneint, that is to say, Ostidamnej.
Low valleys. Now whether the OSTIDAMNII, called also OSTAEI, and OSTIONES, of
whom Strabo makes mention out of Pithaeas of Marfiles, Vshant, Which
particulars every one do very well, and in each point agree unto this Region
of our Danmonij. And seeing that those Ostiones be called by Artemidorus
COSSINI, as Stephanus in his Cities Corini) whether in stead of COSSINI,
Cossini.
we are not to read CORINI: For, we read Fusij for Furij, and Valesij for
Valerij. And surely, the Geographers have not so much as a glimps where to
seek these Ostidamnij and Cossini, by the western Sea, if they be hence
excluded. But the Country of this nation is at this day divided into two parts,
known by later names of Cornwall and Denshire, whereof we will speak in
order.

CORNWALL.
COrnwall, which also by later Writers is called Cornubia in Latin, of all
Britain does bear most Westward, and is inhabited by that remnant of Britans,
which Marinus Scotus calls Occidentales Britones, that is, Britains of the
West parts, who in the British tongue (for as yet they have not lost their
ancient language) name it Kernaw, because it waxes smaller and smaller in
manner of an horn, and runs forth into the Sea with little Corn] and horns
[ Kern, Corn and Kern.
] in the plural number: although others would have Cornwall to take the name
of one Corineus, I know not what Companion of Brutus, and do call it Corinea,
according to this verse of a fabulous Poet; Pars Corinea datur Corinaeo, de
duce nomen
Patria, deque viro gens Corinensis habet.
To Captain Corineus, part was given, to hold by right:
Of him both coast Corinea, and people Cornish height.


But, no strange matter it is (if a man search Antiquities) for many places to
have Per^copsca. or, Procopia.
Taurica Chersonessus, there be promontories termed, (...) that is, Rams
Foreheads, because they shoot forth into the sea, after the fashion of Rams
horns. Semblably, Cyprus was of the Greeks in old time, called Cerastis, for
that it butteth on the sea with promontories bearing out like horns, so that
it is no marvel, if the coast be called Kernaw, and Corn, crookening inward
as it does, like unto an horn, and having diverse small capes and points
sticking out, as it were horns. Whereupon, when in the heat of the Saxons
war, many Britans retired themselves into this tract, trusting to the
natural strength of the place; for, they knew that the ways by land were hard
enough to be passed through by reason of mountains, and crossed in diverse
places Cornwallia, and in the later age Cornubia, and in some writers Occidua
Wallia. So far it is off, that it should be called Cornwallia, of the Gauls
that conquered it, which some there be, that in flattery of the French name
and nation would uphold: who, if they were as quicke-sighted at home, as they
be curious abroad, might find that their Bretaigne or, Little Britain.
Britain lying upon the sea coast, opposite to this country, is so named of
our Britan, and that Cornovaille, no small territory therein, which speaks
the same language that our Strabo.
changed the name of Armorici, and called it Britain: so in the foregoing
ages, ready they were, and ever at hand to help those Britains their
countrymen against the French; and during the tempestuous troubles of the
Danish war, some of them put over thither also, and are thought to have left
this name of Cornovaille behind them there. But to leave that Cornovaille.

This our Cornwall, as if nature made amends and recompense for the incroching
Orewood, Orewood.
and a certain kind of fruitful Sea-sand, they make so rank and battle, that
it is incredible. The Sea coast, is beautified with very many Towns, able to
set out a great fleet of Ships: the inland parts have rich and plenteous mines
of tin. For, Tin.
there is dug out of them wonderful store of tin, yielding exceeding much
profit and commodity, where are made household pewter vessels, which are used
throughout many parts of Europe in service of the table, and for their
glittering brightness, compared with silver plate. The Inhabitants do
discover these mines by certain tinne-stones lying on the face of the ground,
which they call Shoad, being Lode-workes; the other Stream-workes. This lies
in lower grounds, when by trenching they follow the veins of tin, and turn
aside now and then the streams of water coming in their way: that other, is
in higher places, when as upon the hills they dig very deep pits, which they
call, Shafts, and do undermine.

That the ancient Britans practiced these tinne-works, (to omit Timaeus the
Historian Lib. 6. cap. 8. and 9.
who reports, That the Britans fetched tin out of the Isle Icta, in wicker
boats covered and stitched about with leather) appears for certain out of
Diodorus Siculus, who flourished under Augustus Caesar. For, he writes, that
the Britans, who Inhabited this part, dug tin out of stony ground, and at
a low water carried the same in carts, to certain Islands adjoining. From
whence Merchants transported it by ships into Gaul, and from thence conveied
the same upon horses within thirty days unto the spring-heads of the river ^o.
Eridanus, or else to the city Narbone, as it were, to a Mart. Aethicus also,
who ever he was, that unworthily bears title to be interpreted by S. Hierome
out of the Sclavonian tongue, insinuates the very same, and says, That he
delivered rules and precepts to these Tinne-workers. Attal Sarisin, that is,
the leavings of the Saracens; if they did mean by that name, the ancient
Panims.

After the coming in of the Normans, the Earls of Cornwall gathered great
riches out of these mines, and especially Richard brother to King Henry the
Third: and no marvel, since that in those days Europe had tin from no other
place. For, the incursions of the Mores, had stopped up the tin mines of
Spain; and as for the tin veins in Germany, which are in Misnia and
Bohemia, they were not as yet known: and those verily not discovered, before
the year after Christ's nativitie, was tin met all found in Germany by a
certain Cornishman driven out of his native soil, to the great loss and
hindrance of Richard Earl of Cornwall. This Richard began to make ordinances
for these tin-works, and afterward Edmund his son granted a Charter, and
certain liberties, and withal prescribed certain Laws concerning the same:
which he ratified or strengthened under his seal, and imposed a tribute or
rent upon tin, to be answered unto the Earls.

These liberties, privileges and laws King Edward the Third, did afterward
confirm and augment. The Common wealth of Tinners.
The whole commonwealth of those Tinners and workmen, as it were, one body,
he divided into four quarters, which of the places they call Foy-more,
Black-more, Trewarnaile, and Penwith. Over them all he ordained a Warden, L.
Warden of the Stanniers, of Stannum, that is, Tin; who gives judgment as
well according to equity and conscience, L. Warden of the Stannary.
as Law; and appointed to every quarter their Stewards, who once every iij.
weeks, (every one in his several quarter) minister justice in causes personal
between Tinner and Tinner, and between Tinner and Forrainer, except in causes
of land, life, or member. From whom there lies an appeal to the Lord Warden,
from him to the Duke, from the Duke to the King. In matters of moment, there
are by the Warden general Parliaments, or several assemblies summoned:
whereunto Iurats are sent out of every Stannarie, whose constitutions do bind
them. As for those that deal with tin, they are of four sorts: the owners
of the soil, the adventurers, the merchants or regraters, and the laborers,
called Spadiards (of their Spade) who poor men are pitifully out-eaten by
usurious contracts. But the Kings of England, and Dukes of Cornwall, in their
times have reserved to themselves a praeemption of tin (by the opinion of the
learned in the Law) as well in regard of the propriety, as being chief Lords
and Proprietaries; as of their royal prerogative. Lest the tribute or rent
imposed, should be embezelled, and the Dukes of Cornwall defrauded, unto whom
by the old custom for every thousand pound weight of tin there is paid forty
shillings, it is by a Law provided, that all the tin which is cast and wrought,
be brought to one of the four appointed towns: where twice in the year it is
weighed, and signed with a stamp, (they call it Coinage) and Eryngium, that
is, Cornish Diamonds.
Sea Holly, growing most abundantly every where along the shore. Furthermore,
so plentiful is this country of grain, although not without great toil of
the husbandman, that it has not only sufficient to maintain it self, but
also affoordeth often times great store of corn into Spain. Besides, a most
rich revenue and commodity Pilchards, Pilchards.
which swarming, as one would say, in mighty great skuls about the shores from
July unto November, are there taken, garbaged, salted, hanged in the smoke,
laid up, pressed, and by infinite numbers carried over into France, Spain,
and Italy, unto which countries they be very good chaffer, and right welcome
merchandise, and are there named Which peradventure be Gerres in Pliny.
Fumados. Whereupon Michael a Cornish Poet, and of Rhymers in his time the
chief, in his Satyr against Henry of Aurenches, Archpoet to King Henry the
Third, because he had unreverently played upon Cornishmen, as if they were
seated in the nocke hole of the world; after much satyricall sharpness, came
out with these round rhymes: Non opus est ut opes numerem quibus est opulenta,
Et per quas, inopes sustentat non open lenta:
Piscibus and stanno nusquam tam fertilis ora.
I need not here report the wealth, wherewith enriched it is,
And whereby always to sustain poor folk it does not miss:
No coast elsewhere for fish and tin, so plentious, ywis.
And yet is Cornwall nothing happier in regard of the soil, than it is for the
people; who as they were endued and adorned with all civilitie, even in those
ancient times; ( For by reason of their acquaintance with merchants sailing
thither for tin, as Diodorus Siculus reports, they were more courteous toward
strangers:) so they are valiant, hardy, Hurling.
and fear of hurling the Ball which they use) so far excel, that for slight
and clean strength together, they justly win the prize and praise from other
nations, in that behalf. Moreover, that Poet Michael, when as in the excessive
commendation of his country men, he had with gigging rimes resounded, how
Arthur in his battles, gave them the honor, to give the first charge, he thus
courageously concludes in rhyme.

Quid nos deterret? si firmiter in pede stemus,
Fraus ninos superet, nihil est quod non superemus.
What frighteth us? if footing sure we have on steady ground,
(Bar crafty sleights) there is no force but we can it confound.
And hereof peradventure arises the report so generally received, that Giants
in times past Inhabited this country. For, Havillan the Poet, who lived four
hundred years since, in describing of certain British Giants, wrote
pleasantly of Britain, and the Cornish Giants, Havillan. in Architrenio.
in this wise: -- Titanibus illa
Sed paucis famulosa domus, quibus uda ferarum
Terga dabant vestes, cruor haustus, pocula trunci,
Antra Lares, Dumeta thoros, coenacula rupes,
Praeda cibos, raptus venerem, spectacula caedes,
Imperium vires, animos furor, impetus arma,
Mortem pugna, sepulchra rubus: monstrisque gemebat
Monticolis tellus: sed eorum plurima tractus
Pars erat occidui, terror majorque premebat
Te furor, extremum Zephyri, Cornubia, limen.
A lodge it was to Giants fell (though few) of Titans brood
Enthralled: whose garments were raw hides of beasts full wood;
Their blood they drank, but cups they made of hollow blocks and stocks,

Prey slak'd their hunger, rape their lust, in murder took they Joy,
Force gave them rule, and fury heart, wrath weapons to annoy*
Fight brought the^ death, grieves were their graves: thus groaned the ground
again
With mountain-Monsters. Howbeit, of them the number maine
Did pester most the western tract: more fear made thee aghast
O Cornwall, utmost door that art to let in Zephirus blast.


Now, whether this firm and well compact constitution of the Cornish-men which
proceeds from the temperature of heat and moisture, Western people most
strong and hardy.
is to be referred unto the

Now let us treat of the Promontories, Cities and Rivers, whereof ancient
writers have made mention: For, this is my principal project: beginning at the
furthest point, and so surveying first the Southern shore, then the Northern,
and lastly the course of the river Tamer.
Tamara, which severeth this county from Devonshire. The utmost Promontorie
which lies upon the Western Ocean, and is distant 17. degrees and no more in
the globe or surface of the earth, Those of the Tercieres and^
from the Islands called Azores, is Bolerium, and by Diodorus, Belerium; perhaps
of the British word Pell, which signifies a thing most remote or farthest off:
by Ptolomee also the same is termed (...), Bellerium or Antivestaeum.
or ANTIVESTAEVM, by the Britans, I mean their Bardie only or Poets,
Penringu^ed; that is, the Promontorie of Blood: For, the Welsh Historians name
it Penwith, that is, the Promontorie on the left hand: The Saxons (...). For,
Steort with them betokens a piece of land shooting into the Sea: Steort what
i^ signifies.
and hereupon all that Hundred of Penwith at this day is called by borderers in
their language, Pen vo^ las, that is, the end of the land: and in the same
sense, we in English name it, The lands end; because it is the utmost part of
the Island toward the West. And if this Promontorie were sometimes called
Helenum, as Volaterran and the late writers affirm, it Helenus K. Priams
son, but of Pen-Elin, which ^ignifieth in the British tongue an Elbow, as
Ancon does in Greek. And seeing that crooked and bending shores be termed of
the Greeks Anc^nes, as Elbows, for so Pliny witnesses of Ancona in Italy,
no absurdity is it at all, that this crooked and bowing shore should by the
Britans in the same sense be called Pen-elin, and thereof that Latin name
Helenum be derived. But as touching this name Antivestaeum, I was wont now and
then to doubt, whether it savoured not of some Greek original. For, seeing it
was a common and usual thing with the Greeks, to impose names upon places
taken from the names of such as were opposite unto them, not only in Greece it
self, where they have, Castellidi Lipant^n.
Rhium, and Mardi Mecha or the Red Sea.
Antirrhium, but also in the Mardi Mecha or the Red Sea.
Arabian gulf, where there is Bacchium and Antibacchium, Antibarrium, because
it looks toward Barrium, lying over against it in Italy; I searched
diligently whether any place named Vestaeum, lay opposite unto this our
Antivest^um: but finding no such thing, I betook my self again to the
British tongue, neither yet can I here resolve my self. But the Inhabitants do
suppose, that this Promontorie heretofore ran further into the Sea, and by the
rubbish which is drawn out from thence, the Mariners affirm the ^ame: yea and
the neighbor Inhabitants avouch, out of I wot not what fable, that the earth
now covered there all over with the in-breaking of the Sea, was called Lioness.

In the utmost rocks of this Promontorie, when at a low water they be bare,
there appear veins of tin and copper, and the people there dwelling report,
that there ad speculam Hispaniae, according as Orofius has put down in
writing, That the most high watch-towre of Brigantia in Gallicia, a rare and
admirable piece of work, was erected ad speculam Britannia: that is, if I well
understand him either for the use of Mariners sailing out of Britain toward
Spain, or else, over against the watch-Towre of Britain. For, no other place
of this Island looks directly to Spain. Upon it there stands now a little
village named S. Buriens (in old Eglis Buriens; that is, The Church of Buriena
or Beriena) consecrated to Buriena, a religious Irish woman. S. Burien.
For, this nation always honored Irish Saints as tutelar patrons of their
own, so, all their Towns in manner they have consecrated unto them. This
village King Athelstan, as the report goes, granted to be a privileged place
or Sanctuary, what time as he arrived as Conqueror out of the Silly, or
Sorlings.
Isles of Sylly: True it is, that he built here a Church, and that under
William the Conqueror there was here a College of Chanons, unto whom the
territory adjoining belonged. Near unto this, in a place which they call
Biscaw Woune, are to be seen nineteen stones set in a round circle, distant
every one about twelve foot from the other; A Trophee.
This was some Trophee (or monument of victory) erected by the Romans (as
probably may be conjectured) under the later Emperors, or else, by Athelstan
the Saxon, when he had subdued the Cornish-men, and brought them under his
dominion.

As the shore fetches a compass by little and little from hence Southward, it
lets in a bay or creek of the Sea, in manner of a Crescent, which they call
Mountsbay: wherein, as the common speech goes, the Ocean by rushing with a
violent force drowned the land. Upon this lies Mousehole, in the British
tongue Port Inis, that is, The Haven of the Island: For which, Henry of Ticis, a
Baron in his time and Lord of Alwerton and Tiwernel in this Country, Barons of
Ticis.
obtained of King Edward the First the grant Pen-sans, that is, The Cape or
Head of Saints, or as some think Sands, Marine Amber, that is, Ambrose stone.
a pretty market Town: within a little whereof is that famous stone,
Main-Amber; which, being a great Rock advanced upon some other of meaner size
with so equal a counterpeize, a man, may stir with the push of his finger, but
to remove it quite out of his place a great number of men are not able: as also
Merkin, that is, Jupiters market, (because Thursday anciently dedicated to
Jupiters is their market day) a dangerous rode for ships. And in the very angle
and corner it self S. Michaels mount, S. Michaels mount.
which gave name unto the foresaid Bay; sometime called Dinsol, as we find in
the book of Landaffe: the Inhabitants name it Careg Cowse, Michelstow.
Laurence Noel.
that is, The hoary Crag or Rock, the Saxons (...), that is, Michaels place, as
Master Laurence Noel, a man of good note for his singular learning, and who was
S. Michael, the Archangell, where William Earl of Cornwall S. Michael appeared
in that mount: which apparition, or the like, the Italians challenge to their
hill Garganus, and the Frenchmen likewise to their Michaels mount in Normandy.
At the foot of this mountain within the memory of our Fathers, Weapons of
Brass.
whiles men were digging up of tin they found Spear-heads, axes, and swords of
brass wrapped in linen: such as were sometimes found within the forest
Hercinia in Germany, and not long since in our Wales. For, evident it is by
the monuments of ancient Writers, that the Greeks, the Cimbrians and Britans
used brazen weapons, although the wounds given with brass be less hurtful,
as in which Macrobius reports out of Aristotle. But happily that age was not
so cunning in devising means to mischief and murders, as ours is. In the
rocks underneath, as also along the shore every where breeds the Pyrrhecorax:
Cornish chough.
Pyrrhecorax, a kind of crow with bill and feet red, and A narrow passage
between two creeks or arms of the Sea. Mounts-bay.
Isthmus, for it is scarce four miles over from hence to the Severn or upper
sea. A little above this mount, there opens a Creek of good breadth, called
of the mount, Mountsbay, a most safe rode and harbor for ships, when the South
and Southeast winds are aloft and bluster, at a mid ebb and return of the
Sea, six or seven fathom deep. More toward the East arises Godolcan hill,
right famous for plentiful veins of tin (they call it now Godolphin) but much
more renowned in regard of the Lords Goldphin Hill.
bearing the same name, who with their virtues have equalled the ancientnesse
of that house and lineage. The family of the Godolphins.
But that name in the Cornish language, came of A white Aegle, and this family
has anciently borne for their arms in a shield Gules, an Aegle displaied
Argent, between three Flower-deluces of the same, id est Argent likewise in a
shield Gules.

From S. Michaels mount Southward, immediately there is thrust forth a bi-land
or demi-Ile, at the very entry whereof Heilston shows it self, called in
their country language Hellas, by reason of the salt water flowing thereto: a
Town of great resort for their privilege of marking and coinage of tin. Under
which by the confluence Loo poole.
named Loo poole, divided from the Sea by a narrow bank running between,
which whenever it is by the violence of waves broken through, a wonderful
roaring of waters is heard far and near all over the country adjoining. And
not far from thence there is to be seen a military fense or rampire of a
large compass built of stones, heaped together and laid without mortar, they
call it in their tongue, Earth; of which sort there be others here and there:
raised, as I verily believe, in the Danish war. Neither is it unlike to those
fortifications of the Britans, which Tacitus terms rudes and informs saxorum
compages, that is, rude and ilfavoured compacted piles of stone. As for the
said Meneg, Menna, Meneg.
and no doubt that MENNA, which out of Cornelius a writer of Annals (but
whether he be Tacitus, I wot not) Jornandes in his Geticks describes, and is
in some copies found written Memma. For, it is, as he says, In the utmost
coast of Britain, having in it great store of metal mines, very full of
grass and herbs, bringing forth more plentifully all those things which serve
for pastorage of beasts, rather than nourishment of men. But where as he said,
that it has plenteous store of Metals, it is now so destitute, that it may
seem long since to have been exhaust thereof. The Sailers, at this day call
the utmost South-West point thereof Lisard; Ptolomee, The PROMONTORIE OF THE
DANMONII, add OCRINVM; Aethicus in that strange Geographie of his, OCRANVM; and
he reckons it among the mountains of the West Oc^^num.
Which name whether it take of Ocra, which by Sext. Pompeius, signifies a
craggy hill, I dare not affirm. And yet among the Alps, Ocrea, Ocriculum, and
Interocrea, drew their denomination of their steep and rocky site. The Liskard.
But seeing that Ochr betokens in the British tongue an Edge, what if I
should think the name was given to this Promontorie, because it has a sharp
edge and grows at the end pointed in fashion of a cone? In the turning in of
the shore from this Meneg, you meet with a Bay very commodious for ships to
harbor in, by reason of so many turnings, cones and angled windings therein,
receiving into it the little river Vale. Near unto which within the country,
Voluba.
flourished sometime that ancient Town Voluba, mentioned Valemouth; Falemouth.
or Falemouth Haven. This Haven is as noble as Brindi^.
Brundusium it self in Italy: of exceeding great capacity; for it is able to
receive an hundred ships, which may ride therein so a part by themselves, that
out of never a one of them the top of another Mast can be seen: and most safe
withal under the wind, by reason that it is enclosed on every side with brims
of high rising banks. In the very entrance of this Haven, there mounteth up an
high and steep craggy rock, which the inhabitants call Crage. The gullet on
either hand, as well for the defense and safety S. Mand^^ Eastward, and
toward the West, the fort Pendinas, built both by King Henry the Eighth: Of
which fortresses the Leland.
Antiquarian Poet writes thus: Pendinas.
Pendinas tenet asperi cacumen
Celsu^ montis, and intonat frequenter.
Mauditi quoque subsidet rotundum
Castrum, and impetu fulminat furenti,
Portus ostia qua patent Falensis.
Pendinas mounted is aloft,
On craggy cliffe, and thundreth often:
S. Maudit eke a castle round,
That stands beneath on lower ground
With gunshot makes Fale mouth resound.


But the Haven it self is by Ptolomee called Ostium CENIONIS, The mouth of
Cenio, Cenionis ostium.
doubtless of the British word Geneu, which betokens a door and entrance.
And this to be true, the Town Tregenie near adjoining does testify: for it
is as much (if a man interpret it) as a little Town by the Mouth. Upon the
innermore creeks and nooks of this Haven, there stand some Towns: namely,
Peryn, for a market well frequented, Perin.
where Walter Bronescome Bishop of Excester, in the yeeae 1288. Glasnith.
Arwenak.
(they call it Glasnith) and twelve Prebendaries: Arwenak, the seat of the
ancient and noble family of the Killegrewes; Truro, in the Cornish tongue
Truru, so called of three Streets encircled, as it were, with two rivers; a
Mayor Town, as they call it, and endowed with many privileges, and coynage of
tin: also Grampound, which is seated farthest from the Haven, and neighbor to
it is Golden the inheritance of Tregian, a house ancient and well allied. But
descending to the Havens mouth you may see Fenten-Gollan, in English
Hartes-well, lately the seat of Carminow a family anciently of high esteem for
blood and wealth, Carminow.
between whom and the Lord Scrope two hundred years since, was a plea
commenced in the Court of Chivalry, for bearing in a shield Azure a Bend Or.]
Under which on the Rossi^.
because it is an heath or place of lings: for so Ros signifies in the British
tongue. Whereof, Rosse in Scotland, and another Rosse in Wales have their
names, as being tracts dry, hungry and barren: Howbeit, this here, through
the industry of the husbandmen is more battle-ground and fruitful. Beyond
this Rosseland presently the Ocean (as the land retireth and gives back)
shoots in and makes a large Bay; they call it Tru-ar-draith Bay, which is by
interpretation, The Bay of the town upon the sand: Lansladron. In the time of
Edward the First.
whereunto fall many fresh rillets, amongst which that is principal which
passes by Lanladron, whose Lord S. Serlo Lanladron was summoned a Baron to the
Parliament, in that age when the select men for wisdom and worth amongst Foy.
Scarce two miles from hence, whereas the river Fawey falls into the Sea,
lies the Town Fowey, Foath in Cornish, stretching out in length upon the sea
bank: a Town most renowned in former ages, for sea fights: which the very
arms of the Town do witness, as being compounded of the Cinque Ports arms,
By the haven it has bulwarks on both sides built by King Edward the Fourth:
who shortly after being displeased with these townsmen of Fowey, for that when
the war in France was compounded, they practiced piracy upon the French;
took Hall, situate on the hanging of an hill with a right pleasant walk, the
habitation full well known of Sir Reginald Mohun Knight, The Mohuns. Vzella.

Britans have not the letter ^.


of an ancient and noble house by birth, as descended from the Mohunes, of
Somerset, and the Courtneyes Earls of Devonshire. Farther within the
country, and by the same river, VZELLA mentioned by Ptolomee is seated: which
town having not lost altogether the old name, is at this day called
Lest-uthiell: It stood anciently upon an high hill, where the Lestmel now
shows his ruins: but it was removed lower into the valley. From the high
situation it received the ancient name; for Vchel in the British tongue
sounds as much as [ high] or [ aloft]: whence Vxellodunum in France.
Vxellodunum also in France took the name, because the town standing upon an
hill had a very steep fall on every side. In the British story, this is called
Pen-uchelcoit; that is, The high hill in the wood: which some would have to be
Exceter. But the situation in Ptolomee, and the name remaining still, prove
this to be the ancient Vzella. In these our days, a small town it Fawey,
which aforetime was wont at every tide or high water to flow unto the very
town and to bear and bring in ships, has his channel so choked and damned
up now with sands, coming from the tin-workes (wherewith all the havens in
this province are like in process of time to be choked up) as that it is
hardly able to bear the least barge that is. Howbeit, the chief town it is
of the whole county, How the havens in Cornwall come to be stopped up.
where the Shiriffe sits judicially every month and determines causes: and
there the Warden of the Stannaries has his prison. It enjoys also the
privilege, by the bounteous favor, as themselves say, of Edmund Earl of
Cornwall (who there in times past had his honor) to seal or coin the tin. But
there be two towns above the rest that hinder the light and Leskerd.
to wit, on the East side thereof Leskerd, situat on the top of a very high
hill, much frequented for the market, and renowned for an ancient castle there:
Bodman.
and on the North side Bodman, which stands on the side hand of it scarce two
miles off: and is named (if I be not deceived) Bosuenna in the Cornish tongue,
and Bodminian in old Deeds and Charters. This town situate thus in no healthy
seat between two hills, and lying out in length East and West, is for the market
there kept, of great resort, for the inhabitants populous, beautiful enough
for building, and of name for their privilege of coinage of tin: but more
famous in ancient time for the Bishops See there. For, about the year of our
salvation 905, when the State of the Church lay in this tract altogether
neglected, The book of Winchester Abbey.
by virtue of a decree from Pope Formosus, King Polton, Caeling, and Lanwitham,
that from thence every year he should visit the people of Cornwall, to fetch
out of them their errors: for, before time they did what they could to resist
the truth, and obeyed not the Apostolical decrees. But afterward, in the
furious heat of that terrible Danish war, the Bishopric was translated to
Saint Germans. Hard by Leskerd lies that which sometime was the Church of S.
Guerir, that is, (if you interpret it out of the British speech) S. Leech or
Physician: where, (as writes Asserius) King Alfred lying prostrate at his
prayers, recovered out of a sickness. But when Neotus a man of singular
holiness and learning, was afterward entombed in the same Church, he
outshone the Neotestow, that is, The place of Neotus, S. Neots.
and now Saint Neoths: and the religious men that served God therein were named
Saint Neoths Clerks, and had for their maintenance rich and large revenues, as
we may see in William Conquerours book. Near unto this, as I have learned,
Doomesday.
within the parish of Saint Clare, there are to be seen in a place called
Pennant, that is, The head of the vale, two monuments of stone: of which the
one in the upper part is wrought hollow in manner of a Chair: the other, named
Otherhalfe stone, has an inscription of Barbarous characters, now in manner
worn out, in this wise.

(...)

Which as I take it, should be read thus, Doniert Prayer for the soul, etc.
DONIERT: ROGAVIT, PRO ANIMA: unless it please you to give this conjecture,
that those little pricks after DONIERT, are the relics of the letter E: and
then to read it after this manner, DONIERT EROGAVIT, as if he had given and
bestowed upon those religious men, that piece of land, for his soul. As for
Doneert, I cannot but think, he was that Prince of Cornwall, Dungerth, and
record, that he was drowned in the year of our Salvation 872.

Hard by, there is a number of good big rocks heaped up together, and under
them, one Stone of lesser size, fashioned naturally in form of a cheese, so as
it seems to be pressed like a cheese, whereupon it is named, Wring-cheese.
Many other Stones besides in some sort four square, Wring-cheese.
are to be seen upon the plain adjoining; of which seven or eight are pitched
upright of equal distance asunder. The neighbor Inhabitants term them
Hurlers, as being by a devout and godly error persuaded, they had been men
sometimes transformed into Stones, Hurlers.
for profaning the Lords Day, with hurling the ball. Others, would have it to
be a Trophee (as it were) or a monument, The river Loo.
and the same erected for bounders. In this coast the river Loo makes way and
runs into the sea: and in his very mouth gives name to two little towns,
joined with a bridge together. That on the West side, which is the newer,
flourishes most: but the other Eastward, time has much decayed: although it
be a Corporation retaining still the privilege of a Mayor and Burgesses.
Somewhat Westward from this lies Kilgarth the habitation of the Bevils of
especial good note for antiquity and gentry. From Loo Eastward you meet with
Minhevet, whereby is Pole the seat of the Trelawnies, to whom with others the
inheritance of the Courtneys Earls of Devon accrewed: S. Germans.
until you come to the Liver, a little river stored with oisters, that runs
under S. Germans a small town, unto which during the tempestuous Danish war,
the Bishops Sees were for fear translated: where there is a pretty Church
dedicated unto S. German of Antiziodorum, who rooted out the heresy of
Pelagius, Levinus the Bishop of Kirton, who was in great favor with Canutus
the Dane, obtained by virtue of the Kings authority, that it should be Joined
to his See. Since which time, there has been but one Bishop over this
Province and Denshire both (whose seat is now at Exceter): and who appointed
the little Town of S. Germans to be the seat of his Suffragan. For at this
day, it is nothing else but a village consisting of fishermens cabins, that
make a good gainful trade, by catching store of fish in the Ocean and rivers
near adjoining. Trematon.
Some few miles from hence, upon the same river stands Trematon, bearing the
name of a Castle, though the wall be half down; in Domesday book, William
Earl of Moriton had his Castle, and held his mercate, and was the capital
seat of the Baronie belonging to the Earls and Dukes of Cornwall, as we may
see in the Inquisitions. When the Liver is past this Castle, near unto
Saltash, sometimes Esse, the habitation in old times of the De vallet
Valtorts, and now a Town well replenished with Merchants, and endowed with
many privileges, it runs into the river Tamar, the bound of the whole
country: where at the East Side Mont-Edgecombe, Edge-Com^
the seat of that ancient family of the Edgecombs, sited most pleasantly has a
prospect into an haven underneath it, full of winding creekes. Anthony.
Next unto which is Anthony, a Town memorable for the elegant building
thereof, as also for a fish poole that lets in the Ocean, and yields
seafish for profit Richard Carew, who so maintains his place and estate left
unto him by his ancestors, as that in ornaments of virtues he surmounteth them.
Hitherto we have surveied the South coast: now let us take a view of the
Northern also. The Northern-shore from the very lands end, having for a great
length huge banks of sand driven upon heaps against it, shoots out first to
a Town running into the sea with a long ridge like a tongue, called S. Iies,
S. Iies.
taking the name of one Iia an Irish woman that lived here in great holiness,
for ancie^tly it was named Pendinas. And from her the Bay underneath into which
the little river Hail falls, has likewise received the name, for the
Mariners call it S. Iies Bay. As for the Town it self, it is now very small:
For, the North west wind that In Aquil^^n^m, or North.
North-east as far as Padstow: neither all that way along has it any thing
savouring of antiquity, save only a Chapel built in the sands, to the honor
of S. Piran, who being likewise an Irish Saint rests here entombed: unto
whose Sanctity a certain vain writer in his childish folly has ascribed
this miracle, that with three kine of his own he fed ten Kings of Ireland and
their armies eight days together: also that he raised from death to life both
pigs and men. S. Columbs
Then, farther from the shore is seated S. Columbs a little mercate Town,
consecrated to the memorial of Lhanheton
Lhanheton shows it self, the seat of the Arondels, a family of Knights
degree, who for their fair lands and large possessions were not long since
called, the Great Arondels. In some places they are written in Latin, De
Hirundine, and not amiss, if my judgment be ought: For Hirundo, that is, a
Swallow, is named Arondell in French: and i^ a shield sables, they bear for
their arms six Swallows argent. Lib. 3. Phil^peinos, of W^^liam Brit^^ who
lived anno 117*
Certes, a very ancient and renowned house this is, spreading far and near the
branches of their kindred and affinity: unto the name and coat armor whereof
William Brito a Poet alluded, when as he describes a valiant warrior out of
this family Bar a French noble man, and assailing him, about the year of our
Lord 1170. in these terms: -- Hirundelae velocior alite, quae dat
Hoc agnomen ei, fert cujus in aegide signum,
Se rapit agminibus medijs, clypeoque, m^enti
Quem sibi Guilielmus laeva praetenderat ulna,
Immergit validam praeacutae cuspidis hastam.
-- more swift, than bird hight Swallow.
Arondell
That giv's him name, and in his shield of arms emblazoned well,
He rides amid the armed troops, and with his spear in rest
(The staff was strong, the point right sharp) runs full upon the breast
Of Sir Guillaum, and pierces through his bright and glittering shield,
Which on left arm he for defense, against him stoutly held.


Within a little hereof, there is a double rampire entrenched upon the pitch of
an hill, with a causey leading thereto, named, Castellan Denis, that is, The
Danes Camp; Castle Denis.
like as they did in other places of this tract.

Nor far from hence the river Alan, which also is called Camb-alan, and
Camel, of the crooked windings and reaches that it makes in his course, (for so
Came with them does signify) runs gently into the upper sea: which river at
the very mouth thereof has Padstow a pretty market town, Padstow.
so called shor^ for Petroekstow, (as we read in the Histories of Saints) of
one Petrocch a Britan, canonized a Saint by the people: who, spent his days
here in the service of God, whereas before time it had the name of Loderic and
Laffenac. The site of this Town is very commodious for traffic in Ireland, to
which men may easily sail in four and twenty hours. And much beautified it
is with fair and goodly houses adjoining thereto, in manner of a Castle, built
by Alan, stands the little village Camelford, otherwise Gaffelford. Leland
Judges, it was in old time called Kamblan, who writes also, That King Arthur
our Hector was there slain: For, as he records, pieces of armor, rings,
horse-harnesse of brass are otherwhiles dug up, and turned out of the
ground by husbandmen: and the common fame that continued so many ages together,
reports, that there was a notable battle fought in this place. There are
also certain verses in an unknown Poet living in the middle time, of Cambula
flowing with blood, shed in a battle of Arthur against Mordred: which I will
not think much of my labor to put down, because they may seem to have been
written in no bad Poetical -- Natur^m Cambula fontis
Mutatam stupet esse sui, transcendit inundans
Sanguineus torrens ripas, and volvit in aequor
Corpora caesorum, plures natare videres
Et petere aexilium, quos undis vita reliquit.
Then Cambula was sore aghast, the nature changed to see
Of his springhead, for now the stream by this time began to be
All mixed with blood, which swelling high the banks does overflow,
And carry down the bodies slain, into the sea below.
There might one see how many a man that swum and help did crave,
Was lost among the billows strong, and water was their grave.
And in very deed (not to deny this of Arthur) I have read in Marianus, that
the Britans and Saxons fought in this place a bloody battle, in the year of
our Lord 8^0, so that this may seem a place consecrated unto Mars. And if it
be true that Arthur here died, the same coast was destined unto him for his
death, as for his birth. For, on the shore hard by, stands Tindagium (the
native place of that great Arthur) partly upon a little ridge, Tindagel.
putting forth, as it were, a tongue; and partly within an Island, having both
of them sometime a bridge between. They call it at this day Tindagel, being
now a glorious ruin only, The place of Arthurs Nativitie.
in times past a stately Castle: of which a late Poet has thus written: Est
locus Abrini finnoso littore ponti
Rupe situs media, refluus quem circuit astus;
Fulminat hic lat^ turrit^ vertice castrum,
Nomine Tindagium veteres dixere Corini.

On mids a rock about whose foot the tides turne-keeping play,
A Towry-topped Castle here far thundreth over all,
Which Cornishmen by ancient name, Tindagel Castle call.
A long discourse it would ask to declare here out of Geffries history, how
Uther Pendragon King of Britain, within this Castle became enamoured upon the
wife of Gorlois Prince of Cornwall; and how by Magic slights and delusions,
taking the shape of her husband upon him, dishonourably violated the Lady his
wife, and of her begat the said renowned Arthur. Architrenius.
It may suffice, if I do but allege the verses of our Poet

-- Facie dum falsus adulter
Tindagel irrupit, nec amoris Pendragon astum
Vincit, and omnificas Merlini consulit arts,
Mentiturque ducis habitus, and rege latente,
Induit absentis praesentia Gorlois ora,
Whiles Pendragon that could not quench his flaming heats of love,
But bear a mind adult'rous still, by means brake in above
To Tindagel, disguised in face, by Merlin taught thereto,
By magic and inchauntments strange, which all such feats could do.

But presence of the King in place he did conceal the while.
This Uther Pendragon verily was a Prince flourishing in Mar^iall feats, and
who valiantly upheld the decaying state of his country against the English
Saxons: But whether came from him, That Royal Banner in England, having the
portraict of a Dragon with a golden head, Banners.
whereof of neighbor nations have had experience, and which in far Lands
beyond sea was under King Richard the First, terrible to the Panims, I dare not
avouch: I would believe rather, it was received from the Romans, who a long
time used the Eagle, after that Marius had rejected the Ensigns of a Wolf, of
Minotaurus, And in the end under the latter Emperors, took them to the Dragon:
Whereupon Claudianus writes thus: -- Hij picta Draconum
Calla levant --
The banners these advance aloft
With speckled necks of Dragons wrought.


And Nemesianus: Signa micant, sinuatque truces levis aura Dracones.
Their Ensigns shine, and Dragons fell that therein pictured show,
Wave to and fro with whiffes of wind, as it does gently blow.


Dragon. Tufa, a Banner.
As for another Banner of the English, which Beda called Tufa, as also the
Danes, Reafan, I will say nothing of them in this place, for fear I may seem
to have digressed too far from my purpose. Between Padstow and Tindagel,
inwardly there extends a fruitful vein, and therein flourish the families
of Roscarrock, Carnsew, Penkevell, Cavell, Pencavell, of ancient name and great
respect in this coast.

Forward still, Eastward on the same coast which is open, barren, and destitute
of woods, Botereaux.
there butteth upon the sea Botereaux Castle, corruptly by the common people,
called Boscastle, built by the Lords Botereaux, who gave for their arms three
Buffones, toads sable in a shield Argent. William Botereaux was the first
famous man of that those of Botereaux contracted with the heirs of the Noble
houses, De Moeles, S. Laud, commonly called, S. Lo, and Thweng.

De Sancto Laud^.
From hence the Land shooting forth into the Sea, extends it self so far
northward, that the country carries here full three and twenty miles in
breadth, between the two seas, which hitherto went on still drawn after a
sort together into a narrow streit. In this greatest breadth of it, stands
Stow upon the seaside, the ancient habitation of the Creenvils: Stow.
Greenvils.
which verily for Antiquity and Nobleness of birth is a famous house: out of
which one Richard, in the reign of William Rous.
Rufus, was for his valor much renowned among those worthy Knights that
subdued Glamorganshire in Wales: and another of late days surnamed likewise
Richard, for his Tercera, lost his life, as I shall show more fully in my
Annals. To this Stratton lies close to a market Town of no mean name amongst
the neighbors for their gardens, Stratton.
and good garlic: and next unto it Lancels a fair new seat of that old
family, de Calvo monte, or, Chaumond.

The river TAMARA, now TAMAR, showing his head here not far from the northren
shore, The river Tamar.
takes his course with a swift running stream southward; increased with the
channels of many rivelets hard by TAMARA, a Town mentioned by Ptolomee, now
called Tamerton, by Tamar an ancient Manor of the Trevilions, to whom by
marriage, the Inheritance of Walesborough and Ralegh of Netlested descended:
Lanstuphadon, that is, Saint Stephens, commonly and contractly Launston, which
stands farther off from his bank: a proper little Town this is, situate
upon the pitch of a pretty hill, which of two Burgards, Dunevet and Newport,
is grown as it were, into one Burgh. At the first coming of the Normans,
William Earl of Moriton, built a Castle there; and had a College of
Canon^corum.
Chanons, or Secular Priests, as appears out of Domesday book, wherein it is
named Launstaveton, of that College, no doubt, Launston.
built in the honor of Saint Stephen, which Reginald Earl of Cornwall, about
the year of our Lord 1150, turned into a monastery. Against which pious work
of his, the Bishops of Excester, carried away over much and seduced with humane
and private affection, were very maliciously bent, as fearing exceedingly,
lest one day it would become a Bishops seat, and so prejudice and impeach their
jurisdiction.

Then Tamar looks up unto an high hill stretched out in length, with a vast
head, which Marianus names (...), and interprets it, Hengists mount*
commonly called, Hengston-hill. Which in times past was so plentiful of Tin
veins, that the country people had this by word of it, [Hengston down well
ywrought,] [Is worth London dear ybought.] And it was an ordinary place,
where every seven or eight year, the Stannarie men of Cornwall and Denshire,
were wont in great frequencie, to assemble together, and to consult about their
affairs. At this hill in the year of savation DCCCXXXI, the British Danmonij,
who calling the Danes to aid them of Halton the habitation of the Rouses,
anciently Lords of Little Modbery in Devonshire, and running nigh unto
Salt-Esse, a pretty market Town seated in the descent of an hill, which has
a Major and certain privileges of their own, Salt-Esse.
as I said erewhile, it entertaineth the river Liver, on which stands that
same Town of Saint Germans, whereof I spoke before. And now by this time
spreading broader, discharges it self into the Ocean, making the haven which
in the life of Saint Indractus, is called Tamerworth, after it has severed
Cornwall from Denshire. For Athelstane, the first English Tambra. Whereupon
Alexander Necham, in his Praises of divine writes thus: Loegriae Tamaris
divisor Cornubiaeque,
Indigenas ditat pinguibus Isiciis.
Tamar that Lhoegres does divide from Cornwall in the west,
The neighbour-dwellers richly serves with Salmons of the best.


The place requires here, Saint Vrsula, and 11000. Virgins.
that I should say somewhat of the holy and devout virgin Ursula descended from
hence, as also of the eleven thousand British Virgins. But such is the variety
of Writers, whiles some report they suffered martyrdom under Gratian the
Emperor about the year of our Lord CCCLXXXIII, upon the coast of Germany, as
they sailed to Armorica; others by Attlia the Hun, that scourge of God, a
tyrannous whelpe of the unclean Danmonian Lioness; as also of the
Disforresting of all this country, (for before time it was reputed a Forest)
let Historians speak, for it is no part of my purpose.

As for the Earls, Earls of Cornwall.
none of British blood, are mentioned but only Candorus (called by others
Cadocus) who is accounted by late writers, the last Earl of Cornwall, of
British race, and as they which are skillful in Heraldry, have a tradition,
bare XV. Besaunts V. IIII. III. II. and I. in a shield Sable. But of the
Normans blood the first Earl was Robert of Moriton, half brother to William
Conqueror, by Herlotta, their Robert de Monte. 1175.
This Reginald dying without issue male legitimate, King Henry the Second,
having assigned unto his daughters certain lands and Lordships, reserved this
Earldom to himself, for the ^ehoore of his own youngest son John, a child
of nine years old, upon whom his brother Richard the First conferred it
afterward with other Earledomes. This John afterward Poictou: a Prince verily
in those days puissant, in Gods service devout and religious, in war right
valiant, for counsel sage and prudent, who in Aquitaine fought battles with
fortunate success, and showed much valor: and having made a voyage into the
Holy Land, enforced the Sarazens to make truce with him: the Kingdom of
Apulia, offered unto him by the Pope he refused; the troubles and tumults in
England, he often times composed; and in the year of our Lord MCCLVIL. by some
of the Princes Electours of Germany was chosen King of the Romans, and crowned
at Aquisgrane: whereupon, as if he had made means thereto by money, this verse
was so ri^e and current

Nummus ait pro me, nubit Cornubia Romae.
For me, my money, says this,
Cornwall to Rome now wedded is.
For, so well monied he was before, that one, who then lived, has put down in
writing, that for ten years together he might dispend one hundred marks a
day. But when as Germany was all on a light fire with civil wars among
competitors of the Empire, he returned quickly into England, where he departed
this life, and was interred in the famous Monastery of Hales which he had
built; a little after that his first begotten son Henry, newly in his return
from the Holy Land, whiles he was at divine Viterbium in Italy, was by Guy de
Montfort, son of Simon Montfort Earl of Leceister, in revenge of his fathers
death, wickedly slain. Edmund therefore, his second son succeeded in the
Earldom of Cornwall; who died without any lawful issue: and so his high and
great estate of inheritance returned to King Edward the First, as who was the
next unto him in blood, and Haeresinventus.
found (as our Lawyers say) his heir. Whereas that Richard and Edmund his
son, Princes of the blood Royal of England, bare diverse Arms from the Arms
Royal of England, to wit, in a shield argent, a Lion rampant, gules crowned,
or, within a border sables Vermandois, Dreux, and Courtney: and as Robert Duke
of Burgundy, brother to Henry the First, ^ande d' Or and d' Azur ala bordeure
de Gueules. Memoriales de Aquitaine.
King of France, took unto him the ancient shield of the Dukes of Burgundy:
so we may well think, that this Richard having received the Earldom of
Poictou, from Henry the Third his brother, assumed unto him that Lion gules
crowned, Poictou before him, (as the French writers do record) and added
thereto the border garnished with Besaunts, out of the ancient coat of the
Earls of Cornwall. For so soon as the younger sons of the Kings of France
began to bear the Arms of France with differences, semblably they did among
us, and began first at Edward the First his children. But whither am I carried
away from my purposed matter, as forgetting my self in the delight I take of
mine own study, and profession? When Cornwall was thus reverted unto the
Crown, King Edward the Second, who had received from his father fair lands
and possessions here, bestowed the title of Earl of Cornwall, upon Piers
Gaveston a Gascon, who had ensnared his youth by the allurements of corrupt
life: But when as he for corrupting the Eltham, a younger son of Edward the
Second, advanced thereto by his brother Edward the Third, Dukes of Cornwall.
who dying young, and without issue also, Edward the Third erected Cornwall
into a Dukedom, and invested Edward his son a Prince most accomplished with
martial prowess, in the year of Christ 1336. Duke of Cornwall, by a wreath
on his head, a Ring upon his finger, and a silver verge. Since which time, that
I may note so much under warrant of record, (let the skillful Lawyers judge
thereof) the King of Englands eldest son is reputed Duke of Cornwall by
birth, and by virtue of a special Act, the very first day of his nativitie is
presumed and taken to be of full and perfect age, so that he may sue that day
for his liverie Orig. 35. H. 6.
and he has his Royalties in certain actions, in Stannary matters, in wracks
at sea, customs, etc. yea, and diverse ministers or officers assigned unto him,
for these and such like matters. But more plainly, and fully instructed are we
in these points by Richard Carew of Anthony, a Gentleman innobled no less in
regard of his Parentage, and descent, than for his virtue, and learning, who
has published, and perfected the description of this country more at large,
and not in a slight, and mean manner, whom I must needs acknowledge to have
given me much light herein.

There be in this County Parishes 161.

DEVONIAE Comitatus Vulgo Den Shyre quam olim DANMONII Populi Incoluerunt


DENSHIRE.
THe nearer or hithermore region of the Danmonians, that I speak of, is now
commonly called Denshire, by the Cornish-Britaines Deuinan, and by the Welsh
Britains Duffneint, that is, Low valleies, for that the people dwell for the
most part beneath Devonia, and by that contraction, which the vulgar people
uses, Denshire; and not of the Danes, as some smatterers of mean knowledge
most stiffly maintain: a country which as it extends it self both ways
wider than Cornwall, so is it harborous on either side with more commodious
Havens, no less enriched with tin mines, especially Westward; garnished with
pleasanter meadows, sightly with greater store of woods, and passing well
replenished with Towns, and buildings. But the soil in some places again, is
as lean, and barren: which not withstanding yields fruit to the Husbandman
plenteously, Sand, making grounds fruitful.
For, in most parts thereof it grows in manner barren, if it be not
overstrewed, and mingled with a certain sand from the Sea, which is of great
efficacy to procure fertility, by quickening, as it were, and giving life unto
the glebe: and therefore in places far from the shore it is bought at a dear
rate.

In describing of this region, I will first travel over the West Side, as the
river Tamara runs along, and then the South coast which bordereth on the
Ocean: From whence by the Eastern bounds where it confineth upon Dorset, and
Sommerset shires, I will return back unto the Northern, which is hemmed in
with the Severne Sea.

Tamar which divides these two shires, first on this part receives into it
from Coriton, and K. Sidenham small townlets, but which have given surnames to
ancient, and worshipful families, to Lidstow a little mercate Town, and
Lidford, now a small village, but in ancient time, a famous Town, which in the
year 997. was most grievously shaken, and dispoiled by the furious rage of the
Danes, (which as it is written in that book, whereby William the First took
the survey and value of England) was not wont to be rated and asceased at any
other time, nor otherwise than London was. That little river Lid, here at the
bridge, gathered into a straight, and pent in between rocks, runs down
amain, and holloweth the ground daily more and more so deep, that his water
is not seen; only

Beneath it, Tavistoke. The Charter of the foundation.
Tamar receives Teave a little river, on which Teavistok, commonly called
Tavistoke flourishes, a town in times past famous for the Abbey there, which
Ordulph, the son of Ordgare Earl of Devonshire, (admonished by a vision from
heaven) built about the year of our Savior Christ Dcccclxj. a place, as
William of Malmesburie describes it, Pleasant in regard of the groves standing
so conveniently about it, and of the plenteous fishing there, for the handsome
and uniforme building also of the Church, for the sewers from the river passing
down along by the houses of office, which run with such a force of their
own, that they carry away with them all the superfluity they find. Saint
Rumon is much spoked of, and lies as Bishop there. There is to be seen also in
the same Abbey, the Sepulcher of that Ordgar before named: and the huge
bigness of his sons tomb,; if ye list to believe the said William. But
scarcely had this Abbey stood thirty year after it was first founded, when the
Danes in their spoiling rage burnt it to the ground: yet it flourished again,
and by a laudable ordinance, lectures therein were kept of our ancient language
(I mean the English Saxon tongue) which continued even to our fathers Lectures
of the Saxon tongue.
for fear lest the said language (a thing that now is well near come to
pass) should be forgotten. Tamar having thus received the Teave, draws now
very near unto his mouth, where he and the river Plime together fall into the
Ocean: of which river the Town adjoining to it, Plimmouth. 13. Henry 4.
is called Plimmouth: sometime named Sutton: and seems to have consisted of
two parts. For, we read in the Parliamentary Acts, of Sutton De valle tarta.
Vautort, and Sutton Prior, because it belonged partly to the family of the
Vautorts, and partly to the Prior. Of late time it became of a poor fisher
village to be a great Town, and for the number of Inhabitants grown to that
pass, (as now it is to be seen) that it may be compared with a City. Such
is the commodiousnesse Michaels Isle, strongly fortified both by nature, and
art: as for the haven it self at the very Town, it has fortifications on
both sides, and is chained over when need requires, having on the South side a
Pier against it, and upon an hill next adjoining a Castle built, as it is
thought, by the Valle tortis, ^ive de valle torta.
Vautorts. The whole Town is divided into four Custodias.
Wards, governed by a Praetor.
Major, ordained there by K. Henry the Sixth, and under him every ward had in
times past a Captain set over it, each of them likewise had his inferior
officers. As touching that fabulous wrestling between Corinaeus, Gogmagog.
and Gogmagog the Giant in this place, let it suffice to set down a verse or
two out of Architrenius concerning the same, and the Western Giants.

Hos, auidum belli robur Corinaeus Averno
Praecipitis misit, cubitis ter quatuor altum
Gogmagog Herculea suspendit in aere lucta;
Anthaeumque suum scopulo detrusit in aequor.
Potavitque dato Thetis ebria sanguine fluctus,
Diuisumque tulit mare corpus, Cerberus umbram.
These martial monsters, Giants strong, by Corinaeus slain;
With Gogmagog twelve cubits high, a combat did remain:
Whom up he hanged twixt heaven and earth, (thus once Alcides hung
Antaeus fell) and from the rock into the Sea him flung.
His blood gave Thetis the waves to drink (her self therewith was drunk)
His grisly ghost had Cerberus, when body torn was sunk.
As for that rock, from whence, they say, this Giant was cast down, it is now
called the Haw: a very hill standing between the Town and the Ocean: on the top
whereof, which lies spread into a most pleasant plain, there is a right
delectable, and goodly prospect every way, and for the use of Sailers a very
fair Compass erected. The circuit of this Town not great, but much renowned
it is among foreign nations: and not so much for the commodious haven, as the
valor of the Inhabitants in sea services of Francis Drake.
For (to say nothing of all others) from hence was Sir Francis Drake that
famous Knight, and most skillful man at sea in our days; who first (as I have
heard himself relate) to repair the losses which he had sustained at the
Spaniards hands, for two years space together with victorious success held
and kept the Bay of Mexico as it were besieged, and travailed over the Narrow
passage.
Isthmus of Dariena: From whence when he had once beheld the South sea (as the
Spaniards call it) as another Themistocles stirred up with the Trophies of
Miltiades, thought he should have neglected himself, his country, and his
own glory, unless he sailed over it, which continually presented it self as
an object to his adventurous mind. In the year therefore 1577. putting to sea
from hence, he entered into the streits of Magellan, and in two years and

Drake, pererrati novit quem terminus orbis,
Quemque semel mundi vidit uterque polus.

Sol nescit comitis immemor esse sui.
Sir Drake, whom well the worlds end knows, which thou did compass round:
And whom both poles of heaven once saw, which North and South do bound:
The Stars above will make thee known, if men here silent were,
The Sun himself cannot forget his fellow-travailler.
The rest of his noble exploits, and of others who descended from hence taking
example by him, flourished in glorious atchivements by sea, seeing it belongs
not to this place, let Historians record in writing. Neither have I ought else
to say more of Rous.
Rufus, there flourished here one Ealphege, a learned and married Priest. For,
until the year 1102. Priests in England were not forbidden to have their
wives. The first ti^ that Priests were forbidden marriag^
Then, Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury violently forced both the sacred
Scripture, and nature also, as our writers in those days do complain, and
namely, Henry of Huntingdon expressly of Anselme in these terms: He prohibited
English Priests to have wives, who before-time were not prohibited. Which, as
some thought to be a matter of greatest purity: so others again took it to
be most perilous, lest while by this means they aimed at cleanness above
their power, they should fall into horrible uncleanness, to the exceeding
great shame of Christianity.

More inward in the country, and yet not far from the water of Plim, is
Plimpton Castle guard; for it was the chief seat of the Redversies, or the
Riparii, (for both we read) who were Barons of Plimpton, and Earls of
Denshire. Next unto this, stood Plimpton S. Mary, the glory whereof then fell
to decay, when as not long since the College there of Canons was dissolved,
which William Warlewast, Bishop of Exceter, in old time had founded. More,
Eastward you see Modburie, a little Town, which acknowledges it self to
appertain to the ancient and right worshipful family of the Campernulphs,
Knights, who also are called in old Deeds De campo Arnulphi, Champernouns,
which received much advancement and reputation by the heir of the Uautorts.

From Plims mouth, Stert Caud^ in Dutch a Tail.
where the South shore of this region begins, the country runs along
with a large and great front as far as to Stert, a cape or promontorie (for,
so the word in the English Saxon tongue signifies) but so soon as the shore
has drawn it self back land-ward, the river Dert breaks out, which arising
from the inward part of the country runs down apace, through certain lean
and high grounds, called thereupon Dertmore, (wherein of late were Lode stones
found) and carries down with it certain grit, and sand out of the Tin-mines,
(which by little and little choke up the channel) through the Forest of
Dortmore, where David From thence by Dertinton* a Baronie sometimes of the
Martins, who were Lords of Keimes in Wales, Totnes.
it holds in his stream unto Totnes. Which being an ancient little Town
standing pendant upon the fall of an hill, East, and West, flourished sometime
in great honor. It paid no Non geld^
tribute, as we find in Doomesday, the survey-book of England, but when Exceter
paid; and then it yielded xl. d. and did service, if any expedition marched by
land, or went by sea: and Totnes, Barnestaple and Lidford served and paid, as
much as Exceter. King John granted unto it power to choose a Major for the
chief Magistrate: Edward the First enriched it with sundry liberties; and
about that time it was fortified with a Castle by the Zouches, as the
Inhabitants are persuaded. The Iudael, surnamed De Totnais; afterward of
William Briwer a right noble personage, by one of whose daughters it came to
the Breoses, and from them by a daughter likewise to George De Cantlow.
Cantelupo, Lord of Abergeveny, whose sister Melicent wedded unto Eudo De la
Zouch, Lord Zo^ called usu^
brought it in by her marriage to the family of the Barons La Zouches: and
theirs it was, until that John, Lord Zouch being attaint and proscribed,
because he took part with King Richard the Third, Henry the Seventh bestowed
it franckly (as I have heard say) upon Peter Berie Pomerie, so called of the
Pomeries a right noble house in those parts, which a little more Eastward, and
somewhat farther from the river side, had a very proper Castle of their own.
These derive their pedigree from Radulph Pomerie, who in William Conquerors
time held Which, Dunwinesdon, Brawerdine, Pudeford, Horewood, Toriland, Helecom,
and this Berie, etc. Of this Totnes, the strond or shore adjoining, was called
in old time Totonese: where (as the British History says) Brutus the founder
of the British nation first landed, and Havillanus, as a Poet, relying thereon
versified in this wise: Inde dato cursu, Brutus comitatus Achate,
Gallorum spoliis cumulatis navibus aequor
Exarat, and superis, auraque faventibus usus,
Littora foelices intrat Totonesia portus.
Thence hoising sails with Gaulish spoils the fleet freight sea does take
Our Brutus with his trustiest friend; and through waves way does make:
The Gods looked cheerful on his course, the wind he had at will;
At Totnesse shore, that happy haven, arrived he and stood still.


But, that river Dert, whereof I spoke, having passed beyond Totnes bridge, at
which it leaves whole heap of sands brought down by his stream from out of
Dertmouth.
stands Dertmouth a Port Town, by reason of the commodious haven, defended
with two Castles, much frequented with Merchants and furnished with very good
shipping. A Major it has, by the grant of King Edward the Third. For Lords it
acknowledged long since the Zouches, Nicolas of Teukesbury, and the Brients,
according to the variable change of the times: and has sundry times defended
it self stoutly against the French: but especially in the year of Christ
1404. Monsieur De Castle, a Frenchman, who by his men of war and piracies
had stopped all intercourse of traffic in those parts, and burnt Plimmouth,
whiles he invaded this place, was by women, and country people intercepted,
and slain with all his company. Stoke Fleming that lies hard by, Stoke
Fleming.
and which taking that name of a noble man of Flanders, sometime Lord thereof,
came by the daughter of Mohun to the Carewes.

From this place, as the shore gives back Northward, the sea follows in
upon it, and by that means with a large and spacious creek, which takes
about ten miles in circuit makes a bay, called now Torbay: a very safe rode
and harbor for ships when the South-west wind is aloft; Briew.
and has fast by it a little village so called, where sometime the Briewrs
dwelt, and built a religious house, who in the days of King Richard the First,
See Sommersetshire.
and King John, were men of great renown and revenue: and afterward the
habitation it was of the Wakes. Near unto it is Cockington, where the family
Carry of Cockington.
out of which the Barons of Hunsdon, concerning whom I will speak more in due
place, are descended. A little higher appears in sight Hacombe, Hacombe.
the habitation in old time of Sir Jordan Fitz-Stephen Knight, surnamed of this
place, de Hacombe: by whose daughter and heir Cecilie, it came into the
family of the Archdeacons; From which likewise by Hugh Courtney in process of
time, it was devolved upon the Carewes, The family of the Carews.
whose house in these parts is reputed very worshipful, and spread into many
branches. For, Jane the daugther of the said Hugh, and heir to her mother,
being joined in marriage to Nicolas Baron Carew, brought him many children: and
when the eldest of them, named Thomas, used not his mother de Hacombe, Anthony,
and Bery are sprung) and to John Vere, a son that she had by a second
husband, from whom the Earls of Oxford are issued.

Teignemouth a little village at the mouth of the river Teigne, whereof it has
also the name: where the Danes that were sent before to discover the situation
of Britain, Danes when they first entered Britain.
and to sound the landing places, being first set a shore about the year of
Salvation 800. and having slain the governor of the place, took it as an
ominous good token of future victory; which indeed afterward they followed
with extreme cruelty through the whole Island. More inward, near unto the
source of the river Teigne is Chegford seated, where flourished sometime the
noble family of the Prows: then Chidley, which gave the name to that great
house, and lineage of the Chidleyes: and next unto the very mouth thereof,
Bishops Teignton, so called because John Grandison descended out of Burgundy,
Bishop of Exceter, as presaging what would ensue in future time built a very
fair house, to the end that his Successors (these are the very words of his
testament) might have a place whereon to lean, and lay their heads, if happily
their Temporalities should be seized into the Kings hands. But so far was it
off that his purpose took effect, that his successors have not only lost that
house, but also been quite desseized now well near of all the rest.

About six miles from thence, the river The River Ex.
Isc, whereof Ptolomee makes mention, which the Britains call Isc, and the
English-Saxons Ex, with a large channel runs into the Ocean. Whether it
took this name of Iscaw, that signifies in the British Reeds, which the
Britains call Hesk, Pliny.
wherewith Northern nations, (and such are the Britains) thatched, and
covered their houses, yea and fastened together, as it were, with soder, the
joints of their ships. But considering that there be no reeds here found, I am
not hasty to give credit thereto. This river has his head, and springs first
in a weely, and barren ground named Exmore, near unto Severn sea, a great part
whereof is counted within Sommersetshire: Anticke stones.
and wherein, there are seen certain monuments of anticke work, to wit,
Stones pitched in order, some triangle wise, others in a round circle: and one
among the rest with an Inscription in Saxon letters, or Danish rather, to
direct those (as it should seem) who were to travail that way. Now this Ex or
Isc beginning Twifordton, Tiverton.
so called of two foords, but commonly Teverton, a Town standing much upon
clothing, to the great gain, and credit thereof, passes forward through a
fair country of good, and fertile fields, and is augmented with two especial
rivelets, Creden from the West, and Columb from the East. Upon Creden in the
Primitive Church of the Saxons, there flourished an Episcopal See, in a Town
of the same name, anciently called Cridiantun, now by contraction Kirton: where
that Winifride or Boniface was borne, who converted the Hessians, Thuringers,
and Frisians of Germany unto Christ, and for that was accounted the Apostle of
Germany, and canonized a Saint. At this present, it is of no great reckoning,
but for a small market, and the Bishop of Exceter his house there: Columb that
comes from the East, passes hard by Columbton, a little Town bearing his
name: which King Alfred by his Testament, bequeathed to his younger son:
Poltimore.
and near unto Poltimore the seat of that worshipful, and right ancient
family of Bampfield, Ex.
intermingleth it self with the waters of Ex. And now by this time, Isc or Ex
growing bigger, and sporting himself, as it were, with spreading into many
streams, very commodious for mils, hieth apace, and comes close to the City
of Excester, unto which he leaves his name: whereupon Alexander Necham writes
thus, in his Poem of Divine sapience:
Praebuit, --
To Excester, Ex a River of fame
(First Iscia called) imposed the name.


This City Ptolomee calls ISCA, Antoninus ISCA DVNMONIORVM, for DANMONIORVM;
others (but falsely) Augusta, as if the second Legion Augusta had there been
resident; Whereas, we shall show hereafter that it kept station, and residence
in Caer Leon or Vske in Monmouth shire. Excester.
ISCA SILVRVM. The English Saxons termed it (...), and Monketon, of Exonia, in
British Caerisk, Caeauth, and Pencaer, that is, a head or principal City. For
Caer, (to tell you once for all) with our Welchmen. Caer, what it signifies.
Britans is as much to say, as a City, whereupon they use to name Jerusalem,
Caer Salem; Lutetia or Paris, Caer Paris; Rome, Caer Ruffaine. Thus Carthage in
the Punick tongue, was called, as Solinus witnesses, Cartheia, that is, the
new City. I have heard likewise, that Caer in the Syriack tongue, signified, a
City. Now seeing that the Syrians, as all men confess, peopled the whole
world with their Colonies, it may seem probable, that they left their tongue
also to their posterity, as the mother This City, as says William of
Malmesbury, albeit the soil adjoining be wet, foul and wealie, scarce able
to bring forth hungry oats, and many times empty husks without grain in
them, yet by reason of the stateliness of the place, the riches of the
Inhabitants, and frequent concourse of strangers, all kind of traffic, and
commerce of merchants is there so fresh, that a man can ask there for no
necessary, but he may have it. Situate it is on the Eastward bank of the
river Ex, upon a little hill gently arising with an easy ascent to a pretty
height, the pendant whereof lies East, and West, environed about with
ditches, and very strong walls, having many turrets orderly interposed, and
contains in circuit a mile and a half, having suburbs running out a great
way on each side. In it there are xv. Parish-Churches, and in the Rugemont,
sometime the seat of the West Saxon Kings, and afterward of the Earls of
Cornwall: but at this day commended for nothing else, but the antiquity and
situation thereof. For it commands the whole City, and territory about it,
and has a very pleasant prospect into the sea. In the East quarter of the
City, is to be seen the Cathedral Church in the midst of many fair houses
round about it, founded as the private history of the place witnesses, by King
Athelstan in the honor of Saint Peter, and replenished with Monks: which
Church at length Edward the Confessor after he had remooved some of the Monks
from thence to Westminster, and translated thither the Bishops Sees of
Cornwall, and Kirton, adorned with Episcopal Dignity, and made Bruier the
ninth Bishop after him, when the Monks were displaced, brought in a Deane, and
twenty and four Prebendaries. In which age flourished Joseph Iscanus borne
here, and from hence taking his surname, a Poet of most excellent wit, whose
writings were so well approved, as that they had equal commendation with the
works of ancient Poets: For, his Poem of the Trojan war, was divulged once or
twice in Germany under the name of Cornelius Nepos. Cornel. Nepos.


When this City Excester.
Isca came under the Roman Jurisdiction it appears not for certain: For, so
far off am I from thinking that Vespasian won it, (as Geffrey Monmouth
affirms) what time as he warring in Britain under Claudius the Emperor, was
showed by the Destinies unto the world, that I think it was then scarcely
built. Yet in the time of the Antonines, it may seem to have been well
known: for hither, and no farther this way did Antonine specify any place in
his wayfaring book. It came not fully to the English-Saxons hands before the
465. year after their entrance into Britain. William Malmesbury.
For, at that time Athelstane expelled the Britans quite out of the City, who
before had inhabited it in equal right with the Saxons, yea, and drove them
beyond Tamar, and then fortified the City round about with a rampire, and wall
of fouresquare stone, and other bulwarks for defense. Since which time, many
benefits by the Kings have been bestowed upon it, and among the rest, as we
read Domesday.
book, This City paid no tribute, but when London, York, and Winchester
paid, and that was half a mark of silver for a soldiers service. And when
there was any expedition set out either by sea or land, it served in proportion
to five hides. It has been likewise from time to time much afflicted, once
spoiled and sore shaken, by the furious outrages of the Danes, in the year of
our redemption Suen the Dane in the year 1003. at which time by the treachery
of one Hugh a Norman Governor of the city, it was raced and ruined along from
the East gate to the West. And scarcely began it to flourish again, when
William the Conqueror, most straightly beleaguered it: when the Citizens in
the mean while thought it not sufficient to shut their gates against him, but
malapartly let fly taunts, and flouts at him: but when a piece of their wall
fell down, by the special hand of God, as the Historians of that age report,
they yielded immediately thereupon. At which time, as we find in the said
survey-booke of his, The King had in this City three hundred houses: it paid
fifteen pounds by the year, and forty houses were After this it was thrice
besieged, and yet it easily avoided all: First, by Hugh Courtney Earl of
Denshire in that civil war between the two houses of Lancaster and York:
then, by Perkin Warbecke that imaginary, counterfeit and pretended Prince, who
being a young man of a very base condition, faining himself to be Richard Duke
of York, the second son of King Edward the Fourth, stirred up dangerous
stirs against Henry the Seventh: thirdly, by seditious Rebels of Cornwall,
in the year of Christ 1549: at which time the Citizens, most grievously
pinched though they were with scarcity of all things, continued nevertheless
in their faith and allegiance, until that John Lord Russell,

But Excester received not so great damage at these enemies hands, as it did by
certain dammes, which they call Wears, that Edward Courtney Earl of
Denshire, taking high displeasure against the Citizens, made in the river Ex,
which stop the passage so, that no vessel can come up to the City; but since
that time all merchandise is carried by land from Topesham three miles off. And
albeit it has been decreed by Act of Parliament, Wear.
to take away these Wears, yet they continue there still. Hereupon, the little
Town adjoining is call Wear, being aforetime named, Heneaton: which was
sometime the possession of Augustine de Baa: from whom in right of inheritance
it descended to John Holland, who in his signet which my self Chapter 24. Ed. 3
gardant among flowers de Lys. The civil government of this City is in the
power of four and twenty persons: out of whom there is from year to year a
Major elected; who with four Bailiffes rules here the State. As touching the
Geographicall description of this place, the old tables of Oxford have set
down the longitude thereof to be nineteen degrees, and eleven scruples: the
latitude fifty degrees, and forty scruples or minutes.

This City; Dukes of E^cester.
that I may not omit so much, has had three Dukes. For, Richard the Second of
that name, King of England, created John Holland Earl of Huntingdon and his
brother by the mothers side, the first Duke of Excester: whom Henry the Fourth
deposed from this dignity, and left unto him the name only of Earl of
Huntingdon: See the Ear^^ of Dorset.
and Earl of Dorset, a right noble and worthy warrior. When he was dead
leaving no issue behind him, John Holland son of that aforesaid John, (as
heir unto his brother Richard who died without children, and to his father
both) being restored to his blood, by the favor and bounty of King Henry the
Sixth recovered his fathers honor; and left the same to Henry his son, who so
long as the Lancastrians stood upright, flourished in very much honor; but
afterward when the family of York, was a float and had rule of all, gave an
example to teach men, how ill trusting it is to great Fortunes. For this was
that same Henry, Duke of Excester, Philip Comi^^us, cap. 50.
who albeit he had wedded King Edward the Fourth his sister, was of Excester by
Henry the Eighth, Marquess of Excester.
and designed heir apparent. But this Marquess Reginald Poole (afterward
Cardinal) then a fugitive; practicing with the Emperor and the Pope, against
his own Country, and the King who had now abrogated the Popes authority; he
was judicially arraigned, and being condemned, with some others, 1605.
lost his head. But now of late by the favor of King James, Thomas Cecill Lord
Burleigh, enjoys the title of Earl of Excester, a right good man, and the
worthy son of so excellent a father, being the eldest son of William

From Excester, going to the very mouth of the River, I find no monument of
Antiquity, but Exminster, sometime called Exanminster, bequeathed by King
Elfred to his younger son; Pouderham.
and Pouderham Castle built by Isabell de Redvers or Rivers.
Ripariis, the seat long time of that most noble family of the Courtneys,
Knights: who being lineally descended from the stock of the Earls of
Denshire, and allied by affinity to most honorable houses, flourish still at
this day, most worthy of their descent from so high Ancestors. Under Pouderham,
Ken a pretty brook enters into Ex, which rises near Holcombe, Holcombe.
Burnet.
where in a Park is a fair place built by Sir Thomas Denis, whose Le Dan
Denis, by which name the Cornish called the Danes. But lower upon the very
mouth of the river on the other bank side, as the name it self does testify,
Exmouth.
stands Exanmouth; known by nothing else but the name, and for that some
fishermen dwelt therein.

Otterey.
More Eastward, Otterey, that is, The River of Otters, or River-Dogs, which we
call Otters, as may appear by the signification of the word, falls into the
sea; which runs hard under Honnyton, Honnyton.
a Town not unknown to those that travel into these parts, and was given by
Isabell, heir to Earls of Devonshire, to King Edward the First, when her
issue failed: and does import his name to certain places. Among Honnyton,
Mohuns Ottery, the possession in times past of the Mohuns, from whom by right
of marriage it came to the Carews: beneath Honyton Saint Mary's Otterey, so
called of Saint Mary's College, which John Grandison Bishop of Excester
founded, who drew the whole estates of all the Clergy men in his Diocese to
himself. For he persuaded them in their Wills to give up, and make over all
that they had unto his hands, as who would bestow the same to godly uses, in
endowing Churches, and in building of Hospitals, and Colleges therewith, which
verily he (by report) performed accordingly very devoutly.

From the mouth of this Otterey, the shore runs Eastward with many winding
reaches, and turning creekes, by Budley, Sidmouth, and Seaton, famous Ports in
times Moridunum.
As for Seaton, I would guess it to be that MORIDVNVM, which Antoninus
speaks of, and is placed between DVRNOVARIA and ISCA, (if the book be not
faulty) and called in Peutegerius table by a name cut short, RIDVNVM,
considering both the distance, and the signification of the name. For,
Moridunum in the British tongue is the very same that Seaton in English, to
wit, A Town upon an hill by the Sea. Wiscomb.
Hereto adjoyneth Wiscomb, a Town memorable in this respect that in it there
dwelt William Lord Bonevill, whose heir Cecilie by her marriage brought the
titles of Lord Bonevill, See in Sommerset shire.
and Harington with a goodly inheritance in these Marquess Dorset.

Under these Towns the River Ax discharges it self at a very small channel,
after it has passed down by Ford, where Adelize daughter to Baldwine of
Okchampton, Axminster.
founded an Abbey for Cistercian Monks, 1140. and by Axanminster, a Town
renowned in the ancient Histories only for their Tombs of the Saxon
Brunaburg, and translated hither; and situate it is in the very frontire and
limit of this Province. Near unto which Reginald Mohun of Dunster, unto whom
the Manor of Axminster in right of inheritance fell by the Fourth daughter of
William de Briewr, The Register of Newenham.
built the Abbey of Newenham in the year of Grace 1246. Hence the East-bound
runs crookedly north-westward, by villages of no fame toward Severn side;
along which now let us take our way.

From Cornwall the first shore in this shire that stretches out it self in
length to the Severn Sea, Hercules his Promontory.
is by Ptolomee called, THE PROMONTORIE OF HERCULES, and retains still some
little remnant of that name, being called at this day Hertypoinct, Herton, and
Hertlond, famous in old time for the relics of that holy man Saint Nectan.
Saint Nectan.
In honor of whom there was erected here a little Monastery, by Githa Earl
Goodwins wife, who had this Nectan in especial reverence, William of
Malmesbury.
for that she was persuaded, that for his merits her husband had escaped the
danger of shipwreck in a violent and raging tempest. Howbeit afterward, the
Dinants, who also are named Dinhams, that came out of Bretagne in France, whose
demeans, as in ^ee it was, were counted the founders thereof: and from them
descended Baron Dinham, Dinham.
Lord high Treasurer of England, under K. Henry the Seventh, by whose sisters,
and heirs, the inheritance was divided between Lord Zouch, Bourchier
Fitz-warin, Carew, and Arundell.

Whether ever Hercules came into Britain.
and vanquished here I wot not what Giants. But if it be true as Expounders of
Moral Tales.
Mythologers affirm, that there was never any Hercules, but that by him the
power of humane wisdom is understtod, whereby we overcome pride, lust,
envy, and such like monsters: or if, according to the Gentiles divinity, by
Hercules they mean the Sun, and by those twelve Labors, endured and
performed by Hercules, the twelve signs of the Zodiac, which the Sun in his
yearly course passes through; what it is they say, let them look to it
themselves. But for mine own part, I willingly believe that there was an
Hercules, nay, I could be content to grant with Varro, that there were of them
forty and three, all whose acts were Hercules-rocke in Terra di Laviro.
Campania, Hercules Haven in Riviera di Genoa.
Liguria, Hercules Grove in Germany: hence likewise, the Promontories of
Hercules in Mauritania, Galatia, and Britain.

As the shore gives back again from this Promontorie of Hercules, the two
Towridge, and Taw, which are the only Rivers in this north part of the
County, discharge themselves into the sea at one mouth. Towridge springing not
far from Henry poinct above said, runs South-Eastward, and taking into him
the river Ock, whereof Ock-hampton a little market town took the name, where
Baldwine the Vicount had his Castle in William the Conqueror time (as
appears out of Domesday book) from whom it descended to the Courtneys;
suddenly turning his channel makes way Northward, Poderidge.
insulating in a manner Potheridge the Mansion Monk. Happily for that some one
of them being a professed Monk by dispensation to continue his house, returned
to temporal state; as that Noble house in France surnamed Archevesque, that
is, Archbishop, took that name to continue the memory that one of the
Progenitors of an Archbishop, returned by dispensation to be a Temporal man.
Certainly, whencesoever the name came, it is ancient, and they have
worshipfully matched, and not long since with one of the daughters of Arthur
Plantagenet, Vicount Lisley, natural son to King Edward the Fourth. Hence
Towridge hastneth to Tourington* which it gives name unto, Bediford.
standing over it in a great length upon the brow of a little hill: by Bediford
also, Taw. This Taw breaking forth out of the very midst and heart of the shire,
first runs down by Chimligh a little market town, not far from
Chettlehampton a small Village, where Hyertha, canonized a Shee-Saint, lay
interred: from thence having passed by Tawton, where Werstane, and Putta, the
first Bishops of Denshire had their See, about the year of our Lord 906. and
Tawstoke over against it, John Hooker of the Bishops of Excester. Berstable.
now the seat of the right honorable Earl of Bathe, it makes haste to
Berstaple. Reputed this is a very ancient Town, and for elegant building, and
frequencie of people held chief in all this coast, situate amidst hills in
form of a semicircle Se aequor refundit in ^quor.
the sea reengorgeth it self back again into the sea, it is so shallow,
creeping between sands and shelves, as it hardly bears smaller vessels. On
the south side it has a stately bridge built by one Stamford a Citizen of
London: In the North part, where North Ewe a little river or brook runs,
are seen the relics of a Castle, which by the common report, King
Athelstane, but (as others say) Iudael of Totenais built: for the keeping, and
defense whereof certain Lands adjoining thereabout, are held in Castleguard.
It had sometimes a wall about it, but now there remain scarce any small tokens
thereof: The said Iudael of Totenais received it in free gift in fee of King
William It had within the Burgh forty Burgesses, and nine without. King Henry
the First, endowed it with many privileges, and King John with more. A Major,
and two Bailiffes for a long time it had: but Queen Mary ordained there a
Major, two Aldermen, and a Counsel of twenty and four. The Inhabitants (for
the most part) are Merchants, who in France, and Spain trade, and traffic
much. Neither must this be passed over with John Jewel. Thomas Harding.
John Jewel Bishop of Sarisbury, and Thomas Harding the public professor in
Lovain, who most hotly contended, and wrote learnedly one against the other,
concerning the truth of Religion.

Ralege.
From hence, the river Ta^ saluting (as it were) Ralegh, which in times past had
noble Lords of that name, but now is the possession of a right worshipful
house, surnamed Chichester: and afterward increased by Towbridge water,
falls into the Severne Sea, Kinvith.
but it mee^eth nor with Kinwith Castle, whereof Asserius makes mention. For,
here about such a Castle there was of that name, for site of the ground about
it, very safe on every side, save only on the East quarter: at the which in
the Hubba the Dane, who with many slaughters and overthrowes had harried the
English Nation, was (with many other Danes) slain. And thereupon the place
afterward was called by our Historiographers; Hubbestow. And then it was that
the Englishmen wan the Danes banner, The Danes Banner.
called, Reafan. Which, I note therefore Leather-breech, the Dane, with such an
opinion of good luck, as they thought that it never should be won.

After this, nothing there is to be seen upon this coast but Ilfarcomb, a
good and sure rode for ships, and Comb-Marton bordering hard upon it: under
which, old mines of lead, not without veins of silver, have of late been
discovered. As for this word Comb, Comb, what i^ signifies. Nicotius.
(to observe so much once for all) which is an usual adjection to names of
places a low situation, or a Vale: and derived it may seem to be of Kum a
British word, that betokens the same: and the French men in their tongue
retain it still in the very same sense, from the ancient Gallique language,
the same with old British.

More South-East from hence, Bampton.
and near unto Somersetshire Bampton, sometimes Baentun, shows it self:
which under William the Conqueror befell unto Walter de Doway, Paganelli, or
Painels.
with other right large and fair lands elsewhere: of whose posterity Iuliana
an Inheritrix, married to William Paganell, commonly Paynell, bare Fulconem.
Fulk de Bampton: and he begat William, and Christian the wife of Cogan of
Ireland whose posterity succeeded in the possession thereof; for that the
issue of the said William Bourchiers now Earls of Bathe, by an heir of
Hancford, who had married likewise an heir of the Lord Fitz-warin.

In the prime and infancy of the Normans Empire, Earls of D^^vonshire.
(to say nothing of Hugh the Norman whom Queen Emnia had before time made
Ruler over this country) King William the First ordained one Baldwine to be
the hereditarie Sheriff, or Vicount of Denshire, and Baron of Okchampton:
after whom succeeded in that honor Richard his son, Register of Ford Abbey.
who died without issue male. Then, King Henry the First, bestowed upon
Richard de Redvers or Rivers.
Redveriis, First Tiverton, and afterward the honor of Plimpton He had a
Son named Baldwin, who siding with Maude the Empress against King Stephen
was banished the Realm. Howbeit, Richard his Son recovered this honor of
his Fathers: and he left behind him two Sons, Baldwin, and Richard, who in
order successively were Earls of Denshire, and died without issue. The honor
therefore reverted back again de Vernon, because he was there borne. This
William begat Baldwin, who departed this life before his father: yet before his
death, he had begotten of Margaret, daughter to Gwarin Fitz-Gerold, Baldwine
the third of that name, Earl of Denshire. This Baldwin had two children, to
wit, Baldwin the last Earl out of this family, that died without issue 1261.
who changed the Ghryphon, clasping and crushing a little beast, (which mark his
Ancestors used in their seal) into a Scutcheon, or with a Lion rampant, azur,
and Called, Is^^bella de Fortibus.
Isabell, who being espoused to William Called, Is^^bella de Fortibus.
de Fortibus, Earl of Albemarle, bare to him a Son, named Thomas, who died
soon after, and Avellina a daughter married to Edmund Earl of Lancaster, whom
she mightily enriched, with the inheritance of her father, and died issulesse.
After some time, King Edward the Third, by his Claus. 9. Edw. tertii. M. 35.
^^. dorso.
without any other complement of ceremonies, created Hugh Courtney, Earl of
Devonshire, and linked as cousin, and next heir to the said Isabel. For he
commanded him by virtue of those missives, to use that title, and by a precept
to the high Sheriff of the Shire, commanded he should be so acknowledged.
Reginald Courtney was the first of this family that came into England, brought
hither by King Henry the Second, and by him advanced with the marriage of the
heir of the Baronie of Okchampton, for that he procured the marriage between
the said King, Poictu and Aquitaine. But whether he was branched from the
house of Courtney before it was matched in the blood royal of France, or after
which our Monks affirm, but Du Tillet Keeper of the Records of France
doubts, I may say somewhat in another place. After the first Earl Hugh,
succeeded his son Hugh; whom Edward his Grandchild, by Edward his Son
followed, who died before him; and when he died, he left it to his son Hugh:
and he likewise to Thomas his son, who died in the thirtieth and sixth year
of King Henry the sixth his reign. The said Thomas begat three sons, namely,
Thomas, Henry, and John: whose estate during the heat of those mortal
dissensions between the houses Towton field, was beheaded at York: Henry his
brother, and Successor seven years after, drank of the same cup at
Salisburie. 9. Edward the Fourth.
And although King Edward the Fourth, advanced Sir Humfrey Stafford of
Suthwicke to the Earldom of Denshire, who within three months revolting from
King Edward his advancer most ingratefully, was apprehended, and without
process executed at Bridge water: yet John Courtney aforesaid, the youngest
brother, would not leave this title, but with his life, which he lost in the
battle of Tewksbury. For a long time after, this family lay in some sort
obscured: yet under King Henry the Seventh, it reflourished: for, he advanced
again Edward Courtney, Padua in Italy: for, the best men (as says
Quadrigarius) are of least continuance. In the fortieth and sixth year after
his death, 1603.
King James gave the honorable title of Earl of Devonshire, to Charles Blunt
Lord Mountjoy, and Lieutenant General of Ireland; which title he affected, as
descended from a Cousin, and heir of Humfrey Stafford Earl of Devonshire. He
was a worthy personage, as well for martial prowess, and ornaments of
learning, as

There be contained in this County Parish-Churches 394.


NExt unto the Danmonians Eastward, Ptolomy places in his Geographicall tables
(...), as he wrote in Greek, who in the Latin copies are written DVROTRIGES.
The same people were named by the Britains about the year of Salvation 890.
Dwr-Gwyr, as says mine Author Asserius Menevensis, who lived Dorset, and
Dorset-shire. That name DVROTRIGES, being ancient and mere British, may seem
by a very good and probable Etymology to be derived of DOVR, Dwr what i^
signifies.
or Dwr, which in the British tongue signifies Water, and of Trig, that
betokens an Inhabitant, as if a man would say, dwellers by the water or
Seaside. Neither verily from any other fountain than from water are we to
fetch those names of places in old France or Gaul, which Dur, and Dour, or do
end in the same; As for example, DVROCASES, DVROCOTTORVM, DVRANIVS, DORDONIA,
DVROLORVM, DOROMELLVM, DIVODVRVM, BREVIODVRVM, BATAVODVRVM, GANODVRVM,
OCTODVRVM, and a number of that sort, as well in Gaul as in Britain. As for
that English-Saxon word (...), compounded of both tongues, British and English,
it carries the same sense and signification that DVROTRIGES does. For, Setta
what i^ is.
(...) with our old Forefathers, like as with the rest of the Germans,
Chiltern-hilles, (...): the dwellers by the river Arow, (...): even as the
Germans called the Inhabitants of Woods and Forests Holtsatten: because they
dwelt within or among the Woods. Neither went our Britans from the reason and
meaning of the old name, when they termed these DVROTRIGES, of whom we now
treat, Dwr-Gweir, that is to say, Men bordering on the Maritime or Seacoast.
For, their country

DORSET-SHIRE.
THe County of Dorset as it is on the Northside bounded with Somersetshire and
Wiltshire, on the West with Devonshire and some part of Somersetshire, on the
East with Hampshire: so on the South part, where it carries the greatest
length, it lies all

In the very entrance into this, out of Denshire the first place that shows
it self on this shore is Lime, Lime.
a little town situate upon a steep hill, so called of a small river of the
same name running hard by: which scarcely may challenge the name of a Cobbe,
sufficiently defended from the force of winds with rocks and high trees. In
ancient books I can hardly find any mention thereof: only thus much I have
read, that King Kinwulfe in the year of our Lord 774. gave (by these words)
the land of one Mansion unto the Church of Scireburne, hard by the Wersterne
banks of the river Lime, not far from the place where he hides the course of
his stream within the Sea: to this end, that for the said Church salt might be
boiled to the sustaining of manifold necessities,

Near thereunto the river Carr discharges it self into the Sea, and there
stands Carmouth a little village: Carmouth.
where the bold roving Danes having good success in sea fights, won two
victories of the English, first vanquished King Egbert in the Aethelwolfe. Then
there is Burtport, Burtport.
or more truly Birtport, placed between two small rivers which there meet
together: In this town, in the days of King Edward the Confessor, there were
reckoned one hundred and twenty houses, but in William the Conquerors reign,
as we find in his book of Doomesday, one hundred and no more. In our time in
respect of the soil yiedling the best hemp, and skill of the people for making
ropes and cables for ships, it was provided by a special statute, to remain
in force for a certain set time, that ropes for the Navy of England should be
twisted no where else. Neither is this place able to maintain the name of an
haven, albeit in the mouth of the river being on both sides enclosed within
little hills, nature seems as it were of

From hence the shore winding in and out shoots far into the Sea: and a bank
called Chesil of sands heaped up thick together (with a narrow frith between)
lies in length for nine miles which the South Wind when it is up, Chesill.
commonly cutteth asunder and disperseth, but the Northern wind binds, and
hardneth again. By this Bank or Sand-ridge, Portland.
Portland, sometime an Island is now adjoined to the main-land: The reason of
which name is altogether unknown, unless it were so called because it lies
full against the Port Weymouth: but it sounds more near unto the truth, that
this name was given it of one Port a noble Saxon, who about the year of our
History of Winchester.
This Portland in the declining state of the Saxons Empire (for before-time
writers never spoke of it) felt as much as any other place, from time to time,
the violent rage of the Danes. But when the Danish war was ended, it fell to
the possession of the Church of Winchester. For, at Emme mother to King Edward
the Confessor (whose name was called in question, and she charged for
incontinencie with Aldwin Bishop of Winchester) had gone barefoot upon nine
culters red hot in Winchester Church without harm (an unusual kind of trial
in those days, and then called Ordalium) and so cleared her self of that
imputation, that she made her chastity by so great a miracle more famous to
posterity: She for a memorial thereof, gave nine Lordships to the Church of
Winchester: and King Edward her son, repenting that he had so wrongfully
brought his mothers name into question bestowed likewise upon the said Church
this Island with other revenues. It is in compass scarce seven miles, rising
up about Isidis Plocamos, that is, Isis hair, which as Pliny reports out of
Iuba, is a shrub growing in the Sea not unlike unto Coral without leaf: cut
it up it turns into a black color, and if it fall, it soon breaks. On the
East Side it has one only Church, and very few houses standing close thereto,
and on the North a Castle built by King Henry the Eighth, which also Weimouth.
Weymouth.
A little town this is, upon the mouth of Wey a small river; over against
which on the other side of the bank stands Melcomb, surnamed Regis, that is,
Kings Melcomb, divided from the other only by the haven between. But the
privileges of the haven were awarded from them by sentence of the Parliament;
howbeit afterward recovered.

These stood both sometimes proudly upon their own several privileges, and
were in emulation one of another: but now (God turn it to the good of both)
many they are by Authority of Parliament incorporated into one body, conjoined
of late by a bridge, and grown very much greater, and goodlier in buildings by
sea-adventures than heretofore.

Purbeck (as they call it) which for a great part of it is an heath and forest
like indeed replenished with Dear both red and fallow, having also veins of
marble running scatteringly here and there under the ground. In the midst
whereof, there is an old large castle named Corf seated upon a great slaty
hill, which after a long combat with time somewhat yielded as overcome, unto
time, until of late it has been repaired, and is a notable testimony and
memorial of a Stepmothers hatred. A Stepdames hatred, that is, her husbands
son.
For, Aelfrith to make way for her own son Etheldred to the Crown, when
Edward her son in law King of England, came to visit her in this castle from
his disport of hunting, set some villains and hacksters to murder him, and
like a most wicked Stepdame fed her eyes with his This Purbeck is called an
Isle, although it be only a Demi Island, compassed round about with the sea,
save only on the West Side: For, on the East, the sea bends the banks
inward, and breaking in at a very narrow straight between the two shores
(against which a small Isle with a block house called Brensey stands) makes
a broad and wide bay. On the North side whereof in the said Biland, there
stands over it the town Poole, so as it is wholly environed with waters
except it be on the North-side, where it closes with the continent and has
one gate and no more leading unto it. We may well think it so named, because
that bay aforesaid lying under it, in calm weather when the waters be Melcomb,
and licensed the Major thereof, to wall it about: which work afterward was
begun at the haven, by King Richard the Third, a Prince who deserved to be
rancked among the worst men and the best Kings. But ever since From, but the
English-Saxons, as witnesses Aerius, named it (...); whereupon perhaps, for
that this Bay was in old time called Fraumouth, the posterity ensuing rooke
the rivers name to be From. The head thereof is at Eureshot near unto the
West limit of this shire: From whence he takes his course Eastward by
Frompton, whereto it gave the name, and from the North receives a little river
running down by Cerne Abbey: Augustine the Apostle of the English nation
built, when he had broken there in pieces, Good health.
Heil the Idol of the heathen English-Saxons, and chased away the fog of
paganish superstition. Here was first bred among the religious men (as I have
read) John Morton Cardinal, Morton.
and Archbishop of Canterbury borne at S. Andrews Milborne, worthily advanced
to so high places for his good service in working Englands happiness by the
union of the two houses, of Lancaster, and York; and of this family there has
issued both R. Bishop of worcester, and many gentlemen of very good note in
this country, and elsewhere. Under this somewhat lower, the Frau or From
(choose whether you will) makes an Island, and so goes to see that most
ancient town [ Dorchester] which in Antoninus his Itinerarium is termed
DVRNOVARIA, the river Passage or Ferry, and seems by Ptolomee to be named
untruly, in sundry copies DVRNIVM and DVNIVM. This is the head Town of the
whole Shire, and yet is neither great nor beautiful, being long since
despoiled of the walls by the Danes, who raised as it is thought certain
trenches; whereof one is called Maumbury being an acre inditched, an other
Poundbury somewhat greater: and the third a mile off as a Camp, with five
trenches containing some ten acres, called Maiden castle, which a man may
easily conjecture to have been a summer station or camp of the Romans. But of
her antiquity it shows daily express tokens, namely the Roman causey of the
Fosse high way, and coin of the Romans both copper and silver found there, and
especially at Fordington hard by which the common people there, King Dorn his
pence, whom by some allusion to the name, they dream full sweetly, to have
been the founder of the town. It had anciently a castle in that place where
the Grey-friers built their Convent out of the ruins thereof, and has now but
three parish Churches, whereas the compass of the old town seems to have
been very large. But the most grievous hurt that it took, was when Sueno the
Dane had in most outrageous cruelty renewed the Danish war: and Hush the
Norman who ruled these countries a man of a persidious and treacherous mind,
suffered all to be spoiled and harried. But in what estate it stood soon after
the Normans first coming in, take knowledge if it please you, out of Domesday
book being the Survey of England. In King Edwards days there were in
Dorchester 170. houses, and these for all the Kings service discharged
themselves, and paid according to te^ Hides: but to the use of Houscarles one
mark of silver, excepting the customs which pertain ad firmam noctis, that
is, to the entertainment of the King for one night. There were in it two Mint
Masters. Now there be therein but 82. houses: and one hundredth have been
utterly destroyed since the time of Sheriff Hugh. If these terms seem to be
very obscure (as Sextus Cecilus said in the like matter) impute it not to the
fault of the writers, but to their ignorance who cannot conceive the meaning.

From hence From runs by Woodford, where in old time Guy Brient a Baron and
renowned warrior had a little Castle of his own: which afterward was the
habitation of Hugh Stafford of Suthwick; by one of whose daughters
Inheritrices, it Thomas Strangwaies, who being borne in Lancashire, and brought
hither by the first Marquess Dorset, Strangwaies.
obtained a great and rich inheritance in these parts, and his issue built a
very fair house at Milbery. Then holds he on his course besides Byndon, in
the Saxon tongue (...), which also had a monastery, where Kinegilsus in the
year 614. in a doubtful, and dangerous battle vanquished Marney: now it
gives the honorable title of Vicount unto the Lord Thomas Howard Knight of
the order of S. George: whose father Thomas the second son of Thomas Howard,
the second of that name Duke of Norfolk, Bindon.
Queen Elizabeth created Vicount Howard of Bindon, when he having matched in
marriage with the daughter and heir of Baron Marney, was seized here of a
very great inheritance of the Newborows. Newboroug^^
These who were anciently named de Novo Burgo, and commonly Newboroughs, derive
their pedigree from a younger soon of Henry the first Earl of Warwick of the
Norman line: and held here Winfrott, with the whole Hundred of the gift of
King Henry the First, per (these be the words out of the book of the Offices)
in Capite de Domino Rege: that is, by service of Chamberlain, in Chef, from
our sovereign Lord the King. Grand Serjeantie.
But under Edward the Third I have read, that this was held by Sergeantie,
namely, by holding the Laver or Ewre for the King his Sovereign Lord to wash,
upon his Coronation day. Also Raulph Moien held the Manor of Owres near
adjoining by service of Serjeantie in the Kitchen, of the gift likewise of King
Henry the First: and R. de Wells the Manor of Wells heereabout, since the
Conquest of England, by the service of the Kings Baker. Which I note, only by
the way.

Where From makes his issue into that Bay, whereupon Poole is situate, hard
by the very mouth is planted Warham, in the Saxon tongue (...), a town Trent,
From, and the Sea together: In King Edward the Confessors time, it had two
Mint masters: but whiles William the Conqueror reigned it could not reckon
above seven dwelling houses in it. Yet afterward it flourished again,
fortified with the wall, furnished with a mint house, a great number of
Inhabitants, and a most strong Castle, which that King William the First built,
it continued in a most flourishing state until the days of King Henry the
Second, who when he came to challenge the Crown of England in the year 1142,
he arrived here, besieged and took the Castle which was defended by Robert
Lacy, against him in behalf Stephen, and afterward Robert of Lincoln a man of
mighty possessions in these parts defended the same against King Stephen. But
from that time, by occasion partly of wars, and partly of sudden casualtie by
fires, by reason also that the sea by little and little which draws the
commodity of an haven, it is almost run to ruin: and in the very heart of the
old town it brings forth store of garlic. At this mouth likewise is
discharged another small river with From, Asserius calls it Trent, but now
the Inhabitants thereby name it Piddle: From the North bank whereof scarce
three miles off I saw the ruins of Middleton Abbey, which King Athelstane
founded as a satisfaction to appease the ghost and soul of his brother Edwine,
whom he had deprived both of his Kingdom, and life. For when that solicitous
desire of reigning Middleton
Under this Middleton, there is voided also another river, which runs hard
by Bear a little mercate town, where for a long time, that ancient, and famous
family de Turbida villa, commonly, Turbervill had their chief habitation,
whereof as some were famous, so Hugh Turburvill in the time of King Edward the
First was infamous for his traitorous practices with the French.

But to go back again to the West part of the shire: At the spring head of
From, where the soil is most fruitful, the forest of Blackmore sometimes
thick, and full of Forest of White-hart^
and better known name is called The Forest of white heart. The reason of
which name, the Inhabitants by tradition from their forefathers report to be
thus. When King Henry the Third came hither to hunt, and had taken other Dear,
he spared a most beautiful and goodly White-Hart, which afterward T. de
la-Lynde a gentleman of this country with others in his company took and
killed: but how perilous a matter it was to be twitching (as they say) of a
lion they soon White heart silver. Shirburne.
which is called White heart silver. There joyneth near to this forest
Shirburne town, named also Shirburne Castle, in old time (...), which by
interpretation is Fons Limpidus, or as it is else where written Fons clarus,
that is, Pure fountain or clear well, scited on the hanging of an hill, a
pleasant and proper seat, as William of Malmesburie says, as well for the
frequent number of Inhabitants, as the situation: and now it is the most
populous, and best haunted town of all this country, Aldelme the first Bishop
there consecrated: afterward also in the reign of Etheldred, Herman the
Bishop of Sunning, having obtained this Bishopric, translated his Episcopal
see hither, and joined the said Bishopric of Sunning unto this, which under
William Conqueror the same Bishop translated to Sarisburie, and reserved
Shirburne to be a retiring place for his Successors, unto whom it belongs as
yet: And one of them, namely, Roger, built a strong Castle in the East-part
thereof, under which lay sometime a wide mere, and many fish pooles: and now
being filled up are converted into most pleasant, and rich meadow ground. As for
the Cathedral Church, presently upon the translation of the Sea, it Iuell,
whereof I will speak some where else, winding in and out with many curving
reaches, runs Westward to Chiston, the seat sometime of the lineage de
Maulbauch, Chiston.
from which it descended hereditarily unto the family of the Hors^ies Knights,
where it enters into Sommersetshire.

More toward the East the most famous river Stoure passing full of tenches and
Eeles especially, arising in Wiltshire out of six fountains comes down to
Stourton, the honor and seat of the Barons of Stourton. So soon as it entered
in this Shire Gillingham forest, in which Edmund surnamed Iron-side in a
memorable battle put the Danes to flight: Shaftsbury.
and three miles from thence saluteth Shaftsbury standing upon an hill top,
very defective of water, sometimes called by the Britains as it is commonly,
but falsely thought, Caer Paladur, and in Latin by later writers Septonia: by
the Saxons (...), perhaps of the Churches Spire steeple, such as they termed
Scheafts. A little before the Normans time it had in it 104. houses, and three
Mint masters, as we read in that Domesday.
book so often by me alleged. And afterward, it flourished the more, by
reason of a Nunnerie which Elfgiva a most godly and devout Lady* wife to Edmund
that was King Aelfrids nephews son had erected, and of ten parish Churches
besides, or there about. But most famous in this Aquila prophesying here of the
conversion or change of the Britains Empire: For, some will have the bird, The
prophecy of Aquila.
Aquila, that is, an Eagle, others a man so named to have foretold here, that
the British Empire after the Saxons and Normans should return again to the
ancient Britains: and these men affirm and maintain that this place is of
greater antiquity than Saturn himself, whereas most certain it is, that it
was first built by Alfred. For, the Historiographer of Malmesbury has
recorded, that in his days there was an old stone translated from the ruins
of the wall into the Chapter house of the Names, which had this Inscription:
ANNO DOMINICAE INCARNATIONIS AELFREDVS REX FECIT HANC VRBEM. DCCC.LXXX. REGNI
SVI VIII. That is,

In the year of the incarnation of our Lord, King Aelfred built this City,
880. of his reign the eighth.



Lord Burghley, high Treasurer of England, and I have been informed that it
continued there until the time of King Henry the Eighth. Yet the Inhabitants
have a tradition that an old City stood upon the place which is called the
Castle-Greene, and by some, Bolt-bury; now a fair plain so scited that as of
one side it joyneth to the Town, so of another it is a strange sight to look
down to the vale under it: whereby in the West end of the old Chapel of S.
John, as I hear now, stands a Roman Inscription reversed. From thence the
Stoure, by Marnhill, of which place L. Henry Howard brother of Thomas last Duke
of Norfolk received of King James the Baron Howard, of Mernhill, before that
he was created Earl of Northampton, makes speed to Stourminster, which is as
much to say, as the Monastery or Minster upon Stoure. A small town this is,
standing somewhat with the lowest: from which there is a stone bridge built
reaching to Newton Castle; where offreth it self to be seen a lofty mount
cast up (as they say) to that height with great labor, but of the Castle
there remains nothing at all, but only the bare name. Of these, I have
nothing of more antiquity to say than this, that King Aelfred bequeathed
Stoureminster to a younger son of his. Hard by, at Silleston there rise two
good great hills, the one named Hameldon, the other Hodde, and both of them
fortified with a three fold Ditch and rampire. Barons Fit Pain.
And not far from thence (but the very place I cannot Okeford, the Capital
honor of the Baronie of Robert, the son of Pagan, commonly named Fitz-Payne,
who married the daughter of Guido de Brient, Baron Bri^^^^
who also in this West part enjoyed the honor of a Baron under King Edward the
Third: but for default of heir males of those Fitz-Paynes, it came to the
Poynings, Barons likewise in those days, and at length by a daughter and heir
of Poynings in the reign of Henry the Sixth, Barons Po^^nings.
these Barons titles, Fitz-Payne, Brient, and Poinings were conjoined in the
Percies Earls of Northumberland: Howbeit within our fathers remembrance
through the favor of King Henry the Eighth, the title of Baron Poinings,
reflourished in Sir Thomas Poinings, son of Sir Edward Poinings a martial
man and fruitful father of much base brood; but with him it soon vanished
away, as

From hence Stoure passes on by Brienston, that is, Brients town, where the
Rogerses dwell, Blandford^
an ancient family of Knights degree, to Market Blandford, which since in our
time it chanced to be burnt down, arose again, built more elegantly, and is
better peopled with Inhabitants. Then Stoure from thence, by Tarrent, where
Richard Poer Bishop of Sarisbury founded a Cell, for Virgins Votaries, speedeth
himself apace to that most ancient town VINDOGLADIA, Vindogladi^
where Antoninus makes mention. Which in the Saxons tongue is called (...),
commonly Winburne, Winburn.
and of the Monastery, Wenburnminster: and from hence to Dorcester are counted
sixteen miles just so many as the Emperor Antonine in his Itinerarie
reckons Vindogladia and Durnovaria. The name, as I conjecture, it takes of
the situation, because it is seated between two rivers: for, so in the
British tongue Windugledy sounds as much as between two Swords: now that the
Britains, by a peculiar phrase of their own, term rivers, Swords, it
appears by Aberdugledian, the British name of Milford Haven, which is as much
to say, as the mouth of two rivers, for that two rivers named with them
Gledian, that is, Swords, run into it. The latter name also of this town
seems to be set from Rivers: For Winburn is compounded of Vin, Burn in the
Saxon tongue what it signifies.
a parcel of the old name, and the Saxon word Burn, which among them
Cuthburga sister to Ina King of the West Saxons, Annals of the English-Saxons.
when upon a loathing weariness of wedlock she had sued out a Divorce from
her own husband King of Northumberland, built here a Nunnerie: which yielded
unto the injury of time, and fallen to Pole was Deane, who afterward being
Cardinal, and Archbishop of Canteburie, over and above the nobility of his
house (for descended he was of the Royal blood) became highly renowned for
piety, wisdom, and eloquence. King Etheldred a right good and virtuous
Prince brother of Aelfred, slain in the battle at Wittingham against the
Danes, lies enterred in this Church: upon whose Tomb, which not long since
has been repaired, this new Inscription is to be read: IN HOC LOCO QVIESCIT
CORPUS S. ETHELDREDI REGIS WEST SAXONVM MARTYRIS, QVI ANNO DOMINI DCCC
LXXII.XXIII. APRILIS PER MANVS DANORVM PAGANORVM OCCVBVIT.

That is, Here lies at rest the body of Etheldred King of the West Saxons,
Martyr, who died in the year of our Lord, 872. the 23. of April, by the hands
of the Danes, Or Painims: Paganorum.
Infidels.



Near unto whom lies entombed Gertrude Blunt Marchioness of Excester,
daughter to William Lord Montjoy, and mother to Edward Courtney the last Earl
of Devonshire of that house: and on the other side of the quier John de
Beaufort Duke of Somerset with his wife Margaret daughter and heir to Sir John
Beauchamp of Bletneshoe: whose daughter Margaret Countess of Richmond, and
mother of King Henry the Seventh, a most godly and virtuous Princess, erected
a School here for the training up of youth. But now will I turn my pen from
the Church to the Town; when the Danes by their crafty devices went about to
set the Englishmen together by the ears, and would have broken that league,
and unity which was between King Edward the Elder, and his cosen Aethelwald;
Aethelwald then lusting after the Kingdom Badbury, he fled and conveied
himself to his confederates the Danes. Badbury.
This Badbury is a little hill upon a fair down, scarce two miles off,
environed about with a triple trench, and rampire, and had by report in times
past a Castle, which was the seat of the West Saxon Kings: But now, if ever
there were any such, it lies so buried in the own ruins, and rubbish, that I
could see not so much as one token thereof. But, hard by, a sight I had of a
village or manor called Kingston Lacy, Kingston Lacy.
because together with Winburne it appurtained to the Lacies Earls of
Lincoln: unto whom by covenant it came from the Earls of Leicester, by the
means Robert Earl of Mellent and of Leicester: and at the last, both places,
from the Lacies fell unto the house of Lancaster, whose bounty, and
liberality Winburne had good trial of.

From this Winburne Stoure as it passes, admits Alen a little brook, over
which Giles Winburne, the habitation of the worshipful and ancient house of
Astleys Knights, also Wickhampton, the inheritance sometime of the Barons de
Maltravers: of whom the last, in the reign of Edward the Third, left behind
him two daughters only, the one wedded unto John de Arundell, grandfather to
John Earl of Arundell, who left unto his posterity the title of Barons de
Maltravers: the other, wife of Robert Le-Rous, and afterward of Sir John
Keines, Knight. From hence the Stoure passes on by Canford, Canford. Coperose
or Vitriol. Alum. Tho. Walsingham. 1317.
under which not long ago, James Lord Montjoy, studious in Mineral matters
began to make Calcanthum or Vitriol (we call it Coperas) and to boil Alome:
And out of which, in old time John Earl of Warren, to Lacey, the wife of
Thomas Earl of Lancaster. And now by this time Stoure leaves Dorsetshire
behind him, and after he has traveled through some part of Hantshire, at
length takes up his lodging in the Ocean: and yet not before he has
entertained a pretty river that runs to Cranburne, Cranburne.
a place well watered. Where in the year of Salvation 930. Aelward a noble
Gentleman, surnamed for his whiteness Meaw, founded a little monastery:
which, Robert Fitz-Haimon a Norman, unto whom fell the possessions of the said
Aelward, leaving here one or two Monks in a cell, translated to Theoksbury:
From whom in order of succession, by the Clares Earls Burghs Earls of Ulster,
it came to Lionell Duke of Clarence, and by him to the Crown. But now
Cranborne has his Uicount, now Earl of Salisburie whom King James for his
approved wisdom and worth, honored first with the title of Baron or Lord
Cecil of Essendon, Vicount Cranborne. 1604. Filioll.
and the next year after, of Vicount Cranborne. South from hence lies
Woodland emparked, sometime the seat of the worshipful family of Filioll, the
heirs whereof were married to Edward Seimor after Duke of Somerset, and
Willoughby of Wallaton.

As touching the Earls and Marquesses of this shire, Earls and Marquesses of
Dorset. The life of Osmund, manuscript.
King William the Conqueror, having now by conquest attained to the Kingdom of
England, made Osmund that was Earl of Seez in Normandy, both Bishop of
Sarisbury, and afterward also the Dorset, and his Chancellor; highly admiring
the godly wisdom of the man, and his notable good parts. Long after that,
King Richard the Second in the one and twentieth year of his reign, advanced
John de Beaufort, John of Gaunt his son and Earl of Sommerset, to be
Marquess Dorset, of which dignity King Henry the Fourth in hatred of Richard
the Second deprived him. See the Duk of Somerset.
And when as in the high Court of Parliament, the Commons of England there
assembled, who loved him very dearly, made earnest intercession that the said
dignity of Marquess might be restored unto him, he himself distasting this
new title, and never heard of before those days, utterly refused it. And then
his younger brother named Thomas Beaufort was created Earl of Dorset: who
afterward for his warlike prowess and valor In Normandy.
Harcourt. For, he valiantly defended Harflew in Normandy against the
Frenchmen, and in a pitched field encountering the Earl of Armignac put him to
flight. After he was dead without issue, King Henry the Sixth nominated out of
the same house of Lancaster, Edmund, first Earl, afterward Marquess Dorset,
and lastly Duke of Somerset: whose sons being slain in the civil wars,
Edward the Fourth, when as now the family of Lancaster lay as it were, over
trodden in the dust, created Thomas Gray out of the house of Ruthin, who was his
son in law (for the King had espoused the mother of the said Gray) Marquess
Dorset: when in right of his wife he had entered upon a great state, and
inheritance of the Bonvilles in this country, Frances daughter of Charles
Brandon Duke of Suffolk, 1553.
and Niece unto King Henry the Eighth by his sister. This Duke in Queen Mary's
days being put to death for high treason, learned too late, how dangerous a
thing it is to marry into the blood royal; and to feed ambitious hopes, both
in himself and in others. From that time the title of Dorset James at his
first entrance into this Kingdom, exalted Thomas Sackvill; Baron of Buckhurst,
and Lord high Treasurer of England; a man of rare wisdom, and most careful
providence, to the honor of Earl of Dorset, who ended his life with sudden
death 1608. and left Robert his son his successor who deceasing within the
year, left the said honor again to Richard his hopeful son whom he begot
of the Lady Margaret Howard Daughter to the late Duke of Norfolk.

In this County are numbered Parishes 248.

BELGAE.
Upon the North and East side of the Durotriges, bordered in times past the
Belgae, who as it is by the name probable, and by authority of writers very
likely, passed over from the Belgae, a people in Gaul, into Britain. For,
those Belgae having their beginning (as Caesar according to the information he
had from the men of Rhemes) of the Germans, and in old time being brought over
the Rhene, finding the Caesar says, they gat them over into Britain for to
spoil, and in warlicke manner to invade the country: and were all of them
called after the name of those countries from whence they came: Belgae, from
the Belgae in Gaul. Low Countries. The Nethe^ Lands.
where, after they had made war they remained and began to till the grounds.
But at what time they came hither to dwell, it is not certainly known, unless
Divitiacus King of the Suessones, who flourished before Caesar's time, brought
over the Belgae hither: For, a great part as well of Belgae, it is not
sufficiently showed. Belgae, whenc they were named.
Hubert Thomas of Liege, a great learned man, supposed Belgae to be a German
word, for that the Germans use to call the French and the Italians Wallen, as
strangers, yea and some of them Welgen. John Goropius, himself a Belgian,
maintains it to be derived of the word Belke, which in the Belgicke tongue
signifies wrath or anger, as if they would be sooner incensed with choler than
others. But seeing that the name of the Belgae, seems not to be sought for
out of that tongue Belgae of Pell, which in that tongue betokens Remote or
far off. For, of all Gaul they were the furthest, and as they were furthest
from the civil behavior and humanity of the Roman Province, Morini were the
people of all Belgica most remote, when he wrote thus: Extremique hominum
Morini, that is, The morini of all men furthest. But come we now to our Belgae,
who inhabited far and wide in Somersetshire, Wiltshire, and the inner parts of
Hantshire.

SOMERSETSHIRE.
THe County of Somerset, commonly called, Somersetshire, is a very large and
wealthy Region: the North side whereof the Severne Sea beats upon: the West
part confineth with Denshire: in the South it bordereth first upon Devonshire,
and then upon Dorsetshire: Eastward, upon Wiltshire: and North-east Or, weather.
air there, is so mild and summer-like: and in that sense the Welsh Britans at
this day term it Gladerhaf, borrowing that name out of our English tongue. And
verily, howsoever in summer time it is a right summer-like Country, yet surely,
in winter it may worthily be called, a winterish Region, so wet, and weely, so
miry and moorish it is, to the exceeding great trouble and encombrance of those
that travel in it. But I will believe, that this name without all question
grew from Somerton, Somertunensis, that is Somertunshire. In the very first
limit of the shire Westward, where Ex rises in a solitary and hilly moore,
first appears Dulverton, a silly market, according to the soil, and near
unto it was a small religious house of Black-chanons at Barelinch, who in
latter times acknowledged the Fetyplaces their founders.

Higher upward on the Severne side, where this shire confineth upon Devonshire,
first we meet with Porlock, Denshire.
(in the English-Saxon tongue (...), and Watchet) in times past Wecedpoort,
roades both, and harbors for ships, the which in the year Dunster Castle upon
a flat and low ground, Dunster Castle.
enclosed round about with hills, saving to the Sea-ward; built by the Moions,
or Mohuns. From whose heirs by agreements and compositions it came in the end
to the Lutterels. The Family of the Mohuns, or Moions.
A right noble and mighty house this of the Mohuns was for a long time, and
flourished from the very Conquerours days, (under whose reign that Castle
was built,) unto the time of King Richard the Second. Two Earls there were of
this County out of that family, as I shall show hereafter, William and
Reginald, who in the Barons war lost that honor. The Posterity afterward
were reputed Barons: of whom the last named John, left three daughters, Philip
wife to Edward Duke of York; Elizabeth, wedded to William Knokin: The Mother
of which three Ladies, as the report goes, Commons.
obtained of her husband so much pasture-ground in Common by the Town side for
the benefit of the Inhabitants, as she could go about in one day barefoot.

Near to this Castle, there lie two little Villages consecrate unto two
peculiar Saints of those places: the one of them is named Caranton, of Carantoc
the Britan: the other, Saint Decumanus.
Saint Decombs of Decuman; who putting to sea out of South Wales arrived here,
in a waste and Desert Wilderness, as we read, in an old Or, Martyrologe, that
is, a legend of Martyrs.
Agonel, overgrowen with shrubs, bushes, and briers, among woods of great
thickness, reaching out far out with high and steep hills one way, and
wonderfully uneven with as deep and hollow vallyes another way, where he
bidding worldly vanity farewell, was by a murderer stabbed to death, and of the
people honored as a Saint. And between these Clives, was an old Abbey of
white Monks, founded by William de Romara, Cosen to the Earl of Lincoln.
Somewhat farther from the SOMERSETTENSIS Comitatus. Vulgo Somersett Shyre Qui
^lim pars. fuit. BELGARVM
Stoke-Curcy, a Barony so named of the Lords thereof, the dwelling place of
William De Curcy, The Family of the Curcies. John de Curcie.
Sewer to King Henry the First. Out of which Family, John Curcy (as some
write) issued, that conquered Vlster in Ireland, whom nature framed for
magnanimity, gravitie, and all other virtues, a great person and a noble: the
record and testimony of whose approoved valor, is to be fetched out of the
ancient Annals of Ireland. From thence the shore by little and little bears
out to Stertpoint, where the two greatest Rivers of all this Shire, meeting in
confluence together, at one mouth run forth into the Severne sea. Ptolomee
calls this confluence UZELLA Aestuarium, Vzella.
of the river Ivel, which now has lost his name already before he came
hither. It springs in Dorsetshire, and no sooner enters into Somersetshire,
Evel a great market town, Evell.
which rose by the decay of Ilchester, and takes into him a rill, near which
is Camalet a steep hill, and hard to get up: Camale^.
on the top whereof are to be seen express tokens of a decayed Castle, with
tripl^ rampires of earth cast up, enclosing within it many acres of ground; and
there appear about the hill five or six ditches, so steep, that a man shall
sooner slide down, than go down. The Inhabitants name it, King Arthurs
Palace: That it was the Romans work, appears by pieces of money of their
coin daily dug out there. But what name it had among them, I know not,
unless it be the same which in Ninnius his Catalogue of ancient Cities, is
called Caer Calemion, in Camelion, by transposition of the letters. Hereby are
two towns, West Camalet, and East Camalet, or Queens Camalet, happily for that
it has been in dowry to some Queen. Cadburie.
As for Cadburie a little town next unto it, we may guess very probably to
have been that Cathbregion, where K. Arthur, (as Ninnius writes) defeated the
English-Saxons in a memorable battle. The other of that name, called, North,
Cadbury, K. Henry the Third, gave unto Nicolas de Moeles, who had married Avi^.
De novo Mercatu.
Hawisia, one of the heirs of James of Newmarket, Moeles.
whose posterity continued a long time in great fame and honor, until that
John dying in the time of Edward the Third, left two daughters, Muriel and
Isabel; the one wife to William Botereaux, and the Ivel, Winecaunton, no mean
market, *
is neighbor to this North Cadbury, and near thereunto is Pen, 1756.
Vinecaunton Pen.
an obscure village now, but anciently famous, being ordained by destiny as it
may seem to the overthrow both of Britans and Danes. For at this very place
Keniwalch a West Saxon, had such a day of the Britans, that they would scarcely
ever after abide to come into the field against the English-Saxons. And many a
year after that, King Edmund surnamed Iron-side, gave there a notable foil to
the Danes, as he pursued Canutus their King, then usurping the Crown of
England from place to place. The house of Lorty, called in Latin Records, de
Vrtiaco, was great hereabout, possessing Stoke Triske, Lorty, Baron de Vrtiaco.
Cocklington, and other Mannours, and Henry Lorty of this house, was summoned
a Baron to the Parliament, in the time of King Edward the

Now to return: the river Ivel from hence runs to ISCHALIS, mentioned by
Ptolomee, Ischalis. Ivelcester, commonly, Ilchester.
now Ivelcester: named in the Catalogue of Ninnius (if I be not deceived)
Pontavel Coit, for Pont-Ivel Coit, that is, Ivel bridge in the wood: by
Florentius of Worcester, Givelcester: at this day of small account, but only
for the antiquity, and the market there kept: for, pieces of the Roman
Caesar's, or Emperors money, of gold, Or, Copper.
brass, and silver, are other whiles here dug up. That in old time it had
been a great town, and on some sides strengthened with a double wall, the
ruins declare, and two towers upon the Bridge. About the time of the Normans
coming in, well William Rufus, to put him down, and set up his brother Robert
Duke of Normandy in his Royal throne, Robert Mowbray a warlike man, having
burnt Bathe, forcibly assaulted this town, but with lost labor; yet, what he
could not do then, long process of time has now partly effected, and in some
sort over-mastred it.

A little beneath, by Langport a proper market town, the Rivers Ivel and Pedred
running Mechelney. The River
make between them an Island, called Muchelney, that is to say, The great
Island, wherein are to be seen the defaced walls and ruins of an old Abbey,
built by King Athelstane, Pedred.
as writers reporr. This Pedred, commonly named Parret, has his beginning in
the very edge or skirt of the shire southward, and holding on a crooked and
winding course through Crockhorne, in the Saxon tongue, (...), and Pedderton,
Pedderton.
to whom it gave the name, sometime Pedridan, the Royal seat of King Ina, ^
which town now adays is of none account, unless it be for the market, and
Fair there held, which Henry Daubeney obtained of King Henry the Sixth) at
this place runs into Ivel, and robs him of his name, when he is come
down three miles Eastward, Montacute in Domesday book, Montagu^.
and has bidden farewell to Montacute, so termed Logoresburgh, Annals of
Glaston.
and Biscopeston. As for the Castle, it came to nothing many years since: the
stones thereof being had away to the repairing of the Monastery and other
houses. Upon the pitch of the said hill, there was a Chapel afterward set,
and dedicated unto Saint Michael, built with arch-worke, and an embowed roof
overhead all of stone, right artificially: to which for half a mile well nere,
men ascended upon stone-staires, which in their ascent fetched a compass
Mont-acute has given surname to that right honorable family of Montacute,
Drogo Iuvenis.

Lords Montacute.


which had their beginning of Dru the younger. Out of which there were four
Earls of Sarisburie: the last of them left one daughter only, Alice, who by
Richard Nevil, pare Richard that renowned Earl of Warwick, who kept such
stirs, and made all England to shake, also John Nevil Marquess Montacute,
who were both slain at Barnet field, in the year 1472. Afterward King Henry
the Eighth conferred the title of Lord Montacute, upon Henry Poole, son of
Margaret, daughter to George Montacute, to the title and honor of Vicount
Montacute, which his Grandchild Anthony who succeeded him now honorably
enjoys.

And here I must not forget neither, Preston, sometime the seat of John Sturton
younger son to the first Lord Sturton, one of whose heirs was married to
Sidenham of Brimton thereby; neither Odcombe adjoining thereto, as small a
town as it Odcombe.
seeing it had a Baron of the own, William de Briewer (for so was his father
named, in the Norman-French, because he was borne in an ^riceto. Briewers
Barons.
heath) who being taken up in the new Forest, by King Henry the Second in a
hunting journey, prooved a great man, and gracious in the Court (as whom King
Richard the First highly favored as his minion, and all the world embraced and
loved) grew unto a very wealthy estate, married Beatrix of Vannes, widow to
Reginald Earl of Cornwall, and his daughters, Register of Dunkeswell.
for that his son died without issue, by their marriages brought great
possessions to their husbands Breos, Wake, La-fert, and Piercy. Under this
town hard by, lies Stoke under Hamden, where the Gornaies had their Castle,
and built a College. de Gornaico, Gornays.
commonly named Gornay, was very ancient, and of good account, descended from
the same stock, out of which the Warrens Earls of Surrie, and the Mortimers
are sprung: but in the foregoing age it failed, and some of their lands
descended by the Hamptons, to the house of the Newtons Knights, Newtons.
who willignly acknowledge themselves to be come out of Wales; and not long
since to have been named Caradocks. Neither must I pass over in silence, how
Matthew Gournay, a most famous warrior in the reign of Edward the Third,
Algizer, against the Saracens, in the battles of Benamazin, Scluse, Cressie,
Ingenos, Poictiers, and Nazars in Spain. Then Parret.
Pedred waters Martocke, a little market Town, which in times past William of
Boloigne King Stephens son gave unto Faramuse of Boloigne, whose sole heir
Sibyll, was wedded to Ingelraine Fienes, from whom descended the Fienes, Barons
of Dacre, and Lords Say and Sele.

Parret from hence through the mire and moorish plain country, Faramuse of
Bolen. Fienes.
holding his course Northward, passed by Langport a market Town well
frequented, and Aulre, Aulre.
for, when King Elfred had given the Danes such an overthrow in battle, and by
strait siege compelled them to yield, so far forth, that they took an oath
immediately to depart out of his dominions, and Godrus their King promised to
become Christian, (as writes Asserius) at this very place he with great pomp
was Godfather to the said Godrus at the sacred Font.

Beneath this place from the West, Parret receives into it the river The One,
which springing far of in the West part of this Country, very near unto
Devonshire, runs through most rich and pleasant fields, passing down near
Wivelscomb, assigned anciently to the Bishops of Bathe, Wellington.
and by Wellington, which in the time of Hides. Lediard.
Manentes, what time he granted it together with Lediard, that had twelve
Manentes, Hides, unto the Bishop of Shirburne: Now, a pretty market Town it
is, and graced most by the habitation there of Sir John Popham (For, virtuous
men, and such as have so well deserved of their country, are not to be passed
in silence) a man of an ancient worshipful house, and withal a most upright
Iusticer, John Popham.
and of singular industry, who being Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench,
administreth his office toward malefactors with such wholesome and available
severity, that England has been beholden unto him a long time for a great
part of her private peace, and home-securitie.

Taunton.
The One runs by Thonton, commonly Taunton, and gives it his name. A very
fine and proper Town this is indeed, and most pleasantly seated: in a word,
one of the eyes of this shire: where Ina King of the West Saxons, built a
Castle, which Desburgia his wife raced, and laid even with the ground after
she had expelled from thence Eadbritch, King of the South Saxons, who now had
made himself Lord thereof, and used it as a bridle to keep the country
under, that he had subdued. When Edward the Confessor was King, it paid
tribute (as we find in the Kings Survey-Booke of England) after the rate of
fifty and four Hides: and had in it threescore and three Burgers: The Bishop
of Winchester held it as Lord, and his courts or Pleas were kept here thrice
in the year. Penalty fo peace-breaking, Pacis Infractio.
Breach of peace, hannifare, pence of the Hundred, and pence of Saint Peter de
Circieto, thrice in the year to hold the Bishops Pleas without warning, to go
forth to warfare with the Bishops men. The Country here, most delectable on
every side with green meadows; flourishing with pleasant Gardens and Orchards,
and replenished with fair Manor houses; wonderfully contenteth the eyes of
the beholders. And among these houses; those of greatest note are these:
Orchard, which had in times past Lords of that name, from whom in right of
Inheritance it descended unto the Portmans, men of Knights degree: Mallet.
Hach Beauchamp, and Cory Mallet, bearing those additions of their Lords, For,
this was the seat of the Mallets, that came of the Norman race, and from them
in short time, Pointzes.
it fell by the female heir to the Pointzes. From among de Bello Campo, they
flourished in high places of honor, Beauchamps Barons.
from the time of King Henry the Second: but especially since, that Cecilie
Forts.
de Fortibus, which derived her pedigree from the Earls de Ferrarijs, and that
great Marshall of England William Earl of Pembroke, matched in marriage with
this family. But in the reign of Edward the Third, the whole inheritance,
Roger de S. Mauro, or Seimore, I. Meries, men of ancient descent, and great
alliance. And hereupon it was, that King Henry the Eight, when he had wedded
Jane Seimor, mother to King Edward the Sixth, bestowed upon Edward Seimor her
brother, the titles of Vicount Beauchamp, and Earl of Hertfort, whom King
Edward the Sixth afterward honored, first wi^h the name of Lord and Baron
Seimor to be annexed to his other titles, Vicount Beauchamp.
lest (as the King says in the Patent) the name of his mothers family should
be overshadowed with any other style, and yet afterward created him Duke of
Sommerset.

As you go from thence, where The One windeth himself into Parret, it makes a
Aethelingey, that is, The Isle of Nobles, now commonly known by the name of
Athelney: a place no less famous among us for King Alfreds shrowding himself
therein, what time as the Danes now had brought all into broile, then those
Marshes of Minturny among the Italians, wherein Marius lurked, and lay hidden.
For, touching that King an ancient Poet, wrote thus: -- Mixta dolori
Gaudia semper erant, spes semper mixta timori.
Si modo victor erat, ad crastina bella pavebat,
Si modo victus erat, ad crastina bella parabat.
Cui vestes sudore jugi, cui sica cruore
Tincta jugi, quantum sit onus regnare probarunt.
With dolor great his joys were mixed, his hope was joined with dread,
If now he victour were, next day of wars he stood afraid:
If vanquished now, the morrow next forthwith he thought it good
For to prepare for war: his sword was aye begoard in blood.
His garments eke with painful sweat, were evermore bestain'd.
Which well did show what burden great he bare while that he reigned.


And in truth, this Isle afforded him a very fit shrowding corner: for that by
reason of waters partly standing there in plashes, and partly resorting
reflowing thither, which Asserius termed Gronnas, Latinizing a Saxon word)
there is in manner no access It had sometime a bridge between two castles,
built by Aelfred, and a very large grove of Alders, full of goats and wild
beasts: but of firm ground scarce two acres in breadth: on which, as says
William of Malmesbury (whose words these are and not mine) he founded a little
Monastery: the whole frame whereof, hanged upon four maine posts pitched fast
in the ground, with four round isles of Sphaerick work contrived and brought
round about the same. Not far from this Isle Parret having received the said
river runs alone swelling with certain sandy shelfes sometime in his
channel, by the Hundred of N. Pederton anciently acknowledging the Bluets to
have been Lords thereof, who are thought to have brought that name from Bluet
in little Britain: Here it takes into him an other river from East to bear
him company which opens it Castle Carry which William Lovell Lord thereof held
against K. Stephen in the behalf of Mawd the Empress right inheritrix of the
Crown of England; Lovell. Lupellus in Latin. Castle Carry.
whose issue male failing in the time of King Edward the Third, by heir female
it came to Nicolas de S. Maure a Baron (of a distinct family from that which
was a few lines before mentioned) and shortly after about the time of Henry
the Fifth by an heir female again to the Lord Zouches of Harringworth: as a
moitie of the lands of Lord Zouch of Ashby de la Zouch came before by coheires
to the house of this S. Maures. Lord Saint Maure.
But when the Lord Zouch was attainted by K. Henry the Seventh for assisting
King Richard the Third, this Castle was given by the K. to Robert Willoughby
Lord Brook as his lands at Bridge-water to the Lord Daubency and then he was
restored in blood. Castle Carry this water passes by Lites-Cary to be
remembered in respect of the late owner Thomas Lyte a gentleman studious of all
good knowledge, and so to Somerton, the Shire town in times past, as which
gave the name thereto. A Castle it had of the West Saxon Kings, which Ethelbald
King of Mercia forcing a breach through

No sooner has Parret entertained this river, but he speeds him apace toward,
a great and populous town, commonly called Bridg-water: and is thought to have
taken that name of the Bridge and water there: but the old records and
evidences gain say this opinion: wherein it is always called in plain words
Burg-water, that Walters burgh or Burgh-walter: and (as we may very probably
conjecture) of that Walter de Duaco, or Doway who served under William
Conqueror in his wars, and received at his hands many fair manors in this
shire. Neither carries it any other name in that grant or donation, whereby
Fulke Pains Lord of Bampton passed the possession of the place over unto
William Briwer, to curry favor with him, being so great a man and so gracious
a favorite with King Richard the First: This Williams son and bearing his
name, bettered this haven, having obtained license of King John to fortify a
Castle, built here a Fortress: which now time has wrought her will of: and
began a bridge which one Strivet a gentleman of Cornwall with infinite cost
finished: founded also the Hospital of S. John here, and Dunkeswell Abbay.
William Briwer the younger left this life without issue, in the partition of
his heritage it fell to Margaret his sister, in right of whose daughter that
she had by William De la fort, it came to the house of Cadurci or Chaworths,
and from it hereditarily to the Dukes of Lancaster; as some lands heereabout by
an other sister came to Breos, Earls of Bridge-water
and so by Cantalupe to Lord Zauch. But the greatest honor that this place had,
was by the title of an Earldome, that King Henry the Eight adorned it withal,
what time as he created Henry Doubeney, Earl of Bridge-water, whose sister
Cecilie, was married unto John Bourchier the first Earl of Bath out of that
house.

Beneath this, Vzella.
some few miles off, Parret voideth it self into the Severne sea at a wide
mouth, which, as we said, Ptolomee called Vzella aestuarium: and some even at
Ealstan Bishop of Shirburne about the year of Salvation 845. discomfited the
Danish forces as they were straggling abroad. At the same mouth where we saw
Honispell an ancient Manor of the Coganes, men of great fame in the conquest
of Ireland, Selwood.
there meets it another river called of some Brius which arises out of that
great and wide wood in the East Side of this shire, which the Britans named
Cort Maur, Bruiton.
the Saxons Selwood, that is, (by Asserius interpretation) The great wood, but
now not so great. This river first visits Bruiton, to which he leaves his
name: (a place memorable, for that the Mohuns there entombed, who built a
religious house of the Fitz-Iames, runs a long way by small villages and
increased Aualon, of Appulis: afterward, named Inis Witrin, that is, The
Glassy Isle, like as in the Saxon Idiome, the same sense (...), and in Latin
Gloscania. Of which, a Poet of good antiquity writes thus.

Insula pomorum quae fortunata vocatur,
Ex re nomen habet, quia per se singula profert.
Non opus est illi s^lcantibus arva colonis,
Omnis abest cultus, nisi quem natura ministrat,

Nataque poma suis praetonso germine sylvis.
The Apple-Isle and Fortunate, folk of the thing so call,
For of it self it brings forth corn, Forage, fruit and all.
There is no need of country clowns to plough and till the fields,
Nor seen is any husbandry, but that which nature yields.
Of the own accord there comes up, corn, grass and herbs good store,
Whole woods there be that apples bear, if they be pruned before.
In this Isle under a great hill rising in great height with a tower thereon,
which they call the Tor, William Malmesbury, of Glastenburies antiquity.
flourished the famous Abbay of Glastenbury, the beginning whereof is very
ancient, setched even from that Joseph of Arimathaea, who enterred the body of
Jesus Christ, and whom Philip the Apostle of the Gauls sent into Britain for
to preach Christ. For, thus much both the most ancient records and monuments of
this Monastery testify, and also Patrick the Irish Apostle (who lived there a
Monk thirty years) in an Epistle of his has left to memory. Whereupon this
place was by See Romans in Britanie. I^ confirm. Henric. 2.
The first land of God, The first land of Saints in England, The beginning and
fountain of all religion in England, The tomb of Saints, The mother of
Saints, The Church founded and built by the Lords Disciples. Neither is there
any cause why we should much doubt thereof, sithence I have showed before, that
the beams of Christian religion in the very infancy of the primitive Church
were spread and shined upon this Island, yea and Freculphus Lexoviensis has
written, that the said Philip conducted barbarous nations, near unto darkness
and bordering just upon the Ocean, to the light of knowledge and port of faith.
But to our Monastery, and that out of Malmesburie his book touching this
matter. When that old Cell or little chapel which Joseph had built by
continuance of time was in the end decayed, Devi Bishop Ina (who founded a
school in Rome for the training up and instruction of English youth, and to
the maintenance thereof, as also for alms to be distributed at Rome, had laid
an imposition of Peter Pence upon every house thorowout his realm) having
demolished it, built there a very fair and stately Church, to Christ, Peter,
and Paul: and under the very highest coping thereof round about caused to be
written these verses: Syderei montes, speciosa cacumina Sion,
A Libano geminae flore comante, cedri;
Caelorum portae lati duo lumina mundi.
Ore tonat Paulus, fulgurat arce Petrus:
These verses with some little change are found in the fourth book of
Venantius Fortunatus his Poems: in the praise partly of the Church in Paris and
partly of Nants.
Inter Apostolicas radianti luce coronas,
Doctior hic monitis, celsior ille gradu,
Corda per hunc hominum reserantur, and astra per illum:
Quos docet iste stylo, suscipit ille polo.
Pandit iter coeli hic dogmate, clavibus alter,
Est via cui Paulus, janua fida Petrus.
Hic Petra firma manens, ille Architectus habetur,
Surgit in hijs templum quo placet ara Deo.
Anglia plaude lubens, mittit tibi Roma salutem,
Fulgor Apostolicus Glasconiam irradiat.
A facie hostili duo propugnacula surgunt,
Quod fidei turres urbs caput orbis habet.
Haec pius egregio Rex Ina refertus amore,
Dona suo populo non moritura dedit.
Totus in affectu divae pietatis inhaereus,
Ecclesiaeque juges amplificavit opes.
Melchi-sedech noster merito Rex, atque Sacerdos,
Complevit verae religionis opus,
Publica jura regens, and celsa palatia servans,
Vnica Pontificum gloria, norma fuit.
Hinc abiens, illinc meritorum fulget honor,
Hic quoque gestorum land perennis erit.

From Libanon two cedar trees their flouring heads do bear.
Two royal gates of highest heaven, two lights that men admire,
Paul thundreth with his voice aloft, Peter he flasheth fire.
Of all the Apostles crowned crew, whose rays right glittering be,
Paul for deep learning does excel, Peter for high degree.
The one does open the hearts of men, the other heaven door,
For Peter lets those into heaven, whom Paul had taught before.
As one by means of doctrine shows the way how heaven to win,
By virtue so of the others Keys, men quickly enter in.

And Peter is as sure a gate, for them to pass thereby.
This is a rock remaining firm: a Master builder he:
Twixt these a Church and altar both, to please God, built we see.
Rejoice o England willingly; For, Rome does greet thee well,
The glorious Apostles light in Glaston now do dwell.
Two bulwarks strong afront the Foe are raised; These towers of faith
In that this City holds, the head even of the world it has.
These monuments King Ina gave of perfect mere good will

He with his whole affection in godliness did live,
And holy Church to amplify great riches also give.
Well might he our Melchisedech, a Priest and King, be thought,
For he the true religious work to full perfection brought.
The laws in common weal he kept, and state in Court beside,
The only Prince that prelates graced, and them eke rectifide.
And now departed hence to heaven, of right he there does reign,
Yet shall the praise of his good deeds, with us for ay remain.


Dunstane a man of a subtle wit and well experienced, when he had once by an
opinion of his singular holiness and learning wound himself into the inward
acquaintance of Princes, in stead of these, brought in Monks of a later order,
called Benedictines, and himself first of all others became the Abbat or ruler
here of a great covent of them; who had formerly, and afterward gotten at the
hands of good and godly Princes a royal revenue. And having reigned as it were
in all affluence 600.

Now, I might be thought one of those that in this age have vanities in
admiration, if I should tell you of a Walnut tree in the holy Churchyard here,
that never did put forth leaf before S. Barnabees feast, and upon that very
day was rank and full of leaves; but that is now gone, and a young tree in the
place: as also of the Hawthorne in Giraldus Cambrensis an eie-witnesse of the
thing, has more at large related touching Arthurs Sepulcher in the Churchyard
there.

When Henry the Second King of England, Arthur, the warlike Wo^thy.
took knowledge out of the Songs of British Bards, or Rhythmers, how Arthur
that most noble Worthy of the Britans who by his Martial prowess, had many a
time daunted the fury of the English-Saxons, lay



Antiocheis, wherein he described the wars of the Christians for recoverie of
the Holy Land, and was there present with King Richard the First, speaking of
Britain.

Hinc celebri fato foelici claruit ortu
Flos Regum Arthurus, cujus cum facta stupori,
Non micuere minus, totus quod in aure voluptas,
Et populo plaudente favus. Quemcunque priorum
Alexandrum Magnum.
Pelaeum commendat fama tyrannum,
Pagina Caesareos loquitur Romana triumphos,
Alcidem domitis attollit gloria monstris.
Sed nec pinetum coryli, nec sydera solemn
Aequant: Annals Latios, Graiosque revolve,
Prisca parem nescit, aequalem postera nullum
Exhibitura dies. Reges supereminet omnes,
Solus praeteritis melior, majorque futuris.
For famous death, and happy birth, hence flourished next in place,

Accepted and admired were, in peoples mouth and ear,
No less than if sweet honey they, or pleasant music were.
See former Princes, and compare his worth even with them all:
That King in Pella borne, whom we great Alexander call,
The trumpe of fame does sound aloft. The Roman Stories eke
Much praise and honor both, of their Triumphant Caesar's speak.
And Hercules exalted is for taming Monsters fell:
But Pine-trees, hazels low, (as Sun the Stars) do far excel:
Both Greek and Latin Annals read: no former age his Peer,

In goodness he and greatness both, surmounts Kings all and some,
Better alone, than all before, greater than those to come.
And this worthy Knight, (that I may note so much also by the way out of
Ninnius the Britan, if it be worth the noting) was called, Mab uter, that is, A
terrible or dreadful Son, because he was from his childhood cruel; and
Artur, which in the British tongue imports as much as a horrible bear, or
any iron mall, wherewith the Lions jaws are bruised and broken.

Lo here also, if it please you, other monuments of this place, though they be
not of the greatest antiquity, The Pyramides of Glastenburie.
out of the foresaid William of Malmesburie. That (quoth which to all men is
altogether unknowen, I would gladly relate, if I could pick out the truth:
namely, what those sharp pillars or pyramides should mean which being set
distant certain feet from the old Church, stand in the front, and border of
the Churchyard. The highest of them, and that which is nearer to the Church,
than the rest, has five stories, and carries in height six and twenty foot:
Which albeit for age it be ready to fall, yet has it certain antiquities to
be seen, that plainly may be read, although they cannot so easily be
understood. For in the uppermost story, there is an Image in habit and attire
of a Bishop: in the next under it, the statue of a King in his royal robes,
and these Letters, HER. SEXI. and BLISVVER^. In the third, these names
likewise, and nothing else, WEMCHEST. BANTOMP. WINEVVEGNE. In the fourth HATE.
WVLFREDE, etc. EANFLEDE. In the fifth, which is the lowest, a portaict, and
this writing, etc. BREGDENE. SVVELVVES. HVVINGENDES. BERNE. The other Pyramid
is eighteen foot high, and has four floores or stories; in which you may
read, HEDDE Episcopus.
Bishop, etc. BREGORRED, etc. BEORVVALDE. What all this should signify, I take
not upon me rashly to define: but by conjecture I gather, that in some hollowed
stones within, are contained the bones of those, whose names are read without.
Surely LOGVVOR is affirmed for certain, to be the same man, of whose name the
place was sometime called LOOVVERESBEORGH, which now they call Mont-acute
BEORVVALDE semblably was Abbat next after HEMGISELVS,

To reckon up here the Kings of the West Saxons, that were buried in this
place, would be but needless: Edgar the Peaceable.
Howbeit, King Edgar the Peaceable, who always tendered peace, in regard
thereof, if there were nothing else, I cannot but remember, and put down his
Epitaph, not unbeseeming that age wherein he lived.

Auctor opum, vindex scelerum, largitor honorum,
Sceptriger Edgarus regna superna petit.
Hic alter Solomon, legum pater, orbita pacis,
Quod caruit bellis, claruit inde magis.
Templa Deo, templis monachos, monachis dedit agros,
Nequitiae lapsum, Iustitiaeque locum.
Novit enim regno verum perquirere falso,
Immensum modico perpetuumque brevi.
That well of wealth, and scourge of sin, that honour-giver great,
King Edgar hence is gone to hold in heaven his royal seat:
This second Solomon that was, laws-father, Prince of peace,
In that he wanted wars, the more his glory had increase.
Churches to God, to Churches Monks, to Monks fair Lands he gave,
Down went in his days wickedness, and Justice place might have:
A pure crown for a counterfeit he purchased once for all,
An endless Kingdom for a short, a boundless for a small.
Beneath Glascon three Rivers which there meet, do make a mere, and issuing
forth at one little mouth, run all in one channel Westward, to Uzella Frith,
Godney Moore.
first by Gedney or (as others will have it) Godney more, which (they say)
signifies, Gods Island, and was granted to Joseph of Arimathea: then, by
Weadmoore, a Manor of King Aelfreds, which by his last Will and Testament,
he gave as a legacy to his son Edward, and so by that moory or
fenny-country Crentmaesh, that runs out very far, which the Monks of
Glastenburie interpreted to be the Country of Fen Frogs, like as the little
Town Brentknoll there, which signifies, Frog-hill.

Mendip-hils.
From thence Eastward, Mendippe hills extend themselves in length and breadth;
Leland calls them Minerarios, that is, the Mineral hills; and rightly (as I
suppose) seeing they be in old writings named Muneduppe: for, rich they are in
lead mines, and good to feed cattle. Among these hills there is a cave or den
far within the ground: Ochy hole.
wherein are to be seen certain pits and rivelets, the place they call
Ochiehole, whereof the Inhabitants feine no fewer tales, nor devise less
dotages, than the Italians did of their Sibyls Cave in the mountain Apenninus.
The name (no doubt) grew of Ogo, a British word, that betokens, a Den: even
of the like den, the Isle Euboea, Strabo.
was by such another name sometime called Ocha. Not far hence, in the reign of
K. Henry the Eighth, was turned up with the plough, a table of lead Lambith in
the Duke of Norfolkes house, erected sometime for a trophee in token of
victory, with this inscription: TI. CLAUDIUS CAESAR. AUG. P. M. TRIB. P.
VIIII. IMP. XVI. DE BRITAN.

This Tribuneship of Claudius here mentioned, fell out to be in the 802. year
after the foundation of Rome, when Antistus and M. Suillius were Consuls, what
time P. Ostorius Governor of Britain as Vice-Pretour, was welcomed thither
with many troubles. Out of this time, give me leave, I pray you, to frame
certain conjectures: That in this year Claudius erected two Trophies, or
monuments of victory over the Britans, his own ancient coin shows as a
most certain witness, in the forepart See before among the Coins.
TI. CLAVD. CAESAR. AVG. P. M. TR. P. VIIII. IMP. XVI. P. P. and in the reverse
thereof, DE BRITAN. and there is expressly stamped a triumphall Arch, with an
Image of one gallopping on horseback, and with two triumphall pillars. What
Britains these were then vanquished, Tacitus shows, testifying that this
year Claudius by the conduct of Ostorius subdued two Nations of the Britans
this year, Cangi, a people of Britain.
to wit, The ICENI, and the CANGI. But forasmuch as the Iceni, lay (as it were)
in another climate. What if I said, this Trophee was set up in token of
victory over the Cangi, a smaller nation among our Belga, and that those
CANGI, were seated in these parts. For, not far from hence is Cangi, of whose
name there seems as yet in certain places of this tract, some shadow to
remain, namely, in Cannington, and Cannings, petty countries and Hundreds: as
also in Wincaunton, which elsewhere is called Cangton. But of these matters let
the reader be judge; my self (as I said) does no more but conjecture, whiles I
seek to trace out these their footsteps, and hope to find them out some
where-else.

Among these hills stands Chuton, which was the habitation, (if I take not my
marks amiss) of William Bonvill, whom King Henry the Sixth called by his
writ of Summons to the Parliament, Bonvill.
by the name William de Bonvill and Chuton, among other Barons of the Realm,
made him Knight of the Garter, and richly matched 1. Edward. 4.
was wedded to Thomas Greie, Marquess

Under Mendip hills northward, there is a little village, called, Congersburie,
so named of one Congar, a man of singular holiness. Capgrave has written,
that he was the Emperors son of Constantinople who lived there an Eremite:
Harpetre.
also Harpetre, a Castle by right of inheritance, fell to the Gornaies, and
from them descended to the Ab-Adams, who as I have read, restored it to the
Gornaies again. Southward, not far from the foresaid hole, where Mendip
slopeth down with a stony descent, a little city with an Episcopal See, is
situate beneath at the hill foot, sometime called, (as says Leland) but
whence he had it, Wells.
I wot not, Theodorodunum, now Wells, so named of the Springs, or Wels, which
boil and walme up there: like as Susa in Persia, Croia Pagase in Macedonia,
were named of the like fountains; in their country speech: Steph^n urbibus,
and Barletius.
whereupon this also in Latin, is called, Fontanensis Ecclesia, as one would
say, Fountain-Church. Fot multitude of Inhabitants, for fair and stately
buildings, it may well and truly challenge the pre-eminence of all this
Province. A goodly Church it has, and a College, founded by King Ina, in
honor of Saint Andrew, and soon after endowed by Princes, and great men with
rich livings, and revenewes: among whom King Kinewolph by name, in the year of
our Lord 766. granted unto it very many places lying thereabout. For, in a
Charter of his we read thus, I Kinewolph, King of the West Saxons, for the
love of God, and (that which is not openly to be spoken) for some vexation of
our enemies, those of the Cornish Nation, with Manentium. XI.
Eleven Hides, near to the River called Welwe, for the augmentation of that
Monastery, which stands near the great fountain that they call Wiclea.
This Charter have I set down, both for the antiquity, and because some have
supposed, that the place took name of this River; verily, near the Church
there is a Spring, called Saint Andrews Well, the fairest, deepest, and most
plentiful that I have seen, by and

A gorgeous palace of the Bishops, built in manner of a Castle, fortified with
walls, and a moate stands hard by, Southward; and on the other side fair
houses of the Prebendaries. Combs.
For, Seven and Twenty Prebends, with nineteen other petty Prebends, beside a
Deane, a Chaunter, a Chancellor, and three Archdeacons belong Edward the
elder, a Bishops See was here placed. For, when the Pope had suspended him,
because the Ecclesiastical discipline and jurisdiction in these western parts
of the Realm, began openly to decay, then he knowing himself to be a
maintainer, and Nurse-father of the Church, ordained three new Bishoprics, to
wit, of Kirton.
Cridie, Cornwall, and this of Wells, where he made Eadulph the first Bishop.
905.
But many years after, when Giso sat Bishop there, Harold Earl of the
West Saxons, and of Kent (who gaped so greedily for the goods of the Church) so
disquieted and vexed him, History of Bathe.
that he went within a little off quite abolishing the dignity thereof. But
King William the Conqueror, after he had overthrown Harold, stretched out
his helping hand to the succor of banished Giso, and Doomesday book) the
Bishop held the whole town in his own hands, which paid tribute after the
proportion of fifty Hides. Afterward in the reign of Henry the First,
Johannes de Villula, of Tours in France, being now elected Bishop, translated
his See to Bathe, since which time the two Sees growing into one, the Bishop
bears the title of both; so that he is called, The Bishop of Bathe and
Wells. Whereupon the Monks of Bathe, and Canons of Wells, See in the
Decretals. Ne sede vacant aliquid innovetur.
entered into a great quarrel, and skuffled, as it were, each with the other
about the choosing of their Bishops: Mean while, Savanaricus Bishop of Bathe,
being also Abbat of Glastenbury, translated the Sea of Glastenbury and was
called Bishop thereof: but when he died, this title died with him: and the
Monks and Canons aforesaid, 1193.
were at length brought to accord, by that Robert, Nicolas Burwith Bishop for
four and twenty poor people.

Out of those Mendip or Mine-hils, springs the River From, which running
Eastward, by Cole-pits, before it has held on a long course that way, turns
Northward, Fareley. Philips Norton.
and serves in stead of a bound confining this shire and Glocesteshire,
Philips Norton, a great Market-towne, which took the name of a Church,
consecrate to Saint Philip.

Selwood.
Selwood, whereof I spoke erewhile, spreads long and large: a wood standing
well and thick of trees, whereof the country round about adjoining was named
(as Ethelward mine Author writes, Selwoodshire: and a town steepely seated
thereby is yet called From Selwood, which gains very much by the trade of
clothing: From which, Westward, not full two miles, there shows it self, a
Castle (little though it be) yet fine and trim consisting of four round
Turrets, which being built by the Delamares, and named thereupon Monney de la
Mare, from them came by way of inheritance to the Powlets. Monney de la Mare.
And not far from thence is Witham, where King Henry the Third erected a
Nunnerie, which afterward was the first Carthusians or Charter House Monks in
England, as Hinton not far off near Farley Castle was the second. And now by
this time, From grown bigger by some rivelets issuing out of this wood,
joyneth with the noble river Avon: Bathe. Aqua So^i^.
which holding on a crooked course, runs anon to that ancient City which
of the hot Bathes Ptolomee called (...), that is, Hot waters: Antoninus,
AQVAE SOLIS, that is, The waters of the Sun: the Britains Yr ennaint Twymin
and Caer Badon, the Saxons (...), and of the concourse thither of diseased
people Akmanchester, that is, The City of sickely folk: Stephanus names it
Badiza, we at this day Bath, and the Latinists commonly, Bathonia. Seated it is
low in a plain, and the same not great; environed round about with hills
almost Hot Waters.
of a bluish or sea-colour, sending up from them thin vapors, and a kind of a
strong sent withal, by reason that the water is drilled, and strained through
veins of Brimstone, and a clammy kind of earth called Bitumen. Which springs
are very medicinable, and of great virtue to cure bodies overcharged, and
benumbed (as it were) with corrupt humors: For, by their heat they procure
sweat, and subdue the rebellious stubbornness of the said humors. Yet are not
they wholesome at all hours: For, from eight of the clock in the forenoone
unto three after noone, they are in manner skalding hot, and do The Cross
Bath (so called of a cross standing upright in old time in the midst of it) is
of a very mild and temperate warmth: and has twelve seats of stone about the
brinke or border thereof, and is enclosed within a wall. The second, distant
from this not fully 200. foot is much hotter: whereupon it is termed Hot
Bathe: Adjoining to these, is a Spittle or Lazar house, built by Reginald
Bishop of Bath for the relief of poor diseased persons. And those two are in
the midst of a Street on the West Side of the City. The third, which is the
greatest, and after a sort in the very bosom and heart Kings Bath, near unto
the Cathedral Church, walled also round about, and fitted with 32. seats of
arched work: wherein men and women may sit apart, who when they enter in put
upon their bodies linen garments, and have their guides. Where the said
Cathedral Church now stands, there was in ancient time, The Temple of
Minerva.
as the report goes, a Temple consecrated to Minerva. Certes, Solinus
Polyhistor speaking (no doubt) of these hot Bathes says thus, In Britain,
there are hot springs very daintily adorned and kept for men's use: the
patroness of which fountains is the Goddess Minerva: in whose Temple the
perpetual fire never turns ashes, and dead coals, but when the fire
begins to die, it turns into round masses of stone. Howbeit Athenaeus
writes, that all hot Bathes which naturally break out of the bowels of
Pallas first ministered water unto Hercules for to bath him, after he had
achieved his labors. For my purpose it shall suffice, if I be able to prove
Solinus (who writes that Pallas was the Patroness of these Bathes) this City
to be the same which the Britans in their tongue called Caer Palladdur, Caer
Palladur.
that is, The City of Pallas-water, or Vrbs Palladiae Aquae, if a man turn it
into Latin. For, the matter, the name, and signification do most fitly agree.
The finding out of these Bathes our Fables attribute to the King of Britans
Bleyden Cloyth, Britans addicted to Magic.
that is, Bleyden the Magician; but with what probability, that I leave to
others. Pliny indeed affirms, that the Britans in old time used the practice
of magic with so great ceremonies, that it seemed they taught it the Persians:
yet dare I not ascribe these Bathes to any art magical. Some of our writers,
when their minds were busied in other Julius Caesar to have been the first
finder of them: But my opinion is, that later it was ere the Romans had
knowledge of them, seeing Solinus is the first that has made mention of them.
The English-Saxons about the 44. year after their coming into Britain, when
they had broken league and covenant, and kindled again the coals of war which
had already been quenched, besieged this City: But when the warlike Arthur
came upon them, they took the hill named Mons Bad^nicus, where, when
courageously a long while they had fought it out to the uttermost, a great
number of them were slain. This hill seems to be the very same, which now is
called Bannesdowne, over a little village near this City, which they call
Bathstone, on which there are banks, and a rampire as yet to be seen. Yet
some Aurelius Ambrose, thus we read: Until that year wherein siege was laid
to the hill of Badonicus, which is not far from Severne mouth. But in case
this may not persuade them, know they, that the vale which runs here along
the river Avon, is named in British Nant Badon, that is, The Vale of Badon: and
where we should seek for the hill Badonicus, but by the Vale Badonica, I
cannot hitherto see. Neither durst the Saxons for a long time after, set upon
this City, but left it for a great while to the Britans. Howbeit in the year
of Christ 577. when Cowalin King of the West Saxons, had defeated the Britans
at Deorbam, in Glocestershire, Ackmancester, as I said: For, Osbrich in the
year 676. founded a Nunnery there: and immediately after, when the Mercians
had gotten it under them, King Offa built another Church, both which in the
time of the Danish broiles were overthrown. Out of the ruins of these two,
arose afterward the Church of S. Peter, in which Eadgar surnamed the
Peacemaker, being crowned, and sacred King, bestowed upon the City very many
Immunities, the memory of which thing the Citizens yearly with Solemn plays
do yet celebrate. In Edward the Confessors time, (as we read in Domes-booke of
England) it paid tribute according to 20. Hides, when as the Shire Robert
Mowbray Nephew to the Bishop of Constance, who had raised no small Sedition
against King William Rufus, sacked and burned it. Yet in short space it
revived, and recovered it self, by means of John de Villula of Tours in
France, who being Bishop of Wells, for five hundred marks (as says William
of Malmesburie) purchased this City of King Henry the First, and translated
his Episcopal chair hither, retaining also the title of Bishop of Wells, and
for his own See built a new Church: which being not long since ready to fall,
Olivar Bishop of Bathe began to found another hard by that old (a curious and
stately piece of work, I assure you) and almost finished Chandew descended out
of Bretaigne in France, was by King Henry the Seventh styled with this honor.
Afterward, King Henry the Eighth, Earls of Bathe.
in the 28. year of his reign created John Bourcher Lord Fitzwarin, Earl Who
died shortly after, leaving by his wife the sister of H. Daubeney Earl of
Bridge-water, Inquisit. 31. Henry 8.
John second Earl of this family, who by the daughter of George Lord Roos had
John Lord Fitz-Warin, who deceased before his father, having by Fr. the
daughter of S. Thomas Kitson of Hengrave William now third Earl of Bathe, who
endeavors to beautify and adorn his nobility of birth, with commendable
studies of good letters. The longitude of this City is according to
Geographers measure 20. degrees, and 16. minutes. But the Latitude 51. degrees,
and 21. minutes. And now for a farewell, lo here Nechams verses, such as they
be, of these hot waters at Bathe, who lived 400. years since.

Bathoniae thermas vix praefero Virgilianas,

Prosunt attritis, collisis, invalidisque,
Et quorum morbis frigida causa subest.
Praevenit humanum stabilis natura laborem;
Servit naturae legibus artis opus.
Igne suo succensa quibus data balnea fervent,
Aenea subter aquas vasa latere putant.
Errorem figmenta solent inducere passim.
Sed quid? sulphureum novimus esse locum.
Our Bathes at Bath, with Virgils to compare,

For feeble folk, and crasie good they are,
For bruised, consumed, far-spent, and very old:
For those likewise, whose sickness comes of cold.
Nature prevents the painful skill of man;
Arts work again, helps nature what it can.
Men think these Baths of ours are made thus hot,
By reason of some secret force of fire,
Which under them as under brazen pot

The waters boil, and walme to our desire:
Such fancies vain, use errors forth to bring,
But what? we know from Brimstone veins they spring.
Have here also, if you list to read them, two ancient Inscriptions very
lately dug up near the City in Waldcot field, hard by the Kings high way
side, which Robert Chambers, a studious lover of antiquities, has translated
into his garden: From whence I copied them out.

G. MVRRIVS. C. F. ARNIEN SIS. Adjutric
AD. Piae.
P. Foelicis.
F. IVLI. SECVND. AN. XXV. STIPEND. Hic situs
H. S. E. DIS. MANIBVS. M. VALERIVS. M. POL. EATINVS. Cobortis Equitum.
C. EQ. MILES. LEG. AVG. AN. XXX. STIPEND. X. H. S. E. I have seen these
Antiquities also fastened in the walls on the inside, between the North, and
West gates; to wit, Hercules bearing his left hand aloft, with a club in his
right hand. In the fragment of a stone in great and fair letters.

Decurioni.
DEC. COLONIAE Glevi, that is, Of Gloucester.
GLEV. VIXIT. AN. LXXXVI. Then, leaves folded in, Hercules streining two
Snakes: and in a grave or Sepulcher-table, between two little images, of which
the one holds the Horn of Amalthaea, D. M. Dii^ Manibus that is, To the dead
ghost.
SVCC. PETRONIAE VIXIT ANN. IIII. M^^j^s, that is, Months.
M. IIII. D. Dies, that is, Days.
D. XV. EPO. MVLVSET VICTISIRANA Filia Chariss^maefecerunt.
FILL. KAR. FEC. VRN. IOP.

Between the West, and South gates, Ophiuchus enwrapped with a serpent, two
men's heads with curled hair within the cope of the wall, a hare running, and
annexed thereto upon a stone in letters standing overthwart.

VLIA. ILIA. A naked man laying hand as it were, upon a soldier, within the
battlement also of the wall: two lying along kissing and clipping one another:
a footeman with a sword

III. VSA. IS VXSC. And Medusaes head with hairs all Snakes.

Along the said river of Avon, which now is here the bound between this shire
and Glocestershire, upon the bank Westward we have a sight of Cainsham, so
name of one Keina, a most devout and holy British virgin, who (as the
credulous age beforetime, persuaded many) transformed serpents into stones,
because there be found there Percepier, Percepier.
an herb peculiar unto England. Bitter it is in taste, and has a biting
sharpness withal: it never grows above a span high, and comes up all the
year long of it self: small leavy flowers of a greenish hew it bears,
without any stalk at all: Which herb mightily, and speedily provokes urine:
and of it the distilled water serves for great use, as P. Paena in his
Animadversions or Commentaries of Plants has noted.

Scarce five miles from this place, Bristow.
the river Avon passes through the midst of Bristow, in Welch-British, Caer
oder, Nant Badon, that is, The City Oder, in the Vale of In the Catalogue of
ancient Cities, Caer Brito: In Saxon (...), that is, A bright or shining place.
But such as have called it Venta Belgarum, have deceived both themselves and
others. This City standing partly in Somerset, and partly in Glocester-shires,
is not to be reputed belonging either to this, or that, having Magistrates of
the own by it self, and being of it self entire, and a County incorporate.
Situate it is somewhat high between Avon and the little river From,
sufficiently defended with rivers and fortifications together: For, environed
it was sometime with a double wall. So fair to behold by reason of buildings
as well public as private, that it is fully correspondent to the name of
Bright stow: With common Sewes or Sinks, (they call them Goutes) so made to run
under the ground for the conveiance, Avon, so often as the Moon declineth
downward from the meridian point, and passes by the opposite line unto it, so
swells with the tide from the Ocean, that it raises up the ships there
riding, and lying in the oze 11. or 12. else afloat in water. And the Citizens
themselves are rich Merchants, Europe, yea, and make Voyages at sea so far as
into the most remote parts of America. But, when, and by whom it was built, it
is hard to say. Old it seems not to be, for as much as in all those spoils,
and sackages that the Danes made, there is no mention of it in our Historians.
And verily mine opinion is, that it first grew up to some name, when the
English-Saxons Empire was much declining, seeing that it is no where named
before the year of our Lord 1063; when Harold (as Florentinus of Worcester
writes) embarked himself, and his army, and put to sea from Bristow to
Wales. In the first years of the Normans, Berton, a manor adjoining, And
Bristow paid unto the King (as we find in the book of Domesday) 110. marks of
silver, and the Burgers said, that Bishop G. has 33. marks, and one mark of
After this, Robert Bishop of Constance that plotted seditious practices against
King William Rufus, chose it for the seate-towne of the whole war, fortified
it, being then but a small City, with that inner (wall as I take it) which at
this day is in part standing. But a few years after, the circuit thereof was
every way enlarged. For on the South, Radcliffe, wherein there stood some small
houses under the City side, is by a stone bridge, with houses on each hand
built upon it, more like a street than a bridge, joined to the City: enclosed
within a wall, and the Inhabitants thereof enfranchised Citizens: yea and
hospitals in every quarter thereof for the benefit of poor people, and fair
Parish-Churches to the glory of God were erected. The most beautiful of all
which by far, is S. Mary's of Radcliffe without the walls, into which
William Cannings the founder, has two fair monuments: upon the one lies his
image portraied in an Aldermans roabe: For, five times he had been Major of
this City: upon the other, his image likewise in sacerdotall habit; for that
in this old age he took the Westburie. There is hard by, another Church also,
which they call the Temple, the lantern or tower whereof when the bell rings
shakes to and fro, so as it has cloven and divided it self from the rest of
the building, and made such a chinke from the bottom to the top, as it gapeth
the breadth of three fingers, and both shuts and opens whenever the bell
is rung. And here I must not overpasse in silence S. Stephens Church, the
tower steeple whereof being of a mighty height, one Shipward, alias
Barstable, a Citizen and Merchant, within the memory of our grandfathers,
right sumptuously, and artificially built. From the East Side also and the
North, From, which having run by the wall side gently falls into the Avon,
and yields a dainty harbor for ships, with a wharfe convenient for the
shipping and unlading of Merchandise in and out, (they call it the Kay.) Under
which between the confluences of Avon and From, there is a plain beset round
about with trees, yielding a most pleasant walking place: South-east, where no
rivers are to guard it, Robert the base son of King Henry the First, whom
they commonly name Robert Rufus, and Consul of Gloucester, because he was Earl
of Gloucester, built a large and strong Castle for the defense of this City;
and of a pious and devout affection appointed every tenth stone to the building
of a Chapel near unto the James, which he likewise founded by the City
side. This Robert had to wife Mabile the only daughter and heir of Robert
Fitz-Hamon, who held this town by vassalage in Capite, of King William
Conqueror. This Castle was scarcely built, when King Stephen besieged it, but
with lost labor: for, he was compelled to raise his siege and depart: and a
few years after, was imprisoned in the same, giving thereby a testimony and
proof how uncertain the chance of war is. Beyond the river From which has a
bridge over it, at Frome-gate there rises an high hill, with a steep and
crooked ascent, so as it is painful to go up unto it: From whence ye have a
most fair and goodly prospect to the City and haven underneath. This hill in
the very top and pitch thereof, spreads presently into a large, green and
Jordan the companion of Augustine the Englishmens Apostle. Now it is converted
to a School, and on both sides (to say nothing of the neat and fine houses of
private men) beautified it is with public and stately buildings. Of the one
side was a Collegiat Church called Gaunts, of the founder one Henry Gaunt
Knight, who relinquishing the world, in this place betook himself to the
service of God: but now through the bounty of Thomas Carr a wealthy Citizen,
converted to the keeping of Orphans: on the other side directly over against it
stand two Churches dedicated to S. Augustine, the one (which is the less) a
Parish Church: the other, that is greater,

REX HENRICUS II. ET DOMINVS ROBERTUS FILIVS HARDINGI FILII REGIS DACIAE, HVIVS
MONASTERII PRIMI FVNDATORES EXTITERVNT.

That is, Henry the Second, and Lord Robert the son of Harding, the King of
Denmarks son, were the first founders of of this Monastery.

Robert, Barons de Barkley.
called by the Normans Fitz-Harding, descended of the blood royal of Denmark
was an Alderman of Bristow, of King Henry the Second so entirely beloved, that
by his means Maurice his son married the daughter of the Lord of Barkley.
Whereby his posterity, who flourished in great honor, are unto this day called
Barons of Barkley; and some of them have been buried in this Church.

From hence as Avon holds on his course, there are on each side very high
cliffes by nature set there (as it were) of purpose, the one of them which on
the East Side overlooketh the river bears the name of S. Vincents rock, so
full of Diamonds, that a man may fill whole strikes or bushels of them. These
are not so much set by, because Avon has left these rocks behind him, with
full channel at length he disengorgeth himself into the Severn-sea.

Earls, and Dukes of Somerset.
The first Earl of Somerset, by tradition, was William de M^hun, or Moion, who
may seem to be the very same, whom Maude the Empress in a charter whereby she
created William de Mandevill Earl of Essex, takes as a witness under this
name, Comes. W. de Moion. Neither from that time meet we with any express and
apparent mention of Earls of Somerset, Patents. Anno primo Henric. tertii.
unless it be in these letters Patents of King Henry the Third, unto Peter de
De malo lacu.
Mawley, which, that I may draw out the judgment of others, I will here set
down literally. Know ye, that we have received the homage of our well beloved
Uncle William Earl of Sarisbury for all the lands that he holds of us, and
principally for the De Comitatu
County or Earledom of Somerset, which we have given unto him with all
appurtenances for Whether by these words in the Patent he was Earl of
Somerset, as also of Denshire (for, of the same William he wrote likewise in
the very same words unto Robert de Courtney) I leave for other men to judge.
Under this King Henry the third (as we find in a book written Mohuns
Knights) it is recorded, that Pope Innocentius in a solemn feast, ordained
Reginald Mohun Earl de Ests, (that is, as the Author does interpret it, Of
Somerset) by delivering unto him a golden consecrated rose, and an yearly
pension to be paid upon the high Altar of S. Paul's, in London. So that this
Reginald may seem to have been not properly an Earl; but an Apostolical
Earl. Earl Apostlicall.
For, so were they termed in those days who had their creation from the Bishop
of Rome, (like as they were called Earls Imperial whom the Emperor invested)
and such had power to institute Notaries and Scribes, to legitimate such as
were base borne, etc. under certain conditions. A long time after John de
Beaufort the base son of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster by Katherine
Swineford, being made legitimate by King Richard the Second, See Earls o
Dorset.
together with his brethren and John had three sons, Henry Earl of Somerset,
who died in his tender age; John, created by King Henry the Fifth, the first
Duke of Somerset, who had one sole daughter named Margaret, mother to King
Henry the Seventh: and Edmund who succeeded after his brother in the Dukedom:
and having been a certain Albans. Henry his son being placed in his room,
whiles he served the times, siding one while with York, and anotherwhile with
Lancaster, in the battle at Exham was by those of the houses of York: taken
prisoner, and with the loss of his head paid for his unconstant levitie.
Edmund his brother succeeded him in his honor, who of this family was the last
Duke of Somerset, and when the whole power of the Lancastrians was discomfited
at Tewkesbury, was forcibly pulled out Henry the Seventh honored with title
Edmund his own son a young child, who shortly departed this world: afterward
King Henry the Eighth, did the like for his base son, named Henry Fitz-Roy.
And seeing he had no children, King Edward the Sixth, invested Sir Edward de
Sancto Mauro, commonly, Seimor, with the same honor, who being most
power-able, honorable, and laden with titles, for thus went his style, Duke of
Somerset, Earl of Hertford* Vicount Beauchamp, Baron Seimor, Uncle to the
King, Governor of the King, Protector of his Realms, Dominions, and subjects,
Lieutenant of the forces by land and sea, Lord high Treasurer, and Earl
Marshall of England, Was suddenly overwhelmed, as it were by a disport of
fortune which never suffers sudden over-greatnesse to last long, and for a
small crime, and that upon a nice point subtlely devised, and packed by his
enemies, bereaved both of those dignities, and his life withal.

In this County are numbered Parishes. 385.

WILTONIAE Comitatus herbida Pl^nicie nobilis vul^o will Shire pars olim
BELGARVM.


WILSHIRE.
WIl-shire, which also pertained to the BELGAR, called in the English-Saxon
tongue, (...), in Latin commly termed, Wiltonia, taking that denomination of
Wilton, sometime the chief town, like as it of the River Willy, is altogether
a Polycraticon) so is it exceeding fertile, and plentiful of all things, yea,
and for the variety thereof, passing pleasant and delightsome. The Northern
and upper part, which they call, North-Wilshire, rises up somewhat The river
Isi^ or Ouze.
For, Isis the principal, and, as it were Prince of all the English Rivers;
which afterward takes to him the name of Tamisis, that is, Thames, being now
as yet but little and shallow, together with other Rivers of less name, which
I will speak of in their proper places, water it plentifully. The South part
with large grassie plains, feeds innumerable flocks of sheep, having his
Rivers, swelling Brooks, and rils of everliving fountains. The midst of
this shire, which for the most part also, lies even and plain, is divided
overthwart from East to West, with a Dike of wonderful work, cast up for many
miles together in length: Wansdike.
The people dwelling there about, call it Wansdike, which The Ditch of Wooden
or Mercury, and as it should seem, of Wooden that false imagined God, and
Father of the English-Saxons. But I have always been persuaded, that the
Saxons made it, as a limit to divide the two Kingdoms of the Mercians, and
West Saxons asunder. For, this was the very place of battle between them,
whiles they strove one with another, to enlarge their Dominions. And near unto
this Dike stands, Wodensburg a little Village, where Ceauline, the most
warlike King of the West Saxons, in the year of grace 590. whiles he defended
his Marches, in a bloody fight, received such a foil and overthrow by the
Britans and Englishmen, Dikes of the Marches.
even to his very enemies. And at this Dike, to say nothing of other accidents,
Ina the West Saxon, and Ceolred the Mercian, joined battle, and departed the
field on even hand: Like to this was that ditch, whereby King Offa kept the
Britans off from his Mercians; called even at this day Offa-dike: others also
are still to be seen, among the East Angles in Cambridgeshire, and Suffolk,
wherewith they limited their territory, and defended themselves from the
inrodes and invasions of the Mercians.

In the North-part of Wilshire, which is watered with Isis, or the Thames,
there is a town called Creckelade by Marianus, by others Greekelade of Greek
Philosophers, Lediard. Saint John
which afterward was translated to Oxford. West from that is Highworth highly
seated, a well known Market, but South from Creckelade, I saw Lediard Tregoze,
the seat of the Family of Saint-Iohn, Knights: the which Margaret de Bello
Campo, or Beauchamp, afterward Duchess of Somerset, gave to Oliver of Saint
John her second son. For, to her it came as an inheritance, by Patishul,
Grandison, and Tregoze, Wood-toun, or, Wotton Basset.
names of great honor. Wotton Basset bordeth hard upon this, having Wood, the
addition does prove, that it belonged to the Noble house of the Bassets. But in
the latter foregoing age, it was (as I have heard say, the habitation of the
Duke of York, who made there a very large Park, for to enclose Dear in.
Breden Forest.
From hence Breden wood, now Breden Forest, stretched it self far and wide,
which in the year 905. by Ethelwald Prince of the blood.
Clyto, and the Danes that aided him, was laid waste, and the Inhabitants
endured all calamities of war.

On the West side whereof, the River Avon, above mentioned, gently runs,
which breaking forth almost in the North limit of this shire* keeps his
course southward, Malmesbury.
whiles it is but small, he slideth under Malmesbury hill, and receiving
another stream, well near encloseth the place. A very proper town this is,
and has a great name for clothing, which (as we read in the Eulogie of
Histories) Cunwallow Mulmutius, King of the Britains, built together with
Lacok and Tetburie two Castles, and named it Caer Baldon, which being at length
by heat of wars destroyed, out of the ruins thereof there arose, as writers
record, a Castle which our Ancestors in their tongue, called, (...): at which
time, the Saxon petie Kings had their royal palace at Caerdurburge, now
Brokenbridge, a little village scarce a mile off. Ingelborne, Ingleborne.
until one Maidulph an Irish Scot, Maidulph the Scot.
a man of great learning, and singular holiness of life, taking delight to a
pleasant grove, that grew up here under the hill, lived for a time a solitary
Heremite there: and afterward teaching a School, and with his scholars
betaking himself to a monastical life, built him a little monastery, or
Cell. From this time, of that Maidulph, the town began to be called,
Maidulfesburge for Ingleborne, termed by Beda, Maidulphi Vrbs, that is,
Maidulps City, and afterward short, Malmesburies and in some of our
Histories, and ancient Donations made unto this place, Meldunum, Malduburie,
and Maldunsburg. Among the Disciples of this Maidulph, Aldeme.
flourished chiefly Aldelme, who being elected his successor, by the help of
Eleutherius, Bishop of the West Saxons, unto whom the Aldelmesbirig. But this
name soon perished, yet the memory of the man continues still: for canonized
he was a Saint: and on his festival day, there was here kept a great Fair,
at which usual there is a band of armed men, appointed to keep the peace
among so many strangers resorting thither. And right worthy is he, that his
memory should remain fresh for ever, in regard, not only of his Holiness,
but of his learning also, as those times were. For the first, he was of the
English nation, who wrote in Latin, and the first that taught Englishmen the
way, how to make a Latin verse: the which in these verses, he both promised
of himself, and Primus ego in patriam mecum, modo vita supersit,
Aonio rediens deducam vertice Musas.
I will be first, God lending life, that into country mine,
From Aon top at my return, shall bring the Muses nine.


This Adelme after his death, Athelstane that Noble Prince, chose to be his
peculiar protector and tutelar Saint, and for that cause bestowed very great
immunities upon this town, William Malmesbury.
and enriched the monastery with a large and ample endowments. In which he
made choice to be buried, and his monument the Inhabitants show to this day.
After Athelstane, this Monastery flourished long in continual wealth, and
Malmesburiensis, unto whom for his learned industry, the Histories of England
both Civil, and Ecclesiastical, are deeply indebted. The town also
maintained and upholden, as it were, by the means of the Monastery, was
likewise fortified Conucell at Aix.
rents, and riches that had been so many years in gathering, and heaping up
together, which were (as our Forefathers reputed them) The vows of the
faithful, the ransom and redemption of sins, and the patrimonies of poor
people, were quite scattered: and the very Minster it self should have sped no
better than the rest, but been demolished, had not T. Stumpes a wealthy
clothier, by much suit, but with a greater piece of money, redeemed and bought
it for the townsmen his neighbors, by whom it was converted to a
Parish Church, and for a great part is yet standing at this day.

From this Maiduphus City, Dantesey.
or Malmesburie, as Avon runs, it comes to Dantesey, Baron Danvers.
obtained of late the title and honor of Baron Danvers of Dantesey. Six miles
from hence, Avon takes unto him from the East, a Brook, which runs through
Calne, Calne.
an old little town situate upon a stony ground, having in it a fair Church
to commend it: at which place when great ado there was between the Monks,
and Priests about single life, a frequent Provincial Council, or Synod was
holden in the year of our redemption, A Synod as touching the single life of
Priests.
977. But behold, whiles they were debating the matter, the

From hence Avon now grown greater, Chippinham.
Chippenham, in Saxon Cyppanham, of note at this day for the market there kept;
whereof it took the name: For, Cyppan, in the Saxon tongue, Cyppan, what it is.
is as much to say as to buy, and Cyppman, a buyer, like as Cheapen, and
Chapman: and among the Germans, Coppman. But in those days, it was the Kings
manor: and by King Elfred in his testament, bequeathed to a younger daughter
of his. Nothing is there now worth the sight but the Church, built by the
Barons Hungerford, as appears every where by their coats of Arms set up
thereon. Directly over against this, but somewhat farther from the bank, lies
Cosham, Cosham.
now a little village, but sometime King Etheldreds mansion house, and for that
the Earls of Cornwall, were wont to retire themselves, and sojourne there, it
was of good account: Castlecombe.
within view whereof, is Castlecombe, an old Castle, ennobled sometimes by the
Lords of it, the Walters of Dunstavill, men of great renown in their time:
Dunstavile.
out of whose house, the Writhosleies Earls of Southampton are descended,
Pernell.
Petronilla or Parnell daughter and sole heir of the last Walter, was wedded
de Montfore, and bare unto him William his Son, who sold this Castle, with
the rest of his lands, and possessions unto Bartholomew Badilsmer: from whom
(as I have heard) it passed to the Scr^opes, who ever since have held it. But
now return we unto the river: Leckham.
upon which are seated, Leckham, the possession of the noble family of the
Bainards, where pieces of Roman money have oftentimes been found: Lacocke.
and Lacocke, where the most godly and religious woman, Dame Ela Countess of
Salisburie (being now a widow) built a Monastery, (like as she did Henton)
in the year 1232. to the honor of the blessed Virgin Marie, and Saint
Bernard, in which her self devoutly dedicated, both her body and soul to the
service of God.

Avon from hence shadowed with trees, holding on his course, not far from
Brumham, an inhabitation (in times past) of the Baron Samond, or truly De
Sancto Amando, Saint Amand, Saint Amand Barons. The Vies. Devizes.
afterward of the Baintons from them: before he admits to him a little
rivelet from the East, that puts forth his head near unto the Castle De
Vies, Devizes, or the Vies. Florentius of Worcester calls it Divisio, and
Neubergentis, Divisae. Heretofore a stately place, I assure you, very strong as
well by natural situation, Roger Bishop of Salisburie (whom from a poor
Mass Priest, Fortune had exalted unto the highest authority next the King) at
his excessive charges built. But Fortune (as one says) has set no man so
high, but she threatens to take from him as much, as she has permitted him to
have. For, King Stephen upon a displeasure, wrung from him both this Castle,
and that also of Shirburne, together with all his wealth and riches, as great
as it was, yea, and brought the silly old man so low in prison, what with
hunger, and what with other miseries, that between the fear of death, and
torments of this life, he had neither will to live, nor skill to die. At which
time was handled,

Avon having received this rivelet to bear him company, makes away westward:
and straight ways another brook from the South runs into him, which has
given name to the house standing upon it, called likewise Barons Brook, which
as it afforded habitation in old time to John Pavely, Lord of Westburie
Hundred, so afterward it gave the title of Baron, to Robert Willoughby,
because by the Chenies he derived his pedigree from Paveley, what time as King
Henry the Seventh, advanced him to a Barons dignity, as being high in his
favor, Steward of his house, and appointed (by report) Pompey in times past,
Governor of the Roman Navy, the stem or Prow thereof in his coins. But
this family fading, as it were, and dying in the very blade, quickly came to
an end. For, he left a son Robert Lord Brook, who of a former wife, begat
Edward his son that died before his father, leaving a daughter married to Sir
Foulke Grevil, and of a second wife two daughters, by whom a great inheritance,
and rich estate, conveied to the Marquess of Winchester, and Lord Montjoy.

Edindon.
Near unto this, Eastward lies Edindon, in old time Eathandune, where King
Alfred in as memorable a battle as any time else, most fortunately vanquished
the bold, forthwith to depart out of England. In which place also William de
Edindon, Bishop of Winchester, whom King Edward highly favored, here borne and
taking his name from hence, erected a College, Bon-hommes.
Bonis hominibus, Bon-homes, as they called them, that is, for good men. But at
the little river aforesaid, somewhat higher, Trubridge.
stands upon a hill Trubridge, sometimes (...), that is, a sure and trusty
bridge. But for what cause this name was set upon it, it is not for certain
known. In great name and prosperity it is in these days, by reason of
clothing, and shows the remains of a Castle, which belongs to the Duchy
of Lancaster, and sometime of the Earl of Salisburie. Bradford. Anno 652.
Avon thus increased by this rivelet, waters Bradford, Bradanford, (so named
of a broad foard) situate upon the descent or fall of an hill, and built all
of stone: where Kenilwalch King of the West-Britans, embrued his sword wiuh
blood in civil war against Cuthred his near kinsman. Here Avon bids
Wil-shire farewell, and enters closely into the County

The West limit of this shire goes down directly from hence Southward, by
Long-leat, Long-Leat.
the dwelling place of the Thins, (descended from the B^ttevils) a very fair,
neat, and elegant house, in a foul soil, which although once or twice it
has been burnt, Maiden Bradley.
has risen eftsoon more fair. Also, by Maiden Bradley, so called of one of
the Inhabitants of Manasses Basset, a most noble personage in his time, who
being her self a maiden infected with the leprosy, founded an house here for
maidens that were lepers, and endowed the same with her own Patrimony and
Livetide, like as her Father before time had thereabout erected a Priorie:
Likewise, Stourton, the seat of the Lords Stourton, whom King Henry the Sixth
raised to this dignity, after their esta^e had been much bettered in lands
and revenues, by marriage with the Daughter and heir of the family, Le Moigne,
or Monk of Essex, and not of Mohun, as some hitherto have been falsely
persuaded: and hereupon it is, that they have borne for their Crest, A
Demi-Monke, with a whip in his hand. The place took his name of the River
Stour, that under this town walmeth out of six fountains: which the
Stourtons Lords of the place, have brought into their shield sables.

By Maiden Bradley above said, glideth Dever-rill, Dever-rill.
a pretty small Rill, so called, for that, like as Anas in Spain, and Mole in
Surrey, (which took their names thereupon) it divides (as it were) under the
ground, and a mile off rising up here again, hasteneth toward VERLVCIO,
Verlucio.
a most ancient town, whereof the Emperor Antonine makes mention in his
Itinerarie: which having not quite lost the name, is called, Werminster,
Werminster.
compounded of that old name, and the English Saxon word, (...), which
signifies, a Monastery. In times past, it enjoyed great immunities and
freedoms: For, as we read in the Book of King William the Great, Nec
geldavit, nec hidata fuit: that is, It paid no tribute, nor was rated by the
Hide. Now only, for a round Corn-market, it is exceeding much frequented: for
hardly a man would believe what a mighty deal of Corn is weekly brought
hither, and quickly Clay-hill.

Here by begins, North, South, and Eastward through the midst of the Shire,
the Plains so wide and open, that hardly a man can see from one side to
another, Sarisburie Plains.
and do limit the Horizon; whereupon they are named, The Plains, they are but
rarely inhabited, and had in late time a bad name, for robberies there
committed. On the South side thereof, there run quietly two most still
Rivers, Willey-borne, which Asserius names Guilou, and Nadder, commonly
called, Adder-bourne. Wille-bourne rising at Werminster, runs near
Heitesburie, or Hegtresburie an ancient mansion place of the Family of
Hungerford; Lord Hungerford of Heitesburie.
but in the Church which has been Collegiate, there is seen but one defaced
monument of them. The last Lord Hungerford, created by King Henry the Eighth,
had his denomination of this place, but enjoyed that honor a short while being
condemned of a crime not to be uttered. Hence it hieth to Willy, a Village
some few miles distant: over against it a very large warlike fence or hold, and
the same fortified with a deep and duple Ditch: the neighbour-dwellers call it
Yanesburie Castle. And by the form and manner of making, a man may easily know
it was a Roman Camp. Yanesburie.
There are, who verily think it was Vespasians Camp, considering that he
being Lieutenant of the twentieth Legion under Claudius the Emperor, subdued
unto the Roman Empire, two nations in this tract: Yanesburie, there remain
some relics still of Vespasians name. Opposite to this on the other side the
water, is another less camp-place singly ditched, called Dun-shat, and about
one mile and a half from Yanesburie, another likewise with a single trench,
named Woldsbury. I have noted the names as the country people term them, that
other may collect some matter thereby more than I can. As for Nadder, that
springs out of the South limit of the shire, it creeps with crooked
windings, like an Adder, (whereof it may seem to have been so called) not
Wardour, Wardour Castle.
a proper fine Castle, appertaining sometime to the Progeny, surnamed Saint
Martins. But (to say nothing of many owners between, and amongst them of the
Lord Brook, who repaired it, and died at it) now it belongs to Thomas
Arundell, Baron Arundell.
who being of late by King James, created Baron Arundell of Wardour, is worthy
to be with praise remembered: For, that being a young Gentleman, he of a pious
and godly mind, undertaking a journey to serve in the wars against the
Turks, sworn enemies of Christendom, for his singular prowess showed at the
winning of Strigonium in Hungary, deserved by honorable Charter, (from
Rodolph the Second of that name, Emperor) to be made a Count of the Empire,
For that he had borne himself valiantly, and manfully in the field, Aquatic^m.
and in assaults of Cities and Castles, and showing good proof of valor in
forcing of the water tower near Strigonium, took from the Turks with his
own hand their Banner, 1595.
both himself, and all, and every one his children, heirs and issue
whatsoever of both sexes, Count Imperial.
descending from him lawfully, either borne already, or that ever shall, from
generation to generation be borne, we have created, made, and named Counts,
and Countesses, have endowed, and adorned, and with the title, honor, and
dignity of a Count imperial. Over against it lies Hach, a place at this day
of small reckoning, but which in the time of King Edward the First, L. Hach.
had his Lord Eustach de Hach, summoned among the Peers of the Realm for a
Baron, unto the high Court of Parliament. And a Hindon a quick market, Hindon.
and known for nothing else that I could see.

Wilton.
At the meeting of these two rivers, Willey gives his name to Wilton, a place
well watered, and sometime the head town of the whole Shire, which thereof
took the name. In ancient times it was called Ellandunum: for so we are
informed by the testimony of old parchment records, which have in express
terms Weolsthan Earl of Ellandunum, Ellandunum.
that is to say, of Wilton: and in another place, that he founded a little
Monastery at Ellandunum, that is, at Wilton. By this name Ellan, I am partly
induced to think, Alan the river.
that this is the river Alan, which Ptolomee mentions in this coast of the
Country. At this town it was, that in the year of our redemption 821. Egbert
King of the West Saxons, obtained a victory against Beor Wulf of Mercia, but
so mortal Eadgar, as our Chronicles bear witness, beautified it with a
Nunnery, whereof he made his own daughter Edith, Prioresse. But by the ancient
Charter of Eadgar himself, bearing date, An. 874. it appears certainly to
be of more antiquity. For, therein it is thus written: The Monastery which
by King Edward my great Grandfathers Grandfather, was founded in a well
frequented, and peopled And in the life of Saint Edward the Confessor, we read
thus, Whiles S. Edward went in hand with the building of the Monastery of S.
Peter in Westminster, Editha his wife began at Wilton (where she was brought
up) a Monastery princely built of stone, in lieu of the Church, made of timber,
following the Kings good affection with the like devotion of her own. And
albeit Sueno the Dane spoiled this town most grievously in the raging heat of
hostility, yet fell it not so greatly to decay, until the Bishops of
Salisbury turned another way, the common passage that lay before through it,
into the West countries. For, then by little and little it fell to ruin, and
is now, as it were, a small Village, having nothing to boast of, but a Major,
for the head Magistrate, and in it a passing fine house of the Pembrokes,
raised out of the ruins of the old religious house. But most of all,
Sorbiodunum.
it was over-topped, and shadowed first by SORBIODVNVM, and now by Salisburie,
that is risen out of the ruin thereof. For, so Antoninus in his Itinerarie,
calls that which the Saxons afterward named, (...), and the vulgar Sarum,
Sarisburia, and Salisburialia. Moreover, the account taken by miles of distant
places from it, and the tracts remaining of the name, testify no less, if I
should say never a word. For, who would ever make doubt, that Searesbirig
proceeded from Sorbiodunum, by addition of the Saxon word, (...), which
signifies, a Burg or town, in stead of Dunum, What Dunum signifies among the
Britains and Gauls.
which the Britains and Gauls, both used to put unto places seated on higher
grounds, such as this Sorbiodunum was: In so much (as I have been told by one
right skillful in the British tongue) that Sorviodunum, is by interpretation,
as much, as The dry hill: a conjecture surely more probable that theirs, who
with much ado have derived the name from one Saron in Berosus, or from the
Emperor Severia. For it mounted upon a high hill, and as our Historiographer
of Malmesburie says, Instead of the City, there was a Castle fenced with a
wall of no small bigness, indifferently well provided otherwise of
necessaries, but so scant of water, that it is good chaffer there, sold at a
wonderful price. Whereupon these verses were made of old Sorbiodunum, by one
living in those days.

Est tibi defectus lymph^, sed copia cretae,
Saevit ibi ventus, sed philomela silet.
No water there, but chalk ye have at will:
The winds there sound, but nightingales be still.
Kinric the Saxon, after he had won a most fortunate Victory of the Britans,
was the first of all the Saxons that forced it, in the year 553: and Canutus
the Dane about the year 1003. by setting it on fire, did much harm unto it.
But it revived, when by the authority of a Synod, and the ascent of William
the Conqueror, Herman Bishop of Shirburne and Sunning, translated his See
hither: whose next successor Osmund built a Cathedral Church. And King
William the Conqueror, after he had taken the survey of England summoned all
the States of the Kingdom hither, to swear unto him fealty: at which time
(as it stands upon record in Domesday book) it paid after the rate of 50.
hides. Or, for money weighed out and told.
Of the third penny of Salisbury the King has xx shillings. ad pensum, de
Cremento, IX. libras ad pondus. Which I note therefore, because in our
forefathers days, like as among the old Romans, money was wont to be paid as
well by the weight as tale. but not many years after, in the reign of Richard
the first, partly for the insolency and mis-rule that the garrison soldiers
made there, against the Churchmen, and in part for want of water, the
Churchmen first, and then the Inhabitants began to leave it, and planted
themselves in a lower ground scarce a mile off, South-East from it, where there
is a receipt, as it were, of many rivelets, and where Avon and Nadder meet. Of
this their removing Petrus Of Bloys. New Sarisburie.
Blesensis in his Epistles makes mention. For, thus of old Salisburie he
wrote. A place that was, open to the winds, barraine, dry, and desert: In it
And the Poet aforesaid, in verse thus: Quid Domini domus in castro? nisi
foederis arca
In templo Baalim; carcer uterque locus.
What is Gods house in Castle pent, but like the Arc of bliss
In Baalims temple Captivate? Each place a prison is.


And the place whereunto they descended he thus describes:
Contiguus, celeber fructibus, uber aquis.
Tale Creatoris matri, natura creata
Hospitium toto quaesijt orb diu.
Near to a Park well stored of game, there lies in vale, a ground,
Where corn and fruits in plenty grow, where water-streames abound.
Such lodging long throughout the world, when nature daughter dear,
Had for Creatours mother sought, at last she found it here.


When they were now come down, because they would begin first with the house
of God, Richard Poor the Bishop, in a most delectable place, named before
Merifield, began to found a most stately, and beautiful Minster. Which with an
exceeding high spired steeple, and double cross yles on both sides, carrying
with it a venerable show as well of sacred hilaritie as religious majesty, was
with great cost finished forty years after: and in the year of our Lord 1258.
dedicated even in the presence of King Henry the third: Whereof the said old
Poet has these pretty verses: Regis enim virtus temple spectabitur isto.
Praesulis affectus, artificumque fides.
For why? This Church a Prelates zeal sets forth unto the sight,
The workmens trusty faithfulness, a Princes power and might.


But much more elegantly the most learned Daniel Rogers, as concerning the said
Church: Mira canam, Soles quot continet annus in una
Tam numerosa, ferunt, ade, fenestra micat.
Marmoreasque capit fusas tot ab art columnas,
Comprensas horas* quot vagus annus babet.
Totque patent portae, quot mensibus annus abundat,
Res mira, at verares celebrata fide.
Wonders to tell: How many days in one whole year there been,
So many windows in one Church (men say) are to be seen.
So many pillars cast by Art, of marble there appear,
As hours do flit and fly away throughout the running year.
So many gates do entry give, as months one year do make,
A thing well known for truth though most it for a wonder take.


For, the windows as they reckon them answer just in number to the days, the
pillars great and small, to the hours of a full year, and the gates to the
twelve months. A cloister it has beside on the South side, for largeness
and fine workmanship Simon the Bishop thus to strengthen and fortify the same.
And in such sort grew up this new Salisburie by little an little, out of the
ruins of old Sorbiodunum, that so soon as they by the Kings warrant, had
turned hither the highway, that leads into the West parts, it became the
second City in all this tract, passing well inhabited and frequented,
plentiful of all things, especially of fish, adorned with a very stately
market place, wherein stands their common Hall of timber work, a very
beautiful edifice. But nothing is there, whereof it may so much boast, as of
John Iowell not long since Bishop there, a wonderful great, and deep Divine,
a most stout and earnest maintainer of our reformed religion against the
adversaries by his learned books. Sorbiodunum from thence forward decayed more
and more, and in the reign of King Henry the Seventh, became utterly
desolate, so as at this day, there remains only a tower or two of the
Castle, which notwithstanding a long time after the departure of the townsmen
from thence, was the dwelling house of the Earls of Salisburie: and about
which in King Edward the Thirds time, there arose a memorable 29. Edw. 3.
Term. Hillarii. Combat for the Castle of Sarum or Shirburn, as some will have
it.
For, Robert Bishop of Salisburie stirred Milliam Mont acute Earl of
Salisburie by virtue of a process which our Lawyers term Breve de Recto, that
is, A writ of right, for this Castle: and he made answer that he would defend
his right by combat. Whereupon, at a day appointed, the Bishop ^rought forth
his champion to the railes or bars of the Lists, cl^d in a white garment
reaching down to his mid-leg: upon which he had a mandilian or cassocke
garnished with the Bishops Arms: at whose heels followed a Knight carrying a
staff, and a page with a shield: Immediately after, the Earl brought in by
the hand his own champion also, arraied in the like apparel, accompanied with
two Knights bearing white staves.

This Salisburie had long ago Earls of that name, Earls of Salisburie.
History of Lacock Abbey.
whose pedigree I will derive somewhat farther off and more truly out of the
short reports of Lacock History. William de Evereaux Earl of Rosmar in
Normandy, fair lands and large possessions in this shire, which he left unto
Edward named de Sarisburia a younger son borne in England: like as to Walter
his eldest son, other lands in Normandy, with the Title of Earl of Rosmar:
whose issue within a while after was extinct. That Edward of Sarisburie
aforesaid, flourished in the twentieth year of the Conquerours reign, and is
often times barely named, in the Indiciarie book of England, without the title
of Earl. His son Walter built a a little monastery at Bradenstocke, and
there in his old age took him to the habit of a Canon, or Regular priest,
after he had first begotten his son Patricke (the first Earl of Salisburie)
upon Sibil de Cadurcis: This Patricke, I say, the S. James of compostella in
Spain in the year of our Lord 1169. being slain by one Guy of Lusigniam, left
William his son to succeed: who died in King Richard the first his time. His
only daughter Ela, through the favor of the said King Richard, was married to
William Long Espee, surnamed so of a long sword that he did usually wear, a
base son of King Henry the second; and her marriage honored him with the
title of Earl, and her own coat of Arms be Azur: adorned with six Lions
Ceux. This William had a son named likewise William Long-Espee, against whom
King Henry the Third conceiving great displeasure, for that without license
obtained, he was gone to serve in the S. Lewis King of France, and near unto
Damiata which the Christians had won, carrying a brave and valorous mind,
fighting manfully among the thickkest troops of his enemies died an honorable
and glorious death, a little before that holy King was unfortunately taken
prisoner. Walsingham page 74.
His son named likewise William, lived without the title of Earl, and begat
one only daughter Margaret, who nevertheless being reputed Countresse of
Salisburie, became the wife of Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, unto whom she bare
one only daughter Alice wedded to Thomas Earl of Lancaster: Who being
attainted, King Edward the Second seized upon those possessions, which she had
granted and demised unto her husband: out of which King Willam Mont-acute,
Trowbridg, Winterbourn, Ambresburie, and other Lordships in these words: So
fully and wholly as the Progenitors of Margaret Countess of Salisbury at any
time held the same. And even then, he preferred the said William Mont-acute to
be Earl of Salisburie, and by the cincture of a sword invested him in the said
Earldom. This William became Lord of the Isle of Mann, and begat two sons,
William who succeeded in his Fathers honor, and died without issue having
unhappily slain his only son while he trained him at Tilting: and Margaret
daughter and heir of Thomas de Mont-Hermer; who being of an unconstant and
changeable nature, and plotting the destruction of King Henry the Fourth, was
in the year of our Lord 1400. killed at Chichester, and attainted afterward
of high treason. Howbeit, his son Thomas was fully restored, a man worthy to
be ranged with the bravest Captains and Commanders, whether you respect pains
taking in his affairs, industry in action, or expedition in dispatch, who
lying at the siege before Orleance in France, was with a bullet levelled out of
a great piece of Ordnance wounded in the year 1428. and Pat. 2. Henr. 6. 1461.
Alice his only daughter, being wedded unto Richard Nevill augmented his
honor with the title of Earl of Salisburie, who siding with the house of
York, was in the battle fought at Wakefield, taken prisoner and beheaded:
leaving to succeed him Richard his son, Earl of Warwick and Salisburie;
who delighting in dangers and troubles enwrapped his native country within new
broiles of Civil war, wherein himself also left his life. The one of his
daughters named Isabell was married unto George Duke of Clarence, brother to
King Edward the Fourth, and she bare him a son called Edward Earl of
Warwick who being a very child and innocent, was by King Henry the Seventh
beheaded like as his sister Margaret, suffered the same death under King Henry
the Eighth. An usual Anne, the other daughter of Richard Nevill Earl of
Warwick and Salisburie, became wife to Richard Duke of Gloucester, brother to
King Edward the Fourth, and brought him a son, whom his uncle King Edward in
the 17. of his reign created Earl of Salisburie, and Richard his father
usurping the kingdom made Prince of Wales. But he departed this life in his
tender years, about that time that his mother also died, not without suspicion
of poison. King Henry the Eighth afterward, about the fifth year of his reign
in a full Parliament restored and enabled in blood Margaret daughter to George
Duke of Clarence to the name, style, title, honor, and dignity of Countess
of S. Robert Cecill second son of that Nestor of ours; William Cecill: upon
whom for his singular wisdom, great employments in the affairs of State to
the good of Prince and Country, he had bestowed the honorable titles of Baron
Cecill of Essendon, and Vicount Cranburn. Thus much of the Earls of Salisburie.

Lower still, and not far from this City, is situate upon Avon, Dunctone or
Donketon, Beavois of Southampton, whom the people have enrolled in the number
of their brave worthies for his valor commended so much in rhyme to posterity.

This Salisburie is environed round about with open fields and plains, unless
it be Eastward, where lies hard unto it Clarindon, a very large and goodly
park, passing fit for the keeping and feeding of wild beasts, and adorned in
times past with an house of the Kings. Of which park, and of the twenty
groves enclosed therein Master Michael Maschert Doctor of the Civil laws,
has prettily versified in this wise.

Nobilis est lucus, cervis clausura, This name himself poetically devised.
saronam
Propter, and a claro vertice nomen habet.
Viginti hinc nemorum partito limite, boscis
Ambitus est passus mill cuique suus.

The name it has of one fair down or hill, that mounts on hie:
Within the same stand xx. groves enclosed with several bound:
Of which, in compass every one a mile contains in ground.
Famous is this Clarindon for that here in the year 1164. was made a certain
recognition and record of the customs and liberties of the Kings of England,
before the Prelates, and Peers of the Kingdom, for the avoiding discentions
between the Clergy, Constitutions of Clarinders.
Judges, and Barons of the Realm which were called The Constitutions of
Clarnidon. Of the which so many as the Pope approved have been set down in
Thomas Becket then Archbishop of Canterbury, and the rest of the Bishops
approved them all. Hereby is Jvy Church sometime a small Priory, where as
tradition runs, in our grandfathers remembrance was found a grave, and
therein a corpse of twelve foot, and not far of a stock of wood hollowed,
and the concave lined with lead with a book therein of very thick parchment,
An ancient book.
all written with Capital Roman letters. But it had lien so long that when the
leaves were touched they fouldred to dust. S. Thomas Eliot who saw it judged it
to be an History. No doubt he that so carefully laid it up, hoped it should
be found, and discover somethings memorable to posterity.

Toward the North, about six miles from Salisburie, in these plains before
Cicero terms Insanam substructionem. Stone-henge.
For, within the circuit of a Ditch, there are erected in manner of a Crown,
in three ranks or courses one within another certain mighty and unwrought
stones, whereof some are 28. foot high, and seven foot broad, upon the heads
of which, others like overthwart pieces do bear and rest crosse-wise, with a
small tenants and mortescis, so as (...) le frame seems to hang: whereof we
call it Stonehenge, like as our old (...) ^^rmed it for the greatness Chorea
Gigantum; The Giants Dance. The (...) whereof, such as it is, because it could
not be so fitly expressed in (...) caused by the gravers help to be portraied
here underneath as it (...) weatherbeaten, and decayed.

A. Stones called Corsestones, Weighing 12. tun, carrying in height 24.
foot; in breadth, 7. foot; in compass, 16. B. Stones named, Cronetts, of 6.
or 7. tun weight. C. A place, where men's bones are dug up.


Made Stones.
like as those ancient Trophies or monuments of victory Puzzote.
Puteoli being covered over with water, becomes forthwith a very stone: that
the cesternes in Rome of sand dug out of the ground, and the strongest kind
of lime wrought together grow so hard, that they seem stones indeed? and that
Statues and images of marble chippings, and small grit grow together so compact
and firm, that they are deemed entire and solid marble: The common saying is,
that Ambrosius Aurelianus, or his brother Other did rear them up by the art of
Merlin that great Magician. Mathematic^.
Mathematician, in memory of those Britains who by the treachery of Saxons
were there slain at a parley. Whereupon Alexander Nec^^m, a Poet of no great
antiquity, in a poetical fit, but with no special grace, and favor Apollo,
having his instructions out of Geffreys British history, come out of these
verses: Nobilis est lapidum structura, Chorea Gigantum,
Ars experta suum posse, peregit opus.
Quod ne prodiret in lucem segnius, artem
Se, viresque suas consuluisse reor.
Hoc opus adscribit Merlino garrula fama,
Filia figmenti fabula vana refert.
Illa congerie fertur decorata fuisse
Tellus, quae mittit tot Palamedis aves.

Nam virtus lapidi cujlibet ampla satis.
Nam respersus aquis magnam transfundit in illa
Vim, queis curari sepius aeger eget.
Other Pendragon molem transvexit ad Ambri
Fines, devicto victor ab host means.
O quot nobilium, quot corpora sacra virorum,
Illic Hengesti proditione jacent:
Intercepta fuit gens inclita, gens generosa
Intercepta, nimis credula, cauta minus.

Virtus, qui letho septuaginto dedit.
The Giants Dance, a famous stone-worke stands,
Art did her best in bringing it to pass,
Vain prating fame, reports by Merlins hands
In manner strange this work effected was.
The stones (men say) in their land first did lie,
Scythia.
Whence Palamedi^ aves.
Cranes in flocks so many use to fly.
From thence conveied, as things of charie price,
The Irish soil received them with joy.

Often cures the grief that does sick folk annoy.
For, waters cast and sprinkled on these stones,
Their virtue take, and heal the grieved ones.
The noble Other that Pendragon hight,
Them over seas to Ambresburie brought;
Returning thence, where he by martial might
Had quel'd his foes in battle fiercely fought.
O worthy Wights, how many on that plain,
Of you lie dead by Hengists treason slain!
The Britans brave, that race of noble blood,
Entrap't by little heed and too much trust,
Were killed alas, in parley as they stood,
Through faithless fraud of enemies unjust.
But Eldol Earl his manhood excellent
Then showed, to death who seventie persons sent.


Others say, that the Britains erected this for a stately Sepulcher of the
same Ambrose in the very place where he was slain by his enemies sword: that
he might have of his countries cost such a piece of work, and tomb set over
him as should forever be permanent, as the Altar of his virtue and manhood.
True it is, that men's bones have many times been dug up here, and the
village lying now on Avons side, Ambresbury.
is called Ambresburie, that is to say, Ambrose his town: where, certain
ancient Kings, by the report of the British History, lay interred. And the
book called Eu^^gium says, that a Monastery stood there of three hundred
Monks: which, one Gurmundus (I wot not what Pagan and Barbarian) spoiled and
rifled. In that place afterward Alfritha King Edgar his wife, by repentance and
some good deed Ambrosius Aurelianus.
when the Roman Empire drew now to an end, toske upon him the Imperial purple
Roabe in Britain, (as says Paulus Diaconus) succored his decaying country,
and the aid of that warlike Arthur repressed the violent rage of the enemies,
overthrew puissant armies, consisting of the most courageous Nations of
Germany, and at the last in a battle fought upon this Plain, lost his life in
the defense of his country. Now, seeing both Gildas, and Bid do write, The
Emperors before.
who in the Fourth Consulship of Theodosius the younger, was elected Emperor
here in Britain in hope of his luckie name, and afterward slain at Arles. I
have heard that in the time of King Henry the Eighth, there was found near
this place a table of metal, as it had been tin and lead commixt,
inscribed with many letters, but in so strange a Caracter, that neither Sir
Thomas Eliot, nor master Lilye Schoolmasters of Paul's, could read it, and
therefore neglected it. Had it been preserved, somewhat happily might have
been discovered as concerning Stonehenge, which now lies obscured.

Leporarium.
Scarce four miles from Ambresburie, (on this side Avon) there is a Warren of
Everlie Warren, where there is great increase of hares for Gentlemen in the
country there dwelling, to disport themselves with game: yet not such store as
that the neighbor Inhabitants should require the help of soldiers in their
defense against them, as the men of the Isles Baleares sometime did, by Plinies
relation: albeit, they did likewise much harm here unto the Corn fields: and
near neighbor unto it is Lutgershall, where stood sometimes (as I read) the
Castle of Geffrey Fitz-Peter, Wolshal.
Lord chief Justice of England in his time, and Earl of Essex, a man of
exceeding great wealth. Not much higher is Wolshall, which was the house of the
Noble Family of Seimo^, now Earl of Hertford, or of Saint Maur, Estermie or
Sturmy.
to whom by marriage accrewed a great inheritance of the Est^rmies in this
Savernac Forest.
which is of great name for plenty of good game, and for a kind of Fern there,
that yields a most pleasant savor. In remembrance whereof, their Hunters
^orne of a mighty bigness, and tipped with silver,

More somewhat into the East, the River Cunetio, in the Saxon tongue (...),
commonly Kenet, Kenet River.
arises near unto a little Village of the same name, which some would have to
be that CVNETIO mentioned by Antoninus: but the distance of both sides
gain-saieth it. Here Selburie a round hill mounteth up aloft, to a great
height, which by the form of the hill it self, and the outward settling of
the earth beneath, may seem to have been cast up by man's hand. And many of
that sort, round and with sharp tops are to be seen in this tract: Burrowes
they call them Barrowes, Barrowes and Burrows. Tombs.
raised, happily in memorial of Soldiers there slain. For bones are found in
them, and read I have, how an usual thing it was with the Northern nations,
that every soldier remaining alive after a foughten field, should carry his
headpiece full of earth toward the making of their fellows tombs that were
slain. Although I am of opinion rather, that this of Selburie, was set there
in stead of a limit, if not by the Romans, then certainly by the Saxons: Like
as that fosse called Wodensdike, considering that between the Mercians and the
West Saxons there was much bickering in this Shire many a time, In his
Geomeotrie.
about their Marches: and both 198.
Boethius and the Aibury.
Grammatical Writers have made mention of such Mounts raised for bounds.
Within one mile of Selburie, is Aiburie, an up-landish Kenet runs at the
first Eastward, through certain open fields, out of which there stand up aloft
every where stones like rocks, Rockley.
and off them a little village there is, called, Rockley: among which there
breaks out sometimes at unawares water in manner of a stream or sudden
Land-flood, reputed the messenger, as it were, and forerunner of a dearth, and
is by the rusticall people of the country, called Hunger-borne. From hence
Famis rivulus.
Kenet holds on his course to a town bearing his name, called of Antoninus
Verlucio twenty miles. At which distance just, from thence, that ancient town
called by a new name Marleborow, in old time Marleberge, stands upon this
river Kenet. Cunetio, a town. Marleborow.
Cunetio, now Kenet, stretching out East and West on the pendant of an hill.
Whether this name Marleborow came in latter ages of Marga, which in our
language we call Marle, and use in stead of dung to manure our grounds, I am
not ready to affirm. Certes, it lies near a chaulkey hill, which our
Ancestors before they borrowed this name Chaulke of the Latin word Calx,
Kenet.
named Marle, But the Etymology thereof, that Alexander Necham in his Book of
divine wisdom has coined and drawn from Merlins Tomb (as appears by this
Distichon of his making) is ridiculous.

Merlini tumulus tibi Merlebrigia nomen
Fecit, testis erit Anglica lingua mihi.
O Merlebridge town, of Merlins Tomb
thou had thy name:
Our English tongue will testify,
with me the same.
The fatal end of this town Cunetio, and the name together, and the estate
thereof with the ancient memory also, from the coming in of the Saxons unto
Or nick-r^^med, John Lack-land.
surnamed Sine terra, that is, Without Land, (who afterward was King of
England) had a Castle here, which when he revolted from his brother King
Richard the First, Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, took by force: and which
afterward was most famous by reason of a Parliament there holden, Marleborow.
But now being daunted by time, there remains an heap of rammell and rubbish
witnessing the ruins thereof, and some few relics of the walls remain
within the compass of a dry ditch, and an Inn there is adjoining thereto,
which in stead of the Castle, has the sign of a Castle hanging out at it: The
Inhabitants of the place, The black Prince as they say.
have nothing to make greater show of, than in the Church of Preshut hard by,
of a Christning Font, as it seems, of Touchstone, or of Obsidian stone, in
which (by their report certain Princes (I wot not who) were in times past
baptized,

Ramesburie.
On the same River, and the same side thereof, is seated Ramsburie, a pretty
village, having nothing now to commend it but pleasant meadows about it,
howsoever in old time famous it was for the Bishops See there, who had this
Shire for their Diocese: William Malmesburie, of Bishops.
but that seat being by Herman the Eighth Bishop, laid unto that of Shirburne,
and at length (as I said before) translated to Saliburie, carried away with it
all the name and reputation of this place, Littlecot.
From the other side of the River more Eastward, Littlecot shows it self not
long since a seat of the Darels, a place worthy to be remembered, for the late
Lord thereof Sir John Popham, who being the chief Judge in the Kings Bench
executed justice, (as I have said already) against malefactors, to his high
praise and commendation. And hereby runs the limit between this Shire, and
Berkshire.

Thus far forth have we taken a slight view and survey of Wilshire, which (as
we find in the Domesday book, and worth the noting it is) paid unto the King
ten pounds for an Hawke, twenty shillings Pro summario. Happily a Sumpter
horse. Ore, what it is.
for a strong Steed, for hey now what kind a piece of money, and of what kind
that Ore was, I wot not; but out of a Register of Burton Monastery, I have
observed thus much, that twenty Ores, are worth two Marks of silver.

Earls of Wilshire.
This province can reckon out of diverse and sundry houses, but few Earls,
besides those of Salisburie, whom I have named before: for to omit Weolsthan
before the Normans Conquest, it had none to my knowledge, unto King Richard the
Second his days, who preferred William le Scrope to that one honor. But this
man's good fortunes stood and fell together with his Prince. For, when the one
was deposed, the other lost his head. After whom, within short time succeeded
Bullens: for Thomas Bullen Vicount Rochfort, Son to one of the Daughters and
coheires of Thomas Butler Earl of Ormund, Anne, the King took to wife: A
marriage this was to her self, and her brother unhappie and deadly, to her
Parents woeful, but for all England right happy. For it brought forth to us
Queen Elizabeth, Queen Elizabeth.
a most gracious and excellent Prince, worthy of superlative See Basing in
Hant-shire.
whom soon after he made Marquess of Winchester, and Lord Treasurer of
England, in whose family it remains at

This County contains in it Parishes. 304.

HANTSHIRE.
NExt to Wilshire is that Country which sometimes the Saxons called (...), and
is now commonly named Hantshire: of which, one part that bears farther within
the land, belonged, no doubt, to the Belgae, the other which lies upon the sea
appertained, without question, to the Regni, an ancient people Vespasian
subdued it, and very probable reasons there are inducing us to believe the
same. For, Dio witnesses, that Plautius, and Vespasian, when they were sent by
the Emperor Claudius against the Britains, did give the attempt upon this
Island, with an army divided Suetonius also writes, that in this expedition
Vespasian fought thirty battles with the enemy, and subdued the Isle of
Wight which lies against this country, and two other right puissant nations
with it. For which his victories, as also for passing over the Ocean so safely.
Valerius Flaccus speaks unto Vespasian himself, as one more fortunate than
Julius Caesar, in this manner.

Tuque O Pelagi cui major aperti
Fama, Caledonius post quam tua Carbasa vexit
Oceanus, Fhrigios prius indignatus Iulos.
And thou for Seas discovery whose fame did more appear,
Since that thy ships with sails full spread in Northren Ocean were,
Which skorn'd before, of Phrygian line the Julii to bear.
And of the very same Vespasian, Appolonius Collatius Novariensis, the Poet
versified thus: Ille quidem nuper faelici Mart Britannos
Fuderat.
He verily of late by happy flight.
Had won the field, and Britains put to flight.


But how in this war Titus delivered Vespasian his father, when he was very
straightly Dio and Forcatulus. I, for my part, (to come to my purpose)
beginning at the West side of this province will make my perambulation along
the seacoast, and the rivers that run into the Ocean, and after that survey
the more inland parts thereof.

Hard by the Western bounds the river Avon carries a still stream, and no
sooner runs into this shire, but it meets with the foard of Cerdicus, in
old time Cerdicks-foard, Cerdici vadum Cerdicks ford.
afterward Cerdefoard, and now by contraction of the word, Chardfoard, so named
of Cerdic that Warlike English-Saxon. For, here the said Cerdic in a set 5091.
that not only he enlarged the bounds of his Empire, but also delivered an
easy war unto his posterity: having before time in the year of our
Salvation 508. after great conflicts in this tract, vanquished the most mighty
King of the Britains, Natanleod, called also Nazaleod by others, with many of
his people. Natanleod or Nazaleod.
Of whose name likewise, a small region reaching unto this place was HAMSHIRE
OLIM PARS BELGARVM
Natanleod, as we read in the Annals of the English Saxons: which I sought
very curiously for, but hitherto could not find so much as any small sign or
sample of that name: Whether Natanleod and Aurelius Ambrose be the same.
neither can I guess who that Natanleod should be. But most certain it is,
that Aurelius Ambrose, at the very same time skirmished otherwhiles with the
Saxons in this tract with alternative fortune: and those Chronicles of the
English Saxons no where made mention of him; as who, (a thing that I have
observed) being overmuch affectionate to themselves, reported only their own
fortunate battles, and victories, but never made words of their foiles and
overthrowes. From thence the said river runs on by Regnewood or Ringwood,
called in the Domesday book of Rincewood. Which, that it was the same REGNVM,
the chief town of the Regni whereof Antoninus makes mention, the account of
the distance from other places, the remains of the name and the very
signification thereof do plainly prove. For, Ring-wed by that Saxon addition
seems to signify the Wood of the Regni. A town in ancient time of great
fame, as may be gathered by the Hundred adjoining, which is named thereof: but
now it is a well frequented mercate town and no better: Aven being departed
from hence, entertaineth the river Stoure coming down out of Dorset shire,
where between the meeting of these two streams, there stands a pretty town
of trade and well peopled. At this day of a Church there dedicated unto Christ,
Christ-church
named Christ-Church: but in old time Twinamburne, Interamna in Italy has his
name. It was fortified in times past with a Castle, and beautified with an
ancient Church of Prebendaries, which being built in the Saxons time and after
repaired by Raulph Flammard Bishop of Durham (who was Deane there) in the
reign of William Rufus, and by Richard de Ripariis Earl of Devonshire (whom
King Henry the First enfeoffed in this place) endowed also with great rents and
revenewes, continued in very great name until the days of King Henry the
Eighth, and that fatal and final hour of the Monasteries of England, Under
this town Stoure and Aven joining together do empty themselves into the sea
at one mouth, which Ptolomee called the mouth of the River Alaun; and rightly
too: For I cannot resolve Alaun, because there remain yet some relics (as it
were) of that name in the villages upon it, to wit, in Allington, Allingham,
etc.

A long the East bank of this river in this Shire, King William of Normandy
pulled down all the towns, villages, houses, and Churches far and near,
cast out the poor Inhabitants, and when he had so done brought all within
thirty miles compass or there about into a forest and harbor for wild
beasts, which the Englishmen in those days termed Ytene, New forres
and we now call New forest. Of which Act of his, Gwalter who lived
immediately after, wrote thus. The Conqueror took away land both from God and
men, to dedicate the same unto wild beasts, and Dogs-game: in which space he
threw down six and thirtie-Mother-Churches, and drove all the people thereto
belonging quite away. And this did he, either that the Normans might have safer
and more secure arrival in England, (for it lies over against Normandy) in
case after that all his wars were thought ended, any new dangerous tempest
should arise in this Island against him: or for the pleasure which he took in
hunting: or else to scrape and rape money to himself by what means soever he
could: For, being better affected and more favorable to beasts than to men, he
imposed very heavy fines and penalties, yea and other more grievous
punishments, upon those that should meddle with his Rufus King of England,
Elogium.
another son of his, perished both in this Forest: William by chance shot
through with an arrow by Walter Tirell; the other blasted with a pestilent
air. Henry likewise his Grandchild by Robert his eldest son, whiles he
hotely pursued his game in this Chase was hanged amongst the boughs and so
died: that we may learn thereby. How even childrens children bear the
punishment of their Fathers John White Bishop of Winchester made of this
Forest: Which although they falsely make William Rufus to have ordained the
same, yet because they are well liked of many, I am likewise well content here
to set them down.

Templa adimit Divis, fora civibus, arva colonis
Rufus, and instituit Beaulensi in rure forestam:
Rex cervum insequitur, Regem vindicta, Tirellus
Non been provisum transfixit acumine ferri.
From God and Saint King Rus did Churches take,
From Citizens town-court, and mercate place,
From Farmer lands: New forest for to make,
In Beaulew tract, where whiles the King in chase
Pursues the Heart, just vengeance comes apace,
And King pursues. Tirrell him seeing not,
Unawares him slew with dint of arrow shot.
He calls it Beauley tract, for that King John built hard by, a pretty
Monastery, for the pleasant situation called Beaulieu, which continued ever
unto our Fathers memory, of great fame as being an unviolated sanctuary and a
safe refuge for all that fled to it: in so much that in times past, our people
here thought it unlawful, and an Mercy, every where throughout England,
seemed rather to have proposed unto themselves Romulus to imitate than Moses:
Sanctuaries. Exodus 21. Josephus, Antiquita. u^ lib. 4.
who commanded that wilful murderers should be plucked from the Altar and
put to death: and for them only appointed Sanctuary, who by mere chance had
killed any man.

But least the sea coast, for so long a tract as that forest is here, should
lie without defense all open and exposed to the enemy, King Henry the Eighth
began to strengthen it with forts, for, in that foreland or promontorie
shooting far into the Hurst Castle, Hurst Castle.
which commands sea ward every way. And more toward the East he set up also
another fortress or blockhouse, they name it Calshot Castle for Caldshore, to
defend the entry of Southhampton Haven, as more inwardly on the other are the
two Castles of S. Andrew, and Netly. For, here the shores retiring as it were
themselves a great way back into the land, and the Isle of Wight also; butting
full upon it do make a very good harbor, which Ptolomee calls The mouth of
the river Trisanton, (as I take it) for Traith Anton: that is, Anton Bay. For
Ninnius an old writer gives it almost the same name when he terms it
Trahannon mouth. As for the river running into it, at this day is called Test,
it was in the foregoing age (as we read Terstan, and in old time Ant, or
Anton: as the towns standing upon it, namely Ant port, Andover and Hanton in
some sort do testify.

So far am I of (pardon me) from thinking that it took the name of one Hamon
a Roman, (a name not used among Romans) who should be there slain. And yet
Geffrey of Monmouth tells such a tale, and a Poet likewise his follower who
pretily makes these verses of Hamon.

Ruit huc, illucque ruentem
Occupat Arviragus, ejusque in margin ripae
Amputat ense caput, nomen tenet inde perempti
Hammonis Portus, longumque tenebit in aevum.
Whiles Hamon rusheth here and there within the thickest rank,
Arviragus encountreth him, and on the rivers bank,
With sword in hand strikes of his head: the place of him thus slain,
Thence forth is named Hamons-Haven, and long shall so remain.
South-Anton.
But upon this Haven stands South-hanpton, a little City, neeere unto which
on Ringwood, as from Venta on the other, And as Trisanton in the British
language signifies the Bay of Anton, so Glausentum in the same tongue, is as
much as the Haven of Entum. For, I have heard, that Claudh among the Britans,
is that which the Graecians call (...), that is, a forced Haven made by digging
and casting up the earth. Now, that this place was called Hanton, and Henton,
no man needs to doubt, seeing in that book wherein King William the first made
a survey of all England, this whole shire is expressly named Hanscyre and in
some places Hentscyre, South^hanton* What manner of town that Clausentum was,
it is hard to say: but seated it was in that place, where the field is which
now they call S. Mary's; and reached even to the Haven: and may seem also to
have taken up the other bank or strand of the river: For, a little above at
Bittern over against it, Francis Mills a right honest gentleman there dwelling,
showed unto me the rubbish, old broken walls, and trenches of an ancient
castle, which carries half a mile in compass, and at every tide is compassed
for three parts of it with water a great breadth. The Roman Emperors ancient
coins now and then there dug up, do so evidently prove the antiquity
thereof, that if it were not the Castle of old Clausentum, you would judge it
to be one of those forts or fences Gildas writes, the piracies and
depredations of the Saxons. When all became wasted, by the Danish wars, old
Hanton also was left as a prey in the year of our Lord 980. to be sacked and
rifled by them: and King William the Conqueror in his time had in it but
fourscore men and no more in his demaine. But above 200. years since when
Edward the Third King of England and Philip Valois bustled for the very
Kingdom of France, it was fired by the French and burnt to the gound. Out of
the ashes whereof, presently sprung the town which now is to be seen, but
situate in a more commodious place between two rivers: for number of houses
and those fair built much renowned, for rich Inhabitants and concourse of
merchants wealthy: Canutus King of England and of Denmark, by which he in this
place repressed a flatterer who bare the King in hand that all things in the
Realm were at his will and command. He commanded (says Henry of Huntingdon)
that his chair should be set on the shore, when the sea began to flow. And
then in the presence of many, said he to the

Of those two rivers, between which this South anton stands, that in the
West now called Test, and in times past Anton, (as I suppose) springing out of
the forest of Chate, goes first to Andover, which in the Saxon language is
(...), that is, The passage or Ferry over And: where in the year of our
salvation 893. Aetheldred King of England, when the Danes harried and spoiled
his Kingdom on every side, to the end that he might at length refresh and
cherish his weakened and wearied countries with sure and quiet peace, inserted
into his own family by way of adoption Aulaf the Dane: which not withstanding
soon after took small or none effect: For, this great honor done to the
barbabrous Dane, could not reclaim and stay his Bullingdon, in whose parish is
a place called Tibury hill, Tibury, some say for Titusbury.
and contains a square field by estimation of ten acres ditched about, in
some places deeper than other, wherein has been found tokens of Wells, and
about which the ploughmen have found squared stones, and Roman coins, as they
report, for the place I have not seen. This brook enters into Test near
Worwhell, where Queen Aelfrith built a Monastery to expiate and make
satisfaction for that most foul and heinous fact, wherewith so wickedly she
had charged her soul by making away King Edward her husbands son: as also to
wash out the murdering of her former Aethelwold a most noble Earl, whom King
Edgar trained forth hither a hunting, and then struck him through with a dart,
because he had deluded him in his love secrets, and by deceitful and naughty
means prevented him and gotten for himself this same Aelfrith the most
beautiful Lady that was in those days. After this Test having taken into it a
little river from Wallop, Wallop.
or more truly Well-hop, that is, by interpretation out of our forefathers
ancient language, A pretty well in the side of an hill, whereof that right
worshipful family of the Wallops of Knights degree dwelling hard by, Brige.
took name: seeks for BRIGE or BRAGE, an ancient town likewise placed by
Antonine nine miles from Sorbiodunum: at which distance between Salisburie and
Winchester he finds not far from his bank, Broughton a small country
town: Rumsey.
Then goes this river to see Rumsey, in Saxon speech Rum-(...). A nunnery
founded by King Edgar, the large Church whereof yet stands; out of the which
Mary daughter of King Stephen being there Abbess, and his only heir
surviving, was conveied secretly by Matthew of Alsace son to the Earl of
Flanders, and to him married. But after she had borne to him two daughters, was
enforced by sentence of the Church to return hither again according to her
vow. Thence glideth this water straight into Anton Haven, at Arundinis Vadum,
as Bede called it, and interprets it himself Reedeford: Redbridge.
but now of the bridge where the foard was named, for Redeford, Sedbridge:
where, at the first springing up of the English Saxon Cymbreth, as Bede
writes, baptized the two brethren being very little ones of Arvandus the
petty King of Wight, even as they were ready to be put to death. For, when
Cedwalla the Saxon set upon the Isle of Wight, these small children to save
their lives fled to a little town called Ad lapidem, and hid themselves there,
until at length being betrayed, they were at Cedwallaes commandment killed.
If you ask me, what this little town Ad lapidem, Regesti.
should be, I would say it were Ston^ham, a small village next to Redebridge,
which the very signification of the name may evidently prove for me. The other
river that runs forth at the East Side of Southhampton, may seem to have
been called Alre: For, the mercate town standing upon the bank thereof, not
Alres-ford, that is, The foard of Alre. This town, (to use the words of an old
Record of Winchester): Kinewalce the religious King instructed in the
Sacraments of faith by the Bishop Birinus at the very beginning of Christian
religion (in this tract,) with great devotion of heart gave unto the Church of
God at Wenta. In the year of grace 1220. Godfrey Lucy Bishop of Winchester
made a new market place here, and called it Novum forum, that is, New mercate,
in regard happily of old Alres-ford adjoining thereto. But this new aim
continued not long with the people, who in the matter of speech carry the
greatest stroke. Near heereunto is Tichburne, which I must not omit, for that
it has given name to a worshipful and ancient family.

Upon the West bank of this river is situate the most famous City of the
British Belgians, called by Ptolomee and Antoninus Venta Belgarum, by the
Britains of Wales even at this day, Caer Gwent: by the Saxons in old time
(...), in Latin commonly Wintonia, and by us in these days of Winchester. Yet
there be Venta Simenorum, and do grace Bristow, with the name of Venta
Belgarum. But that there were never any Simeni at all in this Island, I will
prove when I come to the Iceni. In the mean season, though they should seek
all the towns that Antoninus places on every side in the way to, or from
VENTA BELGARVM, as narrowly as Emmots paths, yet shall they find nothing for
their purpose to make good this their assertion.

The Etymology of this name Venta, some fetch from Ventus, that is, Wind,
others from Vinum, that is, Wine, and some again from Wina a Bishop: who all
of them be far wide, and should do well to pray for better judgment. Yet
like I rather the Guin or Guen, that is, White, so that Caer Guin should
signify as much, as the White City. And why not? seeing the old Latins named
these their Cities, Alba longa, and Alba regia, of whiteness: yea, and the
Grecians also had their Leuca, Leucas, and other nations also many places
taking name of whiteness. For, this Venta, like as the other two of the same
name, to wit, VENTA SILVRVM, and VENTA ICENORVM, are seated all three in a
soil that stands upon chalk, and a whitish clay.

A City it was no doubt, flourishing even in the Romans times, as in which the
Emperors of Rome seem to have had their sacred of houses weaving and
embroidering peculiar to their own persons, and uses: seeing among all the
VENTAS in Notitiae, mention is made of the Procurator [Master or Governour]
Cynegii VENTENSIS or BENTENSIS, in Britain: where the only flower of Lawyers,
James Cujacius reads Cynaecii, and in his Paratitles upon the Code
interprets it, Sacrum textrinum, that is, The sacred workhouse or shop of
embroidering and weaving. And right of his mind is Guidus Pancirolus, Cynacium*
who writes that those Gynaecia were instituted for the weaving of the
Princes, and soldiers garments, of Ship-sailes, of linen sheets, or
covering, and such like clothes, necessary for the furniture of mansions. But
Wolfangus Lazius was of opinion, that that the Procurator aforesaid, had the
British dogs*
in so much, as Strabo witnesses, our dogs served as soldiers, and the
ancient Galls made special use of them even in their wars. And of all others,
they were in most request both for those baitings in the Amphitheaters, and
also in all other public huntings among the Romans. For as the same Strabo
writes, they were (...), that is, of a generous kind and framed naturally for
hunting. Whereupon Nemesianus wrote thus: divisa Britannia mittit
Veloces, nostrique orbis venatibus aptos.
Though Britain from this world of ours does lie secluded far,



Gratius also, of their price and excellency, says thus: Quod freta si
Morinum dubi^ refluentia ponto
Veneris, atque ipsos libeat penetrare Britannos,
O quanta est merces, and quantum impendia supra?
If that to Calice-streights you go,
Where tides uncertain ebb and flow.
And list to venture further more,
Crossing the seas to British shore:
What meede would come to quite your pains:
What overdeale beside, of gains.


A Gasehound.
which of the old name Agasaeus, we call yet at this day a Gasehound, those
ancient Greeks both knew, and also had in great price. And this will Oppian in
his first book of his Cynegeticks tell you, Agasaeus, a British houn^
in these Greek verses. (...),
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...).


Which Bodine turned into Latin these: Est etiam catuli species indagine clara,
Corpus huic breve, magnifico sed corpore digna,
Picta Britannorum gens illos effera bello
Nutrit, Agasaeosque vocat, vilissima forma
Corporis, ut credas parasitos esse latrantes.


And may be Englished in this wise. Stout hounds there are, and those of
finders kind,
Of body small but doughtie for their deed:
The painted folk, fierce Britans as we find,
Them Gasehounds call, for they with them do breed.
In making, like house dogs, or at a word,
To lickerous curs that craven at our board.


Claudian also, touching our Mastives writes in this sort: Magnaque taurorum
fracturi colla Britanni.
And British mastives down that pulls,
Or break the necks of sturdy bulls.


I have too far digressed about dogs, yet hope a favorable pardon.

In this City as our own Historiographers do report, in the time of the
Romans, was that Constans the Monk, who by his father Constantine was first
elect Caesar, Augustus: that Constantine I say, who upon hope of this name had
assumed the Imperial purple roabe, that is, usurped the Empire against
Honorius. For, long since, (as Zosinus records speaking of those times) as
well in villages as in Cities, there were great colleges peopled (as it were)
with Monks, who before time ^^ying the light lived scattering here and there
among mountains, woods, and forests all solitary by themselves, whereof also
they were so called. Now, of this College wherein the said Constans was, those
old broken walls which are seen of that thickness and strength, at the
West-gate of the Cathedral Church, may seem to be the ruins and relics.
See before in the Emperors.
But this imperial Monk taken out from hence suffered soon after condign
punishment, both for his fathers ambition and also for the contempt of his
professed religion. During the Heptarchie of the Saxons, this City
Aethelstane. In the Normans time also it flourished very much, and in it was
erected an office for keeping of all public records and evidences of the
Realm. In which prosperous estate it continued a long time: but that once or
twice it was defaced by misfortune of sudden fires, and in the civil war
between Stephen, and Maude about the Kingdom of England, lacked by the unruly
and insolent soldiers. Whereupon Necham our countriman who lived in that age,
writes thus: Guintoniam titulis claram, gazisque repletam
Noverunt veterum tempora prisca patrum.
Sed tam sacra fames auri, jam caecus habendi,
Vrbibus egregiis parcere nescit amor.
Our ancestors knew Winchester sometimes a goodly Town,
In treasure rich and plentiful, in name of great renown:
But now, for hunger after gold our men so greedy are;
That even such Cities excellent, they know not how to spare.


But of these losses it recovered it self by the help of Edward the third,
who here appointed the Mart for wool and cloth, which we commonly call the
Staple. What -- Flammis toties gens aliena dedit.
Hinc facies urbis toties mutata, dolorem
Praetendit, casus nuntia vera sui.

Has fired this town, and made such change;
That now her face and outward hue
Her grief bewray's, and tells full true.


In these days of ours it is indifferently well peopled and frequented, having
water plenty, by reason of the River turned and conveyed diverse ways into
it, lying somewhat in length from East to West, and contains about a mile and
a half in circuit within the walls: which open at six gates, and have every
one of them their suburbs reaching forth without, a good way. On the South side
of the West gate The round Table. Torneaments.
as if it had been King Arthurs table, I have nothing to say but this, That,
as a man which vieweth it well may easily perceive, it is nothing so ancient as
King Arthur. For, in latter times when for the exercise of arms and feats of
warlike prowess, those runnings at tilt, and martial justlings or
torneaments, were much practiced: they used such tables, least any contention
or offense for Dei p^osophist, lib. 4.
as Athenaeus writes, were wont to sit about round tables, and their Esquires
stood at their backs, holding their shields. About the midst of the city, but
more inclining to the South, Kenelwalch King of the West Saxons after the
subversion of that College of Monks which flourished in the Romans time, (as
William of Malmesburie says) First founded to the glory of God, Bishops of
Winchester.
the fairest Church that was in those days; in which very place, the
posterity afterward in building of a Cathedral seat for the Bishop,
although it were more stately than the first, yet followed just in In this See,
there have sitten since Wina, whom the said Kenelwalch ordained the first
Bishop there, Many Bishops some renowned for their wealth and honorable port,
and some for holiness of life. But among other, Saint Swithin continues yet
of greatest fame, not so much for his sanctity, as for the rain which usually
falls about the Feast of his translation in July, by reason the Sun then
Cosmically with Praesepe and Aselli, noted by ancient writers to be rainie
constellations, and not for his weeping, or other weeping Saints Margaret the
Virgin, and Mary Magdalen, whose feasts are shortly after, as some
superstitiously-credulous have believed.

This by the way, pardon me I pray you, for I digress licentiously. Thus
Edington and Walkelin, but Wickham especially: who built all the West part
thereof down from the quire, after a new kind of work, I assure you, most
sumptuously. In the midst of which building is to be seen his own tomb of
decent modesty between two pillars. And these Bishops have ever and anon
consecrated it to new Patrons and Saints, as to Saint Amphibalus, Saint Peter,
Saint Swithin, and last of all to the holy Trinity: by which name it is known
at this day. The English Saxons also, had this Church in great honor for the
sepulture of certain Saints and Kings there, (whose bones Richard Fox the
Bishop gathered, and shrining them in certain little gilded coffers placed
them orderly with their several Inscriptions in the top of that wall which
encloseth the upper part of the quire) and they called it in times past (...),
that is, The old Minster, for difference from another more lately built, which
was named (...), William Malmesburie.
that is, The new Minster; which Elfred founded; and for the building of houses
of office belonging to the same purchase of the Bishop a plot of ground; and
for every foot of it paid him down a mark after the public weight.

This monastery as also that other the older, was built for married Priests,
who afterward, upon I know not what miracle of a Cross that spoke, and
disliked their marriage, were thrust out by Dunstane Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Monks put in their place. The walls of these two monasteries stood so
near and close together, that the voices of those that sung in the one
troubled the chaunting of the other: whereupon there arose grudge and
heart-burning between these Monks, which afterward brake out into open
enmities: By occasion whereof, and because at this new monastery there
gathered and stood much water which from the Western gate came down thither
along the current of the streets, and cast forth from it an Hide. Hide Abbey.
Where, by the permission of King Henry the First, the Monks built a most
stately and beautiful monastery; which a few years after by the crafty
practice of Henry de Blois Bishop of Winchester (as the private history of
this place witnesses) was pitiously burnt. In which fire, that Cross also was
consumed, which Canutus the Dane gave, and upon which, as old writings bear
record, he bestowed as much as his own years revenewes of all England came
unto. The monastery nevertheless was raised up again, and grew by little and
little to wonderful greatness, as the very ruins thereof even at this day
do show, until Trinity, which is the Cathedral Church, when the monks were
thrust out were brought in their stead, a Deane, twelve Prebendaries, and there
placed. At the East side of this Cathedral Church, stands the Bishops
palace, called Wolvesey: a right goodly thing, and sumptuous; which being
towred and compassed almost round with the stream of a pretty river, reaches
even to the City walls: Wickham College.
and in the South-suburbes, just over against it beholds a fair College:
which William Wickham Bishop of this See, the greatest father and Patron (of
all Englishmen) of good literature, William Wickham.
and whose praise for ever to the worlds end will continue, built for a
School, and thereto dedicated it: out of which, both for Church and
Commonwealth there rises a most plentiful increase Saint Mary Abbey.
other fair and goodly buildings, (for very many were here consecrated to
religion) which I list not now to recount, since time and avarice has made an
end of them. Only, that Nunnery, or monastery of veiled Virgins, which
Elfwida, the wife of King Elfred founded, I will not overpasse: seeing it was a
most famous thing as the remainder of it now does show: Matildis Mawde wife to
King Henry the first.
and for that, out of it King Henry the First took to wife Mawde the daughter
of Malcolne King of Scots, by whom the Royal blood of the ancient Kings of
England became united to the Normans, and he therefore won much love of the
English nation. For, neiphew Edmund Iron-side, by his son Edward the
Banished. A woman, as adorned with all other virtues meet for a Queen, so
especially inflamed with an incredible love of true piety and godliness.
Whereupon was this Tetrastich made in her commendation: Prospera non laetam
fecere, nec asperae tristem:
Aspera risus ei, prospera terror erant.
Non decor effecit fragilem, non sceptra superbam,
Sola potens humilis, sola pudica decens.
No prosperous state did make her glad,
Nor adverse chances made her sad:
If fortune frowned, she then did smile;
If fortune frowned, she feared the while.
If beauty tempted, she yet said nay,
No pride she took in scepters sway:

A lady only fair and chaste.


Concerning Sir Guy of Warwick, of whom there go so many pretty tales, who in
single fight overcame here that Danish giant and Golias, Colbrand: and of
Waltheof Earl of Huntingdon, that was here beheaded, where afterward stood
Saint Giles chapel: as also of that excellent Hospital of Saint Cross there
adjoining, founded by Henry of Blois bother to King Stephen, and Bishop of this
City, and augmented by Henry Beauford Cardinal, I need not to speak: seeing
every man may read of them in the common Chronicles.

Winchester, to say nothing of Earls of Winchester.
Clyto the Saxon whom the Normans deprived of his ancient honor King John
created Saier Quincy, Earl of Winchester, who used for his arms a military
belt, they call it a Fesse, with a labell of seven as I have seen upon his
seals. After him succeeded Roger his son, who bare, Gules, seven Mascles
voided, Or: but with him that honor vanished and went away, seeing he died
without issue male. For, he married the eldest daughter and one of the coheires
of Alan Lord of Galloway in Scotland by a former wife, in right of whom he was
Constable of Scotland. He had by her three only daughters, the first married
to William de Ferrariis Earl of Derbie, the second to Alan de la Zouch, the
third to Comine Earl of Bucqhanan in Scotland. A long time after Hugh having
that title bestowed upon him for term of his life, by King Edward the second,
whose minion he was, and only beloved, felt together with his son what is the
consequence of Princes extraordinary favors: For both of them envied by most,
were by the furious rage of the people put cruelly to shameful death. And long
it was after this, that through the bounty of King Edward the Fourth, Lewis of
Bruges Pr. p. Pat. Anno 12. E. 4.
a Netherland Lord of Gruthuse, Prince of Steinhuse, etc. Who had given him
comfort and succor in the Netherlands, when he was fled his native country,
received this honor with Arms resembling those of Roger Quincy, in these
words, Azur a dix Mascles D'or en orm d'un Canton de nostie propre Arms d'
Engleterre, cestsavour, de Goul un Leopard passant d' or, armee d' azur.

Edwards death, he yielded up into the hands of Henry the seventh. But lately
within our memory King Edward the sixth, honored Sir William Pawlet Lord
Treasurer of England, Earl of Wilshire, and Lord Saint John of Basing, with a
new title of Marquess of Winchester. A man prudently pliable to times, raised
not suddenly but by degrees in Court, excessive in vaste informous buildings;
temperate in all other things, full of years, for he lived nintie seven years,
and fruitful in his generation, for he saw one hundred and three, issued from
him by Elizabeth his wife, daughter to Sir William Capell Knight. And now his
grandchild William enjoys the said honors: For the Geographicall position
of Winchester,

From Winchester more Eastward the river Hamble at a great mouth emptieth it
self into the Ocean. Hamble. Solente frith.
Beda calls it Homelea, which, as he writes, by the lands of the Intae
enters into Solente: for so terms he that frith our narrow sea, that runs
between the Isle of Wight and the main land of Britain* in which the tides at
set hours rushing in with great violence out of the Ocean at both ends, and so
meeting one another in the midst, seemed so strange a matter to our men in old
time, that they reckoned it among the wonders of Britain. Whereof, read here
the very words of Beda. The two tides of the Ocean which about Britain break
out of the vast Northern Ocean daily encounter and fight one against another,
beyond the mouth of the river Homelea: and when they have ended their conflict,
return back, from whence they came and run into the Ocean. Into this Frith
that little river also sheadeth it self, which having his head near Warnford,
passes between the Forests of Waltham (where the Bishop of Winchester has a
goodly house), and of Bear, whereby is Wickham a mansion of that ancient family
of Vuedal, and then by Tichfield, sometime a little monastery founded by Petre
de Rupibus Bishop of Winchester Roche.
where the marriage was solemnized between King Henry the sixth, and Margaret
of Anjou; and Writheosleies Earls of South-hampton. From thence forthwith, the
shore with curving crookes draws it self in, and the Island named Portesey
makes a great creek, Portsey.
within the more inward nooke or corner whereof sometimes flourished Port
peris; (where, by report Vespasian landed) An haven town which our Ancestors
by a new name called Port-chester, not of Porto the Saxon, but of the port or
haven. For, Ptolomee terms it (...), that is, THE GREAT HAVEN, Portus Magnus.
for the wideness of it, like as that Portus Magnus also in Africa, as Pliny
witnesses. And verily there remains yet a great Castle which has a fair
and spacious prospect into the haven underneath. But when as the Ocean Portsey
adjoining, which takes in circuit much about fourteen miles, being at every
full sea floated round about with salt-waters, out of which they boil salt,
and by a bridge that has a fortress adjoining unto it, is united to the
Continent. This Island Athelflede King Eadgars wife had given to the New
monastery of Winchester. And in it at the very gullet, or mouth where the sea
enters in, our forefathers built a town, and thereupon named it Portsmouth,
Portesmouth.
that is, the mouth of the haven. A place always in time of war well
frequented, otherwise little resort there is to it: as being more favorable,
and better affected to Mars and Neptune, than to Mercury, that is, to war
Gods house they call it) founded by Peter de Roch.
Rupibus, Bishop of Winchester. Fortified it was with a wall made of timber and
the same well covered over with thick banks of earth: fenced with a platform
also or mount of earth in times past on the North-east, nere to the gate: and
two block-houses at the entry of the haven made of new hewn stone: Which being
by King Edward the fourth begun, King Henry the seventh as the Inhabitants
report, did finish, and strengthened the town with a garrison. But in our
remembrance, Queen ELIZABETH at her great cost and charges so armed it (as one
would say) with new fortifications, as that now there is nothing wanting, that
a man would require in a most strong and fenced place. And of the
garrison-souldiers some keep watch and ward both night and day at the gates:

From hence as the shore fetches a compass and windeth from Portes-bridge,
we had the sight of Havant a little mercate town, and hard by it, of
Wablington, a goodly fair house belonging sometimes to the Earls of
Salisbury; but now to the family of the Cottons Knights. Before which, there
lie two Islands, the one greater, named Haling, the other less, called
Thorney, of thorns there growing: and both of them have their several parish
Church. In many places along this shore, of the sea-waters flowing up thither,
is made salt of a palish or green color: the which British salt.
or Bay Salt, and not of ours made out of salt springs, is Saint Ambrose to be
understood, when he writes thus; Consider we those things which are usual
with many very grace-full: Hexameron. lib. 5. cap. 11.
namely, how water is turned into salt, of such hardness and soliditie, that
oftentimes it is hewed with axes. This in the salts of Britain is no wonder,
as which carrying a show of strong marble, do shine and glitter again with
the whiteness of the same metal, like unto snow, and be wholesome to the
body, etc.

Farther within the land, the MEANVARI dwelt, whose country together with the
Isle of Wight Edilwalch King of the South Saxons received in token of Adoption
Wlpher King of Mercians, Meanvari Bid lib. 4. cap. 13.
Godfather unto him at the Font, when he was baptized. The habitations of these
Meanvari, scarce changing the name, at this day is divided into three hundreds;
to wit, Means-borow, East-mean, and West-mean: and amongst them there mounteth
up an high Hill, environed in the top with a large Warnford. Adae hic Portu
benedicat Solis ab Ortu Gens Deo dicata, per quem sic sum renovata.
but now neither top nor toe, as they say, remains of it: so as a man would
quickly judge it to have been a summer standing camp, and nothing else. Under
this is Warnford seated where Adam de Portu a mighty man, in this tract and of
great wealth in the reign of William the first, reedified the Church a new, as
a couple of rude verses set fast upon the wall do plainly show. Upon these,
more high into the land, Let Churchmen and religious folk, from time that Sun
does rise, Bless Adam Port, by whom I am rebuilded in this wise.
those SEGONTIACI, who yielded themselves unto Julius Caesar, had their seat
toward the North limite of this shire, in and about the hundred of Holeshot:
wherein are to be seen Mercate Aultim, which King Elfred bequeathed by his
Leodre: also Basingstoke a mercate town well frequented: upon the descent of
an hill, on the North side whereof stands solitary a very fair Chapel
consecrated unto the holy Ghost by William, the first Lord Sands, who was
buried there. In the arched and embowed roof whereof is to be seen the holy
history of the Bible painted most artificially, Segontiaci. Basingstoke.
with lively portraicts, and images representing the Prophets, the Apostles,
and the Disciples of Christ. Beneath this, Eastward lies Basing, Basing Saint
John.
a town very well known, by reason of the Lords bearing the name of it, to
wit, Saint John, the Poinings, and the Powlets. For, when Adam de Portu, Lord
of Basing matched in marriage with the daughter and heir of Roger de Aurevall,
whose wife was likewise daughter and heir to the right noble house of Saint
John, William his son, to do honor unto that family assumed to him the
surname of Saint John, and they who lineally descended from him have still
retained the same. But when Edmund Saint John departed out of this world
without issue in King Edward the third his time, Out of an old Missall of the
Family of Powlet.
his sister Margaret, bettered the state of her husband John, Saint Philibert,
with the possessions of the Lord Saint John: And when she was dead without
children, Isabell the other sister wife unto Sir Luke Poinings, bare unto him
Thomas, Lord of Basing, whose Neice Constance by his son Hugh, (unto whom
this fell for her child's part of Inheritance) was wedded into the family of
the Powlets, and she was great Grandmother to that Sir William Powlet who being
made Baron Saint John of Basing by King Henry the Eighth,

Near unto this house, Vines in Britain. Vopiscus.
the Vine shows it self, a very fair place, and Mansion Barons Sands.
whom King Henry the Eighth advanced to that dignity, being Lord Chamberlain
unto him, and having much amended his estate by marrying Margerie Bray,
daughter and heir of John Bray, and cousin to Sir Reinold Bray, a most worthy
Knight of the Order of the Garter, and a right noble Baneret: whose Son
Thomas Lord Sands, was Grandfather to William L. Sands that now lives.
Neighboring hereunto is Odiam glorious in these days for the Kings house
there: Odiam.
and famous for that David the Second King of Scots, was there imprisoned: a
Borough corporate, belonging in times past to the Bishop of Winchester: the
fortress whereof in the Matthew Paris.
thirteen Englishmen for fifteen days defended most valiantly, and made good
against Lewis of France, who with his whole army besieged and asted it very
hotly.

A little above, among these Segontiaci, toward the North side of the country,
sometimes stood VINDONVM, Vindonum.
the chief city of the Segontiaci, which casting off his own name, has
taken the name of the Nation, like as Luteria has assumed unto it the name of
the Parisians there inhabiting: for, called it was by the Britains Caer
Segonte, Silcester.
the City of the Segontiaci. And so Ninnius in his catalogue of cities named
it: we at this day called it Silecester: and Higden seems to clepe it of the
Britains Britenden: that this was the ancient Vindonum, I am induced to think
by reason of the distance of Vindonum in Antoninus, from Gallena, or
Guallenford, and Venta or Winchester: and the rather, because between this
Vindonum and Venta, there is still to be seen a causey, or street-way.
Ninnius records, that it was built by Constantius the son of Constantine
the Great, and called sometime Murimintum, happily, for Muri-vindum, that is, the
walls of Vindon. For, this word Mur borrowed from the provincial language, the
Britains retained still, and V. the consonant, they M. And to use the very
words of Asinnius, though they seem ridiculous, the said Constantius, sowed
upon the soil of this city three seeds, that none should be poor that dwelt
therein at any time. Like as Dinocrates, when Alexandria in Egypt was a
building, strewed it with meal or flower (as Marcellinus writes) all the
circular lines of the draught, which being done by chance, was taken for a
fore-token, that the city should abound with all manner of victuals. He
reports also, that Constantius died here, and that his Sepulcher was to be
seen at one of the gates, as the Inscription shows. But in these matters let
Ninnius clear his own credit; for, stuffed he has that little book with
many a pretty lie. Yet this I may be bold to affirm, that it flourished in
great honor about Mopsuestia in Cilicia, Sepulchers of honor.
and was interred in Constantinople in the Sepulcher of his Ancestors, it is
known for certain, and confessed. Yet I will not deny, but that he might
have in this city a monument erected in honor and remembrance of him. For,
many there were that had such monuments built, about which the soldiers, were
wont yearly to just, and keep solemn turneaments in honor of the dead.

When the declining Roman Empire hastened to an end, and barbarous nations
began every where to waste and spoil the Provinces: their Armies here in
Britain, Constantine Emperor, chosen in hope of his name.
our Constantine for his names sake, they forced, wild he, nild he, to usurp
the Empire, and to put on the Imperial Purple robe in the city Caer Segont,
as both Ninnius, and Gervase of Canterbury, do witness. This Constantine
putting to sea out of Britain, landed at Bononia.
Bologne in France, and drew all the Roman armies even as far as the Alps to
side and join with him in his wars. He stoutly defended Valentia in France,
against the power of Honorius the Emperor: the River Rhene which long before
had been neglected, he fortified with a garrison. Upon Constantina, and
commanded the courts and assemblies of seven Provinces, there to be holden. In
the mean time Gerontius Heir apparent. Iulianus Nobilissimus.
Nobilissimus) and his brother Sebastian, beheaded. Thus much briefly of these
occurrents, (which before are discoursed more at large) out of Zosimus,
Zosomenus, Nicephorus, Orosius, and Olympiodorus, to the end that Verity may
triumph over their vanity, who have besprinkled this story with most
ridiculous and foolish lies of their own devising.

Adelwolph being offended with his brother King Edward, upon a malicious mind,
together with the help of the Danish Rovers, wasted this country even to
Basing-stoke. And now remains nothing save the walls, which although they want
their battlements, Curtain, and coppe, yet they seem to have been of a very
great height. For, the earth is so grown up with the rubble, that I could
scarce with stouping low pass through an old posterne, which they call, Onions
Hole. These walls in some sort continue whole, but that they be broken through
in those places where the gates were: and out of the very walls, I saw grow
oaks of that Selcester, Sell, what it is.
as one would say, The great City: for Sell may seem to sound with them as
much as Great, seeing Asserius has interpreted the Saxon word, Selwood, The
Great wood. And before the walls Westward, where is a plain, there lies a
bank of a great length, raised and cast up for a defense and fortification.
The site of this old city, contains about fourscore acres of ground
within, which being a soil ploughed up an tilled, Arms of the Blewets,
Bainards, and Cusantes.
are divided into corne-fields; with a little grove in In a field sable, seven
Fusils argent in Bend, likewise in a shield sables, a Fesse between two
Cheverns, and in an Escutcheon Or, an Eagle displaied with two heads, gules.
This last, I have heard say, was the coat of the Blewets, unto whom this land
came, about the Conquerours time. The second belonged unto the ancient house of
the Bainards of Leckham: but the first to the Cusanz, by whom from the Blewets
it descended hereditarily, to the said Bainards. But in the reign of William
the Conqueror, it was the possession of William de Ow, a Norman, who being
accused of high treason, Onions pennies. For, they dream that this Onion was a
Giant, and dwelt in this city. There are dug up also many times
inscriptions, of which the unskilful rural people envy us MEMORIAE FL.
VICTORINAE. T. TAM: VICTOR CONJUX POSVIT.

That this Tomb was erected for that Victorina which was called Matter
Castrorum, The mother of the Camp, and who against Gallienus the Emperor,
excited in Gaul, and Britain, the two Victorini, her son, and sons son,
Posthumus likewise, Lollianus, Marius, and Tetricus, Caesar's, I would not with
others affirm. Yet I have read, that two of the VICTORS, were in some place
here in Britain, and those at one and the selfsame time, the one Maximus the
Emperor his soon, the other Praefectus Praetorio to the same Emperor, of
whom Saint Ambrose makes mention in his Epistles, but I dare avouch, that
neither of these twain reared this monument for his wife.

As one high way or street of the Romans went straight from hence Southward to
Winchester, so there was another ran westward through Pamber Forest, very
full of Litchfield, that is, the field of dead bodies, to the Forest of Chute
pleasant for cool shade of trees, and plentiful game: in which the Hunters
and Forresters themselves do wonder at the bank or ridge thereof, so evident
to be seen, paved with stone, but broken here and there.

Kings-cleare.
More toward the North, in the very edge and frontier of this Shire, we saw
Kings-Cleare, a market town in these days well frequented, the residence in
times past of the Saxon Kings, by it Fremantle in a park where King John much
haunted, also Sidmanton, Sidmanton.
the habitation of the Kingsmils, Knights: and Burgh-Cleare situate under an
high hill, in the top whereof a warlike rampire (such as our countrymen called
a Burgh) has a trench taking a great compass about it: from whence, there
being a Specula.
Beacon, that by light burning fire the enemies coming, may be showed to all
the neighbour-Inhabitants round about. And verily such watches or signals as
this, we term in common speech Beacons, Beacon.
of the old word Beacnian, that is, to show by a sign, and for these many
hundred years, they have been in right great request, and much used among us:
in some places, by heaping up a deal of wood, in others by barrels full of
pitch fastened to the top of a mast or pole in the highest places of the
country, at which, by night some do evermore watch: and in old time, there
were set horsemen as posts in many places, whom our Ancestors called Hobelers,
who in the day time should give notice of the enemies approach.

This shire, like as the rest which hitherto we have run over, belonged to the
West Saxon Kings: and when they had deposed Sigebert from his Kingdom, for his
tyranny, evil entreating and lewd managing of his province, this country, as
Marianus writes, was assigned unto him, least he should seem altogether a
private person. Whom notwithstanding afterward, for his wicked deeds, they
likewise expelled from hence: and so far was it off, that this afflicted state
of a King moved any man to take pity of him, that a Swine-heard in the end,
slew him in the wood Anderida, where he had lurked, and hidden himself.

This Shire can reckon but very few Earls, besides those of Winchester which I
have already named. In the first time of the Normans, Bogo or Beavose the
English Cardiff in Wales, is reputed to have been Earl of South-hampton, a
man for warlike prowess much renowned, whom while the Monks labored to set
out with their fained fables, they have obscured his doughtie deeds in greater
darkness. From which time unto the days of K. Henry the Eight, there was no
Earl of South-hampton that I read of: but he created William Fitz-williams
descended from the daughter of Marquess Montacute, both Earl of
South-hampton, and also Admiral of England, when he was now well stricken in
years. Who dying straight after without issue; King Edward the Sixth, in the
first year of his reign conferred the said honor upon Thomas Wriotheosley
Lord Chancellor, whose grandchild Henry by his son Henry, enjoys the
same at this day: and in the prime and flower of his age has by good
literature and military experience strengthened his honorable parentage, that
in riper years he might be more serviceable to his Prince and country.

There be found in this shire Parishes 253. and mercate towns 18.

VECTA INSVLA
TO this County of South-hampton belongs that Island which lies out in
length over against the midst of it Southward, called by the Romans in times
past VECTA, VECTIS, and VICTESIS, by Ptolomee (...), by Britains Guith, by
English-Saxons (...), and (...); (For, an Island they termed (...)) and by us
in these days, the Isle of Wight and the Solent. It is severed from the maine
land, that it may seem to have been conjoined to it: whereof that British
name of it Guith, which betokens a separation; as Ninnius says, is thought
to have been given: even as Sicilie also being broken off (as it were) and cut
from Italy got the name from Secando the Latin word (which signifies cutting)
as the right learned Julius Scaliger is of opinion. Whereupon, (under
correction always of the Judicious Critics) I would read in the sixth Quest.
Natural. of Seneca, thus; Ab Italia Siciliaresecta, that is, Sicilie cut from
Italy: whereas it is commonly read there, rejecta. By this Vicinitie of Site,
and Affinity of name, we may well think, this Vecta to be that Icta, which as
Diodorus Siculus writes, seemed

This Isle, between East and West in ovall form, stretches out twenty miles
in length: and spreads in the midst, where it is broadest twelve miles:
having the one side turning to the North, and the other Southward. The ground
(to say nothing of the sea exceeding full of fish) consists of soil very
fruitful, and is thankful to the husbandman, in so much as it does afford
corn to be carried forth: breeding every where store of conies, hares,
partridges and phesants. One little forest bedecked with cornefields enclosed,
where at each end the sea on the North-side Fresh Water Isle which looks
West, and Binbrige Isle, Eastward. In Bedas days it was counted to contain a
thousand and two hundred Hides: now it reckons upon 36. towns, villages and
Castles: which for Ecclesiastical jurisdiction belong to the Bishop of
Winchester, and for civil government, to the County of South-hanton. The
Inhabitants of this Isle were wont merrily to make their boast, that their case
was happier than all others, because they had neither hooded monks, nor
cavilling Lawyers, nor yet crafty foxes.

Newport.
The places of greater name be these, Newport, the principal mercate town of
Medena, and Novus Burgus de Meden, that is, The new Burgh of Meden: whereof the
whole country is divided into East Meden, and West Meden, an ordering as to
their situation East or West either way. Cacres-brooke an old Castle, so
clepid and clipped short for White garesburg, is in the very heart and midst of
the Isle, taking the name of Whitgar the Saxon, of whom more hereafter: and of
late magnificently reedified by the means of the Captain: unto which Castle
there belonged very many Knights Fees, and above all other places it has here
the glory for antiquity: Brading, another mercate Town, Newton and Yarmouth
anciently called Eremue, which have their Majors, and send Burgesses to the
Parliament. This Yarmouth and Sharp^ore have Castles in them, which together
with Worsleys fort or Hurst a fortification of South-Hamptonshire, situate
upon a little neck of land lying into the Sea: Quarre, where was founded a
Nunnerie in the year of our Lord 1131: Gods-Hill, in which John Worsley
erected a School for the training up of young wits, West-Cowe and East-Cowe,
that is now ruinous: both which, King Henry the Eighth built at the very entry
of New port: and concerning them Leland wrote in this wise: Covae fulmineae
duae coruscant
Haec casum colit, ille Solis ortum
Vectam qua Neoportus intrat altam,
Two Cowes full opposite there stand,
At West and East, in all men's sight:
Then flashen fire from either hand,
Where Newport, enters Isle of Wight.


Also on the North-East side Sandham Castle, furnished as the rest, with great
ordnance. Neither are there wanting for the defense of this Isle natural
fences. For, encircled it is with a continual ridge and raunge as it were of
craggy clifts; there are under the waters likewise hidden stones: and every
where there lie against it, banks and rocks perilous for sailers: but the
most dangerous of all the rest are the Needles, so called because they are so
sharp, and the Shingles; which stand forth against the Owers and Mixon that
lie before the East. Besides these, The Brambles, which are Shelves and
perilous for Sailers, in the North-coast. Moreover if there be any place that
seems open and meet for a landing place, the same by an old order and
custom among them is piled with strong stakes driven and pitched deep into
the ground.

But verily this Isle is neither with these rocks, nor with those fortresses
above said so well fenced, The Inhabitants.
as with the very Inhabitants themselves, who naturally being most warlike,
bold, and adventurous, are through the diligence and care of the Captain of
the Isle, confirmed so by continual exercise in strength and military
discipline, that they exactly know before hand, (what accidents of service
soever may happen in Vintons also, leaders as it were, of twenty, their great
pieces of Ordnance, their Sentinels and warders. Who keep watch and ward at
the Beacons standing on the higher grounds:

The first that brought it in subjection to the Romans, In Vespati cap. 4.
was Vespatian, whiles he served as a private person under Claudius Caesar:
For, thus writes Suetonius of him. Under the Emperor Claudius, by special
favor of Narcissus, he was sent into Germany as Lieutenant of a Legion: and
from thence being remooved into Britain, he fought thirty battles with the
enemy. Two most mighty nations, and above twenty towns, together with the
Isle of Wight, lying next to the said Britain he subdued, under the conduct
partly of A. Plautius a Consular Lieutenant, and in part of Claudius himself.
For which service he received At this Isle also, the navy of Allectus; after
he had usurped the Imperial dignity in Britain, lying in espiall and ambush,
awaited the Romans coming against him, who notwithstanding by the happy means
of a mist passed by their enemies undescried, gat to land, and set fire on
their own ships, that there might be no refuge for them, to escape unto by
flight. Anno D. 5
Lord Cerdic was the first English-Saxon that subdued it, and he granted it
unto Stuffa, and Whitgar, who jointly together slew well-neare all the British
Inhabitants (for few there were of them remaining) in Whitgaraburge a town so
called of his name, and now by contraction shortened into Caresbroke. After,
Wolpher King of the Mercians reduced the Isle of Wight under his obedience, and
assigned Edelwalch King of the South Saxons, together with the province of the
Menvari, what time as he became his Godfather, and answered for him at his
Baptism. Bid lib. 4. cap. 13.
Then, Ceadwalla King of the West Saxons, when the said Edelwalch was slain,
and Aruandus the petty King of the Island made away, annexed to it the
Dominion, and in a tragical, and lamentable massacre killed every mothers
child almost of the inborne Inhabitants, and the fourth part of the Isle, to
wit as much land as contained 300. Hides, he gave unto Bishop Wilfrid. The
first that instructed the Islanders in the knowledge of Christian religion. But
these matters Beda will inform you best, writing as he does, in these words.

After then that Ceadwalla had obtained the kingdom of the Gevissi, he won
also the Bid lib. 4. cap. 16.
which unto that time had been wholly given to Idolatry; and then endeavored
what he could to make a general massacre and tragical slaughter of all the
native Inhabitants thereof, and instead of them to plant there people of his
own province; binding himself with a vow, although he was not yet regenerate
and become Christened, and in case he won the Isle, he would give unto God a
fourth part both of it and also of the whole booty. Which vow he so paid, as
that he offered this Isle, unto Wilfrid the Bishop (who being of his nation
hapened then to come thither and be present) to the use and glory of God. The
measure of the same Island according to the English men's estimation is
proportionable to one thousand and two hundred hides of land. Whereupon the
Bishop had possession given him of so much Land as rose to three hundred Hides.
But he, commended that portion which he received Bernwin, and his sisters
son he was, giving unto him a priest named Hildila, for to minister unto all
that were desirous of salvation, the word and laver of life. Where I think it
not good to pass over in silence, how, for the first fruits (as one would say)
of those who of the same Isle were saved by their belief, two young children
brethren, of the Royal blood, to wit, the sons of Arvandus King of the Isle,
were by the especial favor of GOD crowned with martyrdom) For, when the
enemies approached hard unto the Island, these children slipped secretly out of
the Isle, and were remo^ved Ad Lapidem, when they had committed themselves upon
trust, to be hidden from the face of the King that was conqueror, betrayed
they were and commanded to be killed. Which when a certain Abbat and Priest
named Cynbreth heard, who not far from thence had his monastery in a place
named Reodford, that is the Ford of reed, he came unto the King, who then in
those parts lay secretly at cure of those wounds which he had received whiles
he fought in the Isle of Wight, and requested of him, that if there were no
remedy but that the children must be murdered, they might yet be first
taught the Sacraments of Christian faith before their death. The King granted
his petition, and he then having catechized them in the

From this time forward our writers for a great while have not one word of
Wight Tostie Hing Haralds brother with certain men of war, and Rovers ships
out of Flanders in hatred of his brother invaded it, and after he had compelled
the Islanders to pay him tribute, departed. Some few years after, as we read
in the old book of Cares broke Priorie, which Master Robert Glover Somerset,
showed me, who carried as it were the Sun light of ancient Genealogies and
Pedigrees in his hand. Like as, says this book, William the Bastard conquered
England, even so William Fitz Osbern his Marshall and Earl of Hereford,
conquered the Isle of Wight, and was the first Lord of Wight. Long after this,
the Frenchmen in the year 1377. came suddenly at unawares under sail, invaded
and spoiled it: and the same French in the year 1403. gave the like attempt,
but in vain: For valiantly

Lords of the Isle of Wight.
As touching the Lords of this Isle, after that William Fitz-Osbern was
forthwith slain in the war of Flanders, and his son Roger outlawed and
driven unto exile, it fell into the Kings hands: and Henry the First, King of
England gave it unto Richard Ridvers (otherwise called Redvers and de Ripariis)
Earl of Denshire, and withal, the Fee or Inheritance of the Town
Christ-Church. Christ-Church.
Where, like as at Caresbroke, that Richard built certain Fortresses: but
Baldwin his son, in the troublesome time of King Stephen, when there were in
England so many Tyrants, as there were Lords of Forts and Castles, who took
upon them every one to stamp money

But in the end, Isabell widow to William de Fortibus, Earl of Albemarle and
Holdernesse, sister and heir of Baldwin the last Earl of Devonshire of that
house, after much entreaty was overcome to make over by charter all her right
and interest, and to settle it upon King Edward the First* with the Manours of
Christ-Church, and Fawkeshaul, etc. For four thousand Marks.

Ever since which time, the Kings of England held the Isle, and Henry de
Beauchamp The first or principal Earl of all England. But together with him
this new and unusual title died and vanished quite. Afterward Richard
Widevile Earl Rivers was by King Edward the fourth styled Lord of the Isle of
Wight, and Sir Reginald Bray took it of King Henry the de Insula, or Lisle, out
of which in the reign of King Edward the Second, one was summoned unto the
Parliament by the name of Sir John Lisle, of the Isle of Wight.

ATTREBATII.
AS in Or Gaul.
France, so also in Britain, next adjoining unto the Belgae, are ATTREBATII,
which name being now altogether out of use, the place which they inhabit is
commonly called Barkshire. For, let this stand as granted, Caesar writes the
forrainers coming out of Gallia Belgica inhabited the sea coasts of Britain,
and retained still the names of their countries) that these our ATTREBATII,
ATTREBATES of Gaul: France.
who as Ptolomee records, held the maritime part of Gaul, lying upon the
river Sein, and namely, that very country, which after a sort lies full
opposite and over against our Attrebatii. It was not therefore without good
cause, if Caesar wrote, that Comius Attrebatensis was of great authority in
these countries, Comius Attrebatensis.
namely among Caesar vanquished, he fled hither: In stratagemat.
what time, as Frontinus writes, whiles his ships were grounded upon a shelfe,
he commanded his sails to be hoised up, and so disappointed Caesar (who pursued
him) of his purpose: who kenning a-farre-of, his full sails, and supposing
that with a good gale of forewind he sailed away, gave over further pursuit.
Whence these Attrebatii were so called, it rests doubtful: For whereas some
fetch the original from Attrech,

COMITATUS Bercheri^ vulgo Barkshyre qui olim seeds ATREBATVM


BARKSHIRE.
THat country which we call Barkshire, the late Latin writers Bercheria, and
was sometime by the English Saxons named (...). Asserius.
Which name Asserius Menevensis deriveth from a certain wood called Berroc
where grew good store of box: others from a naked, or bare oak (for so much
the name Beroke it self importeh) unto which, the Inhabitants in dangers and
troublesome times of the commonwealth were wont in old time to resort, there to
consult about their public affairs. The North part hereof the river Isis
which afterward is called Tamisis, that is, the Tamis, running with a winding
channel full of reaches, but carrying a very gentle stream, does pleasantly
water it, and first severeth it from Oxfordshire, afterward from
Buckinghamshire. The The vale of Whitehorse. As for the East part that
confineth with Surrie, it grows very barraine, or at least wise the soil is
less fertile, as standing upon forests and woods that take up a great ground
in length and breadth.

In the West march thereof near unto Ouze.
Isis, stands Farendon, seated high: famous now, for a mercate there kept,
but in times past, for a certain Fort, which Robert Stephen, who
notwithstanding won it with bloody assaults, Farendon.
and laid it so level with the ground, that now it is not to be seen. Guil.
New brig^sis.
But the plot of ground whereon it stood, as we find in the Chronicle of
Waverley Abbay, King John in the year of our Lord 1202. prevented by divine
inspiration granted with all the appurtenances to the building of an Abbay for
the Cistercians order.

From hence the river having with a great turning compass after much
wrestling, gotten out toward the North, passes a long hard by many villages
of small reckoning till at length with a return, Abbendu^ or Abing^
and disporting it self with winding branches and divisions, he comes to
Abbendon, a proper town, and populous: called at first by Abbandune, no doubt*
of the Abbay, rather then of one Abben I wot not what Irish Eremite, as some
have written. A place this was (as we find in an old book of Abbendon) upon
the plain of an hill very fair and delectable to see too a little beyond the
town which now is called Suniggewelle, between two most pleasant rivelets,
which enclosing within them the place it self (as it were a certain nooke)
yield a delightsome sight to the beholders, and a meet succor to the
Inhabitants. The very same was in times past called Sheovesham, a City famous,
goodly to behold, full of riches, compassed about with most plentuous fields,
with green meadows, ^patious pastures, and flocks of cattle spinning forth
milk abundantly. H^ere was the Kings seat: hither resorted and assembled the
people, when soever there was any treaty about the chief, and highest affairs
of the kingdom. But so soon as Cissa King of the West Saxons had built the
Abbay, it began Abbendon, and Abbington, that is, Abbay-towne.

This Abbay had not long flourished, when all of a sudden in a tempestuous
fury of the Danes it was subverted; Yet soon after it was reared again
through the bounty of King Edgar, and afterward by the means, and travail of
the Norman Abbats grew by little and little to such magnificence, that among
all the Abbaies of Britain for riches, and stateliness it would hardly give
place to any. Which the very rubble and H^^ic^^ Quintus quarto fundaverat anno.
Rex, (...) Burford super undas, atque Culhamford.
As for the town, albeit along time it had a great stay of the Abbay, yet
since the year of our salvation 1416. in which King Henry the Fifth built
Bridges over the River Isis or Ouse (as witnesses a verse written in a window
of Saint Helens Church there) and turned the Kings high way hither for to make
a shorter passage, it began to be frequented and traded so, that among all
the towns of this shire, it goes for the chief, has a Major in it, and
makes great gain by that steeped barley sprouting and chitting again, K.
Henry of that name the fifth the fourth year of his reign, both Burford
Bridge and Culhamford, did found on River main.
which the Greeks term Byne and we Malt sand besides, has a Cross, of
singular workmanship in the mids of their mercate place (which by report,) in
the reign of King Henry the sixth* the Brotherhood

As Cissa founded this monastery for Monks: so Cilla (out of an old book I
speak) the sister of King Cedwalla built the Nunnerie at Helnestowe near the
Tamis, where her self was Lady Abbasse over the Virgins, who afterward were
translated to Witham. And whiles the war grew hot between Offa and
Kinulphe, when a Castle was there built, the Nuns retired themselves out of
the way. For, after that Kinulph was overthrown, whatsoever lay under his
jurisdiction from the town of Wallengford in the South part, from
Ichenildstreete unto Essebury, Now, Ashbury near to White horse hill.
and in the North side to the river Tamis. King Offa usurped and seized into
his own hands.

Near unto it, Northwest lies Lee, which by the daughter of a certain
worshipful de Lee, fell to the family of Besiles, and thereof it came to be
called Besiles Lee: and from that house in right of marriage, to Richard
Fetiplace: Besides Lee. Fetiplace.
whose Progenitor Thomas brought some honor to his posterity by matching with
Beatrice the base daughter of John the first, King of Portugal, and widow to
Gilbert Lord Talbot, of whom they are descended. But now, let us return. Hard
by Abendon, Ocke a little river that runs by the South side of the town,
(over which in times past Sir John of Saint Helenes, Knight, built a bridge,)
gently falls into Ouse.
Isis: This Ocke springs in that vale of Whitehorse scarce a mile or two from
Kingston-Lisle, in old time the possession of Warin de Insula, or Lisle, a
noble Baron. Vicount Lisle.
From whom when as Sir John Talbot the younger son of that renowned John
Earl of Shrewsburie was descended by his mother, he was created by King
Henry the Sixth Lord Lisle, like as Warin de Insula in times past in regard of
the possession of this place, (as if that dignity were annexed thereto) and
afterward Vicount Lisle: by a Patent without any such regard. This title
through the gracious favor of Kings flourished still in his posterity one after
another successively. See the Earls of Shrewsbury.
For, briefly to knit up their succession, When Sir Thomas Talbot son of the
said John departed this life without issue, being deadly shot into the mouth
with an arrow in a skirmish defending his possessions against the Lord Barkley.
Sir Edward Gray who had married his sister, received the same at the hands of
King Richard the third, and left it to John his son, and successor. Whose
only daughter and heir King Henry the Sir Charles Brandon, and thereupon
created him Vicount. Lisle. But when as she died in tender years before the
marriage was solemnized, he also relinquished that title. Which King Henry
afterward bestowed upon Sir Arthur Plantagenet base son to King Edward the
fourth. Who had wedded Elizabeth sister to Sir John Gray Vicount Lisle, and
widow of Edmund Dudley. And when he deceased without heirs male, the said
King honored therewith Sir John Dudley son of Edmund by the same Elizabeth
Gray, who in the time of King Edward the sixth was created Duke of
Northumberland, and afterward attainted by Queen Marie. His son Sir Ambrose
Dudley being restored in blood, was by Queen Elizabeth on one and the self
same day created Lord Lisle, and Earl of Warwick, Robert Sidney his sisters
son was honored with the style of Vicoun Lisle by King James, who had before
created him (being Chamberlain to the Queen his wife) Baron Sidney of
Pensherst.

Then runs the river Ocke aforesaid, between Pusey, which they that are
named de Pusey hold it yet by the horn from their ancestors, as given unto them
in ancient time by K. Canutus the Dane, Pusey. Denchworth.
and the two Dencheworths the one and the other; where flourished for a long
time two noble and ancient houses, to wit, de Hide at the one, and Fetiplace
at the other, which families may seem to have sprung out of one and the same
stock, considering they both bear one and the same coat of arms. Then
entertaineth Ock a namelesse river, which issues out of the same vale, at
Wantage called in the English Saxon tongue (...), where some time there was a
Manor house of the Kings, Wantage.
and the place wherein Aelfred that most noble and renowned King was borne and
bred, which at his death he bequeathed to Alfrith. Long time Fulke Fitzwarin
that most warlike Knight, Fitzwarin.
upon whom Roger Bigod Mareschall of England had bestowed it for his martial
prowess, and at this day it acknowledges for Lords thereof the Bourchiers,
Earls of Bath descended from the race of the Fitzwarins, of whose family some
were here buried.

Isis being departed once from Abbendon, straight ways receives into it out
of Oxfordshire, the river Tame (of which elsewhere) and now by a compound word
being called Tamisis; Tamisis or Tamis the River. Sinodum.
first directs his course to Sinodun an high hill, and fenced with a deep
trench, were stood, for certain, in old time a fortress of the Romans: for,
the ground being now broken up with the plough, yields otherwhiles to the
Bretwell, there was a Castle, (if it were not that upon this hill) which King
Henry the Second won by force, Bretwell. Robert Montensis.
a little before that he made peace with King Stephen. From hence Tamis,
holds on his way to the chief City in times past of the Attrebatians, which
Antonius terms, GALLEVA of Attrebats, Ptolomee GALEVA, but both of them
through the carelessnesse of the Scriveners name it wrong, for, GALLENA: and
they likewise in their Greek copies have thrust upon us, (...), for, Gallena,
by transposition of letters. Gallena.
I have thought it was so named in the British tongue, as it were, Guall hen,
that is, The old rampire or fort. Which name being still kept, and [ Ford]
added thereto, Wallengfor
which is a shallow place in the river,: the Englishmen in old Wallengford. In
King Edward the Confessors time, it was counted a Burgh), and contained (as we
find in that Book wherein K. William the Frst, Domesday book.
took the Survey of all England two hundred, threescore, and sixteen Hages,
that is to say, Houses, yielding nine pounds de Gablo, and those that dwelt
there, did the King service on horseback, or by water. Of those Hages eight
were destroyed for the Castle. In old time it was compassed about with walls,
which, as men may see by their tract, took up a mile in circuit. It has a
Castle situate upon the river, very large (I assure you) and stately, so
fortitified in times past, that the hope in it, (as impregnable and invincible)
made diverse over-bold and stout. For, when England burned (as a man may say) in
a general of eight Hages or Houses destroyed for the Castle. Yet William
Gemeticensis makes no mention of this Castle, when he writes, that William of
Normandy having defeited Harold, led his army forthwith to this city (so he
terms it) and after he had passed over the Tamis at the ford, pitched his
tents here before he came to London. At which time Wigod an Englishman was
Lord of Wallengford, Records of Wallengford.
of whom he begat Mawd his sole heir, first wedded to Miles Crispin, and after
his death, through the goodness and favor of K. Henry the first, married
unto Brient, called Fitz Count; Who being brought up in warlike feats, (...)
Co^itis.
and taking part with Mawde the Empress, most manfully defended this Castle
against King Stephen, who had raised a fort just over against it at Craumesh:
and he made it good, until that peace so much wished of all England, was
concluded in this place: and that most grievous dissension about the Crown,
between K. Stephen, and Henry the Second ended. For, then the love of God
took such place in the hearts of the said Brient, and his wife, that they cast
To his most beloved Lords, Of the honor of Wallengford. in Testa. ^evilli in
the Exchequer.
the King our sovereign Lord, his Justices, and Barons of the Exchequer, the
Constable of Wallengford sends greeting. Know ye, that I have made diligent
enquiry by the Knights of my Bayliwicke, according to a commandment of my Lord
the King, directed unto me by the Sheriff: and of the Inquisition thus made,
this is the sum. Wigod of Wallengford, held the honor of Wallengford in King
Harolds time, and afterward in the days of King William the First: He had by
his wife a certain daughter whom he gave in marriage to Robert D'Oyly. This
Robert begat of her a daughter, named Mawd, who was Yet afterward in the time
of King Henry the Third, it belonged to the Earls of Chester: and then to
Richard King of the Romans, and Earl of Cornwall, who repaired it, and unto
his son Edmond, who within the inner Court founded a Collegiate Chapel, who
dying without issue, it fell again to the Crown, and was annexed to the
Dukedom of Cornwall: since which time it has by little and little decayed.
And verily about the time when that most mortal Plague which followed the
conjunction of Saturn and Mars Capricorn, reigned hotely throughout all
Europe, in the year of our Lord 1348. This town was so dispeopled by reason
of continual mortality there, A most grievous Pestilence.
that whereas before time it was passing well Inhabited, and had twelve
Churches in it, it can show now no more than one or two. But the cause of this
desolation the Inhabitants lay rather upon the bridges of Abbindon and
Dorchester, whereby London portway was turned from thence.

Moules-ford.
From hence Southward, the Tamis passes most mildly between very rich and
fertile fields on both sides, by Moules-ford: which K. Henry the first gave
unto Girald Fitz-Walter, Carew.
from whence the Noble family of the Carewes is descended. To this house, much
lands, honor, and reputation accrewed, in Ireland by descent, and in Mohuns,
Dinhams, and others. Aldworth.
Not far from hence is Aldworth, where be certain tombs and portraictures,
bigger than the ordinary proportion of men: which thereupon the unlearned
multitude keeps a wondering at, as if they had been Giants: whereas indeed,
they were but of certain Knights of the Family de la Beche, which here had a
Castle, and is thought in the reign of King Edward the Third to have been
extinguished for default of issue male. And now at length, Tamis meets with
Kenet, which River, The River Kenet. Hungerford.
as I said ere-while, watering the South part of this shire, at his first entry
when he has left Wiltshire behind him, runs under Hungerford, named in old
time Ingleford Charnam-street: 1. p^rs dupl. patent. Norm. 6. ^. 5.

Barons of Hungerford.


a very small town, and seated in a moist place; howbeit, it Hungerford, which
was first raised to greatness by Walter Hungerford, who under King Henry the
Fifth, being Seneschall or Steward of the Kings house* was for his warlike
prowess liberally rewarded by the said king and infeoffed in the Castle and
Barony of Homet in Normandy, To have and to hold unto him and his heirs males
by homage and service, which pleasant conceit, I thought not a miss to insert
here among serious matters. The same Walter in the reign of Henry the Sixth,
being high Treasurer of England, and created withal Baron Hungerford, as well
by his singular wisdom, as his marriage mith Katherine Peverell (descended
from the Moels, and Courtneys,) mightily augmented his state. His son Robert,
who wedded the daughter and heir of the Lord Botereaux, enriched the same
house very much, Sir Robert likewise his son, who matched with Eleanor, the
daughter and heir of William Molines) whereupon he was summoned among the
Barons of the Realm Heitesbury, and condemned him afterward for a crime not
to be spoken of: Widehay.
howbeit, Queen Marie restored his children unto all his estate, save only
the name and title of Barons. Not far from hence Southward is Widehay, the
seat for a long time of the Baron De S. Am^ Barons de Amand.
Saint Amand, whose inheritance Gerard Braybrooke de Beauchamp, who being
summoned to the Parliament by the name of William Beauchamp de Saint Amando,
Beaucha^ De S. ^ma^
flourished among other Barons, like as his son Richard, who left no issue
lawfully begotten.

Kenet keeping on his course downward from thence, between Hemsted Marshall,
which sometimes was held by the rod of Marshalsee, and appertained to the
Mareschals of England where S. Thomas Parry Treasurer of Queen Elizabeth's
household, built a very proper house, and Benham Valence in a Park so called,
because it belonged to William de Valencia Earl of Pembroch. But Queen
Elizabeth gave it to John Baptista a Piemontes, of her privy chamber for
faithful service in her dangers. So the river passes on to that old town
Spinae, whereof Antonine made mention: which retaining still the name is at this
day called Spene: Spine.
but now in steed of a town it is a very little village standing scarce a mile
off from Newbury a famous town that arose and had beginning out of the ruins
of it. For Newbury with us is as much to say, as the Newburgh, Newbury
in respect no doubt, of that more ancient place of habitation which is quite
decayed and gone, and has left the name also in a piece of Newburie it self
which is called Spinham Lands. And if nothing else, yet this verily might prove
that Newburie sprang out of Spine, because the inhabitants of Newbury
acknowledge the Spene as their mother, although in comparison of Spene it be
passing fair and goodly, as well for buildings as furniture: become rich also
by clothing, and very well seated in a champian plain, having the river Kenet
to water it. This town at the time that the Normans conquered England, fell to
Ernulph de Hesdin Earl of Perch: whose successor Thomas Earl of Perch, being
slain at the siege of Lincoln, the Bishop of Chalons his heir sold it unto
William Marescall Earl of Pembroke, who also held the Manor of Hempsted hard
by (whereof I have spoken) and his successors also Mareschals of England,
until that Roger Bigod for his obstinacy lost his honor and possessions both,
which notwithstanding by entreaty he obtained again for his life time.

Kenet passes on hence and takes into him Lamborn a little river, Lambor
which at the Aelfreds testament belonged unto his cousin Alfrith, and
afterward to the Fitz Warens, who of King Henry the Third obtained liberty of
holding a mercate, but now appertains unto the Essexes, Knights: A family
that fetches their pedigree from William Essex Undertreasurer of England
under King Edward the Fourth, and from those who in times past carried the same
surname, Dennington, which others call Dunnington a little castle, but a fine
and proper one, situate with a fair prospect upon the brow of a pretty hill
full of groves, and which inwardly for the most part lets in all the light.
Built, they say, it was by Sir Richard de Abberbury Knight, who also under it
founded for poor people a Almeshouse.
Gods-house. Afterward, it was the residence of Chaucer, then of the Dela
Poles, and in our fathers days of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk.

Kenet having now finished a long course, by Aldermaston which King Henry the
First gave unto Robert Achard: From whose posterity by the Delamares it came at
Fosters a family of Knights degree, Aldermaston.
falls at the last into Tamis, presently after it has with his winding
branches compassed a great part of Reading. Reading.
This town Reading, called in the English Saxon tongue (...), of Rhea; that
is, The River, or of the British word Redin, that signifies Fearne, (which
grows here in great plenty) excels at this day all other towns of this
shire in fair streets, and goodly houses: for wealth also of the Townsmen, and
their name in making of cloth, although it has lost the greatest ornaments it
had, to wit, a beautiful Church and a most ancient Castle. For this the Danes
kept as their hold, (so Asserius writes) when they made a rampire between
Kenet and Tamis, and into this they retired themselves for safety when at
Inglefield (a village Aethelwolfe discomfited, and put to flight.

But King Henry the Second so rased it (because it was a place of refuge for
King Stephens followers) that nothing now remains of it but the bare name in
the next street. Nigh whereunto, King Henry the First having plucked down a
little Nunnerie that Queen Alfrith had founded in former times, to make
satisfaction for her wicked deeds, built for Monks a stately and sumptuous
Abbay, and enriched it with great revenewes. Which Prince, to speak out of his
very Charter of the foundation, Because three Abbaies in the Realm of England
were in old time for their sins destroyed, to wit, Reading, Chelseie, and
Leonminster, which a long time were held in Lay men's hands: by the advice of
the Bishops, built a new Monastery of Reading and gave unto In this Abbay was
the founder himself King Henry, Maude the Empress.
buried with his wife both veiled and crowned for that she had been a Queen,
and a professed Nun, and with them their daughter Mawde, as witnesses the
private History of this place, although some report, that she was enterred at
Becc in Normandy. This Mawde as well as that Lacedemonian Lady Lampido, whom
Pliny makes mention of, was a Kings daughter, a Kings wife, and a Kings
mother: that is to say, daughter of this Henry the First, King of England,
wife of Henry the Fourth, Emperor of Almaine, and mother to Henry the
Second, King of England. Concerning which matter have you here a Distichon
engraven on her tomb, and the same verily in my judgment conceived in some
gracious aspect

Magna ortu, majorque viro, sed maxima partu,
Hic jacet Henrici filia, sponsa, parens.
The daughter, wife, the mother eke, of Henry, lies here;
Much blessed by birth, by marriage more, but most by issue dear.
And well might she be counted greatest by her issue: For, Henry the Second
her son, as John of Salisburie who lived in those days wrote; was the best
and most virtuous King of Britain, King Henry the second.
the most fortunate Duke of Normandy and Aquitain: and as well for valiant
exploits, as for excellent virtues highly renowned. How courageous, how
magnificent, how wise and modest he was even from his tender years, envy it
self can neither And in another place of the same King* Henry the Second the
most mighty King that ever was of Britain, showed I will, also if it please
you, adjoyne heereto a word, or two concerning the same King, out of Giraldus
Combrensis. From the Pyrenean mountains, says he, unto the Western bounds,
and furthest limits of the North Ocean, This our Alexander of the West has
stretched forth his arm. As far therefore as nature in these our parts has
enlarged the land, so far has he marched with Victories. If the bounds of
his expeditions were sought for, sooner would the But lo here an old verse of
his death, which briefly in one word contains fully both all this, and also
the renown of his son King Richard the first.

Mira cano, Sol occubuit, nox nulla sequuta est.
A wonder great, the Sun was set, and night there followed none.
For, King Richa the first.
so far was King Richard his son from bringing darkness with him, that

Hinc videt exiguam Chawsey, properatque videre
Redingum nitidum, texendis nobile pannis.
Hoc docet Aelfredi nostri victricia signa,

Vtque superfuso maduerunt sanguine campi.
Principis hic Zephiro Cauroque parentibus ort
Cornipides crebris implent binnitibus auras,
Et gyros ducunt, gressus glomerantque superbos
Dum cupiunt nostri Martis servire lupatis.
Haeccine sed pietas? heu dira piacula, primum
Neustrius Henricus situs hic, inglorius urna
Nunc jacet erectus, tumulum novus advena quaerit
Frustra; nam regi tenues invidit arenas

From hence he little Chawsey sees, and hastneth for to see
Fair Reading town, a place of name, where Clothes ywoven be.
This shows our Aelfrids victory, what time Begsceg was slain,
With other Danes, whose carcasses lay trampled on the plain;
And how the fields ydrenched were with blood upon them shed*
Where as the Prince in Stable now has standing many a steed
Of noblest kind, that neigh and snort into the air a loud
Tracing the ring and keeping pace that stately is, and proud,
Whiles they desire to learn with all in our wars for to serve,

Purged to be by sacrifice. A King of Normans race
Henry the first, enterred here, now turned out of his place,
An out cast lies dishonored. Who seeks his tomb shall miss:
For Covetise envied that King the small mould which was his.
See see, how Princes monuments it ransacks where it is.
Scarce half a mile from Reading, betwixt most green and flowring meadows,
Kenet is coupled with the Tamis, who now runs with a broader stream by a
small village called Sunning, Sunning.
which a man would mervaile to have been the Sea of eight Bishops who had this
shire and Wiltshire for their Diocese (yet our Histories report as much) the
same afterward by Herman was translated to Shirburne, and in the end to
Salisburie, unto which Bishopric this place still belongs. Hereby falls
Ladden a small water into the Tamis, and not far off stands Laurents
Waltham, where are to be seen the foot foundations of an old fort, and diverse
Roman coins often times dug up; and next to it Billingsbere the
inhabitation of Sir Henry Nevill issued from the Lords Abergevenny. From
Sunning the Tamis passes Bistleham, Bisham.
now called short, Bisham, at first a Lordship of the Knights Templars, then of
the Montacutes, and amongst them, William the first Earl of Salisburie of his
family founded a Priory, wherein, some say, he was buried. Certes his wife
the daughter of the Lord Grandison was buried there, and in the Inscription of
her tomb it was specified, Grandison.
that her father was descended out of Burgundy, cosin-german to the Emperor
of Constantinople, the King of Hungary, and Duke of Baveire, and brought into
England by Edmund Earl of Lancaster. Now is the possession of Sir Edward Hoby
Knight, of me especially to be observed, whose singular kindness toward me the
often consideration thereof shall keep so fresh, that it shall never vanish
out of my remembrance.

Tamis having now left Bisham behind it, fetches it self with a compass
about to a little town named in the former ages Southe-alington afterward
Maiden-hith, and at this day Maindenhead, of the superstitious worshipping of I
wot not what British Maidens head, Maidenhead.
one of those eleven thousand Virgins, who as they returned from Rome into
their country with Vrsula their leader, suffered as Martyrs at Colein in
Germany, under that scourge of God, Attila* Neither is this town of any
antiquity: for, no longer ago then in our great Grandfathers days, there was
a Ferry in a place somewhat higher, at Babhams end. But after they had built
here a bridge of timber piles, it began to flourish with Innes, and go
beyond her mother Bray hard by, which notwithstanding is far more ancient, as
having given name to the whole Cesars protection, inhabited in times past: And
why should I think otherwise? Bibroci.
The relics of them remain yet most evidently in the name. For, BIBRACTE in
France is now also drawn shorter into Bray: and not far from hence Caesar
passed over the Tamis with his army, as I will show in due place, what time as
the people of that small Canton put themselves to the devotion of Caesar.
Certes, If a man should hunt for these Bibroci elsewhere, he should I believe,
hardly find them.

Within this Hundred of the Bray.
Bibroci, Windesore bears a goodly show: in the Saxon tongue, Windesore.
happily of the winding shore called (...) for so it is named Westminster. To the
praise of almighty God, I have granted as an endowment and a perpetual
Inheritance to the use and behoof of those that serve the Lord, Windle-shore
with the appurtenances. And I have read nothing more ancient, concerning
Windsore. But the Monks had not long held it in possession, when William of
Normandy by making an exchange drew it back to himself. For in this tenure
goes his Charter. With the consent and favor of the venerable Abbat of
Westminster, I have made a composition for Windlesor to be the Kings
possession, because that place seemed profitable and commodious by reason of
water hard adjoining to it: and the wood fit for game, and many other
particulars lying there meet and necessary for Kings:

Surely a Princes seat cannot lightly have a more pleasant site, For, from an
high hill that rises with a gentle ascent, it enjoys a most delightful
prospect round about. Fore-right in the Front it overlooketh a vale lying out
far and wide, Order of the Garter.
who here built new out of the ground a most strong Castle in bigness equal
to a pretty City, fortified with ditches and bulwarks made of stone: and
forthwith after he had subdued the French and Scots, held at one and the self
same time John King of France, and

In this place, king Edward the third, for to adorn martial prowess, with
honors, Shame to h^ that evil thinks.
But others there be, that do attribute it unto the garter of the Queen, or
rather of Joan Countess of Salisburie, a Lady of incomparable beauty, which
fell from her as she daunced, and the King took up from the floor: for, when
a number of Nobles Nobilitas sub amore jacet.
Nobility lies under love.


There be also, that would have the invention of this order to be much more
ancient, fathering it upon King Richard the first, and are verily persuaded,
that King Edward at length brought it into use again: but how truly, I know
not. Yet in Richardo cum contra Turcas and Agarenos, etc. that is, when K.
Richard warred upon the Turks and Saracens, Cypres and Acon, and was weary of
so lingering delay, whiles the siege continued long in wonderful care and
anxiety, at length upon a divine inspiration, by the coming in and apparition
(as it was thought) of S. George, it came into his mind to draw upon the legs
of certain choice Knights of his a certain Garter or tach of leather, such
only as he had then ready at hand, whereby they being distinguished, and put
in mind of future glory promised unto them, if they won the victory, they
might be stirred up, and provoked to perform their service bravely, and fight
more valiantly: in imitation of the Romans, who had such variety of Coronets,
wherewith military men for diverse and sundry causes, were rewarded
accordingly: to the end that by these But upon what occasion soever it began,
the mightiest Princes of Christendom, reputed it amongst their greatest honor
to be chosen and admitted into this company: and since the first institution
thereof, there have been already received, Soveraig^
and enrolled into this order, which consists of six and twenty Knights, two
and twenty Kings, or thereabout, besides our Kings of Founders of the Order.
and be commonly called, the Founders of the Order: for, their renown is not
to be abolished, who in those days for stowt courage, and warlike prowess,
had few or no peers, and were in that regard advanced to this honor.

Edward the Third King of England. Edward his eldest Son, Prince of Wales.
Henry, Duke of Lancaster. Thomas, Earl of Warwick. The Capdall de Buch.
Ralph, Earl of Stafford. William de Monteacute Earl of Sarisburie. Roger
Mortimer, Earl of March. Sir John Lisle. Sir Bartholomew Burgwash. Sir John
Beauchampe. Sir John Mohun. Sir Hugh Courtney. Sir Thomas Holland. Sir John
Gray. Sir Richard Fitz Simon. Sir Miles Stapleton. Sir Thomas Wall. Sir Hugh
Wrothesley. Sir Neel Loring. Sir John Chandos. Sir James Awdeley. Sir Otes
Holland. Sir Henry Eme. Sir Zanchet D'brigecourt. Sir Walter Pavely.
On the left side of the Church, are the houses of the Custos, or Deane, and
twelve Prebendaries. On the right side stands an house, not unlike to the
Graecians Prytaneum: wherein twelve aged military men, Gentlemen borne, are
maintained: who wearing every day a red or skarlet kirtle, reaching down to
there ankles, with an upper mantle of purple over it, Almes-Knights.
are bound daily to be present at divine service, there to commend unto God in
their prayers, the Knights of this Order. Betwixt the two Courts before said,
there rises up an high mount, on which is set a round tower: and hard by it
arises another lofty tower, called Winchester tower, of William Wickham This
made Wickham: Wickham his Apophthegm.
which manner of speech in the English tongue, that seldom makes distinction
of cases, carries such a doubtful construction, that uncertain it is,
whether he made these buildings, or the buildings made him. Hereof information
was given to the King by some privy back-biters for to work him a
displeasure; and that in such terms, as if Wickham did arrogantly challenge to
himself all the honor of the building. Which when the King took in very
evil part, and sharply rebuked him for it* he made this answer, That he had
not arrogated, and ascribed to himself the (quoth he) made this Castle, but
this Castle has made me, and from low estate raised me unto the Kings favor,
unto wealth, and dignity. Under the Castle toward the West and South, lies
the town of good bigness and populous withal, which from the time of King
Edward the Third began to flourish: and the other which stands farther of,
and is now called, Old Windsore, fell by little and little to decay, In which,
(whiles William the First reigned, as we read in his book) there were an
hundred Hages, or h^uses, whereof two and twenty were Or, free.
fquit from Gable, out of the rest there went thirty shillings. No other
memorable thing is here to be found, but Eton, which is hereto adjoined Tamis,
and in it a fair College, and a famous School of good literature, Eaton.
founded and built by King Henry the Sixth: wherein, besides the Provost,
Eight fellows, and the singing Choristers, there are threescore Scholars,
instructed in Grammar, and in due time preferred to the Universitie of
Windsore, but that there is an honorable family of Barons, surnamed of
Windsore, who fetch their original from Walter the son of Other, Castellan of
Windsore in the time of K. William the First: from whom also master Robert
Glover most studious, and skillful in Heraldrie, and who in the company of
Heralds, bare the title of Somerset, has prooved, the Fitz-Giralds in Ireland,
Earls of Kildare and Desmond to be derived. Neither think much of your
labor, Barons of Windsore.
to run over these verses of Windsore, taken out of the Poem, entitled, The
marriage of Tame and Isis, and penned certain years past: wherein Tamisis
endeavors to set forth, as well the dignity of the place, as the majesty of
Queen Elizabeth, keeping her Court therein.

I am Windesorae surgunt in culmina ripae
Turrigera, celso lambentes vertice coelum.
Quas ubi conspexit doctae gratatus Etonae,
Quae fuit Orbilijs nimium subjecta plagosis;
Caeruleum caput ille lavans, ita farier infit.
Aerias moles, gradibus surgentia templa,
Ferratos posts pinnas, vivaria, vere

Florentes hortos, Regum cunabula, regum
Auratos thalamos, Regum praeclara sepulchra,
Et quaecunque refers: nunc Windesora referri
Desine. Cappadocis quanquam sis clara Georgi
Militia, procerumque cohors chlamydata nitenti
Cincta periscelidi suras, te lumine tanto
Illustret, tantis radijs perstringit and orbem,
Vt jam Phryxeum spernat Burgundia vellus,

Et cruce conspicuas pallas, Rhodus, Alcala, and Elba,
Solaque militiae sit splendida gloria vestrae;
Desine mirari, latari desine tandem.
Omnia concedunt uni, superatur in uno
Quicquid habes: tibi major honos, and gloria surgit,
Accola quod nostrae ripae sit, and incola vobis
Elizabetha. (simulque suo quasi poplite flexo
Tamisis en placide subsidet, and inde profatur)
Elizabetha suis Diva and Dea sola Britannis:

Complecti cuperem, Melibocco promptius Alps
Imponam, numeremque meas numerosus arenas.
Si quasdam tacuisse velim, quamcunque tacebo
Major exit; Primos actus, veteresque labores
Prosequa^? ad sese revocant praesentia mentem.
Iustitiam dicam? magis at Clementia splendet.
Victrices referam vires? plus vicit inesmis.
Quod pietas floret, quod non timet Anglia Martem,
Quod legi nemo, quod lex dominatur and omni,
Quod vicina truci non servit Scotia Gallo,

Criniger Vltonius, quod jam mitescere discit;
Laus cadit haec illi, nil non debetar and illi.
Crimina-quae pellunt, tanta quae principe dignae
Omnes templa sacro posuerunt pectore Divae;
Religio superos sancte manet esse colendos,
Iustitia utilibus semper praeponere justum.
Edocet, ut praeceps nil sit Prudentia suadet;
Temperies ut casta velit, cupiatque pudica
Instruit; immotam mentem Constantia firmat.
Hinc EADEM SEMPER, recte sibi vindicat illa.
Proferet undos^ quis tantas carmine lands?
Sola tenet laudum quicquid numerabitis omnes.
Sit faelix, valeat, vivat, laudetur, ametur;
Dum mihi sunt fluctus, dum cursus, dum mihi ripae.
Angligenum faelix Princeps moderetur habenas;
Finiat una dies illi annos, and mihi cursus.
And now the tour-supporting banks, at Windsore mount on hie,
That with their loftie-headed tops reach to the cloudy kie.
Which when * he saw, and had withal greeted that learned Eaton,
Where Masters too too rigorous, have scholars overbeaten.
His Sea-like head he lifting up in this wise began to say;
Thy long discourse (O Windsor) I wish thee now to stay,
Of high raised mounts, of temples tall that rise with stately staire,
Of yron-bound beams, of battlements, and pinnacles so fair:
Of gamefull parks, of meadows fresh, ay-spring-like pleasant fields,
Of goodly gardens clad with flowers, that wholesome Zephyrus yields,
Of nurseries, gilt-marriage ^owers, and sumptuous tombs of Kings,
Relate no more, but make an end of all such glorious things.
What though thou much renowned be, by many a Georgian Knight,
And Nobles clad in mantles rich, with costly garter dight,
Do cause thy name to shine so much, and thence to thy great praise
Through out the world are spread abroad so bright and glittering rays,
That Burgundy despises now his goodly Toison D'or,
And France of colars gartrisht fair with cockles sets no store,
Nor Rhodes, with Alcal and Elba, regard the robes with Cross
Sightly beset; so that they count their Orders all but dross,
Compared with Knighthood this of thine, which only bears the name;
Cease now to joy, cease now at length to wonder at the same.
All yield to one, what ever thou have in one is drowned all,
For greater glory grow's to thee, and honor more does fall,
In that there dwells upon my bank, and seated is in thee,
Elizabeth (and therewith Tamis seeming to bow his knee, Queen Elizabeth.

And gently crouch, obeisance made, and then he thus went on)
Elizabeth, of Englishmen sole Goddess, Saint alone.
Whose praise-worth virtues, if in verse I now should take in hand
For to comprize, on Meliboc an hill that high does stand,
I might as easily set the Alps, or number all my sand.
If some I would in silence pass, what ever I suppress,
Will greater prove than all the rest: If I my self address,
Her foremost acts, and travailes old to count, I then shall find,
That those of present times, to them will draw away my mind.
Say, that of justice I relate; more shin's her mercies lore;
Speak I of her victorious arms; unarmed she gained more.
That piety now flourishes, that England fears no war,
That none rules law, but unto law all men obedient are,
That neighbor Scots be not enthralled to Frenchmen rigorous,
That Irish wild do now cast of their fashions barbarous,
That shag-hai'rd Ulster Kern, does learn civility anew,
The praise and thanks is hers alone. What is not to her due:
Those Goddesses that vices chase, and are beseeming best
A Prince so rare, are seated all, and shrined in her breast.
Religion First, puts her in mind to worship God aright,

Prudence advises naught to do rashly without forecast.
Then Temperance persuades to love all things both pure and chaste. Queen
Elizabeth's Mot, or Empress.

And Constancy her resolute mind does settle firm and fast.
Hence justly she, ALWAYS THE SAME, claims and keeps to the last.
Who can discribe in Flowing or rolling.
in waving verse such noble virtues all?
Praiseworthy parts she has alone, what all ye reckon shall.
Then happiness, long life and health, praise, love, may her betide,
So long as waves of mine shall last, or stream and banks abide;

Let both my course, and her life end, in one and selfsame day.
The rest of Or, the (...).
Barkshire which lies Southward from Windsor, is shadowed with woods, and
thickets, commonly called, the Forest of Windlesor, in which the towns and
villages stand but thin (whereof Ockingham is of greatest name, Windsor
Forest. Chases or Forests. Forest, what it is, and whence so called.
by reason of the bigness thereof, and trade of clothing:) but very full it is
of game in every place. Now, for as much as we have oftentimes made mention,
and shall still, of the Forests: what a Forest is, and the reason of that
name, if you desire to know, (but see you laugh not thereat) take it here out
of the black book of the Exchequer. A Forest is a safe harbor, and abiding
place of dear or beasts, not of any whatsoever, but as one would say, Feresta,
that is, a station of wild beasts. And incredible it is how much ground the
kings of England have ^uffered every where to lie untilled, and set a part for
to empale and enclose such dear, or, as they use to say, have afforested.
Neither can I think, that any thing else was the cause thereof, but only the
overmuch delight in hunting, or to maintain the Kings household (although some
attribute it to the infrequencie of the people to inhabit the country) seeing
that since the Danes were here, they for a long time afforested more and more,
and for the maintenance, and keeping of such places ordained most straight
laws, Protoforestarius.
and an overseer, whom they call, Protoforestarius, that is, Chief forrester,
who should hear causes belonging unto Forests, and punish either by death or
loss of limb, whosoever killed Dear within any park or chase. But John of
Sarisburie shall in his own words tell you these things briefly out of his
Polycraticon; that which you may marvel more at, to lay grins for birds, to
set snares to allure them with nooze or pipe, or by any ways laying whatsoever
to entrap or take them, is oftentimes by virtue of an Edict, made a crime, and
either amerced with forfeiture of goods, or punished with loss of limb and
life. You have heard that the fowls of the air, and fishes of the sea are
common: But these ywis belong unto the King, which the Forest Law takes hold
of, and claims wheresoever they fly. Withold thy hand, forbear and Which
courses seeming too inhumane, were the occasion otherwhiles of great troubles
and uproares, so long, until in the end by the rising and revolt of the
Barons, there was wrested from King Henry the third, the Charter de Foresta:
wherein those rigorous laws being made void he granted others more indifferent,
whereunto they are bound even at this day, Justices of the Forests.
who dwell within compass of the Forests. And from that time, two Justices
were appointed for these causes, whereof the one overseeth all Forests Trent,
the other, all the rest beyond Trent as far as Scotland, with great
authority. Throughout all this Province or county (as we find in the Survey
book of England,) The Kings Knight.
The Taine or Kings Knight, holding of him as Lord, whenever he died, left
unto the King for a relief all his armor, one horse with a saddle, and
another without a saddle. And if he had either hounds or hawks, they were
tendered and presented unto the King, that he might take them if he would. When
Gelt was given in Thus much of Barkshire, which (as yet) has given the title
of Earl to no man.

Within the compass of this shire, are parishes. 140.

THese Regions which hitherto we have travailed through, that is to say, of the
Danmonij, Durotriges, Belgae, and Attrebatij; what time as the Saxons bare
Sovereign rule in Britain, The Kingdom of West Saxons.
fell to the Kingdom of the West Saxons, which they in their language, called,
(...), and themselves (...), of Cerdics Grandfather, who first erected this
Kingdom. Geguises.
Whence they were termed Gevissi, and by others also Visi-Saxones, from their
West situation, Visi-Gothi. These at the length in the best and flourishing
time of the Empire, reduced the English Heptarchie into the Saxons Monarchy:
which notwithstanding afterward, through the lither cowardice of their Kings,
quickly aged, and soon vanished. So that herein, that may be verified which
we daily see. The race or issue of the most valiant men, and noblest Families,
like as the offspring of plants, has their springing up, their flowring and
maturitie: and in the end

REGNI.
REGNI, by Ptolomee PHrNOI, inhabited those Regions which we at this day, do
commonly term Surry, and South-sex, with the Seacoast of Hantshire. As
touching the Etymology of this named, I will pass over my conceits in
silence, because per adventure they would carry no more truth with them, than
if I should think they were by Ptolomey, PHrNOI, for that it was Regnum, that
is, a Kingdom, and the Romans permitted the people thereof to remain Tacitus
writes, certain Cities according to an old Custom of the people of Rome,
were given to Cogidunus, a British King, that they might have even Kings also,
as instruments to draw others into bondage and servitude. But this conjecture
seems to my self not probable, and happily to others absurd, I utterly reject:
and willingly embrace the Saxon original of these latter names: to wit, that
South-sex, takes denomination of the South Saxons, and Suthrey of the South
situation Rhey.
for, no man may deny, that Suth-rey imports so much, considering that
Over-rhey, in the old English tongue, signifies, Over, or beyond the river.

SVTH-REY.
SVRRIA, which Bid names Suthriona, commonly called Suthrey, and Surrey, and
by the Saxons, of bordering South (upon the river, (...), for (...), with them
betokens the South, and (...) a river or flood) from the West, boundeth
partly upon Barkshire and Hantshire, from the South upon Sussex: Holmesdale of
the woods therein, runs down very pleasant to behold, by reason of the
delectable variety of groves, fields, and meadows. On each side there be pretty
hills rising up a great way along in the country, parkes every where
replenished with Dear, rivers also full of fish: whereby it affords for
pleasure fair game of hunting, and as delightsome

Chertsey.
The Tamis (that we may follow his course with the stream, as it runs down)
so soon as he has taken his leave of Barkshire passes hard by Chertsey,
which Beda calls the Isle of Cerotus. Now scarce half an Island, unless it
be by winter waters: wherein, as in a place severed from all intercourse and
commerce with men, Frithwald, as he calls himself in the charter of the
foundation, a petty Prince Woilpher King of the Mercians, and Erkenwald Bishop
of London in the first rising of the English primitive Church, founded a little
monastery, 666.
wherein for a time that most devout King Henry the sixth lay interred, whom,
Henry the sixth.
being deposed from his Regal dignity, the house of York to establish their
kingdom securely, deprived also of his life, and here without any honor,
buried him. But King Henry the Seventh afterward having translated his body to
Windsor, and bestowed it in a new tomb, solemnized his funerals after a
princely manner, and so much admired his Godly and holy virtues (for, he was
the lively pattern of Christian piety and patience) that he dealt with Pope
Julius, to have him made a Saint. But the reason why this took no effect was
the Popes covetousness, Histor. of Canterbury.
so that he might seem ready to grant those kind of honors not for the
Princes holiness sake, but for gold. A little beneath this, the river Wey
runs into Tamis, which flowing forth out of Hantshire, so soon as it is
come into Suthrey visits Feornham, Farnham.
commonly termed Farnham, so named of much fern growing in that place: which
Ethelbald King of the West Saxons to use his own words Gave unto the Bishop
and Congregation.
Congregation of Winchester Church. Here, about the year of our Lord 893. King
Elfred with a small power put to flight the Danes as they spoiled and harried
the country: and afterward when King Stephen, had granted leave to as many as
sided with him to build Castles, Henry of Bloys Stephen erected a spacious
Castle upon an hill that overtopped the town: which being a place of refuge
for rebellious and seditious persons, King Henry the Third cast it down:
howbeit the Bishops of Winchester, unto whom it belonged built it up again.
And not far from hence, at Waverley, SVRREY Olim Seeds REGNORVAL
William Giffard Bishop of Winchester founded an Abbey for Monks of the
Cistercian order commonly called, Waverley.
White Monks. *
Which Abbey being a grand child as they termed it from Cisterce in Burgundy,
was so fruitful here in England that it was mother to the Abbeies of Gerondon,
Ford, Tame, Cumb, and grandmother to Bordesley, Bidlesden, Bruer, Bindon, and
Dunkeswell. For so religious orders were wont to keep in pedigree manner the
propagation of their Orders, as a deduction of Colonies out of them. From
thence, Wey holding on his course by Godelming, which King Elfred bequeathed
unto Ethelwald his brothers son, Cateshull.
not far from the Manor of Cateshull, which Hamon of Gatton held to be the
Mareshall of harlots those parts: Guildford.
not far from Loseley, where we saw a large fair house belonging to the
family of the Mores, knights, within a park; it comes to Guilford, in the
Saxon tongue (...), and in some copies, written Gegldford. A mercate town it
is now well frequented, and full of fair Innes, but in old time it was a
royal mansion of the English Saxon Kings, which also that noble Ethelwald held
as a legacy from his Uncle by the fathers side. The King has now thereby a
decaying house, and not far from the river are to be seen the broken walls
of an old large Castle. But in the midst of the town there is a Church, the
west end whereof made of arched work, and embowed over head seems to be
very ancient. Haga.
Here, as it is to be seen in William the first his book, the King had
Hages, that is, houses, wherein remained one hundred seventy and five men. But
for nothing it is so famous, as for the treachery, and cruelty of Goodwin
Earl of Kent, who in the year of Christ 1036. When Elfrid King Etheldreds
son, and heir apparent to the Crown of England came out of Normandy to
claim his right, entertained him with faithful promise of safety, but
forthwith hardly entreated him contrary to his word: Decimation.
For, suddenly in the dead of the night, he surprised and put to death in this
place six hundred Normans, who had accompanied the young Prince, by tithing
them, as our Writers report. Neither slew he every tenth man of them drawn by
lot according to the old military custom, but even as he had killed nine, he
let the tenth man go by: and even these tenth men thus reserved Elfred
himself he delivered him into the hands of Harold the Dane, who after he had
pulled both eyes out of his head, over-layed him with irons, and kept him in
close prison, even unto his dying day.

Wey being passed from hence with a long course Northward, Oking, or Woking.
shows nothing memorable besides Sutton, the residence of the Westons an
ancient family of Knights degree bettered by an heir of T. Camel, Oking, where
King Henry the seventh repaired and enlarged the Manor house being the
inheritance of the Lady Margaret Countess of Richmont his mother, who lived
there in her later time, Newark sometime a small Priory environed with divided
streams: Pyriford, where Edward Earl of Lincoln Lord Clinton, and Admiral
of England built him an house; and Ockham hard by, where that great Philosopher
and father of the Nominals William de Ockham was borne and whereof he took
that name: William Ockham.
as of the next village Ripley, G. de Ripley a ring leader of our Alchimists,
and a mystical impostor. But where this Wey is discharged into Tamis at a
double mouth, Pater No^^nalium.
Otelands a proper house of the Kings offers it self to be seen within a
park: near unto which, Caesar passed over Tamis into the borders of
Cassivelannus. For, Where Cae^ crossed the Tamis.
this was the only place where a man might in times past go over the Tamis on
foot and that hardly too, which the Britains themselves improvidently
bewraied unto Caesar. For, on the other side of the river, there was a great
power Beda, Are seen this day, and it seems to the beholders that every one
of them carrying the thickness of a man's thigh and covered over with lead,
stuck unmovable, as being driven hard into the bottom of the river. But the
Romans entered the river with such force, when the water reached up to their
very chinnes, that the Coway-stakes.
the place at this day of those stakes is called Coway-stakes, and Caesar
makes the borders of Cassivelanus where he sets down his passage over the
river to be about fourscore Italian miles from the sea which beats upon the
East-coast of Kent, where he landed: and at the very same distance is this
passage of ours.

The river Mole.
Within some few miles from thence the river Mole, having from the South side
passed through the whole country, hasteneth to join with the Tamis; but at
length Anas in Spain: whereof it may seem it took name, Anas a river in
Spain.
seeing that creature living within the ground, is called also in English a
Mole. But upon this river, there is not any thing of note, save only a good
way off from the spring and head of it, and near unto an old port way of the
Romans making which men call Stanystreet) there stands the town Aclea,
commonly Ockley: Ockley.
so-named of Oaks where Ethelwolph the son of Egbert, who having been
professeed in the holy Orders and released by the Popes authority, when he had
possession of his fathers kingdom by right of inheritance, joined battle
with the Danes, fought with good success, and slew all the valiantest Hydra. A
little from the fountains where this river springs, stands Gatton which
now is scarce a small village, Gatton.
though in times past it has been a famous town. To prove the antiquity
thereof, it shows Roman coins dug forth of the ground, and sends unto
the Parliament two Burgesses. Lower than it, Rhie-gate.
is seated Rhie-gat, (which if a man interpret according to our ancient
language, is as much as the Rivers course), in a vale running out far into
the East, called Holmesdale; Holmesdale.
the Inhabitants whereof, for that once or twice they vanquished the Danes as
they wasted the country, are wont in their own praise to chaunt this Rythme.

The vale of Holmesdall,
Never won, ne never shall.
This Rhie-gate carrying a greater show for largeness than fair buildings,
has on the South Side a Park thick set with fair groves, wherein the
right Noble Charles, Earl of Nottingham, Baron of Effingham, and Lord Admiral
of England, has a house; where the Earls of Warren and Southrey had founded a
pretty Monastery. On the East side, stands a Castle mounted aloft, now
forlorn and for age ready to fall; built by the same Earls and of the vale
wherein it stands, commonly called Holmecastle: Holmecastle.
under which I saw a wonderful vault carried under the ground of arch-worke
over head, hollowed with great labor out of a soft gritte Warren, as we find
in the Offices or inquisitions held it in chief of the King Or Inquisitions.
in their Baronie, In Baronia sua de Conquesta Angliae.
from the conquest of England. Hence runs this river down by Bechworth
Castle, for which Sir Thomas Brown obtained of King Henry the Sixth the
liberty of holding a Fair. For it is the habitation of the Brownes, Knights:
out of which family since our grandfather can remember, when Sir Anthony
Brown had married Lady Lucie the fourth daughter of John Nevil Marquess
Mont-a-cute, Queen Mary honored his sons son with the title of Vicount
Mont-a-cute. Some few miles from hence Westward Effingham shows it self,
Effingham.
the possession not long since of William Howard (son to that Noble Thomas Duke
of Norfolk Mary Baron Howard of Effingham, and made Lord High-Admirall of
England, was first Lord Chamberlain unto Queen Elizabeth of most happy
memory, and then Lord privy Seal: whose son Charles now flourishes, Lord
great Admiral of England, whom in the year of Elizabeth honored also with
the title of Earl of Nottingham, of whom more in my Annals, but now return
we to the river.

The Mole now being come as far as Whitehill, whereon the Box tree grows in
great plenty, The Swallow, or Swallow hole.
at the foot thereof hides himself, or rather is swallowed up, and thereof
the place is called the Swallow: but after a mile or two near unto Letherhed
bridge boiling up and breaking forth, takes joy to spring out again. So that
the Inhabitants of this tract may boast as well as the Spaniards, A bridge on
which flocks of sheep are pastured.
that they have a bridge which feeds many flocks of sheep: For, this is a
common byword, most rife in the Spaniards mouths, as touching the place where
their river Anas, now called Guadiana, hides himself for ten miles together.
Thus our Mole rising up a fresh hasteneth fair and softly by Stoke Dabernoun
so named of the ancient possessors the Dabernouns gentlemen of great good note,
afterward by inheritance from them the possession of the Lord Bray; L. Bray.
and by Aesher sometimes a retyring place belonging to the Bishops of
Winchester. And then very near Molesey whereunto it gives name, sheddeth
himself into the Tamis.

After Tamis has taken unto him the Mole, he carries his stream Northwardly
and runs fast by Kingstone, called in times past Moreford, as some will have
it; a very good mercate town for the bigness, and well frequented; well
known also in old time by reason of a Castle there belonging to the Clares
Earls of Gloucester. Tamis. In which when England was almost ruinated by the
Danish wars, Athelstan, Edwin, and Etheldred were crowned Kings upon an open
stage in the Market place, and of these Kings here crowned, it came to be
named Kingstone, as one would say, The Kings Town. Tamis now turning his
course directly Northward, visits another place: which the Kings chose for
themselves sometimes to sojourne at, which of the shining brightness they call
Shene: Richmond. Both the place and the village before the time of King Henry
the Seventh called Shene.
but now it is named Richmond, wherein, the most mighty Prince, King Edward the
Third when he had lived sufficiently both to glory and nature, died; with
sorrow that he conceived for the death of that most valiant and Martial
Edward the Third.
For, both of them by bearing their victorious arms throughout all France,
struke so great a terror wheresoever they came, that as the father might most
worthily with King Antiochus carry the name of Thunderbolt, so his son with
Pyrrhus deserved to be named the Eagle. Here also departed Anne wife to King
Richard the Second, sister of the Emperor Wenzelaus, and daughter to the
Emperor Charles the fourth, who first taught English women the manner of
sitting on horseback which now is used: whereas before

Howbeit King Henry the Fifth readorned it with new buildings, and in Shene a
pretty village hard by, he joined thereto a little religious house of
Carthusian Monks, which he called, The house of Jesus of Bethelem. But in the
reign of Henry the seventh, this Princely place was with a woeful sudden fire
consumed almost to ashes; Howbeit rising up again forthwith far more
beautiful and glorious as it were a Phaenix out of her own ashes, by the
means of the same King Henry: it took this new name Richmond, of the title
he bare, being Earl of Richmond, before he obtained the Elizabeth a most
gracious Lady ninety and four years after, having lived fully to the
contentment of nature, (For, 70. year old she was or much thereabout) when it
pleased God to call her out of The death of Queen Elizabeth 1603.
and high conceit, who lively resembled as well the royal qualities of her
Grandfather, as she did his princely presence and countenance, the Worlds love,
and joy of Britain. And so far was she, a woman though she were, from
degenerating and growing unlike her noble Progenitors in that continued course
of their virtues, that if she surmounted them not, surely she equalled them to
the full. Well, posterity may one day hereafter be so thankful as to yield
heereto a gracious credit (neither do I here by way of flattery set a false
color and gloss upon the truth) that a Virgin for the space of forty four
years, so ruled the royal James (on whom as the true and undoubted heir to
her Crown all men's minds were set, and eyes fixed) with his sacred and bright
beams shone unto us, and thereby put us into most comfortable hope of endless
joy. Whom so long as we behold here, we believe not that she is deceased.
And why should we once say that she is deceased? whose virtues live still
immortal, and the memorial of whose name consecrated in men's hearts, and in

How far the Tamis ebbeth and flows.
Thus far swells the Tamis with the access of the flowing tide of the sea,
about lx. Italian miles by water from his mouth. Neither to my knowledge is
there any other river in all Europe, that for so many miles within land feels
the violence of the Ocean forcing and rushing in upon it, and so driving back
and withholding his waters, to the exceeding great commodity of the
inhabitants bordering thereupon. Why Tamis ebbeth and flows so far within
Land.
Whither this comes by reason that from hence he has in manner no crooked
turnings and winding reaches, but with a more straight and direct channel
carries his current into the East, as being for the most part restrained, and
kept in with higher banks, and dilating himself with a wider mouth than all
other rivers, lies more exposed and open to the Ocean, which by that most
swift whirling about of Marriage between Tame and Isis, if happily they may
content your taste: A dextra, nobis Richmondia, Shena vetustis
Celsa nitet, sapiens namque hanc Richmondia dici
Henricus voluit, sibi quod retulisset honorem
Et titulos Comitis Richmondia jure paterno:
Hectoris Edwardi sed deflet funera nostri;
Proh dolor! hic illi regimens libera cessit
Corpore contempto, seeds aditura supernas.
Quem si non subito rapuissent ferrea fata,
Aut te Valesiis rapuisset Gallia victor,
Aut tibi Valesios.
Then on the right hand Richmond stands, a fair and stately thing,
So called of us, (but Shene of old) which name that prudent King
The seventh.
Henry it gave, because to him it brought in fathers right
The Honor and the Style, whereby, he Earl of Richmond hight.
But it of The Third.
Edward King ( halas) our Hector, wailes the death,
Whose soul here freed from body which it scorned, with vital breath,
Departed hence right willingly, in heaven to live for ay:
Whom had not cruell-sudden death untimely fetched away,

Or them of thee.


And after a few verses set between, Tamisis alternum sentit reditumque,
fugamque
Huc reflui pelagi, quoties vaga Cynthia pronos
Octava librat coeli statione jugales.
Aut tenet oppositam varianti lumine plagam,

Atque superbus ait, concedant flumina nobis,
Nulla per Europae dotatas nomine terras
Flumina, tam long sic certis legibus undas
Alternas renovant, nisi fratres Scaldis, and Albis.
Tamis here by turns alternative does feel both ebb, and flow
Of Sea, by course of wandering Moon that rules tide here below.
As often as she with each eight point of heaven above does meet,
Or holds the points full opposite, as lights do change and fleet.

And then in pride of heart he says. All rivers else beside
Veil unto me. No stream so far through Europe keeps again
His tide so just, unless the Scheld, and Elb my brethren twain.


About four miles from the Tamis within the Country, Nonesuch.
Nonesuch a retiring place of the Princes puts down, and surpasses all
other houses round about: which, the most magnificent Prince King Henry the
Eighth, in a very healthful place called Cuddington before, selected for his
own delight and ease, and built with so great sumptuousness and rare
workmanship, that it aspireth to the very top of ostentation for show; so as a
man may think, that all the skill of Architecture Nonesuch] according as
Leland has written of it: Hanc quia non habeant similem laudare Britanni
Saepe solent, Nullique parem, cognomine dicunt.
The Britans often are wont to praise this place, For that through all
The Realm they cannot show the like, and Nonesuch they it call.


As for the very house self, so environed it is about with Parkes full of
Dear, Mary made it over to Henry Fitz-Alan Earl of Arundell for other Lands:
and he, when he had enlarged it with a Library passing well furnished, and
other new buildings, passed over all his right when he died to the L. Lumley,
who for his part spared no cost, that it might be truly answerable to the
name: and from him now is it returned again by compositions and conveiances to
the Crown. Near hereunto (and worth the noting it is) there is a vain of
potters earth highly commended, and therefore the

Nor far from hence the clear rivelet Wandle in Latin Vandalis. Woodcote.
Noviomagi
Vandalis, so full of the best Trouts, issues forth from his head near
Cashalton and Wodcot where by a tuft of trees upon an hill-top there are to be
seen manifest signs of a pretty town, and diverse wels built of flint
stones: Concerning the populousness and wealth whereof the neighbor
Inhabitants report very much: This in my conceit was that City Antonine
NOVIOMAGVS. Noviomagus.
Neither need we to seek from else where proof hereof, but from the
correspondencie of distance. For as the old Itinerary notes, it is ten miles
from London, and twenty eight from Vagmiacj now Maidston. Many a mile therefore
went they out of the way that placed Noviomagus either at Buckingham, or at
Guildford. This was a principal City of the REGNI not known to Marinus
Tyrius a most ancient Geographer, whom Ptolomee taking upon him to censure,
taxes for that he had set NOVIOMAGVS of Britain by Climate more North, and by
account of miles more South than London.

Croidon.
Wandle while it is yet small receives his first increase by a rill springing
at Croidon, in times past called Cradiden: which stands under the hills is
very well known, as well for the house of the Archbishops of Canterbury, unto
whom it has belonged now this long time; as for Char-coles which the townsmen
make good chaffer of: The inhabitants report, that in old time there stood an
house of the Kings in the West part of the town near unto Haling, where the
husbandmen dig up otherwhiles rubble stone, which house the Archbishops having
received it by gift from the King, translated unto their own nearer the river.
And near unto this, the right reverend father in God D. John Whitgift
Archbishop of Canterbury of most praise worthy Memory in his pious affection
founded and endowed with living a very fair Bourne which the common people
report, to break forth here out of the ground, presaging, I wot not how,
either dearth of corn, or the pestilence, may seem not worthy once the
naming, and yet the events sometime ensuing has procured it credit. Near unto
this place stands Beddington, Beddington.
wherein is to be seen a very fair house beautified with a delightful show
of right pleasant gardens and orchards, by Sir Francis Carew Knight: For, the
ancient seat it is of the Carews, who being descended from the Carews of
Moulesford (of whom also are come the Carews of Devonshire) have for a long
time flourished in this country: but especially since Sir James Carew matched
in marriage with the daughter and one of the coheires of the Baron Hoo and
Hastings. *
To digress a little Addington.
Eastward from Croidon stands Addington now the habitation of Sir Oliff Leigh
whereby is to be seen the ruble of a Castle, of Sir Robert Agvilon, and from
him of the Lords Bardolph, who held certain lands here in fee by Serianty to
find in the Kings kitchen at the Coronation one to make a dainty dish which
they called Mapigernoun, and Dilgerunt. What that was I leave to the skillful
in ancient Cookerie, and return to the river. Wandle increased with Croidon
water passing by Morden, divides it self to water Merton, in the old English
tongue (...), situate in a most fruitful soil. Aguilon.
A town made famous in times past by the death of Kinulph King of the West
Saxons who was by a Clito, that is, a Prince of the blood, slain here in a
small cottage of an harlot upon whom he was enamoured, and Clito Kinulphs
followers immediately stabbed, Merton.
suffered condign punishment for his disloyal treachery. Now it shows only
the ruins of a Monastery, that K. Henry the First founded for black Chanons
by the procurement of Gilbert High Sheriff of Surry in the year 1127. which
was famous for the Statute of Merton enacted here in the 21. of King Henry the
Third, and also for Water de Merton founder of Merton College in Oxford borne
and bred here. Above Merton farther from the river is seated Wibandune,
Wimbledon.
now commonly Wimbledon: where, when over much prosperity had hatched civil
broiles among the English Saxons; after the British wars were now ceased;
Ethelbert King of Kent struck up the first Alarm of civil war against his
own country men: but Ceaulin King of the West Saxons discomfited Oslan and
Kneben, of whom peradventure that entrenched rampire or fort which we have
here seen of a round form, is called Bensbury for

Wandle now after a few miles enters the Tamis, Putney. See Earls of Essex.
when it has given name to Wandlesworth, between Putney the native soil of
Thomas Cromwell one of the flowting-stocks of fortune, and Batersey, sometimes
in the Saxon tongue called (...), and in latin Patricii Insula, that is,
Patrickes Isle: and, which now we seek, Kennington, Kennington.
whereunto the Kings of England in old time were wont to retire themselves, but
now find we neither the name nor the rammell thereof. Lambith.
Then, is there Lambith or Lomehith, that is to say, a Lomy or clayish rode, or
hith, famous in former times for the death of Hardy-Cnute.
Canutus the Hardy, King of England, who there amid his cups yielded up his
vital breath. For he, being given wholly to banqueting and feasting, caused
royal dinners four times every day, (as Henry of Huntingdon, reports) to be
served up for all his court, choosing rather to have his invited guests, to
send away whole dishes untouched, than other comers unbidden to call for more
viands to be upon his table. But now this place is of the greater name and more
frequented by reason of the Archbishop Baldwine Archbishop of Canterbury about
the year of Christ 1183. having made an exchange with the Bishop of Rochester,
purchased a manor in this place wherein he began to build a palace for
himself and his successors: which they by little and little increased. But
when they went about to erect a collegiat Church here also, good GOD, what
posting was there to Rome with complaints and appeals, from the Monks of
Canterbury, how many fiery thunderbolts, menaces and censures were sent out
from the Bishop of Rome against these Archbishops? For these Monks were in
bodily fear, least this would be their utter undoing, and a prejudice unto
them in the Elections of the Southworke.
The Borough of Southwarke, in Saxon speech (...), which is the Southworke or
building; because it stands South over against London, the Suburbs whereof it
may seem in some sort to be* but so large it is and populous, that it gives
place to few Cities of England, having been as it were a corporation by it
self, it had in our fathers days Bayliffes, but in the reign of King Edward
the Sixth it was annexed to the City of London, and is at this day taken for a
member as it were of it: and therefore, when we are come to London, we will
speak more at

Beneath this Borough, Barons Saint John of Lagham.
the Tamis forsakes Surry, the East bound whereof passes in a manner directly
down from hence Southward, near unto Lagham, which had their Parliamentarie
Barons called Saint John de Lagham, in the reign of Edward the First, whose
Inheritance came at length by an heir general to John Leddiard: and somewhat
lower in the very angle well near, where it bends to Southsex and Kent,
stands Streborow Castle, the seat in ancient time of Lord Cobham, who of it
were called, Sterborow.
of Sterborow: where the issue proceeding from the bodies of John Cobham, Lord
of Cobham and Cowling, and the daughter of Hugh Nevil, flourished a long time
in glory and dignity. For, Reginald Cobham in King Edward the thirds days
being created Knight of the Garter, was Admiral Lord Borough or Burgh.
from Tamis mouth Westward. But Thomas the last male of that line wedded the
Lady Anne, daughter to Humfrey the Duke of Buckingham, of whom he begat one
only daughter named Anne, married unto Edward Burgh, who derived his pedigree
from the Percies, and Earls of Athole: whose son Thomas made by King Henry
the Eighth Baron Burgh, left a son behind him named William. And his son
Thomas a great favourer of learning, and Lord Governor of Briell, Queeene
Elizabeth made Knight of the Garter, and Lord Deputy of Ireland, Eleanor Cobham
descended out of this family, the wife of Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, whose
reputation had a flawe, I refer you to the English History, if you please.

Now are we to reckon up the Earls of this shire, William Rufus King of
England made William de Warrena, Earls of Surrie, who also are called Earls
of Warren.
who had married his sister, the first Earl of Surrey* For in that Charter of
his, by which he founded the Priory of Lewis, thus we read: Donavi, etc. that
is, I have given and granted, etc. For the life and health of my Lord King
William who brought me into England, and for the health of my Lady Queen my
wives mother: and for the life and health of my Lord King William her son,
after whose coming into England I made this charter, who also created me Earl
of Surry, etc. whose son William succeeded and married the daughter of Hugh
Earl of Vermandois, whereupon his posterity (as some suppose) used the Arms
of Vermandois, vz. Chequy Or and Azure. His son William dying in the
Holy Land about the year 1148. had issue, a daughter only, who adorned first
William, King Stephens son, and afterward Hamelin the base son of Gefferey
Plantagenet Earl of Anjou, both her husbands, with the same title. But whereas
her former husband died without issue, William her son by Hamelin was Earl
of Surry, whose posterie assuming unto them the name of Warrens bare the same
title. This William espoused the William Marescall Earl of Pembroch, the widow
of Hugh Bigod, Earls of March in France.
who bare unto him John, who slew Alan de la Zouch, in presence of the Judges
of the Realm. This John, of Alice the daughter of Hugh le Brune, half sister
by the mothers side of King Henry the third, begat William, who died before his
father: and he of Joan Vere the Earl of Oxfords daughter begat John
Posthumus, borne after his decease, and the last Earl of this house, who was
styled, as I have seen in the circumscription of his seal, Earl of Warren,
of Surry and of Strathern in Scotland, Lord of Bromfield and of Yale, and
Count-palatine. But he dying without lawful issue in the twelfth year of
Edward the thirds reign, Alice his sister and heir wedded unto Edmund Earl
of Arundell, by her marriage Arundells. For Richard their son who married in
the house of Lancaster (after his father was wickedly beheaded for siding with
his Sovereign King Edward the Second, by the malignant envy of the Queen)
was both Earl of Arundell and Surrey, and left both Earledomes to Richard his
son, who contrary-wise lost his head for siding against his sovereign King
Richard the Second. But, Thomas his son, to repair his fathers dishonor,
lost his life for his Prince and country in France leaving his sisters his
heirs for the lands not entailed, who were married to Thomas Mowbraie Duke of
Norfolk, etc. to Sir Powland Lenthall, and Sir William Beauchampe, Lord of
Abergeveny. After by the Mowbraies, the title of Surrey, came at length to the
Howards. Arundell, King Richard the Second bestowed the title of Duke of Surry
upon Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, which honor he enjoyed not long; For, while
he combined with others, by privy conspiracies to restore the same King
Richard to his liberty and kingdom, the conspiracy was not carried so
secretly, but contrary to his expectation brake forth and came to light: then
fled he, and by the people of Cirencester was intercepted and cut shorter by
the head. After him Thomas Beaufort, Chancellor to the King, (if we give
credit to Thomas Walsingham) bare this dignity. For, in the year of our Lord
(as he says) 1410. The Lord Thomas Beaufort Earl of Surrey left this world.
Now, let Walsingham in this point make Beaufort about that time was made Lord
Chancellor. But certain it is, and that out of the Records of the Kingdom,
that King Henry the Sixth, in the nine and twenty year of his reign, created
John Mowbray, the son of John Duke of Norfolk, Earl Warren and of Surry.
Mowbray, received all the titles due to the Mowbraies by creation from his
father. Afterward King Richard the Third, having dispatched the said Richard
and by impious cruel means usurped the kingdom, that he might by his
benefits oblige unto him the house of the Howards, created in one, and the same
day John Lord Howard, Duke of Norfolk as next cousin and heir to the Mowbraies
and his son Thomas, Earl of Surrie: in whose offspring this honor has ever
since been resplendent, and so continues at this day.

This County has in it Parish Churches. 140.

SUSSEX.
Under Suth-rey toward the South lies stretched out in a great length
Suth-sex, which also in times past the Regni inhabited, in the Saxon tongue
called (...), and at this day Sussex, which is as much to say, as the Region of
the South Saxons, a word compounded of the site thereof Southward, and of the
Saxons Downs.
called the Downs, which because they stand upon a fat chalk or kind of
marle yields corn abundantly.

The middle tract, garnished with meadows, pastures, corne-fields, and groves,
Anderida wood.
like as in times past the whole country throughout, which by reason of the
woods was hardly passable. For, the wood Andradswald, in the British language
Coid Andred, taking the name of Anderida the City next, adjoining, took up in
this quarter, a hundred and twenty miles in length, and thirty in breadth;
memorable for the death of Sigebert King of West Saxons, who being deposed from
his royal throne, was in this place stabbed by a Swineheard, and so died. Many
pretty rivers it has, but such as springing out of the North-side of the shire
forthwith take their course to the Ocean, and therefore not able to bear any
vessel of burden.

Iron.
Full of iron mines it is in sundry places, where for the making and fining
whereof, there be furnaces on every side, and a huge deal of wood is yearly
spent, to which purpose diverse brooks in many places are brought to run in
one channel, and sundry meadows turned into pooles and waters, that they might
be of power sufficient to drive hammer milles, which beating upon the iron,
resound all over the places adjoining. And yet the iron here wrought, is not in
every place of like goodness, but generally more brittle than is the Spanish
iron, whether it be by the nature, or tincture and temper thereof. Howbeit,
commodious enough to the iron Masters who cast much great ordnance thereof,
and other things to their no small gain: Now whether Glasses.
by reason of the matter or making, I wot not whether, is likewise nothing so
pure and clear, and therefore used of the common sort only.

This whole region throughout, after the civil manner of partition is divided
into six parts, which by a peculiar name they call Rapes, to wit, of
Chichester, Arundel, Brembre, Lewis, Pevensey and Hastings, every of which
beside their hundreds, has a castle, river, and forest of their own. But for
as much as the limits within which they are bounded be not so well known unto
me, I am determined to take Boseham.
have in manner nothing therein worth relation. In the very confines of
Hantshire and this county, stands Bosenham, commonly called Boseham, a place
environed round about with woods and the sea together; where (as Bede says)
Dicul the Scottish Monk had a very small Cell, and in it, five or six
religious men living poorly, in service of the Lord, which many years after
was converted into a retyring place of ease, for King Harold. Whence he when
upon a time for his recreation, SVSSEXIA Sieve Southsex. olim pars. REGNORVM.
Confessor. Whereby he presently drew upon himself his own ruin and upon
England the danger of final destruction. But, with what a crafty Amphibolie or
Aequivocation, that subtle and captious catcher of syllables Goodwin Earl of
Kent this Harolds father, Earl Goodwin does aequivocate.
caught this place, and how with a wily word-trap, he deceived the Archbishop
of Canterbury, Walter Mapaeus, who lived not many years after shall out of
his book entitled Of Courters toies tell you in his own very words. This
Boseam underneath Chichester, says he, Goodwin saw and Alluding happily to
Basium, that i^ a Busse, which was in times past used, in doing homage.
Boseam? The Archbishop mervailing much what he demanded by that question: I
give you, answered, Boseam* Then he forthwith, with that company of his Knights
and Soldiers, fell down, (as he had before taken order) at his feet, and
kissing them with many thanks went back to Bose^am, kept possession of it as
Lord by strong hand, and having the Testimony of his friends and followers,
praised in presence of the King the Archbishop as Donor thereof, and so held it
peaceably. Afterward as we read in Testa Nevilli (which was an Inquisition of
Lands made in King John's Fitz Aucher and to his heirs in fee farm paying out
of it yearly into the Exchequer forty pounds of silver tried and weighed; and
after that William Marescall held it as his inheritance. Chichester in the
British tongue named Caercei, in the English Saxon language (...), in Latin
Cioestria, lies farther within, at the same nooke in a Champion plain. A
City large enough, and walled about, built by Cissa a Saxon the second King
of this Province and of him so named. For Cissan-Ceaster is nothing else, but
the City of Cissa: whose father Aella, was the first Saxon that here erected
a Kingdom. Yet was it before the conquest of small or one hundred Hages, and
this City was in the hand of Earl Roger Of Montgomerie
and there are in the said Hages or Houses.
threescore. Mansions houses more than had been before, It paid fifteen
pounds to the King, and ten to the Earl. After this, when during the reign of
the said William the first, a decree was enacted, that Bishops Sees should be
translated out of small towns unto places of greater name and resort, it was
graced with the Bishops residence which was before at Selsey, and began to
flourish: not many years after Bishop Raulfe built there a Cathedral church,
which before he had fully finished it, was suddenly by mishap of a fearce
fire burnt down. Yet by his endeavor and the bounteous liberality of King
Henry the first, it was raised Robert Read, erected a fair stone market
place, supported with pillars round about. As for the Castle that stood not
far from the North gate, Earls of Chichester.
it was in times past the habitation of the Earls of Arundell, who hereupon
styled themselves, Earls of Chichester: but afterward it became converted
into an house of the Franciscan Friars. All that space which lies between the
West and South gates, is taken up with the Cathedral Church, the Bishops
palace, and the Deanes and Prebendaries houses. All which about King Richard
the First his time were burnt again. And Seffride the second Bishop of that
name re edified Selsey as of Chichester, at the charges of Robert Shirburne
Bishop, In King Henry the Eight his time.
who greatly adorned and beautified this Church, and every where for his
Empress, set these Mots CREDIT OPERIBVS, that is, TRUST MEN ACCORDING TO
THEIR DEEDS; and DILEXI DECOREM DOMVS TVAE DOMINE, that is, I HAVE LOVED (O
LORD) THE BEAVTIE OF THY HOUSE. Aplederham his habitation hard by) of those
stones, which for that Castle he had provided before. Near the haven of
Chichester is W. Witering, where, as the monuments of the Church testify,
Aella the first founder of the Kingdom of Suth-sex arrived.

Selsey. Scales.
Selsey before said, is somewhat lower in the Saxon tongue, (...), that is to
say, The Isle of Sea calves, (for these in our language we call Scales, which
always seek to Islands, Here be the best Cockles.
and to the shore, for to bring forth their young, but now it is most famous
for good cockles, and full Lobsters. A place (as Beda says) compassed round It
was reckoned by Survey taken, to contain fourscore and seven Hides of Land,
when Edilwalch King of this Province gave it to Wilfride Bishop of York,
whiles he was in exile* who first preached Christ unto this people, and as he
writes, not only by baptism saved from thraldom under the devil, two
hundred and fifty bondmen, slaves.
but also by giving freedom, delivered them from the yoke of bondage under
man. Afterward K. Cedwalla, who vanquished Edilwalch, founded here a Minster,
and beautified it with an Episcopal See, which by Stigand the two and
twentieth Bishop, was translated to Chichester, where it now flourishes, and
does acknowledge Cedwalla to be the founder. In this Isle remains only the

Then makes the shore way for a river, which out of Saint Leonards Forest
runs down, Amberley.
first by Amberley, where William Read Bishop of Chichester, in the reign of
Edward the third, built a castle for his successors: and so from thence, by
Arundell, seated on the hanging of an hill, a place greater in name than deed,
and yet is not that name of great antiquity: for before Aelfreds days, who
bequeathed it by testament to Anthelme his brothers son, I have not read it,
so much as once named. Unless perhaps I should think, that Portus Adurni, is
corruptly so called, Portus Arundi. The reason of this name is fetched neither
from that fabulous horse of Sir Beavois of Southampton, nor of Charudum, a
promontorie in Denmark, as Goropius Becanus has dreamed, but of the valley or
dale, which lies upon the river Arun, in case Arun be the name of the river,
as some have delivered, who thereupon named it in Latin, Aruntina vallis, that
is, Arundale. But all the fame it has, is of the Castle, that flourished under
the Saxon Empire, and which (as we read) presently upon the coming in of the
Normans Roger Montgomerie repaired, who thereupon was (...), Earl of Arundell.
For, de Belismo, See the Earls of Shrewsburie.
who succeeded his brother Hugh, being by King Henry the First proscribed,
lost that, and all his other dignity. For, when he had perfidiously raised
war against the King, he chose this Castle for his surest hold, whiles the
war lasted, and fortified the place with many munitions, but spedde no better
than traitors use to do. For, the Kings forces environing it every way, at
the last won it. Whenas Robert now had forfeited his estate, and was
banished, the Adeliza, daughter to Godfrey Barbatus of Lovaine, Duke of Loraine
and Brabant, for her Dowry; whom he took to be his second wife. In whose
commendation a certain English man in that unlearned age, wrote these not
unlearned verses.

Anglorum Reginatuos Adeliza decores
Ipsa refer parans Musa, stupore riget.
Quid Diadema tibi, pulcherrima, quid tibi gemma?
Pallet gemma tibi, nec diadema nitet.
Deem tibi cultus, cultum natura ministrat?

Ornamenta cave, nec quicquam luminis inde
Accipis, illa micant lumine clara tuo;
Non puduit modicas de magnis dicere lauds,
Nec pudeat Dominam te precor esse meam.
When Muses mine thy beauties rare, (fair Adeliza Queen
Of England) ready are to tell, they stark astonished been.
What booteth thee so beautiful, gold-crowne or precious stone?
Dimne is the Diadem to thee, the gemne has beauty none.

Thy lovely beauty natural, can never bett'red be.
All Ornaments beware; from them no favor thou do take;
But they from thee their luster have, thou do them lightsome make.
I shamed not on matters great to set small praises here,
Bash not, but deigne (I pray) to be my Sovereign Lady dear.
She, after the Kings death, matched in marriage with William de D' aubeney,
some write him, de Albinet^, and de Albiniac^. Earls of Arundell, and of
Sussex. Charta antiqua X. in 29.
Albeney, who taking part with Maud the Empress against King Stephen, and
defending this Castle against him, was in recompense of his good service, by
the said Maude the Empress and Lady of Englishmen, (for this title she used)
created Earl of Arundell: Rape of Arundell to that William: To hold of him by
the service of fourscore and four Knights fees, and one-halfe. And to his
son William, King Richard the first granted, in such words as these, The
Castle of Arundell with the whole Honor of Arundell, and the Third penny of the
Plees out of Sussex, whereof he is Earl. And when after the fifth Earl of
this surname, the issue male failed, one of the sisters and heirs of Hugh the
fifth Earl was married to Sir John Fitz-Alan, Lord of Clun, whose great grand
son Richard, For that he stood seized of the Castle, Honor and Lordship of
Arundell in his own demesne as of Fee, Parl. 11. H 6*
in regard of this his possession of the same Castle, Honor and Seignorie,
without any other consideration or Creation to be an Earl, was Earl of
Arundell and the John Fitz-Alan chalenging the Castle and tittle of Arundell by
force of an entaile against John Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk the right Heir, in
the nearest degree. Whereby it was gathered, that the name, state and dignity
of Earl, was annexed to the Castle, Honor and Seignorie of Arundell, as it is
to be seen in the Parliament Rolls of King Henry the Sixth, out of which I
have copied forth these notes word for word. Of these Fitz-Alans, Edmund second
Earl son to Richard married the heir of the Earl of Surry, and was
beheaded through the malicious fury, 229.
of Queen Isabell not lawfully convicted, for that he opposed himself in
King Edward the Seconds behalf against her wicked practices. His son Richard
petitioned in Parliament to be restored to blood, lands, 4. Edw. 3*
for that his father was put to death not tried by his Peers according to the
law and great Charter of England: nevertheless whereas the attaindor of him
was confirmed by Parliament, he was forced to amend his petition, and upon the
amendment thereof, he was restored by the Kings mere grace. Richard his
son, as his grandfather died for his Sovereign, lost his life for banding
against his Sovereign, King Richard the Second. But Tho. his son more
honorably ended his life serving King Henry the Fifth valerously in France,
and leaving his sisters his John of Arundell Lord Maltravers his next cousin,
and heir male obtained of King Henry the sixth the Earldome of Arundell, See
before the Earls of Surrey.
as we even now declared, and also was by the said King for his good service
created Duke of Touraine. Of the succeeding Earls I find nothing memorable.
Henry Fitz Alan the eleventh and last Earl of that surname lived in our
days, in great honor as you shall see. After whom leaving no issue male Philip
Howard his daughters son succeeded, who not able to digest wrongs and hard
measure offered unto him, by the cunning sleights of some envious persons, fell
into the toil and net pitched for him, and being brought into extreme peril
of his life, yielded up his vital breath in the James, and Parliament
authority.

Besides the Castle and the Earls, Arundell has nothing memorable: For, the
College built by the Earls, which there flourished, because the revenue or
living is alienated and gone, now falls to decay. Howbeit, in the Church are
some monuments of Earls there enterred, but one above the rest right
beautiful, of Alabaster, in which lies in the mids of the Quire Earl Thomas,
and Beatrice his wife, the daughter of John King of Portugal. Neither must I
overpasse this Inscription so Henry Fitz-Alan the last, Earl of this line,
because some there be whom likes it well.

CONSECRATED TO VERTVE, AND HONOR.
THE MAGNANIMOVS, AND WORTHY KNIGHT WHOSE PERSONAGE IS HERE SEEN, AND WHOSE
BONES HERE VNDERNEATHLY ENTERRED, WAS BARLE OF THIS TERRITORY: ACCORDING TO
HIS HOUSE, AND LINEAGE SVRNAMED FITZ ALAN LOKD MALTRAVERS, CLVN, AND
OSVVALDESTRE, PRINCIPAL HONORS: STYLED ALSO LORD AND BARON OF

THVS THIS MAN, NOBLE BY HIS HIGH PARENTAGE, MORE NOBLE FOR WELL PERFORMING THE
PVBLICKE OFFICES OF STATE, ^OST NOBLE, AND RENOVNED BOTH AT HOME, AND ABROAD:
FLOVRISHING STILL IN

JOHN LVMLEY, BARON OF LVMLEY, HIS MOST LOVING AND AFFECTIONATE As having
married his daughter.
SON IN LAW, EXECVTOR OF HIS LAST VVIL, AND TESTAMENT, NOW THAT HIS MOST
SVVEET FATHER IN LAW AND VERY GOOD PATRON IS RIGHT HONORABLY, AND SVMTVOVSLY
BVRIED, HAS IN MOST DEVOVT MANNER WITH ABVNDANT

As for the river Arun, which springing out of the North part of the Shire
runs hereby, it is increased by many brooks falling into it from all sides,
but the Cowdrey, a very goodly house of the Vicounts Montacute; which for
building owes much to the late Vicount, and formerly to Sir William
Fitz-Williams, Earl of South-hampton. Here by is Midherst that is Midlewood
which braggeth of the Bohunes Lords thereof, who carried for their coat of
arms a Cross azur in a field Or, and from Ingelricus de Bohun under King
Henry the first, flourished unto King Henry the seventh his days, who gave
in marriage the daughter and heir of John Bohun unto Sir David Owen Knight,
the base Owen Theodor, with a rich inheritance. These Bohuns (to note so much
by the way for the antiquity of a word now grown out of use) were by
inheritance for a good while the Kings Spigurnells, Spigurnell what it is.
that is, The Sealers of his writs, which office together with Serjeancie of
the Kings chapel, John de Bohun the son of Franco resigned unto King Edward
the First, as we read in an old Charter made, as touching that matter.
Petworth.
Then this river leaves about a mile off Petworth which together with one and
twenty Knights fees William de Albeney Earl of Arundell, bestowed upon
Ioscelin of Lovaine the Brabander, brother to Queen Adeleza, and the younger
son of Godfrey Duke of Brabant, descended from the stock of Charles the
Agnes the only daughter and heir of the Percies. Since which time, the
posterity of that Iosceline, having assumed the name of Percie, The Percies.
See in the end of Northumberland.
(as I will else where show) held it. A Family, I assure you very ancient and
right noble, which deriveth their pedigree from Charles the great more
directly, and with a race of Ancestors less interrupted, than either the Dukes
of Loraine Or of Guise that so highly vaunt themselves thereupon. Iosceline
aforesaid, as I have seen it in his Donations, used this title: Ioscelin of
Lovain, brother to Queen Adeliza, and Castellan of Arundell. And here about
the Family of Dautry, Or De alta ripa has been of right worshipful esteem,
Dautry.
as on the other side of the river the name of Goring at Burton, who were
acknowledged founders of Hardham Or Heredham Burton.
a little off. Where this Arun meets with an other river of a deeper and
bigger stream, which springs near Horseham an indifferent market, which
some suppose to have taken name from Horsa the brother of Hengist, Horsham.
who were the first leaders of the English Saxons into this isle of Britain.
Thus Arun increased, with sundry creekings, by Arundell before mentioned,
holds on his course to the sea.

Michelgrove.
As the shore gives back from the mouth of Arun, inwardly is Michel grove,
that is, Great grove, the heir general whereof so surnamed, was married to
Ihon Shelley, whereby, Shelley. Offington. The family of the Wests.
with the profession of the law, and a marriage with one of the coheires of
Beknap the family of Shelley was greatly enriched: Offington is not far off
well Wests Barons de la Ware. This of the Wests is a noble and ancient Family,
whose state being bettered by marriage with the heirs of De Cantelup^.
Cantlow of Hemston and Fitz-Reginald Fitz Herbert, was adorned also with the
title of Baron, Barons de la Ware.
by the heir general of the Lord de la Ware. Hard by, there is a fort
compassed about with a bank rudely cast up, wherewith the Inhabitants are
persuaded that Caesar entrenched and fortified his camp: But Cisiburie the name
of the place, does plainly show and testify, that it was the work of Cissa:
who being of the Saxons line the second King of this pety kingdom, Cisburie.
after his father Aella, accompanied with his brother Cimen, and no small power
of the Saxons, at this shore arrived and landed at Cimonshore, a place so
called of the said Cimen, which now has lost Cimenshore.
but that it was near unto Wittering, the charter of the donation which King
Cedwalla made unto the Church of Selsey, most evidently prooveth. Another fort
likewise two miles from Cisiburie is to be seen, which they use to call
Chenkburie.

Brood-water. Lord Camois. Camois.
As you go forward, stands near unto the sea, Broodwater, the Baronie of
the Lords of Camois, who from the time of King Edward the First, flourished
unto the days of King Henry the Sixth, what time the inheritance came by
heirs general unto the Lewknors and Radmilds. Out of this family (a thing
neither in that age, nor in ours ever heard of (or exampled before) Sir John
Camois the son of the Lord Raulph Camois, of his own free will (the very
words these be in effect, A wife given and granted to another.
exemplified out of the Parliament gave and demised his own wife Margaret,
daughter and heir of John de Gaidesden unto Sir William Panell Knight, and
unto the same William, gave granted, released and quit claimed all the goods
and chattels, which she has, or otherwise hereafter might have: Parlam. 30.
Edw. primi.
and also whatsoever was in his hands of the foresaid Margarets goods, and
chattels with their appurtenances: so that neither he himself, nor any man
else in his name, might Which is as much, as in one word they said in old time,
The form of a Bill of a kind of Divorcement, called Kepudiu^.
Vt omnia sua secum haberet, That she should have away with her all that was
hers. By which grant, when she demanded her dowry in the Manor of Torpull
which had been the possession of Sir John Camois her first husband, there grew
a memorable suite and controversy in Law: but wherein she was overthrown and
sentence pronounced. That she ought to have no dowry from thence: upon a
Statute made against women absenting themselves from their husbands, etc.

Pope Gregory long since wrote unto Lanfranck Archbishop of Canterbury, How
he heard say, there were some among the Scots that not only forsook, but
also sold their wives, whereas in England they so gave and demised them.

Somewhat lower upon the shore appears Shoreham, Shoreham.
in times past (...), which by little and little fell to be but a village, at
this day called Old Shoreham, and gave increase to another town of the same
name, whereof the greater part also being drowned and made even with the sea is
no more to be seen: and the Brember, which is a good way from the sea. This
Brember was a castle sometime of the Breoses: For, King William the first gave
it unto William de Breose, from whom those Breoses are descended, who were
Lords of Gower and Brechnok: and from them also, both in this County and in
Leicestershire, are come the Families of the Shirleys, Knights. But now in
stead of a Castle, there is nothing but an heap of rubble and ruins. A little
from this Castle lies Stening, a great mercate, and at certain set days much
frequented, which in Aelfrids will, unless I be deceived, is called
Steningham, in latter times it had a Cell of Black-Monkes S. Cudman an obscure
Saint, and visited by pilgrims with oblations.

That ancient place also, called PORTVS ADVRNI, as it seems is scarce three
miles from this mouth of the river: where, when the Saxons first troubled our
sea with their piracies, the Band called Exploratorum under the Roman Emperors
kept their Station; but now it should seem to be choked, and stopped up with
huge heaps of beach gathered together. For, that this was Ederington a pretty
village, which the said Aelfred granted unto his younger son, Ederington.
both the name remaining in part, and also certain cottages adjoining now
called Portslade, that is, The way to the Haven, do after a sort persuade: to
say nothing, how easily they might land Brighthelmsted, which our ancestors
the Saxons termed (...), the very next road or harbor thereunto.

Some few miles from hence, there discharges it self into the sea a certain
river, that has no name, arising out of S. Leonards forest near unto
Slaugham, Slaugham.
the habitation of the Coverts, who in King Henry the third his days
flourished in this quarter, with the degree of Knighthood; thence by Cackfield
to Linfeld, where in former ages was a small Nunnery; and so by Malling
some-time a Manor appurtaining Jews.
to Lewis, which peradventure has his name of pastures called by the English
Saxons (...). This for frequencie of people and greatness is reputed one of
the chiefest towns of the County: Seated it is upon a rising almost on every
side: That it has been walled there are no apparent tokens. Southward it has
under it, as it were, a great suburb called South-over, another Westward, and
beyond the river a third Eastward called Cliffe because it is under a chalkie
cliffe. In the time of the English Saxon government, when King Athelstan made a
Law that money should not be coined but in good towns, he appointed two
minters, or coyners for this place. In the reign of King Edward the Confessor
For custom or rent and roll.
de Gablo et Theloneo. The King had there one hundred twenty seven Burgars.
Their custom and manner was this, If the King minded to send his soldiers to
sea, without them: of all them, whose lands soever they were was collected
twenty shillings, and all those had they that in their ships kept armor. Who
sells an horse within the Burgh gives to the Provost one penny, and the
buier, another. For an ox or cow one half penny, Domesday book.
in what place so ever he buieth within the Rape. He that sheddeth blood makes
amends for seven shillings. He that commits adultery or a rape, for eight
shillings and four pence, Or redeemeth the offense.
and the woman as much. The King has the Adulterer, The Archbishop, William de
Warren the first Earl of Surrie built here a large Castle on the highest
ground for most part with flint and chalk. In the bottom of the town called
Southover he founded to the honor and memory of Saint Pancrace a Priorie, and
stored it with Cluniach Monks, Cluniaco.
In regard of the holiness, religion, and charity which he found in the
Monastery of Clugni in Burgundy (for these be the words taken out of the very
original instrument of the foundation) Whiles going in pilgrimage together
with his wife for religion, he turned in, and lodged there. But this is now
turned into a dwelling house of the Earl of Dorset. Howbeit there remain
still in the town six Churches; amongst The monument of Magnus a Dane.
who embraced a solitary life, was there buried: But behold the verses
themselves, imperfect though they be, and gaping as I may so say, with the very
yawning joints of the stones.



Which peradventure should be thus read.

Clauditur hic miles, Danorum regia proles,
Magnus nomen ei, magnae nota progeniei,
Deponens Magnum, prudentior induit agnum:
Praepete pro vita, fit paruulus Anachorita.

Sir Magnus hight,
a name of great offspring,
Is shut up here,
Though borne he were
in line of Danish King:
He wiser man,
Puts Agnus on,
and lays down Magnus quite:
For swift life this,

a little Anchorite.
About 346. years since this place became famous for the mortal and bloody
battle between K. Henry the third, and the Barons: in which, the prosperous
beginning of the fight on the kings side, was the overthrow of the kings
forces. For, whiles prince Edward the kings son, 1263.
breaking by force through certain of the Barons troops, The battle of Jews.
carelessly pursued the enemies over far, as making sure account of the victory:
the Barons having reinforced themselves, giving a fresh charge, so discomfited,
and put to flight the Kings army, that they constrained the King to accept
unequal conditions of peace, and to deliver his son Prince Edward with
others into their hands. Lewis the river, 232.
as it descends, so swells, that the bottom cannot contain it, and
therefore makes a large mere, and is fed more full with a brooket falling from
Laughton, a seat of Pelhams, a family of especial respect, by Gline that is in
the British tongue, the vale, the habitation of Morleyes, whose antiquity the
name does testify. And afterward, albeit it gathers it self into a
channel, yet often times it overfloweth the low lands about it to no small
detriment. Not far from the said mere, Furle shows it self a principal
mansion of the Gages, who advanced their estate by the marriage of one of the
heirs of Saint Clare, Princes favor, and Court Offices.

The shore next opens it self at Cuckmere, which yet affords no commodious
Others call it, The three Charles.
though it be fed with a fresh, which insulateth Michelham, where Gilbert de
Aquila, founded a Priory for black Chanons. And then at East-bourn the shore
arises into so high a Promontory, called of the beach Beachy-points, and
Beau-cliffe (for the fair show being interchangeably compounded with row, of
chalk and flint) that it is esteemed the highest cliffe of all the South coast
of England. As hitherto from Arundell, and beyond, the country along the
coast: for a great breadth, mounteth up into high hills, Downs.
called the Downs, which for rich fertility gives place to few valleys, and
plains: so now it falls into such a low level and marsh, that the people
think it has been over-flowed by the sea. They call it Pevensey Marsh, of
Pevensey the next town adjoining, Pevensey.
which lies in the plain somewhat within the land upon a Pevensell, now
commonly, Pemsey: It has had a mean haven, and a fair large castle, in the
ruinous walls whereof, remain great bricks, such as the Britans used, which
is some argument of the antiquity thereof. It belonged in the Conquerours time
to Robert Earl of Moriton, Florentius wigorniensis, page 452.
half brother by the mothers side to the Conqueror, and then had fifty and
six Burgesses. After the attainder of his Son William Earl of Moriton, it
came to King Henry the First, by Escheat. In the composition between Stephen,
and King Henry the second both town, Composition between King Stephen, and
Henry of Anjoy. Honor de Aquila. Robert de Monte.
and castle with whatsoever Richard de Aquila, had Honor of Pevensey, which
after his name, was called Honor de Aquila, and Baronia de Aquila, or of the
Eagle, was assigned to William Son to K. Stephen. But he surrendered it with
Norwich into King Henry the Seconds hand, in the year 1158, when he restored
to him all such Lands as Stephen was seized of before he usurped the crown of
England. After some years King Henry the third, over-favouring forrainers
granted the Honor de Aquila (which had fallen to the crown by Escheat, for
that Gilbert de Aquila had passed into Normandy, against the Kings good will
Peter Earl of Savoy the Queens uncle. But he fearing the envy of the English
against forrainers relinquished it to the King, and so at length it came to the
Duchy of Lancaster. Herst Monceaux. Herst what it is.
Inward from Pevensey is seated Herst in a Park among the woods, which name
also it has of the woody situation: For, the ancient Englishmen called a wood
(...). This was immediately after the Normans entry into England the seat of
certain noble gentlemen, who of that place were a good while named de Herst,
until William the son of Walleran de Herst, took unto him the name
Monceaux, of the place happily where he was borne, an usual thing in that age:
whereupon that name also was adnexed unto this place, which ever since was of
the Lord, termed Herst Monceaux. From whose Posterity by heir general it
descended haereditarily Fienes. Regist, of the Monastery of Roberts-bridge.

The family of the Fienes. Patent. 37. Henry 6. An. 14. Ed. 4.


These Fienes, called likewise Fenis, and Fienles, derive their pedigree from
Ingelram de Fienes, who had wedded the heir of Pharumuse of Boloigne, of the
house of the Earls of Boloigne in France. About the time of King Edward the
Second, Sir John Fienes married the heir of Monceaux, his son William
married one of the heirs of the Lord Say, his son likewise the heir of
Batisford, whose son Sir Roger Fienes married the daughter of Holland, and in
the first year of King Henry the Sixth built of brick the large, fair,
uniforme, and convenient house here Castle-like within a deep moate. The said
King Henry the Sixth, Accepted, declared and reputed Sir Richard Fienis son
of the said Sir Roger, to be Baron of Dacre, And the same tittle, King Edward
the fourth chosen Arbitratour and Umpire between Humfrey Dacre, awarded and
confirmed to the said S. Richard Fienis, and to the heirs of his body
lawfully begotten; for that he had married Ioane the cousin and next heir of
Thomas Baron Dacre; and to have praecedence before the L. Dacre of Gilesland
heir male of the family. Since which time the heirs lineally descending from
him being enriched by one of the heirs of the Lord Fitzhugh, have enjoyed the
honor of Baron Dacre, until that very lately George Fienis Lord Dacre son to
the unfortunate Thomas Lord Dacre died without issue, whose only sister and
heir Margaret, Sampson Lennard Esquire a man both virtuous and courteous took
to wife, and by her has fair issue. In whose behalf it was published,
declared, and adjudged by the Lords Commisioners for Martial causes, in the
second year That the said Margaret ought to bear, have, and enjoy the name,
state, degree, title, style, honor, place, and precedence of the Baronie of
Dacre; to have and to hold to her, and the issue of her body in as full and
ample manner, as any of her ancestors enjoied the same. And that her children
may, and shall have, take, and enjoy the place, and precedence respectively, as
the children of her ancestors Barons Dacre have formerly had, and enjoyed.

Now to return to the Seacoast, about three miles from Pevensey is
Beckes-hill a place much frequented by Saint Richard Bishop of Chichester, and
where he died. Under this is Bulver-hith in an open shore, with a rooflesse
Church, not so named of a bulls hide which cut into thongs by William the
Conqueror, reached to Battle See Normans before.
And so after two days marched to Hastings then to an hill near Nenfeld now
called Standard hill, because (as they say) he there pitched his Standard, and
from thence two miles farther where in a plain the Kingdom of England was put
upon the hazard and chance of a battle; and the English-Saxon Empire came to
a full period and final end. For there, King Harold in the year of our Lord
1066. the day before the Ides of October, albeit his forces were much weakened
York, encountered him in a place named Epiton. When the Normans had sounded the
Battle, first the skirmish continued for a pretty while with shot of arrows
from both sides; then, setting foot to foot, as if they fought man to man,
they maintained fight a longer time: But when the English men had most
valiantly Harold himself was shot through with an arrow and fell down dead:
for then Martin, which he called de Bello, or Battle Abbey, in that very
place where Harold after many a wound and stab among the thickest of his
enemies gave up the ghost, that the same might be as it were an everlasting
monument of the Normans victory: and therein he offered his sword, and royal
robe which he ware, the day of his Coronation. These the Monks kept until
their suppression, as also a table of the Normans gentry which entered with the
Conqueror; but so corruptly in later times, that they inserted therein the
names of such as were their benefactours, and As the Abbey increased, there
were built about the compass of the same one hundred and fifteen houses of
which the town of Battle was made. Wherein there is a place called by a
French word Sangue lac, of the blood there shed: which by nature of the ground
seems after rain to wax red. Whence, William Newborough, wrote although
untruely, thus: The place, in which there was a very great slaughter of the
English men fighting for their country, if peradventure it be wet with any
small shower, sweateth forth very fresh blood endeed: as if the very evidence
thereof did plainly declare that the voice of But to the said Abbey King
William the Conqueror granted many and great privileges. And among other, to
use the very words of the Charter. If any thief, murderer, or felon for fear
of death fly and come to this Church, let him have no harm but be dismissed
and sent away free from all punishment. Be it lawful also for the Abbat of the
same Church to deliver from the gallows any thief or robber wheresoever, if
he chance to come by where such execution is in hand.

Henry the First likewise, A mercate kept on the Sunday.
(that I may rehearse the words of his Charter) instituted a mercate to be
there kept on the Lords day, free from all toll and tallage. But Sir Anthony
Brown Lord Vicount Mount-acute, who not long since in that place built a
goodly Ashburnham.
saw I any thing worth relation but only Ashburnham, that gave the name to a
family of as great antiquity as any one in all this tract.

Hastings, Hastings.
which I spoke of, called in the English Saxon tongue (...). is situate
somewhat higher upon the same shore. Some there be that ridiculously Matthew
Paris, writes William Conqueror at Hasting did set up hastily a fortress of
timber. But it may seem to have taken this new name of Hastings a Danish
Pirate, who wheresoever he landed, with intent to spoil and raise booties,
built oftentimes fortresses, as we read in Asserius Menevensis, of Boemflote
castle built by him in Essex, as also of others at Appledor and Middleton in
Kent. The tradition is that the old town of Hastings is swallowed up of the
sea. That which stands now as I observed is couched between a high cliffe
sea-ward and as high an hill land-ward, having *
and in each of them a parish Church. The haven such as it is being fed but
with a poor small rill, is at the South end of the Town, and has had a great
Castle upon the hill which over commanded it, now there are only ruins
thereof, and on the said hill Light houses to direct sailers in the night time.
Here in the reign of King Althelstan was a mint-house. Afterward it was
accounted the first of the Cinque Ports, which with the members belonging to
it, Cinqueports.
namely Seford, Peuensey, Hodeney, Bulverhith, Winchelsey, Rhy, etc. was bound
to find one and twenty ships for war at sea. In what manner and form (if
you desire to know) both this Port and the rest also Hastings with his members
ought to find at the Kings summons one and twenty ships: 21. Edw. 1.
And in every ship there must be one and twenty tall and able men, well
armed and appointed for the Kings service. Yet so, as that summons be made
thereof on the Kings behalf forty days before. And when the foresaid ships
and men therein, are come to the place whereunto they were summoned, they shall
abide there in the Kings service for fifteen days at their own proper costs
and charges. And if the King shall have farther need of their service, after
the fifteen days above said, or will have them to stay there any longer,
those ships with the men therein being, whiles they Thus Hastings flourished
long, 3946.
inhabited with a warlike people and skillful sailers, well stored with barks
and craies and gained much by fishing, which is plentiful along the shore. But
after that the peer made of timber was at length violently carried away by
extreme rage of the sea, it has decayed, and the fishing less used, by the
reason of the dangerous landing, for they are enforced to work their vessels
to land by a Capstall or Craine. In which respect for the bettering of the
town, Queen Elizabeth granted a contribution toward the making of a new
harbor, 1578.
which was begun, but the contribution was quickly converted into private
purses, and the public good neglected.

The whole Rape of Hastings and the Honor was holden by the Earls of Ew,
(commonly called de Augi) in Normandy, Ancenses. Earls of Ew.
descended from the base son of Richard the First Duke of Normandy; until
the days of Alice the heir of the house, whom in the reign of Henry the
Third, Ralph de Issodun in France took to wife, whose posterity lost a fair
patrimony in England, for that, as our Lawyers spoke in those days, *
they were Ad fidem Regis Franciae, that is, under the king of France his
allegiance. When King Henry the third had seized their lands into his hands,
he granted the Rape of Hastings first to Peter Earl of Savoy, then to Prince
Edward his son, and John son to the Duke of little Britain upon certain
exchanges of lands pertaining to the Honor of Richmond which Peter Earl of
Savoy had made over for the use of the Prince. Long time after when the Duke of
Britain had lost their lands in England for adhering to the French King, King
Henry the Fourth gave the Rape of Hastings with the Manor of Crowherst,
Burgwash, etc. to Sir John Pelham the elder, Esc. 7. H. 6.
upon whose loialtie, wisdom, and valor he much relied. Before we depart
from Hastings, as it shall not be offensive I hope, to remember that in the
first days of the Normans, there were in this shire great gentlemen surnamed
Hastings and de Hastings, Enquisition 5. Edw. 1.
of whom Matthew de Hastings held the Manor of Grenocle in this service, that
he should find at this haven an oa^e, when the kings would cross over the
seas, Hastings that are Earls of Huntingdon enjoy this title of Hastings. For
King Edward the Fourth bestowed this title with certain Royalties (as they
term them) upon Sir William Hastings his Chamberlain. William Lord Hastings.
Who is by Cominaus commended, for that having received an yearly pension of
Lewis the I will in no case (says he) that my handwriting, be seen amongst
the accounts of the French Kings Treasure. But this man by diving so deep into
the friendship of Kings overwhelmed and drowned himself quite. For whiles he
spoke his mind, and reasoned over franckly at a private consultation, with the
Usurper King Richard the Third, all of a sudden, and unlooked for, had he was
away, and without pleading for himself, presently made shorter by the head
upon the next block. Neither is this to be passed over in silence that King
Henry the Sixth adorned Sir Thomas Hoo, a worthy knight, whom 26. Henry 6.
Baron of Hoo and Hastings.
with the title of Baron, Hoo, and Hastings: whose daughters and heirs were
married to Sir Gefferie Bollen, (from whence by the mothers side Queen
ELIZABETH was descended) to Roger Coplie, to John Carew, John Devenish.

From thence the shore passing under Farley hill far seen both by sea, and
land whereon stands a solitary Church full bleakly, and a beacon is hollowed
with an in-winding Bay, Winchelsey.
and upon it stands Winchelsey which was built in the time of King Edward the
Frst, when a more ancient town of the same name, in the Saxons tongue called
(...), was quite swallowed up with the rough and raging Ocean in the year of
our Lord 1250. (what time the face of the earth both here Th. Walsingham.
Situate it is upon a high hill, very steep on that side, which either looks
toward the sea, or over-looketh the rode where ships lie at anchor. Whence it
is that the way leading from that part to the haven goes not straight forward,
least it should by an over sudden and down right descent, force those that
go down to fall headlong, or them that go up to creep rather with their
hands then to walk: but lying side-waies it windeth with curving turns in and
out, Camber-Castle.
to one side and the other. At first, it was enclosed with a rampire,
after-wards with strong walls: and scarce began it to flourish, when it was
sacked by the French men and Spaniards, and by reason that the sea shrunk
back from it, began *
And now only bears the countenance of a fair town, and has under it in
the level which the sea relinquished a Castle fortified by Henry the Eighth,
and large marshes defended from sea-rages with works very chargeably: By the
decay hereof and the benefit of the sea together. Rhie opposite unto it and as
highly seated began to flourish, Rhie.
or rather to reflourish, For that in old time it flourished: and that William
of Ipres Earl of Kent fortified it, Ipres Tower now the prison, and the
immunities or privileges that it had in common with the Cinque Ports may
sufficiently show. But by occasion of the Vicinity of Winchelsey or the
shrinking back of the sea, it lay for a good while in former ages unknown:
But when Winchelsey decayed, and King Edward the Third walled it *
yet now it begins to complain that the sea abandoneth it (such is the
variable, and interchangeable course of that element) and in part imputes it,
that the river Rother is not contained in his channel, and so loses his
force to carry away the sands and beach which the sea does inbeate into the
haven: Notwithstanding it has many fishing vessels and serves London, and the
Court with variety

Now whether it have the name of Riue a Norman word which signifies a strond
or Bank, I cannot easily say. But seeing that in Records it is very often
called in Latin Ripa, and they who bring fish from hence be termed Ripiers, I
incline rather this way, and would incline more, if the Frenchmen used this
word for a stroud or shore, as Plinius does Ripa. These two towns, (neither
may it seem impertinent Fescampe in Normandy. But when King Henry the Third
perceived that religious men intermingled secretly in matters of State, he gave
them in exchange for these two, Chiltenham and Sclover two Manours in
Gloucestershire, and other lands; adding for the reason, that the Abbat and
Monks might not lawfully fight with temporal arms against the enemies of the
Crown.

The River Rother. Barons Burghersh.
Into this haven the River Rother, or Rither sheddeth it self, which issuing
forth at Ritheram fields (for so the Englishmen in ancient times called that
town, which we do Rotherfield) passes by Burgwash, in old time Burghersh,
Bartholomew Burgwash, a mighty man in his time, who being approved in most
weighty Ambassages, and wars in Aquitaine, for his wisdom, and valor
deserved, to be created a Baron of the Realm, to be admitted into the Order of
the Garter, at the very first institution even among the Founders thereof, and
to be made Constable of Dover Castle, and Warden of the Cinque Ports. And his
son carrying the same fore-name not degenerating from his father, lived in
high honor and estimation; but he left behind him one daughter, and no more
issue, married into the house of Le Despencer; of which there remains still a
goodly offspring of Noble personages. Baron Echingham.
Echingham next adjoining, had also a Baron, named William de Echingham, in the
time of King Rape. And their inheritance in the end, by the heirs females name
to the Barons of Windsor, and to the Tirwhits. Then the Rother dividing his
water into three channels, passes under Roberts bridge, Roberts Bridge, or
Rotherbridge Bodiam.
where Alured de S. Martin, in King Henry the seconds days founded a
Monastery: and so running beside Bodiam, a Castle belonging to the ancient
Family of the Lewknors, built by the Dalegrigs, here falls (as I said) into
the Ocean. Now I have passed along the Sea coast of Sussex. And as for the
mid-land part of the shire, I have nothing more to relate thereof, unless I
should recount the woods, and forests, lying out fair in length and breadth,
which are a remnant of the vast wood, Anderida. Among which, to begin at the
West, those of greatest note are The forest of Arundill, Saint Leonards
forest, Word forest, and not far off East Gren-sted anciently a parcel of
the Barony of Eagle, and made a Mercate by King Henry the seventh. Ashdowne
forest, under which stands Buckhurst the habitation of the ancient house of
the Sackviles, out of which race Queen Elizabeth in our days advanced Thomas
Sackvile her allie by the Bollens, a wise Gentleman, to be Baron of Buckhurst,
Baron Buckhurst.
took him into her Privy Council, admitted him into the most honorable Order
of the Garter, and made him Lord Treasurer of England: whom also of late, K.
James created Earl of Dorset. Waterdown forest, where I saw Eridge, a lodge of
the Lord Abergevenny, and by it craggie rocks rising up so thick, as though
sporting nature had there purposed a sea. Here-by in the very confines of Kent,
is Groomebridge an Wallers, whose house there was built by Charles Duke of
Orleance, father to K. Lewis the 12. of France, when he being taken prisoner in
the battle at Agincourt, by Richard Waller of this place, was here a long
time detained prisoner.

Earls of Sussex.
As touching the Earls; Sussex had five by the line of Albiney, who were
likewise called Earls of Arundell; but had the third penny of Sussex, as
Earls then had. The first of them was William D' Albiney, the son of
William, Butler to King Henry the first, See Earls of Arundell.
and Lord of Buckenham in Norfolk: who gave for his arms Gules, a Lion
rampant, Or: and was called one while Earl of Arundell, and another while
Earl of Chichester, for that in those places he kept his chief residence.
This man, of Adeliz the daughter of Godfrey With the beard.
Barbatus Duke of Lorraine, and of Brabant, Dowager, or Widow of K. Henry the
First, begat William the second Earl of Sussex, and of Arundell, father to
William the third Earl: unto whom Mabile the sister, and one of the heirs of
the last Raulph Earl of Chester, bare William the fourth Earl, and Hugh the
fifth, who both died without issue, and also four daughters married unto Sir
Robert Yateshall, Sir John Fitz-Alan, Sir Roger de Somery, and Sir Robert After
this, the title of Arundell budded forth again, as I said before, in the
Fitz-Alans: but that of Sussex lay hidden, and lost unto this our age: which
has seen five Ratcliffes, descended of the most Noble house of the
Fitz-walters, (that derived their pedigree from the Clares) bearing that
honor, to wit, Robert created Earl of Sussex by King Henry the Eight, who
wedded Elizabeth daughter of Henry Stafford Earl of Buckingham, 21. Henry 8.
of whom he begat Henry the second Earl: unto whom Elizabeth the daughter of
Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, brought forth Thomas: who being Lord
Chamberlain to Queen Elizabeth, died without issue, a most worthy and
honorable personage, in whose mind were seated jointly both politic

This Province contains parishes. 312.

Regni, The Kingdom of the South Saxons.
in the time of the Britains, and afterward the kingdom of the South Saxons,
called in the Saxon tongue, (...), which in the two and thirty year after the
Saxons coming, was begun by Ella, who, as Beda writes, First among the Kings
of the English Nation ruled all their Southern Provinces, which are severed by
the River Humber, and the limits adjoining thereto. The first Christian King
was Edilwalch, baptized in the presence of Wulpher King of Mercia, his
Godfather, and he in sign of adoption gave unto him two Provinces, namely, the
Isle of Wight, and the Province of the Meanvari: But in the 306. year after
the beginning of this Kingdom, when Aldinius the last King was slain by Ina
King of West Saxons, it came wholly under the Dominion of the West Saxons.

CANTIVM.
NOw am I come to Kent, which Country although master WILLIAM LAMBARD, a man
right well endued with excellent learning, and as godly virtues, has so lively
depainted out in a full volume, that his painful I deal by way of close
pilfering I willingly acknowledge him, (and deserve he does no less) to have
been my foundation, and fountain both of all (well-neere) that I shall say.

Time as yet has not bereft this Region of the ancient name, Carrion, corruptly
read in Diodorus Siculus.
but as it was called CANTIVM by Caesar, Strabo, Diodorus Siculus, Ptolomee,
Ninnius witnesses, (...), that is, The country of the people inhabiting
Cantium, and we Kent. This name master Lambard deriveth from Caine, which
among the Britains, sounds as much as a green Bough, because in old time it
was shadowed with woods. But it may be lawful for me to put in my conjecture;
whereas Britain here runs out with a mighty nooke, or corner into the
East, and I have observed, that such a kind of nooke in Scotland, is called,
Cantir; Again, that the Inhabitants of another Angle in Ptolomee termed
Cantae, as also that the Cangani in Wales, were possessed of another corner,
(to say nothing of the Cantabri, Hereof comes Canton in Heraldrie, for a
corner; and the Helvetians countries, were b^ the French called Canton.
who likewise dwelt in an angle among the Celtiberians, who as they came from
one original, so likewise they were of the same language with our Britans) I
would guess, that the name was given by reason of the form and situation,
and so much the rather, both for that our Frenchmen have used Canton for a
Corner, and that (as it is probable) from the old Language of the Gauls: for it
comes not from the Germane or Latin tongue, which together with that old
tongue, be the mothers of this latter Angulus. For it looks full upon France
with a huge Angle, compassed with the aestuarie of Tamis, and with the Ocean
sea, saving, that Westward it has Surrey, and southward Sussex to confine upon
it.

KENT.
THe Region which we call Kent, extends it self in length, from West to East
fifty miles, and from South to North 26. For situation, it is not uniforme as
being more plain toward the West, and full of shady woods; but higher
Eastward, by reason of hills, mounting up with easy ascents. The Inhabitants
Tamis, into three plots or portions, they call them steps or degrees; the upper
whereof, lying upon Tamis, they say is healthful, but not so wealthy: the
middle they account both healthful, Rumney Marsh.
and plentiful: the lower they hold to be wealthy, but not healthy: as which
for a great part thereof is very moist, yet it brings forth rank grass in
great plenty. Howbeit every where almost it is full of meadows, pastures, and
cornefields: abounding wonderfully in apple trees, and cherrie-trees also,
which being brought out of Pontus into Italy, in the 608. year after the
foundation of Rome, P^a^. 15. ca. 25. Cherries were brought over into Britain
about the year of our Lord 48. 236.
and in the 120. year after translated from thence into Britain, prosper
here exceeding well, and take up many plots of land: the trees being planted
after Caesar in old time gave the Inhabitants, is yet of right due unto them:
that I may not speak of their warlike prowess, whereas a certain Monk has
written, Prowess of Kentishmen.
How the Kentishmen so far excelled, that when our armies are ready to join
battle, they of all Englishmen, are worthily placed in the as being reputed
the most valiant and resolute soldiers. Which, John of Salisburie, verifieth
also in his Polycraticon. For good desert (says he) of that notable valor,
which Kent showed so puissantly, and patiently against the Danes, it retains
still unto these days in all battles the honor of the first and fore-ward,
yea, and of the first conflict with the enemy. In praise of whom William of
Malmesbury has likewise written thus, The country people and towne-dwellers of
Kent, above all other Englishmen retain still the resent of their ancient
worthiness. And as they are more forward, and readier to give honor, and
etertainment to others, so they be more slow to take revenge upon others.

Julius Caesar.
Caesar (to speak briefly by way of Preface, before I come to describe the
particular places) when he first attempted the conquest of our Island; arrived
at this country; Romans repulsed, they withdrew themselves into the woods.
After this they skirmished sharply with the Roman Cavallery in their march,
yet so, as the Romans had every way the upper hand. Also, within a while after,
they charged the Romans again, and most resolutely brake through the midst of
them, and having slain Laberius Durus, Marshall of the field retired safe: and
the morrow after set upon the Foragers, and victualers of the camp, etc. which
I have briefly related before out of Cesars own Commentaries. At which time,
Cyngetorix, See Romans in Britain. Page 34.
Taximagulus, and Segonax were great Commanders of Kent (whom he, because he
would be thought to have vanquished Kings, terms Kings) whereas indeed they
were but Lords of the country, or Noble men of the better mark.

After the Roman Empire was here established, it was counted under the
jurisdiction of the President of Britannia Prima. But the Sea coast which they
termed CANTIVM Quod nunc KENT
The Saxon shore, like as the opposite shore unto it, from the River Rhene to
Xantoigne in France, had a Ruler over it from Dioclesians time whom Marcellinus
calls Tractus maritini Comitem, that is, The Count, or Lieutenant of the
Maritime tract: The Count or Comes of the Saxon coast.
the book of Notices, styles him: The honorable, Earl or Lieutenant of the
Saxon shore along Britain, whose office was with garrisons set upon the shore
in places convenient, to repress the depredations, and robberies of
Barbarians, but of Saxons especially, who grievously infected Britain. And he
was under the dispose of the Right honorable General of the Footmen, whom
they called Praesentalis, who besides the Garrisons lying at the Havens,
assigned unto him for the defense Victores Iuniores Britannicianos Primanos
Iuniores, and Secundanos Seniores, The L. Warden or Keeper of the Cinque ports.
(these are the names of certain bands or Companies) this he had for his
under Officers to it, Principem ex officio Magistri praesentalium a part
peditum, Numerarios duos, Commentariensem, Cornicularium, Adjutorem,
Subadjuvam, Regerendarium, Exceptores singulares, etc. Neither doubt I, but
that our Ancestors imitated this custom of the Romans, when they placed over
this coast a Governor or Portreve, whom now they use to call Warden of the
Cinque Ports, because as the Comes or Earl of the Saxon shore aforesaid was
Governor of nine Ports, so he is of five.

But when the Romans were departed quite out of Britain, Vortigern, who bare
sovereign rule in the greatest part of Britain, placed over Kent a Guorong,
that is to Vice Roy, or Freed man under him, and unwitting to him, he
forthwith freely granted this region, as Ninnius and William of Malmesbury
write, unto Hengist the Saxon, for his daughter Rowens sake: upon whom he was
exceedingly enamoured. Hence it came, that the first Saxon Kingdom erected in
Britain in the year of our Lord 456. was called by them (...), that is, The
Kingdom of the Kentishmen, which after three hundred and twenty years, when
Baldred their last King was subdued, fell to be under the Dominion of the West
Saxons, to whom it continued subject until the Normans Conquest: For then, if
we may believe Thomas Spot the Monk, (for none of the more ancient Writers
have recorded it) the Yeomanrie of Kent at Swanes-comb (a village this is where
(they say) Suene the Dane sometime pitched Gavelkind, that is, Give all kin,
by which they are not so bound by Copyhold, customarie tenures, or
Tenant-right, as in other parts of England, but in manner every man is a
freeholder, and has some part of his own to live upon. For lands of this
nature are equally divided among the male children, or if there be no sons,
among the daughters. By virtue of this also, they are at full age and enter
upon their inheritance when they come to be fifteen years old: and lawful it
is for them to alienate and make it over to any one, either by gift or by The
County of Kent avoucheth, that this County ought by right to be free from such
kind of grievance: for it says, that this County was never conquered, as the
residue of England was, but by concluding of a peace subjected themselves to
the dominion of the Conqueror, retaining to themselves all their liberties,
immunities, and customs, which they had, and used before time. After this,
William the Conqueror, that he might more firmly assure to himself Kent,
which is the very key of England, placed a Constable over Dover Castle, and
according to the ancient order of the Romans made him also Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports. And these be they, Hastings, and Sandwich, unto which,
Winchelsey, and Rye are joined as principal ports, and other small towns as
Members. Which because they are bound to serve in the wars by sea, enjoy many
great immunities: as who are free from payment of Subsidies, and from Wardship
of their children as touching the body, neither are they sued in any court,
but within their own towns; and of the inhabitants therein, such as they call
Barons, at the Coronation of Kings and Queens support the

The Northside of this Country, Tamis the sovereign of all Rivers in Britain
runs hard by, *
as I have said before, which having held on his course past Surrey, forthwith
being with a winding reach almost retired into himself, does there admit into
his channel into the first limit of this shire Ravensburne a small water,
Ravensburn. An old great Camp.
and of Keston heath hard under the pitching of an ancient camp, strange for
the height of double rampires, and depth of double ditches of all that I have
seen: doubtless the work of many Laboring hands. Of what capacity it was I
could not discover for that the greatest part thereof is now several, and
overgrowne with a thicket, but verily great it was, as may be gathered by that
which is apparent. We may probably conjectture that it was a Roman Camp, but I
might seem to rove; if I should think it that Camp which Julius Caesar
pitched, when the Britans gave him the last battle with their whole forces,
and then having bad success retired themselves, and gave him leave to march to
the Tamis side. And yet certes Keston the name of the place seems to retain
a parcel of Kesars Caesar, as we do. As for the other small intrenchment not
far of by W. Wickham, it was cast in fresh memory when old Sir Christopher
Heydon a man then of great command in these parts, trained the country people.
This water having passed by Bromeley a Mansion house of the Bishops of
Rochester, when it has gathered strength, the depth of his ford gives name to
Depe-ford: Depe-ford.
a most famous Ship-docke, where the Kings ships are built, and such as be
decayed, repaired: there also is a goodly Storehouse and a College (as it
were) or incorporation ordained for the use of the navy. The place was
sometime called West-Greenwich, and at the conquest of England fell to
Cislebert Mamignot for his share, whose Grandchild Walkelin, defended Dover
Castle against King Stephen, Magnignot.
by her marriage brought a rich inheritance called the Honor of Mamignot into
the family of the Says.

From hence the Tamis goes to Green-wich, that is, the Green Creek, for the
creek of a river in the old English tongue was called Wic, Green-wich.
a place in times past famous for the Danish Fleet that lay there often at
Rode, and for the Danes cruelty showed unto Ealpheg Archbishop of Canterbury,
whom in the year of our Lord a thousand and twelve, they cruelly executed with
most exquisite torments. Whose death together with the cause thereof Ditmarus
Mersepurgius, who about the same time lived, has thus in the eighth book of
his Chronicles described. I understood by the relation of Sewald, a pitiful
deed, and therefore memorable: namely, That the perfideous crew of The same
that Danes.
Northman soldiers under Thurkil as yet their Captain, took that excellent
prelate, Archbishop of the City of Canterbury named Ealph^g with the rest,
and them after their wicked manner emprisoned and bound, yea and put him to
endure famine and unspeakeable pains. This good man moved with humane frailty
promises unto them a sum of money, and for the obtaining thereof did set
down a time between, that if in this space he could not by some acceptable
ransom escape this momentany death, he might yet in the mean while purge
himself with many a groan, to be offered as a lively sacrifice unto the Lord.
But when all the time and space appointed were come and gone, this greedy gulf
of Pirates called forth the servant of the Lord, and in threatening wise demands
this tribute promised unto But now is the place of very great name, by reason
of the Kings house, which Humfrey Duke of Gloucester built and named Placence;
which also King Henry the Seventh most sumptuously enlarged: who adjoined
thereto a little house of observant Friars, and finished that tower famous in
Spanish fables, which the said Duke of Gloucester begun, on an high hill, from
whence there is a most fair, and pleasant prospect open to the river winding
in and out, and almost redoubling it self, the green meddowes and marshes
underlying, the City of London, and the Country round about. Which being now
enlarged and beautified Henry Howard Earl of Northampton, Lord Privy Seal,
etc. cannot but acknowledge him a well deserving benefactor. But the greatest
ornament by far that graced this Green-wich, was our late Queen Elizabeth, who
here most happily borne to see the light by the resplendent brightness of her
royal virtue enlightened all England. But as touching Green-wich have here
these verses of Leland the Antiquarian Poet: Ecce ut jam niteat locus petitus
Tanquam syderea domus cathedrae.
Quae fastigia picta? quae fenestrae?

Quae porro viridaria, ac perennes
Fontes? Flora sinum occupat venusta
Fundens delicias nitentis horti.
Rerum commodus aestimator ille,
R^pae qui variis modis amoenae,
Nomen contulit eleganter aptum.
How glittereth now this place of great request,
Like to the seat of heavenly welkin hie?
With gallant tops, with windows of the best.

What Orchards green, what springs ay-running by.
Fair Flora here that in this creek does dwell,
Bestows on it the flowers of garden gay;
To judge no doubt of things he knew full well,
Who gave this bank thus pleasant every way,
So fit a name, as did the thing bewray.


Nothing else have I here to note (but that, for I would not have the
remembrance of well deserving benefactors to miscarry) William Lambard a godly
good Gentleman built an Almeshouse here for the sustentation of poor persons
which The College of Queen Elizabeth's poor people, and as the prying
adversaries of our religion then observed, was the first Protestant that built
an Hospital. At the back of this, Eltham.
as ye turn out scarce three miles off, stands Eltham, a retyring place
likewise of the Kings, but unholsomly by reason of the moate. Anthony Beck
Bishop of Durham, and Patriarch of Jerusalem built this in a manner new, and
gave unto Queen Eleanor wife to King Edward the First, after he had craftily
conveyed unto himself the inheritance of the Vescyes, unto whom this place
before The Book. of Durham.
For that Bishop, whom the last Baron of Vescy had made his foefie for trust,
of all his inheritance to the use of William Vescy his little base son, dealt
not so faithfully, as he should with this orphane and ward of his, but
dispoiled him of Alnwick Castle, this, and other fair lands.

The Breach. 1527. Leisnes.
Beneath Greenwich, the Thames having broken down his banks, has by his
irruption surrounded and overwhelmed many acres of land. For the inning whereof
diverse have as it were strugled with the waters now many years; and yet with
great works, *
and charges cannot overmaster the violence of the tides, which the Chanons of
Liesnes adjoining kept sound and sweet land in their times. This Abbey was
Richard Lucie chief Justice of England, and by him dedicated to God and the
memory of Thomas of Canterbury, whom he so admired for his piety, while
other condemned him for pervicacie against his Prince, as he became here a
devoted Chanon to him. Here in the marshes grows plentifully the herb
Cochlearia, called by our Country men Scurvy-grasse, which some Phisicians
would have to be the same which Pliny calls Britannica, Scurvy-grasse. 1527.
The herb Britannica.
by which name I have already made mention thereof: but hear what Pliny
says. In Germany, when as Germanicus Caesar had removed his camp forward
beyond Rhene, in the maritime tract there was one fountain and no more, of
fresh water, whereof if a man drank, within two years his teeth would fall
out of his head and the joints in his knees become loose Stomacace and
Sceletyrbe. For remedy hereof, there was found an herb called Brittannica,
wholesome not only for the sinews and maladies of the mouth but also against
the Squincie and stinging of serpents, etc. They of Friseland.
Frisia, *
what way our camp lay, showed it unto our soldiers. And I marvel what
should be the cause of that name, See afterward in the British Isles,
concerning the Arrenat or Armory of the Britains.
unless peradventure they that confine upon the Ocean, dedicated the name
thereof to Britain, as lying so nere unto it. But that most learned Hadrian
Iunius in his book named Nomenclator, brings another reason of the name whom
you may have recourse unto if you please: For, this word Britannica has here
diverted me a side from my course.

From thence the Thames being contained within his banks meets with the
river Darent, which falling down out of Suthrey runs with a soft stream
not far Seven-oke (so called as men say of seven exceeding great Oaks now cut
down) which commends Sir William Sevenok an Alderman of London, *
who being a foundling and brought up here; Sevenoke.
and therefore so named, built here in grateful remembrance an Hospital and
a school. On the East side of it stands Knoll so called for that it is
seated upon a hill, which Thomas Bourchier Archbishop of Canterbury purchasing
of Sir William Fienes, Knoll.
Lord Say and Seal, adorned with a fair house: and now lately Thomas Earl of
Dorset Lord Treasurer has fourbished and beautified the old work with new
chargeable additaments. Otford.
Darent then passes by (...), now Otford, a place famous in former ages for an
overthrow and slaughter of the Danes which happened there in the year 1016.
and lately by reason William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury built, for
himself and his successors so sumptuously, that for to avoid envy, Cranmer
who next succeeded him was constreined to exchange it with King Henry the
Eighth. Somewhat lower hard by Darent stands Lullingstone, where there was
sometime a Castle the seat of a family of the same name, but now of Sir
Percival Heart, descended from one of the coheires of the Lord Bray. Dartford.
Then Darent gives name unto Darentford, commonly Dartford a great market
town well frequented, and well watered, where King Edward the Third built a
Nunnery, which King Henry the Eighth converted into a house for himself and
his successors: Here the rivelet Crey, anciently called Crecan intermingleth
it self with Darent, when in his short course he Mary Crey, Paul's Crey,
Votes-Crey, North Crey, and Crey-ford, in former ages Crecanford, where Hengist
the Saxon the eighth year after his arrival, joined battle with the
Britains, and after he had slain their captains, brought them under with so
great a

From the river Darent or Dart unto the mouth of Medway, the Thames sees
nothing above him but little towns pleasantly seated, which to pass over in
silence were no prejudice either of their fame or any thing else. Swane-scomb
that is King Swanes Camp.
Yet amongst them is Swans-combe (of which I have heretofore spoken) of
honorable memory among the Kentish men, for obtaining their the continuance of
their ancient franchises, afterward it was well known by the Montceusies, men
of great Nobility the owners thereof who had there Barony here-about. And by it
Graves-end so called (as Master Gereves-end; that is, the limit of the Gereve
or Reve. A town as well known as any other in England, for the usual passage
by water between it and London, Graves-end.
since the Abbat of Grace by the tower of London, to which it appertained,
obtained of King Richard the second that the inhabitants of it and Milton
only, should transport passengers from thence to London. King Henry the
Eighth when he fortified the sea coast, raised two Platformes or Block-houses
here, and two other opposite on Essex side. Beyond Graves-end is Shorn held
anciently by Sir Roger Northwood by service to carry with other the kings
tennants a white ensign forty days at his own charges when the King warred
in Scotland. Inquis. 35. E. 3
Somewhat more within the land, lies Cobham, the habitation for a long Cobham;
of whom John Cobham the last of that name, founded a College here and a castle
at Cowling: Barons of Cobham.
who left one only daughter wife to Sir John de la Pole Knight: She likewise
bare but one daughter, though married in her time to many husbands. But by Sir
Reginald Braibrooke only had she issue As for her husband Sir John Old
Castle, whiles he endeavored to bring in innovation in religion, was both
hanged, and burnt. Ioane her only daughter by Sir Reginald Braybrooke, was
wedded unto Thomas Broke of Somersetshire, from whom six Lord Cobhams have
lineally descended, and flourished in honorable reputation until our time.
From Graves-end a little country called Ho, lying as a demi Island between
rivers Thames and Medway stretches it self into the East, and is for
situation but John Lord Cobham in a moorish ground, and Cliffe a good big
town, so called of a cliffe upon which it stands. Clive at Ho.
But whether it be that Clives at Ho, so famous in the tender age and infancy
of our English Church, by reason of a Synod there holden I dare not as others
do, affirm: considering, that in regard of the site it is a place
inconvenient for such an assembly; and besides that Clives at Hoo seems to
have been within the Kingdom of the Mercians. Medway.
As for the river Medweg, now called Medway, and in the British tongue,
(unless I miss of the truth,) Vaga, whereunto afterward was added Med, has
his spring head in the wood Anderida which is termed the Weald, that is a
Wood-land country; Weald.
and takes up the South-part of this region far and Penshurst.
At first, whiles it carries but a slender stream it receives the Eden by
Penshurst the seat anciently (as it seems by the name) of Sir Stephen de
Penherst who also was called de Penshester a famous Warden of the Cinque ports;
but now the house of the Sidneies who derive their race from William de Sidney
Chamberlain to King Henry the second: Sidney.
out of which came Sir Henry Sidney that renowned Lord deputy of Ireland, who
of the daughter of John Dudley Duke of Northumberland, and Earl of Warwick,
begat Philip and Robert. This Robert, James our sovereign King, made right
honorable, Vicount Lisl^
first by the title of Baron Sidney of Penshurst and afterward, of Vicount
Lisle. But Sir Philip, whom I cannot pass over in silence, being the glorious
star of this family, a lively pattern of virtue, and the lovely joy of all
the learned Sidney, See in Bark shire. Philip Sidney
whom, as Gods will was he should be therefore borne into the world, even to
show unto our age a sample of ancient virtues: so his good pleasure was before
any man looked for it to call for him again, and take him out of the world as
being more worthy of heaven then earth. Thus we may see, Perfect virtue
suddenly vanishes out of sight, and the best men continue not long.

Then the river Medway, branching it self into five streamlets, is joined with
as Tunbridge to the town there situate, as the town of Bridges. This about
King William Rufus his time Richard son of Count Gilbert; Tunbridge.
Grandchild to Godfrey Earl of Ewe, and Lord of Briony obtained in requital
for Briony in Normandy, when there had bin long debate about Briony. This
Richard, (as William Gemeticensis writes) in recompense for the same castle
received in England the town of Tunbridge for it. And the report goes, that
the The Lowy of Tunbridge.
Lowy of Briony was measured round about with a line, and with the same line
brought into England, he received so much ground measured out at Tunbridge.
Shortly after, he built here a fair large castle fenced with the river, a
deep ditch, and strong walls; and albeit it is now ruinous and *
yet it manifestly shows what it was. His posterity, who were Earls of
Gloucester, and surnamed De Clare, (for that they were Lords of Clare in
Suffolk) built here a priorie for Chanons of Saint Augustines order, founded
the parish Church which was impropriated to the Knights of Saint John of
Jerusalem, and compounded about the tenure of the Manor, for which there had
been long suit, to hold it of the Archbishop of Canterbury by Knights fee,
and to be their high Stewards at their inthronizations. From these Clares
Earls of Gloucester, it came by an heir general to Sir Hugh Audley Earl of
Gloucester, and by his only daughter to the Earls of Stafford, who were
afterward Dukes of Buckingham, and from them by attainder to the Crown. It
has in latter ages been beholden to Sir Andrew of London for a fair
free-Schoole, and to John Wilford for a causey toward London. Three miles
directly South from hence in the very limit of Sussex, and near Frant, I saw
in a white-sandy ground diverse vastie, craggie stones of strange forms,
whereof two of the greatest stand so close together, and yet severed with so
straight a line, Whet-stones.
as you would think they had been sawed asunder, and Nature when she reared
these, might seem sportingly to have thought of a Sea. But to return to the
River.

From Tunbridge, Medway passes by Haudelo, from whence came that John Haudelo,
who happily marrying the heir of the Lord Burnell, had issue by her a son,
who was called Nicholas, summoned to Parliament among the Barons by the name of
Burnell. Then Medway increased with another water, called Twist, which twisteth
Mereworth.
runs on not far from Mereworth, where stands a fair Castle like house,
which from the Earls of Arundell came unto the Nevils Lords of Abergevennie,
and Le Despencer: whose heir in the right line, is Marie, Lady Fane, unto
whom, and her heirs King James in the first Parliament that he held, Vagniacae.
restored, gave and granted, etc. the name, style, title, honor, and dignity
of Baroness le Despencer: and that her heirs successively should be Barons le
Despencer for ever. Now by this time Medway having received a rivelet, that
loses it self under ground, and rises again at Loose, serving thirteen
fulling-mills, hastneth to Maidstone, which seeing the Saxons called it
Medwegston, and (...), I believe verily it is the same VAGNIACAE, which
Antonine the Emperor mentions, Ninnius in his Catalogue of cities, calls
corruply, Caer Megwad, for, Medwag. Neither verily does the account of distance
disagree; From Noviomagus one way, and Durobrovis another, whereof I shall
treat anon. Under the latter Emperors, as is to be seen in Peutegerus his
table lately set out by M. Velserus, it is named MADVS. Thus as years by
litlte and little turn about, so names likewise by little and little become
changed. Madus.
A large fair, and sweet town this is, and populous: for the fair stone
bridge, it has been beholding to the Archbishops of Canterbury. Among whom to
grace this place at the confluence of the waters, Boniface of Savoy, built a a
small College, John Vfford raised a palace for himself and successors, which
Simon Islip increased, and between them, which it stands in plight, William
Courtney erected Elizabeth amply restored them, and their Major, whereas
anciently they had a Portgreve for their head Magistrate. This I note, because
this [ Greve] is an ancient Saxon word, and as yet among the Germans
signifies, a Ruler, as Markegrave, Reingrave, Landgrave, etc.

Here, a little beneath Maidstone Eastward, a pretty rivelet joyneth with
Medway, springing first at Leneham: which town by probable conjecture is the
very same that Antonine the Emperor calls DVROLENVM, Len^h^^
written amiss in some copies* DVROLEVUM. For Durolenum in the British
language, is as much to say as The water Lenum. And besides the remains of the
name, the distance also from DVROVENVM, Durolenum: to say nothing of the
situation thereof, near unto that high rode way of the Romans, which in old
time (as Higden of Chester does write) led from Dover through the midst of Kent.

Hard by, Bocton M^lherb*
at Bocton Malherb has dwelt a long time the family of the Wottons, out of
which in our remembrance flourished both Nicolas Wotton, Doct. of the laws,
who being of the Privy counsel to K. Henry the Eight, K. Edward the sixth, Q.
Mary, and Q. Elizabeth, sent in Embassage nine times to foreign Princes, and
thrice chosen a Commit about peace between the English, French, and Scottish;
lived a goodly time, and ran a long race in this life with great commendation
of piety and wisdom: and also Sir Edward Wotton, Baron Wotton.
whom for his approved wisdom in weighty affairs, Q. Elizabeth James
created Baron Wotton of Merlay. Here under is Vlcomb anciently a mansio^ of the
family De sancto Leodegario, corruptly called Sentleger and Sellenger, and
Motinden, where Sir R. Rockesly descended from Kriol, and Crevecur built a
house, who held lands at Seaton by serjeantie to be Vantrarius Regis, when the
K. goes into Gascoin, Fin. Mich. xi. E. 2.
donec perusus fuerit pari solutarum pretii. 4. d. which as they that
understand Law Latin (for I do not) translate that he should be the Kings
fore-foot-man, until he had worn out a pair of shoes, prized 4. d. Neither
has this river any other memorable thing nere to it, Leeds castle. The family
^ Crevequer.
but Leeds Castle, built by the noble Crevequers, who in ancient charters are
named de Crevequer, and De crepito cord: afterward it was the unfortunate
seat of Bartholomew L. Baldismer, who perfidiously fortified Thomas de la More,
a gentleman that lived at the same time, and which of late I did publish in
print. In the year 1521. Queen Isabel came to the Castle of Leeds, about the
feast of Saint Michael; minding there to lodge all night, but was not permitted
to enter in. The King offended hereat, as taking it to be done in contempt of
him, called certain of the neighbor inhabitants out of Essex and London, and
commanded them to lay siege unto the Castle. Now, there held the Castle at that
time Bartholomew de Baldismer, who having left therein his wife and sons, was
gone himself with the rest of the Barons to overthrow the Hughs de Spencer.
Meane-while, when *
Thus Medway having received this rivelet from Leeds, fetching about through
good grounds runs by Allington, T. Wyat the elder, a worthy learned knight,
reedified a fair house now decayed, whose son Sr. Thomas enriched by an heir
of Sir T. Haut, proposing to himself great hopes upon fair prete^ses pitifully
overthrew himself and his state. Ailesford.
Hence comes Medway to Ailsford in the old English Saxon (...), which H. of
Huntingdon, calls Elstre, Ninnius Episford: who has written, that it was
named in the British tongue Saissenaeg haibail of the Saxons there vanquished,
like as others in the very same sense termed it Anglesford. For, Guortemere
Guortigerns son, did here set upon Hengist and the English Saxons, whom being
disraied, and not able to abide a second charge, he put all to flight: so as
they had been utterly defeated for ever, but that Hengist skil-full and
provident to prevent, and divert danger, withdrew himself into the Isle of
Tenet, until that invincible vigor and heat of the Britanes were allaied,
Horsted.
and fresh supplies came to his succor out of Germany. In this Battle were
slain the Generals of both sides, Catigern the Britain, Catigern his
Sepulcher.
and Horsa the Saxon: of whom the one, buried at Horsted not far from hence,
gave name to the place: and Catigern honored with a stately and solemn
funeral is thought to have been enterred Ailesford where under the side of a
hill I saw four huge, rude, hard stones erected, two for the sides, one
transversall in the midst between them, and the hugest of all piled and
laid over them in manner of the British monument which is called Stone heng
but not so artificially with mortis and tenants. Verily the unskilful common
people term it at this day, of the same Catigern, Keiths or Kits Coty house.
In Ailsford it self, for the religious house of the Carmelites founded by
Richard Lord Gray of Codnor in the time of King Henry the Third, is now seen
a fair habitation of Sir William Siddey a learned Knight, painefully, and
expensfully studious of the common good of his country as both his endowed
house for the poor, and the bridge here with the common voice do Boxley.
Neither is Boxley near adjoining to be passed over in silence, where William
de Ipres, in Flaunders, Earl of Kent founded an Abbey in the year of our Lord
1145. Wrotham.
and translated thither the Monks, from Clarevalle in Burgundy. Medway having
wound himself higher, from the East receives a brook springing near Wrotham
or Wirtham, Malling.
so named for plenty of wortes: where the Archbishops had a place until Simon
Islep pulled it down; leaves Malling which grew to be a town after Gundulph
Bishop of Rochester had there founded an Abbey of Nuns, Leibourn.
and waters Leibourn which has a Castle sometime the seat of a family
thereof surnamed, out of which Sir Roger Leibourn was a great Agent in the
Barons wars, Baron Leibourn. Briling. Baron Say.
and William was a Parliamentary Baron in the time of King Edward the first.
Near neighbor to Leibourn is Briling, now the habitation of the Lord
Abergeveny, Maminots, then of the Says, whose Inheritance at length by heirs
general came to the families of Clinton, Fienes, and Aulton. Upon the bank of
Medway Eastward somewhat higher, after it has passed by Halling where Hamo
Heath Bishop of Rochester built an house for his successors, there stands an
ancient City; Durobrevis.
which Antonine calls DVRO BRVS, DVRO-BRIVAE and in another place more truly
DVRO PROVae and DVRO BROVae: Bid DVRO BREVIS: In an ancient table set forth by
Welser. Roibis.
and in the declining state of the Roman Empire, process of time contracted
his name so, that it came to be named ROIBIS, and so by addition of (...),
which comes of the latin word Castrum, betokens among our ancestors a city
or Castle, Ceaster what it is. Rochester.
was called (...), and now with us more short Rochester, Roffa, of one Rhufus
as Bede guesseth: but it seems unto me to retain in it somewhat still of
that old name Durobrevis. Neither is there cause why any man should doubt of
the name, seeing that by the account of journies, or distance between places,
and Bedes authority, it is named expressly in the Charter of the foundation
of the Cathedral Church there DVROBROVIS: yet thus much I would advertise the
Reader, that in the printed books of Bid it is read Darueruum, whereas in the
manuscript copies it is termed DVROBREVIS: seated it is in a bottom, fortified
on the one side with a marsh, the river, the weak walls, and as William of
Malmesburie says, pent within too straight a room: whereupon, in time past it
was counted a Castle rather then a City. For, Bid calls it Castellum
Cantuariorum, the Kentishmens Castle. But now it stretches forth with large
suburbs on the West, East, and South sides. It has passed through no few
dangers and mischances. In the year of Christ 676. it was overthrown and laid
along by King Aetheldred the Mercian: and many a time afterward sacked by the
Danes. Aethelbert King of Iustus to be the first Bishop of that See. But when
it fell to decay for very age, Bishop Gundulph a Norman about the year 1080.
reedified it, and thrusting out the Priests brought in Monks in their rooms:
and when they were cast out, a Deane, six Prebendaries and Scholars were
substituted in their places. Near unto the Church there stands over the
river an old Castle fortified both by art, and situation: Which, as the report
goes Odo Bishop of Bayeux and Earl of Kent built: But it was, no doubt, King
William the first that built it: For in Domesday book we read thus, The Bishop
of Rouecester holds in Elesford, Yet, certain it is, that Bishop Odo when
his hope depended of a doubtful change of the State, held this against King
William Rufus: At which time there passed proclamation through England, that
whosoever would not be reputed a Niding, should repair to recover Rochester
Castle. Whereupon the youth fearing that name, *
and most reproachful and opprobrious in that age, Niding. William of
Malmesbury.
swarmed thither in such numbers, that Odo was enforced to yield the place,
lose his dignity, and abjure the realm. But concerning the reedification of
this Castle about this time, listen what the Textus Roffensis. An ancient
Manuscript book of that church.
Text of Rocester says, when King William the second would not confirm the
gift of Lanfrank as touching the Manor of Hedenham in the County of
Buckingham, made unto Rochester church, unless Lanfranck and Gundulph Bishop
(as Florentius of Worcester says) yea and license withal, to build in the
same a tower for themselves. Since which time it was belaied with Al'armes made
all England to shake, and Simon Montford Earl of Leicester assaulted it most
fiercely, though in vain, and cut down the wooden bridge, which was after
repaired. But in the time of King Richard the Second, *
Sir Robert Knowles by warlike prowes raised from low estate to high
reputation, The French called him Canol.
and great riches, built a very goodly stone bridge of arch-work with money
levied out of French spoils. At the end of the said bridge, Sir John Cobham
who much furthered the work, erected a Chapel (for our elders built no
notable bridge without a chapel) upon which besides arms of Saints, are seen
the arms of the King and his three uncles then living. And long after
Archbishop Watham coped a great part of the said bridge with iron bars. Under
Medway swelling with a violent and swift stream strugleth and breaks through
roaring and loud; but forthwith running more still and calm becomes a road
at Gillingham and Chetham for a most royal and warlike navy of strong and
serviceable ships, and the same most ready always at a short warning: which,
our late gracious Lady Queen Elizabeth, with exceeding great cost built for
the safeguard of her subjects and terror of her enemies; The Kings Navy.
and for the defense thereof raised a castelet at Vpnore upon the river side.

Now Medway grown more full and carrying a greater breadth, with his curling
waves right goodly and pleasant to behold, Toliatis an Isle.
runs a long by the fruitful fields, until that being divided by meeting
with Island Shepey, (which we supposed to be West-Swale: the Eastern, that
seems to have severed Sheppey from the firm land, Shepey. Iu. ^et.
is named East-Swale: but by Bid, termed Genlad and Yenlet. This Isle, of the
sheep, whereof it feeds mighty great flocks, being called by our ancestors
Shepey, that is, The Isle of Sheep, passing plentiful in corn, but scarce of
woods contains twenty one miles in compass. Upon the North-shore it had a
little Monastery, (now they call it Minster) built by Sexburga Ercombert the
King of Kent, in the year of 710. Under which, a certain Brabander of late
began to try by the furnace out of stones found upon the shore, both
Brimstone and Coperas. It has Westward in the Front thereof a very fine and
strong Castle, which King Edward the third built, as himself writes, Pleasant
for site, to the terror of his enemies, and solace of his people: unto which
he adjoined a Burgh, and in the honor of Philip the Queen his wife called it
Queene-borough, as one would say, Queen Borough.
The Queens Burgh. The Constable whereof at this day, is Sir Edward Hoby, who
has polished his excellent wit with learned studies. Eastward, is Shurland
seated, which belonged in late times to the Cheineies, and now to Sir Philip
Herbert second son to Henry Earl of Pembroch, whom King James in one and the
same day created Baron Herbert of Shurland, and Earl of Mont-Gomerie.

This Isle appertains to the Hundred of Middleton, so named of Middleton the
town, now Milton. This was some time a town of the Kings aboade, and of
greater name by far than at this day, although, Hasting the Danish pirate for
to annoy it, fortified a Castle hard by in the year 893. Near adjoining
heereto Sittingburn a town furnished with Innes shows it self with hiw new
Major and corporation: the remains also of Thong Castle, which as some write,
was so called for that Hengist built it by a measure of thongs cut out of a
beasts hide, when Vortigern Guncelline of Baldismer, of noble parentage, whose
son Bartholomew begat Guncelline: and he by the Inheretrie of Raulph
Fitz-Barnard Lord of Kings-Downe was father to that seditious Sir Bartholomew
Lord Baldismer of whom I spoke: he again of Margaret Clare begat Sir Giles
Lord Baldismer that died without issue; also Margerie, wife to William Roos of
Hamlake; Maude the wife of John Vere Earl of Oxford; Elizabeth espoused to
William Bohun Earl of Northampton, and afterward to Edmund Mortimer; and
Margaret whom Sir John Tiptoft wedded: from whom descended a goodly offspring
and fair race of great nobility.

Then saw I Tenham not commended for health, Tenham.
but the parent as it were of all Rich. Harris his fruterer, to the public
good. Chery gardens.
For thirty Parishes thereabout, are replenished with Cherie-gardens, and
Orchards beautifully disposed in direct lines. Amongst these is Feversham very
commodiously situate. Feversham.
For, the most plentiful part of this country lies round about it, and it
has a creek fit for bringing in and carrying forth commodities; whereby at
this day it flourishes amongst all the neighbor towns. It seems also in
former times to have flourished, considering that King Aethelstane assembled
hither an assembly the Sages of his Kingdom, and made laws here in the year
of our redemption 903.

King Stephen also he that usurped the Kingdom of England, founded an Abbey
here, for the Monks of Clugny; In which, himself, Maude his wife, and
Eustach his son were entombed. Nigh thereto, like as else where through this
County, are found pits of great depth, which being narrow in the mouth and
very spacious beneath have their certain distinct rooms or chambers (as it
were) with their several supporting pillars of chalk. Concerning these there
are diverse opinions. I for my part, cannot tell what to think of them unless
they were those pits, out of which the Britains in old time dug forth
chalk or white marle to dung their grounds withal, as Pliny writes. For,
they sound pits, says he, An hundred foot deep, straight at the mouth, but
of great capacity within: like unto these very same of

And verily, no where else are they found but in a chalkie and marly soil.
Unless a man would think, that our English-Saxons dug such caves and holes
to the same use and purpose, as the Germans did, of whom they were descended.
For, they Tacitus writes, Pits made in Kent.
to make holes and caves under the ground, and those to charge aloft with great
heaps of dung, as harbors of refuge for Winter, and garners of receipt for
corn; because by such like places they mitigate the rigor of cold wether: and
if at any time the enemy comes, he wastes only the open ground: but as
for those things that lie hidden and buried under the earth, they are either
unknown, or in this respect do disappoint the enemies, for that they are to
be sought for.

From above Feversham, *
the shore runs on, plentiful of shel-fish, but especially oisters,
Reculver. Regulbium.
(whereof there are many pits, or stews) as far as Reculver, and farther.
Reculver, is a place of ancient memory, named in the old English-Saxon
Reaculf, but in elder time REGVLBIVM. For so it is named, in the Roman Office
book Notitia Provinciarum; which reports that the captain of the primer
band of the Vetasians lay here in garrison under the Lieutenant of the
Saxon-shoare: (for so was the sea coast a-long this tract called) who had the
command then of nine Ports, as the L. Warden now has of five Ports. And verily
the Roman Emperors coins dug up there give testimony to this antiquity of
the place: In it Aethelbert King of Kent when he had made a grant of Canterbury
to Augustine the Monk, built himself a Palace, and Bassa an English-Saxon
beatified it with a Monastery, out of which Brightwald the Eighth Archbishop
of Canterbury was elected. Of this Monastery, Raculf-Minster, what time as
Edred brother to King Edward the Elder gave it to Christ-church in Canterbury.
Howbeit, at this day it is nothing else but an uplandish country town, and if
it be of any name, it has it for the salt savory Oisters there dredged, and
for that Minster; the steeples whereof shooting up their lofty spires stand
the Mariners in good stead, as marks, whereby they avoid certain sands and
shelves in the mouth of the Thames. For, as he Hadrian^^ Iunius.
versifieth in his Philippeis.

Cernit oloriferum Thamisin sua Doridi amarae.
Flumina miscentem --
Thames, Stoure river.
where he does mix his stream
With brackish sea --
Now are we come to the Isle Tanet, which the river Stour, by Bid named
Wantsum, severeth from the firm land by a small channel running between,
which river made of two diverse rivelets in the wood-land called the Weald, so
soon as it goes in one entire stream, visits Ashford and Wye, Ashford. Wie.
two pretty Mercate towns well known: Either of them had sometimes their
several Colleges of Priests: the one built by John Kemp Archbishop of
Canterbury, who was there borne: the other to wit of Ashford, by Sir R. Fogge
Knight. Wye also had a special fountain, into which Eustace a Norman Abbat,
Page 4157.
if we may believe Roger of Hoveden, whom I would advise you to have recourse
unto if you take delight in such like miracles. As how the blind by drinking
thereof recovered sight, the dumb their speech, the deaf their hearing, the
lame their limbs. And how a woman possessed of the devil, sipping thereof
vomited two toades which immediately were first transformed into huge black
dogs, and again into asses: and much more no less strange than ridiculous,
which some in that age as easily believed, as others falsely forged. Chilham.
Thence the Stour leaving East-well the inhabitation of the family of the
Finches, worshipful of it self, and by descent from Philip Belknap, and
Peoplesham: goes on to Chilham, or, as other call it Iulham, where Fulbert of
Dover.
which one Fulbert of Dover is reported to have built: whose issue male soon
failed, and ended in a daughter inheritrice, whom Richard the base son of
King John took to wife, and had with her this Castle and the lands thereto
belonging: Of her he begat two daughters; namely Lora the wife of William
Marmion, and Isabell wife first to David of Strathbolgy Earl of Athole in
Scotland, afterward to Sir Alexander Baliol who was called to Parliament by the
name of Lord of Chilham: and mother to that John Earl Athole, 1306.
who being condemned oftentimes for treason was hanged at the last upon a
gibbet fifty foot high (as the King commanded because he might be so much the
more conspicuous in men's eyes, as he was of higher and nobler birth) and being
cut down half alive, had his head smitten off, and the truncke of his body
thrown into the fire, a very cruel kind of punishment and seldom seen
among us. And after his goods were confiscate, King Edward the first
bounteously bestowed this castle together with Fel-borough.
Felebergh Hundred upon Sir Bartholomew Badilsmer; who likewise quickly lost
the same, for his treason, as I have before related. There is a constant report
among the inhabitants, that Julius Caesar in his second voyage against the
Britans Chilham, and that thereof it was called As we call Iuliana, Gilian.
Iulham, that is, Julius his Mansion: and if I be not deceived, they have the
truth on their side. For here about it was when at his second remove, he in
his march stayed upon the intelligence that his ships were sore weather-beaten,
and thereupon returned and left his army encamped ten days while he rigged
and repaired the decaies of his Navy. And in his march from hence, was
encountered sharply by the Britans, and lost with many other Laberius Durus a
Marshall of the field. Laberias Durus a Tribune.
A little beneath this town there is a pretty hillocke to be seen apparelled
in a fresh suit of green sord, where men say, many years ago one Iullaber
was enterred, whom some dream to have been a Giant, others, a Witch. But I
conceiving an opinion that some antiquity lies hidden under Laberius was here
buried, and so that the said hillocke became named Iul-laber.

Five miles from hence the river Stoure dividing his Channel, runs swiftly
by DVROVERNVM the chief City of this County and gives it his name.
Durovernum.
For Durwhern in the Welsh.
British tongue signifies a swift river: Ptolome calls it in steed of
Durovernum, DARVERNVM, Bid and others DOROBERNIA, the English Saxons (...),
that is, The Kentishmens city: Ninnius and the Britans Caer Kent, Canterbury.
that is, the City of Cent, we, Canterbury, and the later writers in Latin
Cantuaria. A right ancient city this is, and famous, no doubt in the Romans
time: not over great (as William of Malmesbury said, 400. years since) nor
very small: much renowned Augustine the Apostle of the Englishmen.
Whiles the Saxons Heptarchie flourished, it was the head city of the kingdom
of Kent and the kings seat; until such time as king Ethelbert passed a grant
of it together with the roialty thereof unto Augustine the Apostle as they
called him, and consecrated Archbishop of the English Nation, who established
here his habitation for himself and his successors. And albeit the
Metropolitan dignity, together with the honor of the Pall (that is an
Episcopal vestiment that was coming over the shoulders, made of a sheep
skin, in memorial of him that sought the stray Pall what it is.
to be at London, yet for the honor of Augustine it was translated hither.
For, Kenulph King of the Mercians thus writes unto Pope Leo. Because Augustine
of blessed Memory, the minister of Gods word unto the English Nation, Anno.
7093.
and who most gloriously governed the Churches of English Saxony, departed
this life in the City of Canterbury, and his body was there buried in the
Minster of Saint Peter Prince of the Apostles, the which Laurence his
successors consecrated, it has pleased all the wise men of our nation, that
the Metropolitan honor should be conferred upon that City where his body
was entombed, who engraffed in these parts the verity of But whether the
Archbishops See and Metropolitan dignity were here ordained by authority of the
wise men of our nation (that is to say) the States of the Parliament, (to
speak according to our time) or by Augustine him self whiles he lived, as
others would have it: the Bishops of Rome, who next followed established the
same so, as they decreed, That to have it severed and taken away from thence
Since which time, it is incredible, how much it has flourished, in regard both
of the Archiepiscopal dignity, and also of that school of the better kind of
literature which Theodore the seventh Archbishop erected there. And albeit it
was sore shaken with the Danish wars, and consumed for a great part thereof
sundry times by casualtie of fire, yet rose it up always again more
beautiful and glorious then before.

After the Normans entry into this land when King William Rufus, as it was
recorded in the Register of Saint Augustines Abbey, Had given the City of
Canterbury wholly in * fee simple unto the Bishops, which before time they had
held at the Kings courtesy it begun not only to get heart again, what
through the same of the religious piety of godly men there, and what through
the bounty of the Bishops, and especially of Simon Sudbury, who rebuilt up the
walls new; but grew also as it were upon a sudden to such a state, that for
beauty of private dwelling houses it equalled all the cities of Britain, but
for the magnificent and sumptuous building of religious places and the number
of them, it surpassed even those that were most famous. Among which, two
especially surmounted all; Christs-church, and Saint Augustines, both of them
replenished with Monks of the Order of Saint Benet. And as for Christ-Church,
it raises it self aloft near the heart of the City, with so great a
majesty and stateliness, that it strikes a sensible impression of religion
into their Beda says, by the faithful and believing Romans, the same
Augustine of whom I spoke, got into his hands, consecrated it to Christ, and
assigned it to be the seat for his successors: wherein 73. Archbishops in a
continued train of succession have now set. Of whom Lanfranke, and William
Corboyle brought the upper part of the Church, and they that succeeded, the
nethermore, (where as that the more ancient work had been consumed with fire)
to that stateliness which now we see not without exceeding great charges,
which a devout persuasion in former times willingly disbursed. For, a number of
high, of low, and of mean degree flocked hither in pilgrimage with very great
and rich oblations to visit the tomb of Thomas Becket the Archbishop: So
bright, so shining and glittering, as Erasmus (who saw it) says, was every
corner with rare and exceeding big precious stones: yea, and the Church all
round about did abound with more than princelike riches: and as though Christ's
name to whom it was dedicated, had been quite forgotten, it came to be called
Saint Thomas Church. Neither was it for any thing else so famous, as for his
memorial and sepulture, although it may justly vaunt of many famous men's tombs
and monuments: especially, that of Edward surnamed The Black Prince of Wales,
a most worthy and renowned Knight for warlike prowess, and the very wonder of
his age: also of Henry the Fourth, a most puissant King of England. But Henry
the Eighth scattered this wealth heaped up together in so many ages, and
dispersed those Monks: in lieu of whom were placed in this Christs-Church, a
Deane, an Archdeacon, Prebendaries twelve, and Six Preachers, who in places
adjoining round about should teach and preach the word of God. The other Church
that always mightily strove with this for superiority, stood by the Cities
side Eastward, known by the name of Saint Austines: which Augustine himself,
and King Ethelbert at his exhortation, founded and dedicated to Saint Peter and
Paul: that it might be the Sepulture place, both for the Kings of Kent, and
also for Augustine himself was enterred in the porch of the same, with this
Epitaph, as witnesses Thomas Spot.

Inclytus Anglorum praesulpius, and decus altum,
Hic Augustinus requiescit corpore sanctus.
The body of Saint Augustine does here interred lie:
A Prelate great, devout also, and Englands honor hie.
But, as Bede reports, who rather is to be credited, this was the more
ancient Inscription of his tomb.

HIC REQVIESCIT DOMINVS AVGVSTINVS DOROVERNENSIS ARCHIEPISCOPVS PRIMVS, QVI
OLIM HVC A BEATO GREGORIO ROMANAE VRBIS PONTIFICE DIRECTVS, ET A DEO OPERATIONE
MIRACVLORVM

HERE RESTS DAN. AUGUSTINE, THE FIRST ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY: WHO BEING IN
TIMES PAST DIRECTED HITHER FROM BLESSED GREGORY THE BISHOP OF ROME, AND
THROVGH THE VVORKING OF MIRACLES SVPPORTED BY GOD, BOTH BROVGHT KING ETHELBERT
AND HIS PEOPLE FROM IDOLATRY TO THE FAITH OF CHRIST, AND ALSO

Together with him in the same porch were buried six Archbishops next
succeeding, and in memorial of these seven namely, Austen, Laurence, Mellitus,
Iustus, Honorius, Deus-dedit, and Theodosius, were these verses (such as they
are) engraven there in marble: SEPTEM SVNT ANGLIS PRIMATES ET PROTO PATRES,
SEPTEM RECTORES, SEPTEM COELOQVE TRIONES;
SEPTEM CISTERNAE VITAE, SEPTEMQVE LVCERNAE;
ET SEPTEM PALMAE REGNI, SEPTEMQVE CORONAE,
SEPTEM SVNT STELLAE, QUAS HAEC TENET AREA CELLAE.
Seven Patriarchs of England, Primates seven:
Seven Rectors, and seven Laborers in heaven.
Seven Cesternes pure of life, seven Lamps of light
Seven Palms, and of this Realm seven Crowns full bright,
Seven Stars, are here bestowed in vault below.


I may not forget another Church near unto this, built as Bede says, by the
Romans Saint Martin, wherein, before Austens coming, Bertha wife to King
Ethelbert, descended from the blood Royal of France was wont to frequent
divine Christian service. Concerning the Castle on the South side of the City,
the Bulwarks whereof now are decayed, it makes no show of any great antiquity,
and there is no memorable thing thereof come to my knowledge, but only that it
was built by the Normans: as touching the dignity of the Sea of Canterbury,
which in times past carried a great State, I will say nothing but this, that,
as in former ages, during the Roman Hierarchy, the Archbishops of Canterbury
were Primates of all Britain, Legates to the Pope, and as Vrbane the second
said, The Patriarchs, as it were, of another world: so when the Popes
authority was abrogated, a decree passed in the Synod, Anno, 1534. that
laying aside the said title, they should be styled Primates and Metropolitanes
of all England. Which dignity the right reverend Father in Christ D. John
Whitgift lately held, who devoutly consecrated both his whole life to God, and
all his painful labors to the Church, and in the year 1604. slept in the
Lord, a Prelate Richard Bancroft, a man of singular courage and counsel, in
establishing and supporting the state Ecclesiastical. For the Latitude of
Canterbury, the Pole Artick is elevated above the Horizon there fifty one
degrees and sixteen minutes, and the Longitude is reckoned to be four and
twenty degrees, and fifty one minutes.

Stour by this time having gathered his waters all into one stream runs
beside Hackington, Hackington.
where Dame Lora Countess of Leicester, a most honorable Lady in those days,
having abandoned all worldly pleasures, sequestered her self from the world
devoutly, to serve God wholly. Before which time Baldwin Archbishop Saint
Stephens.
Howbeit ever since, the name remained and the place is called Saint Stephens:
of which Sir Roger Manwood Knight, L. chief Baron of the Exchequer, a man of
exquisite knowledge in our common laws, Fordich.
(unto whom for his bounteous liberality the poor inhabitants are much
beholding) was of late time a right great ornament: *
and even so is his son at this day Sir Peter Manwood Knight of the Bath,
whom I cannot but mention when as he is a favourer of virtue, and learning.
From thence Stour passes by Fordich (called the little Burough of Forewich in
King William The first English Nun.
and so in former time to Stoure-mouth, which it has now forsaken a mile, and
more; yet left and bequeathed his name to it. But now by Stoure-mouth runs a
brook which issuing our of Saint Eadburghs well at Liming (where the daughter
to King Ethelbert first of our nation took the veil) while it seeks the
sea, Elham.
sees Elham a mercate town of which I have read nothing, but that the Manor
was the inheritance of Julian Leibourn a Lady of great honor in her time,
Inq. 2. E. 3.
who was mother of Laurence Hastings first Earl of Penbrooke of that surname,
and after wife to William Clinton Earl of Huntingdon. Then it holds his
course by diverse villages, which thereof receive the addition of Bourn, as
Bishops-bourn, Hawles-bourn, Patricks-bourn, and Beakes-bourn. This Caesar
calls it (as I have observed travailing lately in these parts) which Caesar
came unto, when he had marched by night almost twelve Italian miles from the
seacoast, and where he had the first encounter, in his second expedition into
Britain; with the Britains, whom he drove into the woods, where they had a
place fortified both by nature, and men's labor, with a number of trees hewn
down and plashed to fore-close the entries, But yet the Romans forced an
entry, Herdes.
drove them out, and there about encamped. The place of camp as I hear, is
near H^rdes, a place of ancien Gentlement of that surname, descended from
Esten grave, Herengod, and the Fitz-Bernards.

Below Stoure-mouth, Stoure dividing his stream takes two several ways,
and In-lade and Wantsume, making the Isle of Tenet on the West and South side:
for on all other sides it is washed with the maine Sea. This Island Solinus
named ATHANATON, and in other copies THANATON: the Britains Iuis Ruhin, as
witnesses Asserius: happily, for Rhutupin, of Rhutupinae a City adjoining.
The English Saxons called it (...), and (...), and we Tenet. All the Isle
stands upon a whitish maile, full of goodly corn fields, and being a right
fertile soil, carries in length eight miles, and four in breadth: reckoned
in old time to contain 600. Hides in English. An hides as it is thought
consists of an hundred acres, called in latin in old time, Familia, Mansa
and Manens. Lapis tituli.
Families: in stead whereof, it is corruptly read in Bid Milliarium
Sexcentarum, for, Familiarum Sexcentarum. But whereas Solinus writes that
there is not a snake creeping in this Isle, and that the mould or earth carried
from hence kills snakes, it Etymology therefore derived (...), that is, from
the death of snakes, falls quite to the ground. Here the English Saxons
landed first: here by the permission of Guortigern they first seated
themselves: here was their place of refuge; and here Guortimor the Britain
made a great slaughter of them: when, at Lapis Tituli, (for so is that place
named in Ninnius which we now call Stouar almost in the same sense, and haven
certainly it was) he put them to flight and forced them with all the speed
they might to take their Pinnaces.

In which place also, he gave commandment, says he, that himself should be
buried to repress thereby, as he thought, the furious outrages of the English
Saxons: in like sort as Scipio Africanus did, who commanded that his tomb
should be so set, Now Elflet.
as that it might look toward Africa: supposing that his very tomb would be
a terror to the Carthaginians. Here also at VVipped fleet, (so called of
VVipped the Saxon there slain) Hengest discomfited the Britains and put them
to flight, after he had sore tired them with sundry conflicts. S. Austine our
Apostle (as they call him) many years after landed in this Isle, unto whose
blessing the credulous Clergy ascribed the plentiful fertility of the
country: and the Monk Gotceline cried out in this 596. Minster.
O the land of Tenet, happy by reason of her fertility, but most happy for
receiving and entertaining so many Divine in-commers bringing God with them, or
rather so many heavenly citizens. Egbert the third King of the Kentishmen to
pacify dame Domneva a devout Lady, whom before time he had exceedingly much
wronged, granted here a fair piece of land, wherein she errected a Monastery
for 70. veiled virgins: the prioresse whereof was Mildred, for her holiness
canonized a Saint, and the Kings of Kent bestowed many fair possessions upon
it, but Withred especially, who (that I may note the antiquity and manner of
livery of Seisin in that age out of the very form of his own Donation) For
the full complement of his confirmation thereof, laid upon the holy altar a
turfe of that ground which he gave at Humantun. Here afterward sundry 1217.
and also polluted this Monastery of Domneva with all kind of cruelty, Lewis
of France.
that it flourished not again before the Normans government. Here also landed
Lewis of France, who called in by the tumultuous Barons of England against King
John, published by their instigation a pretended right to the Crown of
England. For that whereas King John for his notorious treason against King
Richard his brother absent in the Holy Land, was by his Peers lawfully
condemned, and therefore after the death of King Richard the right of the
Crown was devolved to the Queen of Castile sister to the said King Richard;
Chronicles of W. Thorn.
and that she and her heirs had conveied over their right to the said Lewis,
and his wife her daughter: Also that King John had Arthur, whereof he was found
guilty by his Peers in France, and also by subjecting his Kingdoms which were
always, free to the Pope, as much as in him lay, contrary to his oath at his
Coronation, and that without the consent of the Peers of the Realm, etc.
Which I leave to Historians, with the success of his expedition, least I might
seem to digress extraordinarily.

Neither must I pass over here in silence, that which makes for the singular
praise of the inhabitants of Tenet, those especially which dwell by the roads
or harbors of Margate, Ramsgate and Brodstear. For, they are passing
industrious, and as if they were Amphibii, that is, both land creatures, and
sea creatures, get their living Goodwinsands, Rhutupia. Portu^ Trutu^ensi^.
The four-foots, The whitdick, etc.) these men are wont to bestir themselves
lustily in recovering both ships, men, and Merchandise endangered.

At the mouth of Wantsum Southward, (which men think has changed his
channel) over against the Isle stood a City, which Ptolomee calls RHVTVPIAN,
Tacitus, PORTVS TRVTVLENSIS, for Rhutupensis, if Beatus Renanus conjectureth
Antonine, RHITVPIS PORTVS, Ammianus Marcellinus, RHVTVPIAH STATIO, that is, the
Road of Rhutupiae, Orosius, THE HAVEN and City of Rhutubus: the old
English-Saxons as Beda witnesses, Reptacesler, others Ruptimuth, Alfred of
Beverly names it Richberge: we at this day, Richborow: Thus has time sported
in varying of one and the same name. Whence this name should arise, it is not
for certain known. But seeing the places near unto it, as Sandwich and
Sandiby have their denomination of Sandi: I considering also, that Rhyd Tufith
in the British-tongue betokens a sandy fourd, I would willingly if I durst,
derive it from thence: This City seemed to have been seated on the descent of
an hill, the Castle there stood overlooking from an higher place the Ocean
which is now so far excluded by reason of sandy residence inbealched with the
tides, that it comes hardly within a Lupicinus sent by The younge^
Constantius the Emperor into Britain for to repress the rodes and invasions
of Scots and Picts both, landed the Heruli, and Batavians, and Maesian
regiments. Here also Theodosius the father of Theodosius the Emperor, to whom
as Symmachus witnesses, the Senate decreed for pacifying Britan armed Statues
on horseback, arrived with his Herculij, Iovij, Victores and Fidentes, for
these were names of Roman regiments. Afterward when the Saxon Pirates
impeached intercourse of merchants and infested our coasts with continual
piracies, the Second Legion Augusta, which being remooved by the Emperor
Claudius out of Germany had remained many years in Garrison at Caer Leon
Isea Silurum in Wales, was translattd hither, and had a Provost of their own
here under the great Lieutenant and Count of the Saxon shore. Clemens Maximus.
Which Provostship happily, that Clemens Maximus bare, who being here in
Britan by the soldiers saluted Emperor, slew Gratian, the lawful Emperor;
and was afterward himself slain by Theodosius at Aquileia: For, this Maximus
it was whom Ausonius in the verses of Aquileia, called the Rhutupine robber.

See how these verses are englished in page 83.
Maximus armigeri quondam sub nomine lixae.
Faelix quae tanti spectatrix laeta triumphi,
Fudisti Ausonio Rhutupinum Mart latronem.
Parentalia, preserved the memory of Flavius Sanctus another President or
Governor of Rhutupiae, concerning whom thus he wrote.

Militiam nullo qui turbine sedulus egit,
Praeside laetatus quo Rhutupinus ager.
His martial service who discharged with care without all stir,
And Rutupin rejoice in him, There be that under (...) name of Rhi^^tupine
would have all Britans to be un^derstood.
who was their governor.
Ausonius likewise in a lamentable funeral verse, sets forth the praise of
Claudius Contentus his Uncle, who being overtaken with death left behind him
unto strangers

Et patruos Elegia meos reminiscere cantus,
Contentum, tellus quem Rhutupina tegit.
My doleful Muse now call to mind the songs of Uncle mine,
Contentus, who enterred lies within mould Rhutupine.
This Rhutupiae flourished also after the coming in of the English Saxons.
For, writers record, that it was the Royal Palace of Ethelbert King of Kent;
and Bid gave it the name of a City. But ever since, it began to decay:
neither is the name of it Alfred of Beverley, who has put down in writing,
that Alcher with a power of Kentish-men at this town, then called Richberge,
foiled and defeated the Danes encombered with the spoils they had before
gotten.

Now has time razed out all the footings and tractes thereof, and to teach us
that Cities as well as men have their fatal periods, it is a very field at
this day, wherein when the corn is come uppe a man may see the draughts
Augustins Cross. And there remain only certain walls of a Castle of rough
flinte, and long Britan brickes in form of a quadrant and the same cemented
with lime, and a most stiff binding sand, mightily strengthened by tract of
time, so that the cement is as hard as the stone. Over the entry whereof is
fixed a head of a personage engraven in stone, some say it was Queen Berthas
head, but I take it to be a Roman work, a man would deem this to have been
the Citadell or keep of the City, it stands on such a height over-looking the
low grounds in Tenet, which the Ocean by little and little shrinking away has
now left. Moreover, the plot whereon the Sandwich.
and we, Sandwich. This being one of the Cinque Ports, as they term them, is
on the North and West side, fortified with walls and on other parts fenced
with a rampire, river and ditch. The haven by reason of sand choking it, and a
great ship of burden belonging to Pope Paul the Fourth, which was
accidentally sunk in the very channel thereof, is not deep enough to bear
any tall vessels.

In ancient times it sundry times felt the furious forces of the Danes,
afterward Canutus the Dane when he had gained the Crown of England, bestowed
it upon Christs-Church in Canterbury with the royalty of the water on each
side, *
so far forth as a ship being a floate, a man might cast a Danish hatchet
out of the vessel to the bank. In the Norman reign it was reckoned one of
the Cinque ports, and to find five ships. In the year 1217. Lewis of France
of whom we spoke lately, Escaetria. 23. E. 3. p. 2.
burned it, King Edward the first for a time placed here the staple, and King
Edward the Third by exchange reunited it to the Crown. About which time there
flourished here a family surnamed De Sandwico, which had matched with one of
the heirs of Creve^cur, and Dauranches, Lord of Folkesto, and deserved well of
this place. In the time of King Henry the Sixth it was Roger Manwood chief
Baron of the Exchequer native of this place, built, and endowed here a
free-schoole, and the Netherlanders have bettered the town by making, and
trading of Baies, and other commodities.

Cantium the Promontory.
Beneath Rhutupiae, Ptolomee places the Promontorie CANTIVM as the utmost cape
of this Angle, which in some copies is corruptly written NVCANTIVM and
ACANTIVM: The Foreland.
Diodorus as corruptly calls it CARRION, and we at this day the Foreland of
Kent. Now all these shores on every side, are of this Rhutupiae by the Poets
termed Rhutupina littora. Hence it is, that Iuvenall satyrically inveighing
against Curtius Montanus a dainty and delicious glutton, speaking of oysters
carried from

-- nulli major fuit usus edendi
Tempestate mea, Circaeis nata forent, an
Lucrinum ad saxum, Rhutupinove aedita fundo
Ostrea, callebat primo deprendere morsu.
None in my time had more use of his tooth,
Whence oisters came, where they were bred, full well
He knew: at Circeie cape, at Lucrine rock, forsooth,
Or Rhutup British sea.
coast, at first bit he could tell.
And Lucan the Poet.

Aut vaga cum Thetis, Rhutupinaque littora fervent.
Or when unconstant waving sea, and British shores do Or boil.
rage.
From this fore-land aforesaid, the shore runs on Southward for certain
miles together, indented with a continued raunge of many hills mounting up.
But Sandon, Deal. where Caesar arrived.
three Neighbor Castles, which King Henry the Eighth, within the remembrance
of our Fathers built, it setleth low, and in a flat and open plain lies full
against the sea. At this Deal, or Dole: as Ninnius calls it (and that truly
in mine opinion: For, our Britains at this day do so term a plain lying low
and open upon sea or river) the constant report goes that Julius Caesar did
arrive: and Ninnius avoucheth as much, who in barbarous Latin wrote thus,
Caesar ad Dole bellum pugnavit, that is, At Dole Caesar fought a battle. A
Table likewise set up in Dover Castle confirms the same: yea and Caesar
himself verifieth it: who reports that Swans song Iactat Dela novas celebris
arces,
Notus Caesareis locus trophaeis.
Deal famed much, vuants of new turrets hie,
A place well known by Caesar's victory.


For he, Caesar's entry into Britain.
(give me leave I pray you to digress awhile out of my course) having, (as
Pomponius Sabinus reports out of Seneca) won all that was to be gotten by
sea and land, cast his eye to the Ocean, and as if the Roman world Athenaeus
out of Cotas, either to be revenged of the Britains who aided the Gauls (as
Strabo says; or in hope of British pearls, as Suctonius reports: or
inflamed with an ambitious desire of glory, as others do record, in the year
before Christ's nativitie fifty four, and once again in the year ensuing,
entered into Britain: having before hand sounded the havens by his espialls, In
his book de Artees Natu^.
as Su^tonius, and himself does testify; and not, as Roger Bachon fableth, by
setting certain looking glasses upon the coast of Gaul, and by Art
perspective, which by reflection multiplieth hidden forms. What he exploited
here, himself has at large delivered in his Commentaries; and I likewise
before have summarily Suetonius concerning Scaeva, whose valourous service
during the civil war was notably seen above others at Dyrrachium, and whom
our Poet Joseph of Excester in his Antiocheis, and namely in these his verses
touching Britain, reported (I know not how truly) to have been a Britain
borne.

Hinc et Scaeva satus, pars non obscura tumulius
Civilis, MAGNVM solus qui mole soluta
Obsedit, meliorque stetit pro Caesare murus.
Here borne also was Scaeva, he that bare no little sway
In all these civil broiles; the Fort that stood full in his way
Pompey besieged, was Caesar's strongest stay.
But what were the exploits of Caesar in this our country, See page 34, 35, etc.
learn you may of himself, and out of that which has before been written.
For, neither as yet, have I met with that old father a Britain, whom Marcus
Aper, as we read in Quintilian, saw in this Island; who avowed that he was
present at the battle, in which they assaied to keep Caesar from landing,
when he came to war upon them: neither is it any part of my meaning now to
write an History, but a Topographie.

Upon this shore, lie out with a long train certain heaps in manner of
banks or rampires, which some imagine that the wind swept up together. But I
suppose them to have been a fence and countermure, Castra navalia. Caesar's
ship-campe.
or rather the Ship-campe, which Caesar

For I understand by relation of the dwellers, thereby, that this rampire is
called Romes-worke, as if it were A work of the Romans. And so much the rather
believe I, that Caesar arrived here, because he writes, that seven miles
from hence, (for, so we read in the ancient books, corrected by Flavius
Constantinus a man of Consul degree) the sea is kept in and compassed with such
straight mountains that for the higher places a dart may be flung to the very
shore: verily as soon as we are past Deal, a mighty ridge of steep high
Cliffs, Cicero terms them moles magnificas, that is, Stately cliffes bringing
forth Samphyre in great plenty, runs for seven miles or there about, as far
as to Dover: where it opens it self: and of that nature is the place, that,
right as Caesar writes, between two hills it lets in and encloseth the
sea. Within this partition and separation of the Cliffes lies DVBRIS, Dubris.
Dover. Darell.
which Antonine the Emperor mentions, the Saxons name it (...), and we
Dover. This name was given unto it, as Darell out of Eadmer For, when as,
(says he) in ancient times the sea there barbarous spreaded it self upon
urgent necessity to make it a more commodious haven, they kept it in with more
straight bounds. Howbeit, William Lambard, with more probability fetched the
reason of this name from the word Dufyrrha, which in the British language
betokens a place steep and upright.

The town which is seated between high clyffes (whereas some-time the haven
was, when the sea more insinuated it self, as we collect by the anchors and
ship planks that are dug there up; is more famous for the commodiousnesse of
the haven, (such as it is) and for ready passage into France, than for any
elegancie, Cinque Ports, and in times past it was charged to furnish and set
out one and twenty ships unto the wars, in the same manner and form as
Hastings did, whereof I have already spoken. In Sussex.
Toward the sea (now somewhat excluded by Beach) it was fenced with a wall;
whereof some part as yet stands. It had a fair church consecrated unto Saint
Martin, founded by Whitred King of Kent, an house also of the Knights-Templars,
which now are quite gone, and nothing to be seen of them: It yeildeth
likewise a seat for the Archbishop of Canterburies Suffragans, who when the
Archbishop is busied in weightier affairs, mannageth for him matters that
pertain Suffragan to the Archbishop of Canterbury.
and not to the Episcopal jurisdiction. From the top of a rough and crag^i^
cliffe which mounteth up to a wonderful height, where it looks down to the
sea: a most statey Castle like unto a pretty City fortified right strongly
with bul-warkes and many a Tower, overlooketh and threatens after a sort the
sea under it: Matthew of Paris calls it the Key and Lock, The Bar and
Sparre of England. The common sort of people dreameth, that it was built by
Julius Caesar, and verily I suppose by the British Bricks in the Chapel
there, that it was built by the Romans, who used such in their great buildings.
What time as the Roman Empire declined, they placed here a band or company of
the Tungricanes, A band of the Tungricanes.
who were accounted among the Aides-Palatine: out of whose armoury and munition
happily were Balistae like huge crosse-bowes bent by force of two or four men.

From the entrance of the English Saxons into this land, unto the expiation of
their Kingdom, no where could I as yet read so much as one bare word of this
Castle or the Town; save only in certain by-notes out of a Table, that was
here hanged upon a wall; which reported that Caesar, having arrived at Deal,
and discomfited the Britains at Baramdowne (which is a plain adjoining, fit
for horse fight, and meet to embattaile an army in) began the Castle of
Dover; Arviragus afterward fortified it against the Romans, and stopped up the
haven. Also, that after him King Arthur and his knights vanquished I wot not
what rebels here. Howbeit a little before the Normans coming in, it was
reputed the only defense and strength of England: and for that cause William
Duke Harold by on oath to deliver up into his hands this Castle together with
the well, what time as he aspired to the Kingdom: and after he had settled
his estate and affairs at London, thought it good before all other things to
fortify this piece, and to assign fair lands in Kent unto Gentlemen to be
held in Castle-guard, with this condition to be in readiness with certain
numbers of men for defense of the same: which service notwithstanding at this
day is redeemed with a yearly payment of money. Castleguard changed.
For, when Sir Hubert de Burgh was Constable of this Castle, (to use the words
of an old writer) he weighed with himself that it was not safe for the Castle
to have every month new warders for the Castle guard, procured by the assent
It is written, that Phillip surnamed Augustus King of France, when Lewis his
son, went about to gain the Crown of England, had won certain Cities and
Forts, and could not get this, being manfully defended by the said Sir Hubert
de Burgh: said thus. Verily my son has not one foot of land in England,
until he be Master of Dover Castle: as being in very deed the strongest hold
of all England and most commodious for the French. Upon the other cliffe which
stands over against it, and bears up his head, in manner, even with it, are
extant the remains of a very ancient building. One, I know not upon what
reason Caesar's Altar. But John Twin of Canterbury a learned old man, who in his
youth saw a great part thereof standing whole and entire, assured me, that it
had been a Watch-towre to give night light and direction to ships. Like as
there stood another opposite unto it at Bologne in France, erected thereby the
Romans, and long after reedified by Charles the Great (as Regino witnesses, in
whom Phanum, for Pharum, is falsely read, which at this day the French term
Tour de Order, and the English, The old man of Bullen. Under this cliffe, Henry
the Eighth, in our fathers days with exceeding labor, and 63000. pounds
charges, by pitching huge posts fast within the very sea, and the same bound
together with iron work, and heaping thereupon a deal of timber and stones,
brought up a mighty Pile which we call, The Peer, wherein the ships might
more safely ride. But the furious violence of the raging Ocean soon overcame
the laudable endeavor of that puissant Prince, and so the frame of this work
beaten continually upon with the waves, became dis-joyned. For the repair
whereof, Queen Elizabeth laid out a great sum of money, and the Authority
of Parliament imposed upon every English ship that carry forth or bring in
merchandise a certain toll upon Tonneage for certain years.

This Sea coast of Britain is separated from the Continent of Europe by a
frete or straight, where, as some suppose the Seas brake in and made way
between the lands. Solinus calls it Fretum Gallicum, Tacitus, and Ammianus
Macellinus, Fretum Oceani, and Oceanum Fretalem, Gratius the Poet:
The narrow Seas on Bollen-coast that keep uncertain tides.


They of the Netherlands call it Dehofden, The streight^ of Calais or narrow
seas.
of the two heads or promontories; we the Narrow-sea, and The strait of Calais,
as the Frenchmen, Pas de Callais. For, this is the place as says a Poet of our
time.

-- gemini qua janua ponti
Faucibus angustis, lateque frementibus undis
Gallorum Anglorumque vetat concurrere terras.
Where current of two seas
In gullet straight, wherein throughout, their billows rage and fret

The narrow sea, as Marcellinus truly writes, swells at every tide with
terrible high floods, and again at the ebb, becomes as flat as a plain
field: if it be not raised with winds, and counter seas between two risings of
the moon it flows twice and ebbeth as often. For, as the Moon ascends
toward the Meridian, and is set again under the Horizon in the just opposite
point, the Ocean here swells mightily, and the huge billows Rhutupinaque
littora fervent. And Rhutup shore does boil and billow, and D. Paulinus, where
he speaks of the County of Bulloigne, which he terms the utmost skirt of
the world, not without cause used these words, Oceanum barbaris fluctibus
frementem, that is, The Ocean raging and roaring with barbarous billows.

Here might arise a question beseeming a learned man that has wit and time at
will, Whether Britanie was in time past joined unto France.
whether, where this narrow sea runs between France and Britain now, there
was a narrow bank or neck of land that in times past conjoined these regions,
and afterward being broken either by the general deluge, or by rushing in of
the waves, Pythagoras in Ovid says thus: Vidi ego quod quondam fuerat
solidissima tellus
Esse fretum; vidi factas ex aequore terras.
My self have seen maine ground sometime turned into sea and sand,
And seen I have again the Sea, became maine settled land.


Strabo gathering of things to come by those that are past, concluded that such
Isthmi, necks, or narrow banks of land, both have been, and shall be
wrought and pierced through. You see, says Seneca, whole regions violently
removed from their places, and now to lie beyond the Sea, which lay before
bounding upon it and hard by. You see, there is separation made both of
Countries and nations, when as some part of nature is provoked of it self: or
when the mighty wind beats strongly upon some sea: the force whereof, as in
general, is wonderful. For, although it rage but in part, yet it is of the
universal power that so it rages. Thus has the sea rent Spain from the
Continent of Afric: Thus by Deucalions flood so much spoken of by the
greatest Poets, was Sicilie out from Italy. And hereupon Virgil wrote thus,
Haec loca vi quondam, and vasta convulsa ruina
(Tantum aevi longinqua valet mutare vetustas)
Dissiluisse ferunt, cum protinus utraque tellus
Vna foret, venit medio vi pontus and undis,
Hesperium Siculo latus abscidit, arvaque and urbes
Littore diductas angusto interluit aestu.
These lands whilom by violence of breach and ruins great,
(Such change makes time, and what is it that long time does not eat?)
A sunder fell (men say) where as they both in one did grow,
The Seas brake in by force, and through the mids did overthrow
Both towns and grounds. And Italy forthwith from Sicily side,
Did cut, and them with inlet straight does still part and divide.


Pliny shows likewise of Isles, that Cyprus was rent from Syria, Eubaea,
from Baeotia, Besbicus, from Bythinia, being parts before of the maine land:
But none of the old writers was ever able to avouch, that Britain was so
severed from the Maine: only those verses of Virgil and Claudian before cited
by me in the very first entrance into this work, together with the conjecture
of Servius Honoratus do insinuate so much. And yet, Dominicus Marius Niger,
and Master John Twin a right learned man, and whosoever he was that wrested
these verses made of Scicilia, unto Britain, are of this opinion: -- Britannia
quondam
Gallorum pars una fuit, sed pontus and aestus
Mutavere situm, rupit confinia Nereus
Victor: and abscissos interluit aequore montes.
-- Some time was Britannie
A part of France. But swelling tides on hie
Have changed the site; and Nereus he, as Conqueror has torn
The confines quite, and runs between the cliffs a sounder worn.


Considering therefore, that in this matter there is no assured ground upon
certain authority; the learned, by laying and comparing the like examples in
such narrow Seas as this, for searching out of the truth; propose these and
such like points duly to be weighed and considered.

First, whether the nature of the soil in both shores be the same; which
verily is

Secondly, How great the breadth is of the sea or straight. Certes, the
straight here is not much broader, than either the straight of Gibraltar, or
of Scicily: to wit, twenty four miles over: so as at the first sight, one
would imagine that these lands were severed by the billows of the raging
counter-seas. For that the land sunk downward by earthquakes, I hardly dare
think, seeing that this our Northen climate of the world is seldom shaken
with earthquakes, and those when they happen, be never great.



Fourthly, Of what nature the ground is in the bothoms, stony, sandy, beachy,
or else oasy, and muddy. And whether there be beds or shelves of sand lying
scattered in the said narrow sea? I have learned of Sailers that there lies
but Frowen shoale.
one bank, and the same in the very mid-channell, which at a low water is
scarce 3. fathom deep, But within half a league to the Southward it is 27.
fathom deep, and to the Northward 25.

Rhegium which stands upon the Sicilian Straight, is named of the Greek word
(...) that is, to break, because in that place, by the violent force of waves
Sicilie was broken off from Italy. But thinking, as I do hereof, I can meet
with none, unless one would suppose that Vitsan upon the French shore, had the
name from Gwith, which in the Welsh.
British tongue betokens a division or separation.

They that would have Britain to have been the very continent of Gaul after
that universal deluge, argue from the wolves, whereof there were many among us
in old time, like as at this day in Scotland and Ireland.

Saint Augustine, De Civitate Dei lib. 16. c. 7.
but unto it he answers thus, Wolves and other beasts may be thought to have
swome over the sea unto Islands, yet only to near adjoining Islands ( as stags
yearly for their relief and food swim out of Italy into Cicily). But some
Isles there be so far remote from maine lands, that it is to be thought no
beast could swim over. If it should be said, men caught them and so brought
them over with them, it carries some credit, that this might well have been
for the delight they had in hunting. Although it cannot be denied but by the
commandment or permission of God even by the work of Angels they Let the
earth bring forth a living soul, then it appears much more evidently, that
all kind of living creatures were in the Arc, not so much for the increase and
reparation of them, as to As a type of the Gentiles calling.
figure out sundry Nations for the sacrament of the church, in case the earth,
brought forth many creatures in those Islands, whereto they can not pass. Thus
Philosophizeth he. Neither is any man able upon this argument to pronounce any
thing more sufficiently and exquisitely. For me, it may suffice, that I have
propounded thereof, let the Reader thoroughly weigh and examine it. And he that

Morini.
On the other side in the Firme-land, inhabited the MORINI, so called in the
ancient Gauls tongue, as it were Maritimi, sive Maris accolae, men dwelling
upon the Seacoast, or hard by the sea. Their country is now termed Conto de
Guines, and Conte de Bolonois, and had in old time two places of very great
name, to wit GESSORIACVM, and ITIVM, That is from Itius Portus.
whence, as Caesar has recorded, there was the best and most commodious
passing out of Gaul or France into Britain, and most Authors think it was
that town which now they call Callais. But that famous and learned man
Hospitalius, Callais is no ancient town, but was only a small village, such as
the Frenchmen term Burgados, until that Philip Earl of Bolen, walled it
about, not very many years before the English won it. Neither is it red in any
place, that men took shipping there for Britain, before those times. I think
therefore that Itium is to be sought some where else: that is to say, below,
at Vitsan, near unto Blackness, which we call Whitsan, the word sounding not
much unlike to Itium. For, that all men crossed over out of this Island thither,
and embarked there to sail hither, we observed out of our own histories: in
so much as certain lands were held in Coperland near Dover by service to hold
the Kings head between Dover and Whit-sand when soever he crossed the Sea
Lewis the younger French King when he came in devout pilgrimage to visit Thomas
of Canterbury, The shortest passage between France and Britain.
besought that saint by way of most humble intercession, that no passenger
might miscarry by shipwreck between Vitsan and Dover; as who would say, that
at the same time, that was the usual passage to and fro: neither in truth, is
this narrow sea else where more straightened: although it is to be supposed,
that they who fail between, in passing over did not respect the nearer way
and shorter cut in sailing, but the commodiousnesse of the havens in the one
shore, and the other. For even so, albeit the sea be narrowest, between
Blackness in France, and the Nesse in England, yet now the ordinary passing is
between Dover and Callais: as in former ages, before that Vitsan haven was
dammed up, the passage was between Dover: and before that time, between
Rhutupiae and Gessoriacum: From whence Claudius the Emperor and the other
captains, whom I have spoken of, sailed over into Britain. Gessoriacum.
This GESSORIACVM, Pliny seems to call. Portum Morinorum Britannicum,
peradventure for the passage from thence into Britain Ptolomee, in whom it
has crept into the place of Itium, names it Gessoriacum Navale, in which
signification also our Welsh Britans commonly term it Bowling-long, that is,
Boloine the ship-road.

For that Gessoriacum was the very same Seacoast town, which Ammianus calls
BONONIA, Tabula Pentegeriana, now set forth by M. Welser. Bonania Galliae.
the Frenchmen Bologne, the Low Country men Beunen, and we Bolen, I dare be
bold to aver and maintain against Hector Boethius, and Turnebus: Beatus
Rhenanus, who saw an ancient military Map, wherein was written Gessoriacum quod
nunc Bononia, that is, Gessoriacum, now called Bolen: and also upon Itinerarie
computation, or account of the miles, which answers just to the distance that
Antonine the Emperor has put down betvveene Ambiani and Gessoriacum. But,
that which may serve in steed of all proofs.

The rablement of Pirates serving under Carausius, which the Panegirick
Oration, pronounced unto Constantius the Emperor, Page 272. in Basil edition
and page 251.
reported to have been enclosed and shut up within the walls of Gessoriacum
and there surprised: an other Oration unto Constantius Maximus his son,
relates to have been vanquished at Bononia: so Bononia, that is, Bolen, and
Gessoriacum must needs be one and the self same place: and it may seem, that
the more ancient name was worn out much about that time. For it is not to be
surmised, that so grave authors unto the great Princes erred in the setting
down and naming of this place, the memory thereof being then so fresh, and
that victory so glorious. But, what have I to do with France? Calais and Bolen
from the French. And as for Bolen, they rendered it back again at the humble
request of the French King after eight years, for a sum of money agreed
upon. But Callais they held 212. year in despite and maugre of the French.
Now return we to Britain with full sails and a favorable tide.

From ( Dover, leaving the little Abbey of Bradsole dedicated to S. Radegund,
whereof Hugh the first Abbat was founder) there runs for five miles in length
a continued Folkstone: which was a flourishing place in times past, as may
appear by the pieces of Roman coin and Britain brickes daily there found:
but under what name, it is uncertain. Probable it is, that it was one of those
towers or holds which in the reign of Theodosius the younger, the Romans
placed for to keep off the Saxons, as Gildas says, At certain distances along
the shore, in the South part of Britain.

Famous it was and much frequented by the English Saxons, for religions sake,
by reason of a Monastery that Eanswide daughter to Eadbald King of Kent
consecrated there unto Nuns: But now it is a small town, and the greatest
part thereof the Sea has, as it were, parted away. Howbeit, it was the Baronie
of the Family de Abrincis, Aurenches: From whom it came to Sir Hamon Crevequer,
and by his daughter to Sir John of Sandwich, whose grand child Julian by his
son John, brought the same as her dowry to John Segrave.

From thence, as the shore turns a front South Westward Sandgate Castle,
built by King Henry the Eighth defends the coast, and upon a Castle hill
thereby are seen relics of an ancient Castle. More inward is Saltwood a
Castle of the Bishops of Canterbury which William Courtney Archbishop of
Canterbury enlarged. And near unto it is Often-hanger, where Sir Edward
Poinings Baneret a father of many fair bastards, L. Poinings by King Henric
the Eighth.
and amongst them of Thomas Lord Poining Lieuftenant of Bollen, began to build
a stately house but left it unperfect when death had bereft him of his only I.
Scot his neighbor at Scots-Hall: where the family of Scots has lived in
worshipful estimation a long time, as descended from Pashely, and Serteaux by
Pimpe. But to return to the seacoast: Hith.
near to Sandgate, Hith is situated, one of the Cinque ports, whereof it
assumed that name, which in the English Saxons tongue signifies an haven or
harbor: although hardly it maintains that name now, by reason of sands, and
the Sea withdrawing it self from it. And yet it is not long since it first
made any show, and that by the decay and fall of Westhyth, a neighbour-towne
Westward, and which was sometime a Port, until the Sea in our great
grandfathers days retired from it. So are Seatownes subject to the uncertain
vicissitude of the Sea.

Hith, like as West-Hith also, had their beginning from the ruin of Lime
standing hard by, which in times past was a most famous Port town, until the
sands that the Sea casts up, had choked and stopped the haven. Both, Antonine
and the book of Norrices called it PORTVS LEMANIS, Ptolomee (...) which being
in Greek a significative word, the Copiantes, or Copiers out of old books,
because they would seem to supply the defect, wrote it (...) and the Latin
Interpreters following them translated it Novus portus, that is, New port, or
New haven: whereas, the proper name of the place was Limen or Leman, like as at
this time Lime. Here the Captain over a company or band of Turnacenses, kept
his station under the Count or Lieuftenant of the Saxon shore. And a Port way
paved with stone, called Stonystreet, Castle adjoining hard unto it, now named
Stutfall, which in the side and descent of a pretty hill, took up about ten
acres of ground in compass: and the relics of the wall remain still of
British brick and flint so close laid and couched together with a kind of
strong mortar made of lime, sand and pibles, that as yet time has not given it
the check: and now, although it be not an haven town, yet it retains still
no small show of the ancient dignity it Warden of the Cinque Ports at a place
called Shipway uses to take his solemn oath, when he first enters into his
office, and here, upon certain set days, the custom was to decide causes
between the inhabitants of the said Ports.

Some have thought, that in this place a great river discharged it self into
the sea, for that one or two writers have made mention of the river Leman, and
the mouth of Leman, at which the Danes Fleet in the year of our salvation 892.
arrived. But I suppose they are deceived in the description of the place, both
because there is no river here, but a very small one, which straight ways
being of no reckoning at all Archdeacon of Huntingdon, a compendious author,
and of good approved credit writes, that the said fleet arrived at the Haven
Leman, and says not a word of the river. Unless a man would think, (with
whom I dare not accord) that the river Rother, which intermingleth it self
with the Ocean under Rhieine, ran down this way, and changed his course by
little and little, when that champian plain called Rumney Marsh, grew unto the
firm land.

For,Rumney Marsh.
this Marsh-country, (which from Lime contains 14. miles in length, and 8. in
breadth, and reckons two towns, nineteen parishes, and 44200. acres or there
about, by reason of rank green grass most convenient for the grasing and
feeding of beasts), has been by little and little laid unto the land by the
benefit of the sea. Seas-gift, like as Herodotus called Egypt, the gift of the
river Nilus, and a very Petrus Nannius.
learned man termed the pastures of Holland, the gifts of the North Wind and
the river Rhene. For, the sea to make amends yielded that again in this place
(which it swallowed up else where in this coast) either by retyring back, or
by laying oze thereto from time to time: as some places which in the
remembrance of our grandfathers, lay close unto the sea shore, are now
dis-joyned a mile or two from the sea. How fruitful the soil is, what a number
of herds of cattle it feeds, that are sent thither from the furthest parts
of Wale, and England to be fatted; what art and cunning is used in making of
banks to fence it, against the violent risings of the sea, one would hardly
believe, that has not seen Sewers were made in the time of King Henry the
third. And King Edward the fourth ordained, that it should be a Corporation,
consisting of a Bailive, Iurates, and the Communalty. In the Saxons time the
inhabitants thereof were called (...), that is, Viri palnstres.
Marshmen: and verily the signification of that name accords passing well
with the nature of the place. Neither can I understand and conceive that
ancient writer Aethelward, when he reports, 795.
That Cinulph King of the Mercians wasted Kent, and the country which is called
Mersc-warum. And in another place, That Herbyth a Captain was by the Danes
beheaded in a place named Mersc-warum, if he meant not this very Marsh-country,
Rumney, Rumney.
or Romeney, and in former time Romenal, which some conjecture by the name to
Marsh, and one of the Cinque Ports, whereof Old Romeney and Lid are accounted
members, which jointly were charged with the setting forth of five ships of
war, in that manner and form, as I have before said. It is seated upon an
hill of gravel and sand, and had on the West side an haven of good receipt and
commodious withal, for most of the winds; before the sea withdrew it self
from it. Domes-day Book.
The inhabitants, as we read in King William the Conquerours book, were in
regard of their sea service, quitte and quiet from all custom, beside for The
penalties for these offenses.
robbery, peace-breach and Foristell. And in those days it flourished with the
best; For it was divided into twelve wards, it had also five Parish-churches,
it had a Priorie, and an Hospital for sick persons: But in the reign of
Edward the first, Promhil a pretty town well frequented: 1287.
it made the Rother also forsake his old channel, which here before time
emptied himself into the sea, and stopped his mouth, opening a new and nearer
way for him to pass into the sea by Rhie: So as by little and

Beneath this, the land tending more Eastward makes a Promontory, (we call it
the Nesse, as it were a nose) before which lies a dangerous flat in the sea,
and upon which stands Lid a town well inhabited: whereunto the inhabitants
of Promhill after that inundation aforesaid betook themselves. Lid.
And in the very utmost point of this Promontory which the people call
Denge-nesse, Dnagenesse.
where there is nothing but beach and pible stones, Hulver or Holy-trees Ilices.
Holme-trees grow plentifully with their sharp prickey leaves always green,
in manner of underwood, for a mile and more. Among the said beach near unto
Ston end is to be seen an heap of greater stones, which the neighbor
Inhabitants call Saint Cryspins, and Crispinians tomb, whom they report to
have been Rother-Mouth, by which for some space Kent is divided from Sussex.

The course of this river on Sussex side we have in part briefly spoken of
before. On Kent side it has Newenden, which I almost parswade my self was
that haven so long sought for, and which the book Notitia Provinciaru^ called
ANDERIDA, the old Britains Caer Andred, Anderida. Andredceaster.
and the Saxons (...): first, because the Inhabitants wood Andredswald, that
took the name of it; lastly, because the English-Saxons seem to have termed
it Brittenden, that is, The Britans Vale, (as they called also Segontium an
ancient town of the Britans of which we spoke before): whence the whole
Hundred adjoining is named Selbrittenden. The Romans for to defend this coast
against the Saxon rovers, placed here the band of the Abulci with their
Captain: Afterward being taken by the English Saxons it decayed quite. For,
Hengist being fully determined to rid all the Britans out of Kent, and thinking
it would much avail him to increase his troops and bands with greater forces
of his own nation, called forth Aella out of Germany with a strong power of
English Saxons, and while he gave the assault unto this Anderida by violence,
the Britans out of the wood hard by, where they lay in ambushments, chased him
so, that at length after many losses on both sides given and taken, when he had
parted his army and both discomfited and put to flight the Britans in the wood,
and also at the same time forced the town, by assaults; his barbarous heart
was so enflamed with desire of revenge, that he put the Inhabitants to the
sword and razed the town even to the ground. The place lying thus desolate,
was showed, (as Henry of Huntingdon says,) to those that passed by many ages
after. Until the Friars Carmelites newly come out from Mount Carmell in the
Holiland, Priory in the time of King Edward the first, at the charges of Sir
Thomas Albuger Knight: and so straight ways there rose up a village, which in
regard of the old town overthrowen, began to be called Newenden, that is, The
New town in the vale. I saw nothing there now, but a mean village with a poor
Church, and a wodden bridge to no great purpose for a ferry is in most use,
since that the river Rother, not containing himself in his channel has
overlaied, and is like to endanger and surround the level of rich lands
thereby. Whereupon the inhabitants of Rhie complain, that their haven is not
scoured by the stream of Rother as heretofore, and the owners here suffer
great loss: which Oxeney do fear, if it were remedied, would fall upon them.
This is a river-isle ten miles about, Oxeney.
encompassed with the river Rother dividing his streams, and now brackish;
having his name either of mire, which our ancestors called Hox, or of Oxen,
which it feeds plentifully with rank grass. Opposite to this is Appledore,
Appledore.
where a confused rabble of Danish and Norman Pirates, which under the conduct
of one Hasting had sore annoied the French coasts, laden with booties landed,
and built a Castle: whom notwithstanding King Aelfred by his valor enforced to
accept conditions of peace.

Vp-land hence, and from Nawenden I saw (which I should have before remembered)
Cranbroke and Tenterden good clothing towns, Sisingherst.
Sisingherst a fair house of the family of Bakers advanced by Sir John Baker
not long since Chancellor of the Exchequer, and his marriage with a daughter
and heir of Dingley, Bengebury.
Bengebury an habitation of the ancient family of Colpepper, Homsteed.
and near adjoining Hemsted a mansion of the Guildfords, an old family, but
most eminent since S. John Guilford was Controuler of the house to king Edward
the Fourth. Guildford.
For his son and heir S. Richard Guildford was by king Henry the seventh
made knight of the Garter. Of his sons again Sir Edward Guildford was
Marshall of Callais, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, and Jane Duchess of
Northumberland, wife to Sir I. Dudley Duke of Northumberland, mother to the
late Earls of Warwick, and Leicester, and Sir Henry was chosen Knight of the
Garter by King Henry the Eight, and had his Arms enobled with a Canton of
Granado by Ferdinand king of Spain for his worthy service in that Kingdom
when it was recovered from the Moors, and Edward, lived in great esteem at
home. To be brief from the said Sir John are issued by females immediately the
Darells of Cale-hill, Gages, Brownes of Beechworth, Walsinghams, Cromers,
Isaacs, and Iseleies, families of prime and principal note in these parts. But
now I digress and therefore crave pardon.

In the parishes heere-about the commendable trade of clothing was first set
up Flemings into England in the tenth year of his reign to teach our men that
skill of Draperie, or weaving and making woollen cloth, which is justly counted
at this day one of the Stays that support our common Weal. Thus much of Kent,
which (to conclude summarily) has this part last spoken of for Draperie, the
Isle of Tenet and the East parts for the Granarie, the Weald for the wood,
Rumney Marsh for the meddow-plot, the North downs toward the Thames for the
Conny-garthe, Kentish capons.
Tenham and thereabout for an Orchard, and Head-Corne for the brood and
poultrey of fat, big, and commended capons.

Earls of Kent.
As for the Earls, omitting the English Saxons Godwin, and Leofwin his brother,
Odo half brother by the mothers side to King William the Conqueror, and
Bishop of Baieux, was the first Earl of Kent, of the Norman blood: a man, by
nature of a bad disposition and busy head, bent always to sow sedition and to
trouble the State. Whereupon he was committed to prison by a subtle
distinction, as Earl of Kent, and not Bishop of Baieux in regard of his holy
orders; and afterward for a most dangerous rebellion which he had raised, he
was by his nephew King William Rufus deprived of his places of dignity, lost
all his goods in England and abjured the Realm. Afterward, King Stephen who
as an Intruder reaped the revenewes and Commodities of the Crown of England,
that he might bind by benefits martial men to Ipres a Fleming to that honor:
who being, as Fitz-Stephen calls him; Violentus Cantij incubator, that is,
the violent over-pressor of Kent, was forced by King Henry the second to
depart, sheading many tears and so became a monk, Henry likewise the son
of King Henry the second, whom his father had crowned King, rebelling against
his father, gave in like respect the title of Kent unto Philip Earl of
Flanders. But this Philip was Earl of Kent in title only and by promise. For,
as Gervase of Canterbury writes, Philip Earl of Flanders undertook to the
uttermost of his power for to aid the young King, doing him homage and binding
himself with an oath; unto whom the said King promised in reward of his
service the Not many years after, Hubert de Burgh, having done notable good
service unto the State, received as it were, by due desert the same honor at
the hands of King Henry the Third: who also made him chief Justice of
England. This Hubert was a man who unfainedly loved his Country, and amidst
the storms of frowning Edward the Second. Who bestowed it upon his younger
brother Edmund of Woodstocke, An. 15. E. 2.
who being Tutor of his nephew Edward the Third, falling into the tempest of
false, injurious, and malignant envy was beheaded, for that he never
dissembled his natural brotherly affection toward his brother deposed, and
went about when he was (God wot) murdered before (not knowing so much) to
enlarge him out of prison; persuaded thereunto by such as covertly practiced
his destruction. He had two sons Edmund, and John, who were restored by
Parliament to blood and land shortly after. And with all, it was inacted that
no Peer of the land, or other that procured the death of the said Earl should
be empeached therefore, than Mortimer Earl of March, Sir Simon Beresford,
John Matravers, Baious, and John Devoroil. So these his two sons succeeded in
order, and when they were both dead without issue, their sister Ioane, who
survived them, (for her lovely beauty called The Fair maid of Kent) brought
this honor unto the house of the Hollands. For Sir Thomas Holland her husband
was styled Earl of Kent, and she after married by dispensation to the Black
Prince heir to him King Richard the Second. Her son Sir Thomas Holland
succeeded in that honorable title, who died in the twentieth year of King
Richard the Second. Thomas and Edmund. Thomas who also was created Duke of
Surry, and forthwith for complotting a conspiracy against King Henry the
Fourth lost his head, leaving no child: Edmunds his brother being Lord High
Admiral of England, Saint Brieu.
was wounded at the assault of Saint Brieu in little Britan, and died thereof
in the year of Salvation 1408. leaving likewise no issue. Now when this
dignity was expired, in this family of the Hollands, their glass being run
out, and the Patrimony parted among Edmund sisters; King Edward the Fourth
honored with the title of the Earldome of Kent, The Walsingham.
First Sir William Nevill Lord Fauconberg: and after his death, Edmund Lord
Gray of Ruthin, Hastings and Weisford, and who had to succeed him George his
son. He of Anne Widevile his George by his second wife Katherine, daughter
to William Herbert Earl of Pembrooke, was father of Sir Henry Gray of Wrest
knight, whose grand-sonne Reginald, by his son Henry, Queen Elizabeth in
the year 1571. advanced to the Earledom of Kent. And after his decease without
issue, his brother Henry succeeded, a right honorable personage and endued
with the ornaments of true nobility.

This province has parishes. 398.

DOBVNI.
HItherto we have walked over all those Countries that lie between the British
Ocean of the one side, and the Severne sea and river Thames on the other.
Thames and the salt water of Severne; and there view the DOBVNI, who in ancient
times inhabited those parts which now are termed Oxfordshire and
Gloucestershire. Duffin in the British tongue signifies low, deep, or flat.
This their name, I verily suppose came of Duffen a British word, because the
places where they planted themselves, were for the most part low and lying
under the hills, whereupon the name became Bathieia in Troas, Catabathmos in
Africa, and Deep-Dale in Britan took their names. I am the more easily induced
to believe this because I see, that Dio in the very same signification has
named certain people, Bodo what it signifies in British and French.
BODVNNI if the letters be not misplaced. For, Bodo or BODVN, (as Pliny says)
in the ancient French tongue, (which I have proved before was the same that in
the British language,) betokens Deep. Hence was it, that the City
Bodincomagus, as he writes, became so called, for that it stood where the
Padus.
Po was deepest hence had the people Bodiontij that name, who inhabited a deep
vale by the Lake of Lozanne, and Geneva, now called Val de Fontenay, to say
nothing of Bodotria the deepest Frith in all Britan. Concerning these Bodunj, I
have found in all my reading no matter of great antiquity, save only that A.
Plautius sent as Propraetor by Claudius into Britan, received part of them upon
their submission into his protection, to wit, those that were under
Cattuellani, (for they held the region bordering upon them) and as Dio has
recorded, about the

But when the English Saxons reigned in Britan, and the name of Dobuni was
worn out, some of these, as also the people dwelling round about Wiccij: but
whereupon, I dare scarce venture to guess, without craving leave of the
Reader. Yet, if Wic in the Saxons tongue sounds as much as the Or Cove.
creek, or reach of a river, and the Viguones, a nation in Germany are so
called, because they dwell near unto the creekes or baies of the Sea, and of
rivers, (for so does Beatus Rhenanus constantly affirm) It will be no
absurdity, Wiccii.
if I derive our Wiccii from thence, Severne, which is very full of such Coves
and small creekes and reaches.

GLOCESTRLAE Comitatus olim seeds DOBVNORUM


GLOUCESTERSHIRE.
Gloucestershire, in the Saxon tongue (...), which Dobuni, on the West Side
butteth upon on Monmouth-shire and Hereford-shire, on the North upon
Worcestershire, on the East upon Warwickshire, Oxfordshire and Barck-shire,
on the South upon Wilt-shire and Somersetshire both. A pleasant country and a
fruitful, stretching out in length, from North-east unto South-west. The part
that lies more Eastward, rising up in height with hills and wolds is called
Cotteswold: the middle part settleth down low to a most fertile plain, and is
watered with Severne that noble river, which does infuse life, as it were, into
the soil. That part which bends more Westward on the further side of
Severne, is all over be spread with woods. But what mean I to busy my self
herein? William Malmesbury will ease me of this labor, who fully gives high
commendations to this country. Have therefore what he writes in his book of
Bishop; The country (says he) is called of the principal City: The vale of
Gloucester. the ground throughout yields plenty of corn, and brings forth
abundance of fruits: the one through the natural goodness only of the
ground, the other through diligent manuring and tillage; in so much, as it
would provoke the laziest body that is, to take pains, seeing that it
answers back again with the increase of an hundred fold, that which is
sown. Here may you see the high ways and common lanes clad with apple trees
and peare-trees, not set nor graffed by the industry of man's hand, but growing
naturally of their own accord. The ground Vines and wine.
so plentiful in increase, and so pleasant in taste. The very wines thereof
made, affect not their mouths that drink of them with any unpleasing
tartness, as being little inferior in sweetness and odor to the French
wines. The houses in it are almost innumerable, the Churches passing fair, and
the towns standing very thick. But that which adds unto all these good
gifts a special glory is the river Severne, Severn.
than which there is not any one in this land, for channel broader, for
stream swifter, for fish better stored. There is in it a daily rage and fury
of the waters, which I Higra.
and so cutting through the midst of it, check and avoid the violence
thereof.

But that which he says of the hundred fold increase and yield of the ground,
does not hold true. Neither for all that, would I think with these whining and
Columella takes up for it, that the soil is now wearied and become barren
with too much fruitfulness and over-free bearing in former ages. Howbeit
hereby, if I should say nothing of other things, it is to be seen, that we
have no cause to wonder, why many places in this country and elsewhere in
England are called Vine-yards, seeing it has affoorded wine; and surely it may
seem to proceed rather of the Inhabitants idleness than any distemperature
and indisposition of the air; that it yields none at this day. But why in
some places within this Country, as we read in our

Forest of Deane.
The part, that lies more West beyond Severne, (which the Silures in old time
possessed) along the river Vaga or Wye, that parts England and Wales, was
wholly Deane-forrest: The Latin writers some name it of the Danes Danica Sylva
the Danes wood others with Girald, the Wood of Danubia. But I would think, if
it had not this name of Dean a little town adjoining, that by short cutting
the word, Arden.
it was called Deane, for Arden. Which term both Gauls and Britans in ancient
times may seem to have used for a wood, considering that two mighty great
woods, the one in that part of Gaul called Gallia Belgica, and the other among
us in Warwickshire, are by one and the self same name termed Arden. For, this
was a wonderful thick Forest, and in former ages so dark and terrible, by
reason of crooked and winding ways, as also the grisly shade therein, that it
made the inhabitants more fierce, and bolder to commit robberies. Henry the
sixth they so infested all Severne side with robbing and spoiling, that there
were laws made by authority of the Parliament, for to restrain them. Iron.
But since that rich Mines of Iron were here found out, those thick woods
began to wax thin by little and little. In this Forest, upon the foresaid
river stood Tudenham and Wollaston, two towns of good antiquity, which Walter
and Roger the brethren of Gislebert Lord of Clare wrested out of the Welch-mens
hands, about the year 1160. Lidney.
As also Lidney is adjoining to them, where Sir William Winter, Viceadmirall of
England, a renowned Knight for Sea-services (as his brother Arthur slain in
Orkeney-Isles) built a fair house. But the most ancient town of all others is
ABONE or AVONE, Abone.
mentioned by Antonine the Emperor in his Iourney-booke, Aventon: a small
town indeed, Aventon.
but standing upon Severne, just nine miles, as he writes, from VENTASILVRVM,
or Caer-went.

And seeing that Avon in the British tongue imports A River, it shall be no
strange thing, if we think it so called of the river: for in the very same
signification, (that I may omit the rest) we have Waterton, Bourne, and
Riverton: as the Latins had Aquinum and Fluentium. And I suppose the rather,
that it took name of the river, because people were wont at this place to
ferry over the river, whereupon the town standing over against it, is by
Antonine called TRAIECTVS, that is, a passage or ferry: but without doubt, the
number in that place set down, is corrupted. For Trajectus.
whereas the river is scarce three miles broad. It may seem then to have been
utterly decayed, or turned rather into a village, either when as passengers
began to ferry over below, or when Athelstane thrust out the Welsh Britans from
hence. For, he was the first that drove them, as William of Malmesbury
witnesses, beyond the river Wye. And where as before his time, Severne was the
bound, between the English and Welshmen, he appointed Wye to be the limit
confining them both: Whence our Necham writes thus.

Inde vagos vaga Cambrenses, hinc respicit Anglos.
To Wales on this side, looks Wie,
On that again, our England he does eye.
S. Breulais.
Not far from Wye amongst blind by-ways beset with thick plumps of trees,
appears Breulis Castle more than half fallen down, remarkable for the death
of Mahel youngest son of Miles, Earl of Hereford. For there, his greedy
devises, bloody cruelty, and covetousness ready to pray upon other men's
estates (for which vices Girald has written, being entertained guest-wise by
Sir Walter Clifford in this Castle, when the house was all on a light fire, he
was killed with a stone that from the top of an high Turret fell upon his head
and brained him.

Neither have I any thing else to be recounted in this wood-countrey beside
Newnham a pretty mercate, and Westbury thereby a seat of the Bainhams of
ancient descent: But that Herbert who had wedded the sister of the said Mahel
Earl of Hereford, in her right was called Lord of Deane from whom that Noble
house of the Herberts fetches their pedigree, out of which family came the
Lords of Blanleveney, and of late days, Herberts Earls of Huntingdon and
Pembroch, with others. From hence also, if we may believe David Powell in his
history of Wales, was descended Antonie Fitz-Herbert, whose great learning and
industry in the wisdom of our law, both the judicial Court of Flees,
wherein he sat Justice a long time, and also those exact books of our common
law by him exquisitely penned and published, do sufficiently witness. But
other have drawn his descent and that more truly, if I have insight therein,
from the race of the Fitz-Herberts Knights in Derby shire.

The river Severn, Severne.
called by the Britains HAFFREN, after it has run a long course with a
channel somewhat narrow, no sooner enters into this shire, but entertaineth
the river Avon, and another brook coming from the East. Betwixt which, is
seated Tewkesbury, Tewkesbury.
in the Saxon tongue (...), by others Theoci Curia, taking the name from one
Theocus who there did lead an Eremites life. It is a great and fair town,
having three bridges to pass over, standing upon three rivers, famous for
making of Woollen cloth, Mustard.
and the best mustard; which for the quick heat that it has, biteth most and
pierces deepest: but most famous in times past by reason of an ancient
Monastery which Dodo a man of great power in Mercia founded in the year 715,
where before time he kept his royal court, as is testified by this inscription
which there remained long after.

HANC AVLAM REGIAM DODO DVX CONSECRARI

THIS ROIAL PALACE DVKE DODO CAVSED TO BE CONSECRATED FOR A CHVRCH.

And Odo his brother endowed the same, which being by continuance of time, and
the fury of enemies ruinated, Robert FITZ-HAIMON the Norman, Lord of Corboile
and Thorigny in Normandy reedified, translating monks from Cranborn in
Dorsetshire hither upon a devout mind verily and a religious, that he might
make some amends to the Church, for the loss that the Church of Baieux in
Normandy had sustained: William of Malmesbury) be easily reported, how highly
Robert Fitz-hamon exalted this Monastery, wherein the beauty of the buildings
ravished the eyes, and the charity of the Monks allured the hearts of such
folk as used to come thither, Within this both himself and his successors
Earls of Gloucester were buried: who had a Castle of their own called Holmes
hard by, which now is almost vanished out of sight. Neither is this town less
memorable for that battle, whereby the house of Lancaster received a mortal
wound: as wherein very many of their side in the year, 1471. were slain, more
taken prisoners and diverse beheaded, their power so weakened and their hopes
abated, especially Edward the only son of King Henry the sixth, a very child,
was there put to death, and in most shameful and villainous manner his brains
dashed out, as that never after they came unto the field against King Edward
the Fourth. In which respect, John Leland wrote of this town in this wise:
Ampla foro, and partis spoliis praeclara, Theoci
Curia, sabrinae qua se committit Avona
Fulget; nobilium sacrisque recondit in antris
Multorum cineres, quondam inclyta corpora bello.
Where Av'n and Severn meet in one, there stands a goodly town.
For market great and pillage rich there won, of much renown,
Hight Tewkesburie: where noble men entombed many are,
Now gone to mould, who sometimes were redoubted Knights in war.


From thence we come to Deorhirst, which Bid speaks of, situate somewhat
low upon the bank of Severn, whereby it has great losses many times, when he
over-floweth his bounds. It had in it sometimes a little Monastery, which
being by the Danes overthrown flourished again at length under Edward the
Confessor; who, as Testament, assigned The religious place at Deorhirst and the
government thereof to Saint Denis near unto Paris. Yet, a little while after,
as William of Malmesbury says, It was but a vain and void representation of
antiquity. Over against it lies a place half encompassed in with Severne,
called in the Saxon tongue (...), and Alney, now the Eight, that is, The Island:
Famous, by the reason of this occurrence, that when both the Englishmen and the
Danes were much weakened with continual encounters, to make a final dispatch
at once of all quarrels, the Fortune and destiny of both nations was committed
to Edmund King of the English, and to Canutus King of the Danes, who in this
Island by a single combat tried it out, unto whether of them the right of this
Realm should belong. But after they had fought and given over on even Edmund
was dispatched out of the way not without suspicion of poison, Canutus seized
into his own hands all England.

From Deorhirst Severne runs down by Haesfield which King Henry the Third
gave to Rich. Pauncefote, Pauncefote, or Pauncevolt. Placita 15. Edw. 1.
whose successors built a fair house here, and whose predecessors were
possessed of fair lands in this Country before, and in the Conquerours time
in Wiltshire making many reaches winding in and out, and forthwith dividing
himself to make a river Island most rich and beautiful in green meddowes, he
passes along by the head City of this Shire, which Antonine the Emperor
called CLEVVM and GLEVVM, the Britans term Caer Glovie, the English Saxons
(...), we Gloucester, the Vulgar sort of Latinists Glovernia, others
Claudiocestria, Emperor Claudius, as they imagine: who forsooth, should give
it this name, when he had bestowed here his daughter Genissa in marriage upon
Arviragus the Britan. Touching whom, Iuvenall writes thus, Regem aliquem
capies, vel de temone Britanno
Excidet Arviragus.
Some King (sure) thou shall prisoner take in chase or battle heat,
Or else Arviragus shall loose his British royal seat.


As though he had begat any other daughters of his three wives besides
Claudia, Antonia and Octavia; or as if Arviragus had been known in that age,
whose name was never heard of before Domitians time and scarce then. But, let
them go, that Ninnius, who writes, That it took the name from Glovus, the
great grandfathers father of King Vortigern; but that long before it, Antonine
had named it Glevum (which, both the Distance from Corinium and the name also
may prove.) But as the Saxon name Gleavecester came from Glevum, so Glevum
proportionably from the British, Caer Glow which I suppose sprung from the word
Glow, that in the British tongue signifies Fair and Goodly: so that Caer Glow
may be as much as to say, a fair City: In which signification also, the
Greeks had their Callipolis: Callidromos, Callistratia: the English men their
Brightstow, and Shirley, and in this very County Faireford, Faire-ley, etc.

This City was built by the Romans, and set, as it were upon the neck of the
Silures to yoke them. And there also was a Colonie planted to people it, which
they called COLONIA GLEVVM. For I have seen a fragment of antique stone in the
walls of Bath near unto the North-gate, with this Inscription.

Decurio.
DEC COLONIAE GLEV VIXIT ANN. LXXXVI. It lies stretched out in length over
Severne: on that side where it is not watered Englands Survey, were plucked
down for the rearing of this Castle. About which, Roger the son of Miles,
Constable of Gloucester went to law with King Henry the second: and his brother
Walter lost all the right and interest he had in this City and Castle, as
Robert de Mont has written. Ceaulin King of the West Saxons, was the first,
that about the year of our redemption 570. by force and arms wrested
Gloucester out of the Britans hands. After Mercians won it, under whom it
flourished in great honor, and Osricke King of Northumberland by permission of
Etheldred the Mercian, founded there a very great and stately Monastery for
Nuns, over whom Kineburg, Eadburg and Eve Queens of the Mercians were
Prioresses successively one after another. Edelfled also that most noble Lady
of the Mercians, adorned this City with a Church, wherein she her self was
buried, and not long after, when the Danes had spoiled and wasted the whole
country, 878.
those sacred Virgins were thrown out, and The Danes (as Aethelward that
ancient author writes) with many a stroke pitched poor cottages into the
city of Glenvcester. At which time, when those more ancient Churches were
subverted, Aldred Archbishop of York, and Bishop of Worcester erected another
for Monks which is now Deane and six Prebendaries. But the same in these late
precedent ages was newly beautified. For, John Hanley and Thomas Farley two
Abbats added unto it the Chapel of the blessed Virgin Mary: N. Morwent raised
from the very foundation the forefront, which is an excellent piece of work:
G. Horton an Abbat, adjoined to it the cross North-part; Abbat Trowcester a
most dainty and fine Cloister, and Abbat Sebrok an exceeding high fair
steeple. As for the South side, it was also repaired with the peoples offerings
at the Sepulcher of the unhappy King Edward the second, who lies here
enterred under a monument of Alabaster: and not far from him another Prince
as unfortunate as he, Robert Curt-hose, the eldest son of King William the
Conqueror Duke of Normandy within a wooden Robert Curt-hose.
who was bereft of the Kingdom of England for that he was borne before his
father was King, deprived of his two sons the one by strange death in the
New-forrest, the other dispoiled of the Earldom of Flanders his inheritance,
and slain; he himself dispossessed of the Dukedom of Normandy by his
brother King Henry the first, his eyes plucked out, and kept close prisoner 26.
years with all contumelious indignities until through extreme anguish he
ended his life. Above the quire, in an arch of this church, there is a wall
built in form of a semicircle full of corners, with such an artificial
device, that if a man speak with never so low a voice at the one part thereof,
and another lay his ear to the other being a good way distant, he may most
easily hear every syllable. In the reign of William Conqueror and before, it
may seem that the chiefest trade of the Citizens was to make Iron. For as we
find in the Domes-day-booke.
Survey book of England, the King demanded in manner no other tribute than
certain Icres of Iron, and Iron bars, for the use of the Kings Navy, and
some few Sextarios.
quarts of honey. After the coming in of the Normans, it suffered diverse
calamities: by the hands of Edward, King Henry the third his son; whiles
England was all on a smoke and cumbustion by the Barons war, it was spoiled;
and afterward by casualty of fire almost wholly consumed to ashes; but now
Hundreds, it is made a County, and called the County of the City of Gloucester.
Also within the memory of our fathers, King Henry the Eighth augmented the
state thereof with an Episcopal See, with which dignity in old time it had
been highly endowed, as Geffery of Monmouth avoucheth, and I will not derogate
ought from the credit of his assertion, considering that among the Prelates of
Britain the Bishop Cluviensis is reckoned, which name derived from Clevum or
Glow, does after a sort confirm and strengthen my conjecture, that this is
that Glevum, whereof Antonine makes mention.

Severne, having now left Gloucester behind it, and gathered his waters unto one
stream again, *
windeth it self by Elmore a Mansion house of the Gises, ancient by their own
lineall descent, Elmore.
being in elder times owners of Apsely-Gise near Brickhill: and from the
Beauchamps of Holt, who acknowledge Huber de Burgo Earl of Kent (whom I lately
mentioned) beneficious to them, and testify the same by their Armories. Lower
upon the same side Stroud a pretty river slideth into Severne out of Coteswold
by Stroud a Market town sometimes better peopled with Clothiers, and not far
from Minching-Hampton which anciently had a Nunnery, Minching.
or belonged to Nuns whom our ancestors named Minchings.

Now Severn waxing broader and deeper by reason of the alternative flowing and
Cam-bridge a little country town: where it receives Came a small rivelet: Over
the bridge whereof, when the Danes with rich spoils passed (as Aethelward
writes) Cam-bridge.
in battail-ray, the West Saxons and the Mercians received them with an hot
battle in Woodnesfield, where three of their Petty Kings were slain,
namely, Heatfden, Cinvil and Inguar.

*
On the same shore not much beneath, stands Barkley, in the Saxon-tongue
(...), Barkley* See Bristow in Somersetshire.
of great name for a most strong Castle, a Major, who is the Head Magistrate,
and especially for the Lords thereof descended from Robert-Fitz-Harding to
Barkely Hearnes. Out of this house are branched many Knights and Gentlemen of
signal note, and in the reign of King Henry the seventh flourished William
Lord Barkely, who was honored by King Edward the fourth with the style of
Viscount Barkely, by King Richard the third with the honor of Earl of
Nottingham (in regard of his mother daughter of Thomas Moubray Duke of
Norfolk, and Earl of Nottingham) and by King Henry the Seventh with the
office of Marshall of England, and dignity of Marquis Barkely. But for that he
died issuelesse, these his titles died together with him. If you be willing to
know by what a crafty fetch Goodwin Earl of Kent, a man most deeply pregnant
in devising how to do injury, got the possession of this place, you may read
these few lines out of Wall. Mapaeus, Barkley near unto Severn is a town of
500. pounds revenew. In it there was a Nunnery, and the Abbess over these
Nuns was a Noble woman and a beautiful. Goodwins fraudulent fetch.
Earl Goodwin by a cunning and subtle wile, desiring not her self, but hers,
as he passed that way, left with her a Nephew of his, a very proper and
beautiful young Gentleman (pretending that he was sickly) until he returned
back. Him he had given this lesson, that he should keep his bed and in no
wise seem to be recovered until he had got both her and as many of the Nuns
as he could with child as they came to visit him. De honestis, ^nustas.
And to the end that the young man might obtain their favor and his own full
purpose, when they visited him: the Earl gave unto him pretty rings and fine
girdles to bestow for favors upon them, and thereby to deceive but because she
her self (so says Doomes-day book,) would eat nothing that came out of this
Manor, for that the Nunnery was destroyed* he purchased for her Vdecester,
that thereof she might live, so long as she made her abode at Barkley.

Thus we see, a good and honest mind abhors whatsoever is evil gotten. How
King Edward the second being deposed from his Kingdom through the crafty
complotting and practice of his wife, was made away in the Castle here, by the
wicked subtlety of Adam Bishop of Hereford, who wrote unto his keepers these
few words without points between them: K. Edward the second murdered.
Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est: Historians, than look for at my
hands.

Beneath this Barkley, the little river Avon closely enters into the Sea, at
the head whereof scarce eight miles from the waterside, upon the hills near
Alderley a small town, Wilkes of stone or Shellfish ston^fied.
there are found certain stones resembling Coccles or Periwinckles and
Oysters: which, whether they have been sometimes living creatures, or the
gamesom sports of Nature, I leave it to Philosophers (that hunt after natures
works.) But Fracastorius the principal Philosopher in this our age; makes no
doubt, but that they were living creatures engendered in the Sea, and by waters
brought to the Shellfish stonified.
also that the sea flowed there where now hills do rise aloft: and that as
the said Sea retired the hills also were discovered. But this is out of my
race.

TRAIECTVS, that is, The ferry, whereof Antonine the Emperor makes mention
over against Abone, where they were wont to pass over Severne salt water by
boat, was in times past as I guess by the name, at Oldbury, which is by
interp^e^^tion, The Old Burgh: like as we do ferry, in these days at Aust, a
little town somewhat lower. This in ancient times was called Aust clive: for,
a great craggy cliffe it is endeed, mounting up a great height. And verily,
memorable is the thing which Mapaeus whom I spoke of writes to have been done
in this place. Edward the elder, says he, Lay at Austclive, and Leolin Prince
of Wales at Bethesley: now when Leolin would not come down to parley, nor
cross Severn, Edward passes over to Leolin; whom when Leolin saw and knew who
he was, he cast off his rich robe (for he had prepared himself to sit in
judgment) entered the water brest-high, and clasping the boat with an embrace,
said, Most wise and sage King, thy humility has overcome my insolency, and thy
wisdom triumphed over my folly: Come, get upon my neck which I have (fool
as I am) lifted up against thee, and so shall thou enter into that land, which
thy benign mildness has made thine own this day:) and after he had taken
him upon his shoulders, he would needs have him sit upon his roabe aforesaid,
and so putting his own hands jointly into his, did him homage. Upon the same
shore also is situate Thornebury, where are to be seen the Edward the last
Duke of Buckingham, was in hand to build, in the year of our Lord, (as the
engraving does purport) 1511. when he had taken down an ancient house which
Hugh Audeley E. of Gloucester had formerly built seven miles from hence, Avon
sheading it self into Severn running cross before it, makes a division
between Glocestershire, and Sommersetshire, and not far from the bank
thereof, Pucle-Church appears, Pucle-Kerkes, wherein Edmund King of England,
whiles he interposed himself between his Sewer, and one Leove a most vilanous
wretch, The Bradstones.
for to part and end certain quarrels between them was thrust through the
body, and so lost his life.

Nere bordering upon this place are two towns; Winterburne, which had for
their Lords the Bradstons, amongst whom S. Thomas was summoned amongst the
Barons in the time of King Edward the Third. From whom the Vicounts Montacute,
the Barons of Wentworth, etc. fetch their descent: Acton, which gave name to
the house of the Actons, Knights: whose heir, being married unto Nicolas
Points Knight in K. Edward Deorham. Marianus.
left the same to their offspring: Derham a little town, in the Saxons tongue
(...), where Ceaulin the Saxon slew three Princes or chief Lords of the
Britans, Commeail, Condidan and Fariemeiol, with others, whom he likewise put
to the sword and dispossessed the Britans of that country for ever.

There remain yet in that place huge rampie^s and trenches as fortifications
of their camps, and other most apparent monuments here and there of so great a
war. This was the chief seat of the Barony of James of New-merch.
James de novo Mercatu, who begat three daughters, wedded to Nicholas de
Moelis, John de Boteraux, and Ralph Russell: one of whose posterity, enriched
by matching with the heir of the ancient family of Gorges, assumed unto them
the name of Gorges. But from Ralph Russell the heir this Deorham Venis. Above
these is Sodbury known by the family of Walsh, and neighbors thereunto are
Wike-ware the ancient seat of the family De-la-ware, *
Woton under Edge, which yet remembers the slaughter of Sir. Thomas Talbot
Vicount Lisle here slain in the time of King Edward the Fourth in an
encounter with the Lord Barkley, De-la-ware. Wotton under Edge. Vicount Lisle.
about possessions, since which time have continued suites between their
posterity until now, lately they were finally compounded. More Northward I had
sight of Durisley reputed the ancientest habitation of the Barkleyes, hereupon
styled Barkleis of Duresley, who built here a Castle now more than ruinous, and
were accounted founders of the Abbey of Kings-wood thereby for Cistertian
Monks, Douresley.
derived from Tintern whom Maud the Empress greatly enriched. The Richard the
Second, and the heir general was married to Cantelow. Inq. 6. R. 2. Vleigh.
Within one mile of this, where the river Came lately spoken of, springs, is
Vleigh, a seat also of the Barkeleis descended from the Barons Barkeley, styled
of Vleigh, Escaetria. 8. H. 4. Beverston Castle.
and Stoke Giffard, who were found coheires to I. Baron Boutetort, descended
from the Baron Zouch of Richards Castles, alias Mortimer, and the Somerus Lords
of Dueley, Beverston Castle not far of Eastward appertained also to the name
of Barkeleies, but in former times to the Gournois, and Ab-Adam a Baron in the
time of King Edward the First.

Cotswould. Would what it is in English
Hitherto have we cursorily passed over the principal places in this Shire
situate beyond and upon Severn, and not far from his bank: Now proceed we
forward to the Cotteswold, which of woulds, and Cotes, that is, hills and
Sheepfolds took that name. For, mountains and hills without woods, the
Englishmen in old time termed Woulds: whence it is that an Old Glossary
interprets Alps Italy, The Woulds of Italy. In these Woulds there feed in
great numbers, flocks of sheep, long necked and square of bulk and bone, by
reason (as it is commonly thought) of the weally and hilly situation of their
pasturage: whose wool being most fine and soft is had in passing great account
among all nations. Under the side of these hills, and among them are to be
seen, as it were, in a row neighboring together, these places following, of
more antiquity than the rest, beginning at the North-east end of them.

Campden.
Campden, commonly Camden, a market town well peopled and of good resort,
where, as John Castoreus writes, all the Kings of Saxon blood assembled in the
year of Salvation 689. and consulted in common about making war upon the
Britans. In William the Conquerours time this Weston and Biselay were in the
possession of Hugh Earl of Chester, Inqui. 2. Edward 1.
and from his posterity came at last by Nicolaa de Albeniaco an inherice
Arundel unto Roger de Somery. Near unto it stands the said Weston, a place
now to be remembered in regard of a fair house, which makes a goodly show a
far off, built by Ralph Sheldon for him and his Posterity.

Hales in late time a most flourishing Abbay built by Richard Earl of Cornwall
and King of Romans, Hales.
*
who was there buried with his Wife Sanchia daughter to the Earl of Province:
Alexander of Hales, he flourished.
and deserving commendation for breeding up of Alexander of Hales a great
Clerk and so deeply learned above all others in that subtle and deep
Divinity of the School men, 1230.
as he carried away the surname of Doctor Irrefragabilis, that is, Doctor
ungain-said. Sudley.
the Doctor ungain-said, as he that could not be gainsaid.

Sudley, in times past Sudlengh, a very fair Castle, the seat not long since
of Sir Thomas Baron Seimor of Sudley, and Admiral of England, attainted in the
time of king Edward the Sixth, and afterward of Sir John Bruges whom Queen
Mary created Baron Chandos of Sudley; Barons of Chan.
because he derived his pedigree from the ancient family of Chandos; out of
which there flourished in the reign of Edward the third Sir John Chandos a
famous Baneret Vicount of Saint Saviors, See Banerets before. Barons of Sudley.
L* of Caumont, and Kerkito^ in France, a martial man, and for military
Prowess every way most renowned. But in old time certain Noblemen here dwelt,
and of it had their addition de Sudley, descended of a right ancient English
Race, to wit from Gorda K. Aetheldreds daughter, whose son Ralph Medantinus
Earl of Hereford begat Harold L. of Sudley, whose progeny flourished here a
long time, until for default of issue male, the daughter and heir matched
William Butler of the family of Wem, 20. H. 6.
and brought him a son named Thomas: and he begat Ralph, Lord Treasurer of
England, created by king Henry the Sixth Baron of Sudley, Escaetria 13. Edward
4.
with a fee of 200. marks yearly, who repaired this castle and enlarged it
with new buildings. His sisters and coheires were married unto the houses of
Northbury and Belk^ape: and by their posterity the possessions in short time
were divided into sundry Families. Todington.
Toddington also is next adjoining hereunto, where the Tracies Gentlemen of a
right worshipful and ancient house flourished a long time, Tracies.
who long since found the Barons of Sudley very bounteous unto them. But how in
the first variance about Religion, William Tracy Lord of this place was
proceeded against and punished after his death by digging up his corpse and
burning it openly, William de Tracy long before, embrued his hands in the
bloody murder of Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, the Ecclesiastical
Historiographers have written at large, and it is no part of my purpose to
relate such like matters. Winchelcombe.
There is here likewise Winchelcombe a great Town and well inhabited, wherein
Kenulph the Mercian King erected an Abbay, and on the same day that he
hallowed and dedicated it, he freed and sent home Edbricht a King of Kent,
whom he had kept before his Prisoner. A man would hardly believe how much
haunted and frequented this Abbay was long since, for the Relics of King
Kenelme a child seven years old, whom his own sister to get the Inheritance
Worcester, in this wise, Edris surnamed Stre^na, that is, The getter, or
gainer, who first under King Aetheldred, and afterward for a good while under
Cnut or Canut governed the whole Kingdom of England, Sherif-dome.
and ruled as Vice Roy, adjoined the Sherif-dome of Winchelcombe which was then
an entire thing by it self, *
unto the shire of Gloucester. Thence I found nothing memorable, Coberley.
but near the fountain of Churn River, Coberley, a seat of a stem of
Barkeleies so often named even from the Conquest, which matched with an heir
of Chandos, and so came hereditarily to the Bruges progenitors Chandos. Then by
Bird-lip-hill, whereby we ascended unto this high Coteswold out of the vale,
lies Brimsfield, which had for the L. thereof the Giffords in times past, unto
whom in right of marriage there came a goodly inheritance from the Cliffords,
Cliffords Barons.
and straight ways by the female heirs, the same fell to the Lords le Strange
of Blackmer, to Audleies and diverse others. Thus much of the places among the
Woulds.

But under the said Woulds I have seen that notable Roman highway by a well
Fosse, Fosse way.
which out of Warwicke-shire comes down first by Lemington, (where it may
seem there was a Station of the Romans by the pieces of Roman Coin ploughed
there often times out of the ground: some of which Edward Palmer a curious and
diligent Antiquary, whose Ancestors flourished here a long-time, has of his
courtesy imparted unto me) then, by Stow on the Would, where by reason of
that high site, the Winds blow cold: and North-Leach bearing the name of a
Riveret running hard by it: Circencester.
and then to Circencester, which the River Corinus, now Churn rising among the
Woulds near Corberley, very commodious for Milles, passes by into the South,
and so gives it his name. This was a City of as great antiquity as any other,
Corinium.
called by Ptolomee CORINIUM, by Antonine The water Cornovium, just fifteen
miles from Glevum or Gloucester, as he notes. The Britans named it Caer Cori,
and Caer Ceri; the English Saxon (...), we in these days Circester, and
Circiter. The ruinate walls do plainly show that it was very large: for, by
report they took up two miles in compass: That it was a famous place, the
Roman Coins, the cherkerworke pavements, and the engraven marble stones that
now and then are there dug up, (which, have been broken and to no small
prejudice of Antiquity) do evidently testify: A Roman port-way.
As also the Port Consular ways of the Romans, that here did cross one
another, whereof that which led to GLEVUM or Gloucester, is yet extant with his
high rigde evident to be seen as far as to Bird-lip-hill, Gurmund, I wot
not what Tyrant of Afric, whereupon Giraldus calls it Passerum urbem, that
is, the Sparrowes City: and out of those Chronicles Necham writes thus, Urbs
vires experta tuas Gurmunde per annos
Septem --
This City felt for seven years space,
Thy forces Gurmund --


Who this Gurmund was I know not. The Inhabitants show a Mount beneath the
Gurmund did cast up, and yet they call it Grismunds Tower. Marianus an
Historian of good antiquity and credit, reports, that Ceaulin King of the
West Saxons dispossessed the Britans of it, what time he had discomfited and
put to flight their forces at Deorham, and brought Gloucester to his subjection.
Many years after this, it was subject to the West Saxons: for, we read, that
Penda the Mercian was defeited by Cineglise King of the West Saxons, when he
besieged it with a mighty Army. Howbeit, at length both it, and the whole
Territory and country came under subjection of the Mercians, and so continued
until the English Monarchy. Under which it sustained much sorrow and grievous
calamity by the Danes: and peradventure at the hand of Gurmon that Dane, whom
the Historiographers Guthrus and Gurmundus. *
So that it may seem he was that Gurmund which they so much speak of. For
certes when he raged, about the year 879. a rablement of Danes rousted here
one whole year. Now scarce the fourth part within the walls is inhabited: the
remains beside are pasture grounds and the ruins of an Abbay, built (as the
report goes) at first by the Saxons, and newly repaired afterward by King
Henry the First for Black Chanons, wherein, I heard say, that many of the
family of the Barons de Samond.
Sancto Amando were buried. But the Castle that it had, was by a Warrant from
the King, overthrown in the first year of Henry the Third his Reign. The
Townsmen raise the chief gain by the Trade of Clothing, and they make great
reports of the singular bounty of King Richard the First Thomas Holland Earl
of Kent, late Duke of Surrey, John Holland Earl of Huntingdon, late Duke of
Excester, John Montacute Earl of Salisbury, Thomas de Spenser Earl of
Gloucester, and others, who being by him dispoiled of their honors, and
maligning his usurpation, conspired to take away his life, and here, by the
townsmen intercepted, were some of them slain outright, and others beheaded.

The river Churne when it has left Circester behind him, six miles Isis,
afterward Tamisis.
near to Dounamveny an ancient seat of the Hungerfords, joyneth with Isis.
For, ISIS, commonly called Ouse, that it might be by original of
Gloucestershire, has his head there, Torleton an upland Village, not far
from that famous Port-way, called the Fosse. This is that Isis which afterward
entertaineth Tame, and by a compound word is called Tamisis, Sovereign as it
were of all the Britain Rivers in Britain: of which a man may well and truly
say as ancient Writers did of Euphrates in the East part of the World: that it
does both Sow and Water the best part of Britain. The poetical description of
whose Source or first head, I have here put down out of a Poem entitled The
Marriage of Tame and Isis, which whether you admit or omit, it skilleth but
little.

Lanigeros qua lata greges Cotswaldia pascit,
Crescit and in colles faciles, visura Dobunos,
Fossa longo spelunca recessu
Cernitur, abrupti surgente crepidine clivi:
Cujus inauratis resplendent limina tophis,
Atria tegit ebur, tectumque Gagate Britanno
Emicat, alterno solidantur pumice posts.
Materiam sed vincit opus, ceduntque labori
Artifici tophus, pumex, ebur, atque Gagates.
Pingitur hinc vitrei mother atrix Cynthia regni
Passibus obliquis volventia sydera lustrans:
Oceano tellus conjuncta marita marito

Nilus, Fosse way.
Amazonius, tractusque binominis Istri,
Vicini and Rheni: sed and his intermicat auro
Vellere Phrixae^ dives, redimitaque spicis
Clara triumphatis erecta BRITANNIA Gallis, etc.
Vndoso hic solio residet regnator aquarum
ISIS, fluminea qui majestate verendus
Caeruleo gremio ^esupinat prodigus urnam,
Intonsos crines i^vis and arundine cinctus,
Cornua cana liqu^nt, fluitantia lumina lymphis

Tota madet, toto distillant corpore guttae:
Et salientis aquae prorumpunt undique venae.
Pisciculi liquidis penetralibus undique ludunt,
Plurimus and cygnus niveis argenteus alis
Pervolitat circum, etc.
Where Cotswald spread abroad does lie and feed fair flocks of sheep,
And Dobunes for to see in downs arises nothing steep,
Within a nouke along not much the Fosse and it between,

Whereof the entry glistereth with soft stones richly guilt,
The Haull is seel'd with Ivory, the roufe aloft ybuilt
Of Geat the best that Britain yields: The pillars very strong,
With Pumish laid each other course are raised all along.
The stuff full fair, yet Art does it surpass, and to the feate
Of Artisan, give place the gold, stones, Yv'ry, and Geat.
Here painted is the Moon that rules the Sea like Crystal Glass,
As she through rolling Signs above with traverse course does pass,
And there again enchaced are both land and Ocean wide,
Conjoined as man and wife in one, with Rivers great beside,
Like brethren all, as Ganges rich, strange Nilus, Tanais,
Yea and the course of Ister large, which Ister, and Danubius.
double named is,
Of Rhene also a neighbor stream. And here bedight in gold,
Among them glitt'reth Britanny with riches manifold
Of golden fleece; a Coronet of Wheat-eares she does wear,
And for her triumph over France, her head aloft does rear, etc.
In waving Throne here sits the King of waters all and some
ISIS, who in that Majesty which Rivers does become,
All reverend, from his watchet lap powr's forth his stream amain
With weed and reed his hairs tuckt up that grow both long and plain,
His hoary horns distilling run, with water stand his eyes,
And shoot from them a luster far: his kembed beard likewise,
Down to the breast wet-through does reach: his body drops again,
All over and on every side breaks out some water vein.
In secret watrish room's within the little fishes play,
And many a silver Swan besides, his white wings does display,
And flutter round about, etc.
Earls of Gloucester.
As touching the Earls of Gloucester; some there be, who have thrust upon us one
William Fitz-Eustace, for the first Earl: who this was, I have not yet found,
and I verily believe he is yet unborne. The History of Tewkesbury Abbay.
But that which I have found, I will not conceal from the Reader. About the
coming in of the Normans, we read that one Bithricke an English Saxon was
Lord of Gloucester, whom Maud wife to William Conqueror, upon a secret rankor
and hatred conceived against him for his contempt of her beauty (for, Bithrick
had before time refused to marry her) troubled and molested most maliciously.
And when she had at length cast him in Prison, Robert Lord of Corboile in
Normandy, Fitz-Haimon. William of Malmesbury.
was by the King endowed with his possessions, who in a battle having
received a wound with the push of a pike upon the temples of his head, had his
wits cracked therewith, and survived a good while after, as a man bestraught and
mad. His daughter Mabil, whom others name Sibill, Robert the base son of
King Henry the First by the intercession of his father, obtained for his wife,
but not before he had made him Earl of Gloucester. This is he who is called
commonly by Writers The Consul of Gloucester. A man of an haughty valorous
mind and undaunted heart, as any one in that age; and who being never dejected
with any adversity, wanne great praise for his fidelity and worthy exploits in
the behalf of his sister Maude the Empress against Stephen then usurping the
Crown of England. Register of Keinsham Abbay, and Tewkesbury.
This honorable Title left he unto his son William, who dejected with
comfortless grief when death had deprived him of his only son and heir,
assured his estate with his eldest daughter to John son to King Henry the
Second, with certain provisoes for his other daughters. Yet his three
daughters brought this Earldome into as many families. For John when he had
obtained the Kingdom repudiated her upon pretenses, as well that she was
barren, as that they were within prohibited degrees of consanguinity: and
reserving the Castle of Bristow to himself, Pat. 15. Joan. R. 4.
after some time, passed over his repudiated wife with the Honor of Gloucester,
to Geffrey Mandevil son of Geffrey Fitz Peter, Earl of Essex for 20000.
marks, who thus over-marrying himself was greatly impoverished, and wounded
in Tournament died soon after issuelesse: and she being Hubert of Burgh died
immediately. Then K. John upon an exchange granted the Earldome of Gloucester to
Almary Earl of Eureux, son to the eldest daughter of the foresaid E. William,
who enjoyed it a short time dying also without issue. So by Amice William
married to Richard de Clare Earl of Hertford, Earls of Gloucester and Hertford.
this Earldom descended to Gilbert her son, who was styled Earl of
Gloucester and Hertford, and mightily enriched his house by marrying one of the
heirs of William Marshall Earl of Pembroch.

His son and successor Richard in the beginning of the Barons wars against
king Henry the Third ended his life, leaving Gilbert his son to succeed him,
who powerfully and prudently swaied much in the said wars, as he inclined to
them or the king. He obnoxious to King Edward the First, surrendered his lands
unto him, and received them again by marrying Joane the Kings Daughter
(surnamed of Acres in the Holyland because she was there borne) to his second
Wife, who bare unto him Gilbert last Earl of Gloucester of this surname, slain
in the flower of his youth in Scotland at the battle of Sterling in the 6.
year of K. Edward the second. Howbeit while this Gilbert the third was in
minority, Sir Ralph de Mont-hermer who by a secret contract had espoused his
mother the Kings daughter (for which he incurred the kings high displeasure,
and a short imprisonment) but after reconciled was summoned to Parliaments by
the name of Earl of Gloucester and Hertford. But when Gilbert was out of his
minority, he was summoned amongst the Barons by the name of Sir Ralph de
Mont-hermer, as long as he lived, which I note more willingly for the rareness
of the example. Thomas De La Mare in the life of Edward^.
After the death of Gilbert the third without children Sir Hugh Le De-Spenser
(commonly named Spenser) the younger, was by writers called Earl of Gloucester,
Gilbert the third. But after that he was by the Queen and Nobles of the Realm
hanged, for hatred they bare to K. Edward the 2. whose minion he was; Sir Hugh
Audley, who had matched in marriage with the second sister, through the favor
of King Edward the Third, received this honor. After his death King Richard
the Second erected this Earldom into a Dukedom, and so it had three Dukes
and one Earl between: and unto them all it prooved Equus Sejanus, that is,
Fatal to give them their fall. Thomas of Woodstocke youngest son to King
Edward the Third, was the first Duke of Gloucester advanced to that high honor
by the said King Richard the Second, and shortly after by him subverted. For
when he busily plotted great matters, the King took order that he Calis, where
with a featherbed cast upon him he was smouthered: having before under his own
band confessed (as it stands upon Record in the Parliament Rols) that he by
virtue of a Patent which he had wrested from the King, took upon him the
Kings regal authority, that he came armed into the Kings presence, reviled
him, consulted with learned about renouncing his allegiance, and devised to
depose the King: for which being now dead he was by authority of Parliament
attainted and condemned of high Treason. When he was thus dispatched, the same
King conferred the Title of Earl of Gloucester upon Thomas Le De-Spenser in the
right of his Great Grandmother; who within a while after sped no better than
his great Grandfather Sir Hugh. For by King Henry the Briston by the peoples
fury beheaded. After some years King Henry the Fifth created his brother
Humfrey, the second Duke of Gloucester, who styled himself the first year of
King Henry the Sixth, as I have seen in an Instrument of his, Humfrey by the
Grace of God, son, brother, and Uncle to Kings, Duke of Gloucester, Earl of
Henault, Holland, Zeland, and Penbroch; Lord of Friesland, Great Chamberlain
of the Kingdom of England, Protector and Defender of the same Kingdom, and
Church of England. A man that had right well deserved of the common wealth and
of learning, but through the fraudulent practice and malignant envy of the
Queen brought to his end at Saint Edmunds Bury. The third and last Duke was
Richard brother to King Edward the Fourth who afterward having Richard the
third: and after two years lost both it and his life in a pitched field,
finding by experience that power gotten by wicked means is never long lasting.

Concerning this last Duke of Gloucester, Richard the third King o^ England.
and his first entry to the Crown, give me leave for a while to play the part
of an Historiographer, which I will speedily give over again as not well able
to act it. When this Richard Duke of Gloucester being York, he retriving after
the Kingdom for himself, by profuse liberality and bounty to very many, by
passing great gravitie tempered with singular affability, by deep wisdom, by
ministering justice indifferently, and by close devises, won wholly to him all
men's hearts, but the Lawyers especially to serve his turn. So shortly he
effected that in the name of all the States of the Realm, there should be
exhibited unto him a supplication, wherein they most earnestly besought him for
the public Weal of the Kingdom, to take upon him the Crown, to uphold his
Country, and the commonweal now shrinking and down falling, not to suffer
it to run headlong into Dame Elizabeth Greie widow, whom he married without
the assent of his Nobles, without solemn publication of Banes, secretly in a
profane place, and not in the face of the Church, contrary to the law of Gods
Church and commendable custom of the Church of England: and which was worse,
having before time by a precontract espoused Dame Aeleanor Butler, She was
married first to R. Butler, L. of Sudley.
daughter to the old George Duke of Clarence the second brother of King Edward
the Fourth, was by authority of Parliament convicted and attainted of high
treason, thereupon his children disabled and debarred from all right
succession; evident it was to every man, that Richard himself remained the
sole and undoubted heir to the Crown. Of whom they assured themselves, that
being borne in England he would seriously provide for the good of England,
neither could they make any doubt of his birth, parentage, and Filiation; whose
wisdom also, whose justice, princely courage, warlike exploits most By the
authority of the Parliament it was pronounced, decreed and declared, that all,
and singular the contents in the foresaid Bill were true and undoubted; and the
Lord the King with the assent of the three States of the Kingdom, by the
foresaid authority pronounces, decrees, and declares the same, for true and
These things have I laid forth more at large out of the Parliament Roll, that
ye may understand, both what and how great matters, the power of a Prince, the
outward show of virtue, the wily fetches of Lawyers, fawning hope, pensive
fear, desire of change, and goodly pretenses, are able to effect in that most
wise assembly of all the States of a Kingdom, even against all Law and right.
But this Richard is not to be accounted worthy to have bin a Sovereign had he
not bin a Sovereign as Galba was reputed; who when he was a Sovereign,
deceived all men's expectation: but most worthy indeed of Soveraigntie, had he
not being transported with ambition (which blasteth all good parts) by lewd
practices, and mischievous means made foul way thereunto. For that by the
common consent of all that Chorographer I will return to my own part, and
leave these matters unto our Historiographers, when God shall send them.

In this County there are Parishes. 280.



OXONIENSIS Comitatus vulgo Oxfordshyre qui pars olim DOBUNORUM


OXFORDSHIRE.
OXFORDSHIRE, in the Saxon Tongue (...), which, as we said, belonged also to
the Dobuni, on the West side joyneth upon Gloucestershire, on the South, which
way it runs out farthest in breadth, is dissevered from Bark-shire, by the
River Isis or Tamis: Eastward, it bordereth upon Buckingham-shire: and
Northward where it ends pointed, North-hampton-shire of one side, and
Warwickshire on the other side, confining with it. It is a fertile Country and
plentiful: wherein the Plains are garnished with Corne-fields and meddowes,
the Hills beset with Woods, stored in every place not only with Corn and
fruits, but also with all kind of game for Hound, or Hawke; and well watered
with fishfull Rivers. For ISIS, or OUSE which afterward comes to be named
Tamis, makes a long course and runs under the South side; Cherwell also a
pretty River well stored with fish, after it has for a time parted
North-hampton-shire and Oxfordshire passes gently with a still stream
through the midst of the Country, and divides it, as it were, into two
parts. And Tamis with his waters conforteth and gives heart to the East part,
until both of them together with many other Riverets and Brooks running into
them be lodged in Isis.

This Isis when it has passed a small part of Wil-shire, no sooner is entered
into Oxfordshire but presently being kept in and restrained with Rodcot
bridge, Rodcot Bridge, Bablac.
passes by Bablac, where Sir R. Vere that most puissant Earl of Oxford,
Marquess of Dublin, and Duke of Ireland, who as he stood in most high favor
and authority with King Richard the Second, so he was as much envied of the
Nobles, taught us (as one said) that no power is always powerful. Who being
there discomfited in a skirmish by the Nobles and constrained to take the River
and swim over, found the Catastrophe of his Marriage of Tame and Isis, made
these verses.

-- Hic Verus notissimus apro,
Dum dare terga negat virtus, 1387.
and tendere contra
Non sinit invictae rectrix prudentia mentis;
Vndique dum resonat repetitis ictibus umbo,
Tinnituque strepit circum sua tempora cassis,
Se dedit in fluvium, fluvius laetatus and illo
Hospite, suscepit salvum, salvumque remisit.
Wild Bore the badge of the Veres.
well known by badge of savage Bore,
While manhood shames to yield, yet strive again
Stout heart may not, restrained by wisdoms lore;
Whiles shield resounds by doubled blows amain,
And helmet rings about his ears; is feign
The stream to take: The River glad therefore,
His Guest took safe, and set him safe on shore.
Isis from thence overflowing many times the flat and low grounds, is first
increased with the Brook Windrush, which springing out of Cotteswold, has
standing upon the bank side Burford, Burford.
in the Saxon Tongue (...), where Cuthred King of Aethelbald the Mercian, who
began to oppress his people and suck their blood, came into the field against
him, and put him to flight: having won his Banner, wherein, by report of
Authors, there was a golden Dragon depainted. Barons Lovell.
Then passes it by Minster Lovell, the habitation in times past of the great
Barons Lovels of Tichmerch, who being descended from Lovell.
Lupellus a Noble Tichmerch, with the heirs of the Lords Holland D'eyncourt,
and the Vicounts Beaumont. But their line expired in Francis Vicount Lovell,
Lord Chamberlain to King Richard the Third, (attainted by King Henry the
Seventh, and slain in the battle at Stoke in the quarrel of Lambert that
Counterfeit Prince) whose sister Fridiswid was Grandmother to Henry the first
Lord Norris. Hence Windrush hodling on his course waters Whitney an ancient
Town, Whitney.
and before the Normans days belonging to the Bishops of Winchester: to which
adjoyneth Coges, Arsic.
the chief place of the Barony of Arsic, the Lords whereof branched out of the
family of the Earls of Oxford are utterly extinguished many years ago. Near
Witchwood bears a great breadth and in time past spread far wider. For King
Richard the Third disforested the great Territory of Witchwood between
Woodstocke and Brightstow: which Edward the Fourth made to be a Forest, as John
Rosse of Warwick witnesses. Einsham.
Isis having received Windrush passes down to Einsham in the Saxon tongue
(...), a Manor in times past of the Kings, seated among most pleasant meadows,
which Cuthwulfe the Saxon was the first that took from the Britans whom he had
hereabout vanquished, and long after Aethelmar a Nobleman beautified it with an
Abbay: the which, Aethelred King of England in the year of Salvation 1005.
confirmed to the Benedictine Monks, and in his confirmation signed the
privilege of the liberty thereof, (I speak out of the very original grant as
it was with the sign of the sacred Cross: but now is turned into a private
dwelling house and acknowledges the Earl of Derby Lord thereof. Beneath this,
Evenlode a little river arising likewise out of Cotteswald speedeth him into
Isis; which riveret in the very border of the Shire passes by an ancient
Monument standing not far from his bank, to wit, certain huge stones placed
in a round circle (the common people usually call them Rolle-richstones,
Rolle-rich-stones.
and dreameth that they were sometimes men, by a wonderful Metamorphosis
turned into hard stones. The draught of them, such as it is, portrayed long
since, here I represent unto your view. For, without all form and shape they
be, unequal, and by long continuance of time much impaired. The highest of
them all, which without the circle looks into the earth, they The King,
because he should have been King of England (forsooth) if he had once seen
Long Compton, a little Town so called lying beneath, and which a man, if he
go some few paces forward, may see: other five standing at the other side,
touching as it were, one another, they imagine to have been knights mounted on
horse back; and the rest the Army. But lo the foresaid Portraiture.



Rollo the Dane, who afterward conquered Normandy. For, what time as he with
his Danes and Normans troubled England with depredations, we read that the
Danes joined battle with the English thereby, at Hoche Norton, and afterward
fought a second time at Scier stane in Huiccia, which also I would deem to be
that Mere-stone standing hard by for a land Mark, and parting four shires:
For, so much does that Saxon word Scier-stane most plainly import. Certainly in
an Exchequer book the Town adjacent is called Rollen-drich, where as it is
there specified, Turstan le Dispenser held land by Serjeanty of the Kings
Dispensary, that is, to be the Kings Steward. As for that Hoch-Norton, which I
spoke of before, for the rusticall behavior of the Inhabitants in the age
before going it grew to be a proverb, Hocknorton. This place, for no one thing
was more famous in old time, than for the woeful slaughter of the Englishmen
in a foughten field against the Danes, under the Reign of King Edward the
Elder. Afterward, it became the seat of the Barony of the D' Oilies an
honorable and ancient Family of the Norman race; of whom the first that came
into England was Robert de Oily, who for his good and valiant service, received
of William Conqueror this Town and many fair possessions, whereof he gave
certain to his sworn brother Roger Ivery, which were called the Barony of
Saint Valeric. But when the said Robert departed Niele succeeded him therein:
whose son Robert the second was founder of Osney Abbay. But at length the
daughter and heir general of this house D' Oily, was married to Henry Earl
of Warwick: and she bare unto him Thomas Earl of Warwick, who dyed without
issue in the Reign of Henry the Third: and Margaret, who deceased likewise
without children, abeit she had two husbands, John Marescall, and John de
Plessetis, both of them Earls of Warwick. But then, (that I may speak in the
very words of the Charter of the Grant) King Henry the Third granted
Hoch-norton and Cudlington unto John de Plessetis, which were in times past the
possessions of Henry D'Oily, and which after the decease of Margaret, wife
sometime to the foresaid John Earl of Warwick, fell into the kings hand as an
Escheat of Normans Howbeit out of this ancient and famous stock there
remains at this day a family of D' Oilies in this shire. Evenlode passes by
no memorable thing else, but La Bruer, now Bruern sometime an Abbay of white
Monks, and after he has run a good long course takes to him a Brook, near
unto which stands Woodstocke, in the English Saxon language (...), that is, A
woody place, where King Etheldred in times past held an assembly of the States
of the Kingdom and enacted Laws. Here is one of the Kings houses full of
State and magnificence, built by King Henry the First, who adjoined also
thereunto a very large Park compassed round about with a stone wall, which,
John Rosse writes to have been the first Park in England, although we read
Doomesday Book, these words, Parcus silvestris bestiarum in other places. In
which sense old Varro uses the word Parcus, which some think to be but a new
word. But since that, Parkes are grown to such a number that there be more of
them in England, than are to be found in all Christendom beside; so much were
our Ancestors ravished with an extraordinary delight of hunting. Our
Historians report, that King Henry the Second being enamoured upon Rosamund
Clifford, a Damsel so fair, so comely, and well favored without comparison,
that her beauty did put all other women out of the Princes mind, in so much as
now she was termed Rosa mundi, that is, The Rose of the World; and for to hide
her out of the sight of his jealous Juno the Queen, he built a Labyrinth in
this house, with many Geffrey Chaucer*
that Geffrey Chaucer our English Homer was there bred and brought up. Of whom
and of our English Poets I may truly avouch that, which that learned Italian
said of Homer and the Greek Poets; -- Hic ille est cujus de gurgite sacro
Combibit arcanos vatum omnis turba furores.
This is the man whose sacred stream has served all the crew
Of Poets, thence they drank their fill, thence they their furies drew.


For, he surpassing all others without question in wit, and leaving our
smattering Poet-asters by many degrees behind him: -- jam monte potitus,
Ridet anhelantem dura ad fastigia turbam.
When once himself the steep top hill had won,
At all the sort of them he laughed anon,
To see how they the pitch thereof to gain
Puffing and blowing do clamber up in vain.


Isis having now entertained Evenlode, divides his Channel and severing it
self makes many and those most delectable Islands, near which stood Godstow
a little Nunnery, which Dame Ida a rich widow built; and King John both
repaired and also endowed with yearly Revenewes, that these holy Virgins might
releeve with their prayer (for by this time had that persuasion possessed all
men's minds) the souls of King Henry the Second his father, and of Rosamund:
For, there was she buried with this Epitaph in Rhyme: Hac jacet in tumba Rosa
mundi, non Rosamunda,
Non redolet, sed olet, quae redolere solet.
Rose of the World, not Rose the fresh pure flower
Within this Tomb has taken up her boure:
She senteth now and nothing sweet does smell,
Which erst was wont to savor passing well.


*
We read that Hugh the Bishop of Lincoln Diocesan of this place coming hither
caused her bones to be removed out of the Church as unworthy of Christian
burial for her unchaste life. Nevertheless the holy sisters there translated
them again into the Church, and laid them up in a perfumed leather bag;
enclosed in lead as was found in her Tomb at the dissolution of the house; and
they erected a Cross there whereby the Passengers were put in mind with two
rhyming Verses

*
Neither does the Ouse or Isis as yet gather himself into one stream, when he
meets with Cherwell, which out of Northamptonshire, runs almost through
the mids of this Country. This River first waters Banbury sometime (...), a
fair large Town, at which Kinric the West Saxon King in old time put to
flight the Britans in a memorable battle fighting manfully for their lives,
state, and all they had: and in this later foregoing age, not far off Richard
Nevill Earl of Warwick siding with the house of Lancaster gave such an
overthrow to those of York, that forthwith also he took King Edward the
Fourth now forlorn and hopeless. Now the fame of this Town is for zeal,
cheese, and cakes, and has a Castle for Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, (for to
the Sea of Lincoln it belongs) first built, who having a mind to dwell
stately rather than quietly, brought upon himself many adversities by his huge
buildings. About this Town, (that I may observe so much by the way) pieces of
the Roman Emperors Coin found, (as also elsewhere in the field near
adjoining) make somewhat to prove the antiquity of the place.

Near to Banbury is Hanwell, where the Family of Cope has flourished many
years in great and good esteem. And near it again is Broughton the
habitation of Sir Richard Fienes, or Fenis: unto whom and to the heirs of his
body, the most mighty Prince King James, in the first year of his Reign,
Recognized and confirmed as who lineally descended from Sir James Fienes Baron
Say and Sele, and Lord high Treasurer of England, who was cruelly beheaded by a
rabble of Rebels in the time of King Henry the Sixth.

Cherwell carrying his Stream along from Banbury sees nothing but pleasant
fields passing well husbanded, and as plentiful meadows. Amongst which stand
Heiford Warin, so denominated Warin Fitz-Gerold Lord thereof, Heyford Purcell
likewise, so named of the Purcels, *
or de Porcellis ancient Gentlemen the old owners, Blechindon an an ancient
Possession of the ancient Family Le Pover, Islip.
and Islip in elder time Ghistlipe the natall place of that King Edward (whom
for his religious Piety and continency our Ancestors, and the Popes vouchsafed
the name of Saint Edward the Confessor) as he himself witnesses in the
originall-Charter, whereby he granted this place to the Church of Westminster.

Here there runs a riveret from the East in to Cherwell, Burcester.
which passes by Burcester, Gilbert Basset and Egelina Courteney his Wife,
built here a Religious House in honor of Saint Eadburga, in the time of King
Henry the Second, and that not long since the Barons Le Strange of Knocking
were Lords of the place. But Westward, there lie some few remains of a decayed
and forlorn ancient station Alchester, Aldchester.
they call it happily, as one would say, Aldchester, that is, an old Town, by
which a Port way from Wallengford, as the neighbor Inhabitants think, led to
Banbury, and the same they called Akemanstreet way: the Tract whereof for
certain miles together is yet most plainly to be seen in the plain of
Otmore, Bath sometime called Akemancester. Hedindon.
which John gave to Sir Thomas Basset for his Barony. *


But where Cherwell is confluent with Isis, and pleasant Eights or Islets lie
dispersed by the sundry disseverings of Waters; there the most Famous
University of OXFORD, Oxford*
called in the English Saxon tongue Oxenford, shows it self aloft in a
Champion plain. OXFORD, I say, our most noble Athens, The Muses-Seate, and one
of Englands stays; nay The Sun, the Eye, and the Soul thereof, the very
Source and most clear Spring of good Literature and Wisdom: From whence,
Religion, Civility and Learning are spread most plenteously into all parts of
the Realm. Bellositum. Some are of opinion, that it has been named Caer
Vortigern and Caer Vember in the British language, and that I wot not, what
Vortigerns and Memprices built it. But what ever it was in the Britans time,
the English Saxons called it Bosphori, and the Germans their Ochen-furt upon
Odera, to wit, of the fourd of Oxen: in which sense it is named of our Britans
in Wales at this day Rhyd-ychen: And yet Leland grounding upon a probable
conjecture, deriveth the name from the River Ouse called in Latin Isis, and
supposes that it has been named Ousford considering that the River Eights or
Islands which Isis scatters hereabout, be called Ousney.

Sage antiquity, as we read in our Chronicles, consecrated this City even in
the British age unto the Muses: whom from Greeke-lad (which is a small Town at
this day in Wilt-shire) they translated hither as unto a more fruitful
Plant-plot. Alexander Necham, Lib. 2. de Natur^erum.
The skill of Civil Law Italy challenges to it self: but for Heavenly Writ
or Holy Scripture, the liberal Sciences also do prove, that the City of Paris
is to be preferred before all others. Moreover according to the Prophecy of
Merline, Wisdom and Learning flourished at Oxford, which in due time was to
pass over into the parts of Ireland. But when during the English Saxons age
next ensuing, there was nothing but continual wasting and rasing of Towns and
Cities, according to the Frideswide.
and for a great while was frequented only for the relics of Frideswide, who
for the chastity and integrity of her life was canonized a Saint, upon this
occasion especially, for that by a solemn vow she had wholly devoted her
self unto the Service of GOD; and Prince Algar whiles he came a wooing unto
her, was miraculously, as writers say, stricken blind. This Frideswide, (as
we read in William of Malmesbury) triumphing for her virginity, erected here
a Monastery, into which when certain Danes adjudged to die in King Etheldreds
time fled for refuge as to a Sanctuary, they were all burned with the
buildings, (such was the unsatiable anger of the Englishmen against them.) But
soon after, when the King repented this Act, the Sanctuary, Roger Bishop of
Salisbury unto a Chanon excellently well learned who there presented unto GOD
many such Chanons who should live regularly in their Order. But leaving these
matters, let us return unto the University. When the tempestuous Danish
storms were meetely well blown over, Aelfred that most devout and Godly King
recalled the long banished Muses unto their own Sacred Chancells and built
three Colleges: one for Grammarians, a second for Philosophers, and a third
for Divines. But this you may more plainly understand out of these words in
old Annals of the new Abbey of Winchester. In the year of Christ's Incarnation
* 806. and in the second year of Saint Grimbald his coming into Neoth an
Abbat, and besides a worthy Teacher in Divinity; and holy Grimbald a right
excellent Professor of the most sweet written Word of Holy Scripture. But in
Grammar and Rhetoric, the Regent was Asserius a Monk, in the skill of
Literature passing well learned. In Logic, Music and Arithmeticke, the
Reader was John a Monk of the Church of Menevensis.
Saint David's: In Geometry and Astronomy read John a Monk also and Companion
of Saint Grimbald, a Man of a passing quick wit, and right learned every
way: At which Lectures was present that most glorious and invincible King
Aelfred, whose memorial in every Man's mouth shall be as sweet as honey.

But presently after, as we read in a very good manuscript copy of the said
Asserius, who at the same time professed learning here; There arose a most
dangerous and pernicious dissension at Oxford, between Grimbald and these
great Clerks whom he brought thither with him on the one side, and those old
Schoolmen whom he there found, on the other side: who upon his coming
refused altogether to embrace the Rules, Orders and Forms of reading
prescribed and begun by him. For three years space the variance and discord
between them was not great, howbeit there lurked a secret hatred fostered and
festered among them, which brake out afterward in most grievous and bitter
manner, and was most evident. For the appeasing whereof, that most Invincible
King Aelfred being by a message and complaint from Grimbald certified of that
discord, went to OXFORD to determine Grimbalds coming to OXFORD Learning
generally flourished there, although the Scholars and Students were fewer then
in number than in former times, by reason that the most of them through the
cruelty and tyranny of Painims were expelled. Moreover they proved and
declared, and that by the undoubted testimony of old Chronicles, that the
Orders and Ordinances of that place were made and established by certain Godly
and learned men, as namely Gildas of holy memory, Melkin, Ninnius, Kentigern
and others, who all of them studied and followed their books there until they
were aged persons, managing and governing German came to Oxford and abode there
half a year, what time as he traveled through Britan, with a purpose to
preach against the Pelagian heresies, who wondrous well allowed of their
former Orders and Ordinances. This Noble King with incredible and unexampled
humility heard both parts most diligently, Grymbald taking this unkindely and
to the heart, forthwith went his ways to Winchester Abbay newly founded by
Aelfred: Shortly after he caused his own Tomb to be translated to
Winchester, wherein he purposed after he had run his race in this life, that
his bones should be bestowed, in an arched Vault made under the Chancell of
Saint Peter's Church in Oxford: Which Church verily the same Grymbald had built
from the very foundation out of the ground, with stone most curiously wrought
and polished.

Within some years after this new revived felicity, there ensued diverse
disturbances Etheldred by way of robbery and foul work and havocke there: and
straight after, Herald surnamed Light foot raged against it with such
barbarous cruelty, for that some of his followers were slain there in a fray,
that there followed thereupon a most heavy banishment of the Students, and the
University, (a sorrowful spectacle) lay as it were, half dead and past all
recovery, until the days of king William the Conqueror. Whom some write
falsely to have won it by assault: but Oxonia written amiss in the Copies,
for Exonia, that is, Excester deceived them. And that it was at that time a
place of Studies and Students, may be understood out of these words of
Ingulph, who in that age flourished. I, Ingulph (says he) being first Studia,
Schools of Universitie.
Study of Oxford, when as in learning of Aristotle, I had profited above my
fellows of the same time, etc. For those Schools of Learning which we call
Academies or Universities, that Age termed Studia, that is, Studies, as I will
show anon. But at this very time, it was so impoverished, that whereas within
the wall and without, (I speak out of William the Conqueror his Domesday
book) there were about seven hundred and fifty houses, besides four and
twenty Mansions upon the Walls, five hundred of them were not able to pay their
Subsidy or Imposition. And to use the very words of that book, This City paid
pro Toll and Tribute.
Theloneo et Gablo, and for other Customs by the year to the King twenty
pounds and six quarts of Honey: and unto Earl Algar ten pounds. About this
time, Robert D'oily a noble man of Normandy (of whom I have before spoken) when
he had received at the hands of William the Conqueror in reward of his
Service in the Wars, large Possessions in this Shire, built a spacious Castle
in the West side of the City with deep Ditches, Rampires, an high raised
Mount, and therein a Parish Church to Saint George, unto which when as the
Parishioners could not have access, by reason that King Stephen most
straightly besieged Maude the Empress within this Castle; 1074.
Saint Thomas Chapel in the street hard by was built. He also, Register of
Osney Abbay
as it is thought, fortified the whole City with new walls, which by little
and little time does force, and as it were embreach with his assault. Robert
likewise Nephew unto him by his brother Neale, and Chamberlain to King Henry
the First, Osney.
a most stately Abbay, as the ruins do yet show, amidst the divided waters,
1129.
not far from the Castle: persuaded thereto by Edith his wife, (the daughter
of Forne) who before time had been one of King Henry the First his sweet
hearts and lig-bies.

About those times as we read in the Chronicle of the said Osney Abbay, Robert
Pulein began to read in Oxford the Holy Scriptures, in England now grown
out of request: Who afterward, when as by his Doctrine the English and
Frenchmen both had much profited; was called by Pope Lucius the second, and
promoted to be Chancellor of the Church of Rome. To the same effect also
writes John Rosse of Warwick. By the procurement of King Henry the First, the
Divinity Lecture which had discontinued a long time in Oxford, But long before
this time, in this Palace was borne into the World that Lion-hearted Knight,
Richard Cu^ de Lion.
Richard the First King of England; commonly called Ceeur de Lion, a Prince of
a most hauty mind and full of resolution, borne for the weal of Christendom,
the honor of England, and the terror of Infidels. Upon whose death a Poet in
that age of no mean conceit versified thus, Viscera Carcelorum, Corpus Fons
servat Ebrardi,
Et cor Rhothomagum, Magne Richard, tuum:
In tria dividitur unus, qui, plus fuit uno,
Nec superest uno gloria tanta viro.
Hic Richard jaces, sed mors si cederet armis,
Victa timore tui, cederet ipsa tuis.
Thy Bowels keep's Carceolum, thy corpse Font Everard:
And Roan thy valiant Lions heart, O noble great Richard.
Thus one three fold divided is, for more he was then one,
And for that one, so great he was, such glory is in none.
Here li'st thou Richard, but if death to force of arms could yield,
For fear of thee he would to thee have given as lost the field.


Thus after the City was refreshed again with these buildings, many began
to flock hither as it were to a Mart of learning and virtue: and by the
industrious means Robert Pulein, a man borne to promote the Commonwealth of
learning, who refused no pains, but labored all that he could to set open
again those Well springs of good Literature which had been stopped up,
through the favor especially of King Henry the First, King Henry the Second,
and King Richard his son, of whom I spoke ere while. And these endeavors of
Pulein sped so well and took so good effect, that in the reign of King John,
there were here three thousand Students; who all at once every one changed
their Habitation to Reding and partly to Cambridge, because the Citizens seemed
to wrong and abuse overmuch these Students and Professors of Learning: but
after this tumult was appeased, they returned within a short time. Then and in
the age presently ensuing, as God provided Frideswide, (a thing before-time
thought to be an heinous Offense in a Prince for the dishonor offered to her
by Algar a Prince) and so removed that superstitious fear, wherewith some
superstitious Priests had for a time frighted Princes from once coming to
Oxford: and had assembled here a very great Parliament for the composing of
certain controversies between him and the Barons, he confirmed the
privileges granted by the former Kings, and conferred also some other
himself. So that by this time there was so great store Matthew Paris, in plain
terms called The University of Oxford, The Second School of the Church, nay,
rather a ground work of the Church, next after Paris. For with the name of
University the Bishops of Rome had before time honored Oxford, which Title at
that time by their Decrees they vouchsafed to none but unto that of Paris, this
of Oxford, unto Bononia in Italy and Salamanca in Spain. And in the Council
of Vienna, it was ordained that there should be erected Schools for the
Hebrew, Greek, Arabicke and Chaldaean tongues, in the Studies of Paris,
Oxford, Bononie and Clementinarum Quinto.
Salamanca, as the most famous of all others, to the end that the knowledge of
those twain skillful in every of those tongues. For those who were to be
Professors in Oxford, The same Council ordained, That the Prelates of England,
Scotland, Ireland and Wales, the Monasteries also,

Out of these words may be observed, both that Oxford was the chief place of
Studies in England, Scotland, Ireland and Wales, and also that those Schools
which we now adays do call Academies and Universities, were aptly in old time
named Studies: as S. Hierom termed the Schools of Gaul, Studia Florentissima,
that is, Studia. Ad Rusticum Mon^^hum.
most flourishing Studies. And as for the name of University, it was taken up
about the time of King Henry the Third, for a Public School, and if I be not
deceived in mine own observations, it was then in use not for the place but
for the very body and society of Students, Vniversitas.
as we read in books of that age, Vniversitas Magistrorum that is, The
University of Masters of Oxford, etc. But happily this may seem beside my Text.

Now by this time, good and bountiful Patrons began to furnish the City
within, and the Suburbs without with most stately Colleges, Halls and Schools,
and to endow them also with large Revenewes: For the greatest part of the
University was beforetime in the Suburbs without the North-gate. Colleges.
In the reign of King Henry the third, John Balliol of Barnards Castle in the
Bishopric of Durham who died in the year 1269. the father of Balliol King of
Scots, The book of Mailros.

The first endowed College for Scholars.


founded Balliol College and so named it: and straight after Walter Merton
Bishop of Rochester, translated the College which he had built in Surrey to
Oxford, in the year 1274. enriched it with The house of Scholars of Merton,
but now it is called Merton College. And these two were the first endowed
Colleges for Students in Christendom. William Archdeacon of Durham repaired
and enlarged with new building that work of King Aelfred, which now they call,
University College. At which time, the Students; for that they entertained
somewhat coursely Otto the Popes Legate, or Horse-leach rather, sent out to
suck the English Clergies blood, were excommunicate and with all indignities
shamefully handled. And in those days, as Armachanus writes, there were
counted here thirty thousand Students. Under King Edward the Second, Walter
Stapledon Bishop of Exceter founded Exceter College and Heart Hall, 1318.
Register of Hide-Abby.
and the King himself in imitation of him built the College Oriall, and S.
Mary Hall. At which time a convert Jew read an Hebrew Lecture here, unto whom
for a Stipend every one of the Clergy of Oxford for every Mark of his
Ecclesiastical living, contributed a penny. Afterward Queen Philip wife to
King Edward the Third, built Queens College, and Simon Islip, Archbishop of
Canterbury, Canterbury College.

The Students then, having the world at will and all things falling out to
their hearts desire, became insolent, and being divided into factions, under
the names of Northren and Southren men, struck up the Alarm to intestine and
unreasonable tumults among themselves. Whereupon the Northren faction went
their ways to Stanford and began there to set up Schools. But some few
years after, when Stanford recalled by Proclamation directed to the
High-sheriffe of Lincolneshire upon penalty to forfeit their books and the
Kings displeasure. And then it was ordained that no Oxford man should profess
at Stanford, to any prejudice or hinderance of Oxford. Shortly after William
Wickham Bishop of Winchester founded a magnificent College, which they call
New-Colledge: into which out of another College of his at Winchester the best
wits are yearly transplanted. And he about the same by the tract of the City
wall built a fair high wall embatled and turrited. Also Richard Angervill
Bishop of Durham, surnamed Philobiblos, that is Love book, furnished a Library
for the public use of Students. His Successor Thomas laid the foundation of
Durham College, for Durham Monks, and Richard Fleming Bishop of Lincoln
founded likewise Lincoln College. Also at the same time the Monks of the
order of Saint Bennet, by a Chapter held among them, laid their moneys together
and increased Gloucester Hall: built before by I. Lord Gifford of Brimsfield for
Monks of Gloucester, wherein one or two Monks out of every Covent of
Benedictine Monks were maintained at study, who afterward should profess
Gloucester Hall, Nicholas Wadham of Merifeld in the County of Somerset, has
assigned a fair portion of lands and money for the propagation of Religion and
Learning, which I note incidently by way of congratulation to our Age, that
there are yet some who graciously respect the advancement of good Learning.
About that time, not to speak of the Chanons of Saint Frideswide, Hide Abbay.
Locus Regalus.
and Osney, or the Cistertian Monks of Reilew, there were erected four fair
Frieries and other religious houses, where flourished also many profound
Learned men. In the age ensuing, when Henry the Fifth reigned, Henry Chicheley
Archbishop of Canterbury built two and those very fair Colleges, the one
dedicated to the memory of All Souls, and the other to Saint Bernard. And
there passed William Wainflet Bishop of Winchester founded Mary Magdalen
College: for building rare and excellent, for sight commodious, and for walks
passing pleasant. And at the very same time was built the Divinity School, so
fine a piece of elegant work that this of Xeuxis may justly be engraven upon
it: Invisurum facilius aliquem quam imitaturum: that is, Sooner will one envy
me, then set such another by me. And Humfrey that good Duke of Gloucester, a
singular Patron, and a respective lover of learning, increased the Library over
it with an hundred twenty nine most select Manuscript books, which at his
great charges he procured out of Italy. But such was the private avarice of
some in the giddy time of K. Edward the Sixth, Sir Thomas Bodley.
that they for small gain envied the use thereof to Posterity. Yet Thomas
Bodley a right worshipful knight and a most worthy Nource-son of this
University furnished richly in the same place a new Library with the best books
of exquisite choice from all parts, with great charges and studious care, never
sufficiently commended. Whereby the University may once again have a public
Storehouse of knowledge and learning, and himself deserves the Glory that
may flourish freshly in the memory of all Eternity. And whereas by an ancient
custom of the wisest men, those were wont to be dedicated within such
Libraries in gold, silver or brass, by whose care they were erected; and whose
immortal souls in them do speak: to the end that Time might not have power
and prevail against men of worth, and the desires of mortal men might be
satisfied Dorset late Chancellor of this University (that he might also leave
some memorial of himself) has in the very place dedicated unto Sir Thomas
Bodley so passing well deserving of the Learned Commonwealth, his
representation with this inscription: THOMAS SACKUILLUS DORSETTIAE COMES,
SUMMUS ANGLIAE THESAURARIUS, ET HUJUS ACADEMIAE CANCELLARIUS,

That is, THOMAS SACKUIL EARL OF DORSET, LORD HIGH TREASURER OF ENGLAND, AND
CHANCELLOR OF THIS UNIVERSITIE,



William Smith Bishop of Lincoln built new out of the ground Brazen Nose
College, (which that good and godly old man Master Alexander Nowell Deane of
Saint Paul's in London lately augmented with Revenewes) and Richard Fox Bishop
of Winchester erected likewise that which is named Corpus Christi College: and
Thomas Wolsey Cardinal of York following their example, began another
(where the Monastery of Frideswide stood) the most stately and fairest of them
all, for Professors and 200. Students, which Henry the Eighth, joining unto it
Canterbury College assigned to a Deane Prebends and Students, endowed it with
livings, and named it Christ's Church. And the same most puissant Prince, with
money disbursed out of his own Treasury, Thomas Pope Knight reared a new
Durrham College: and Sir Thomas White Knight Citizen and Alderman of London
raised Bernard College, both which lay buried in the rubbish. They reedified
them, repaired them with new buildings, enriched them with fair lands and gave
them new names: For the one of them they dedicated to Saint John Baptist, and
that other to the holy and sacred Trinity. Queen Mary also built the common
Schools. And now of late Hugh Prise Doctor of the Laws, has begun a new
College (with good speed and happy success as I wish) to the honor Jesus.
With these Colleges which are in number 16. (and eight Haulls beside) all
fair, and decently built, richly endowed and furnished with good Libraries,
Oxford at this day so flourishes, that it far surmounteth all other
Universities of Christendom. And for Living Libraries, (for so may I well and
truly with Eunapius term great Scholars and learned men) for the discipline
and teaching of the best Arts, and for the politic government of this their
republicke of Literature, it may give place to none. But to what end is all
this? Oxford needs no man's commendation: the excellency thereof does so much
exceed, and (if I may use Plinies word) superfluit, that is, Surmounteth. Let
this suffice to say of Oxford as Pomponius Mela did of Athens, Clarior est quam
ut indicari egeat, that is, More glorious it is of it self, than But have
here for an upshot and farewell, the beginning of Oxford story out of the
Proctors book. By the joint testimony of most Chronicles, many places in
diverse Coasts and Climats of the world we read to have flourished at sundry
times in the studies of diverse sciences; But the University of Oxford is found
to be for foundation more ancient; for plurality of sciences more general, in
profession of the Catholic truth more constant, and in multiplicity of
Privileges more excellent, than all other Schools that are known among the
Latins. The Mathematicians of this University have observed, that this their
City is from the Fortunate Islands 22. Degrees, and the Arcticke or North Pole
elevated 51. Degrees, and 50. Scruples high. And thus much briefly of my dear
Nurse-mother Oxford.

Isis and Cherwell have consociated their waters together within one Channel,
Isis then entire of himself and with a swifter current runs Southward, to
find Tame whom so long he had sought for. And gone he is not forward many
miles, but behold Tame streaming out of Buckinghamshire, meets with him: who
is no sooner entered into this Shire, but he gives name to Tame a Mercate Town
situate very pleasantly among Rivers. For, Tame passes hard by the Northside,
and two Riverers shedding themselves into it compass the same, the one on the
East, and the other on the West. Alexander that liberal Bishop of Lincoln,
Lord of the place, when his prodigal humor in sumptuous building of Castles
was of every body privily misliked, to wash out that stain (as Newbrigensis
says) Quatremans, who in the age foregoing were men of great reputation in
these parts, founded an Hospital for the sustentation of poor people. But
both of these are now decayed and quite gone: Baron Williams of Ta^^
and in stead thereof Sir John Williams Knight, whom Queen Mary advanced to
the Dignity of a Baron, by the Title of Lord William of Tame erected a very
fair School, Baron William of Tame.
and a small Hospital. But this Title soon determined when Norris and Wenman.

From hence Tame runs down near unto Ricot, a goodly house, which in times
past belonged to those Quatremans: whose stock failing to bring forth Males,
it was devolved at length after many sails and alienations passed by the
Foulers and Herons, unto the said Lord Williams; and so by his daughter fell to
Sir Henry, Lord Norris, whom Queen Elizabeth made Baron Norris of Ricot, a man
of good mark in regard of his noble birth and parentage: for he descended from
the Lovells, who were near allied by kindred unto the greatest houses in
England: but most renowned for that right valiant and warlike Progeny of his,
as the Netherlands, Portugal, little Bretagne, and Ireland can witness. At
the length, Tame by Haseley, where sometimes Barentines flourished as at
Cholgrave comes to Dorchester by Bid termed Civitas Dorcinia: by Leland
Hydropolis, a name devised by his own conceit, yet fit enough, Dorchester.
considering that Dour in the British tongue signifies water. That this Town
was in old time inhabited by Romans, their coined pieces of money oftentimes
turned up do imply: and our Chronicles record, that it was for a long time
much frequented by reason of a Bishops See, which Birinus the Apostle of the
West Saxons appointed to be there. For when he had baptized Cinigilse a pety
King of the West Saxons, unto whom Oswald King of Northumberland was Godfather,
both these Kings, as says Bid, gave this City unto the same Bishop to make
therein his Episcopal residency. This Birinus, as we may read also in Bid,
was Dignior attolli guam sit Tyrinthius heroes,
Quam sit Alexander Macedo; Tyrinthius hosts
Vicit, Alexander mundum, Birinus utrunque.
Nec tantum vicit mundum, Birinus, and hostem,
Sed sese bello vincens, and victus eodem.
More worthy for to be extold than Hercules for might,
Or that great king of Macedon, who Alexander hight:
For Hercules subdued his foes; and Alexander he
Won all the World by force of Arms: But our Birinus, see,
Did vanquish both: nor conquered he only the World and Foe,
But in one fight subdued himself, and was subdued also.


After 460. years, Remigus Bishop of this place least the name of Bishop
should loose credit in so small a City (a thing forbidden in the Canons) in the
Reign of William the first translated his seat to Lincoln. At which time this
City of Dorchester (as Malmesbury says who then flourished) was but slender
and of small resort, yet the majesty of the Churches was great, whether you
respected either the old building, or the new diligence and care employed
thereupon. Ever since it began by little and Tame and Isis meeting in one
stream become hand-fast (as it were) and joined in Wedlock: Tame and Isis
meet.
and as in waters, so in name, they are coupled, as Ior and Dan in the holy
Land, Dor and Dan in France, whence come Jordan and Dordan. For ever after
this, the River by a compound word is called, Tamisis, that is, Tamis. He
seems first to have observed this, who wrote the book entitled Eulogium
Historiarum. Now as touching this marriage of Isis with Tame have here
certain Verses taken out of Hic vestit Zephyrus florentes gramine ripas,
FLORAQYE nectareis redimit caput ISIDIS herbis,
GRATIA flores,
Contexit geminas CONCORDIA laeta corollas,
Extollitque suas taedas Hymenaeus in altum.
Naiades aedificant thalamumque thorumque profundo,
Stamine gemmato textum, pictisque columnis
Vndique fulgentem. Qualem nec Lydia Regi
Extruxit Pelopi, nec tu Cleopatra marito.
Illic manubias cumulant, quas Brutus Achivis,
Quas Brennus Graecis, rigidus Gurmundus Hibernis,
Bunduica Romany, claris Arthurius Anglis

Abstulit Edwardus, virtusque Britannica Gallis.
Hauserat interea sperati conjugis ignes
TAMA Catechlaunum delabens montibus, illa
Impatiens nescire thorum, nupturaque gressus
Accelerat, longique dies sibi stare videntur,
Ambitiosa suum donec praeponere nomen
Possit amatori. Quid non mortalia cogit
Ambitio? notamque suo jam nomine Tame.
villam
Linquit, Norrisiis geminans salvete, valete.

Augurium latura thori, nunc TAMA resurgit
Nexa comam spicis, trabea succincta virenti,
Aurorae superans digitos, vultumque Diones,
Pestanae non labra rosae, non lumina gemmae,
Lilia non aequant crines, non colla pruinae,
Vtque fluit, crines madidos in terga repellit,
Reddit and undanti legem formamque capillo,
En subito frontem placidis e fluctibus ISIS
Effert, and totis radios spargentia campis

Iungit and optatae nunc oscula plurima TAMAE,
Mutuaque explicitis innectunt colla lacertis,
Oscula mill sonant, connexu brachia pallent,
Labra ligant animos: tandem descenditur una
In thalamum, quo juncta FIDE CONCORDIA sancta,
Splendida conceptis sancit connubia verbis.
Vndique multifori strepitat nunc tibia buxi,
Flucticolae Nymphae, Dryades, Satyrique petulci
In numeros circum ludunt, ducuntque choreas,

Permulcent volucres sylvas modulamine passim,
Certatimque sonat laetum reparabilis ECHO.
Omnia nunc rident, campi laetantur, AMORES
Fraenatis plaudunt avibus per inania vecti:
Personat and cythara quicquid videre priores,
Pronuba victura lauro velata BRITONA.
Haec canit ut toto diducta BRITANNIA mundo,
Cum victor rupes divulserit aequore Nereus,
Et cur Neptuni lapidosa grandine natum

Hercules illimes libatus Thamisis undas,
Quas huc adveniens ar as sacravit Ulysses,
Vtque Corinaeo Brutus comitatus Achate
Occiduos adiit tractus, ut Caesar anhelus
Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis, etc.
And after a few other verses:
Dixerat, unito consurgit and unus amore
Laetior exultans nunc nomine TAMISIS uno,
Oceanumque patrem quaerens jactantior undas
Promovet.
Here Zephyrus with fresh green grass
The Banks above does spread,
Flora.
Fair Flora with ay-living herbs
Adourneth ISIS head,
Most lovely GRACE selecteth forth
Sweet flowers that never die
And gladsome CONCORD plats thereof
Two guitlands skilfully.
With all God HYMENAEUS lifts
His torches up on hie.
A Bride-chamber the NAIADES
Beneath of rare device
And Bed do rear, ywov'n with warp
Beset with stones of price.
All shining eke with pillars tall,
And wrought full curiously
The like did ne^her Lydie for
King Pelops edify,
Nor thou, Queen Cleopatra, for
Thine husband Antony.
There lay they forth and make no spare,
Those spoils that whilom Brut
From Achives took; what riches great
From Grecians Brennus stout,
And from fierce Irish, Gurmund wonn,
What either Bundwic Queen,
From Romans gat, or Arthur from
Our English there are seen.
What ever from the Scots by force
Of fight our Edward King,
Or valiant English from the French
By arms away did bring.
Mean while, down Catechlanian hills
TAME gliding, kindled had
The fire of love in hope of ISE
Her husband wondrous glad.
Impatient now of all delay
She hastneth him to wed,
And thinks the days be long until
They meet in marriage bed.
Until I say, ambitious she,
May now before her love
Her own name set: see whereunto
Ambition minds does move!
And now by this she leav's the Tame.
town
That known is by her name,
All hail, fare well redoubling to
The Norris's by the same.
Old Dorchester at length she sees

And lucky Augury of this
Long wished marriage.
Up rises Tame then, who know's
Her locks with ears of corn
Full well to knit, with kirtle green
Her wast eke to adorn:
The lightsome rays of morning bright
She now does far excel,
Dione fair in countenance

Her lips the Pestane Rose surpass,
Her eyes, gemmes of great cost,
Her hair the Lilies fresh and white,
Her neck the hoary frost.
And as she runs, her hair all wet
She does behind her cast,
Which waving thus she kembeth slick,
And lays even at last.
Lo, Isis sudainly out of

His lovely face, his eyes withal
Glitter with golden hew,
As they from dropping visage send
Their beams the fields throughout,
Whiles one another neck with arms
Displayed they clip about,
Full sweetly he does Tama kiss
Whom he has wished so long,
A thousand kisses twixt them twain

With clasping close their arms wax pale,
Their lips their hearts link fast,
To nuptial chamber thus they both
Jointly descend at last:
Where CONCORD with religious FAITH
Together both ymet,
Knit up the knot of wedlock sure
With words in form yset.
And now the pipes of thyrled box

The water Nymphs, the Dryades
The wanton Satyrs round
About the place disport and dance
The measures cunningly,
Whiles on the grass they foot it fine,
In rounds as merrily.
The Birds heerewith in every wood
Melodiously do sing,
And ECHO her redoubled notes

All things now laugh, the fields rejoice
The CVPIDS as they fly,
Amid the air on bridled birds
Clap hands right pleasantly
BRITONA, hand-fast-maker she,
All clad in Laurel green,
Play's on the Harp what ever acts
Our ancestors have seen.
She sings how BRITANNY from all
The world divided was,
When Nereus with victorious Sea
Through cloven rocks did pass:
And why it was that Hercules
When he arrived here,
Upon our coast, and tasted once
The mudlesse TAMIS clear,
Did Neptun's son high Albion
Vanquish in bloody fight
And with an haile-like storm of stones
Killed him in field outright.
And when Ulysses hither came,
What Altars sacred were
By him? How Brute with Corinae
His trusty friend and fere,
Went forth into the Western parts
And how that Caesar, he
When he had sought and found, turned back
With fear, from Britannie.
And after some few verses interposed.
This said, then Tame and Isis both
In love and name both one,
Hight Tamisis, more joy's therein,
And hastening to be gone
Arises up and leaping out,
With hastfull hot desire,
Advances forth his stream, and seeks
The Ocean main his sire.


Benson.
From Dorchester, Tamis goes to Benson, in old time Bensingston, which Marian
calls Villam Regiam, that is, The Kings town, and reports, That Ceaulin
took it from the Britans in the year of our Lord, 572. and that the
West Saxons kept the possession of it 200. years after. For, then Offa the
King of Mercians, thinking it would be for his commodity and honor both, that
they should have nothing on this side the river, won it, and subjected it to
him. But at this day it goes for a village only, and has a house of the
Kings hard by, sometime a fair place, but now Elmes called Ewelme, Ewelme.
but commonly New-Elme, was built by William de la pole Duke of Suffolk, who
having taken to Wife Alice the only daughter of Thomas Chaucer, had by her
fair lands heereabout as elsewhere: and beside this house, he erected also a
fair Church, wherein the said Alice lies buried, and a proper Hospital: But
John Earl of Lincoln his Grand child, who by King Richard the Third had been
declared heir apparent to the Crown, overthrew in some sort the happy estate
of this Family. For whiles he plotted and projected seditiously to rebel
against King Henry the seventh, he was attainted and slain in the battle at
Stoke, and Edmund his Honor, by laying unto it certain Manours, and
Wallingford among others, which before had a long time belonged unto the Dukes
of Cornwall.

Tamis from hence having fetched a great compass about windeth in manner back
again into himself, enclosing within it the Hundred of Henley, mounting high
with Hills, and beset with thick Woods, which some do think the ANCALITES
that yielded themselves unto Caesar's protection, Ancalites.
did inhabit. Here is ^ix-br^nd and Stonor ancient Possessions of the Families
of Stonores *
who since the time of King Edward the Third when Sir John Stonore was chief
Justice in the Common Pleas, Stonor.
flourished with great alliance, and fair revenues until they were
transferred by an Heir general to Sir Adrian Fortescue unhappily attainted,
whose daughter, Heir to her mother was married to the first Baron Wen^worth.
Next neighbor hereunto is Pus-hull which the Family of D'oily held by yielding
yearly Pus-hull Naper. Fin Mich. 10. R. 2. Gray of Rotherfield.
or three shillings for all service. Under this Southward stands Greies
Rotherfield, a house which in times past Walter Gray the Archbishop of York
gave freely unto William Gray his Nephew, the Inheritance whereof by the Baron
of D'Eincourt was devolved upon the Lovels. Now it is the dwelling house of Sir
William Knolles, Treasurer of the Kings House, whom James our King for his
faithful service performed unto Queen Elizabeth, and to be performed unto
himself, Baron Knolles. Henley.
advanced to the honorable title of Baron Knolles of Rotherfield. Nere unto
it, Henley upon Tamis, in old time called Hanleganz shows it self in the
very confines of the shires. The Inhabitants whereof be for the most part
Watermen, who make their chiefest gain by carrying down in their Barges wood
Molinies were Lords thereof, from whom by the Hungerfords who procured unto the
town, of King Henry the Sixth the liberty of holding two faires, it came by
right of Inheritance unto the honorable house of the Hastings. Xiphilinus.
And where now the Tamis has a wooden Bridge over it, they say in times past
there stood one of stone arched. But whether this Bridge were here, that Dio
writes the Romans passed over when they pursued the Britans along this tract,
who below had swom over the river, hard it is for a man to say. From Henley,
the Chiltern-bils hold on with a continued ridge running Northward, and divide
this Country from Buckinghamshire: at the foot whereof stand many small
towns: among which these Robert D' Oily: Shirburne.
and Shirburne a pretty Castle of the Quatremans in times past, but now the
habitation of the Chamberlans descended out of the house of the Earls of
Tankervill, who having been long ago Chamberlains of Normandy, their
Posterity relinquishing that old name of Tankervills, became surnamed
Chamberlans, of the Office which their ancestors bare.

To omit Edgar, Earls of Oxford.
Algar, and other English Saxons, official Earls of Oxford; Since after the
Conquest, the title of the Earldom of Oxford has flourished a long time in
the Family of Vere, which derive their descent from the Earls of Guines, and
that surname from Vere a town in Zeland. They received the beginning of their
Aubrey de Vere for his singular wisdom with sundry favors and benefits, as
namely with the Chamberlainship of England, and Portgreveship of the City of
London. To his son Aubrey, ^
Henry the Second (before he was established King, and when he used only
this style, Henry Son to King Henry's daughter, right heir of England and
Normandy) restored first the Chamberlan-shippe, which he had lost in the
civil broiles, and then offered unto him which of the Titles he himself would
choose, of these four Earledomes: Dorset, Wilshire, Barkshire, and
Oxfordshire; that he might divert him from Stephen then usurping the Kingdom,
and assure him to himself. And in the end both Maude the Empress, and Henry
also her son being now come to the Robert de Vere, who being in very high
favor with King Richard the second was honored with these new and strange
dignities not heard of before, namely, Marquess of Dublin, and Duke of
Ireland: of which, as one said, he left nothing at all to himself, but to his
Tomb John the First of that name so trusty and true to the House of Lancaster,
that both He and his Son and Heir Aubrey lost their heads therefore
together in the First year of King Edward the Fourth. John his second Son a
right skillful, and expert Martial man, nevertheless was most firm and
faithful to the said House of Lancaster, fought in sundry battles against
King Edward the Fourth, defended and made good for a while Saint Michaels
Mount, and was an especial assistant unto Henry the Seventh in attaining to
the Kingdom. Another John likewise in the reign of Henry the Eighth, a Man in
all parts of his Good Earl. He was great Grandfather of Henry that is now
Earl, and the Eighteenth of this race in Lineall descent, and also Grandfather
of Sir Francis and Sir Horatio Vere, brethren, who by their singular knowledge
in Military affairs, and exploits most valiantly, and fortunately achieved in
the Low Countries, have added exceeding much honor and glory to themselves,
and to the ancient Nobility of their Family.

This County contains Parish Churches. 280.

CATTIEUCHLANI.
Upon the DOBUNI Eastward there confined the people, which Ptolomee calls
according to the diversity of copies, CATTIEUCHLANI, CATTIDUDANI, CATHICLUDANI,
and Dio CATTUELLANI. Which of these might be the truest name, I can not easily
say. Yet give me leave I pray you in this place to cast forth my conjecture
(although it is an abortive) concerning this point. CASSII, that of this Cassii
their Prince was named Cassivellaunus or Cassibelinus: (for so we find it
diversely written. Also that, of Cassivellaunus name, this very people were by
the Grecians termed Cattuellani, Cathuellani and Cattieuchlani. For, Cassii.
among the Nations of Britain, Caesar reckons the CASSII; who that they were
seated in these parts it is most certain: and of whose name a pretty portion of
this Tract is at this day called Caishow. And seeing that Cassivellaunus ruled
this Country as it appears by Caesar, and CASSII does most plainly bewray it
self; it may seem probable enough that Cassivellaunus, was so named, as one
would say, The Prince of the Cassii. And unless it were so, why should Dio
name this Cassivellaunus, Suellan, for Vellan, and Ninnius the Britan, Belin.
call him, not Cassibellinus, but Bellinus; as though that Bellinus were the
proper name either of the Man, or of his Dignity? Neither let it seem strange,
that Princes in old time took names of their own Nations. Catti in Germany
had their Cattimarus, the Teutons their Teutomarus and Teutobochus, the Daci
their Decebalus, and the Goths their Gottiso. And what should let, but that our
Cassii might have their Cassibelinus? Considering that Belinus has been an
usual name in this Island: and some have thought; that Cunobelinus who reigned
amongst the Iceni, was so called, as one would say, the Belinus of the Iceni.
From this Cassivellaunus therefore, if the Greek writers have not wrested
these names Cattuellani and Cattieuchlani, etc. I confess, that in this matter
mine

But whence this people should come to be named CASSII, I know not, unless
happily it were of their Martial prowess. For, Servius Honoratus writes,
that the ancient Gauls who spoke the same language that Britans did, called
hardy and valiant men, Gessos: Whence Ninnius interprets Cethilou The seed
of Warriors. Now that these excelled in Warlike prowess it is manifest: for,
before Caesar's coming, they had warred continually with their Neighbors, they
had reduced part of the DOBUNI under their subjection; the Britans had chosen
their Prince, General over all their forces in the War against Caesar, and
they had enlarged their Empire and name far abroad every way; For, all those
generally were known by the name of CASSII, or CATTIEUCHLANI who now take up
three Shires or Counties, to wit, Buckingham-shire, Bedford-shire and

BUCKINGHA^ Comitatus, in quo olim insederunt CATTIEUCHLANI



WHereas Buckingham-shire is given to bring forth Beech trees plentifully,
which the English-Saxons in elder times called Bucken, it may seem
conjecturally that Buckingham the chief Town, and so the whole shire took
the name from Beech trees. For there is a Country in Germany bearing Beech
trees, named Buchonia: and with us, a town in Norfolk called Buckenham,
fruitful of Beech, as I have been informed. This shire carrying but a small
breadth, runs forth in length from the Tamis Northward. On the South Side it
looks into Barke-shire, severed from it by the river Tamis: on the West,
Oxfordshire; from the North it has Northhampton-shire, and from the East
first Bedford-shire, then Hertford-shire, and afterward Middle-sex. The Country
generally is of a rich plentiful soil, and passing full of Inhabitants, who
chiefly employ themselves in graizing of cattle. It is divided into two parts,
whereof the one bending into the South and East, and rising into hills, they
call Chilterne, in the English-Saxon tongue (...): the other lying under it
Northward is named the Vale.

Chiltern got that name according to the very nature of the soil of Chalky
marle, Chiltern.
which the ancient English men termed Cylt or Chilt. For, all of it mounteth
aloft with whitish hills, standing upon a mixed earth of Clay and Chalk clad
with groves and woods, wherein is much Beech, and it was altogether unpassable
in times past by reason of trees, until that Leofstane Abbot of Saint Albans
did cut them down, because they yielded a place of refuge for thieves. In it,
where the Tamis glideth at the foot of those hills with a winding course,
Marlow.
stands Marlow, a pretty town of no mean credit taking name of the said
Chalk commonly termed Marle: which being spread upon Corn ground eaten out of
heart with long tillage, does quicken the same again, so as that after one
years rest it never lies fallow, but yields

Nere unto this, a rill sheaddeth it self in the Tamis, making way through low
places, Wickham.
and where it turns has a town upon it called High Wickham or Wicombe
rather, which happily thereof took the name, considering that the German
Saxons term any winding reach of river and sea, a Wicke, and Comb a low
Valle. And very many places we meet withal in England named in that respect.
This town for largeness and fair building is equal to the greatest towns
in this shire, and in that it has a Major for the Head-Magistrate worthily to
be preferred before the rest. About the time of the Normans coming in, Wigod
of Wallengford was Lord both of the Burgh of Wicomb, and also of the Villa
forinseca (I speak according to the Record Inquisition) that is, The out
Hamlet or Bery. After whose death King Henry the first laid it unto the Crown.
But King John at the length, divided the said Out Berry between Robert de
Vi-pa^^t and Alane Basset. North off Wicomb mounteth up aloft the highest place
of this Region, and thereof it retains still the British name Pen. For the
head or eminent top of a thing is with them called Pen: and hence it is that
the Pennine Alps, the Ap^^nine and many Mountains among us took their names.
Nere unto this Wickham or Wicomb is Bradenham seated in a very commodious and
wholesome place, which now is become the principal habitation of the Barons of
Windesor: (concerning whom I have already spoken in Barke-shire) ever since
that in the memory of our fathers William Lord Windesor seated himself here,
Andrew descended from the old stem of ancient Barons, King Henry the Eighth
dignified with the honor of Baron Windesor.

Tamis having entertained the said Ri^^ comes down with a rolling stream by
Aelan, See in Bashire.
famous for a College, the nour^e garden (as it were) or plant plot of good
letters, which that most virtuous and godly Prince K. Henry the Sixth, as I have
already said, first founded. And some few miles forward the river Cole enters
into Tamis, Colbroke: Colbroke. Pontes.
which was that PONTES, whereof Antonine the Emperor makes mention, as the
distance on both sides from Wallingford and London does witness: Neither is
there any other place else in the way that leads from Wallingford to London
to which the name of Pontes, that is, Bridges, might be more fitly applied. For
this Cole is here parted into four channels, over which stand as many bridges
for the commodity of passengers; whereof that it took this name, the very
signification of the word does plainly show. Like as Gephyrae a town in
Bo^etia, and another Pontes in France, where the County of Ponthieu, our
Tunbridg, and others are so called, of Bridges. This County of Ponthieu (to
note so much by the way) descended Aeleanor the wife of King Edward the First,
who by her mothers right was sole and entire Heir of the same. Cole by these
several partitions of his streams compasses in certain pleasant Islands,
into which the Danes fled in the year of our Lord 894. when Aelfred preassed
hard upon them, and there by the benefit of the place defended themselves,
until the English for want of provisions were forced to break up Siege and
leave them. At this divorce and division of the waters Eure or Ever a little
Town shows it self, which when K. Richard the First had given unto Sir
Robert Fitz-Roger, Lord of Clavering, his younger sons of this place assumed
their surname, to wit, Hugh, from whom the Barons of Eure; and Robert from whom
the Family of Eure in Axolme is sprung Burnham better known by the Hodengs,
Burnham.
Lord Huntercombs, and Scudamores, who were Lords thereof and of Beacons-field
successively by inheritance, than by it self. Stoke Pogeis, Stoke Pogeis.
so called of the Lords thereof in old time named de Pogeis, and from them
hereditarily devolved upon the Hastings: of whose race Edward Baron Hastings of
Loughborrow founded here an Hospital for poor people, making himself one of
their society, and his nephew by the brother Henry Earl of Huntingdon built a
very fair house: and Fernham, the very same, if I be not deceived, which was
called Fernham Royal: Fernham* Royal.
and which in times past, the Barons Furnivall held by service of finding their
Sovereign Lord the King upon the day of his Coronation a glove for his right
From the Furnivalls it came by the daughter of Thomas Nevill, The book of
Fines.
unto the Talbots Earls of Shrewsbury, who although by exchange they
surrendered up this Manor unto King Henry the Eight, yet they reserved this
honorable Office still to them and their Heirs for ever.

This Cole carries down with him another riveret also, which somewhat above
from the West sheddeth it self into it: upon it we saw first Missenden, where
stood a religious House that acknowledged the D'Ollies their founders and
certain Gentlemen surnamed De Missenden their especial benefactours upon a
vow for escaping a ship-wracke. I. Rosse.
And then in the Vale Amersham, Amersham.
in the Saxon tongue (...) Fr^ncis Russe^^ Earl of Bedford, who being the
express pattern of true Piety and nobleness lived most dearly beloved of all
good men. But the principal seat of the Earls of Bedford is called Cheineis,
Cheneys.
standing more Eastward, where both John the first Earl out of this Family,
and that noble Francis his son lie entombed together. Latimers.
Unto which adjoyneth on the one side Latimers, (so named of the Lords thereof,
I mean those more ancient Barons Latimer) before time called Islehamsted,
where Sir Edwin Sands Knight, who took to wife the only daughter of the Baron
Sands, dwelt, while he lived in a very fair house, and on the other Chesham
Bois, where, and at Draiton Beauchamp the Family of Cheneis has anciently

From hence I passed scarce three miles Northward, but I came to the ridge of
Chilturne-hils, which divides the whole region a cross from the South-west to
the North-east, passing by many villages and small towns, among which that of
greatest Hamden, which gave name to an ancient and well spread Family in these
parts. In the very East corner of these hills Ashridge a retiring house sometime
of the kings stands upon an ascent; Asheridg^^
where Edmund Earl of Cornwall son to Richard king of the Romans founded a
religious house for a new Order of religious men in those days, called
Good-men.
Bon: Hommes by him first brought into England: Who professed the rule of S.
Augustine, and were according to the manner of the Order of the Eremitans clad
in sky colored garments. From this ridge or edge of the Hills, there is a
large prospect every way down into the Vale beneath, The Vale.
which I said was the other part of the Shire. This almost throughout is a
plain Champion, standing likewise upon a clay-soile, stiff, tough, and
fruitful; with pasture meadows most plentiful of grass de Borstall were
famous in former times. About this Forest the year after Christ's Nativity
914. the Danes furiously raged: and then happily it was, that the ancient Burgh
was destroyed, whose antiquity Roman coined pieces of money there found do
testify, which afterward became the royal house of King Edward the
Confessor: Brill.
But now it is a Country Village, and in stead of Buri-Hill, they call it
short, Brill. In this Vale although it be exceeding full of Towns and
Villages, yet very few of them are memorable, Or Isa.
and those either upon the River Tame or Vsa, Ouse. Not far from Tame, which
waters the South part of the Vale, upon the rising of a pretty hill stands a
fair Market Town well occupied, and compassed about with many most pleasant
green meadows and pastures, commonly called Ailesbury, Ailesbury.
of which, the whole Vale is termed the Vale of Ailesbury. The Engish-Saxons
called it (...), when Cuthwulf the Saxon won it in the year of our Lord 572.
For the British name, whereby it was known before, in continuance of time is
utterly lost. Famous it has been in times past especially for Ediths sake
there fostered, who having obtained of her Father ^rewald this Town for her
Dowry, forthwith by persuasion of the religious people bad the world and her
husband farewell, and taking her self to the Vale for opinion of holiness and
devotion in that most Eadburg: of whose name there is a little Town among the
Hills as yet called Eadburton. In the time of King William the Conqueror it was
a Manor of the Kings: and certain yard-lands were here given by the King,
with this condition, that the Possessour or Holder thereof (mark ye nice and
dainty ones) should find (...) for the Kings bed when the King came thither.
In the Reign of Edward the First, certain Gentlemen named de Ailesbury, who
bare for their Arms A^ure, a Cross Argent, were by report (but I know not how
truly) the Lords thereof; certain it is, they were in those days men of the
better sort and of great good note, and such as by marriage with the daughter
and Caihaignes (who were in times past Lords of Meddleton Caihaignes) came to a
fair and goodly inheritance, which at last by heirs general came to the De
Cadurcis.
Chaworths, the Staffords of Gra^ton, etc. But now, the greatest name and
reputation that it has is by grazing and feeding of Cattaile. Very much
beholden also it is unto Justice Baldwin, who not only adorned it with
public aedifices, but also made a passing fair causey to it (where the way
was very deep and cumbersome) for three miles or thereabout in length.

Here round about in every side flocks of sheep pasture most plenteously in
mighty numbers, laden with fleeces, to the great gain and commodity of their
Masters especially at Quarendon, Quarendon.
a Lordship belonging to Sir Henry Lee an honorable Eythorp, which sometime
was the Dinhams and now the Dorm^^s Knights, and also Winchindon appertaining
to the Family of the Godwins Knights likewise, etc.

Lower we meet with nothing memorable upon Tame, unless Cheardesley be (as
many think it is) the place which was called in the Saxon-tongue
Cerdick-flega, of Cerdic the Saxon, who fought a very sharp and bloody
battle there with the Britans. Credendon, Crendon.
now Crendon, which was the Capital house belonging to the Honor of Giffard,
for so were those lands termed which fell unto Walter Giffard at the Conquest
of England, whose son the second Earl of Buckingham and Ermingard his wife,
Notesly.
built the Abbay of Noteley thereby in the year 1112. But his cozen Hugh de
Bolebec, from whom by the females the Earls of Oxford are descended, Vi^ounts
Bolebec.
held of him no small possessions in these parts. And the ruins of Bolebec
Castle are seen hard by within the Parish of Whitchurch. Near unto which is
Ascot, the principal Mansion house of the Dormers from whence descended the
Duchess of Feria in Spain, and others of noble note.

Usa or Ouse, in times past Isa, and the second Isis, which with a soft and
still stream Bittlesden, Bittlesden. The Register of the Abbay.
which Robert de Mapertshall Lord of the place gave unto Osbert de Clinton
Chamberlain to King Henry the First a powerful Courtier, that he might not be
punished as a Fellon for stealing away one of the Kings Hounds. But he restored
it unto him again with a cousin of his in marriage: yet lost he the same in the
hot broile of the civil war under King Stephen; De Bosco.
and Ernald Bois by way of a benefit and courtesy received it at the hands of
Robert Earl of Leicester: And he in the year of Christ 1127. founded there a
little Monastery for the Cistertien Monks. Then Ouse saluteth Buckingham the
Shire Town, which, as Marian says, King Edward Before the Conquest.
elder in the year of our Lord 915. fortified with a Rampire and Sconces on
both banks, against the Invasions and assaults of the Danes. Yet was it of no
great name, as it may seem, in the first age of the Normans, seeing that in
the Reign of King Edward the Confessor, (as we read in William Conquerours
Domesday book) it discharged it self for one Hide and no more, and had but
six and twenty Burgesses. As for the Town it is seated upon a low ground, but
the River Ouse, very commodious for Mils encircleth it about save only on the
North side. The Castle standing in the midst raised upon an hill cast up,
whereof no Relics in manner are now to be seen, divides the Town as it
were in twain. The greater part of the Town bears North, wherein stands
the Towne-house, the other toward the South is the Rumald a child, who being
borne in Kings-Sutton a Village thereby was canonized by our forefathers for a
childe-Saint, and much famed with many miracles.

From hence Ouse hasteneth fair and softly into the North, and more Eastward
from the River, Whaddon.
near unto the woods, ye have a sight of Whaddon, the habitation in times past
of the Giffords, who were by Inheritance keepers of Whaddon Chase under the
Earl of Vlster: and from whom it came to the Pigots, who passed it away by
sail and alienation. There stands now a house of the warlike Family of the
Greys, Barons of Wilton, Barons Gray of Wilton.
who held the Manor near adjoining named Acton, by Serjeanty of keeping one
Gerfalcon of their Sovereign Lord the King. Whereupon that Family Greys has
for their Badge or Cognizance a Falcon Sejant upon a Glove.

Not far from hence is Thor^ton an habitation of the Tirelles, and Saulden,
where is a fair and lovely house built by Sir John Fortescue a right
honorable knight and deeply learned withal, who for his wisdom was
Chauncellor of the Exchequer and Duchy of Lancaster, and of the Privy
Counsel to Queen Elizabeth, and king James. On the other side of the River
and not far from the bank stand neighbour-like, Stow a house of the Family
of Temple, Leckhamsted an habitation of the Greenwaies, Lillinstone likewise
the seat of the ancient Family De-Hairell, commonly called Dairell; and
Luffeld, where in times past was founded a Monastery by Robert Earl of
Leicester: but by reason that the Monks were all consumed with the plague, the
Stony-Stratford, a Town of all the rest most frequented, named so of Stones,
The Street way, and a Fourd: For, the houses are built of a certain rough
stone which is dug forth in great abundance at Caversham hard by,
Watlingstreet, which was a Military high way made by the Romans, and is
evidently to be seen yet beyond the Town with the bank or causey thereof,
and has a fourd but now nothing shalow, and hardly passable. The Town is of
good bigness, and shows two Churches, and in the mids a Cross, though it be
none of the fairest, erected in memorial of Queen Aeleonor of Spain, wife to
Edward the First with the Arms of England, Castile and Leon, etc. also of the
Earldome of Ponthieu, whereof she was heir: And where sometimes there had been
a Fourd, the River Ous^ has a stone bridge over it, which keeps in the River
that was wont, when it swelled with winter floods, to break out and overflow
the fields with great violence. But upon the bank of the Pasham, a place so
called of passing over the River, so that it may seem in times past to have
been that passage, which King Edward the Elder kept against the Danes, whiles
he fortified Torcester: But this passage or Ferry became quite forlet after
that the Bridge was built at Stony-Stratford. Now if I should guess that
LACTORODVM, which Antonine the Emperor mentions stood here; beside the
situation upon the Military Highway of the Romans, and the distance from
other places, the signification also of the old name LACTORODVM fetched out of
the British language, Lactorodum.
makes for me and favors my conjecture. Which name accords passing well
with this new English Ouse runs hard by Wolverton anciently Woluerington the
seat of an ancient family so surnamed: Leach in the British tongue signifies
stones, Rid and Ryd a Fourd. Wolverton. Newport Paynell.
whose lands are named in Records, The Baronie of Wulverington, from whom it
came to the house of the Longvilles of ancient descent in these parts: and by
Newport Painell which took that name of Sir Fulcoa Painell the Lord thereof,
and was from him devolved to the Barons Someries of Dudley, who here had their
Castle. Then, by Terringham, (which gave both name and habitation to a
worshipful house and of great antiquity) it goes to Oulney a meetly good
mercate town. This far and a little further reaches the County of
Buckingham by Use the limit and bound thereof.

Earls of Buckingham.
so far as hitherto I could observe, was Walter surnamed Giffard, son to
Osbern de Bolebec, a man of great name and reputation among the Normans: Who in
a Charter of King Henry the First is cited among the witnesses thereto by the
name of Earl of Buckingham. After him followed his son bearing the same
name, who in the book of Abbingdon Abbay is called Earl Walter the younger,
and died issuelesse in the year 1164. Afterward in the reign of Henry the
Second, that famous Richard Strangbow Earl of Pembroch called Conqueror of
Ireland, who derived his descent from the sister and heir of Walter Giffard the
second, in certain public instruments bare this title. Then for a long time
after lay this title as it were out of use and quite lost, until that in the
year 1377. Thomas of Woodstock, of whom I have already spoken among the Dukes
of Gloucester. Of this Thamas his daughter married unto Edmund Earl of Stafford
was borne Humfrey Earl of Stafford, created Duke of Buckingham, with an
invidious precedence before all Dukes of England by King Henry the Sixth, in
whose quarrel he spent his life, fighting most valiantly in the battle at
Northampton. After him succeeded his Graundchild Henry, by his Son Humfrey,
who made way for King Richard the Third the usurper unto the Kingdom, and
streightwaies practiced to depose him: for that he would not restore unto him
the inheritance of the Bohuns by hereditarie right belonging unto him: but he
being intercepted lost his head for it: and found (but Edward being restored
again through special favor of King Henry the Seventh, by the wicked slights
and practices of Cardinal Wolsey fell into disgrace with King Henry the
Eighth, and being condemned of high treason, for that among other matters he
had consulted with a Wizard about succession of the Charles the fifth heard, he
said, as (it is written in his life) That a Butchers dog had devoured the
fairest Bucke in all England: alluding to the name Buckingham, and the said
Cardinal who was a Butchers son. Ever since which time the splendor of this
most noble family has so decayed and faded, that there remains to their
posterity the bare title only of Barons of Stafford, whereas they were styled
before, Dukes of Buckingham, Earls of Stafford, Hereford, Northampton, and
Perth; Lords of Brecknock, Kimbalton, and Tunbridge.

There are reckoned in this small Shire Parishes 185.

BEDFORD Comitatus olim pars CATHIFVCLANORVM



BEDFORD-SHIRE is one of the three Counties, which we said the Cattieuchlani
inhabited: On the East Side and the South it joyneth to Cambridge-shire and
Hertford-shire, on the West to Buckingham-shire, and on the North to
Northamton-shire and Huntingdon-shire, and by the river OVSE crossing over it
is divided into two parts. The North-side

Ouse, Barons Mordant.
where it enters into this shire, first visits Turvy the Lord Mordants
house, who are beholden to King Henry the Eighth for their Barony: For he
created John Mordant a wise and prudent man, who had wedded the daughter and
one of the coheires of H. Vere of Addington, Baron Mordant; then runs it by
Harwood a Village, in old time called Hareleswood, where Sampson, surnamed
Fortis founded a See Hypodigma page 153.
and where in the year of our redemption 1399. a little before those troubles
and civil broiles wherewith England a long time was rent in pieces, this river
stood still, The water divided.
and by reason that the waters gave back on both sides, men might pass on
foot within the very channel for three miles together, not without wondering
of all that saw it, who took it as a plain presage of the division ensuing.
Afterward it passes by Odill or Woodhill, sometimes Wahull, which had his
Lords surnamed also De Wahul, men of ancient Nobility (whose Barony consisted
of thirty knights fees in diverse countries) and had here their Castle, which is
now hereditarily descended to Sir R. Chetwood knight; as the inheritance of the
Chetwoods came formerly to the Wahuls. Wahull.
From hence Ouse no less full of crooked crankes and windings, than Maeander
it self, Bletsho.
goes by Bletnesho, commonly called Bletso, the residence in times past of the
Pateshuls, after of the Beauchamps, and now of the Honorable family of S.
John, which long since by their valor attained unto very large and goodly
possessions in Glamorgan-shire, and in our days through the favor of Q.
Elizabeth of happy memory, unto the dignity of Barons, when she created Sir
Oliver the second Baron of her creation, Lord S. John of Bletnesho unto whom it
came by Margaret Beauchamp an inheritrice wedded first to Sir Oliver S. John,
Barons S. John de Bletnesh.
from whose these Barons derive their pedigree, and secondly to John Duke of
Somerset, unto whom she bare the Lady Margaret Countess of Richmond, a Lady
most virtuous and always to be remembered with praises; from whose loins the
late Kings and Queens of England

From hence Ouse hastneth by Brumham a seat of the Dives of very ancient
parentage in these parts to Bedford, Bedford.
in the Saxon-tongue (...), the principal town, and whereof the Shire also
takes name: and cutteth it so through the midst, that it might seem to be
two several towns, but that a stone bridge joyneth them together. A town to
be commended more for the pleasant situation and ancientry thereof, then for
beauty or largeness, although a man may tell five Churches in it. That it was
Antonines LACTODORVM, Places to give entertainment by the way unto Travelers,
Bayting and lodging places.
I dare not as others do, affirm: considering that it stands not upon the
Romans Military road way, which is the most certain mark to find out the
station and Mansions mentioned by Antonine: neither Liswidur or Lettidur: but
it may seem to have been translated so out of the English name. For Lettuy in
the British language signifies Common Innes, and so Lettidur, Innes upon a
river: like Bedford in English, Beds or Innes at a fourd. Cuthwulf the Saxon,
about the year of our salvation, 572. beneath this town so vanquished the
Britans in an open pitch field, Offa the most puissant King of the Mercians
choose here (as we read in Florilegus) for himself a place of sepulture;
whose tomb the river Ouse swelling upon a time and carrying a more violent and
swifter stream than ordinary in a flood swouped clean away. Afterward also
when it was rased down and lay along by occasion of the Danish depredations,
Before the Conquest.
K. Edward the Elder repaired it, and laid unto it upon the South Side of the
river a pretty townlet, which in that age, as we find in the best copy of
Hovedon, was called Mikesgat. In the time of King Edward the Confessor, as we
read in that book which King William the Conqueror caused to be written It
defended it self for half an Hundred in wars, expeditions, and shipping. The
land belonging to this town was never bided. After this it suffered far more
grievous calamities under the Normans: For when Paganus.
Pain de Beauchamp the third Baron of Bedford had built here a Castle, there
arose not any storm of civil war but it thundered upon it so long as it stood.
Stephen, when with breach of his oath he intercepted to himself the Kingdom
of England, first forced this Castle, and with very great slaughter of men won
it: afterward when the Barons had taken arms against King John, William de
Beauchamp Lord thereof, and one of the Captains of their side, surrendered it
unto their hands: But a year or two after, Falco de laid siege thereto, and
forthwith the Barons yielded, and the King in free gift bestowed it upon him.
Yet the unthankefull man raised up a world of war again upon King Henry the
third: He pulled down Churches to strengthen this Castle, and exceedingly
damnified the territory adjoining, until the King besieged it; and when after
threescore days he had quelled the stubborn stomachs of these rebels,
brought this nest and nourse of sedition into his own hands.

It will not be, I hope, distasteful to the reader, if I set down here the
manner of assaulting this Castle out of a writer who then lived, and saw it: to
the end we may understand with what devises and engines that age (as witty
well near as ours to work men mischief) used in their sieges of Towns. On
the East Side (says he) there was planted one Petrarie and two Mangonells
which daily played upon Cattus.
under which the Pioners and underminers had their ingresse and egresse, whiles
they dug under the Walls of Tower and Castle. Now, was this Castle taken by
four assaults. In the first was the Barbican won: in the second, the out
Ballie. At the third, fell the Wall down near the old Tower by the means of
the Miners, where, by the help of a Of these Mangonells, Patraries, Trabucks,
Bricols, Espringolds, and of that which our ancestors termed the Warwolse, by
which before that Gunnes were devised, they discharged volies of mighty huge
stones, with great violence, and so brake through strong walls, much might
here be said, were they not beside my purpose. But my author proceeds thus:
Falco remained Excommunicate until he restored unto the King the Castle of
Plumpton and Stoke-curcy, with his plate of gold and silver both, and such
money as that he had: and from thence was led to London. Mean Neither yet for
all this is there any thing here more worth the seeing, than the remains of
this Castle on the East side of the town, hanging over the river.

On both sides of Bedford stood two pretty and very fair religious houses,
Helenstow now Eustow on the South part, consecrated by Judith wife to Waltheof
Earl of Huntingdon unto Helena Great Constantines Mother, and to sacred
Virgins: on the East, Newenham, which Roise the wife of Pagani.
Pain de Beauchamp translated thither from Saint Paul's within Bedford.

Ouse is not gone far from hence, Aeton.
but he sees the tokens of a decayed Castle at Eaton, which was another seat
of the family de Beauchamp, and bids Bedford-shire farewell hard by Bissemed,
where Hugh de Beauchamp, and Roger his brother founded Saint Austins order, as
appears by the Popes Bull. These stand on the farther side of Ouse which yet
before from the South is augmented with a namelesse Some call it, Ivell.
brook, at whose confluents is to be seen Temsford, well known by reason of
the Danes standing Camp, and the Castle there, which they then built, when
they wintering in Camp, lay sore upon this Country, and threw down the
Britans Fort (as it is thought) The place whereof, Salenae seems to be that
which Antoninus called Sulloniaca.
now called Chesterfield and Sandy, shows oftentimes pieces of Roman coin,
as express tokens of the antiquity thereof: Neither do some doubt by the very
situation, but that this was that SALENAE, which Ptolomee ascribes to the
Cattieuchlani, if Salndy be the name, Potton.
as diverse have avouched unto me. Here I overpasse Potton a little market John
Kinaston gave it and the Lands adjoining freely unto Thomas Earl of Lancaster.
Neither have I reason to make many words of such places as be situate upon this
Brook, Chicksand.
to wit, Chicksand, where Pain de Beauchamp built a little Monastery. Shelford
a market, Wardon more inward where was a house of Cistertian monks, and was
mother to the Abbaies of Saulterey, Sibton and Tilthey, Biglesward much spoken
of and frequented for the horse Fair there, and the stone bridge. Stratton.
From whence Stratton is not far, the mansion place in times past of the
Barons Latimer, afterward of the Enderbeies, and from them hereditarily until
our time of the Pigotts.

Five miles from the head of this brook in the very heart and midst well
near Ampthill or Amethull.
stands Ampthill upon an hill, a parcel of the Barony of Kainho heretofore
and lately a stately house, resembling a castle, and environed with Parks,
built by Sir John Cornwale Baron Fanhop, in the reign of Henry the Sixth with
the spoils won from the French; whose goods, as I have read, when Edward the
Fourth had confiscated for taking part with the Family of Lancaster, and
indicted him, or this house rather, as Fanhop himself says, of high treason*
forthwith it was granted unto Edmund Gray Lord of Ruthin, and afterward Earl
of Kent: whose grandchild Richard passed both it and Ruthin over to King Henry
the Seventh, and he annexed the same unto the Kings Sacred Patrimony, as the
Civilians term it, or as our Lawyers use to say, unto the Crown, and shortly
after with the Lands appertaining the Honor of Ampthil. From hence more
Northward lies Haughton Conquest, Haughton Conquest. Woburn.
so called of a worshipful and ancient family, which a long time dwelt
therein: Westward is Woburn: where now is a free school founded by Francis
Earl of Bedford: and where sometime flourished a notable monastery built by
Henry de Bolebic for Cistercians, who himself entered into this order: Under
which, at Aspley Gowiz, Earth turning wood into stone.
there is a kind of earth, men say, that turns wood into stones: and for
proof and testimony thereof, I have heard say, there was a wooden ladder to be
seen in that monastery, that having lien a good while covered all over in that
earth, was dug forth again all stone. More into the East, Tuddington
shows a fair house, goodly to be seen, which Sir Henry Cheiney made by
Queen Elizabeth Cheyney of Tuddington built, and shortly after died
Sans-issue, where also in old time Paulin Pever a Courtier, and Sewer to King
Henry the Third (as Matthew Paris witnesses) built a strong house with the
hall, chapel, chambers, and other houses of stone, and the same covered with
lead, with Orchards also and Parkes to it, in such sort, as it caused the
beholders to wonder thereat.

We were not gone forward far from hence but we came to Hockley in the Hole,
hock, and hocks. So passing along fields smelling sweet in Summer of the best
Beans, *
which with their redolent savor do dull the quick sent of Hounds and
Spaniels not without fuming and cha^ing of Hunters; we mounted up by a whitish
chalkey hill into the Chiltern, and streightwaies were at Dunstable. Dunstable.


This Town seated in a chalkey ground, well inhabited, and full of Innes, has
four Streets answering to the four quarters of the world: in every one of
which (notwithstanding the Soil be most dry by nature) there is a large Pond
of standing water, for the public use of the Inhabitants. And albeit they be
fed only Cross or Column rather to be seen with the Arms of England,
Castle and Ponthieu engraven thereon, adorned also with Statues and Images,
which King Edward the First erected as he did some others in memorial of
Aeleoner his Wife all the way as he conveyed her Corpse out of Lincolnshire
with funeral pomp to Westminster. That this Dunstable was the very same
Station which the Emperor Antonine in his Itinerary calls MAGIONINIUM,
MAGIOVINIUM and MAGINTUM no man needs to make doubt, Magiovinium.
or to seek it else where. For, besides that it is situate upon the Romans
high way, there are pieces Madning money: and within a little of the very
descent of the Chiltern hills there is a military model raised up round with a
Rampire and Ditch, such as Strabo writes the Britans Towns were, containing
nine Acres of ground, which the people use to call Madning-boure and
Madin-boure: in which very name with a little change MAGINTUM most plainly
shows it self. But when the said MAGINTUM, by the injury of war or time
was decayed, king Henry the First here reedified a Town, built a royal house
at Kings-bury, and planted a Colony to repress the boldness of Thieves that
here beset the ways and lay in wait, as the private History of the Priory,
that himself Note that the plot of ground where the two high ways Watling and
Ikening meet, was first by Henry the elder King of England Sartabatur. Or
cleansed by stocking up.
cleared, to keep under and bridle the wickedness of a certain most
notorious Thief named Dun, and his Companions, and of that Dun the said place
was named Dunstable. The King our Lord built there the Burgh of Dunstable, and
made for himself a royal Manor, or house near under that place. The King
had in the same Town both Fair and Market. Afterward, he founded a Church,
and by authority of Pope Eugenius the Third, placed therein Regular Chanons:
and feoffed the said Religious Chanons in the whole Burgh by his Charter, and
bestowed upon them

As for Leighton Buzard on the one side of Dunstable, and Luton on the other,
neither have I read, *
nor seen any thing memorable in them, unless I should say that at Luton I
saw a fair Church, but the Quier then Roofelesse, and overgrowne with Weeds;
and adjoining to it an elegant Chapel founded by I. Lord Wenlocke, and well
maintained by the Family of Rotheram planted here by Thomas Rotheram
Archbishop of York, and Chancellor of England in the time of King Edward the
Fourth.

Dukes, Earls and Barons of Bedford. Franciscus Alovertus.
As touching the Lords, Dukes, and Earls of Bedford. First, there were Barons
of Bedford out of the Family of Beauchamp: who by right of inheritance were
Mowbraies, Wakes, Fitz-Ottes, etc. King Edward the Third created Engelrame de
Coucy Earl of Suesons in France, son to Engelrame Lord of Coucy, and his
Wife daughter to the Duke of Austria, the first Earl of Bedford to the title
of a Dukedom: and it had three Dukes: the first was John, the third son of
King Henry the Fourth, who most valiantly vanquished the French men in a
Sea Fight at the mouth of Sequana.
Seyne, and afterward (being Regent of France) slain in a battle on land,
before Vernoil, who was buried in Roan, and together with him all the
Englishmens good fortune in France. At which time he was Regent of France, Duke
of Bedford, Alaunson and Anjou, Earl of Maine, Richmond and Kendall, and
Constable of England. For so was his style. Whose Monument when Charles the
Eighth King of France came to see, and a Noble man standing by advised him to
raze it, Nay answered he, let him rest in peace now being dead, of whom in war
The second Duke of Bedford was George Nevill a very child, son to John
Marquess Mont-acute, both whom King Edward the Fourth so soon as he had
raised them to that type of Honors, threw down again, and that by authority
of the Parliament; the Father, for his perfidious disloyalty in revolting from
him; the Son, in dislike of his Father: Howbeit there was a colorable
pretense made, that his estate was too weak for to maintain the port and
dignity of a Duke: and because great men of high place if they be not wealthy
withal, are always grievous and injurious. The third was Jasper of Hatfield,
Earl of Pembroch, Honored with that title by his Nephew King Henry the
Seventh, for that he was both his Uncle, and had delivered him out of
extreme

But within the remembrance of our Fathers it fell back again to the title of
an Earldom: what time as King Edward the Sixth created John Lord Russell
Earl of Bedford: after whom succeeded his Son Francis, a man so religious
and of such a noble courteous nature, that I can never speak ought so highly
in his commendation, but his virtue will far surpass the same. He left to
succeed him Edward his Nephew by his Son Sir Francis Russell, who was slain
a day or two before his Father departed this life by Scotishmen in a tumult
upon a True-day in the middle marches. 1585.

This small Province has Parishes 116.

HERTFORDIAE Comitatus A. Cattifuclanis olim. Inhabitatus.


HERTFORD-SHIRE.
HERTFORD-SHIRE, which I said was the third of those that belonged to the
Cattieuchlani, lies on the East and partly on the South side of Bedford-shire:
The West side is enclosed with Bedford-shire and Buckingham-shire: The South
with Middlesex, the East with Essex, and the North with Cambridge-shire. A rich
country in corn fields, pastures, medows,

In the very limit thereof Northward, Roiston. Chronicles of Dunstable.
where it boundeth upon Cambridge-shire, stands Roiston, a town well known,
but of no antiquity: as being risen since the Normans days. For one Dame
Roise, a woman in that age of right great name, Others say she was the wife of
Richard de Clare.
whom some think to have been Countess of Norfolk, erected there about a
Cross in the high way, (which was thought in that age a pious work to put
passengers in mind of Christ's passion) whereupon this place was for many
years called Roises-Crosse, until that Eustach de Marc adjoined thereto a
little Monastery in the honor of Thomas of Canterbury: for then, were Innes
built, and by little and little it grew to be a town, which in stead of Roises
Cross was called Roiston, that is, Roises town: unto which King Richard the
First granted a Fair at certain set times and a market; Now, it is very
famous and passing much frequented for Malt: For, it is almost incredible, how
many buyers and sellers of corn, how many Badgers, yea and Corne-mongers or
Regraters flock hither weekly every market day, and what a number of horses
laden do then fill the high ways on every side.

Over Roiston Southward is mounted Tharfield among the high hills, an ancient
habitation of the family of Berners, Tharfield. Berners.
descended from Hugh de Berners, unto whom in Eversdon within the county of
Cambridge. And in so great worship and reputation flourished his posterity,
that Sir John Bourchier, who married the right heir at common law of that
family, being promoted by King Edward the Fourth to the honor of Baron, took
his addition thereof, and was styled Baron Bourchier of Berners, and usually
Lord Berners.

Upon this confineth Nucelles, Nucelles. The family of Roffes.
belonging in times past to the house of the Rochesters or Roffes: but all the
repute and glory that it has arose from the inhabitants thereof afterward,
namely the Barons of Scales descended out of Norfolk, but yet the heirs of
Roffe. Barons de Scales.
For King Edward the First gave unto Sir Robert de Scales in Gules with six
escallops argent is seen in many places. They flourished unto King Edward the
Fourth his days, at what time the only daughter and heir of this family was
wedded unto Sir Anthony Widevile Earl Rivers; whom being advanced by his own
glorious prowess and the kings marriage with his sister, the malicious hatred
and envy of his enemies most vilanouslie overwrought, and brought to utter
destruction. For, King Richard the Third beheaded him, innocent man as he was.
And, when as she died without issue, the inheritance was parted in King Henry
the Sevenths time between John Earl of Oxford, Howards, and Sir William
Tindale knight, who by the Bigods of Felbridge, were found next cousens and
coheires. The Manor of Barkway hereby appertained also to those Lords Scales,
a well known throughfare. Beyond which is Barley that imparted surname to the
ancient, *
and well allied family of the Barleies; and on this side Anestie, Anestie.
which was not long since the inheritance of the house of York, and in elder
times the Castle there was a nest of rebels, wherefore Nicholas Cl. 2. H. 3. m.
11.
But now time has wholly rased it all.

Ashwell.
To return, though disorderly, Eastward is Ashwell, as one would say, The well
or fountain among the Ashes: a Country town of good bigness and full of
houses, situate on a low ground in the very North edge of the shire; where
there is a source of springs bubling out of a stony bank overshadowed on every
side with tall ashes, from whence there flows at certain veins continually
running such store of water, that forthwith being gathered within banks it
carries a stream able to drive a Mill and all of a sudden, as it were,
grows to a good big river. Of these wels and ashes Ashwell: so I have been
sometime of this opinion, that the ancient Britans, who, as Gildas witnesses,
heaped divine honors upon hills, rivers, fountains, and groves, from the very
same thing and in the same sense called it Magiovinium, and that it was the
same which Antonine named MAGIONINIVM. But time has now discovered a more
certain truth, neither am I ashamed to change mine opinion in this point,
seeing I take no pleasure at all in mine own error. And yet to prove the
ancientnesse of this town, the large quadrant adjoining, enclosed with a
trench and rampire makes much, which by the Roman pieces of coin dug up
there oftentimes, shows whose work it was, and in that Domesday.
book, wherein above 500. years since Burgh.

Southward we saw Merkat-Baldock, situate upon a whitish soil, wherein as also
in Hitching hard by, we read of no antiquity. Then is there seated in a
well-husbanded and good ground Wimondley an ancient and famous Lordship, held
by the most honorable tenure with us, Grand-Sergeantie.
which our Lawyers term Grand-Sergeanty: namely, that the Lord thereof should
serve unto the Kings of England upon their Coronation day the first cup, and be
as it were the Kings Cup Bearer. Which honorable office in regard of this
Lordship, certain Noble Gentlemen called Fitz-Tek.
Fitz-Tek held in the beginning of the Normans reign; Argentons.
from whom by a daughter it came unto the Argentons. David de Argenton a Norman
and a martial knight, who under King William the Conqueror served in the
wars, and they in remembrance hereof gave for their arms Three Cups Argent in
a shield Gueules. But at last, for want of issue male in King Henry the Sixth
his days, Elizabeth Argenton the sole and entier inheritrice, brought it unto
her husband Sir William Allington knight, with fair lands thereby and this
dignity, from whom Sir Giles Allington now the heir of this family is the
seventh, a young Gentleman right courteous and of a generous nature, who I hope
will give some new luster by his virtues unto the ancient worship of his house.

Hard by and near unto the road highway, between Stevenhaugh and Knebworth
Littons descended from Litton in Darbyshire, I saw certain round hills cast up
and raised by man's hands, such as the old Romans were wont to rear for
Soldiers slain in the wars, of which the Captain himself laid the first
turfe. Unless some man would rather say they had a reference to the bounds:
For such like little hills in old time were reared to signify the bounds of
lands, In the County of Northampton.
under which they used to lay ashes, coals, lime, brick, and tile beaten to
powder, etc. as I will show elsewhere more at large.

Beneath this, more Southward, the river Lea, by our forefathers named (...),
has his head: who with a mild course passes down, first, by Whethamsted a
town plentiful in wheat, whereof it took name; which place, John of
Whethamsted there Brocket Hall, the residence in late time of the Brockets
Knights, approaches near unto Bishops Hatfield situate upon the fall and
hanging of a little hill: in the upper part Salisburies, in times past
belonging to the Bishops of Ely, Bishops* Hatfield.
whereupon it was named Bishops Hatfield, which John Morton Bishop of Ely
reedified. For in this place King Eadgar gave unto the Church of Ely forty
hides of land. Afterward it passes under Hertford, which in some Copies of
Bid is named Herudford, where he treats of the Synod there holden in the
year of our Salvation 670. which name some interpret: The red Ford, others,
The Ford of Hearts. This Town in William the Conquerours time, discharged it
self for ten hides and in it were 26. Burgesses, and at that time Ralph Limsey
a Noble man built here a Cell for Saint Albans Monks. But now it is neither
greatly inhabited nor much frequented: and in this respect most of all
commended, because it is ancient. Lea, built, as men think, by King Edward the
elder, and enlarged first by the house of Clare, whereunto it belonged. For
Gislebert of Clare about King Henry the Second his days, was accounted Earl
of this Hertford, and Robert Fitz-walter, of the same house of Clare, what time
as Stephen seized into his hands all the Castles of England wheresoever,
avouched franckly even to Stephen his face, as we read in Matthew of Paris, that
the keeping of this Castle by ancient right appertained to himself. Afterward
it was laid unto the Crown: and King Edward the Third granted unto John of
Gaunt his son, then Earl of Richmond, who afterward was Duke of Lancaster,
this Castle with the Town and honor of (as the very words run in the
Grant) he might according to his estate keep house and decently make his
aboade.

From hence Lea falls down forthwith to Ware, so named of a bar or dam
made to stay water streams, which our Ancestors called a Wear or Ware. This
Town, even at the very first did much harm unto Hertford, and afterward by
reason it became so greatly hanted, darkened, as it were, the light thereof.

For, when the Barons war against King John was waxed hot, this Ware
presuming much upon their Lord the Baron Wake, turned London high way to it,
whereas before it was but a little Village, and known by a Friery which he
founded: neither was it lawful to pass that way with any Carts, considering
that the Hertford. Near about which time Gilbert Marescall Earl of Pembroch a
principal and most potent Peer of the Realm, proclaimed here a disport of
running on horseback with lances, which they call Tourneaments, under the
name of Fortunie, making a scorn of the Kings Authority, Tourneament
whereby such Toureneaments were inhibited. To which place when a great number
of the Nobility and Gentry were assembled, it fortuned that himself as he
ran at tilt, by occasion that his flinging horse brake bridle and cast him,
was trampled under foot and so pitifully dyed. These Justs or Tourneaments
were certain public exercises of Arms and more than flourishes, practiced
among noble Gentlemen, and instituted (if we believe Munster) in the year of
our Lord 934. having also special laws thereto belonging, which you may find
in the said Munster: and the same exercises were used a long time in such an
outrageous manner, and with such flaughter of Gentlemen in all places, but in
England most of all, since that King Stephen brought them in, that by diverse
Decrees of the Church they were forbidden, upon pain that whosoever therein
were slain should want Christian Burial in Church or Churchyard; and here
with us King Henry the Third by advise of his Sages made an Act of Parliament,
that their heirs who transgressed in this kind, should be disinherited.
Howbeit, contrary to the said law so good and wholesome, Matthew. Paris Anno 1248.
this naughty and wicked custom was practiced a great while, and grew not
quite out of use before the happy Edward the Third.

Betwixt these two Towns, Hertford and Ware, distant scarce two miles a
sunder, Lea is increased by two rilles from the North: Asserius terms them
Mimeram and Benefician. I would guess that to be Benefician upon which
stands Benington, where the notable family of Bensted had in old time a
little Castle: Wood-hall.
and also Woodhall an habitation of the Butlers, *
who being branched from Sir Ralph Butler Baron Wem in Shropshire, Butler.
and his wife heir to William Pantulfe Lord of Wem, were Lords of Pulre-bach,
and enriched much by an heir of Sir Richard Gobion, and another of Peletot
Lord of this place, in the time of King Edward the Third. I take Mimeran to be
the other brook whereupon Pukerich is seated, which by the grant of King
Edward the First, at the mediation of William le Bland had a Mercate and Fair
granted to it. Standon.
Whereupon also neighboureth Standon with a seemly house built by Sir Ralph
Sadleir Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, Privy Counselor to three
Princes, and the last Knight Baneret of England: a man so advanced for his
great services, and stayed wisdom.

At the back of Pukerich, Munden Furnivall shows it self, a place to be
remembered Geffrey Earl of Britain gave it to Gerard de Furnivall (of whom
also it bare the name) a younger son of Furnivall of Sheffeld. But now let us
return to the River Lea and the Town of Ware, unto which the Danes being come
with their light Pinnaces, and Shallops raised a Fort, as the said Asserius
reports, which when King Aelfred could not win by force, he by digging
three several Channels, turned aside the water of Lea, that they might not
return with their Vessels; So as ever since it stood the neighbor Inhabitants
in small or no stead; until being brought of late unto his ancient Channel, it
is become more commodious for the carriages of all commodities, etc. Lea is not
gone forward far from Ware, when he entertaineth a Riveret named Stort from
the East, Essex by Bishops Stortford, Bishops Stortford. Castle of Way-more.
a small Town fensed sometime with a little Castle set upon a mount cast up of
purpose, within a pretty Island: which Castle King William the Conqueror gave
unto the Bishops of London: and of those Bishops it came to be so called; but
King John for hatred to Bishop William overthrew it. From thence it makes his
way by Sabridgworth a parcel of the Honor of Earl William Mandevile, and
sometime the possession of Geffrey Say, near Shingle-hall honested by the
Owners, the Leventhorpes of ancient Gentry. So on, not far from Honsdon
forfeited by Sir William Oldhall to the Crown in the time of King Henry the
Sixth, which gave a Title of Baron Hunsdon to Sir Henry Carry, through the
favor of Queen Elizabeth, unto whom he was Lord Chamberlain, as Somerset was
by his mother Mary Bolen cozen german to the said Queen. Lea having thus
admitted into him this Riveret, hasteneth now with a merry glee to the Tamis,
under Hodesdon a fair through Fair, Hodesdon.
to which H. Bourchier Earl of Essex having a fair house at Base thereby
(while it stood) procured a Market: and then as it were in gratulatory wise
saluteth Theobalds, Theobalds.
commonly called Tibaulds, which our Nestor of Britain, the right honorable
Baron Burghley, late Lord high Treasurer of England built: an house if we
respect the workmanship none more fair and elegant; if the gardens, Orchards,
and walks bedight with Groves, none more pleasant: unto whom especially this
River willingly acknowledges it self beholden for the recovery again

But return we now to places more within the Country, and of greater
antiquity. From Hertford twelve miles Westward, stood VEROLAMIUM, a City in
times past very much renowned, and as greatly frequented: Tacitus calls it
VERULAMIUM, Ptolomee, Verolamium. Saint Albans.
UROLANIUM and VEROLAMIUM, well known this is in these days, near unto Saint
Albans in Caisho Hundred, which the CASSII of whom Caesar makes mention, in
all probability, held and inhabited.

The Saxons named it (...), of the famous Highway Watlingstreet, and also
(...). Neither has it as yet lost that ancient name, for commonly they call it
Verulam, although there remains nothing of it to be seen, Cassibelaunus
fortified with woods and marshes, Cassibelines town.
which Caesar wan: For there was not to be seen any other Poole or Mere in
this Tract, to my knowledge. Municipia.
In Nero his time it was counted a MUNICIPIUM: whence it is that in Ninius his
Catalogue of Cities, it is named Caer-Municip. So that probable it is, that
this was the very same CAER MUNICIPIUM, which Hubert Golizius found in an old
Inscription. These Municipia were Towns endowed with the right of Roman
Citizens, and this name came A Muneribus capiendis, that is, of public
Offices and charges in the Commonwealth: and they had for their States and
Degrees, * Decurions, that is, Gentlemen, and Commons: for their public
Council, a Senate and People: For their Magistrates and Priests, Duum-virj,
Trium-virj to sit in judgment and minister justice, CENSORS: AEDILES,
Quaestors and Flamins. But whether this Municipium or town enfranchised were
with suffrages or without, a man cannot easily affirm. A Municip with
suffrages they termed that which was capable of honorable Offices: like as
that other they called without suffrage, which was not capable. In the Reign
of the same Nero, when Bunduica or Boadicia Queen of the Icenes in her deep
love of her Country, and conceived bitter hatred against the Romans, raised
bloody and mortal War upon them, it was rased and destroyed by the Britans,
as Tacitus records. Hence it is that Suetonius wrote thus: To these
mischiefs so great proceeding from the Prince, Verulam an^ Maldon.
there happened (to mend the matter) a grievous loss in Britain, wherein two
principal Towers of great importance, with much slaughter of Roman Citizens
and Allies, were put to the sack and spoiled. Nevertheless it flourished
again and became exceeding famous and passing well frequented: yea and I have
seen old Antiquities of money stamped, as it seems here, with this
inscription, TASCIA, and on the reverse VER. Which that learned searcher of
venerable antiquity David Powell, Doctor in Divinity, interprets to be The
Tribute of Verulamium. For Tasc, as he teaches me in the British or Welsh
tongue sounds as much as Tribute, Tascia, A Tribute Penny, and Tascyd the
chief Collector of Tribute. But lo here is the very piece of money portraied
for you to see, which heretofore also I have exhibited.



Caesar writes of them: See page 97. Britans coins.
And they use, says he, brass money or rings of iron weighed to a certain
poise. Where the ancient books have Lanceis Ferreis, for which the Critics
put in Laminis Ferreis, that is, plates of iron. But let my pen return again
to the matter proposed, for my meaning is not here to weave the same web
still. As for Verulam, it was famous for nothing so much as for bringing forth
Alban a Citizen Dioclesian went about by exquisite torments to wipe Christian
Religion quite out of the memory of men, was the first in Britain that with
invincible constancy and resolution suffered death for Christ his sake.
Whereupon he is called our Stephen, and the Alban Martyr.
Protomartyr of Britain, yea and Fortunatus Presbyter the Poet wrote thus of
him, Albanum egregium foecunda Britannia profert.
Fruitful Britain brings forth
Alban a Martyr of mickle worth.


And Hiericus a Frenchman, who flourished 700. years ago, of the same Alban
and his executioner miraculously stricken blind, made these verses, In the
life of Saint German.
Millia poenarum Christi pro nomine passus,
Quem tandem rapuit capitis sententia caesi,
Sed non lictori cessit res tuta superbo,
Utque caput Sancto, ceciderunt lumina saevo.
Thousands of torments when he had endured for Christ his sake
At length he dyed by dome thus given. [his head away to take]
The Tortor proudly did the feat, but clear he went not quite,
That holy Martyr lost his head, this cruel wretch his sight.


In reproach of this Martyr and for the terror of Christians as we find in an
old A Legend of his passion and Martyrdom.
Agon of his, the Citizens of Verulam engraved his Martyrdom in a Marble
stone, and inserted the same in their walls. But afterward when the blood of
Martyrs had conquered Tyrants cruelty, the Christians built a Church, as Bede
says, of wondrous workmanship, in memorial of him: and Verulam carried with
it so great an opinion of Religion, that there in was holden a Synod or
Council in the year of the worlds Redemption 429. when as the Pelagian
Heresy, by means of Agricola son to the Bishop Severianus had budded forth
a fresh into this Island, and polluted the British Saint Germans Chapel.
there remains yet a Chapel bearing S. Germans name still, although it be
put to a profane use: in which place he openly out of the Pulpit preached Gods
word, as the ancient records of S. Albans church do testify.

Which German (as Constantius flourishing in that time writes in his life)
commanded the Sepulcher of Saint Albane to be opened: and therein bestowed,
certain Relics of Saints, that whom one heaven had received, should also in
one Sepulcher be together Thus much I note by the way, that ye may observe
and consider the fashions of that age. Not long after, the English Saxons won
it: but Uther the Britan, firnamed for his serpentine wisdom, Pendragon, by a
sore siege and a long recovered it. After whose death, it fell again into
their hands. For, we may easily gather out of Gildas words, that the Saxons in
his days were possessed of this City. God, says he, has lighted unto us the
most clear Lamps of holy Saints, the Sepulchers of whose bodies, and places of
their Martyrdom, at this day (were they not taken away by the woeful
disseverance which the barbarous enemy has wrought amongst us, for our many
grievous sins) might kindle no small heat of divine charity in the minds of
the beholders: Saint Albane of Verulam, I mean, etc. When Verulam by these
wars was utterly decayed, Offa the most mighty King of the Mercians built
just over against it about the year of our Lord 795. in a place which they
called Holmehurst, a very goodly and large Monastery in memory of Saint Alban,
or as we read in the very Charter thereof, Unto our Lord Jesus Christ, and S.
Alban Martyr, whose Relics Gods grace has revealed in hope of present
prosperity, and future happiness: and forthwith with the Monastery there rose
a Town, which of him they call Saint Albans. This King Offa and the succeeding
Kings of England, assigned unto it very fair and large possessions, and
obtained for it at the hands of the Bishops of Rome as ample privileges, which
I will relate out of our Florilegus, that ye may see the profuse liberality of
Princes toward the Church. Thus therefore writes he. Offa the most puissant
King Peradventure Wineslow.
Uneslaw, with as much round about, as the Kings written Deeds at this day do
witness, that are to be seen in the foresaid Monastery: which Monastery is
privileged with so great liberty, that it alone is quite That is, of every
house a penny.
Rom-scot to Saint Peter's Vicar, the Bishop of Rome, and himself obtained of
the said Bishop of Rome that the Church of Saint Alban the Protomartyr of the
English nation, might faithfully collect, and being so collected reserve to
their proper use, the same Rom-scot throughout all the Province of Hertford, in
which the said Church stands. Whence it is, that Pope Hadrian also the fourth
who was borne hard by Verulam granted this indulgence unto the Abbats of this
Monastery (I speak the very words out of the Privilege) that as Saint Alban
is distinctly known to be the Protomartyr of the English nation: so the Abbat
of this Monastery should at all times among other Abbats of England in degree
of dignity be reputed first and principal. Neither left the Abbats ought
undone that might serve either for use or ornament: who filled up with earth a
mighty large poole under Verulam, which I spoke of. The name whereof yet
remains still here in a certain street of the town named
Fish-poole-streete. Near unto which street, because certain ankers were in
our remembrance Gildas) that the river Tamis sometimes had his course and
channel this way. But of this Mere or Fish-poole, have here what an old
Historian has written. Abbot Alfrike for a great piece of money purchased a
large and deep pond, (an evil neighbor and hurtful to Saint Albans Church)
which was called Fish-poole, appertaining to the Kings: And the Kings officers
and fishers molested the Abbay, and burdened the Monks thereby. Out of which
poole he the said Abbot in the end drained and derived the water, and made it
dry ground.

If I were disposed upon the report of the common people to reckon up what
great store of Roman pieces of coin, how many cast images of gold and silver,
how many vessels, what a sort of modules or Chapiters of pillars, and how many
wonderful Historiographer. Ealred the Abbot in the reign of King Eadgar,
having searched for the ancient vaults under ground at Verulam, overthrew all.
About the year of Christ 960. and stopped up all the ways with passages under
ground, which were strongly and artificially arched over head: For, they were
the lurking holes of whores and thieves. He levelled with the ground the
ditches of the City and certain dens, into which malefactors fled as unto
places of refuge. But the whole tiles, and stones which he found fit for
building, he laid aside. Near unto the bank they did light upon plankes of
oak with nails driven into them, cemented with stone-pitch: also the tackling
and furniture of Ships as anchors half eaten with A little after he writes.
Eadmer his successor went forward with the work that Ealfred began, and his
pioners overthrew the foundations of a Palace in the mids of the old City,
and in the hollow place of a wall as it were, in a little closet, they happened
upon books covered with oken boords and silken strings at them: whereof one
contained the life of Saint Albane written in the British tongue; the rest the
ceremonies of the Heathen. When they opened the ground deeper, they met with
old tables of stone, with tiles also and pillars, likewise with pitchers and
pots of earth made by Potters and Turners work: vessels moreover of glass
containing the ashes of the dead, etc. To conclude, out of these remains of
Verulam, Eadmer built a new Monastery to Saint Albane. Thus much for the
antiquity and dignity of Verulam; now have also with you for an over-deale in
the commendation of Verulam Six verses.
Hexastich of Alexander Necham, who 400. years since was there borne.

Urbs infignis erat Verolamia, plus operosae
Arti, naturae debuit illa minus.
Pendragon Arthuri patris haec obsessa laborem
Septennem sprevit cive superba suo.
Hic est martyrii roseo decoratus honor
Albanus, civis, inclyta Roma tuus.
The famous town whilom called Verolame,
To Nature ought less than to painful art;
When Arthurs Sire Pendragon against it came,
With force of Arms to work her peoples smart;
His seven years siege did never daunt their heart.
Here Alban gained the Crown of Martyrdom,
Thy Citizen sometime o noble Rome.
And in another passage.

Hic locus aetatis nostrae primordia novit
Annos foelices, latitiaeque dies.
Hic locus ingenuus, pueriles imbuit annos
Artibus, and nostrae laudis origo fuit.
Hic locus insignis, magnosque creavit alumnos,
Foelix eximio Martyr, gente, situ.
Militat hic Christo, nocteque dieque labori
Invigilans sancto religiosa cohors.
This is the place that knowledge took of my Nativity,
My happy years, my days also of mirth and Jollity.
This place my childhood trained up in all Arts liberal,
And laid the groundwork of my name and skill Poetical.
This place great and renowned Clerks into the world has sent:
For Martyr blessed, for nation, for site, all excellent.
A troop here of Religious men serve Christ both night and day,
In holy warfare taking pains, duly to watch and pray.
Saint Albans.
Verolamium at this day being turned into fields: The town of Saint Albans
raised out of the ruins thereof flourishes; a fair town and a large, and the
Church of that Monastery remains yet for bigness, beauty and antiquity, to
be had in admiration: which when the Monks were thrust out of it, was by the
Townes-men redeemed with the sum of 400. pounds of our money, that it might not
be laid even Richard Lea Knight, Master of the Pioners, brought as a spoil out
of the Scottish wars, and gave unto the said Church, with this lofty and
arrogant inscription.

CUM LAETHIA OPPIDUM APUD SCOTOS NON IN CELEBRE, ET EDINBURGUS When Leeth a
Town of good account among the Scots, and Edinbrough their chief City were
on fire: Sir Richard Lea Knight saved me from burning, and brought me into
England. And I being mindful of this so great a benefit, whereas before I was
wont to serve for Baptising of none, but Kings Children, have now willingly
offered my service even to the meanest of the English Nation. Lea the victor
would But to the matter. As antiquity consecrated this place to be an Altar of
Religion: so Mars also may seem to have destined it for the very plot of
bloody battle; For, to let other particulars go by, when England under the
two houses of Lancaster and York bereft, as it were, of vital breath was
ready through Civil 1455.
the chief Captains of both sides joined battle twice with reciprocal
variety of fortune in the very Town. First, Richard Duke of York gave the
Lancastrians here a sore overthrow, took King Henry the Sixth captive, and
slew many Honorable personages. Four years after the Lancastrians under the
conduct of Queen Margaret won here the field, put the house of York to
flight, and restored the King to his former liberty.

About this town (that I may let pass the mount or fortification which the
common sort uses to call Oister-hils and I take to have been the Camp of
Ostorius the famous Lieutenant of Britain) the Abbats in a pious and devout
intent erected a Sopwell, De prato of the Meadow.
and Saint Julians Spittle for Lepres, and another named Saint Mary de pree for
diseased women: near unto which they had a great Manor named Gorumbery:
where Sir Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England built an
house beseeming his place and calling. To this adjoyneth Redborn, which is by
interpretation Red-water, and yet the water running thereby (from Mergrate
sometime a religious house, now a seat of the Ferrers out of the house of
Groby) is no more red than is the Red Sea. Redborn.
This Redborne in times past was a place renowned and resorted unto in regard
of Amphibalus the Martyrs relics here found, who instructed Saint Alban in
the Christian faith, and for Christ's sake suffered death under Dioclesian. At
this day well known, for that it is seated upon that common Watlingstreet, and
has hard by Wenmer called also Womer, a brook that never breaks out and
rises, but it foretells dearth and scarcity of corn, or else some extremity
of dangerous times, as the vulgar people do verily believe. Nere unto this
Redborn I have some reason to think that the Station Duro-Co-Brive stood,
Duro-Co-Briue.
whereof Antonine the Emperor makes mention, although the distance of places
gaine-saith it. For, as Redborn in our language, so Dur-coch in the British is
all one in signification, with Redwater. And verily the truest conjectures that
we can make of ancient places, are from antique inscriptions from the lying of
Journeies every way, from the analogy and similitude of their names, and from
rivers and lakes adjoining: although they answer not just to the

Certes it cannot otherwise be, but that Duro-Co-Brive, stood where that Roman
Rode-way passes over this water, to wit under Flansted: for even there, by the
highway Verlam: (for which seven, through the careless negligence of the
transcribers, twelve has crept in.) Which brook presently, whiles it is yet
but small cutteth the high way cross, and although it carry here no name at
all, yet beneath S. Albans town it is called Cot, Briva, what it is.
which is near to the name Co. As for that BRIVA, which is an adjection to
many names of places, it signified, as I suppose, among the old Britans and
Gauls, a bridge, or a passage, seeing it is found only where there are
rivers. In this Island there was one or two Durobrivae, that is to say, if I be
not deceived Water passages; in Gauls, Briva Isarae now Pontoise, where in
times past they passed over the river Ysere.
Isara, Briva-Oderae, where they passed over Oderam, and Samarobriva Some.

Flamsted.
Somewhat above, Flamsted shows it self upon the hill, which in the time of
King Edward the Confessor, Leostane the Abbat of Saint Albans gave unto three
knights, Turnot, Waldefe and Turman, for to defend and secure the country
thereby against thieves. But William the Conqueror took it from them, and gave
it to Roger of Todeney or Tony, a noble Norman, whose possession it was, but by
a daughter it was transferred at length to the Beauchamps Earls of Warwick.

Hemsted.
From hence I went down Southward to Hempsted a little mercate town called
Hehan-Hamsted (when King Offa gave it unto the monastery of Saint Albans)
situate among the hills by a riveret side, which flows anon into another,
that runs Berkhamsted. Berkhamsted.
Where the Nobles of England, who devised how they might shake off the new
yoke of the Normans, assembled themselves together by the persuasion of
Fretherike Abbat of Saint Albans: and unto whom William the Conqueror repaired
(as we read in the life of the same Fretherike) fearing least he should loose
the Kingdom with shame, which he had gotten with the effusion of so much
blood. And after much debating of matters in the presence of the Archbishop
La^frank, the King for the preservation of his peace swore upon all the
relics of Saint Albans Church, and by laying hand upon the Holy Gospells unto
Abbat Frederick, who ministered the oath, to observe and keep inviolably the
good and approoved ancient laws of the kingdom, which the holy and devout
Kings of Robert Earl of Moriton, and Cornwall his half brother: Who fortified
the castle here with a duple trench and rampire: In which Richard King of the
Romans, and Earl of Cornwall full of honors and years changed this life for
a better. For default of whose issue and offspring King Edward the Third in the
end made over this Castle with the Town unto Edward his eldest son, that
most warlike Prince, whom he created Earl of Cornwall. Now that Castle is
nothing else but broken walls and a rude heap of stones: above which Sir
Edward Carry Knight, and Master of the Kings Jewell-house descended from the
family Caryes in Devonshire, and the Beauforts Dukes of Somerset built of late
a very goodly and most pleasant house. In the very Town it self nothing is
worth sight save only the school, which John Incent Deane of Paul's in London,
a native of this place founded.

Kings Langley.
More into the South, stands Kings Langley, sometime the Kings house, in which
was borne, and thereof took name Edmund of Langley King Edward the Third his
Son, and Duke of York: where there was a small cell of Friars preachers, in
which that silly and miserable Prince King Richard the Second, after he had
been wickedly deprived both of Kingdom and life, was first buried, and soon
after translated to Westminster; requited there by way of amends with a brazen
tomb Langley also, Abbats Langley.
which because it belonged to the Abbats of Saint Albanes is called Abbats
Langley: wherein was borne Nicholas surnamed Break-speare, afterward Bishop of
Pope Hadrian the Fourth.
known by the name of Pope Hadrian the Fourth: who was the first that taught
the Norwegians to the Christian Faith, and repressed the Citizens of Rome
aspiring to their ancient freedom; whose stirrup also as he alighted from his
horse, Frederik the First Emperor of the Romans held, and whose breath was
stopped in the end with a fly that flew into his mouth. Watford.
Somewhat lower I saw Watford and Rickemansworth, two mercate towns:
concerning which I have read nothing of greater antiquity than this, that King
Offa liberally gave them unto Saint Alban; as also Caishobery next unto
Watford. Caishobery.
In which place Sir Richard Morisin Knight, a great learned man, and who had
been used in Embassages to the mightiest Princes, under King Henry the Eighth
and King Edward the Sixth began to build an house, Charles his Son finally
finished.

More into the East, the Romans Military high way went directly from London to
Verolam by Hamsted-heath, Edgeworth and Ellestre: near unto which at the very
same distance where Antonine the Emperor in his Itinerarie places
SVLLONIACAE, to wit, Sulloniacae, Salenae in Ptolomee, but misplaced.
twelve miles from London and nine from Verolam, there remain yet the marks
of an ancient Station, and much rubish or rammell is dug up at an hill which
in these days they call Brockley-hill. But when the Romans Empire ceased in
this Island, as Barbarism by little and little crept in, whiles all parts
smoked with the Saxons war, this, as every thing else, lay a great while
relinquished, until that a little before the Normans coming in, Leofstane
Caused the thick and shady Woods, which lie from the edge of Chiltriae.
Chiltern unto London, especially where the Kings high way called
Watlingstreete lay to be cut up, the rugged places to be levelled, Bridges to
be built, and the uneven ways to be made plain and safer for passage. But
about three hundred years since, this way was after a sort again forsaken, by
reason that another way through license of the Bishops of London was laid open
through High-gate and Bernet. Bernet.
This Bernet, for the beast market there kept, begins now to be famous, but
it was more renowned for a field there fought, when in the war between the
two Families of Lancaster and York, England dared to do against her own
bowels, whatsoever ambitious treachery and disloyalty Gledesmore hard by,
even on Easter day in the morning there was a bloody battle most fiercely
fought, and that with variable fortune for a great while, by reason that a most
thick mist covered the face of the ground. But in the end the victory fell
happily unto King Edward the Fourth, by occasion that Richard Nevil Earl of
Warwick was there slain, whom as the favorable indulgence of Fortune made
over-stout and bold, yea and dangerous unto Kings: *
so his death freed England from all fear of civil Wars. Bernet has for
his neighbors Mimmes a seat of a Worshipful Family of the Coningesbies
descended to them by Frowick from the Knolles, Mimmes.
ancient possessours thereof; and North-hall, North-hall.
where Ambrose Dudley last Earl of Warwick raised a stately house

This County of Hertford had Earls out of the Family de Clare, Earls of
Hertford.
who notwithstanding were oftener called Earls of Clare, from Clare in
Suffolk their principal seat. The first to my knowledge was Gilbert, who
under the title of Earl of Hertford is put down as a witness in a Charter of
King Stephens. Likewise Roger de Clare in the time of King Henry the Second is
in the Red-booke of the Exchequer named Earl of Hertford.

Likewise his successors, See the Earls of Gloucester and in Suffolk.
whom you may see in their places. But seeing both by right of inheritance, and
also through the Princes favor they attained to the Earldom of Gloucester,
they bare both titles jointly, and were called unto Parliaments Gloucester and
Hertford. And Richard de Clare who died in the year of our Lord 1262. is in
plain terms by Florilegus of Westminster called Earl of Gloucester and of
Hertford, where he reports this Epitaph composed for him in that age, to his
great commendation.

Hic p^d^r Hippolyti, Paridis gena, sensus Vlyssis,
Aeneae pietas, Hectoris ira jacet.
Chaste Hyppolite, and Paris fair, Ulysses wife and sly,
Aeneas kind, fierce Hector here jointly entombed lie.
But not long since King Henry the Eighth honored Sir Edward de Saint Maur or
Seym^r with the title of Earl of Hertford, who also was created Duke of
Somerse^ by King Edward the Sixth. After whom succeeded in this Earldom his
Son bearing the same name, a right Honorable personage, and a singular lover
of Learning.

This Counti^ has Parishes. 120.

TRINOBANTES.
Caesar calls TRINOBANTES, Ptolomee and Tacitus, TRINOANTES, were next
neighbors to the Cattieuchlani, inhabiting in those countries, which now
having changed their names are commonly termed Middlesex and Essex. Whence that
ancient name sprung, See among the Coins the piece stamped with TASCNOVANEI.
I dare not verily so much as guess, unless it come of the British word
Tre-Nant, which is as much as Towns in a vale. For this whole region in a
manner lies low in a valley upon the Tamis. Galloway in Scotland, lying
altogether low in valleys were of old time in the British tongue called
Noantes and Novantes, and in the Veil of Rhine, in French named Le Vaule, the
people in old time called Nantuates, had both their abode and their name
thence: so that this conjecture of mine may seem as probable as that of
others, who over curiously have derived Trinobantes, of Troy, as a man would
say Troia Nova, that is, New Troy. But I Caesar's time of all these countries
well near the strongest City or State (for, evermore he terms by the name of
Civitas, Civitas, that is, City, what it signifies in Caesar.
a whole people living under the same law) and their King in those days, was
Immanuentius, who being slain by Cassibelinus, his son Mandubratius saving
his life by flight, went into Gaul to Caesar, and putting himself under his
protection returned with him into Britain. At which time these Arinobantes
petitioned Caesar by their Ambassadors, that he would defend Mandubratius from
the injuries of Cassibelinus, Mandubratius, that I may note so much by the way,
is evermore called by Eutropius, Bid, Androgeus.
and the later writers, Androgeus. But whence this diversity of the name
should arise, I am altogether ignorant: unless that be true, which I have
learned from a very skillful man in the British history and language both, that
this name Androgeus was given unto him for his lewdness and perfidious
Triades, among the three Traitors of Britain, he is counted the most
villainous; in that he was the first that made way to bring the foreign Romans
into Britain, and betrayed his Country. After Mandubratius, when as now by
reason of hot civil wars, Britain was neglected of the Cunobeline ruled as
King in these parts, of whose coin I exhibit here unto you one or two pieces,
although I have already showed the very same and others heretofore.



Suetonius.
Admimus this man's Son banished by his Father fled with a small retinue about
him to the Roman Emperor Cajus Caligula, and yielded himself. Which so
puffed up the young Emperors mind, that as if all the Island had absolutely
and wholly yielded into his hands, he sent glorious letters to Rome,
admonishing oftentimes the bearers thereof not to deliver them unto the
Consuls, but in the Temple of Mars, and in a frequent assembly of the Senate.
When Cunobelinus was dead, Aulius Plautius by commission from Claudius the
Emperor set upon this Country. Fasti Capitolini.
One of Cunobilinus his Sons named Togodumnus he slew, Catacratus he
overthrew in the field, over whom also, as we find in the Capitollin Record of
the Roman Triumphs, he rode Ovant in triumph: and that, with so great honor
as Suetonius writes, that Claudius the Emperor went side by side with him
both in his going to the Capitol and also in his return from thence. And he
himself shortly after transporting his forces hither, brought these parts
within few Months into the form of a Province. Thence-forth the Trinobantes
rested a while in peace, but that under Nero they privily entered into a
conspiracy with the Iceni to shake off the Romans yoke. But Suetonius
Paulinus, as Tacitus records, quickly quenched this flame of sedition with a
great effusion of Britanes blood. When the Roman Empire was at length come to
an end in Britane, Vortigern the Britane, gave to the Saxons (who kept him
prisoner) for his ransom this Country with others, as Ninnius writes: and it
had his peculiar Kings for a long time together, but such as held by homage
sometimes of the Kentish Kings, sometimes of the Mercians. Among whom Sebert in
the year 603. was the Suthred the last King, who being vanquished by Egbert in
the year 804. left the Kingdom unto the West Saxons: But hereof elsewhere
more largely: Now let us survey the very Country.

MIDDLE SEX OLIMA TRINOBANTIBVS habitata


MIDLE-SEX.
MIDLE-SEX takes name of the Middle-Saxons, because the Inhabitants thereof
were in the midst between East Saxons, West Saxons, South Saxons, and those
whom that age called Mercians. It is severed from Buckingham-shire by the River
Cole which the Britans called Co, on the West Side, from Hertford-shire on the
North-side by a known crooked Essex on the East with the River Lea, from
Surrey and Kent on the South by the Tamis. It being comprised within short
Bounds lies out in length, where it is longest twenty miles, and in the
narrowest place it is scant twelve miles over. For air passing temperate, and
for Soil fertile, with sumptuous houses and pretty Towns on all sides
pleasantly beautified: and every where offers to the view many things
memorable. By the River Cole, Breakespeare, Pope Hadrian the fourth. Haresfield.
where it enters first into this Shire, we saw Breakespeare an ancient house
belonging to a Family so surnamed, out of which came Pope Hadrian the Fourth,
of whom erewhile I spoke: then, Haresfeld, in old time Herefelle, the
possession in King William the Conquerours days of Richard the Fitz-Gislebert.
Uxbridge.
son of Count Gislebert. More Southward, Vxbridge anciently Woxbridge a
Town of later time built, and full of Innes, stretches out in length. Beneath
which is Draiton, reedified by the Barons Paget; Colham, which from the Barons
Le Strange came to the Earls of Darby: and Stanwell ever since the Normans
coming in, unto our fathers days the habitation of the Family of Windesore.
And not far from hence, Cole after it has made certain scattering meadow
Islands, at two small mouths falls into Tamis. Along the side whereof, as a
Germane Poet in this our age pretily versified, Tot campos, Sylvas, tot regia
tecta, tot hortos
Artifici dextra excultos, tot vidimus arces,

So many fields and pleasant woods, so many princely Bowres,
And Palaces we saw besides, so many stately Towers,
So many gardens trimly dressed by curious hand which are,
That now with Roman Tyberis the Tamis may well compare.


At the very first entrance, Stanes.
Stanes in the Saxon tongue (...) offers it self to our sight, where Tamis
has a wooden Bridge over it. This name it took of a meerestone here in
times past set up to mark out the jurisdiction that the City of London has in
the River. Runingmead.
Near unto this stone is that most famous Meadow Runingmead commonly called
Renimed: in which the Baronage of England assembled in great John. Whereof in
the marriage of Tame and Isis the Poet wrote thus, speaking of the Tamis that
runs hard by.

Subluit hic pratum, quod dixit Renimed Anglus,
Quo sedere duces armis annisque verendi,
Regis Joannis cuperent qui vertere sceptrum,
Edwardi Sancti dum leges juraque vellent
Principe contempto tenebroso e carcere duci:
Hinc sonnere tubae plusquam civilia bella,
Venit and hinc refugus nostras Lodovicus in orat.

Where close in counsel sat the Lords, as well for armor dred
As ancient years right reverend: who sought their sovereign King
John to depose from regal Throne: Whiles that they meant to bring
(Contemning Prince) S. Edwards laws and liberties again,
Inure, which had long time forlet a quite forgotten lain.
Hence more than civil Wars, aloud the trumpets ganne to sound,
Hence Lewis of France, who soon retired, set foot on English ground.
From thence it passes by Coway-stakes at Lalam, where we said that Caesar
crossed over the Tamis, and the Britans fensed the bank and Fourd against him
with stakes, whereof it had the name. Harrow hill.
Tamis passing down from thence sees above it Harrow, the highest hill of all
this Country, under which Southward there lie for a long way together exceeding
rich and fruitful fields, especially about Heston a small Village that
yields so fine flower for manchet that a long time it has served for the
Kings mouth. Hanworth.
Within a little of it is Hanworth, where stands a pretty house of the Kings
which King Henry the Eighth took exceeding delight in, as being a retiring
place Hampton Court.
Afterward it runs hard by Hampton Court a royal Palace of the Kings, a
work in truth of admirable magnificence built out of the ground by Thomas
Wolsey Cardinal, in ostentation of his riches, when for very pride, being
otherwise a most prudent man, he was not able to manage his mind. But it was
made an Honor, enlarged and finished by King Henry the Eighth so amply, as it
contains within it five several inner Courts passing large, environed with
very fair buildings wrought right curiously, and goodly to behold. Of which
Leland writes thus: Est locus insolito rerum splendore superbus,
Alluiturque vaga Tamisini fluminis unda,
Nomine ab antiquo jam tempore dictus Avona.
Hic Rex Henricus taleis Octavius aedes
Erexit, qualeis toto Sol aureus orb
Non vidit.
A stately place for rare and glorious show
There is, which Tamis with wandering stream does dowsse;
Times past, by name of Avon men it knew;
Here Henry the Eigth of that name, built an house
So sumptuous, as that on such an one
(Seek through the World,) the bright Sun never shone.


And another in the Nuptial Poem of Tame and Isis.

Alluit Hamptonam celebrem quae laxior urbis
Mentitur formam spacijs; hanc condidit aulam
Purpureus pater ille gravis, gravis ille sacerdos
Wolsaeus, fortuna favos cui ^elle repletos
Obtulit, heu tandem foriunae dona dolores.
He runs by HAMPTON, which for spacious seat
Seems City-like: Of this fair Courtly Hall
First founder was a Priest and Prelate great
Wolsey, that grave and glorious Cardinal:
Fortune on him had poured her gifts full fast,
But Fortunes Bliss, Alas, proved Bale at last.
And now with a winding reach the River bends his course Northward by
Gistleworth, Thistleworth.
for so was that called in old time, which now is Thistleworth. Where sometime
stood the Palace of Richard King of Romans and Earl of Cornwall, which the
Londoners in a tumultuous broile burnt to the ground.

From hence Sion shows it self, a little Monastery so named of the most holy
Mount Sion: Which King Henry the Fifth, when he had expelled thence the Monks
aliens, built for religious Virgins to the honor of our Savior, the Virgin
Mary, and Saint Briget of Sion: like as he founded another on the Rivers side
over against it for Bethelem. In this Sion, he appointed to the Glory of God
so many Nuns, Priests, and lay brethren divided a part within their several
walls, as were in number equal to Christ his Apostles and Disciples: upon whom
when he had bestowed sufficient living he provided by a law, that contenting
Somerset, who plucked down the Church, and there began a new house. Under this
the small water Brent issues into the Tamis, which springing out of a Pond
vulgarly called Brouns-well, for Brentwell, that is, in old English Frog-well,
passes down between Hendon, which Archbishop Dunstan borne for the
advancement of Monks, purchased for some few gold Bizantines, Bezantes
B^zantines of silver valued at two shillings anciently.
which were Imperial pieces of Gold coined at Bizantium or Constantinople, and
gave to the Monks of Saint Peter of Westminster: and Hamsted-hils (from whence
London, and the lovely Country about it.) Over which the ancient Roman military
way led to Verulam or Saint Albans by Edge-worth, and not by High-gate as now,
which new way was opened by the Bishops of London about some 300. years since.
But to return, Brent into whom all the small Rillets of these parts resort,
runs on by Brentstreat, an Hamlet to whom it imparted his name, waters
Hanger-wood, Hanwell, Oisterly Park, where Sir Thomas Gresham built a fair
large house: and so near his fall into the Tamis gives name to Brentford a
fair throughfaire, and frequent Market.

Near which in the year 1116. King Edmond surnamed Ironside, so fiercely
charged upon the Danes whom he compelled by force to retire from the Siege of
Stanes hitherto, all that lies between London highway (which goes through
Hounslow) and the Tamis was called the Forest or Warren of Stanes, until that
King Henry the Third, as in his Charter we read; Disforrested and diswarened
it. Fulham.
Then by the Tamis side is Fulham, in the English Saxon tongue (...), that is,
The place of Fowls: the greatest credit and honor whereof is the Bishop of
Londons house standing there conveniently, not far from the City, albeit not
so healthfully. Chelsey, as one would say, Shelf^ey.
Also Chelsey, so named of a shelfe of Sand in the River Tamis as some suppose,
but in Records it is named Chelche-hith: a place garnished with fair and
stately houses, by King Henry the Eighth, by William Powlet the first Marquess
of

But LONDON, London.
the Epitome or Breviary of all Britain, the seat of the British Empire, and
the Kings of Englands Chamber, so much overtoppeth all these, as according to
the Poet, Inter viburna Cupress^s, that is, the Cypresse-tree amongst the
Viornes. Tacitus, Ptolomee, and Antonine call it LONDINIUM, and LONGIDINIUM:
Ammianus LUNDINUM and AUGUSTA; Stephen in his Cities (...), our Britans
Lundayn; the old Saxons (...): Strangers Londra and Londres: the inhabitants
London: Fabulous writers Troja nova, that is, New Troy, Dinas Belin, that is,
Belins City, and Caer Lud of King Lud, whom they write to have reedified it and
given it the name. But these few names and original Erasmus his conjecture,
who deriveth it from Lindum a City in the Isle Rhodes I willingly leave to such
as well like it. For mine own part; seeing that Caesar and Strabo do write
that the ancient Britains called those Woods and groves by the names of Cities
and Towns, which they had fenced with trees cast down and plashed to stop
up all passage: seeing also I have understood that such woods or groves are in
the British tongue named Ll^wn, Britans towne^
I incline a little to the opinion that London thence took name, as one would
say, by way of excellency The City, or A City thick of trees. But if herein I
fail of the truth, let me with good leave give my conjecture (and here would
I have no man to charge me with inconstancy while I disport in conjecture) that
whence it had the fame, thence also it took Lhong: so that Londinum may seem
to sound as much as a ship-Rode, or City of ships. For, the Britains term a
City Dinas, whence the Latins have fetched their Dinum. Dinas.
And hence it is, that elsewhere it is called LONGIDINIUM, and in the funeral
song or Dump of a most ancient British Poet.
Bard, Lhong-porth, that is, an harbor or haven of ships; and by this very
term Bononia, or Bolen in France, which Ptolomee calls Gessoriacum Navale,
Glossarie is named Bolung-long. For, many Cities have drawn their names from
Ships, as Naupactus, Naustathmos, Nauplia, Navalia Augusti, etc. But of these
none has better right to assume unto it the name of a Ship-Rode, or Haven,
than our London. For, in regard of both Elements most blessed and happy it is,
as being situate in a rich and fertile Soil, abounding with plentiful store
of all things and on the gentle ascent and rising of an hill, hard by the Tamis
side, the most mild Merchant, as one would say, of all things that the World
does yield: which swelling at certain set hours with the Ocean-tides, by his
safe and deep channel able to entertain the greatest Ships that be, daily
brings in so great riches from all parts, that it striveth at this day with
the Mart-townes of Christendom for the second prise,

Who was the first founder, is by long time grown out of knowledge, and in
truth very few Cities there are that know their own first founders, considering
they grew up to their greatness by little and little. But as other Cities so
this of ours fathereth her original upon the Trojanes, as verily believing
that Brutus the Nephew in the third descent of Great Aeneas was the builder
thereof. But whosoever founded it, the happy and fortunate estate thereof has
given good proof, that built it was in a good hour and marked for life, and
long continuance. And that it is for antiquity honorable, Ammianus Marcellinus
gives us to understand, who called it in his times, and that was 1200. years
ago, an old town: and Cornelius Tacitus in like manner, who in Nero his days
1540. years since, reported it to have been a place very famous for fresh
Trade, concourse of Merchants, and great store of victuals and all things
necessary. This only at that time was wanting to the glory thereof, that it
had the name neither of Free City nor of Colony. Neither verily could it have
stood with the Romans profit, if a City flourishing with merchandise should
have enjoyed the right of a Colony or Free City. And therefore it was, as I
suppose, that they ordained it to be a Praefecture: Praefecturae.
for so they termed towns where Marts were kept and Justice ministered: yet so
as that they had no Magistrates of their own, but rulers were sent every year
Rome. Hence it comes that Tacitus the Panegyrist, and Marcellinus call it
only a town. And although it was not in name loftier, yet in wealth, riches
and prosperity it flourished as much as any other, yea and continued in manner
always the same under the dominion of Romans, English-Saxons, and Normans,
seldom or never afflicted with any great calamities. In the Reign of Nero,
when the Britans had conspired to recover and resume their liberty under the
leading of Boadicia, the Londoners could not with all their weeping and tears
hold Suetonius Paulinus, but that after he had levied a power of the Citizens
to aid him, he would needs dislodge and remove C. Alectus had by a deceitful
wile made away C. Carausius a Clive-lander, C. Carausius. Panegyrice,
pronounced before Constantius Caesar, and untruly entitled, unto Maximian.
Frankes put to the sword.
who taking vantage of our rough seas, of Dioclesians dangerous wars in the
East, and withal presuming of the French, and most venterous Mariners and
servitors at sea, had withheld to himself the revenewes of Britain and
Holland, and borne for the space of six years the title of Emperor Augustus,
as his coins very often found here do show: when M. Aurelius Asclepiodotus
likewise had Alectus in the third year now of his usurpation of the imperial
purple and state; those French, who remained alive after the fight, hasting to
London forthwith would have sacked the City, had not the Tamis, which never
failed to help the Londoners, very fitly brought in the Roman soldiers, who
by reason of a For, they put the Barbarians to the sword all the City over, and
thereby gave the Citizens not only safety by the slaughter of their enemies,
but also pleasure in the beholding of such a sight. And then it was, as our
Chronicles record, that Lucius Gallus was slain by a little Brooks side,
which ran through the middle almost of the City, and of him was in British
called Nant-Gall, in English Walbrooke: which name remains still in a Street,
under which there is a sewer within the ground to rid away filth; London
stone* Milliarium.
not far from London-stone, which I take to have been a Milliary, or
Milemarke, such as was in the Mercate place of Rome: From which was taken the
dimension of all journies every way, considering it is in the very mids of the
City, as it lies in length. Neither am I persuaded that London Constantine the
Great at the request of his mother Helena, did first fense it about with a Wall
made of rough stone and British brickes, Hellens money oftentimes found under
the Walls. The Wall.
which took up in compass three miles or thereabout: so as it enclosed the
model of the City, almost four square but not equal on every side,
considering that from West to East it is far longer, than from South to
North. That part of this Wall which stood along the Tamis side is by the
continual flowing and washing of the River fallen down and gone. Yet there
appeared certain remains thereof in King Henry the Seconds time, as
Fitz-Stephen, who then lived, has written. The rest now standing is stronger
toward the North, 1474.
as which not many years since was reedified by the means of Jotceline Lord
Major of London, became of a sudden new, as it were, and fresh again. But
toward East and West, although the Barons in old time during their wars
repaired and renewed it with the Jews houses then demolished, yet is it all
throughout in decay. For Londoners, like to those old Lacedaemonians laugh at
strong walled Cities, as cotte houses for Women, thinking their own City
sufficiently fensed when it is fortified with men and not with stones. The
Gates.
This Wall gives entrance at seven principal Gates, (for wittingly I omit the
smaller) which as they have been newly repaired, so they have had also new
names given unto them.

On the West side there be two: to wit Lud-gate of king Lud, or Flud-gate, as
Leland is of opinion, of a little flood running beneath it (like as the Gate
Fluentana in 1586.
and Newgate the fairest of them all, so called of the newness thereof, where
as before it was termed Chamberlangate, which also is the public Goall or
Prison. On the North side are four; Aldersgate of the antiquity, or as others
would have it, of Aldrict.
Aldrich a Saxon: Creple-gate, of a Spitle of lame Creples sometime adjoining
thereunto: More-gate of a moory ground hard by, now turned into a field and
pleasant Walks: which Gate was first built by Falconer Lord Major in the year
of our Lord 1414. and Bishopsgate of a Bishop, which Gate the Dutch Merchants
of the Stilyard were bound by Covenant, Esterlings.
both to repair and also to defend at all times of danger and extremity. On
the East side there is Aldgate alone, so named of the oldnesse, or Elbegate, as
others term it, Tamis beside that on the Bridge two Gates more, namely,
Belings-gate, a Wharfe now, or a key for the receipt of Ships, and Douregate,
that is, The Watergate, commonly called Dowgate.

Where the Wall ends also toward the River there were two very strong Forts
or Bastilions: The Tower.
of which the one Eastward remains yet, usually called, The Tower of London:
in the British tongue, Bringwin, or Tourgwin of the whiteness. A most famous
and goodly Citadell, encompassed round with thick and strong Walls, full of
lofty, and stately Turrets, fenced with a broad and deep ditch, furnished also
with an Armory or Magazine of warlike Munition, and other buildings besides: so
as it Fitz-Stephen recorded to have been at the East side of this City went
both to the making of this one. The other Fort was on the West side of the
City, where Fleet, a little Riveret (whence Fleete-streete took name) now of
no account, but in times past able to bear Vessels, as I have read in the
Parliament Rolls, sheddeth it self into the Tamis. Fitz-Stephen called this
the Palatine Tower or Castle: and they write, William the Conqueror it was
consumed by fire. Out of the ruins whereof, both a great part of Paul's Church
was newly built: and also in the very plot of ground where it stood, Robert
Kilwarby Archbishop of Canterbury founded a religious house for Dominican
Friars (whereupon we call the place Black Friars.) Whereby, a man may easily
guess of what bigness it was. Howbeit there stood in that place in the days
of king Henry the second ( Gervase of Tilbury in his book entitled Otia
Imperiatia is mine Author) two Forts or Castles built with Walls and Rampires:
The one whereof belonged to Bainard, the other to the Barons of Montfichet by
right of succession. But nothing remains of them at this day. Yet some
think, that Pembroch house was a piece of them, which we term Bainards
Castle, of William a Noble man Lord of Dunmow, Pat. 6.1. m. 21.
whose possession sometime it was, whose successors the Fitz-walters were in
right of inheritance the Ensign Bearers of the City of London, and amongst
them Robert Fitz-walter had license of king Edward the First to sell the site
of Bainard Castle to the said Archbishop Robert.

Neither was this City at that time walled only, but also when the Flamin or
Pagan Priest was taken away, and Christian Religion established under that good
Emperor, a Bishop was enstalled in his room. For, it appears, that at the
Council of Arles which in the year of grace 314. was held under Constantine
the Great, the Bishop of London was present. For, he subscribed, as is to be
seen in the first Tome of the Councels in this manner: RESTITUTUS Bishop in
the City of London, out of which Restitutus and his successors had their seat
and resiance, as some affirm, at Saint Peter's in Cornhill. Hereafter, London
flourished in such honor, that it began to be called AUGUSTA, and by that
name was famous under the Emperor Valentinian. For, Amianus Marcellinus in his
27. book writes thus: London called Augusta.
And going forward to London an ancient Town, which the posterity called
Augusta: and in the 28. book. He went from Augusta, which men of old time
called Lundi, whence it came, that when after Constantines time there was a
Mint appointed therein. (For we read in his pieces of money, A Mint.
which he stamped in honor of his father Constantius, and in others, this
inscription P. LON. S. that is, Pecunia Londini signata, that is, Money stamped
at London) he that had the charge and overseeing thereof under Lord high
Treasurer.
Comes sacrarum largitionum, is in the book of Notice termed Praepositus
Thesaurorum Augustensiam in Britannia, that is, Provost of the Treasury of
Augusta, or London in Britain. For this name AUGUSTA was a name full of much
dignity, full of majesty. And both founders and repairers of Cities when they
either hoped or wished that such Cities would become flourishing and powerful,
gave them significative names of good fortune. But among the most auspicious
names that be, none is more magnificent, none more auspicate than AUGUSTA. For,
this of AUGUSTUS, that most gracious and mighty Emperor Octavianus took unto
himself not without the judgment of the best learned. Surnamed he was, says
Dio, Augustus, as one of great Majesty above the nature of man. For, what
things be most honorable and sacred, are called London this name for so high
an honor without the License of the Roman Emperors. For that names could not
be imposed to Cities without license, Virgil notes in that Verse of his:
Urbem appellabant, permisso nomine, Acestam.
The City, by permission, ACESTA they did name.


But as continuance of time has out-worne this so honorable a name of Augusta:
so it has confirmed that other more ancient name, Londinum. Whiles it enjoyed
the foresaid name Augusta, it escaped fair from destruction by a rebellious
rout of Ransackers: but Theodosius the father of Theodosius the Emperor did
cut them in pieces whiles they were encombred with their spoils, and entered,
as Marcianus says, with And marching with his Army from thence, he by his
valiant prowess so freed Britain from those intolerable miseries and dangers
wherewith it was beset, that the Romans, as witnesses Symmachus, honored him
among other ancient Vortigern, to redeem himself being taken Prisoner,
delivered it for his ransom unto Hengest the Saxon: considering that it
belonged to the East Saxons, whose Country, as Writers do record, Vortigerne
upon that condition made over unto Hengest.

At which time the State of the Church went to wrack and endured sore
afflictions, the Pastors were either slain or forced to fly, their flocks
driven away, Theon the last Bishop of London of British blood, was feign to
hide the holy Relics of Saints, for a memorial (as mine Author says) and
not for any Superstition. Relics hidden for a remembrance.
But although those days of the English-Saxons were such as that a man might
truly say: Mars then brandished and shook his weapons, yet was London never
the less, as Bede testifies, a Town of Trade and Traffic, Frequented with
many Nations resorting thither by sea and land. But afterward, when a more
gracious gale of peace breathed favorably upon this wearied Island, and the
English-Saxons began to profess Christianity, 610. Saint Paul's Church.
it also began a fresh to flourish again. For, Aethelbert King of Kent,
under whom Sebert reigned in this Tract, as it were, his Vassal and by Paul,
which being eftsoons reedified and repaired became at length most stately and
magnificent, endowed also with fair Livings and Revenewes, wherewith are
maintained, a Bishop, a Deane, and Chaunter, a Chancellor, and a Treasurer,
five Archdeacons, thirty Prebendaries and diverse others.

The East part of this Church, which seems to be the newer and curiously
wrought, having under it a very fair Arched Vault, which also is Saint Faithes
Church, was begun of the ruins of that Palatine Castle (which I speak of)
by Maurice the Bishop; about the year of our Lord 1086. when as before time it
had been consumed by a woeful accidental fire: whereof, Malmesbury writes
thus: The beauty thereof is so magnificent, that it deserves to be numbered
in the rank of most excellent Edifices: so large is that Arched Vault
underneath, and the Church above it of such capacity, that it may seem
sufficient to receive any multitude of people whatsoever. Bishop.
Because therefore Maurice carried a mind beyond all measure in this project,
he betook the charge and cost of so laborious a piece of work unto those that
came after. In the end when B. Richard his Successor had made over all the
Revenewes belonging unto the Bishopric to the building of this Cathedral
Church, sustaining himself and his Family otherwise in the mean while, he
seemed in a manner to have done just nothing: so that he spent his whole
substance profusely heereabout, and yet small effect came thereof.

1560.
fired again with Lightning, and is not as yet reedified. The measure also and
proportion of this so stately building, I will here Saint Paul's Church
contains in length six hundred ninety foot: the breadth thereof is one
hundred and thirty foot: the height of the West Arched Roufe from the Ground
carries an hundred and two foot: and the new Fabrique from the Ground is
four score and eight foot high. The stoneworke of the Steeple from the plain
ground rises in height two hundred and threescore foot: and the timber frame
upon the same is two hundred seaventy

The Temple of Diana.
That there stood of old time a Temple of Diana in this place some have
conjectured, and arguments there are to make this their conjecture good.
Certain old houses adjoining are in the ancient records of the Church called
Dianaes Chamber: and in the Churchyard, while Edward the First reigned, an
incredible number of Ox-heads were dug up, as we find in our Annals, which
the common sort at that time made a wondering at, as the Sacrifices of
Gentiles: and the learned know, that Taurapolia were celebrated in the honor
of Diana. Sacrifice of Bulls.
I my self also when I was a boy, have seen a stagges head sticking upon a
speare-top, (a ceremony suting well with the sacrifices of Diana) carried round
about within the very Church in solemn de Bawd in Essex did present for
certain lands that there held, as I have heard say, the Priests of this Church
arrayed in their sacred vestiments, and wearing Garlands of flowers upon their
heads, were wont to receive at the steps of the quire.

Now whether this were in use before those Bawds were bound to exhibit such a
Stagge, I wot not: but surely this rite and ceremony may seem to smell of
Diana's worship and the Gentiles errors, more than of Christian Religion. And
verily no man need to doubt, that from them certain strange, and foraine and
heathenish rites crept into Christian religion. Which Ceremonies the first
Christians,

But ever since this Church was built, it has been the Sea of the Bishops of
London: and the first Bishop that it had under the English (about fifty years
after that Theo^ of the British Nation was thrust out) was Melitus a Roman
consecrated by Austin Archbishop of Canturbury. In honor of which Austin, flat
against the Decree of Pope Gregory the Great, the Ensigns of the
Archbishopricke, and the Metropolitan Sec, were translated from London to
Canturbury. Within this Cathedral Church, Who were buried in Paul's Church.
About the year 680.
(to say nothing of Saint Erkenwald, and the Bishops) Sebba King of the East
Saxons, who gave over his kingdom for to serve Christ; Etheldred or Egeldred,
who was an Oppressor rather than a Ruler of this Kingdom, cruel in the
beginning, wretched in the middle, and shameful in the end: 1016.
so outrageous he was in his connivency to a Parricidie committed, so infamous
in his flight and effeminacy, William Malmesbury.
and so miserable in his death.

Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln; John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, Sir Simon de
Burly a right noble Knight of the Garter executed by encroched Authority
without the kings assent, Sir John de Beauchamp, Lord Warden of the Cinque
Ports; John Lord Latimer, Sir John Mason knight; William Herbert Earl of
Pembroch, Sir Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, a man
of a deep reach Philip Sidney, and Sir Francis Walsingham, two famous knights,
etc. and Sir Christopher Hatton Lord Chancellor of England, for whose
perpetual memory Sir William Hatton his Nephew by sister, descended from the
ancient Family of the Newports, whom he adopted into the name of Hatton,
dutifully erected a sumptuous monument, well beseeming the greatness of his
adoptive father.

Beside this Church, there is not to my knowledge any other work of the
English Saxons extant in London to be seen: for why? they continued not long
in perfect peace; considering that in short space the West Saxons subdued the
East Saxons; and London became subject to the Mercians. Scarcely were these
civil Aelfred recovered it out of their hands, and after he had repaired it,
gave it unto Aetheldred Earl of the Mercians, Or Cnute.
Canut especially, who by digging a new Channel attempted to turn away the
Tamis from it. Howbeit evermore they lost their labor; the Citizens did so
manfully repulse the force of the enemy. Yet were they not a little terrified
still by them, until they lovingly received and saluted as their King, William
Duke of Normandy; whom God destined to be borne for the good of England
against those Spoilers. Presently then, the winds were laid, the clouds
disparcled, and golden days in deed shone upon it: Since when it never
sustained any great calamity to speak of: but through the special favor and
indulgence of Princes obtained very large and great Immunities, The Kings
Chamber, and so flourished a new with fresh trade and traffic of Merchants,
that William of Malmesbury who lived well near about that time, termed it, A
noble and wealthy City, replenished with rich Citizens, and frequented with the
commerce of Occupiers and Factours coming out of all lands. And Fitz-Stephen
living also in those days, has left in writing, that London at that time
counted an hundred and twenty two Parish Churches, and thirteen Covents of
religious Orders: also that when a Muster and show was made of able men to
bear Arms, they brought into the Field under their Colors forty thousand
footmen, and twenty thousand horsemen.

Then was it enlarged with new buildings, and the spacious Suburbs stretched
Innes of the Court.
and best peopled: In which are twelve Innes, ordained for Students of our
Common law: whereof four being very fair and large belong to the judicial
Courts, the rest to the Chauncery: besides two Innes moreover for the Sergeants
at Law. Herein such a number of young Gentlemen do so painefully ply their
books, and study the Law, that for frequency of Students, it is not inferior
either to Angiers, Cane, or Orleance it self, as Sir John Fortescue in his
small Treatise of the Laws of England does witness. The New Temple.
The said four principal houses, are The Inner Temple, the Middle Temple,
Graies Inn, and Lincolns Inn. Those two former named, Old Temple where new
stands Southhampton house in Holborne. Templars.
stand in the very place where in times past, during the Henry the Second,
Heraclius Patriarch of Jerusalem consecrated a Church for Knights Templars,
which they had newly built according to the form of the Temple, near unto the
Sepulcher of our Lord at Jerusalem. For, at their first institution about the
year of our Lord 1113. they dwelt in part of the Temple hard by the Sepulcher,
whereof they were so named, and vowed to defend Christian Religion, the Holy
Land, and Pilgrims going to visit the Lords Sepulcher, against all
Mahometans, and Infidels; professing to live in chastity and obedience;
whereupon all men most willingly and with right loving hearts embraced them: so
that, through the bounteous liberality of Princes and devout people, having
gotten in all places very fair Possessions, and exceeding great wealth, Henry
the Third, and many Noble men desired much to be buried in their Church among
them. Some of whose Images are there to be seen, with their legs acrosse.
For, so they were buried in that Age that had Taken upon them the Cross (as
they then termed it) to serve in the Holy Land, or had vowed the same. Among
whom was William Marshall the elder a most powerful man in his time, William
and Gilbert his sons Marshalles of England and Earls of Penbroch. Upon
William the elder his Tomb I some years since read in the upper part Comes
Penbrochiae, and upon side this Verse: Miles eram Martis, Mars multos vicerat
armis.
Of Mars I was a doughty Knight,
Mars vanquished many a man in fight.


*
But in process of time, when with insatiable greediness they had hoorded
great Guil. Tyrius.
appropriating spiritual livings to themselves, and other hard means; their
riches turned to their ruin. For thereby their former piety was after a manner
stifled, they fell at jarre with other religious orders, their professed
obedience to the Patriarch of Jerusalem was rejected, envy among the common
sort was procured, which hope of gain among the better sort so enkindled, that
in the year of our salvation 1312. this order was condemned of impiety, and by
the Popes authority utterly abolished. The Statute as touching the Templars
Lands. 17. Edward. 2.
Howbeit their possessions were by authority of the Parliament assigned to the
Hospitalier Knights of S. John of Jerusalem, least that such Lands given to
pious and good uses, against the Donours will should be alienated to other
uses. And yet it is apparent out of ancient writings, that this place,
Templers, See Hospitilars afterward.
was the seat and habitation of Thomas Earl of Lancaster, and of Sir Hugh
Spenser King Edward the Second his minion: afterward of Sir Aimer de Valence
Earl of Pembroch, and in the end turned into two Colleges or Innes of
Lawyers. Of the rest of these Innes, I have found nothing at all by reading:
But the general voice goes, that the one was the dwelling house of the Lord
Greies of Wilton, and the other of the Earls of Lincoln.

Nere unto this K. Henry the third erected between the New and the Old Temple
an house of Converts, for the maintenance of those that were converted from
Iudaisme to the Christian Truth: which King Edward the Third appointed
afterward for The Roules.
and thereof at this day it is called The Rowls.

These Suburbs with houses standing close together, and stately habitations of
the Nobles and great Men of the Land along the Tamis side, reach out as far
as to Westminster. Among which these are the most memorable here: Bride-well,
where King Henry the Eighth built a royal house for the entertainment of
Charles the Fifth Emperor: but now it is an House of Correction: Buckhurst
house, or Salisbury Court, belonging sometimes to the Bishops of Salisbury: the
White Freers, or Carmelite Freers: The Temples whereof I speak: Then without
the Bars Essex house, built by the Lord Paget: Arondel house before called
Hampton place, and Somerset house built by Edward Semer Duke of Somerset: The
Savoy, so named of Peter Earl of Savoy, who there dwelt, which Queen Aeleonor
wife to King Henry the Third purchased Mont-joy, and gave it to her Son
Edmund Earl of Lancaster. Whose Posterity dwelt in it a long time until that
King Henry the Seventh dedicated it as an Hospital for the Poor:
Montis-Jovis.
Worcester-house, late Bedford-house, Salisbury-house, Durham-house, built by
Antony Beck Bishop of Durham, and Patriarch of Jerusalem, and thereby the
only ornament of this part the Britain-Burse, built by the Earl of Salisbury,
and so named by King James: Yorke-house in times past, Bath-house, and
Northampton-house now begun by Henry Earl of Northampton. But what mean I
to name these places?

(...)
None claim them wholly for their own:
Fortune disposes them every one.
Westminster.
By this Suburbs Westminster, which sometime was more than a mile distant, is
conjoined so close unto the City of London, that it seems a member thereof:
whereas it is a City of it self, having their peculiar Magistrates and
Privileges. It was called in times past Thorney, of Thorns: but now
Westminster, of the West situation, and the Monastery. Most renowned it is for
that Church, the Hall of Justice, and the Kings Palace.

This Church is famous especially by reason of the Inauguration and Sepulture
of the Kings of England. Sulcard writes, that there stood sometimes a Temple
of Apollo Antoninus Pius Emperor of Rome it fell down with an Earthquake. Out
of the remains whereof, Sebert King of the East Saxons erected another to
Saint Peter, which being by the Danes overthrown, Bishop Dunstane
reedified, and granted it to some few Monks. But afterward, The devout King
destined unto God that place, both for that it was nere unto the famous and
wealthy City of London, and also had a pleasant situation amongst fruitful
fields, and green grounds lying round about it: and withal the principal
River running hard by, bringing in from all parts of the world great variety of
Wares and Merchandise of all sorts to the City adjoining. But chiefly for the
love of the chief Apostle, whom he reverenced with a special and singular
affection: He made choice to have a place there for his own Sepulcher: and
thereupon commanded, that of the tenths of The form of that ancient building
read if you please out of an old Manuscript book: The principal plot or
groundwork of the building supported with most lofty Arches is cast round
with a four square work and semblable joints. But But after an hundred and
threescore years King Henry the Third subverted this fabric of King Edwards,
and built from the very foundation a new Church of very fair workmanship,
supported with sundry rows of Marble pillars, and the Rowfe covered The wonder
of the World) Leland calls it: for a man would say that all the curious and
exquisite work that can be devised, is there compacted: wherein is to be
seen his own most stately magnificall Monument all of solid and massy
Copper. This Church when the Monks were driven thence from time to time was
altered to and fro with sundry changes. First of all it had a Deane and
Prebendaries: soon after one Bishop and no more, namely T. Thurlebey, who
having wasted the Church Patrimony surrendered it Collegiat Church, or rather
into a Seminary and nurse-garden of the Church, appointed twelve Prebendaries
there, and as many old Soldiers past service for Almes-men, forty Scholars,
who in their due time are preferred to the Universities, and from thence sent
forth into the Church, and Commonweal, etc. Over these she placed D. Bill
Deane, whose successor was D. Gabriel Goodman, a right good man indeed and of
singular integrity, an especial Patron of my studies.

Within this Church are entombed (that I may note them also according to their
Sebert the first of that name, Princes interred in West-Minster Church.
and first Christian King of the East Saxons: Harold the bastard son of Canutus
the Dane, King of England, S. Edward King and Confessor, with his wife Edith:
Maud, wife to King Henry the First, the daughter of Malcolme King of Scots:
King Henry the Third, and his son, King Edward the First with Aeleonor his
wife, daughter to Ferdinand^ the first King of Castile and of Leon. King Edward
the Third, and Philippa of Henault his wife: Anne, sister to Wenzelaus the
Emperor: King Henry the Fifth with Catharine his wife, daughter to Charles the
Sixth king of France: Anne, wife to king Richard the Third, daughter to Richard
Nevill Earl of Warwick: king Henry the Seventh with his wife Elizabeth:
daughter to king Edward the Fourth, and his mother Margaret Countess of
Richmond: king Edward the Sixth: Anne of Cleve the fourth wife of king Henry
the Eighth: Queen Mary: And whom we are not to speak of without praise, The
Love and Joy of England Queen ELIZABETH of Sacred memory, Queen Elizabeth.
our late Sovereign and most gracious Lady, a Prince matchless for her
heroicke Virtues, Wi^edome and Magnanimity above that Sex, rare knowledge and
skill in the Tongues, is here intombed in a James of a pious mind erected to
her memory. But alas, how little is that Monument in regard of so Noble and
worthy a Lady? Who of her self is her own Monument and that right magnificent.

For, how great SHE was] RELIGION REFORMED, PEACE WELL GROUNDED, MONEY REDUCED
TO THE TRUE VALUE, A NAVY PASSING WELL FURNISHED IN READINESS, HONOR AT SEA
RESTORED, REBELLION EXTINGVISHED, ENGLAND FOR THE SPACE OF XLIIII. YEARS MOST
WISELY GOVERNED, ENRICHED AND FORTIFIED; SCOTLAND FREED FROM THE FRENCH, FRANCE
RELIEVED, NETHERLANDS SUPPORTED, SPAIN AWED, IRELAND QUIETED, AND THE WHOLE
GLOBE OF THE

Dukes. Earls, and other Nobles entombed in Westminster.
Of Dukes and Earls degree, there ly here buried: Edmund Earl of Lancaster
second son of K. Henry the third, and his wife Aveline de fortibus Countess of
Albemarle. William and Audomar of Valence of the family of Lusignian, Earls of
Pembroch, Alphonsus John, and other children of King Edward the First, John of
Eltham Earl of Cornwall, son to K. Edward the second, Thomas of Woodstocke
Duke of Gloucester the youngest son of K. Edward the third, with other of his
children, Aeleanor daughter and heir of Humfrey Bohun Earl of Hereford and of
Essex wife to Thomas of Woodstocke, Sophia the daughter of K. James, who, died,
as it were, in the very first day-dawning of her age, Phillippa Mohun Duchess
of York, Lewis Vicount Robsert of Henault in right of his wife, Lord
Bourchier, Anne the young daughter and heir of John Mowbray Duke of Norfolk
promised in marriage unto Richard Duke of York younger son to K. Edward the
fourth, Sir Giles Daubency Lord Chamberlain to king Henry the Seventh, and his
wife of the house of the Arundels in Cornwall, I. Vicount Wells, Francis
Brandon Duchess of Suffolk, Mary her daughter, Margaret Douglasse Countess of
Lennox, grandmother to James King of Britain, with Charles her son, Winifrid
Bruges Marchioness of Winchester, Anne Duchess of Somerset and Jane her
daughter, Anne Cecill Countess of Oxford daughter to the L. Burghley Lord high
Treasurer of England, with Mildred Burghley her mother, Elizabeth Berkeley
Countess of Ormund, Francis Sidney Countess of Sussex, James Butler, Vicount
Thurles son and heir to the Earl of Ormond.

Besides these, Humfrey Lord Bourchier of Cromwall, Sir Humfrey Bourchier son
and heir to the Lord Bourchier of Berners both slain at Bernet field, Sir
Nicholas Carew, Baron Carew Baroness Powisse, T. Lord Wentworth, Thomas Lord
Wharton, John Lord Russell, Sir T. Bromley Lord Chancellor of England, Douglas
Howard daughter and heir general of H. Vicount Howard of Bindon wife to Sir
Arthur Gorges, Elizabeth daughter and heir of Edward Earl of Rutland wife to
William Cecill. Sir John Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, Francis
Howard Countess of Hertford, Henry and George Carry, the father and son
Barons of Hunsdon both Lords Chamberlaines to Queen Elizabeth the heart of
Anne Sophia the tender daughter of Christopher Harley, Count Beaumont
Ambassador from the king of Charles Blunt Earl of Devonshire, Lord Lieutenant
General of Ireland. And (whom in no wise we must forget) the Prince of
English Poets Geoffry Chauer: as also he that for pregnant wit and an excellent
gift in Poetry of all English Poets came nearest unto him, Edmund Spencer.
Beside many others of the Clergy, and Gentlemen of quality.

There was also another College or Free-chapell hard by consisting of a Deane,
and twelve Chanons, dedicated to Saint Stephen: which King Edward the Third in
his princely Magnificence repaired with curious workmanship and endowed with
fair possessions, so as he may seem to have built it new what time as he had
with his victories overrun and subdued al France, recalling to mind (as we
read the Charter of and pondering in a due weight of devout consideration the
exceeding benefits of Christ, whereby of his own sweet mercy and pity he
preventeth us in all occasions, delivering us, although without all desert,
from sundry perils, and defending us gloriously with his powerful right hand
against the violent assaults of our adversaries with victorious successes: and
in other tribulations and perplexities wherein we have exceeding much been
encombred, by comforting us and by applying, and in-powering remedies upon us
beyond all hope and expectation. There was adjoining hereto a Palace, the
ancient habitation of the Kings of England from the time of King Edward the
Confessor: which in the Reign of king Henry the Eighth, was burnt by casual
fire to the ground. A very large, stately, and sumptuous Palace this was, and
in that age for building incomparable, with a vawmur^,: Fitz Stephen^.
The remains whereof, are the Chamber, wherein the King, the Nobles, The
higher house.
with the Counselors and Officers of State, do assemble at the high Court of
Parliament, and the next unto it, wherein anciently they were wont to begin
the Parliaments, known by the name of Saint Edwards painted chamber, because
the tradition holds that the said king Edward therein dyed.

But how sinful an Act, how bloody, how foul, how heinous, horrible, hideous,
and odious both to God and man, certain brute and savage beasts in men's shape
enterprised of late, The Treason of Robert Catesby.
by the device of that Arch Traitor Robert Catesby, with undermining, and
placing a mighty deal of gunpowder under these Edifices against their Prince,
their Country and all the States of the Kingdom, and that under an abominable
Excidat illa dies aevo, ne postera credant
Secula, nos certe taceamus, and obruta multa
Nocte tegi propriae patiamur crimina gentis.
That cursed day forgotten be: no future age believe

Conceal the same, and suffer such Designs of our own Nation
Hidden to be and buried quite in darkness of oblivion.


Adjoining unto this is the Whitehall, wherein at this day the Court of
Requests is kept. Westminster hall.
Beneath this is that Hall, which of all other is the greatest, and the very
Praetorium or Hall of Justice for all England. In this are the Judicial
Courts, namely: The Kings Bench, the Common Pleas, and The Chancery: And in
places near thereabout, The Star Chamber, the Exchequer, Court of Ward, and
Court of the D^teby of Lancaster, etc. In which at certain set times (we call
them Terms) yearly causes are heard Magna Charta made a law in these words:
Let not the Common Pleas fol^ow our Court, but be holden in some certain
place. William Lambert.
Which notwithstanding some expound thus: That the Common Pleas from
thenceforth be handled in a Court of the own by it self a part, and not in
the Kings Bench, as before. This Judgment Hall which we Judges, Whose mouth
(as that Royal Writer says) shall not err in Judgment. Prove. c. 16.
But the foresaid Palace, after it was burnt down in the year of our Lord
1512. lay desolate, and king Henry the Eighth translated shortly after the
kings Seat from thence to an house not far off, which belonged but a while
before to Cardinal Wolsey, and is called White Hall. This house is a Princely
thing: enclosed of the one side with a Park James (where anciently was a
Spittle for Maiden Lepres) built by king Henry the Eighth, on the other side
with the Tamis. A certain Poet termed the foresaid House according to the
English name thereof Leucaeum in Latin, as appears in these Verses: --
Regale subintrant
Leucaeum Reges (dederant memorabile quondam
Atria, quae niveo candebant marmore, nomen)
Quod Tamisis prima est cui gloria pascere cygnos
Ledaeos, ranco pronus subterluit aestu.
To Royal Palace Kings enter in, sometime LEUCEUM hight.
(This famous name those Courts it gave that shone with marble white.)
Hard under it with low-sound stream Tamis down apace does glide,
A River feeding Swannes, wherein he takes especial pride.


The Mues.
Hard by, near unto the Mues so called, for that it served to keep Hawks, and
now is become a most fair Stable for the kings horses, there remains a
monument in memorial of that most pious and kind Queen Aeleonor, erected by
the king Edward the First her most dearly beloved husband: and certes the
memory of her loving kindness shall remain worthy to be consecrated to
aeternity. For she, the daughter of Ferdinand the Third, king of Castile,
being given in marriage to Edward the first king of England, The love of a wife.
accompanied him into the Holy Land: where, when as he and by a certain Moore
wounded with an envenomed sword, and by all the remedies that Physicians could
devise was not so much eased as afflicted: she took her to a cure strange I
must needs say and never heard of before, Rodericus Toletanum lib. 1.
howbeit full of love and kind affection. For, her Husbands wounds infected
with the poison, and which by reason of the malignity thereof could not be
closed and healed, she day by day licked with her tongue, and sucked out the
venomous humor which to her was a most sweet liquour. By the vigor and
strength whereof, or to say more truly, by virtue of a wives lovely fidelity
she so drew unto her all the substance of the poison, that the wounds being
closed, and cicatrized, he became perfectly healed, and she caught no harm
at all. What then can be heard more rare, what more admirable than this woman's
faithful love? That a wives tongue thus anointed, as I may so Thus much of
Westminster jointly with London (although as I have said, it is a City by it
self, and has a several jurisdiction from it) because with continued
buildings it so joyneth thereto, that it may seem to be one and the same City.

Moreover, at the West end of the City, other Suburbs run a great way in
length, Holborne.
with goodly rows of houses orderly ranged, as namely Holborne or rather more
truly Oldborne: wherein stood anciently the first house of the Templers only
in the place now called Southampton house. But now there stand certain Innes,
Ely, well beseeming Bishops to dwell in: for which they are beholden to John de
Hotham Bishop of Ely under king Edward the Third.

At the North side likewise there be Suburbs annexed to the City, wherein
Jordan a man very wealthy and devout built an house for the Knights Hospitalers
of Saint John of Jerusalem, Saint John's Hospitalers after called Knights of the
Rhodes and now of Malt.
which grew in time so great, that it resembled a Palace: and had in it a very
fair Church and a Towre-steeple raised to a great height with so fine
workmanship, that while it stood, it was a singular beauty and ornament to the
City. These Knights Hospitalers at their first institution, about the year
1124. and long after, were so lowly all the while they continued poor, that
their Governor was styled Servant to the poor Servitours of the hospital of
Jerusalem, like as the Master of the Templars, Templars.
who shortly after arose, was termed The humble Minister of the poor Knights
of the Temple. This religious Order was instituted shortly after Geffery of
Bollen had recovered Jerusalem. The Brethren whereof ware a white Cross upon
their upper Saint John at Jerusalem, and to secure the passages thither, they
charitably buried the dead, they were continual in prayer, mortified
themselves with watchings and fastings, they were courteous and kind to the
poor whom they called their Masters, and fed with white bread, while
themselves lived with brown; and carried themselves with great austerity.
Whereby they purchased to themselves the love and liking of all sorts, and
through the bounty of good Princes and private persons admiring their piety,
and prowess, they rose from this low degree to so high an estate, and great
riches, that after a sort they wallowed in wealth. For they had about the year
of our Lord 1240. within Christendom nineteen Templars nine thousand (the
Revenewes and rents whereof in England fell afterward also to these
Hospitalers.) And this Estate of theirs grown to so great an height made way
for them to as great honors, so as their Prior in England was reputed the
Lords of S. John's.
Prime Baron of the Land and able with fullness and abundance of all things to
maintain an honorable Port, until that King Henry the Eighth advised by
them, which respected their private profit, gat their lands and livings into
his own hands, like as he did of the Monasteries also. Albeit it was then
declared that such religious places being of most pious intent consecrated to
the Glory of God, might have been according to the Canons of the Church,
bestowed in exhibition and Alms for Gods Ministers, relief Charter House.
where now is to be seen a sightly circuit of fair houses, was the
Charter House, founded by Sir Walter Many of Henault, who with singular
commendation served under King Edward the Third in the French wars: and in
that place heretofore was a most famous Cemitery, or burial place in which in
a plague time at London, were buried in the year 1349. more than 50000.
persons: a thing recorded to posterity by an inscription which continued there
a long time engraven in Brass.

On this North-West side likewise London has other great Suburbs, and there
stood in old time a Barbacan. Gal^ottus Martius.
Watchtowre or military Forefense, whence the place was of an Arabicke word
called Barbacan, and by the gift of King Edward the Third became Vffords; from
whom by the Willoughbies it came to Sir Pengrine Bertey, Lord Willoughbey of
Eresby, a man noble and generous, and one of Mars his brood.

Neither less Suburbs run out on the North-East and East. In the fields of
which Suburbs, whiles I was first writing these matters, there were gotten out
of the ground many urnes, funeral vessels, little Images, and earthen pots,
wherein were small pieces of money coined by Claudius, Nero, Vespasian, etc.
Glass vials also and sundry small earthen vessels, wherein some liquid
substance remained which I would think to be either of that sacred oblation
of Wine and Milk, which the ancient Romans used when they burnt the dead, or
else those odoriferous liquours that Statius

-- Pharijque liquores
Arsuram lavere comam.
And liquid baulmes from Aegypt-land that came,
Did wash his hair that ready was for flame.
This place the Romans appointed to burn and bury dead bodies, who according

London Bridge.
Now for that side where the River runs, toward the South bank thereof, the
Citizens made a Bridge also over the Water reaching to that large Borough of
Southwarke, whereof I have already spoken; First, of wood in that place where
before time they used for passage a ferry boat in stead of a Bridge.
Afterward, under the Reign of King John they built a new Bridge with
admirable workmanship of stone hewn out of the Quarry, See of Southwarke, in
Suthrey.
upon 19. Arches, beside the drawbridge, and so furnished it on both sides
with passing fair houses joining one to another in manner

Saint Savior.
In this Burgh of Southwarke, to speak only of things memorable, there stood
sometime a famous Abbay of Monks, of Saint Benets Order, called Bermondsey,
consecrated in times past unto our Savior, by Aldwin Child Citizen of London:
also a stately house built by Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, Suffolkehouse.
which having served his turn but a small time, was shortly after pulled down.

S. Thomas Hospital.
These are extant, Saint Thomas Hospital, reedified or founded rather by the
City of London, for the sustenance of feeble and impotent persons: The Priory
of the blessed Virgin Mary, called Saint Mary Over The because it stands
beyond the Tamis in regard of London, erected by William Pont del Arche a
Norman for black Chanons. The Bishops house of Winchester built by William
Giffard Bishop, for his Successors, about the year of our Lord 1107. From
which along the Tamis bank there runs Westward a continued raunge of
dwelling houses: where within our fathers remembrance was the Bordello or
Lupanarie, for so the Latins term those little rooms or secret chambers of
harlots wherein they filthily prostituted their bodies to sale, because they
after the manner of ravening she-wolves catch hold of silly wretched men and
pluck them into their holes. But these were prohibited by King Henry the
Eighth, at which time England was grown to excessive lasciviousness and riot;
which in other Nations are continued for gain, under a Stews, but of those
Ponds or Stews, Stews.
which are here to feed Pikes and Tenches fat, and to scowre them from the
strong and muddy fennish taste. Here have I seen Pikes panches opened with a
knife to show their fatness: and presently the wide gashes and wounds come
together again by the touch of Tenches, and with their glutinous slime
perfectly healed up. Among these buildings there is a place in manner of a
Theater for baiting of Bears and Bulls with Dogs: and certain kenels
appointed severally for Band-Dogges or Mastives, Band-dogges or Mastives.
which are of that strength, and so sure of bit, that three of them are able to
take and hold down a Bear, and four a Lion: so that the Poet Taurorum
fracturi colla Britanni.
The British Dogs are able well,
To break the necks of Bulls so fell.


Like as he that said, they were more fierce than the Dogs of Arcadian kind,
which are thought to be engendered of Lions.

What time as the Bridge was thus made between London and this Borough, the
City was not only enlarged; but also an excellent form of Common wealth was
therein ordained, and the Citizens reduced into certain distinct Corporations
and Companies. The whole City divided into six and twenty Wards: and the
Counsel Societies or Companies of Citizens. ^^ibus. Wards.
named of their age in our tongue Aldermen, as one would say, Senators, who
each one have the overseeing and rule of his several Ward: and whereas in
ancient time they had for their Head-Magistrate, a Or Portgrave.
Portreve, that is, a Governor of the City, King Richard the First ordained
two Ballives: Major for their chief Magistrate: Praetor or Major.
also two Sheriffs, whereof the one is called the Kings, the other the Cities
Sheriff. 1411.
This form of Common wealth being thus established it is incredible to tell
how much London grew, 1405.
and grows still in public and also private buildings, whiles all the Cities
of England besides decrease. For, to say nothing of that beautiful piece of
work, the Senat^ house named Guild Hall, built by Sir Thomas Knowles Major:
Leaden Hall, a large and goodly building, erected by Simon Eire, to be a
common Garner in time of dearth to pull down the price of Corn; The Burse.
the Merchants meeting place standing upon Pillars, 1567.
which the common people call the Burse, and Elizabeth with a solemn ceremony
named The Royal Exchange, Royal Exchange.
for the use of Merchants, and an ornament to the City, set up by Sir Thomas
Gresham Citizen and knight; a magnificent work verily, whether you respect the
modull of the building, the resort of Merchants from all Nations th^ther, or
the store of wares there. Which Sir Thomas Gresham, being withal an exceeding
great lover of learning, consecrated a most spacious house his own habitation
to the furtherance of learning, Grehams College.
and instituted there Professors of Divinity, Law, Physic, Astronomy,
Geometry, and Music, with liberal salaries and stipends: to the end that
London might be a place not only furnished with all sorts of Traffic, but
also with the liberal Arts and Sciences. To pass over the House of the
Society of the House, commonly Stilyard, as the Easterlings yard, and the
waters conveyed by pipes under the ground, into all parts of the City, and
very goodly conducts or cisternes castellated to receive the same: also the new
conveyance of water devised by the skillful travel of Peer Maurice a German;
who by means of a forcer or wheel, with pipes placed at a certain level,
brought water of late out of the Tamis into a great part of the City; To omit
all these, I say, it is so adorned every where with Churches, that RELIGION and
GODLINESS seem to have made choice of their residence herein. For the Churches
therein amount to the number of one hundred twenty and one, more verily than
Rom^ it self (as great and holy as it is) can show. Besides Hospitals for
diseased persons, it maintains also six hundred Orphane children or Christ's
Church Hospital, and poor people upon contribution of Alms about 1240. etc.
A long time it would ask to discourse particularly of the good laws and
orders, of the laudable government, of the port and dignity of the Major and
Aldermen, of their forward service and loyalty to their Prince, of the Citizens
courtesy, the fair building and costly furniture, the breed of excellent and
choice wits, their gardens in the Suburbs full of dainty arbours, and
banqueting rooms, stored also with strange herbs from foreign countries, of
the multitude, strength and furniture of their ships, the incredible store of
all sorts of Merchandise (two hundred thousand broad-clothes, Guicciardin.
beside other An^werp alone has received from hence every year) and of the
superabundance of all things which belong to the furniture or necessity
Hadrianus Iunius in his Philippeis: -- Tecti^ opibusque refertum
Londinum, and si fas, numeroso cive superbum,
Larga ubi foecundo rerum undat copia cornu.
Thick built with houses London is, with riches stuffed full,
Proud, (if we may so say) of men that therein live and dwell,
Wherein most plenteous wise abound all things that tongue can tell.


Iul. Scaliger in his Poem of Cities.

Vrbs animis, numeroque potens, and r^bore genti^.
For peoples, courage, numbers, power, it is a City strong.
And another Poet has powered out these Verses also, concerning London, if you
deigne to read them, LONDINUM gemino procurrit littore long
Aemula materna tollens sua lumina Troia
Clementer surgente jugo dum te^dit in ortum:
Urbs peramaena situ, coeloque soloque beata.
Urbs pietate potens, numeroso cive superba,
Urbsque Britannorum quae digna BRITANNIA dici.
Haec nova doctrinis Lutetia, mercibus Ormus,
Altera Roma viris, Chrysaea secunda metallis.
Along both banks out stretched far the City LONDON lies
Resembling much her mother Troie, aloft she lifts her eyes,
Whiles on a gentle rising hill she bears toward East:
A City pleasant for her site, in air, and soil much blessed.
Religious, and populous: and hence she looks on hie,
And well deserves for to be called the Britans Britanie.
For learning new Lutetia, Ormus for Traffic mich,
A second Rome for valiant men, Chrysae for metals rich.


In this manner likewise versified Henry of Huntingdon in praise of London,
while King Stephen reigned, about four hundred years since: Ibis and in
nostros dives Londonia versus,
Quae nos immemores non sinis esse tui.
Quando tuas arces, tua moenia mente retracto,
Quae vidi, videor cuncta videre mihi.
Fama^ loquax and not a loqui, moritura silendo,
Laudibus crubait fingere falsa tuis.
Thou also shall of Verses ours Rich London have thy part,
For why? we cannot thee forget, so great is thy desert.
When I think of thy stately Towers, thy fair and spacious Wall
Which I have seen, me thinks therewith I see no * less then all.
This prattling fame, that is borne to prate, and talked she not would dye,
In all the praise that goes of thee has bash'd to tell one lie.


Another Poet in like manner pleasantly played upon London in this sort: Hac
Urbs illa potens, cui tres tria dona ministrant
Bacchus, Apollo, Ceres, pocula, carmen, ador.
Hac Urbs illa potens, quam Juno, Minerva, Diana
Mercibus, arce, feris, ditat, adornat, alit.
This is that City strong to which three gifts are given by three,
By Bacchus, Ceres, and Phoebus, Wine, Wheat, and Poetree.
This place stern Pallas, Juno Queen, Diana Hunters-feer
Adorn's, enricheth, and does feed, with towers, with wares, with deer.


But in a more grave note and serious style, a friend of mine and a praise
worthy person, Master John Ionston, Professor of Divinity in the Kings
University of S. Andrews.

URBS AUGUSTA, cui coelumque, solumque, salumque
Cuique favent cunctis cuncta elementa bonis.
Mitius haud usquam coelum est, uberrima Tellus
Fundit inexhausti germina laeta soli.
Et pater Oceanus Tamisino gurgite mistus,
Convehit immensas totius orbis opes.

Gentis praesidium, cor, anima, atque oculus.
Gens antiqua, potens virtute and robore belli,
Artium and omnigenum nobilitata opibus.
Singula contemplare animo, attentusque tuere,
Aut Orbem aut Orbis dixeris esse caput.
This City well AUGUSTA called, to which (a truth to say)
Air, Land, Sea, and all Elements, show favor every way.
The weather no where milder is, the ground most rich to see,

And Ocean, that with Tams stream his flowing tide does blend
Conveis to it commodities, all that the world can send.
The noble seat of Kings it is for port and roialty,
Of all the Realm the fence, the heart, the life, and lightsome ey.
The people ancient, valorous, expert in chivalry,
Enriched with all sorts and means of Art and mystery.
Take heedfull view of every thing, and then say thus in brief,
This either is a world it self, or of the world the chief.
John Stowe Citizen of London, and a famous Chronicler has discoursed more at
large, and more exactly in that his Survey of London, which he lately published.

Now will I take my leave of my dear native Country, and bid London a diew,
after I have given this only note, that the Pole is here elevated fifty one
degrees, and four and thirty scruples, and the Meridian distant from the
farthest West-poynt three and twenty degrees and five and twenty scruples. That
the Orpheus harp a star.
Fidicula symbolizing in nature with Venus and Mercury, is the Tropic star
which glanceth upon the Horizon, but never sets; and the Dragons head is
reputed by Astronomers to be the Vertical star over head.

Or beyond Radcliffe. Isle of Dogs.
From London, the Tamis watering Redcliff, so called of the Red-cliffe, a pretty
fine Town and dwelling place of Sailers, as he fetches almost a round
compass with a great winding reach, takes into him the River Lea at the east
bound of this County, when it has collected his divided stream and cherished
fruitful Marish-medowes. Upon which there stands nothing in this side worth
the speaking of. For, neither Aedelmton has ought to show, Edmonton* Waltham
Cross.
but the name derived of Nobility; nor Waltham, unless it be the Cross
erected there for the funeral pomp of Queen Aeleonor Wife to King Edward the
First, whereof also it took name. Only Enfeld a house of the Kings is here to
be seen, built by Sir Thomas Lovel knight (of the order of the Garter and one
of King Henry the Seventh his Privy Counsel) and Durance Wrothes of ancient
name in this County. To Enfeld-house, Enfield Chase.
Enfeld-chace is hard adjoining, a place much renowned for hunting: the
possession in times past of the Magnavils Earls of Essex, afterward of the
Bohuns who succeeded them: and now it belongs to the Duchy of Lancaster,
since the time that Henry the Fourth King of England espoused one of the
daughters and coheires of Humfrey Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex of that
surname. And there are yet to be seen, in the midst well nere of this Chase,
the rubbish and ruins of an old house, which the vulgar sort says was the
dwelling place of the Magnavils Earls of Essex. As for the title of Midlesex,
the Kings of England have vouchsafed it to none, neither Duke, Marquis, Earl,
or Baron.

In this County, without the City of London, are reckoned
Parishes much about 73.
Within the City, Liberties, and Suburbs. 121.
ESSEXIA COMITATVS. QVEM olim TRINOBANTES tenuerunt Continens in se opida
marcatoria* xx. Pagos et Villas ccccxiiii. vna Cunt singulis hundredis et flu:
minibus in ^odem


ESSEX.
THE other part of the Trinobantes, toward the East called in the English Saxon
tongue (...), and (...), in the Norman language Exssesa, of the situation
toward the East, and the Saxons which inhabited it, and commonly Essex, is a
Country large in compass, fruitful, full of Woods, Stour divides it from
Suffolk, on the East the Ocean windeth it self into it: On the South part,
the Tamis being now grown great secludeth it from Kent like as in the West
part the little River Ley from Midlesex, and Stort or Stour the less which
runs into it, from Hertfordshire. In describing of this Country, according
to my method begun, first I will speak of the memorable places by Ley and
the Tamis, afterward of those that be

By Ley, in the English Saxon Tongue (...), there stretches out a great way in
length and breadth a Forest serving for game, stored very full with Dear, that
for their bigness, and fatness withal, have the name above all other. In
times past called it was by way of excellency Foresta de Essex, Waltham Forest.
now Waltham Forest, of the town Waltham, in the Saxons speech (...), that
(...); A wild or woody habitation. This stands upon Ley, where, by dividing
his Channel he makes diverse Eights or Islands, and is not of any great
Antiquity to make boast of. For, when the Kingdom of the Saxons began to
decay, one Tovie, a man of great wealth and authority, as we read in the
private History of the place, The Kings Staller, that is, Standerd bearer, for
the abundance of wild beasts there, first founded it, and planted threescore
and six indwellers therein. After his death Athelstane his son quickly made
a hand of all his goods and great estate: and King Edward the Confessor gave
this Town to Harold Earl Goodwins son: Waltham Abbay.
and straight ways an Abbay was erected there, the work and Tomb both of the
said Harold. For, he being crept up by the error of men and his own ambition
to regal Dignity built this Abbay in honor of an Holy Cross found far
Westward, and brought hither, as they write, by miracle. Herein made he his
prayers and vows for victory when he marched against Normans, and being soon
after slain by them, was by his mother, who had with most suppliant suite
craved and obtained at the Conquerours hands his Corpse, here Baron Deny.
But now it has a Baron, namely Sir Edward Deny, called lately unto that
honor by King James his Writ. Over this Town upon the rising of an Hill
stands Copthall, Copthall.
and yields a great way off, a fair sight to seed men's eyes. This was the
habitation in times past of Fitz-Aucher, and lately of Sir Thomas Heneage
Knight, who made it a very goodly and beautiful house. Near unto this River
also was seated, Durolitum.
no doubt, DUROLITUM, a Town of antique memory, which the Emperor Antonine
makes mention of, but in what place precisely, I am not able to show. For, the
ancient places of this County, (I tell you once for all before hand) lie hidden
so enwrapped in obscurity, that I, who elsewhere could see somewhat, herein,
am here more than dim-sighted. But if I may give my guess, I Leyton: that is,
The Town upon Ley, like as Durolitum in the British Tongue signifies, The
water Ley. A small Village it is in these days, inhabited in scattering wise,
five miles from London, for which five, through the careless negligence of
transcribers is crept into Antonine xv.

That there was a common passage here in times past over the River, a place
nigh Ouldfourd seems to prove, in which when Queen Mawd wife to King Henry
the First hardly escaped danger of drowning, she gave order that a little
beneath, at Stretford, there should be a Bridge made over the water. There,
the River brancheth into three several streams, and most pleasantly waters
on every side the green meadows: wherein I saw the remains of a little
Monastery which William Montfichet, a Lord of great name of the Normans race
built, in the year of our Lord 1140. and forthwith Ley gathering it self
again into one channel mildely discharges it self in the Tamis, whereupon
the place is called Leymouth.

The Tamis which is mightily by this time increased, does violently carry away
Berking, Berking.
which Bid names Berecing, a Nunnery founded by Erkenwald Bishop of London,
Roding the river.

The Book of Ely.


where Roding a little River enters into the Tamis. This running hard by many
Villages imparteth his name unto them, as Heigh Roding, Eithorp Roding, Leaden
Roding, etc. of the which, Leofwin a Nobleman gave one or two in times past, to
the Church of Ely, for to expiate and make satisfaction for the wicked act he
had committed in murdering his own mother: Chipping Anger.
then, by Anger, where upon a very high Hill are the tokens of a Castle built
by Richard Lucy Lord Chief Justice of England in the Reign of Henry the
Second: of which Family, a daughter and one of the heirs, Liber Inq. de
Ripariu.
King John gave in marriage to Richard Rivers, who Stranford Rivers.

*
So it passes by Lambourn Manor, which is held by service of the Wardstaffe,
viz. to carry a load of straw in a Carte with six horses, two ropes, two men
in harness to watch the said Wardstaffe when it is brought to the Town of
Aibridge, etc. and then by Wansted Park, where the late Earl of Leicester
built much for his pleasure. From the mouth of this Roding, this Tamis
hasteneth through a ground lying very flat and low, Marshes.
and in most places otherwhiles overflowne, (whereby are occasioned strong and
unwholesome vapors exceeding hurtful to the health of the neighbor
Inhabitants) to Tilbury: Holes cut out.
near unto which there be certain holes in the rising of a chalky Hill,
sunk into the ground ten sathome deep, the mouth whereof is but



Tilbury, In Kent page 334. Tilbury.
( Bid names it Tilaburgh) it consists of some few cottages by the Tamis
side, yet was it in ancient time the seat of Bishop Chad, when about the year
of our Salvation 630. he ingrafted the East Saxons by Baptism into the Church
of Christ. Afterward, this River passing by places lying flat and unwholesome,
with a winding return of his Water, Convennos the Isle.
severeth the Island CONVENNON, which also is called COUNOS, (whereof Ptolomee
makes mention) from the firm land. Canvey.
This has not yet wholly foregone the old name, but is called Canvey. It lies
against the Coast of Essex, from Leegh to Hole Haven, five miles in length:
some part whereof appertains to the Collegiat Church of Westminster. But so
Wiches.

There adjoyne to this Island along in order, Beamfleot.
first Beamfleot, fortified with deep and wide Trenches (as says Florilegus)
and with a Castle, by Hasting the Dane, which King Aelfred won from them:
Then Hadleigh, sometime the Castle of Hubert de Burgo, afterward of Thomas of
Woodstocke Duke of Gloucester, now defaced with ruins: Leegh, a proper fine
little Town and very full of stout and adventerous Sailers: with Pritlewel
fast by where Sweno de Essex built long since a Cell for Monks. And here the
land shoots forward to make a Promontory, which they call Black-taile Point,
S. Shobery.
and Shobery Nesse of Shobery a Village situate upon it; which sometime, was a
City an Havenet named (...), For, in old Annals of the English-Saxons we
read thus, Anno 894.
The Danes being driven from Beamfleot, go to a City seated in East-sex,
called in the English Tongue Sceobirig, and there built themselves a sure and
strong Fort. Here by reason that the banks on both sides shrink back, the
Tamis at a huge and wide mouth rowleth into the sea. This does Ptolomee term
Aestuarium TAMESAE, and corruptly in some other Copies TEMESAE, and Tamis Mouth.

More inward is Rochford placed, Rochford.
that has given name to this Hundred: Now, it belongs to the Barons Rich,
but in old time it had Lords of ancient Nobility surnamed thereof: whose
inheritance came at length to Butler Earl of Ormond and Wiltshire, and from
them to Sir Thomas Bullen, whom King Henry the Eighth created Vicount Rochford,
Lord Rochfo^
and afterward Earl of Wiltshire, out of whose Progeny sprung that most
gracious Queen ELIZABETH, and the Barons of Hunsdon.

Here I have heard much speech of a Lawless Court (as they called it) holden
in a strange manner about Michaelmasse, *
in the first peep of the day upon the first cock crowing, Lawless Court.
in a silent sort; yet with shrowde fines eftsoons redoubled, if not Curia de
Domino Rege tenetur sin^ lege. Ante ortum solis, luceat, nisi polus, etc. not
worth remembering.

Leaving the Tamis Bank, and going farther within the country, yea from West
to East, these places of name above the rest standing thus in order show
themselves.

Havering an ancient retiring place of the Kings, Havering.
so called of a Ring, which in that place a Pilgrim delivered as sent from S.
J. Baptist (for so they write) unto K. Edward the Confessor: Horn-Church, named
in times past Cornutum Monasterium, that is, the horned Minster, for there
shoot out at the East end of the Church certain points of lead fashioned like
horns: Rumford. See the the Annalles.
Rumford, the glory whereof depends of a swine market; and Giddy-hall, an
house adjoining to it, which belonged to that Sir Thomas Cook Major of London,
whose great riches hoorded up together wrought him his greatest danger. For,
being judicially arraigned* (innocent man as he was) of high treason, and
through Markham acquit in a most dangerous time, yet was he put to a very
grievous fine, Brent-wood.
and stripped in manner of all that he was worth: Brentwood called by the Normans
Bois arse, in the same sense, and by that name King Stephen granted a Market
and a Fair there, to the Abbat of S. Osith; and many years after Isabell
Countess of Bedford daughter to King Edward the Third built a Chapel to the
memory of S. Thomas of Canterbury, for the ease of the Inhabitants: Engerstone
a Town of note for nothing else but the Market and Innes for Travailers.

Here am I at a stand, and am half in a doubt whether I should now slip as an
abortive fruit that conjecture, which my mind has travailed with.
Considering there has been in this Tract the City CAESAROMAGUS, Caesaromagus
called in the Itinerary table Baromagus.
and the same doubtless Caesar's City, as DRUSOMAGUS the City of Drusus, which
also should seem to have been built in the honor of Caesar Augustus. For,
Suaetonius writes thus, Kings, that were in amity and league, founded every
one in his own Kingdom Cities named Caesareae in honor of Augustus. What if
I should say that CAESAROMAGUS did stand near unto Brentwood, would not a
learned Reader laugh at me, as one Soothsayer does when he spieth another?
Certes, no ground I have nor reason to strengthen this my conjecture from the
distance thereof, seeing the numbers of the miles in Antonine be most corruptly
put down, which nevertheless agree well enough with the distance from
Hundred, which of old time was called Ceasford, and now Cheasford Hundred.
Surely, as in some ancient Cities the names are a little altered, and in others
clean changed: so there be again, wherein one syllable or twain at most be
remaining: thus CAESARAUGUSTA in Spain is now altered to be Saragosa:
CAESAROMAGUS in France, has lost the name clean and is called Beavois, and
CAESAREA in Normandy, now Cherburg, has but one syllable left of it.

South-Okindon. Bruin.
Beneath Brentwood I saw South-Okindon: where dwelt the Bruins a Family as
famous as any one in this Tract: out of the two heirs female whereof, being
many times married to sundry husbands, Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, the
Tirels, Berners, Harlestones, Heveninghams and others descended. And of that
house there be males yet remaining in South-hampton-shire. Also, Thorndon,
where Sir John Petre Knight raised a goodly fair house, Thorndon. Baron Petre.
who now was by our Sovereign King James Petre of Writtle. That Thorndon was
in times past the dwelling place of a worshipful Family of Fitzlewis: the last
of which name if we may believe the common report, by occasion that the house
happened to be set on fire in the time of his wedding feast, was pittiously
himself therein burnt to death* Burghsted, and more short Bursted, that is,
the place of a Burgh, which name our forefathers used to give unto many places
that were of greater antiquity. This I once supposed to have been CAESAROMAGUS:
and what ever it was in old time, it is at this day but a good country Town
near unto Byliricay, a Market town of very good resort. Likewise Ashdowne,
Ashdowne.
sometimes Assandun, that is, as Marian interprets it, the Mount of Asses,
where long since a bloody battle was fought, in which King Edmund surnamed
Ironside had at the beginning a good hand of the Danes and put them to rout,
but straight ways the fortune of the field turning about, he was so defeited
that he lost a great number of the English Nobility. In memorial of which
battle we read that King Canutus the Dane built a Church afterward in that
place, what time as

Not far from these, is Ralegh, a pretty proper town: and it seems to be
Raganeia in Domesday book, wherein is mention made of a Castle that Suenus
here built, in which also we read thus: There is one Park and six Arpennes
of Vineyard, and it yields twenty Modij of wine if it take well. Which I note
the rather, both for the French word Arpenn and also for the wine made in this
Isle. Arpen. Wine. Radulphus de Dicero. The family of the Essex.
This Suenus was a man of great name and of noble birth, the son of Robert,
son of Wiwarc, but father to Robert of Essex: whose son was that Sir Robert
de Essex, who in right of inheritance was the Kings Standard bearer, and who
for that in a light skirmish against the Welsh, he Cloystre, forfeited a
goodly patrimony, and livelod, which was confiscate to King Henry the Second,
and helped to fill his Coffers. As for the Barony, it lay dead from that time a
great while in the Kings hands, until Sir Hubert de Burgh obtained it of King
John.

Above this the shores retiring back by little and little admit two creekes of
the Ocean entering within them: the one, the neighbor inhabitants call Crouch,
the other Blackwater (which in old time was named Pant.) In the said Crouch, by
reason of the waters division, there lie scattered four Islands carrying a
pleasant green hew, but by occasion of inundations, grown to be morish and
fenny, among which these Wallot and Foulness: that is, The Promontory of
Fowls, which has a Church also in it: and when the sea is at the lowest ebb,
a man may ride over to it. Dengy hundred.
Between these Creekes lies Dengy Hundred, in ancient times Dancing, passing
plentiful in grass, and rich in Cattaile, but Sheep especially where all
their doing is in making of Cheese: Essex cheese.
and there shall ye have men take the women's office in hand and milk Ewes:
whence those huge thick Cheeses are made that are vented and sold not only
into all parts of England, but into foreign nations also, for the rusticall
people, laborers, and handicraftes men to fill their bellies, and feed upon.
The chief Town hereof at this day is Dengy; so called as the Inhabitants are
persuaded, of the Danes, who gave name unto the whole Hundred: Near unto
Tillingham, given by Ethelbert the first Christian King of the English-Saxons,
unto the Church of Saint Paul in London: and higher up to the North shore,
flourished sometimes a City of ancient Record, which our forefathers called
Ithancestre. For, Ralph Niger writes thus out of S. Bid. Bishop Chad baptized
the East Saxons near to Maldon in the City of Ithancestre, that stood upon the
bank of the River Pant, which runs hard by Maldon, in Dengy Province; but
now is that City drowned in the River Pant. To point out the place precisely I
am not able, but I nothing doubt that the River called Froshwell at this day,
was heretofore named Pant: seeing that one of the Springs thereof is called
Pantswell, and the Monks of Coggeshall, so termed it. Doubtless, this
Ithancester was situate upon the utmost Promontory of Dengy Hundred, where in
these days stands Saint Peter's upon the wall. For, along this shore much a
do have the inhabitants to defend their grounds with forced banks or walls
against the violence of the Ocean, ready to inrush upon them. And I my self am
partly of this mind, that this Ithancester was that OTHONA where a Band of the
Fortenses with their Captain, in the declination of the Roman Empire, kept
their station or Guard under the Comes or Lieutenant of the Saxon-shore,
against the depredations of the Saxon Rovers: For the altering of OTHONA to
ITHANA, is no hard straining: and the situation thereof upon a Creek into
which many Rivers are discharged, was for this purpose very fit and commodious,
and yet here remains a huge ruin of a thick Wall, whereby many Roman

It seems not amiss to set down, how King Edward the Confessor granted by
a brief Charter the keeping of this Hundred to Ranulph The Normans call him
Peverell.
Peperking, which I will willingly here annex, to the end that we, who sift
every prick and accent of the law, may see the upright simplicity and plain
dealing of that age. And thus goes the tenor of it, as it was taken forth of
the Kings Records in the Exchequer, but

Iche Edward Koning
In the Records Saint Hilary term E. 2.17. in the keeping of the Treasurer and
Chamberlain of the Exchequer.
Have given of my Forest the keeping.
Of the Hundred of Chelmer and Dancing,
To Randolph Peperking and to his kindling:
With heorte and hind, do and bocke,
Hare and Fox, Cat and Brocke,
Wild Fowell with his flock,
Partrich, Fesant hen, and Fesant cock:
With green and wild stob and stock.
To kepen and to yemen by all her might,
Both by day and eke by night:
And Hounds for to hold
Good and swift and bold:
Four Greahounds and six racches,
For Hare and Fox, and wild Cattes.
And therefore ich made him my book:
Witness the Bishop Wolston
And book ylered many on,
And Swein of Essex our Brother
And teken him many other,
And our Stiward Howelin
That by sought me for him.
This was, the plain dealing, truth, and simplicity of that age, which used
to make all their assurances whatsoever, in a few lines, and with a few gilt
Crosses. For, before the coming in of the Normans, as we read in Ingulphus,
writings Obligatory were made firm with golden Crosses and other small signs
or marks: but the Normans Seals or signets first taken up among Englishmen.
with a Print or Seal in wax, set to with every ones special Signet under the
express entituling of three or four Witnesses. Before time many houses and
land thereto passed by grant and bargain without script, Charter, or Deed
only with the Landlords sword or helmet, with his horn or cup. Yea and many
Tenements were demised with a spur, or horse-cury-combe, with a bow, and
some with an arrow.

In the Creek of Blackwater, which as I said, closes the North side of this
Hundred, and is stored with those dainty Oysters, which we call Walfleot
Oysters, their run two Rivers that water a great part of the Shire, Chelmer and
Froshwell. The River Chelmer flowing out of the inner part of the country which
is woody, runs down first by Thaxted a little Mercate Town seated very
pleasantly upon an high rising Tiltey, where Maurice Fitz-Gilbert founded in
times past a small Abbay, unto Estanues ad Turrim, now Eston, which noble
Gentleman surnamed De Lovaine inhabited, as descended from Godfrey of Lovaine
brother to Henry the Sixth of that name Duke of Brabant, who being sent hither
to keep the Honor of Eye, his posterity flourished among the Peers of this
Realm to the time of King Edward the Third, when the heir general was
married into the house of Bourchier.

Thence it glideth down to Dunmow, of old time called Dunmawg, and in the Tax
book of England Dunmaw, a Town pleasantly situate upon an hill with a pretty
gentle fall. Where, one Juga founded a Priory in the year 1111. But William
Bainard, of whom Juga held (thus we find it written in the private history of
this Church) the Village of little Dunmow, by felony lost his Barony, and King
Henry the First gave it to Robert the son of Richard, son to Gislebert
Earl of Clare, and to his heirs, with the honor of Bainards Castle in
London: which Robert at that time was King Henry's Sewar. These be the very
words of the Author: neither do I think it lawful for me to alter Clare in
the family of Clare.

Now let us for a while digress and go aside a little on either hand from the
River. Not far from hence is Plaisy seated, so called in French of Pleasing,
in times past, named Estre, the habitation both in the last years of the
English Saxons, and also afterward, of the great Constables of England, as
witnesses Ely book. At this town the first William Mandevill Earl of Essex
began a Castle, and two Princes of great authority, Thomas of Woodstocke Duke
of Gloucester and Earl of Essex who founded John Holland Earl of Huntingdon
brother to King Richard the Second by the mothers side, deprived of lost
honorable title of Duke of Excester, when they could not keep a mean between
froward stubbernesse and servile obsequiousness, found thence their
subversion. For Thomas, upon his rash and headstrong contumacy was on a sudden
violently carried from hence to Calice and there smothered: and John, for a
seditious conspiracy was beheaded in this place by King Henry the Fourth, that
he might seem to have been justly punished by way of satisfaction for the
said Thomas of Woodstocke, of whose death he was thought to be the principal
practiser, and procurer. From thence passes Chelmer down not far from Leez,
a little Abbay of old time founded by the Gernons, which at this Rich, Barons
Rich.
who acknowledge themselves for this dignity beholden to Richard Rich a most
wise and judicious person; Lord Chancellor of England under King Edward the
Sixth, who in the first year of his reign created him Baron Rich. A little
beneath, stands Hatfield Peverell, so denominated of Randulph Peverell the
owner thereof, who had to wife a Lady of incomparable beauty, in those days;
the daughter of Ingelricke a man of great nobility among the English-Saxons:
This Lady founded here a College, which now is in manner quite plucked down,
The Book of Saint Martins in London.
and in a window of the Church, whereof there remains still a small part,
lies entombed. She bare unto her husband William Peverell Castellane of Dover,
Sir Pain Peverell Lord of Brun in the County of Cambridge: and unto King
William the William Peverell Lord of Nottingham. But now return we to Chelmer,
which by this time speedeth it self to Chelmerford commonly Chensford (where,
by the distance of the place from CAMALODUNUM, it may seem that old CANONIUM
sometimes stood). Canonium.
This is a good big Town situate in the heart of the Shire between two
Rivers, who as it were, agreed here to join both their streams together: to
wit Chelmer from the East, and another from the South, the name whereof if it
be Can, as some would have it, we have no reason to doubt, that this was
CANONIUM.

Famous it was within the remembrance of our fathers in regard of a small
religious house built by Malcome King of Scots, now of note only for the
Assizes (for so Maurice Bishop of London, unto whom it belonged, built the
Bridges here in the Reign of Henry the First, and turned London way thither,
which lay before through Writtle, a Town right well known for the largeness
of the Parish: which, King Henry the Third granted unto Robert Brus Lord of
Anandale in Scotland: (whose wife was one of the heirs of John surnamed Scot,
the last Earl of Chester) for that he would not have the Earldome of Chester
to be divided among the distaves: and King Edward the Third, when as the
posterity of the Bruses forsook their allegiance, bestowed it upon Humfrey
Bohun Earl of Hereford and of Essex. James at his entrance to the Kingdom
bestowed Baronies bountifully upon select persons, he created Sir John Petre a
right respective Knight, Baron Petre of Writtle. Whose father Sir William Petre
a man of approoved wisdom and exquisite learning, memorable not so much for
those most honorable places and offices of State which he bare, (as who was
of the Privy Counsel to King Henry the Eighth, King Edward the Sixth, Queen
Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, Egerstone, where he lies buried.

Frosh-well the River, more truly called Pant, and near to his mouth,
Black-water issuing out of a small spring about Radwinter that belonged to the
Barons of Cobham, after it has gone a long course and seen nothing but
Bocking a fat Parsonage, it comes to Cogeshall, a Mercate Town, well known
in times past for a Priory of Cluniacke Monks built by King Stephen, and the
habitation of ancient Knights thence surnamed De Cogeshall, Cogeshall.
from whose heir general married into the old family Tirell, Tirell.
there branched far a fair propagation of the Tirells in this shire and
elsewhere. Easterford. Whitham.
Then goes on this water by Easterford, some call it East-Sturford: and
leaving some mile of Whitham a fair through-faire and built by King Edward the
elder, in the year 914. which also afterward was of the Honor of Eustace
Earl of Bollen; meets at length with Chelmer. Which now passing on whole in
one channel not far from Danbury mounted upon an high Hill, the habitation
for a time of the family of the Darcies, runs hard by Woodham-walters, the
ancient seat of the Lords Fitz-Walters: who being nobly descended were of a
most ancient race, derived from Robert the younger son of Richard son to
Earl Gislebert: but in the age more lately foregoing, translated by a daughter
into the stock Ratcliffes, who being advanced to the Earldom of Sussex dwell
now a little from hence in New Hall, a stately and sumptuous house. This New
Hall appertained sometime to the Butlers Earls of Ormond, and then
hereditarily to Sir Thomas Bollen Earl of Wiltshire, of whom King Henry the
Eighth getting it by way of Exchange, enlarged it to his exceeding great
charges, and called it by a new name Beaulieu, which for all that was never
current among the people. After this, Chelmer with other waters running with
him, being divided by a River-Island, casting off that name, and now being
called of some Blacke-water and of others Pant, saluteth that ancient Colony of
the Romans CAMALODUNUM, Camalodunum.
which many hundred years since adorned this shore. Ptolomee terms it
CAMUDOLANUM, Antonine Pliny, Dio, and an old marble stone, induce us to believe
that CAMALODUNUM is the right name. In the seeking out of this City, good God,
how dim-sighted have some been? whereas it bewraied it self by the very name
and situation; and showed it self clearly to them that are half blind: A
number have searched for it in the West part of this Isle, as that good man,
who thought himself to carry, as one would say, the Sun of Antiquity in his
own hand: others in the furthest part of Scotland: others wholly addicted in
opinion to Leland affirmed it to be Colchester: when as (the name scarce any
whit maimed) it is called at this day, in stead of CAMALODUNUM, Maldon, Maldon.
in the Saxon Tongue (...), and (...), the Pliny from Mona, and the very
situation in the ancient Itinerary Table do afford a most evident proof
thereof. That this name was imposed upon CAMALODUNUM, of the God CAMULUS, I
hardly dare imagine. Howbeit that Mars was worshipped under this name Camulus,
both an old stone at Rome in the house of Collotians, and Altars discovered
with this Inscription CAMULO DEO SANCTO ET FORTISSIMO, Camulus a God.
that is, TO CAMULUS THE HOLY AND MOST MIGHTY GOD, do jointly prove. And in
an antique Coin of Cunobellinus, whose royal Palace this was, (as I have
already said) I have seen the portraict Mars, with these letters, CAMV. But
seeing this piece of money is not now ready at hand to show, I exhibit here
unto you other express portraicts of Cunobellinus his pieces, which may be
thought to have reference to this Camalodunum.



This Cunobelin governed this East part of the Isle in the time of Tiberius the
Emperor, and seems to have had three sons, Admimus, Togodumnus, and
Catacratus. Admimus by his father banished, was entertained by Caius Caligula
the Emperor what time as he made his ridiculous expedition into Batavia, that
from thence Togodumnus, Aulus Plautius in a set battle defeited and slew him,
and over Catacratus, whom, as I said, he discomfited and put to flight, he
rode ovant in pety triumph. This is that Plautius, who at the persuasion of C.
Bericus, the Britain a banished man (for there never want quarrels one or other
of War) was the first after Julius Caesar that attempted Britain under
Claudius: Claudius in Britannia.
whom Claudius himself, having shipped over the Legions, followed in person
with the whole power of the Empire, and with Elephants (the bones of which
beasts being found, have deceived very many) he passed over the Tamis and put
to flight the Britans, who upon the bank received and encountered him as he
came toward them; and won with ease Camalodunum the Kings seat. For which
exploit after he had named his son BRITANNICUS, and been himself
oftentimes saluted Imperator, within six months after he set first forth in
his voyage, returned to Rome. But hereof have I have written before more at
large, neither list I to iterate the same in this place.

When Camalodunum was thus brought under the Romans subjection, Claudius
planted a Colony there with a strong Band of old tried Soldiers, and in
memorial hereof ordained pieces of money to be stamped with this
Inscription: COL. CAMALODUN. Out of which it is gathered, that this happened in
the XII. year of his Empire, and in the year 52. after the Birth of Christ.
And in regard of those old experienced soldiers of the fourteenth Legion
called Gemina Martia Victrix, Tacitus terms the Subduers of Britain,
brought thither and placed in it, it was named COLONIA VICTRICENSIS, and the
Inhabitants Cives Romani, that is, Citizens of Rome, in an old Inscription,
which I here present to you.

CN. MUNATIUS. M. F. PAL. AURELIUS BASSUS PROC. AUG. PRAEF. FABR. RRAEF. COH.
III. SAGITTARIORUM, PRAEF. A Colony (if it may be material to know so much) is
A Company of men that be all Servius.
built with houses to their hands, which they are to have and hold by a
certain right. For the most part, old soldiers that had served long, were
brought to such a place, both that themselves might be provided for, and
maintained, and also be ready in all extremity to help against Rebels, and
inform withal the Provincials in their duties by law required. These Colonies
also were of great estimation, as being pety resemblances and images, as it
were, of the City of Rome. Moreover they had their peculiar Magistrates both
superior and inferior: Of which because others have written sufficiently, I
need not to stand either upon them, or such like points. In this first Colony
that the Romans planted in Britain, there was a Temple built unto Deified.
The Altar and Temple of Claudius.
Divus Claudius, Tacitus terms it, The Altar of eternal Whereof Seneca
makes mention in his Play, after this manner. A small matter it is, says he,
and not sufficient, that Claudius has a Temple in Britain which the Barbarous
Nation adoreth, and prays unto, as to a God. There were Priests also elected
in honor of him, by name Sodales Augustales, which under a show of Religion
lavishly consumed the Britans goods. But after ten years, fortune turned her
wheel and down went this Colony. For, when those old soldiers brought into
these territories which they had won, exercised extreme cruelty upon these
silly people, the burning broiles of War which before were quenched brake out
into flames, with greater flashes. The Britans under the leading of Bunduica,
who also is called B^odicia, by maine force sacked and set on fire this Colony,
lying unfortified and without Dio says, fourscore thousand.
This slaughter was foretold by many Prodigies. The Image of Victory in this
City was turned backward and fallen down: In their Senate house strange
noises were heard* The Theater resounded with howlings and yellings: Houses
were seen under the water of Tamis, and the Arm of the sea beneath it
overflowed the banks as red as blood to see to, which now (for what cause I
know not) we call Black water, Idumanu^.
like as Ptolomee termed it IDUMANUM aestuarium, under which is couched a
signification of Blackness: for, Yd^, in the British tongue sounds as much
as Black. Yet, out of the very embers, the Romans raised it again: For,
Antonine the Emperor made mention of it many years after. Howbeit in the
English Saxons government it is scarce mentioned: Only Marianus has written,
that Edward the son of Aelfred repaired Maldun when it was sore shaken by the
furious rage of the Danes, and then fortified it with a Castle. William the
Norman, Conqueror of England, as we read in his Domesday.
Commentary, had in this Town 180 houses in the tenure and occupation of
Burgesses, and 18. Mansions wasted. But at this day, for the number of the
Inhabitants, and the bigness, it is worthily counted one of the principal
Towns in all Essex, and in Records named, The Burgh of Maldon.

It is a Haven commodious enough, and for the bigness very well inhabited,
being Dunum which signified an hilly, and high situation, wherein I saw nothing
memorable, unless I should mention two silly Churches, a desolate place of
White Friars, and a small pile of Brick built not long since by R. Darcy,
which name has been respective heereabout.

Hence passing down over the brackish water divided into two streamlets, by
Highbridge, I sought for an ancient place which Antonine the Emperor placed
six miles from Camalodunum, in the way toward Suffolk, and called it AD ANSAM.

This I have thought to have been some Bound belonging to the Colony of
Camalodunum, which resembled the fashion of Ansa, The bounds of Colonies.
that is, The handle or ear of a pot. Siculus Flaccus, The Territories lying
to Colonies were limited with diverse and sundry marks: In the limits there
were set up for bound-markes here one thing, and there another: in one place
little Images, in another long earthen Vessels: here you should have little
sword blades, three square stones or Lozenges pointed, and elsewhere according
Vitalis and Arcadius, they were mere stones like flagons and small wine pipes:
why might not therefore a stone fashioned like the handle of a pot be set for
a bound? Seeing that Antony according to his wonted manner called it Ad Ansam,
and not Ansae? But how religiously and with what ceremonial complements, these
bound-markes were in old time set, I will by way of digression set down here
out of the same Siculus Flaccus. When they were to place their bound marks,
the very stones themselves they did set upon the firm ground, hard by those
places wherein they meant to pitch them fast, in pittes or holes dug for the
purpose, they anointed them and with vailes and garlands bedecked them. This
done, in those pits wherein they were to put them, after sacrifice made, and an
unspotted beast killed, upon burning firebrands covered over in the grave, they
dropped in blood, and thereupon they threw Frankincense and corn, Honey combs
also and wine with other things, as the manner is to sacrifice unto gods of
bounds and limits, they threw after the rest into the said pit. Thus when all
these Viands were consumed with fire, they pitched the foresaid bound marks
upon the hot ashes thereof, and so with careful diligence fastened them
strongly, and rammed them round about with fragments of stones, that they might
stand the surer. But in what place soever this Ad Ansam was, I betake my self
again to my former opinion for the signification of the word: namely, that Ad
Ansam was either a bound mark, or only, a resting place or some Inn by the
high way side under such a sign: and that I collect by the distance to have
been near unto Cogeshall. Neither were they any things else but bound marks
or Innes, that in the Roman Cogeshall.
Ad Columnam, Ad Fines, Ad tres Tabernas, Ad Rotam, Ad septem Fratres, Ad
Aquilam minorem, Ad Herculem, etc. that is, At the Pillar, At the Bounds, At
the three Taverns, At the Wheel, At the seven Brethren, At the less Aegle, At
Hercules, etc.

And therefore to search more curiously into these matters, were nothing else
but to hunt after the winds. Yet I will here impart what I incidently
happened upon in a private note, while I was inquisitive heereabout for Ad
Ansam. In a place called Westfield three quarters of a mile distant from
Cogeshall and belonging to the Abbay there, was found by touching of a plough a
great brazen Pot. The Ploughmen supposing it to have been hid treasure, sent
for the Abbot of Cogeshall to see the taking up of it; and he going thither
met with Sir Clement Harleston, and desired him also to accompany him thither.
The mouth of the Pot was closed with a white substance like paste or clay, as
hard as burned brick, when that by force was removed, there was found within
it another Pot but that was of earth; that being opened there was found in it a
lesser Pot of earth of the quantity of a Gollon covered with a matter like
Velvet, and fastened at the mouth with a silke-lace. In it they found some
whole bones and many pieces of small bones wrapped up in fine silk of fresh
color, which the Abbot took for the Relics of some Saints, and laid up in
his Vestuary. But this by way of digression, leaving it to your consideration.

From Malden the Shores drawn back intertaine the Sea in a most large and
pleasant Bay, which yields exceeding great store of those Oysters of the best
Walfleot. And (that our Coasts should not be defrauded of their due fame and
glory) I take these to be those very Shores, which, as Pliny says, served the
Romans Kitchins: seeing that Mutianus gives unto British Oysters the third
place after those of Cizicum, in these very words of his: The Oysters of
Cizicum be greater than those that come from Lucrinum, and sweeter than they of
Britain.

But neither at that time, nor afterward, when Sergius Orata brought those
Lucrine Oysters into such name and great request, did the British Shores, as
he says, Serve Rome with Oysters. Lib. 9. cap. 54.
So that he may seem to have given the chief price unto British Oysters.
Neither think I were those Oysters other than these which A^sonius called
Mira, that is, Wonderful, in this Verse to Paulinus.

Mira Caledonius nonnunquam detegit astus.
The British Tides sometimes lay bare,
Those Oysters huge, that wondrous are.
But, of these Oysters and of their pits or stews in this Coast I will give
those

Into this Creek, beside other Rivers, Coln sheddeth himself, which growing
to an head out of diverse Springs in the North part of this County, passes by
the Town of Hedningham or Hengham, commonly called Heningham, where was a
goodly fair proper Castle in times past, and the ancient habitation of the
Earls of Oxford who procured a Market thereunto. Over against which, upon the
other side of the River stands Sibble Heningham, the place, as I have heard
say, wherein was borne Sir John Hawkwood (the Italians corruptly call him
Aucuthus) whom they so highly admired for his warlike prowess, Hawkwood.
that the State of Florence in regard of his notable demerites adorned him with
the statue of a man of Arms and an honorable Paulus Iovius in his Elogia
commends him. But for my part it may suffice to add unto the rest this 4.
Verses.
Tetrasticon of Julius Feroldus.

Hawkwood Anglorum decus, and decus addite genti
Italicae, Italico praesidiumque solo.
Ut tumuli quondam Florentia, sic simulachri,
Virtutem Iovius donat honor tuam.
The glory prime of Englishmen, then of Italians bold,
O Hawkwood and to Italy a sure defensive hold:
Thy virtue Florence honored sometime with costly grave,
And Iovius adorn's the same now with a statue, brave.
This renowned Knight thus celebrated abroad, was forgotten at home, save that
some of his kind souldierly followers founded a Chantery at Castle Heningham
for him and for two of his military Companions, *
John Oliver and Thomas Newenton Esquires. 14. H. 4.


From hence the River Coln, holding on his course by Hawsted, which was the
seat of the Family of the Bourchiers, whence came Robert Bourchier Lord
Chancellor Edward the Third, and from him sprang a most honorable Progeny of
Earls and Barons of that name. Thence by Earls Coln (so called of the
Sepulture there of the Earls of Oxford) where Aubry de Vere in the time of
King Henry the First founded a little Monastery and became himself a religious
Monk; Colonia.
it comes to Colonia, whereof Antonine the Emperor makes mention, and which
he notes to be a different place from the Colony Camalodunum. Now whether
this took name of a Colony hither brought, or of the river Coln, Apollo
himself had need to tell us: I would rather derive it from the river, seeing,
as I do, that many little Towns situate upon it, are named Coln. A Earls
Colne, Wakes Colne, Colne Engaine, Colchester.
Whites Colne, bearing the names all of their Lords. The Britains called Caer
Colin, the Saxons (...), and we Colchester. A proper and fine Borough it is,
well traded and pleasantly seated, as being situate upon the brow of an hill,
stretching out from West to East, walled about, beautified with 15. Churches,
besides that large and stately one, without the walls, which Endo Sewar to
King Henry the First consecrated unto Saint John, now ruinated, and converted
into a private dwelling house. 1105.
In the midst of the Town, there is a Castle now yielding to time ready to
fall: which as our Historians write, Edward the son of Aelfred first raised
from the ground, what time as he repaired Colchester defaced with wars, and
long after Mawde the Empress gave it to Alberic Vere to assure him to her
Party.

The infinite deal of ancient Coin daily gotten out of the ground there does
Gallienus. For, the most were such as had upon them the Inscriptions of the
Tetrici, and the Victori^i, of Posthumus, C. Carausius, Constantine, and the
Emperors that followed him. The Inhabitants affirm, that Flavia Iulia Helena
the mother of Constantine the Great was borne and bred there, Helen Great
Constantines mother.
being the daughter of King Coel: and in memory of the Cross which she found,
they give for their Arms a Cross enragled between four Crowns: whence it
is, that our Necham as touching her, and this place came out with these Verses,
although Apollo was not greatly his friend therein, Effulsit sydus vitae,
Colcestria lumen
Septem Climatibus lux radiosa dedit.
Sydus erat Constantinus, decus imperiale,
Servijt huic flexo poplite Roma potens.
From out of thee, O Cholchester, there shone a Star of life,
The rays whereof to Climats seven gave great and glorious light,
This Star was Constantine the Great, that noble Emperor,
Whom Rome in all obedience lay prostrate to adore.


Verily she was a woman of life most holy, and of invincible resolution and
constancy in propagation of Christian Religion: Whereupon in ancient
Inscriptions she is every where named PIISSIMA, and VENERABILIS AUGUSTA, that
is, Most DEVOUT, and VENERABLE EMPRESS. Beneath this, where River Coln runs
into the Sea, S. Osith. Chic.
stands to be seen Saint Osithes, a little Town, whose ancient name, which
was Chic, is grown out of use by reason of Osith the Virgin of royal
Parentage, who being wholly devoted to the Service of God, and stabbed there to
death by the Danish Pirates, was of our Ancestors honored for a Saint: and in
her memorial Richard Bishop of London about the year 1120. built a religious
house, of Regular Chanons. But now it is the chief seat of the right
honorable Lords Darcy, called De Chich, whom King Edward the Sixth advanced to
the honor of Barons when he created Sir Thomas Darcy his Counselor, Barons
Darcy of Chich.
Vice-chamberlaine, and Captain of the Guard, Lord Darcy of Chich.

From hence the Shore shooting out, buncheth forth as far as to the
Promontory Nesse, Nesse.
which in the English-Saxon tongue is called (...). What has been found in
this place, have here out of the words and credit of Ralphe the Monk of
Coggeshall, who wrote 350. years ago. In King Richards time, on the Seashore,
at a Village called Eadulphnesse, Giants. Giants bones.
were found two teeth of a certain Giant, of such a huge bigness, that two
hundred such teeth as men have now a days might be cut out of them. These saw
I at Coggeshall (quoth he) and not without wondering. And such another
Giantlike thing (I wot not what) as this, was in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign dug up by R. Candish a Gentleman, near unto this place.
Neither do I deny, but there have been men, that for their huge bodies, and
firm strength were wondrous to behold: whom God, as S. Austin says, would
have beauty of body, nor tallness of stature, are to be counted simply good
things, seeing they be common as well to Infidels as to the godly. Yet may we
very well think, that which Suetonius has written, namely that the huge
limbs of monstrous Sea-creatures else where, and in this Kingdom also, were
commonly said and taken to have been Giants bones.

From this Promontory, the shore bends back by little and little to the
mouth of Stoure, a place memorable for the battle at Sea there fought
between the English and Danes in the year 884. where now lies Harewich a
most safe Road, Harewich.
whence it has the name: *
For, (...) in the English-Saxon tongue, betokens a Station, or a creek
where an Army encamped. The Town is not great, but well peopled, fortified
Elizabeth. The salt water so creeketh about it, that it almost insulateth it,
but thereby makes the Springs so brackish, that there is a defect of fresh
water, which they fetch some good way off.

This is the Stoure, that running between Essex and Suffolk serves as a
bound to them both, and on this side waters nothing else but rich and
fruitful fields. But not far from the head thereof stands Bumstead, which
the Family of Helion Barony, from whom the Wentworths of Gosfield are descended.

And what way this Country looks toward Cambridge-shire Barklow shows it
self, Barklow.
well known now, by reason of four little hills or Burries cast up by man's
hand: such as in old time were wont to be raised (so some would have it) as
Tombs for Soldiers slain, *
whose Relics were not easy to be found. But when a fifth and sixth of them
were not long since dug down, three troughes of stone were found, and in
them broken bones of men, as I was informed. The country people say that they
were reared after a field there fought against the Danes. Ancient tombs.
For, Dane-wort which with bloud-red berries, comes up here plenteously,
they still call by no other name than Danes-bloud, Danes-bloud.
of the number of Danes that were there slain, verily

Walden.
A little below stands upon a hill Walden of Saffron, called Saffron Walden,
among the fields looking merrily with most lovely Saffron. A very good Market
town incorporated by King Edward the Sixth with a Treasurer, two Chamberlaines
and the Commonalty. Commonly called Mandevilles.
Famous in times past it was for a Castle of the Magnavilles (which now is
almost vanished out of sight) and an Abbay adjoining, founded in a place very
commodious in the year 1136. wherein the Magnavilles founders thereof were
buried. Geffrey de Magnavilla was the first that gave light and life (as it
were) to this place. For Mawde the Empress in these words (out of her very
Patent I copy them) gave unto him Newport (a good big Town, this is hard
by). For so much as Newport into his Castle of Walden, with all the customs
that before time in better manner appertained to that Market, to wit in Toll,
passage and other customs, and that the ways of Newport near unto the water
bank be directed straight according to the old custom into Walden, upon the
ground forfeited unto me: and that the Market of Walden be kept upon Sunday and
Thursday: and that a Fair be holden at Walden to begin on Whitsunday even,
and to last all the Whitson week. (And from that time, by occasion of this
Market, for a great while it was called Cheping Walden). Also as it is in the
Book of Walden Abbay, he the said Geffrey appointed Walden to be the
principal place and seat of his honor and Earldom for him and his
Successors. The place

That place now they call Audley End, of Sir Thomas Audley Lord Chancellor of
England, who changed the Abbay into his own dwelling house. This Thomas,
created by King Henry the Eighth Baron Audley of Walden, Baron Audley of Walden.
left one sole daughter and heir Margaret, second wife to Thomas Howard Duke
of Norfolk, of whom he begat Lord Thomas, Lord William, Lady Elizabeth, and
Lady Margaret. The said Thomas employed in sundry Sea-services with
commendation Queen Elizabeth summoned by Writ unto the High Court of
Parliament, among other Barons of the Realm, by Lord Howard of Walden. 1597.
And King James of late girded him with the sword of the Earldome of Suffolk,
and made him his Chamberlain: who in this place has begun a magnificent
Building. Near to another house of his at Chesterford, there was a Town of
far greater antiquity, hard by Icaldun, in the very border of the Shire,
Burrow-banke.
which now of the old Burgh, the rusticall people use to call Burrow Bank,
where remain the footings only of a Town lying in manner dead, and the
manifest tract of the very walls. Yet will I not say, that it was VILLA
FAUSTINI, which Antonine the Emperor places in this Tract: and albeit Ingrata
haud lati spatia detinet campi,
Sed rure vero, barbaroque laetatur:
It takes not up large ground that yields no gain,
But Country like, is homely rude and plain:


Yet dare not I once dream that this is that Villa Faustini, which in these
and other Verses is by that pleasant and conceited Poet Martial, depaincted
Epigrams. The fields here on every side (as I said) smell sweetly, and smile
pleasantly with Saffron, Saffron.
a commodity brought into England in the time of King Edward the Third. This in
the month of ^uly every third year, when the heads thereof have been plucked
up and after twenty days spitted or set again under mould, about the end of
September they put forth a whitish blew flower, out of the middle whereof
there hang three read fillets of Saffron (we call them Chives) which are
gathered very early in the morning before the Sun rising, and being plucked
out of the flower, are dried at a soft fire. And so great increase comes
hereof that out of every acre of ground there are made fourscore or an
hundred pounds weight of Saffron, while it is moist: which being dried yield
some twe^^y pound

More into the South is Clavering seated, Barons of Clavering.
which King Henry the Second gave unto Sir Robert Fits-Roger (from whom the
family of Evers are issued.) The posterity of this Sir Roger, after they had a
long time taken their name of their fathers forename, or Christen-name
according to that ancient custom, as John Fitz-Robert, Robert Fitz-Iohn, etc.
afterward, by the commandment of King Edward the First, Clavering. See in
Northumberland.
But of these I am to speak in Northumberland. Stansted Montfichet here also
puts up the head: which I will not pass over in silence, considering it
has been the Baronie or habitation in times past of the family De Monte Fisco,
Barons Montfichet. The Montfichet Coat of Arms* Playz.
commonly Mont-fitchet, who bare for their Arms three Cheverus Or, in a shield
Gueles, and were reputed men of very great nobility. But five of them
flourished in right line: and at the last three sisters were seized of the
inheritance, Margaret wife of Hugh De Boleber, Aveline wedded to William De
Fortibus Earl of Aumarle, and Philip wife to Hugh Playz. The posterity male of
this Hugh flourished within the remembrance of our great Grandfathers, and
determined in a daughter married to Sir John Howard Knight; from whose daughter
by Sir George descended the Barons Latimer, and the Wingfeldes.

And a little below, Haslingbury.
is Haslingbury to be seen, the residence of the Barons Morley: of whom I
shall speak more in Norfolk. And close to this, stands an ancient Fort or
Military fense thereof named Walbery: Barington.
and more Eastward Barrington Hall, where dwells that right ancient Family
of the Barringtons, which in the Reign of King Stephen the Barons of
Montfiche^ enriched with fair possessions, and more ennobled their house in
our fathers remembrance by matching with one of the daughters and coheires of
Sir Henry Pole, Lord Montacute, son of Margaret Countess of Salisbury,
descended of the Blood Royal.

Neither is Hatfield Regis, Hatefield Brad-oke.
commonly called of a broad spread Oak, Hatfield Brad-Oake Robert Vere Earl of
Oxford built a Priory, and there lies entombed crosse-legged with a French
inscription, wherein he is noted to be first of that name Robert, and third
Earl of Oxford.

After the coming of the Normans, Mande the Empress, Lady of the English (for
so she styled herself) created Geffrey De Magnavilla, Earls of Essex
usually called Mandevil, son to William by Margaret daughter and heir of E^do
the Steward or Shewar, the first Earl of Essex, that she might so by her
benefits oblige unto her a man both mighty and martial. Who in those
troublesome times under King Stephen despoiled of his estate made an end of his
own turbulent life with the sword. And he verily for his wicked deeds (as I
find in an old Writer) justly incurred the worlds censure and Register of
Walden.
in which while he stood, he was deadly wounded in the head at a little Town
called Burwell. When he lay at the point of death ready to give his last gasp
there came by chance certain Knights Templars, who laid upon him the habit of
their religious Profession signed with a red Cross, and afterward when he
was full dead, taking him up with them, enclosed him within a Coffin of Lead,
and hunge him upon a tree in the Orchard of Old Temple at London. For in a
reverent awe of the Church they durst not Geffry his son, who was restored by
Henry the Second to his fathers honors and Estate for him, and his heirs; but
he having no children left them to his brother William, who by his wife was
also Earl of Albemarle, and dyed likewise in his greatest glory issuelesse.
Some years after K. John promoted Geffrey Fitz-Petre, Justicer of England, a
wise and grave Personage unto this honor in consideration of a great mass of
money and Title by his wife Beatrice the eldest daughter of William de Say, who
was the sisters son of that great Geffrey de Magnavill, the first Earl of
Essex. This Fitz-Petre, a man (as an old Author writes) Passing well monied
had formerly dealt with the Bishop of Ely the Kings chief Justicer, for a
great piece of money presently paid and And so was girt with the sword of the
Earldom of Essex by King John at the solemnity of his Coronation. This
Geffrey Fitz-Petre was advanced to the high estate of Justicer of England by
King Richard the First, when he removed Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury from
Geffrey Fitz-Petre executed with great commendation preserving by his wisdom
the Realm from that confusion which it after fell into by King John's unadvised
carriage. Register of Walden Monastery.
His two Sons Geffrey and William, assumed unto them the surname of Magnavill
or Mandevill, and enjoyed this honor successively. As for Geffrey, he by his
wife was Earl of Gloucester also, and being a young man lost his life at a
Turneament. William took part with Lewis of France against King John, and
departed out of this World without issue. These being thus dead childelesse,
their sisters son Humfrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford and high Constable of
England, succeeded in their room.

See the Earls of Hereford.
Of this man's Posterity male, there succeeded many years together one after
H^reford and of Essex: of whom I will speak among the Earls of Hereford,
seeing that they wrote themselves Earls of Hereford and of Essex. Aeleonor the
eldest daughter of the last of these Bohuns, being given in marriage together
with the Title of Essex unto Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Gloucester, bare unto
him a daughter named Anne, who had for her first Husband Edmund Earl of
Stafford, from whom came the Dukes of Buckingham: and for her second Sir
William Bourchier, unto whom King Henry the Fifth gave the Earldom of Ew in
Normandy. This William of her body begat Henry Bourchier, whom King Edward the
fourth invested in the Dignity of the Earldom of Essex, in regard he had
married his Aunt, Eliz. sister to Rich. Duke of York.
and was descended from Thomas of Woodstocke. He had to succeed him Anne, who
being then little respected, King Henry the Eighth presently and all at once
made Thomas Cromwell, (whom he had used as his Instrument to suppress and
abolish the Popes authority) Earl of Essex, Lord Great Chamberlain of England
and Knight of the Order of Saint George: whom before for his reaching politic
head, he had made Baron Cromwell of Ok^ham, The Kings Vicar general in
Spiritual matters, and Lord of the Privy Seal: and all these honors were
heaped upon him within the compass of five years.

But in the fifth month after he was Earl, he lost his head and so had the
interlude Catastrophe, as most of these have, who are busy managers of the
greatest affairs. And then the same King thought Sir William Parr, upon whom
he had bestowed in marriage Anne the only daughter and heir of the foresaid
Henry Bour^^ier, worthy also to be entitled Earl of Essex.

Parr was dead without issue, Walter D'Eureux Vicount Hereford, whose great
Grandmother was Cecilie Bourgchier Sister to Henry Bourgchier whom I named
right now, through the gracious favor of Queen Elizabeth, received this
dignity of the Earldom of Essex, and left it to his Son Robert. Who being
adorned with singular gifts of nature, and supported besides with the special
favor of his most gracious Prince, grew so fast unto such honor, that all
England conceived good hope he would have fully equalled, yea and far
surpassed the greatest virtues and praises of all his Progenitors. But (alas)
whiles he was carried away with popularity, and made have to out go his hopes,
he cast himself headlong into destruction: as many more have done, who
despising that which

But our most gracious Sovereign King James of his Royal benignity has
restored his son Robert to his blood, and honors by Parliament authority.

There be counted in this County Parish Churches 415.

ICENI.
THe Region next unto the Trinobantes which afterward East-England, and
contains Suffolk, Norfolk, and Cambridge-shire with Huntingdon-shire, was
inhabited in times past by the ICENI, called elsewhere amiss TIGENI: and in
Ptolomee more corruptly SIMENI: whom also I have thought hee^etofore to have
been in Caesar by a confused name, termed CENIMAGNI: and so to think induced I
was, partly by that most near affinity between these names ICENI, and
CENI-MAGNI, and in part by the consent of Caesar and Tacitus together. For
Caesar writes that the Cenimagni yielded themselves unto the Romans: which
Tacitus records that the Iceni likewise did, in these words: They willingly
joined in amity with us. But (that which makes most to the clearing of this
point) in a Manuscript old book for CENIMAGNI, we find written with the word
divided in twain, CENIAGNI. For which if I might not be thought somewhat too
bold a Critic, I would read instead thereof ICENI, REGNI. Neither verily
can you find the Cenimagni elsewhere in all Britain, if they be a diverse
people from Iceni and Regni. But of this name ICENI, there remain in this
tract very many footings, if I may so term them, as Ikensworth, Ikenthorpe,
Ikbortow, Iken, Ikining, Ichlingham, Eike, etc. Yea and that high street-way,
which went from hence, the Historians of the former age every where do name
Ichenild-Street, Ichenild-street.
as one would say, the Icenes street.

What should be the reason of this name (so love me Truth) I dare not guess,
unless one would fetch it from the Wedge-like-forme of the country, and say,
it lies Wedgwise upon the Sea. For the Britans in their language call a Wedge
and for the same cause a place in Wales, by the Lake or Mere Lhintegid, is of
that form named Lhan-yken, as Welsh-Britans informed me: and in the very same
sense a little country in Spain (as Strabo writes) is cleped SPHEN, Sphen.
that is, The wedge, and yet the same seems not to resemble a wedge so near,
as this of ours does.

A mighty nation this was, as says Tacitus, and after they had betaken
themselves to the protection of the Romans, never shaken nor troubled unto
Claudius his time. For then, when as Ostorius the Roman Lieutenant raised M.
Ostorius the Lieutenants son won the honor of saving a Citizens life. When
this war was thus hushed, scarce 13. years had gone over their heads, when a
new tempest of war arose upon these occasions. Prasutagus King of these
Iceni, to secure (though it were with the hurt of his own private estate) his
kindred from calamity, ordained by his last will and testament Nero the Emperor
to be his heir, supposing that by this obsequious service of his (let Tacit.
speak for me a while) his Kingdom and house both should be safe from Boodicia,
who also is called Bunduica was whipped, and her daughters defloured. All the
principal men of the Iceni, as though they had received the whole Country in
free gift were stripped of their goods, and turned out of their ancient
inheritance: those also of the Kings stock and blood accounted no better than
bondslaves. By occasions of which grievous injuries and for fear of greater
indignities (for so much they had been reduced into the form of a Trinobantes
to rebellion, and others also who had not as yet been inured to bondage: These
by privy conspiracies agreed to resume their liberty, being incensed with
most bitter and deadly hatred against the old soldiers planted at Maldon above
said. Thus began a most dangerous war to kindle, which was set more on a
light fire by the greedy covetousness of Seneca, Seneca his usury in Britanny.
who about that time exacted with extremity 400000. Sesterces, an hundred
times told, (which amount

In this war, that I may be brief, that Boodicia, whom Gildas seems to
call the crafty Lioness, wife to Prasutagus, slew outright of Romans and
their associates fourscore thousand, rased Caimalodunum their Colonie, and the
free town Verulamium. The ninth Legion she discomfited, and put to flight
Catus Decianus the Procuratour: but at length she being put to the worst by
Suetonius Paulinus in a pitched field, with an invincible courage and
resolution Tacitus writes) by drinking a cup of poison; or as Dio says, by
sickness. In the heat of this war, Xiphilinus records out of Dio, that the
Britans especially worshipped the Goddess VICTORY under the name of ANDATES,
Andates or Andrastes. The Goddess Victory.
which the Greek book in another place calls Andrastes: also that in her
sacred grove, they sacrificed prisoners alive in most barbarous and savage
manner. And yet the Britans in these days acknowledge no such name of Victory,
neither know I what the meaning of it should be, unless, as the Latins have
called Victory Victoriam, a vincendo, that is, of winning: the Sabins acunam,
ab Vevacuando, that is, of emptying and making riddance: and the Grecians
NIKHN, (...), that is, of not yielding or giving back: so the Britans named it
Anaraith, of overthrowing; For, so they term a mischievous and deadly
overthrow. But thus much slightly by the way. From those times ever since no
mention is there in authors of the Iceni, neither can any thing by reading be
found, but that the Romans, when their Empire went In Kent.
did set a new officer over the sea coasts along these and other countries to
restrain the piracies and robberies of the Saxons, whom, as I have said
heretofore, they called Earl or Lieutenant.
Comes of the Saxons shore along Britain.

But when the English Saxons now had established their Seven kingdoms.
Heptarchie in this Island, this province became part of the Kingdom of East
Angles, which of the site thereof Eastward they named in their language, (...),
that is, East-Angle.
The Kingdom of East English: and it had for the first King thereof, Vffa, Uff
kines.
whence his successors were a long time called Vff Kines, who seem to have
Mercia, and sometimes to the Kings of Kent. Whose offspring being come to an
end in S. Edmund; the Danes overran this country most piteously for the space
of 50. years or thereabout, afflicting it with all the calamities that
accompany the wars: until that King Edward the elder having subdued them
united it at length to his own Kingdom of the West Saxons. But afterward, it
had peculiar Presidents and Governors: which honorable place at the first
coming in of the Normans, Ralph President of East-Angle.
and a while after one Ralph What kind of country this was, behold how Abbo
Floriacensis, who lived in the year of Christ 970. has pictured out in these
words: This part East Angle or East England is renowned, as for other causes,
so in this regard, that it is watered almost on every side: being on the
Southeast and East environed with the Ocean, and on the North-east with huge
Fennes soked in moisture, which rising by reason of the level ground from the
mids in manner of all Britain, for the space of a hundred miles and more does
descend with the greatest rivers into the sea. But of that side which lies
Westward the Province it self is continuate to the rest of the Island, and
therefore passable throughout: but, least it should be overrun with the often
irruptions and breakings Thus far Abbo.

SVFFOL^IAE Comitatus (cuius Populi olim ic^m Dicti) Continens inse oppida
mercatoria xxv Pagos et Villas CCCCLXIIII. Vna cum singulis Hundredis et
fluminibus in code^e Auc Fore Christ^ph^r^ Saxton.



SUFFOLK, which we must speak of first, in the Saxon Tongue (...), that is,
South-folke, or people in respect of Northfolke, has on the West side
Cambridge-shire, on the South the River Stoure, which divides it from Essex:
on the East side the German Sea, and on the North two little Rivers; Ouse the
least, and Waveney, which flowing out as it were of Norfolk. A large country
it is, and full of havens, of a fat and fertile Soil, (unless it be Eastward)
being compounded (as it is) of clay and marle: by means whereof, there are in
every place most rich and goodly corn fields, with pastures as battable, for
grazing and feeding of cattle. And great store of cheeses are there made,
which to the great commodity of the Inhabitants are vented into all parts of
England: Cheeses.
Nay into Germany, France, and Spain also, as Pantaleon the Physician writes,
who stuck not to compare these of ours for color, and taste both with those of
Placentia: but he was no dainty toothed scholar out of Apicius school. Neither
be there wanting woods here, which have been more plentiful, and parkes;

This County was divided politically into three parts: whereof one is called
the Geldable, because out of it there is gathered a Tribute: a second, Saint
Edmunds liberty, for that it belonged to his Abbay: the third Saint Audries
liberty, because it appertained to Ely Abbay, unto which our Kings in times
past granted certain territories with Sach and Soch, as says Ely Book,
without any exception either of Ecclesiastical or secular jurisdiction. But
let us survey it Chorographically, and beginning at the East side take a view
of the better and more remarkable places.

Where it lies West and toward Cambridgeshire, in the very limite stands
Ixning, more famous in times past than now. For Audre the Virgin K. Annas
daughter and canonized for a Saint, was here borne, Ralph also Earl of this
East England here entered into conspiracy against William the Conqueror, Novus
mercatus.
and Hervey the first Bishop of Ely made a causey or high way from hence to Ely.

But now, for that Newmercate is so near, Newmercate. Newmarket Heath.
whither men resort with their wares and commodities more frequently, it has
begun to decay. That this Newmercate is a Town of late days built, the very
name it self does import: and it is situate in such sort, that the South part
thereof belongs to Cambridgeshire, the North side to Suffolk: and both of
them have their several small Churches: whereof this acknowledges Ixning, the
former Ditton or Dichton, for their mother. Hereof I Henry the Third, Sir
Robert L' Isle gave one part of it in frank marriage with his daughter
Cassandra unto Sir Richard de Argenton, from whom the Alingtons are descended.

Here lies out a great way round about, a large Plain, named of this Town,
Newmarket Heath, consisting of a sandy and barren ground yet green withal,
wherein is to be seen that wonderful Ditch, which, as if it had been cast
by the devil, the common sort call Devils Dike, whereas in very truth, most
certainly it is known to be one of them, wherewith the Inhabitants, (as Abbo
writes) fenced themselves against the inrodes of their enemies, as shall be
showed more at large when we are come to Cambridgeshire. Yet in the mean time,
I am here to advertise Snaile-well and Moulton.

More within the Country is that renowned Town of Saint Edmund, S. Edmunds
Bury.
which in the Saxons age, men called (...): and in the time of the Britans, as
it should seem, was that VILLA FAUSTINI, whereof Antonine makes mention: for
of that opinion was Talbot a man right skillful in antiquities, and very much
conversant in Iciani, as from Colonia in Antonine agrees well enough: And as
Villa in the Latin Tongue signifies some Gentleman's house standing upon his
land, so (...), in old English betokened the same. Guord or worth.
For, that Abbo aforesaid, interprets Bederics-gueord, by these words
Bederici Cortis, that is, Villa, that is to say, Bederics-Court, Farm, or
Mansion house. Besides that, the Englishmen may seem to have brought the
significancy of that Latin word into their own Language: For as Faustinus in
Latin implies a certain meaning of prosperity: so does Bederic in the German
tongue, as writes that most learned Hadrianus Iunius, where he interprets
the name of Betorix (who in Strabo was the son of Melo the Sicambrian,) Full
of happiness and favor. But if these were diverse Faustinus, and who this
Bedericus was. Sure I am that it was not that VILLA FAUSTINI, which Martial in
his Epigrammes depainteth: and if I said it was the habitation of that Beric,
Bery the Britan.
who being driven out of Britain, as Dio writes, persuaded the Emperor
Claudius to war upon the Britans, I should not believe my self. But
whatsoever it was, if it be not that Faustini Villa, yet seems it to have
been of famous memory, considering that when Christian Religion began to
spring up in this Tract, King Sigebert here founded a Church; and Abbo called
it Villam regiam, that is, A royal town: But after that the people had
translated hither the body of Edmund that most Christian King, whom the Danes
with exquisite torments had put to death, and built in Edmundi Burgus, commonly
Saint Edmundbury, and more shortly, Bury: and flourished marveilous much. But
especially since that King Canutus for to expiate the sacrilegious impiety of
his father Suenus against this Church, being affrighted with a vision of Saint
Edmunds, built it again of a new work, enriched it, offered his own Crown
unto the holy Martyr, brought into it Monks with their Abbot, and gave unto it
many fair and large Manours, and among other things the Town it self full
and whole: over which the Monks themselves by their Seneschall had rule and
jurisdiction. Whereupon, Ioscelin de Branklond a Monk of this house, writes
thus: The men as well without the Burgh as within are ours, and all

Afterward, Herveie the Abbot coming of the Norman blood, compassed it round
about with a wall, whereof there remain still some few Relics, and Abbot
Newport walled the Abbay. The Bishop of Rome endowed it with very great
immunities and among other things granted, Malmesburiensis.
That the said place should be subject to no Bishop in any matter, and in
matters lawful depend upon the pleasure and direction of the Archbishop. Which
is yet observed at this day. And now by this time the Monks abounding in
wealth erected a new Church of a sumptuous and stately building, enlarging it
every day more than other with new works; and whiles they laid the foundation
of a new Chapel in the Reign of Edward the First, There were found (as
Eversden a The walls of a certain old Church built round, Eversden.
so as that the Altar stood (as it were) in the mids, and we verily think,
says he, it was that, which was first built to Saint Edmunds service: But what
manner of Town this was, and how great the Abbay also was while it stood,
hear Leland speak: who saw it standing: The Sun (says he) has not seen
either a City more finely seated, (so delicately stands it upon the easy
ascent or hanging of an hill, and a little River runs down on the East side
thereof:) or a goodlier Abbay, whether a man indifferently consider, either the
endowment with Revenewes, or the largeness, or the incomparable magnificence
thereof. A man that saw the Abbay would say verily it were a City: so many
Gates there are in it, and some of brass, so many Towers, and a most stately
Church: Upon which attend Now but two.
three others also standing If you demand how great the wealth of this Abbay
was, a man could hardly tell, and namely how many gifts and oblations were hung
upon the Tomb alone of Saint Edmund: and besides, there came in, out of lands
and Revenewes, a thousand five hundred Or Sc^eschal.
Steward governed the Townsmen) and with how great rage they fell together by
the ears, purposedly to kill one another, my relation would seem incredible.
But as great a piece of work as this was, so long in building and still
increasing, and as much riches as they gathered together for so many years
with S. Edmunds shrine, and the monuments of Alan Rufus Earl of Britain and
Richmond, Sir Thomas of Brotherton son to King Edward the first Earl of
Norfolk, and Marshall of England, *
Thomas of Beaufor, Duke of Excester, W. Earl of Stafford, Marie Queen
Dowager of France Daughter to King Henry the Seventh, and many other Humfrey
Duke of Gloucester.
England also, that I may note this also by the way if ever else it had loss
Humfrey Duke of Gloucester a due observer of Justice, and who had furnished his
noble wit with the better and deeper kind of studies, after he had under
King Henry the Sixth governed the Kingdom five and twenty years with great
commendation, so that neither good men had cause to complain of, nor evil to
find fault with, was here in Saint Saviors Hospital brought to his end by
the spightfull envy of Margaret of Lorain. Who seeing her husband King Henry
the Sixth, to be a man of a silly simple mind and faint hearted, to the end
she might draw into her own hands the managing of the State, devised and
plotted this wicked Normandy and Aquitane were thereby shortly after lost, and
Wars more then civil enkindled in England.

Nere unto this Saint Edmunds Bury, is Rushbroke to be seen, the habitation of
the worshipful Family of the Iermins, Ikesworth. Blund.
Knights: and not far from thence Ikesworth, where there stood an ancient
Priory founded by Gilbert Blund, a man of great nobility and Lord of Ikesworth,
whose issue male by the right line, ended in William, that in King Henry the
Third his days was slain in the battle at Lewis, and left two sisters his
Heirs, Agnes wife to William de Creketot, and Roise wedded to Robert de
Valoniis. *
Afterward, both here, at Haulsted near by Rougham, and elsewhere, the Drury,
Drury.
(which signifies in old English, A Precious jewel) has been of great
respect and good note, especially since they married with the heirs of
Fressil, and Saxham.

More Northward is Saint Genovefs Fernham, in this regard memorable, for that
Richard Lucy Lord chief Justice of England took Prisoner there in a pight
field Robert Earl of Leicester, 1173.
making foul work and havocke here; and withal put to the sword above ten
thousand Flemings, whom he had levied and sent forth to the depopulation of
his Country. Here hard by, I had the sight of two very fair houses the one
built by the Kitsons Knights, at Hengrave, the possession in times past of
Edmund de Hengrave, Hengrave. Culfurth. Sir Nicholas Bacon.
a most renowned Lawyer under King Edward the First: the other at Culfurth,
erected by Sir Nicolas Bacon, Knight, son unto that Sir Nicolas Bacon, Lord
Keeper of the great Seal of England: who for his singular wisdom and most
sound judgment, was right worthily esteemed one of the two Supporters of this
Kingdom in his time. Lidgate. John Lidgate.
And not far off stands Lidgate a small Village, yet in this respect not to
be passed over in silence, because it brought into the World John Lidgate the
Monk, whose wit may seem to have been framed and shapen by the very Muses
themselves: so brightly re-shine in his English verses, all the pleasant graces
and elegancies of speech, according to that age. Thus much for the more

Stoke Clare.
On the South side we saw the river Stour, which immediately from the very
spring head spreads a great Mere, called Stourmeer: but soon after drawing
it self within the banks runs first by Clare a noble Village: which had a
Castle, but now decayed, and gave name to the right noble Family of the Clares,
descended from Earl Gislebert the Norman: and the title of Dukedom unto
Leonel King Edward the Thirds son, who after he had married a wife out of
that house was entitled by his father, Duke of Clarence. For he of this place
with a fuller sound, than that of Clare, Earls of Clare.
was styled Duke of Clarence, (like as before him the sons of Earl Gislebert
and De Clare) and called Earls of Clare. Who died at Ad Albam Pompiam.
Languvill in Italy, after he had by a second marriage, matched with a Daughter
of Gal^acius Vicount of Millain: and in the Collegiat Church here lies
interred: as also Joan Acres daughter to King Edward the first, married to
Gislebert de Clare Earl of Gloucester. Here peradventure the Readers may look,
that I should set down the Earls of Clare so denominated of this place, and
the Dukes of Clarence, considering they have been always in this Realm of
right honorable reputation: and verily so will I do in few words, for their
satisfaction in this behalf. Richard the son of Gislebert Earl of Aucensis,
or Ew^.
Augy in Normandy served in the wars under King William when he entered
England, and by him was endowed with the Towns of Clare Tunbridge. This
Gislebert begat four sons, namely Gislebert, Roger, Walter, and Robert;
Guliel. Gemi^icensis. Lib. 7. c. 37.
from whom the Fitz-walters are descended. Gislebert by the daughter of the
Earl of Cleremont had issue Richard, who succeeded him; Gislebert, of whom
came that Noble Richard Earl of Pembroch and Conqueror of Ireland; and
Walter. Richard the first begotten son was slain by the Welshmen and left
behind him two sons Gilbert and Roger. Rob. Montensis
Gilbert in King Stephens days was Earl of Herford: howbeit both he and his
Successors are more often and commonly called Earls of Clare, of this their
principal seat and habitation, yea and so many times they wrote themselves.
After him dying without issue, succeeded his brother Roger, Gloucester, in right
of whom his posterity were Earls of Gloucester. And those you may see in their
due place. But when at length their issue male failed, Leonel Third son of
King Edward the Third, (who had married Elizabeth the Daughter and sole Heir
of William de Burgh Earl of Vlster, begotten of the Body of Elizabeth Clare)
was by his Father honored with this new Title, Duke of Clarence.

But when as he had but one only Daughter named Phillippa, wife to Edmund
Mortimer Earl of March, King Henry the Fourth created Thomas his own younger
son Duke of Clarence, Dukes of Clarence.
who being withal Earl of Albemarle, High Steward Anjou by the violent
assault of Scots and French. A long time after, king Edward the Fourth bestowed
this honor upon his own brother George, whom after grievous enmity and bitter
hatred, he had received again into favor, and yet at the last made an end of
him in prison, causing him, as the report currently goes, to be drowned in a
Butte of Malmesey. 1421.
A thing naturally engraffed in men, that whom they have feared, and with whom
they have contended in matter of life, those they hate for ever, though they be
their natural brethren.

From Clare, by Long-Melford, a very fair Almes-house lately built by that
good Cordal Knight, and Master of the Rolls, Stour passes on, and comes to
Sudbury, Sudbury.
that is to say, the South-Burgh, and runs in manner round about it, which
men suppose to have been in old time the chief town of this Shire, and to
have taken this name in regard of Norwich, that is, The Northren Town. Neither
would it take it well at this day to be counted much inferior to the Towns
adjoining: for, it is populous and wealthy, by reason of Clothing there, and
has for the chief Magistrate, a Major, who every year is chosen out of
seven Aldermen. Not Edwardeston.
is Edwardeston, a Town of no great name at this day, but yet in times past it
had Lords therein dwelling of passing great Honor, of the surname of Barons.
Monte-chensie.
Mont-chensie: out of which Family Sir Guarin Montchensie married the daughter
and one of the heirs of that mighty William Marescall, Earl of Pembroch, and
of her begat a daughter named Joan, who unto the style of her Husband William
de Valentia of the family of Lusignie in France, brought and adjoined the title
of Earl of Penbroch. Minor Histor. Matthew. Paris.
But the said Sir Guarin Mont-chensy, as he was a right honorable person, so
he was a man exceeding wealthy, *
in so much as in those days they accounted him the most potent Baron, and the
rich Crassus of England. For his last will and testament amounted unto two
hundred thousand Marks, no small wealth as the standard Waldgrave.
From a younger brother or cadet of this house of Montchensie, issued by an
heir general the Family of the Waldgraves, who have long flourished in
Knightly degree at Smalebridge nearer to Stoure, as another Family of great
account in elder ages at Buers, Buers.
which was thereof surnamed.

A few miles from hence Stour is enlarged with Breton a small Brook, at one of
whose heads is seen Bretenham a very slender little town, where fcarce
remains any show at all of any great building: and yet both the near
resemblance and the signification of the name partly induced me to think it to
be that COMBRETONIUM whereof Antonine the Emperor made mention in this tract.
Cumbretonium. Bretenham.
For like as Bretenham in English signifies an Habitation, or Mansion place by
Breton, so Combretonium in British Valley, or a place lying somewhat low by
Breton. But this in Peutegerius his Table is falsely named COMVETRONUM and
ADCOVECIN. Somewhat Eastward from hence is Nettlested seen, Barons Wentworth.
of whence was Sir Thomas Wentworth, whom King Henry the Eighth adorned with
the title of Baron Wentworth, and near thereto is Offion, that is to say, The
town of Offa King of the Mercians, where upon a clay Hill lie the ruins of an
ancient Castle, which they say Offa built, after he had wickedly murdered
Aethelbert King of the East Angles, and usurped his Kingdom.

But to return to the River Breton. *
Upon another brook that joyneth therewith stands Lancham a pretty Market,
Lancham.
and near it the Manor of Burnt-Elleie, whereunto Henry Shelton Lord thereof,
Hadley.
whose posterity a long time here flourished. Hadley, in the Saxons language
(...), is watered with the same brook: a town of good note in these days for
making of Clothes: Gathrum or Garmo the Dane.
and in old time much mentioned by our Historians, because Guthrum or Gormo the
Dane was here buried. For, when Aelfred brought him to this pass, that he
became Christian and was baptized, he assigned unto him these countries of the
East Angles, that he might (to use the words of mine Author) cherish them by
right of inheritance under the Allegiance of a King, which he had overrunne by
robbing and ransacking.

From hence Breton speedeth it self by Higham, whence the family of Higham is
Bentley.
to Stour which jointly in one stream run not far from Bentley, where the
Talmachs of a celebrate ancient house flourished for a long time, and after a
few miles near unto Arwerton the house long since of the family of the Bacons;
Arwerton.
who held this Manor, and Brom, by conducting all the footmen of Suffolk
and Norfolk from S. Edmunds dike in the wars of Wales. Now it belongs to
the Parkers haereditarily, who by the Fathers side derive their descent from
the Barons Morley, and by the Mothers from the Calthrops, a Family sometime of
great account in these parts. Beneath this Stour falls into the Ocean; and at
the very mouth thereof, the river Orwell or Gipping discharges it self
together with it.

This River springs up in the very navell or center, as one would say, of
this Wulpet.
out of two fountains, the one near to Wulpet, the other by Gipping a small
Village. Wulpet is a Market town, and sounds as much as, The Wolves pit, if
we may believe Nubrigensis who has told as pretty and formal a tale of this
place as is that fable called the TRUE NARRATION of Lucian: Vera narratio.
namely, how two little Boys (forsooth) of a green color, and of Satyrs
kind, after they had made a long journey by passages under the ground, from
out of another world from the Antipodes and Saint Martins Land, came up here:
of whom if you would know more, repair to the Author himself, where you shall
find such matter as will make you laugh your fill, Norton.
if you have a laughing spleen. I wot not whether I were best to relate here,
into what a vain hope of finding gold at Norton hard by, a certain credulous
desire of having, enticed and allured king Henry the Eight; but the digging and
undermining there sufficiently show it, although I say nothing. But between
Gipping and Wulpet upon an high hill remain the tokens of Hawhglee an ancient
Castle, Hagoneth.
taking up much about two Acres of ground. Some affirm this to have been
called Hagoneth Castle, which belonged to Ralph le Broc, and that in the year
1173. it was by Robert Earl of Leicester won and overthrown in the intestine
war between

Upon the same River are seen two little Market Towns, Stow and Needham, and
not far from the bank, Hemingston: in which Baldwin Le Pettour (mark his
name well) held certain lands, by Serjeanty, (the words I have out of an old
book) for which on Christmasse day, Farter,
every year before our sovereign Lord the King of England he should perform
one Saltus, one Suffletus, and one Bumbulus, or, as we read elsewhere, his
tenor was, per saltum, sufflum, and pettum, that is, if I understand these
terms aright, That he should dance, puff up his cheeks making therewith a
sound, A pretty conceited tenure.
and besides let a crack downward. Such was the plain and jolly mirth of
those times. And observed it is, that unto this Foe, the Manor of Langhall
belonged.

Ipswich.
Near unto the mouth of this river we saw Ipswich, in times past Gippwich, a
fair town resembling a City, situate in a ground somewhat low: which is the
eye (as it were) of this shire, as having an Haven commodious enough; fenced in
times past with a trench and rampire, of good trade and stored with wares, well
peopled, and full of Inhabitants, adorned with fourteen Churches, and with
goodly, large and stately edifices. I say nothing of four religious houses now
overturned, and that sumptuous and magnificent College which Cardinal Wolsey
a Butchers son of this place, here began to build, whose vast mind reached
always at things too high. The body politic, or corporation of this town
consists, as I was informed, Burgesses ( Portmen they term them) out of whom
are chosen yearly for the head Magistrates two Baillives, and as many Justices
out of four and twenty others. As touching the Antiquity thereof so far as
ever I could observe* the name of it was not heard of before the Danish
invasion, whereof it smarted: For in the year of salvation 991. the Danes
sacked and spoiled it, and all the Sea coast with so great cruelty, that
Siritius Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Nobles of England thought it the
safest and best course they could take, to redeem and buy their peace of them
for the sum of ten thousand pounds. Nevertheless, within nine years, they
made spoil of this town again, and presently thereupon the Englishmen
valiantly encountered them in the field, but through the cowardly running away
of Turkill, as writes Henry of Huntingdon (for in matter of war things of
small weight otherwise, are of right great moment, and sway very much) our men
were put to flight, and let the victory slip out of their hands. In the reign
of S. Edward, as we find in the Survey book of England, out of this town
Queen Edeva had two parts, and Earl Guert a third part: and Burgesses there
were eight hundred, paying custom to the King. Domesday book.
But after the Normans had possessed themselves of England, they erected a pile
or Castle here, which Hugh Bigod defended for a good while against Stephen the
usurping King of England, but surrendered it in the end: This fort is now quite
gone, so as there remain not so much as the ruins thereof. Some say it was in
the parish of Westfield hard by, where is to be seen the rubbish of a Castle,
Gipwic, as men say, stood in times past. I think verily it was then
demolished, Waleton.
when K. Henry the second laid Waleton Castle near unto it even with the
ground. For it was a place of refuge for Rebels, and here landed those three
thousand Flemings whom the nobles of England had called in against him, what
time as he unadvisedly Langerston.
they call it Langerston, that for two miles or thereabout in length lies
forth into the maine Sea, as he says, not without great danger and terror of
such as sail that way: howbeit the same serves very well for Fishermen to dry
their fishes, and after a sort is a defense unto that spacious and wide Haven
of Orwell. And thus much for the South part of this Shire.

Others call it Thredling.
Deben, a Riveret having his springhead near unto Mendelesham; unto which
Town, the Lord of the place H. Fitz Otho, Master of the Mint, purchased the
liberty of Market and Fair: by whose Heirs there fell no small Possessions
unto the Boutetorts Lords of Wily in Worcestershire, Boutetort.
and from them again in the Reign of Richard the Second, unto Frevil, Barkley
of Stoke, Burnel, and others.

This River Deben first flows hard unto the little Market Town Debenham, and
gives it the name, which others would have to be called more truly Depenham,
for that the ways every where about it, by reason of a clay ground and the
same over Vfford the seat in times past of Robert de Vfford Earl of Suffolk,
and by a Town over against it on the other side of the River named
Rendelisham, Rendelisham.
that is, as Beda interprets it, Rendils Mansion place, where Redwald King of
the East Saxons kept usually his Court, who was the first of all his Nation
that was baptized, and received Christianity; but afterward, seduced by his
Wife, he had in the self same Church, as says Beda, one Altar for Christ's
Religion, and another for sacrifices unto Devils. In this place also Swidelm a
King of the East Angles was likewise afterward baptized by Bishop Cedde.
Chadda.

From hence the River Deben passes down to Woodbridge, a little Town
beautified Saint Andrees Liberty: and after it has gone some few miles, it is
received into the Ocean at Bawdsey Haven.

By this time now the Shore creeps by little and little Eastward to the mouth
of the River Some name it Winchell. Framlingham.
Ore, which runs near to Framlingham Castle, belonging sometime to the
Bigods by the bounty of King Henry the First: and forthwith on the West side
thereof spreads (as it were) into a lake. A very fair and beautiful Castle
this is, fortified with a bank, ditch, and walls of great thickness, wherein
are thirteen towers, and inwardly furnished with buildings right commodious
and necessary. From hence it was that in the year of our Redemption 1173. what
time Robert Earl of Leicester, with his mercenary Flemings infested this
Country far and near: from this Castle also in the year 1553. Queen Mary
entered upon her Kingdom, for all the ambitious fretting and fuming of John
Dudley Duke of Northumberland against King Henry the Eighth his Daughters.

Then comes the River to Parrham a little Town, Parrham. Barons Willoughbey
of Parrham. Oreford.
the Lord whereof William Willoughby King Edward the Sixth honored with the
Estate of a Baron: and afterward running by Glemham, which gave name to an
ancient Family descended from the Bacons and Brandons; at Oreford, that took
the name of it, disburdeneth himself into the Sea. A big Town this was and
of great resort, fenced also with a Castle Valoineis, and afterward to the
Willoughbies, but complains at this day of the seas unkindnesse which
shrinketh back from it by little and little, and begins to envy the
commodity of an Haven unto the Town. Neither have I any thing else to say of
Oreford, unless it please you to run over these few words of Ralph Cogeshall
an old Writer.

In King Henry the Seconds days, says he, when Bartholmew Glanvile kept the
Castle Oreford, it happened that the Fishermen caught a wild man within their
nets, who in all parts and members of his body resembled a man, had hair on
his head, a huge beard with a Piloe devant, about the breast exceeding hairy
and rough: who notwithstanding slipped away secretly to the Sea and was never
seen after: So that it may be very true, which is so rise with the common
people, That there is nothing bred in any part of Nature, Tritons and Monsters
of the Sea.
but the same also is in the Sea: and that it is not altogether a fained Fable,
that Pliny has reported of a Triton taken on the Shore of Portugal, and of
the Seaman caught in the Streights of Gibraltare.

Not much higher, lies Aldborough for Situation right safe and very pleasant
within Slaughden vale, where from the East the Sea, and from the West the River
Aldburgh.
This name Aldburgh, is by interpretation the Old Burgh, or as others would
have it, The Burgh upon the River Ald. Now it is an harbor very commodious for
Sailers and Fishermen, and thereby well frequented, and acknowledges the Ocean
Sea to be favorable unto it, how spiteful soever and malicious it is to other
Towns in this Coast. Near unto it, what time as in the year 1555. by reason
of unseasonable weather the Corn throughout all England was choked and blasted
in the ear, there grew Pease miraculously among the rocks, without any earth
at all about them about the end of September, Pease growing out of the Rocks.
and brought down the price of Corn. Yet the wiser sort of men do say that
Pulse being cast upon the Shore by Shipwreck is wont otherwhiles to come up
again there, so that the thing is not to

Dunwich.
From hence coasting along the Shore, at ten miles end, we met with Dunwich, in
the English Saxon tongue Dunmoc, whereof Beda makes mention: where Faelix the
Burgumdium that reduced the Eastangles again into the faith, when they were
backesliding from Christ, in the year of Grace 630. placed an Episcopal See,
whose Successors for many years together were Bishops over all East England.
But Bise the Fourth Bishop after Faelix, when he became very aged and sickly
withal, being not able to discharge so great a Jurisdiction, divided it into
two Sees: the one continued still in this Dunwich, the other he placed in
North Elmham, Conqueror, Dunwich had in it two hundred and six and thirty
Burgesses: an hundred poor people: it was valued at fifty pounds, and
threescore thousand Herings, of gift. For, so we read in Domes-day Book. In
the foregoing Age, it was well peopled and frequented with Inhabitants: famous
also for a Mint therein: and in the Reign of Henry the Second, Allectum or
Halecum.
as William of Newborough writes, It was a Town of good note, and full stored
with sundry kinds of Riches. At which time, when England was all on a light
fire with new stirs and broiles, it was so fortified, that it made Robert
Earl of Leicester afraid, who with his Army over-ranne all the parts
there-about at his pleasure. But now by a certain peculiar spite and envy of
Nature, that suffers Blithe voideth it self into the Sea, on whose bank
Southward we saw Blithborow a small Town, Blithborrow.
which for no other thing is memorable, but because Anna a Christian King was
there buried, whom Penda the Mercian slew in a pitched Field. It was beautified
by King Henry the First with a College of Chanons, who granted the same as a
Cell to the Chanons of Saint Osiths. And it was made a Mercate by the means of
John Lord of Clavering, unto whom King Edward the Second gave this Liberty
together William De Casineto.
Cheney, who held the Barony of Horsford in the County of Norfolk, and erected
the little Abbay at Sibton.

Easton-Nesse shoots out, Easton-Nesse*
and reaches far into the East, which is deemed to be the farthest East
point in all Britain; Ptolomee calls it (...), or EXTENSIO. And that you may
not doubt, that this is the very same which we call Easton, be it known unto
you, that Eysteney in the British tongue is the same that in Greek (...),
Extensio. A Promontory.
and in Latin Extensio, that is, A stretching forth: although this name may
seem with as good probability to have been imposed in our English Language,
of the Situation Eastward. Upon the point of this Promontory stands Easton a
Village of Fishermen well near eaten up by Sea, and on South side of this
Promontory, Southwold lies in the Plain, full against the open shore of the
sea: a Town well enough frequented through the benefit of an Haven Blithe
emptying it self there into the Sea makes; and at every high water it is so
environed with the waves, that it seems to be an Island, and a man would
wonder that it is not overflowne. In so much as when I saw the manner thereof,
Lib. 3. de Natura Deorum.
I called that saying of Cicero into my remembrance: What should I speak of the
Sea Tides about Spain and Britain, and of their Flowing and Ebbing at
certain times? Surely, they cannot be without the hand of God, who has
restrained and gaged the waves within their bounds. Wingfield.
More within the land Wingfield shows it self, where the walls of a Castle
half down are to be seen: which has given name to a family in this Tract
that is spread into a number of branches, and is besides for knighthood and
ancient Gentility renowned, and thereof it was the principal seat: Dunnington,
Philips.
which stands much upon the Lord thereof Sir John Philips, father to that Sir
William who married the daughter and Heir of Baron Bardolph, whose daughter
and Heir likewise John Vicount Beaumont took to Wife: But now the Habitation
it is of the ancient Family of the Rousses. Not far from hence stands
Huntingfield, Huntingfield. Henningham.
which had a Baron of that name in King Edward the Third his time, and near
unto it Heveningham, the residence of the Family of Heveningham, knights: who
are known to be of very great antiquity: and not far off stands
Halesworth, Halesworth.
in times past Healsworda, an ancient Town of the Argentons, and now of the
Alingtons: unto which Sir Richard Argenton obtained at the hand of King Henry
the Third the liberty of a Mercate.

Ouse the least, and Waveney on the North side, divided this County from
Norfolk; which Riverets rising out of a Marish ground by Lophamford, from two
springs but a little a sunder one from another, take their courses diverse ways
with creekes full of shallow fourds. Along by Ouse which runs Westward,
there is nothing in this Quarter to be seen worth the report. Hoxon.
By Waveney side that tends Eastward, first is Hoxon in times past Hegilsdon
ennobled by reason of King Edmunds Martyrdom. King Edmunds Martyrdom.
For there the most cruel and bloody Danes (that I may use the words of Abbo)
having bound the most Christian King to a tree, for that he would not renounce
Christianity, shot him in with sharp arrows all his body over, augmenting the
pains of his torment And as a Poet of middle time versified of him.

Iam loca vulneribus desunt, nec dum furiosis
Tela, sed hyberna grandine plura volant.
Though now no place was left for wound, yet arrows did not fail,
These furious Wretches; still they fly thicker than winter hail.
In which place afterward stood a very fair house of the Bishops of Norwich,
until they exchanged it not long since for the Abbay of Saint Benet. Hard by,
at Brom, Cornwalleis.
dwelt a long time the family of Cornwalleis, of knights degree: of whom Sir
John Cornwall was Steward of Edward the Sixth his Household while he was Prince;
and his son Sir Thomas, for his wisdom and faithfulness became one of the
privy counsel to Queen Mary, Eaye.
and Controller of her royal House. Beneath it lies Eay, that is, The Island;
so called, because it is watered on every side with brooks, where are to be
seen the rubbish, ruins, and decayed walls of an old Castle that belonged to
Robert Malet a Norman Baron. But after that he under King Henry Liber
inquisitionum.
because he sided with Robert Duke of Normandy against the King, the said King
bestowed this Honor upon Stephen Earl of Bullen, who, being afterward the By
intrusion reaping the commodities thereof.
Vsufructuary King of England left it unto his son William Earl of Warren. But
after he had surrendered his State to King Henry the Second, and lost his life
in the expedition of Tholose, the King held it in his own hands until that
King Richard the First conferred it upon Henry the Fifth of that name Duke of
Brabant and of Lorain, together with King Stephens Niece by his daughter, who
had been a professed Nun. Long time after, when it was now devolved again
upon the Kings of England, King Edward the third gave it, as I have read, to
Sir Robert Vfford Earl of Suffolk.

Bedingfield.
Neither must I pass over in silence Bedingfield near adjoining, which gave
the name to a worshipful and ancient Family, that received very much
reputation and credit from the Heir of the Family of Tudenham. From thence by
Flixton, in stead of Felixton, Flixton.
so named of Faelix the first Bishop of these parts; like as many other places
in this Shire, the River Waveney runs down to Bungey, and spreads it
self in manner round about it; Bungey.
where Hugh Bigod fortified a Castle both by artificial workmanship, and also
by natural situation, when as the seditious Barons tossed all England to and
fro with storms of rebellion. Concerning which Castle, as impregnable, he was
wont to vaunt in these terms: Were I in my Castle of Bungey
Upon the River of Waveney,
I would ne care for the King of Cockeney.


Yet notwithstanding afterward he obtained at the hands of King Henry the
Second (by giving him a great sum of money and pledges withal of his
loyalty) that it might not be overthrown and rased. Not far thence from the
bank, you may see Mettingham; Mettingham.
where, upon a plain, Sir John surnamed De Norwich Lord of the place built a
four square Castle and a College within it, whose daughter, and in the end
the Heir of the same Family, Robert de Vfford aforesaid, Earl of Suffolk

Now Waveney drawing nearer unto the Sea whiles he striveth in vain to make
himself a twofold issue into the Ocean, the one together with the River Yare,
and the other by the mere Luthing, Luthingland.
makes a pretty big Demi Isle or Biland, which some name Lovingland, others
more truly Luthingland, of Luthing the lake spreading in length and breadth,
which beginning at the Ocean Shore is discharged into the River Yare. Lestoffe.
At the entrance whereof stands upon the Sea, Lestoffe, a narrow and little
Town: and at the issue of it Gorlston, where I saw the tower steeple of a
small suppressed Friery, which stands the Sailers in good stead for a mark.
Within the land, Somerley town.
hard by Yare is situate Somerley town, the habitation in ancient time of Fitz
Osbert, Iernegans Knights of high esteem in these parts: farther up into the
land where Yare and Waveney meet in one stream, there flourished Cnobersburg,
that is, as Bede interprereth it, Cnobers City, Cnoberi urbs.
we call it at this day Burgh-Castle. Which, as Bede says, was a most pleasant
Castle, by reason of woods and Sea together, wherein a Monastery was built by
Fursaey a holy Scot: by whose persuasion Sigebert King of the East Angles
became a Monk and resigned up his Kingdom: who afterward being drawn
against his will out of this Monastery to encourage his people in battle
against the Mercians, together with his company lost his life. In that place
now there are only ruinous walls in form, as it were, four square, built of
flint stone and British Brick, but all overgrown Yare to repress the piracies
of the Saxons: or rather that it was the ancient GARIANONUM it self, where the
Stablesian Horsemen had their Station, and keep Ward, at the declination of the
Roman Empire in Britain.

Suffolk has had Earls and Dukes out of sundry families. Dukes and Earls of
Suffolk.
There be of the later writers who report, that the Glanvils in times past
were honored with this title: But seeing they ground upon no certain
authority, whereas men may easily mistake, and I have found nothing of them in
the public records of the Kingdom, they must pardon me if I believe them not,
until they produce more certainty. Yet in the mean while I confess, that the
family of the Glanvils in this tract was of right good note and high
reputation. Neither have I hitherto learned by witnesses of credit, that any
one was entitled Earl of this Province severally before the days of King
Robert Vfford Earl of Suffolk a man much renowned both in peace and war,
the son of Sir Robert Vfford Steward of the Kings house under King Edward the
Second, by Cecily de Valoniis Lady of Orford. After him succeeded his son
William, who having four sons that were taken away by untimely death during
his life, died himself suddenly in the Parliament house as he was about to
report the mind of the Commonalty. And then Sir Robert Willoughby, Roger Lord
Scales, and Henry Ferrars of Groby the next of his blood and his Heirs
divided the Inheritance between them. Afterward King Richard the Second
promoted Michael De-la-Pole to this Title, Inquisit. 5. Rich. 2.
and made him L. Chancellor of England. Who, as Thomas Walsingham writes,
employed himself more in traffic and For he was the son of William
De-la-pole, that first Mayor of Kyngston upon Hull, Leland, in his Commentary
upon his Cygnea Cantio.
and for his wealthy Estate, adorned by King Edward the Third with the dignity
of a Baneret. But when as in the prosperous confluence of so many advancements
the man's nature was not capable of so great fortunes, he was enforced by his
adversaries envy to depart out of his Country, and so died a banished man. His
son Michael being restored, died at the siege of Harflew, and again within
one month his son Michael was slain in the battle of Agincourt leaving
daughters only. Walsingham page 358. Regist. Monal de Mels^. See Hull in
Yorkshire.
Then William his brother succeeded, whom King Henry the sixth so favored that
he made him also Earl of Penbroke, and then Marquess of Suffolk, to him and
the heirs And that both he and the heirs of his body should carry the golden
rod having a Dove in the top thereof, on the Coronation day of the King of
England: and the like rod or verge Yuory at the Coronation of the Queens of
England: And afterward he advanced the same William for his great service and
deserts to the honor and title of Duke of Suffolk. Certes he was an
excellent man in those days, famous and of great worth. For whereas his father
and three brethren had in the French wars lost their lives for their Country,
he, as we find in the Parliament Rols of the 28. of King Henry the Sixth, in
the same war served full 34. years: For seventeene years together he never
returned home from warfare; being once taken prisoner when he was as yet no
better than a private Knight, he paid down for his ransom twenty John
De-la-Pole, who wedded K. Edward the fourth his sister, and of her begat John
Earl of Lincoln by K. Richard the Third proclaimed heir apparent of the
Crown: whose ambitious mind puffed up and giddy therewith could not contain
it self, but soon after brake out against King Henry the Seventh, Suffolk
fled into Flanders: began there to conspire and stir up rebellion against King
Henry the Seventh, who, albeit he feared him, would seem to favor him, and
as a Prince better contented with repentance than punishment, freely pardoned
him for sundry offenses, that he might win him. But after he was thus fled,
his estate was forfeited, and the King never thought himself secure from his
practices, until he had so far prevailed with Philip Duke of Burgundy, that
he was delivered into his hands (against Richard de la Pole a banished man in
France, usurped the title of Duke of Suffolk: who being the last male (to my
knowledge) of this house, was slain in the battle of Pavie (wherein Francis
the first, king of France was taken prisoner in the year of our Lord 1524.)
fighting manfully among the thickest of his enemies. For whom, in consideration
of his singular valor, and high parentage Burbon himself, although he was
his enemy, made a sumptuous funeral, and honored the same with his presence in
mourning black. In the mean time, king Henry the Eighth adorned Sir Charles
Brandon, unto whom he had given in marriage his own sister Marie widow, and
Dowager to Lewis the twelfth king of France, with the title of Duke of
Suffolk, and granted to him all the Honors, and Manours which Edmund Earl of
Suffolk had forfeited. After whom succeeded Henry his son a child, and
after him his brother Charles: who both died of the English swet upon one day
in the year 1551. Then king Edward the Sixth honored with that title Henry
Gray Marquess Dorset, who had married Francis their sister: but he enjoying
the same but a small time lost his head in Queen Maryes days for Suffolk.
From that time lay this title of Suffolk void, until that very lately king
James advanced to that honor Thomas Lord Howard of Walden, the second son of
Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, whom for his approved fidelity and virtue he
also made his Lord Chamberlain, in his first entry into the kingdom.

The Parishes in this County amount to the number of 575.

NORFOLCIAE comitatus quem oli^ ICENI Insederunt. Centinens in Sc ovida
Mercatoria. XXVI. Pagos et villas DCXXV ^na Cum Singulis hundredi^ ^t
fluminibus in codem. An^ ^eri Christophere Saylon.


NORTH-FOLKE.
NORTH-FOLKE, commonly Norfolk, which is by interpretation, people of the
North, lies Norward of Suffolk, from which it is divided by those two little
Rivers which I spoke of, Ouse the least, and Waveney, running diverse ways: on
the East and North side the German Ocean which is plentiful of Ouse, a River
disporting himself with his manifold branches and divisions secludeth it from
Cambridge-Shire. It is a Region large and spacious, and in manner all
throughout a plain champion, unless it be where there rise gently some
pretty Hills; passing rich, exceeding full of Sheep, and stored with Conyes:
replenished likewise with a great number of populous Villages: for, beside
twenty seven Market towns, it is able to show Villages and Country Towns 625:
Watered with diverse Rivers and Brooks, and not altogether destitute of Woods.
The soil, according to the Mershland and Flegg: otherwhere, but Westward
especially, lean, light, and sandy: elsewhere, standing upon clay and chalk.
But the goodness of the ground a man may collect by this (whence Varro wills
us to gather it) that the Inhabitants are of a passing good complexion: to say
nothing of their exceeding wily wits, and the same right quick in the insight
of our common laws: in so much as it is counted, as well now, as in times
past, the only Country for best breed of Lawyers: so that even out of the
meanest sort of the common people, there may be found not a few, who if there
were nothing else to bear action, or able to fetch matter

Upon the least Ouse, where Thet a small brook breaking out of Suffolk,
meets and runs with him, in a low ground, was seated that ancient City
SITOMAGUS which Antonine the Emperor makes mention of, corruptly in the
Fragments of an old Choragraphicall table called SIMOMAGUS and SINOMAGUS now
Thetford, Ford. Sitomagus. Thetford. Magus.
For, like as Sitomagus in the British tongue implies a City by the river
Sit, which now is Thet for Magus as Pliny shows, signified a City) so
Thetford in English betokens the Ford of Thet; neither are these two names
Sit and Thet much unlike in sound. There are in it at this day but few
Inhabitants, although it be of a good bigness; but in times past it was very
populous; and beside other tokens of antiquity it has still to be seen a
great Mount raised to a good height by men's hands; fensed with a double
rampire, and as the report goes, fortified in ancient time with walls: which
was a Roman work as some think, or rather of the English Saxon Kings, as
others would have it, under whom Suenus the Dane, who in a rage set it on fire
in the year 1004; and six years after being spoiled again by the furious
Danes, it lost all the beauty and dignity that it had. For the recovery
whereof, Bishop Arfast removed his Episcopal See from Elmham hither, and
Bishop William his successor did all he could to adorn and set it out: so
that, under King Edward the Confessor, there were counted in it 947.
Burgesses, and in William the Conquerours time 720. Mansions: whereof 224.
stood void, and the chief Magistrate was termed a Consul, which name may
intimate that it was a Roman town. But when Bishop Herbert (surnamed Losenga,
for that he was composed of Leafing and Flattery) Norwich, it fell again to
decay, and as it were languished. Neither could it sufficiently be comforted
for the absence of the Bishop, by the Abbay of Cluniac Monks, which by his
means was built. This Abbay, Hugh Bigod built out of the ground: For so
writes he in the Instrument of the foundation. I Hugh Bigod Steward to King
Henry, by his grant and by the advice of Herbert Bishop of Norwich, have
ordained Monks of the Order of Cluny, in the Church of S. Mary which was the
Episcopal seat of Thetford, which I gave unto them, and afterward founded
another more meet for their use, without the Town. Howbeit even then, the
greatest part of the Edmund that most holy King a little before his death fought
Seven hours and more with the Danes not without an horrible slaughter, and
afterward gave over the battle on even hand; such was the alternative
fortune of the Field, that it drove both sides past their senses.

By Waveney the other River of those twain, that bound this Shire and runs
Eastward, not far from the Spring head thereof, are seen Buckenham and
Keninghall. Iceni, is the Seat of that most honorable Family of the Howards,
whose glory is so great, that the envy of Bucchanan cannot empaire it. As for
the other, so named, as I take it of Beech trees which the Saxons called
Bucken; it is a fair and strong Castle, built by William de Aubigny the
Norman, (unto whom the Conqueror had given the place) and by his heirs that
were successively Earls of Arundell, it descended to the Tatsalls, and from
them by Caly and the Cliftons unto the family of the Knevets. The Family of the
Knevets.
These are of an ancient house and renowned ever since Sir John Knevet was Lord
Chancellor of England under King Edward the Third, and also honorably allied
by great marriages. For Buckenham, from hence sprang those right worshipful
knights, Sir Thomas Knevet Lord Knevet, Sir Henry Knevet of Wiltshire, and Sir
Thomas Knevet of Ashellwell Thorpe and others. This Ashellwell Thorpe is a
little Town nere adjoining, which from the Thorpes in times past of Knights
degree, by the Tilneis and the L. L. Bourchiers of Berners, Barons Bourchiers
of Berners.
is devolved at length hereditarily unto that Sir Thomas Knevet before named.
As for that Buckenham, aforesaid, it is holden by this tenure and condition,
that the Lords thereof should at the Coronation of the Kings of England be the
Kings Butlers that day. Like as, (a thing that may beseem the noting) in
Charleton a little neighbor village, Raulph de Carleton and some one other,
held lands by To present an hundred Herring-Pies or Pasties, when Herrings
first come in, unto their Sovereign Lord the King, wheresoever he be in
England.

But this river near to his spring runs by and by under Disce, now Dis, a
pretty town well known; which King Henry the First gave frankely to Sir
Richard Lucy, and he straightwayes passed it over to Walter Fitz-Robert with
his Daughter: of whose Posterity Robert Fitz-Walter obtained for this place the
liberty of keeping Market, at the hands of King Edward the First. From thence,
although Waveney be on each side beset with Towns, yet there is not one
amongst them that may boast of any Antiquity: unless it be Harleston a good
Mercate, and Shelton that stands farther of, both which have given surnames
to the ancient Families of the Sheltons Harlestons: but before it comes to
the Sea, it coupleth it self with the river Yare, which the Britans called
Guerne, the Englishmen Gerne, and Iere, of Alder trees, no doubt, so termed in
British wherewith it is overshadowed. It arises out of the mids of this
Country, not far from Gernston a little Town that took name thereof, and
has hard by it Hengham, Hengham. Lord of Rhia.
which had Lords, descended from John Marescall (Nephew by the brother to
William Marescall Earl of Penbroch) upon whom King John bestowed it with the
Lands of Hugh de Gornay, a Traitor, and also with the Hubert de Rhia. From
this Marescals it passed in revolution of time, unto the Lord Morleis, and from
them by Lovell unto the Parkers, now Lords Morley. A little from hence is
Sculton, otherwise called Burdos or Burdelois, which was held by this Tenure, *
That the Lord thereof on the Coronation day of the Kings of England, Sculton.
Wood rising.
should be chief Lardiner. Joint-neighbour to Sculton is Wood-Rising the fair
seat of the Family of Southwels, which received the greatest reputation and
increase from Sir Richard Southwell Privy Counselor to King Edward the
Sixth; and his Brother Sir Robert Master of the Rowles.

More Eastward is to be seen Wimundham, Windham.
now short, Windham, famous for the Albineys Earls of Arundell, there
enterred: whose Ancestor and Progenitor William Butler to King Henry the First
founded the Priory, and gave it to the Abbay of Saint Albans for a Cell, which
afterward was advanced to an Abbay. Upon the Steeple whereof, which is of a
great height, William Ke^ one of the Captains of the Norfolk Rebels, in the
year of our Lord 1549. was hanged on high. Neither would it be passed over in
silence, that five miles from hence stands Attilborrough, Attilborough.
Mortimers.
the seat of the Mortimers, an ancient Family, who being different from those
of Wigmor, bare for their Arms, A Shield, Or, Seem de flowers de Lyz Sables,
and founded here a Collegiat Church, where there is little now to be seen.
The Inheritance of these Mortimers has by marriage long since accrued to the
Ratcliffs, now Earls of Sussex, to the Family of Fitz-Ralph, and to Sir Ralph
Bigot.

The said Yare holds not his course far into the East, before he takes
Wentsum a Riveret (others call it Wentfar) from the South, into his stream:
upon which, near unto the head thereof, there is a four square Rampire at
Taiesborrough, containing four and twenty Acres. It may seem to have been a
Camp place of the Romans, if it be not that which in an old Chorographicall
Table or Map published by Marcus Welserus, is called AD TAUM. Somewhat higher,
upon the same River, stood VENTA ICENORUM, the most flourishing City, (for a
little one) in times past of all this people; Venta Icenorum. Caster.
but now having lost the old name, it is called Caster. And no marvel, that
of the three VENTAE, Cities of Britain, this only lost the name, seeing
Norwich had her beginning, about three miles from hence, near unto the
confluents of Yare and another namelesse River (some call it Bariden) where
they meet in one: which River with a long course running in and out by
Fakenham, which King Henry the first gave to Hugh Capell, and King John
afterward to the Earl of Arundell; and making many crooked reaches, speedeth
it self this way by Attilbridge to Yare, Horsford.
and leaves Horsford North from it: William De Casineto.
Cheneys, who in the Reign of Henry the Second, was one of the great Lords and
chief Peers of England, lies overgrowne with bushes and brambles. Norwich.
Wic in the Saxons tongue what it signifies.
This NORWICH is a famous City, called in the English Saxon tongue (...), that
is, a Northerly Creek, if Wic among the Saxons signifies the creek or Cove
of a River, as Rhenanus shows unto us: for, in this very place the River
runs down amain with a crooked and winding compass: or, a Northern
Station, if Wic, as Hadrianus Iunius would have it, betokens a sure and
secure station or place of abode; where dwelling houses stand jointly and close
together: or a Northerly Castle, if Wic sound as much as Castle, as our In the
English Saxon Grammar.
Archbishop Alfrick the Saxon has interpreted it. But if I should with some
others be of opinion that Norwich by a little turning Venta, what should I do
but turn awry from the very truth? For by no better right may it challenge
unto it self the name of Venta, than either Basil in Germany, the name of
AUGUSTA, or Baldach of BABYLON. For, like as Baldach had the beginning of
Babylons fall; Augusta Ra^racorum.
and Basil sprang from the ruin of Augusta: even so our Norwich appeared and
showed it self, though it were late, out of that ancient VENTA, which, the
British name thereof Caer Guntum in Authors, does prove: Wentsum or Wentfar
the name of Venta does most plainly discover it self. For, this name Norwich
we cannot read of any where in our Chronicles before the Danish wars.

So far is it off, that either Caesar or Guiteline the Britain built it, as
they write who are more hasty to believe all than to weigh matters with sound
judgment. But now, verily, by reason of the wealth, the number of Inhabitants,
and resort of people, the fair buildings, and fair Churches, and those so
many, (for it contains about thirty Parishes) the painful industry of the
Citizens, their loyalty toward their Prince, and their courtesy unto
strangers, it is worthily to be ranged with the most celebrate Cities of
Britain. It is right pleasantly situate on the Equator, and four and twenty
Degrees and five and fifty Scrupuls in Longitude. The form is somewhat long:
lying out in length from South to North a mile and an half: but carrying in
breadth, about half so much, drawing it self in by little and little at the
South end in manner, as it were, of a cone or sharp point. Compassed it is
about with strong walls (in which are orderly placed many Turrets, and twelve
gates) unless it be on the East Side; where the River (after it has with
many windings in and out watered the North part of the City, having four
Bridges for men to pass to and fro over it) is a Fence thereto, with his deep
Channel there, and high steep banks. In the very infancy, as I may so say, of
this City, when Etheldred a witless Sueno or Swan the Dane who ranged at his
pleasure through England with a great rabble of spoiling Ravenours, first put it
to the sack, and afterward set it on fire. Yet it revived again, and as we
read in that Domesday book wherein William the Conqueror took the review of
all England, there were by account in King Edward the Confessors time, no
fewer than one thousand three hundred and twenty Burgesses in it. At which time
(that I may speak out of the same Book) It paid unto the King twenty pounds
and to the Earl ten pounds: and beside all this twenty shillings, and four
Prebendaries, and six Sextars of Honey; also a Bear and six Dogs for to
bait the Bear: but now it paieth seventy pounds by weight to the King, and an
hundred shillings for a Fine, as some take it.
Gersume to the Queen, and an ambling Palfrey: But while the said King William
reigned, that flaming fire of fatal sedition, which Raulph Earl of East
England had kindled against the King, settled it self here. For, when he had
saved himself by flight, his wife together with the French Britons endured in
this place a most grievous Siege even to extreme famine: yet at length driven
she was to this hard pinch that she fled the land, and this City was so
empaired, that scarce 560. Burgesses were left in it, as we read in that
Domesday book. Of this yielding up of the City Lanfrank Archbishop of
Canterbury makes mention in his Epistle to King William, in these words. Your
Kingdom is purged of these villainous and filthy Britons, The Castle of Norwich
is rendered up into your hands. And the Britons From that time began it again
to recover it self by little and little out of this diluge of calamities, and
Bishop Herbert, whose good name was cracked for his foul Simony, translated
the Episcopal See from Thetford hither, and built up a very fair Cathedral
Church on the East side and lower part of the City, in a certain place then
called Cow-holme, near unto the Castle. The first stone whereof in the Reign
of King William Rufus, and in the year after Christ's Nativity 1096. himself
laid, with this inscription.

DOMINUS HERBERTUS POSUIT PRIMUM LAPIDEM IN NOMINE PATRIS, FILII, ET SPIRITUS
SANCTI. AMEN. That is.

Afterward, he procured of Pope Paschal that it should be established, and
confirmed for the Mother Church of Norfolk and Suffolk: he endowed it
bountifully with as much lands, as might sufficiently maintain threescore
Monks, who had there fair and spacious Cloisters. But after that they were
thrust out by King Henry the Eight, there were substituted for them a Deane,
six Prebendaries and others. The Church being thus built and an Episcopal See
there placed, the Town now (as Malmesbury) became of great name for frequent
trade of Merchants and resort of people. And in the 17. year of King Stephen,
as we read in old Annals, Norwich was founded a new, became a well peopled
City, and was made a Corporation. And most certain it is out of the kings
Records, that king Stephen granted it unto his son William for his Appennage,
as they term it, or inheritance. Out of whose hands King Henry the Second
shortly after wrested it by composition and kept it for himself: And albeit
his Son Henry, called the younger King, when he aspired ambitiously to the
kingdom, had made a large promise thereof unto Hugh Bigod Earl of Norfolk
whom he had drawn to side with him. At which time Bigod taking part with the
young King, who could not contain his hope of the Kingdom within Lewis the
Frenchman, with whom the seditious Barons of England combined against King
John, won it easily by Siege. Now, that Bigod reedified this Castle I verily
believe, because I have seen Lions Saliant engraven there in a Stone after the
same form that the Bigods used in times past in their Seals: of whom also
there was one that in his Seal used a Cross. These things fell out in the
first age (we may say) of Norwich.

But in the age next ensuing, it increased mightily and flourished, by reason
that the Major in stead of their Bailiffes, which before were the principal
Magistrates. They built likewise a passing fair Towne-house in the very
midst of the City near unto the Mercat-place, which on certain set days is
furnished exceeding well with all things necessary for man's life. And verily
much beholden it is unto the Or Dutchmen of the Low countries.
Netherlanders, that being weary of Duke de Alba his cruelty, and hating the
bloody Inquisition, repaired hither in great numbers and first brought in the
making and trade of says, baies, and other stuffes now much in use. But why
should I stand long upon these things, when as Alexander Nevill a Gentleman
well borne and very learned has notably described all these matters, together
with the story of their Bishops, the orderly succession of their Magistrates,
and the furious outrage of that most villainous Rebel Ke^ against this City?
This only will I add, that in the year 1583. the Citizens conveyed water
out of the River through pipes by an artificial Instrument or water-forcer up
into the highest places of the City. Here I may justly commence an action both
against Polydor Virgill an Italian, and also against Angelus Capellus a
Frenchman, and put them to their answer Norwich. I would have the same merry
action also against our Country man D. Caius, but that I know for certain that
the good old man, right learned though he were, was blinded in this point with
the natural love of this his own native Country. Neither have I more to say of
Norwich unless it may please you to run over these Verses of John Ionston a
Scottish-Britan written of the same.

Vrbs speciosa situ, nitidis pulcherrima tectis,
Grata peregrinis, delitiosa suis.
Bellorum seeds, trepido turbante tumultu,
Tristia Neustriaco sub duce damna tulit.
Victis dissidijs, postquam caput ardua coelo
Extulit, immensis crevit opima opibus.
Cultus vincit opes, and cultum gratia rerum,
Quam been? si luxus non comitetur opes.
Omnia sic adeo sola haec sibi sufficit, ut si
Fors regno desit, haec caput esse queat.
A City seated daintily, most fair built she is known,
Pleasing and kind to Strangers all, delightful to her own.
The seat of war whiles civil sturs and tumults yet remained,
In William the Normans days, she grievous loss sustained,
These broiles and jarres once past, when as her head aloft again
She bare, in richness infinite and wealth she grew amain.
Her Port exceeds that wealth, and things all superfine, this Port
How happy were it, if excess with such wealth did not sort.
So all sufficient in her self, and so complete is she,
That if need were, of all the Realm the Mistress she might be.
From Norwich, the River Yare having entertained other beackes and brooks as
guests, yet all under his own name, passes on still with many winding crookes
very full of the fishes called Ruffes, A Ruff. De Rariorum animatium, Historia.
which name because in English it sounds like to Rough, D. Caius named it
aptly in Latin Aspredo, that is, Rough. For, it is all the body over, rough
and has very sharp and pricky finnes: it delights in sandy places; for
shape and bigness like unto a Perch; in color brown and duskish above, but
palish yellow beneath: marked by the chawes with a double course of
half-circles: the eye for the upper half of it of a dark brown, for the
nether somewhat yellowish like delayed gold, the ball and sight thereof black.
This special mark by it Ruff resembles that of the Perch, much commended
for holsomnesse; and for eating tender and short.

*
When Y^re is gone past Claxton, where there stands a Castlet built round, which
Sir Thomas Gaudy knight Justice of the Common Pleas of late repaired, it
receives a brook which passes by nothing memorable but Halles-hall,
Halles-hall.
and that only memorable for his ancient Owner Sir James Hobart Attorney
General and of the Privy Counsel to King Henry the Seventh (by him dubbed
Knight at such time as he created Henry Wales) who by building from the ground
the fair Church at Loddon being his Parish Church, Hobart.
Saint Olaves bridge over Waveney that divides Norfolk and Suffolk, the
cawsey thereby, and other works of piety, deserved well of the Church, his
Country, and the Commonweal, and planted three houses of his own Issue, out
of the second whereof Sir Henry Hobart his great Grandchilde now likewise
Attorney General to King James is lineally descended. Now Yare approaching
nearer to the Sea, Garieni^ Ostium. Yarmouth.
runs down Southward, that so it may shed it self more gently into the
salt sea waves, and thereby makes a little languet of land like a tongue
thrust out, which it self of one side waters, and the Sea on the other
beats upon. On this languet I saw standing in a most open plain shore,
Yarmouth, in the English-Saxon Yares-mouth, a very convenient Haven, and as
fair a Town, beautifully built and passing well fensed both by the natural
strength of the place and also by the skillful industry of man's Art. For
although it be environed almost round with Water, on the West side with the
River which has a Draw Bridge over it, and from other Parts with the Ocean,
unless it be Herbert Bishop of Norwich hard by the North gate: under which
are to be seen the foundations brought above ground of a goodly piece of work
to enlarge the same. Garianon^^.
That this was that old Town GARIANONUM, where, in times past, the Stablesian
Horsemen kept their standing watch and ward against the barbarous enemies,
Garianonum was where Caster is now (in times past the fair seat of Sir John
Fastolfe, a most martial knight, and now appertaining to the Pastons) albeit
it is much celebrated among the Inhabitants for the antiquity thereof, and the
fame goes that the River Yare had another mouth or passage into the Sea under
it.

But, as I am persuaded that GARIANONUM stood at Burgh-castle in Suffolk,
which is on the other bank about two miles off, so I am easily induced to
think, that both Yarmouth arose out of the ruins thereof, and also that the
said Caster was one of the Roman Forts, placed also upon the mouth of Yare,
that now is stopped up. For, like as the Caurus.
North Western Wind does play the Tyrant upon Holland Rhene-mouthes: even so
the Aquilo.
North-East Wind afflicts and annoieth this Coast, and drives the sand on
heaps, so as it may seem to have dammed up this mouth also.

Neither will it be prejudicial to the Truth, if I should name our Yarmouth,
GARIANONUM, being so near adjoining as it is, unto the old Garianonum:
considering that Gorienis the River, whence it took the name, having now
changed his channel, enters into the maine Sea a little beneath this Town,
which it has also given name unto: For, I must needs confess, that this our
Yarmouth is of later memory. For, when that ancient Garianonum aforesaid was
decayed, and there was no Garrison to Cerdicus the Saxon. Cerdick sand.
Cerdick a warlike Saxon landed here (whereupon the Inhabitants at this day
call the place Cerdick-sand, and the Writers of Histories, Cerdick-shore) and
after he had made sore war upon the Iceni, took Sea and sailed from hence
into the West parts, where he erected the Kingdom of the West Saxons. And not
long after, the Saxons in stead of Garianonum, founded a new Town in that
moist and waterish ground, near the West side of the River and named it
Yarmouth: But finding the Situation thereof not to be healthful, they betook
themselves to the other side of the River called then of the same Cerdicke,
Cerdick-sand, and built this new Town, in which there flourished in King
Edward the Confessor his days 70. Burgesses, William Worcester.
as we find recorded in the Domesday book.
Notitia of England. After this, about the year of our Lestoffe, yea and the
Portuenses.
Portmen, for so termed they the Inhabitants of the Cinque Ports, not without
much blood shed on both sides. For they were most spitefully bent against them,
happily for being excluded out of the number of the Cinque Ports, and deprived of
these privileges which old Garianonum or Yarmouth, and their Ancestors,
enjoyed under the Lieutenant.
Comes of the Saxon Shore in elder times. But this their stoutnesse was
repressed at length and taken down by the Kings Authority: or as some think,
their lusty courage became abated by that most grievous and lamentable plague,
which in one year, within this one little Town brought Chronographicall Table
hanging up in the Church, wherein are set down also their wars with the
Portmen and Lestoffians aforesaid.

Since that time, their hearts have not been so haughty, nor their wealth so
great, Hertings.
to make them bold: howbeit painfully they follow the trade of Merchandise, and
taking of Halecum.
Herrings (which the learned think to be Chalcides and Leucomaewides) Saint
Michael, and what store of Herrings and other fish is then bought and sold.
Portuenses.
At which time, they of the Cinque Ports abovesaid by an old order and custom,
appoint their Bailiffs, Commissioners, and send them hither, who, that I may
speak out of their own Patent or Commission, together with the Magistrates of
this Town, during the time of the free Fair, hold a Court, for matters
concerning the Fair, do execute the Kings Justice, and keep the Kings peace.
As for the Haven below the Town, it is very commodious both for the
inhabitants, and for Norwich-men also: but for fear that it should be barred
and stopped The river Thyrn.


At this mouth also, another River, which some call Thyrn sheddeth it self
together with Yare into the sea: This River springing up near unto Holt a
town so called of an Holt or tuft of trees, and for the Market well known,
running about five miles distant from Yare, Blickling.
holds on a joint course a great way and keeps pace with him, by Blickling,
Ailesham.
now the seat of the ancient Family of Clear who in former times dwelt at
Ormesby; *
and by Ailesham a Market Town of good resort, where the Earl of Athole in
Scotland had lands not far from Worsted, Worsted. Worsted Stuff.
whereas I read, the Stuff Worsted, in so great request amongst our
Ancestors, was first made; and hence so named, as Dornicks, Cameric, Calecut,
etc. had in like manner their denomination from the places where they were
first invented, Saint Benets in the Holme.
and made. Then passes Thyrn nere the decayed great Abbay called Saint Benet
in the Holme: which Knut the Dane built, and the Monks afterward so
strengthened with most strong walls and bulwarks, that it seemed rather a Castle
than a Cloister. In so much, that William the Conqueror could not win it by
assault, until a Monk betrayed it into his hands upon this condition, that
himself might be made Abbot thereof. Which was done accordingly: but
forthwith, this new Abbot for being a Traitor, (as the Inhabitants Ludham.
Clipsby.
From thence runs this River down by Ludham, an house of the Bishops of
Norwich, and by Clipsby, which gave name to a Family of ancient note in his
Tract, and straightway uniteth his own stream with the Yare. From the mouth
of Yare the shore goes directly (as it were) North, to Winterton a point or
cape very well known to Sailers, which took that name, I suppose, of the A
most fat and battle ground.
who with exceeding violence rusheth against the banks and piles that are
opposed against him. Howbeit, the Country adjoining round about, in many men's
opinion has the fattest Soil and softest mould of any country in all England,
as which asks least labor, and yields most fruit. For, with a silly jade,
(as Pliny writes of Bizacium in Afric) and a poor old woman at one side of
the yoke drawing the plough, it is easily broken up, and eared. From Winterton
immediately the shore turning Westward, the sea retireth, without any bearing
out in manner at all, along a flat and low coast, as far as to Eccles, which
is almost overflowed and drowned with the Ocean. Bronholme.
From thence it carries an higher shore, by Bronholme sometime a Priory
Glanvill, and seated upon the sharp top of an hill, the Cross whereof our
ancestors had in holy reverence, *
I know not for what miracles. Next it is Paston a small townlet which yet has
given surname to a Family grown great, Paston. Gimmingham.
both in Estate and alliance, since they matched with an Heiresse of Beary
Maultbye. Not far hence is Gimmingham, which with other Manors, John Earl of
Warren and Surrie gave in times past to Thomas Earl of Lancaster, and by
Cromer where the neighbor Inhabitants with great expense went about to make an
Havenet, but to small purpose, the Ocean so furiously played the Tyrant and
made resistance. Wauburne*
Thence the Shore runs forth to Wauburne-hope; a Creek fortified in our
time, so called of Wauburne a little Town, unto which by the intercession of
Oliver de Bordeaux, King Edward the Second granted the Liberty of keeping a
Market: Blackney.
Next unto it is Clay, and over against it with a little River running
between, Blackney, 1321.
our Country man Bale calls it Nigeria, a famous House of Carmelite Friars in
this late age before going, John Baconthorp.
built by Sir Robert de Roos, Sir Robert Bacon, and John Bret: out of which
came John Baconthorp, so named of the place of his nativity, (which now is the
habitation of the Heidons, an ancient Race of Knights degree) A man in that age
of such variety and depth withal of excellent learning, that he was had in
exceeding great admiration among the Italians, and commonly called The Resolute
Doctor. The Resolute Doctor.
Whence it is, that Paulus Pansa thus writes of him. If thy mind stand to
enter into the secret power of the Almighty and most merciful God, no man has
written of his Essence more exactly. If any man desires to learn the causes
of things, or the effects of Nature; if he wish to know the sundry motions of
Heaven, and the contrary qualities of the Elements, this man offers himself
as a storehouse to furnish him: The Armor of Christian Religion, of better
proof and defense than When you are past Wauburne, the Coast lies more low
and flat, as far as to Saint Edmunds Point, cut through and distinguished
with many a rillet, and hardly defended from the injury of the Sea by heaps of
sand which they use to call Meals, Meals o^ Miles.
opposed against it.

More within the Country is Walsingham scarce four miles from hence:
Walsingham.
whereupon it is that of the vicinity unto the Sea Erasmus calls it
Parathalassia. Very famous now is this Village by reason of the best Saffron
growing there: but of late time as much renowned through all England for a
Pilgrimage to our Lady the Virgin Mary: whom he who had not in that former
Age visited and presented with Erasmus an eyewitness describe in his own
very words. Not far from the Sea, (says he) about four miles, there
stands a Town living almost of nothing else but upon the resort of
Pilgrims. There is a College of Chanons, Regulares.
yet such, as unto whom the Latinists have given the addition of Regulares, a
middle kind betwixt Monks and those Chanons whom they term Secular: This
College has scarce any other Revenewes than from the liberality of the said
Virgin. For certain of the greater Presents and Oblations are laid up and
preserved. But if there be any money offered or ought else, of small value,
that goes unto the maintenance of the Covent, and their Head or President,
whom they call Prior. The Church is fair and neat; yet in it the Virgin
dwells not: that honor forsooth, she has done unto her Son: she has
her Church But within the memory of our fathers, when King Henry the Eighth had
set his mind and Walsingham, I have nothing else to say more, but that the
Family of the Walsinghams, Knights (as they will have it that curiously search
after Genealogies) fetched first their name and Original from hence: Out of
which house flourished that Sir Francis Walsingham, Secretary unto Queen
Elizabeth, a man as of deep insight, so also of as rare and painful industry
in the weightiest affairs Houghton. The Neirfords.
But hard by it at Houghton, flourished sometime the noble Family of the
Neirfords, who by matching in marriage with Petronillae Va^lx.
Parnel de Vallibus (who had about Holt, Cley, and elsewhere a goodly
Inheritance) was greatly enriched. But now let us look back again to the
Shore.

Near unto Walsingham Westward, upon the Sea side, was that ancient Town
BRANNODUNUM, Brannodunum.
where when the Saxons first molested Britain with their Invasions, The
Dalmatian Horsemen lay in Garrison under the Lieutenant of the Saxon Shore. But
now it is a country Village, reteining naught but the remains of that name,
and showing a Trench and Rampire (the neighbor Inhabitants call it the Castle)
that contains within it a plot of ground much about eight Acres, and is
Brancaster, Brancastor.
where pieces of Roman money are many times gotten out of the earth. Very
commodiously was there a Garrison planted in this place: for at S. Edmunds
Chapel near adjoining, Hunstanton.
and Hunstanton, built by that holy King Saint Edmund, the coast draws back
into the South, and so admits a larger creek for the Sea to enter into,
lying open for Pirates, into which many Rivers also do void themselves. As for
Hunstanton, it is to be remembered in this regard, if there were nothing else,
Le Strange.
for that it has been the Habitation of the Family of Le Strange, Knights by
degree, ever since that in the Reign of Edward the Second, John Baron Le
Strange of Knockin, gave the same unto Hamon his younger Brother.

The catching of Hawks, and the plentiful fishing, the Ieat and Amber also
found Sharnborn.
Yet Sharnborn in this Coast is not to be omitted both for that Foelix the
Burgundian who brought these East Englishmen to the Christian Faith and state
of perpetual Felicity, Foelix a Bishop.
built in this place the second Church of Christians in this Country (for the
first, he founded at Babingley where he landed) as also because it is verily
thought and that by the faithful testimony of old deeds and evidences, that an
old Englishman Lord of this place before the coming of the Normans, by virtue
of sentence given judicially in open Court by William Conqueror himself,
recovered this Lordship against Warren, unto whom the Conqueror had given it.
Which argument they enforce hard, who would prove that the said

The Washes. Mecaru Aestuarium.
The foresaid Creek or Bay, our Country men call the Washes, Ptolomee termed it
AESTUARIUM METARIS, happily for Malthraith, by which name the Britains called the
like Frithes and Arms of the Sea in other places: neither does it signify
among them any other thing than an Arm of the Sea uncertainly changing the
channel such as this is: Upon this, where the River Ouse striveth forcibly
against the Ocean, Lynne.
stands Linne, peradventure so named of the waters broad spreading; For that
does Lhyn import in the Wel^h.
British tongue. A large Town this is, encompassed with a deep trench and
walls for the most part thereof, divided by two small Rivers Linnum Episcopi,
that is, Bishops Linne, because it appertained to the Bishops of Norwich,
until King Henry the Eighth his days, for it had beginning out of the ruins
of an elder Town which stood over against it in Marshland, and is at this day
called Old Linne and Linnum Regis, that is, Kings Linne; yet by reason of the
safe Haven which yields most easy access, for the number also of Merchants
there dwelling, and thither resorting, for the fair and the goodly houses, the
wealth also of the townsmen, it is doubtless the principal town of this
Shire except Norwich only. It has likewise most large franchises and
immunities, which the Inhabitants bought with their own blood of King John,
whiles they took Major, and delivered unto them his own sword to be carried
before him, yea and gave unto them a silver cup all gilt* which they still do
keep. These their liberties being afterward lost, they redeemed not without
blood also, of King Henry the Third, when siding with him Ely, as the book of
Ely and Matthew Paris do both jointly witness.

Over against Linne, on the farther side of the River lies Mershland, a little
moist mersh country, as the name implies, divided and parted every where with
ditches, trenches and furrows to draine and draw the waters away: a soil
standing upon a very rich and fertile mould, and breeding abundance of cattle:
in so much as that in a place commonly called Tilneysmeth there feed much about
30000. sheep: but so subject to the beating, and overflowing of the roaring
maine Sea, which very often breaks, teareth, and troubles it so grievously,
that hardly it can be holden Mershland, are these: Walpole, which the Lord of
the place gave in times past unto the Church of Ely together with his son,
whom he had made a Monk there: Wigenhall, the possession of I. Howard in the
Reign of Edward the First, whose Posterity spread, and became a most honorable
and noble Family, whereof I have already spoken: Tilney, Tilney.
whence in old time the stock of the Tilneys, Knights, took name; and Saint
Mary's the seat of the ancient race of the Carvils. S. Mary's.


Now have we passed along all the Seacoast. As for the inner part of the
Country, there are also very many Towns toward the West side, but because they
be of later memory, I will briefly run them over. Near to Linne upon an
high hill stands Rising-castle, almost marchable to the Castle of Norwich;
the seat in times past of the Albineys; afterward of Robert de Monthault, by
one of the sisters and coheires of Hugh Albiney Earl of Arundell; and at last
the mansion place of the Mowbrays: who, as I have learned, came out of the same
house that the Albineys did. But now, after long languishings, as it were, by
reason of old age, the said Castle has given up the ghost. Below it is
Castle-acre, where was sometimes the habitation of the Earls of Warren, in a
Castle now half down, on a little Rivers side: which carrying no name,
arises not far from Godwicke a lucky good name, where there stands a small
house, but greatly graced by the Lord thereof, Sir Edward Coke Knight, a man of
rare endowments of nature, and as in the Common laws much practiced, so of
deep insight Common Pleas, he administreth justice as uprightly and
judiciously. Neither is he less to be remembered, for that he loves learning,
and has well deserved of the present and succeeding ages by his learned
labors. Reports.


This Riveret or brook with a small stream and shallow water runs Westward
to Linne, Neirford.
by Neirford, that gave name to the Family of the Neirfords famous in times
past, and by Neirborrough: where near unto the house of the Spilmans, knights,
upon a very high hill is to be seen a warlike Fort of passing great strength
and of ancient Penteney, a pretty Abbay, the ordinary burial place in ancient
time of the Noblemen and Gentlemen in this Tract.

Near unto it lies Wormegay, Wormegay.
commonly Wrongey, which Reginald de Warren brother of William de Warren the
second Earl of Surry had with his wife, of whom as I have read, the said Earl
had the donation or Maritagium (as they use to speak in the law phrase) and by
his sons daughter streightwayes it was transferred to the Bardolphs,
Bardolphs Barons.
who being Barons of great nobility, flourished a long time in honorable state,
and bare for their Arms Three Cinque-foiles or in a Shield Az^r, The greatest
part of whose Inheritance together with the Title came to Sir William Phellips,
and by his Vicount Beaumont. More Eastward are seated, Swaffham a Market Town
of good note, sometime the Possession of the Earl of Richmond: Ashele Manor,
by Tenure whereof the Hastings and Greies Lords of Ruthin had the charge of
table clothes and linen used at the solemn Coronation of the Kings of
England: North Elmham, the Bishops See for a good time, when as this Province
was divided into two Dioceses: Dereham, wherein Withburga King Annas daughter
Greshenhall, Greshenhall. Elsing. Folliots.
and adjoining thereto Elsing, the possessions in ancient time of the Folliots,
men of great worth and Dignity, which in right of dowry came by a daughter of
Richard Folliot to Sir Hugh de Hastings, descended out of the Family of
Abergevenny: and at length by the daughters and heirs of Hastings the last,
Greshenhall aforesaid fell unto Sir Hamon le Strange of Hunstanton, and Elsing
unto William Brown the brother of Sir Antonie Brown the first Vicount
Mount-acute. In this quarter also is Ick-borrough, Ickborrough. Iciani.
which Talbot supposes to have been that ICIANI, whereof Antonine speaks.
Neither have I cause to write any more of these places.

Earls and Dukes of Norfolk.
William the Conqueror made one Raulph Governor of East-England, that is to
say, of Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire, who forthwith gaping as I said,
after an alteration and change in the State, was dispossessed of that place.
After certain years, in the Reign of Stephen, Hugh Bigod was Earl of
Norfolk: For, when peace was concluded between Stephen and Henry Duke of
Anjou, Composition betwixt King Stephen and Henry Duke of Anjou.
who became afterward King Henry the second, by express words it was
provided, that William King Stephens son should have the whole Earldom of
Norfolk, excepting among other things, The third penny of that County, whereof
Hugh Bigod was Earl. Whom Norfolk and Norwich. Who dying about the 27. year
of Henry the Second, Roger his son succeeded, who, for what cause I know not,
obtained at the hands of King Richard the first a new Charter of his creation:
Him succeeded his son Hugh, who took to his wife Mawde the eldest daughter
and one of the heirs of William Marescall Earl of Pembroch. By whom he had
issue one son named Roger, Earl of Norfolk and Marescall of England, who at
Tournament having his bones put out of joint, died without issue: and another,
called Hugh Bigod Lord chief Justice of England slain in the battle of
Lewis: whose son Roger succeeded his Uncle in the Earldome of Norfolk and
dignity of Marescall: but having incurred through his insolent Thomas of
Br^therton the Kings son, whom he had begotten of his second wife Margaret
sister to Philip the Fair, King of France. For thus reports the History, out
of the Library of Saint Austens in Canterbury. In the year 1301. Roger Bigod
Earl of Norfolk ordained King Edward to be his heir: and he delivered into
his hands the rod of the Marshals Office with this condition, that if his wife
brought him any children, he should without all contradiction receive again
all from the King and hold it peaceably as before: and the King gave unto him a
1000. pounds in money, and a thousand pound land during his life, together with
the Marshalship, and the Earldome. But when he was Thomas of Brotherton his
brother, according to the conveiance aforesaid, with the Titles of Marshall and
Earl of Norfolk. Parliament 21. Richard. 2.
Whose daughter Margaret called Marshallesse and Countess of Norfolk wife to
John Lord Segrave, king Richard the Second created in her absence Duchess of
Norfolk for term of life: and the same day created Thomas Mowbray the
daughters son of the said Margaret, then Earl of Notingham, the first Duke
of Norfolk, To him and his heirs males; unto whom he had likewise granted
before the State and style of Earl Marshall of England.

This is he, that before the king was challenged and accused by Henry of
Lancaster Duke of Hereford, for uttering inconsiderately certain reproachful,
and derogatory That both of them should be banished, Lancaster for ten years,
and Mowbray for ever: who afterward ended his life at Venice, leaving two
sons behind him in Marshall and of Nottingham, for no other Title used he,
was beheaded for seditious plotting against Henry of Lancaster, who now had
possessed himself of the Crown by the name of King Henry the Fourth. But his
brother and heir John, who through the favor of King Henry the Fifth was
raised up, and for certain years after called only Earl Marshall and of
Nottingham, at last in the very beginning of Henry the Sixth his Reign, Rot.
Parl. 3. Hen. 6.
By authority of Parliament and by virtue of the Patent granted by King Richard
the Second, was declared, Duke of Norfolk, as being the son of Thomas Duke
of Norfolk his father, and heir to Thomas his brother. After him succeeded
John his son, who died in the first year of Edward the Fourth: and after him
likewise John his son, who whiles Surry and of Warren. Whose only daughter
Anne, Richard Duke of York, the young son of King Edward the Fourth took to
wife, and together with her received of his father the Titles of Duke of
Norfolk, Earl Marshall, Earl of Warren and Nottingham. But after that he and
his wife both were made away in their tender years, Richard the Third, King of
England conferred this Title of the Duke of Norfolk, and the dignity of Earl
Marshall upon John Lord Howard, who was found next cozen in blood and one of
the heirs to the said Anne Duchess of York and Norfolk; as whose mother
was one of the daughters of that first Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, and who
in the time of King Edward the Fourth was summoned a Baron to Bosworth field,
fighting valiantly in the quarrel of King Richard, against King Henry the
Seventh. His son Thomas, who being by King Richard the Third created Earl of
Surry, and by King Henry the Seventh made Lord Treasurer, was by King Henry the
Eighth restored to the Title of Duke of Norfolk, and his son the same day
created Earl of Surry: after that by his conduct, James the fourth, King of
the Scots was slain, and the Scottish power vanquished at Branxton. Floddon
field.
In memorial of which Victory the said King granted to him and his heirs
males for ever, that they should bear in the midst of the Bend in the Howards
Arms, the whole half of the upper part of a Lion Geules, pierced through the
mouth with an arrow, in the due colors of the Arms of the King of Scots. I
translate it verbatim out of the Patent. After him succeeded his son Thomas
as well in his honors, as in the Office of Lord Treasurer of England, and
lived to the time of Queen Mary, tossed to and fro between the reciprocal
ebbes and flows of fortune, whose grand son Thomas (by his son Henry, the
first of the English Nobility that did illustrate his high birth with the
beauty of learning) being attainted for purposing a marriage with Mary the
Queen of Scots, See in the Adages of Hadrianus Junius, Achilleum Vo^um.
lost his life in the year of our Lord 1572. and was the last Duke of
Norfolk. Since which time his offspring lay for a good while half dead: but
now watered and revived with the vital dew of King James, reflourisheth very
freshly.

In this Province there be Parish Churches about 660.

CAMBRIDGE Comitatus quem olim ICENI Insederunt


CAMBRIDGE-SHIRE.
CAMBRIDGE-SHIRE, called in the English-Saxon (...) lies more inward, and
stretched out in length Northward. On the East it butteth upon Northfolke and
Suffolk, on the South upon the East Saxons or Essexe, and Hertfordshire, on
the West upon Bedford and Huntingdon shires, Ouse which crosses it over-thwart
from West to East.

The lower and South-part is better manured, and therefore more plentiful,
being somewhat a plain, yet not altogether level, for the most part or all
of it rather (save only where it brings forth saffron) is laid out into
corn fields, and yields plentifully the best barley; of which steeped in
water and lying wet therein until it spurt again, then after the said sprout
is full come, dried and parched over a Kill, they make Byne Malt.
store of malt: By venting and sending out whereof into the
neighbor-countries, the Inhabitants raise very great gain. The farther and
Northern part, because The Isle of Ely, a tract passing green, fresh and gay
by reason of most plenteous pastures: howbeit after a sort hollow, by occasion
of the water that in some places secretly enters in; yea and otherwhile when
it overfloweth, surroundeth most part of it.

Along the West side of the lower part runs one of the two highwayes made by
the Romans, ( Ely book calls it Ermingstreet) which passes forth right to
H^ntingdon through Roiston, Roiston. See in Hertfordshire, Caxton.
that stands in the very edge and entry of the Shire, a town well known,
yet but of late built, whereof I have already spoken: also by Caxton, in times
past the seat of the Barony of Stephen de Eschal^ers, and from whose Frevills,
and from them by the Burgoins to the Iermins. Neither is Gamlinghay far distant
from hence, where dwelt the Avenells, whose Inheritance came by marriage to the
ancient Family of Saint George, (out of which there flourished many Knights
since the time of King Henry the First) at Hatley, Hatley Saint George.
which of them is called Hatley Saint George. Above Caxton before mentioned is
Eltesley, where was in elder Ages a Religious house of Holy Virgins, among
whom was celebrated the incertaine memory of Saint Pandionia the daughter of a
Scottish King, *
as the tradition is. But long since they were translated to Hinchinbroke. And
again above Eltesley, was the Priory of Swasey founded for black Monks by
Alan la Zouch brother to the Vicount of Rohan Lesser Britain, and was the
common Sepulture a long time for the Family of Zouch.

More Westward a little river runs through the middle of this part, which
issuing down out of Ashwel, hastneth from South to North with many turnings,
to join it self with the Ouse, Shengay. A Commandery.
running by Shengay (where be the goodliest medows of this Shire) a Commandery
in old time of the Knights Templars; which Shengay, Sibyl the daughter of Roger
Mont-gomery Earl of Shrewsbury, and wife of I. de Raines gave unto them in the
year 1130. nor far from Burn Castle, Burn. Barons de Burn.
in ancient times the Barony of Picot Sheriff of this Shire, and of the
Peverels, from whom by one of the daughters, this and other Possessions came
unto Sir Gilbert Pech: the last of whose house, after he Barnwell History. The
King heir to private persons.
ordained King Edward the First, to be his Heir. For, in those days the Noble
men of England brought into use again the custom of the Romans under their
Emperors, which was to nominate them their heirs, if they were in any
disfavour with their Sovereigns.

But in the Barons war in King Henry the Third his days, this Castle was
burnt down, being set on fire by Ribald L' Isle: At which time Walter de
Cottenham

By what name writers termed this River, it is a question: some call it Granta,
others Camus. And unto these I rather incline: both for that the course thereof
is somewhat crooked; for, so much does Came in the British tongue signify,
whence a certain crooked river in Cornwall is named Camel; and also because
that ancient town CAMBORITUM, Camboritum.
which Antonine the Emperor mentions in his third journey of Britain, stood
upon this river as I am well near induced to believe, by the distance, by the
name, and also by the pieces of Roman money found here nigh unto the bridge in
great store. For, CAMBORITUM, signifies A Fourd at Camus, or a Fourd with
crooked windings. Rith what it signifies in British and French.
For Rith in our British or Welsh tongue betokens A Fourd, which I note to
this end, that the Frenchmen may more easily perceive and see what is the
meaning of Augustoritum, Darioritum, Rithomagus, and other such like in France.
Howbeit the Saxons choose rather to call our Camboritum, (...) and (...),
Grantcester.
which name it keeps still: but whence it was derived, I cannot yet see. If I
should fetch it from Gron a Saxon word that signifies a Fenny place, I might
perhaps go wide: And yet Asserius termed once or twice, certain fennish and
marish grounds in Somersetshire, by a mungrell name half Saxon and half
Latin, Gronnas paludosissimas: and very well known it is, that a City in West
Frisland, which is situate in such a ground is named Groningen. But let other
hunt after the derivation of this name. About the year of Christ 700. this
Bid, whiles he reports that near unto the walls, there was found a little
trough or coffin, very cunningly and finely wrought of Marble, and covered most
fitly with a lidde of the like stone. But now a small Village it is: one part
whereof Henry Lacie Earl of Lincoln gave unto his base son Henry, with this
condition, that his sons and their posterity (which a good while since be
clean worn out) should have no other Christian name but Henry: the other
part, Henry the Sixth King of England coming out of the house of Lancaster,
into whose hands the Patrimony of Earl Lacie fell, granted unto the Kings
College in Cambridge: Cambridge.
which was either a part or else a plant of that ancient Camboritum, so near
it comes unto it both in situation and name. Neither Grant was turned into
Came; for this might seem a deflexion some what too hardly streined, wherein
all the letters but one are quite swallowed up. I would rather think that the
common people retained the term of the ancient name of Camboritum or of the
river Came, although writers used more often the Saxon name Grantbridge. This
City which being the other University of England, the other eye, the other
strong-stay, as it were, thereof, and a most famous Mart and storehouse of
good Literature and Godliness, stands upon the river Came, which after it has
in sporting wise besprinkled the West side thereof with many Islets, turning
into the East, divides it into two parts, and has a Bridge over it, whence
arose this latter name Cambridge. Beyond the bridge is seen a large and
Maudlen College. On this side the Bridge, where stands the greatest part by
far of the City, you have a pleasant sight every where to the eye, what of
fair streets orderly raunged, what of a number of Churches, and of sixteen
Colleges, sacred mansions of the Muses, wherein a number of great learned men
are maintained, and wherein the knowledge of the best Arts, and the skill in
tongues so flourish, that they may be rightly counted the fountains of
Literature, Religion, and all Knowledge whatsoever, who right sweetly bedew and
sprinkle, with most holesom waters the gardens of the Church and Commonwealth
through England. Neither is there wanting any thing here, that a man may
require in a most flourishing University, were it not that Platoes judgment.
For, he being of a very excellent and strong constitution of body chose out the
Academia, an unwholesome place of Attica, for to study in, that so the

And least we should seem in the worst-kinde unthankefull to those singular
Patrons of learning, or rather that I may use the words of Eumenius, toward the
Parents of our Children: Colleges.
let us summarily rehearse both themselves, and the Colleges also which they
founded and consecrated to good Literature, to their honorable memory, and
that out of the Cambridge Story. The report goes, that Cantaber a Spaniard,
375. years before the Nativity of Christ, first began and founded this
University: Sebert King of the East Angles restored it again in the year
after Christ's birth, 630. Afterward being other whiles overthrown and
destroyed with the Danish storms, John Caiu^.
it lay a long time forlorn and of no account, until all began to revive
under the Normans government.

And not long after, Innes, Hostels and Halles were built for Scholars, howbeit
endowed with no possessions. But Hugh Balsham Bishop of Ely, in the year 1284.
built the first College called Peter-house, and endowed it with Lands: whose
example these ensuing did imitate and follow: Richard Badew with the good help
and furtherance of Lady Elizabeth Clare Countess of Vlster, in the year 1340.
founded Clare Hall: Lady Mary S. Paul Countess of Pembroch in the year 1347.
Pembroch Hall: The Guild or Society of Corpus Christi Brethren, Corpus Christi
College, which is called also S. Bennet College: William Bateman Bishop of
Norwich, about the year 1353. Trinity Hall: Edmund Gonevil in the year 1348.
and John Caius Doctor of Physic in our time, Gonevil and Caius College:
Henry the Sixth King of England erected Kings College in the year 1441.
whereunto he joined a Chapel, which may rightly be counted one of the fairest
buildings of the whole world. His wife Margaret of Anjou, in the year 1443.
built Queens College: Robert Woodlarke Professor of Divinity in the year
1459. S. Katharines Hall: John Alcocke Bishop of Ely in the year 1497. was the
founder of Jesus College: Lady Margaret Countess of Richmond mother to King
Henry the Seventh, about the year 1506. erected Christ's College, and S.
John's, enlarged now in goodly manner with new buildings: Sir Thomas Audley Lord
Chancellor of England, in the year 1542. built Maudlen College; which Sir
Christopher Wray Lord chief Justice of England has lately bewtified with new
buildings and endowed with great possessions: And that most puissant King,
Henry the Eight, in the year of our salvation 1546. made Trinity College of
three others, to wit, of S. Michaels House or College, which Herveie Stanton
in the reign of Edward the Second built, of Kings Hall founded by King Edward
the Third, and of Fishwicks Hostell. Which College, that the Students might
inhabit more pleasantly, is now repaired, nay rather new built, with that
magnificence, by the careful direction of Thomas Nevill Doctor of Divinity,
Master of the said College, Canterbury, that it is become a College for
stately greatness, for uniforme building and beauty of the rooms, scarce
inferior to any other in Christendom: and he himself may be accounted in
the judgment even of the greatest Philosopher Truly Decently magnificent.
(...), for bestowing so great cost in public and not in his own private
uses. Also wherein I congratulate our Age, and our selves in the behalf of
good learning, that honorable and prudent man Sir Walter Mildmay knight, one
of the Privy Counsel to Queen Elizabeth, who founded a new College in the
honor of Emanuel: and Lady Francis Sidneie Countess of Sussex, in her last
will gave a Legacy of 5000. pounds to the building of a College that should be
called Sidney-Sussex, which is now fully finished.

Barnewell.
unless it were Barnewell Abbey, which Sir Pain Peverell a worthy and valiant
warrior, Standard Bearer to Robert Duke of Normandy in the holy War against
Infidels, translated, in the reign of Henry the first, from S. Giles Church,
where Picot the Sheriff had ordained secular Priests, Historia Barnewallensis.
unto this place, and brought into it thirty Monks, Historia Barnwellensis.
for that himself at that time was thirty years of Age. The reason of that
Barnewell, you may read if it please you, out of the private History of that
place, in these words: Paganut.
Sir Pain Peverell obtained of King Henry the First, a certain plot of ground
without the Burgh of Cambridge: Out of the very midst of that place there
sprung up certain Fountains very pure and lively, which in English they
called Barnewell in those days, as one would say the wels of Barnes, that is,
Children; For that Boys and Youths meeting once a year there on the Even of
Saint John Baptists Nativity, after the English manner exercised themselves in
wrestling and other sports and pastimes befitting their age, yea and merrily
applauded one another with songs and minstralsie. Whence it came, that for the
number of Boys and Girls running thither and there playing, grew to be a
custom, that on the sudden a multitude of buyers and sellers repaired
thither.

Neither was Cambridge, (albeit it was consecrated to the Muses) altogether
free from the furies of Mars. For, when the Danes robbed and spoiled up and
down, many times they wintered here: and in the year of Redemption 1010. when
Sueno the Dane, by most cruel and terrible tyranny, bare down all before him,
they spared not the honor of the place, nor the Muses, (which we read that
Sylla yet did at Athens) but pitifully burnt and defaced it all. Nevertheless
at the first coming in of the Normans, it was sufficiently peopled. For, thus
we read in the Domesday book of King William the Conqueror. The Borough of
Grentbridge is divided into ten Wards, and has 387. Mansion houses. But
eighteen houses were destroyed for building of the Castle, what time, as the
said King William the First determined to overawe Ely: therefore Henry the
Third to repress their outrages caused a deep ditch to be cast on the East
side, which is still called Kings ditch.

Here happily there is a secret expectation of some, that I should give mine
opinion as touching the antiquity of this University. But I will be no dealer
in this case: For, I mean not to make comparison between these two most
flourishing Universities of ours, to whom I know none equal. Howbeit I fear
me, they have builded Castles in the Air, and thrust upon us devices of their
own brains; who Cantaber of Spain straight after Rome was built, and many
years before the Nativity of Christ erected this University. True and certain
it is, that whenever it was first ordained, it was a seat of learning about
the time of King Henry the First. For, thus we read in an old Additament of
Peter Blessensis unto Ingulph. Abbot Ioffred sent over to his Manor of
Cotenham near Cambridge, Joffred made Abbot of Crowland. Anno 1109.
Gislebert his fellow Monk, and professor of Divinity, with three other
Monks: who following him into England, being thoroughly furnished with
Philosophical Theoremes, and other primitive sciences, repaired daily to
Cambridge: and having hired a certain public Barn, made open profession of
their sciences, and in short space of time drew together a great number of
Scholars. Studium Aurelianense.
Whereupon sorting themselves apart in several places, and taking the
University of Orleance for their pattern, early in the morning, Monk Odo a
singular Grammarian and Satyricall Poet read Grammar unto Boys and those of
the younger sort assigned unto him, according to the Doctrine of Priscian and
of Remigius upon him. At one of the clock, Terricus a most witty and subtle
Sophister taught the elder sort of young men, Aristotle's Logic, after the
Introductions of Porphyrie and the Comments of Averroes. At three of the clock
Monk William read a Lecture in Tullies Rhetoric and Quintilians Flores: But
the great Master Gislebert, upon every

University by authority, Robert de Remington shall tell you. Under the Reign
(says he) of Edward the First, Grantbridge of a School was made an
University (such as Oxenford is) by the Court of Rome. But what mean I thus
unadvisedly to step into these lists? Wherein long since two most learned old
men have encountered one with another: Unto whom verily, as to right learned men
I am willing to yield up my weapons, and veil bonnet with all reverence. The
Meridian line cutting the Zenith just over Cambridge, is distant from the
furthest West point twenty three degrees, and twenty five scruples. And the
Arch of the same Meridian lying between the Equator and Vertical point, is
fifty two degrees and II. scruples.

Came from Cambridge continuing his course by Waterbeach an ancient seat of
Nuns, *
which Lady Mary S. Paul translated from thence to Denny somewhat higher but
nothing healthfuller, when in a low ground he has spread a Mere, associateth
himself with the River Ouse.

But to return hard under Cambridge Eastward near unto Sture a little brook
is kept every year in the month of September, Stourbridge Fair.
the greatest Fair of all England, whether you respect the multitude of buyers
and sellers resorting thither, or the store of commodities there to be vented.
Hard by whereas the way was most comberous and troublesome to passengers to and
fro, that right good and praiseworthy man G. Hervy Doctor of the Civil Law
and M. of Trinity Hall in Cambridge, made Neumercat.

Near unto Cambridge on the South-East side, there appear aloft certain high
Hills; Gogmagog Hills.
the Students call them Gogmagog-Hills: Henry of Huntingdon termed them
Amoenissima montana de Balsham, that is, The most pleasant Mountains of
Balsham, by reason of a little Village standing beneath them, wherein as he
writes, the Danes left no kind of most savage cruelty unattempted. On the top
of these hills I saw a Fort entrenched, A Military Fort.
and the same very large, strengthened with a threefold Rampire: an hold surely
in those days inexpugnable, as some skillful men in feats of War be of
opinion, were it not that water is so far off. Gervase of Tilbury seems to
Vandelbiria. Beneath Cambridge (says he) there was a place named Vandelbiria,
for that the Vandals wasting the parts of Britain, Wandlesbury.
with cruel slaughter of Christians, there encamped themselves: where upon the
very top of the hill they pitched their Tents; there is a Plain enclosed round
with a Trench and Rampire, which has entrance into it but in one place as it
were at a Gate.

Touching the Martial spectre, or sprite that walked here, which he adds to
the rest, because it is but a mere toyish and fantastical devise of the
doting vulgar sort; I willing over-passe it. For it is not my purpose to tell
pleasant tales, and tickle ears. In the Vale under these hills is Salston to
be seen, Salston.
which from the Burges of Burgh-Green, by Walter De-la-pole and Ingalthorp,
came unto Sir John Nevill Marquess Mont-acute, and by his daughter and one of
his heirs to the Hudlestons, who have lived here in worship and reputation.

More Eastward, first we meet with Hildersham, belonging sometimes to the
Bustlers and now by marriage to the Parises: Horsheath.
Further hard by the Woods, is Horsheath situate; the Possession whereof is
known by a long descent to have pertained unto the ancient Families of the
Argentons and Alingtons, See in Hertfordshire.
of whom elsewhere I have written, and is now the habitation of the Alingtons.
Adjoining hereunto is Castle Camps, Castle Camps
the ancient seat also of the Veres Earls of Oxford, which Hugh Vere held (as
the old book of Inquisition Records) That he might be the Kings Chamberleine:
whereas notwithstanding most true it is, that Henry the First King of England
granted unto Aubry de Vere that Office in these words: Magistra Cameraria
Angliae. Lord Great Chamberleine.
The principal Chamberlaineship of all England in Fee and Inheritance, with
all the Dignities, Liberties, and Honors thereto belonging, as freely and
honorably, as Robert Mallet held the same, etc. The Kings notwithstanding
ordained sometimes one, and sometimes another at their pleasure to execute this
Office.

The Earls of Oxford also, Inq. 6. E. 2.
that I may note it incidently, by the heir of R. Sandford Fingrey and
Wulfelmelston by Serjeanty of Chamberlainship to the Queens at the Coronation
of the Kings.

Ditches.
Not far from hence are seen here and there those great and long Ditches which
certainly the East Angles did cast, to restrain the Mercians, who with sudden
inrodes were wont most outragiously to make havocke of all before them. The
first of these begins at Hinkeston, runs Eastward by Hildersham toward
Hors-heath, about five miles in length. The second near unto this, called
Brentditch goes from Melborne by Fulmer.

Where D. Hervies cawsey which I mentioned, ends, there appears also a
third forefence or ditch cast up in old time: which beginning at the East bank
of the river Came, reaches directly by Fenn-Ditton, or more truly Ditch-ton (so
called of the very Ditch) between great Wilberham and Fulburn, as far as to
Balsham. At this day this is called commonly Seven mile Dyke, because it is
seven miles from Newmercate: in times past, Fleamdyke.
Fleam-Dyke in old English, that is, Flight-Dyke, of some memorable flight
there, as it seems. At the said Wilberham sometimes called Wilburgham, dwelt
in times past the Barons Lisle of De Rubeo monte.
Rong-mount, De Insula.
men of ancient nobility: of whom John, for his Martial prowess was by King
Edward the Third ranged among the first founders of the order of the Garter:
and of that Family there yet remains an heir Male, a reverend old Man and
full of Children, named Edmund Lisle, who is still Lord of this place.

More East from hence five miles within the Country, is to be seen the fourth
forefence or ditch, the greatest of all the rest, with a rampire thereto; which
the common people wondering greatly at, as a work made by Devils and not by
men, use to call Devils-Dyke: Devils Dyke.
others, Rech-Dyke, of Rech a little mercate town, where it begins. This is
doubtless that, whereof Abbo Floriacensis when he describes the sight of East
England, writes thus. From that part whereas the Sun inclines Westward, the
Province it self adjoyneth to the rest of the Island, and is therefore
passable: but for fear of being overrun with many invasions and inrodes of
enemies, it is fortified in the front with a bank or rampire like unto an huge
wall, and with a Trench or Ditch below in the ground. This for many miles
together cutteth overthwart that Plain which is called Newmarketheath, Rech:
above which the Country is fenny, and therefore impassable: and it ends nere
to Cowlidge, where the passage by reason of woods was more cumbersome. And it
was the limit as well of the Kingdom, as of the Bishopric of the East
Angles. Who was the author of so great a piece of work, it is uncertain. Some
later writers say it was King Canutus the Dane: Abbo died anno. 1003. Canutus
began his reign Anno. 1018. Anno. 905.
whereas notwithstanding the said Abbo made mention of it, who died before that
Canutus obtained the Kingdom of England: and the Saxon Chronicle, where it
relates the rebellion of Athelwolph against King Edward the Elder, calls it
simply Dyke; and shows, That King Edward laid waste whatsoever lies between
the Dyke and the river Ouse, as far as to the North Fennes: also that
Aethelwold the rebel, and Eohric the Dane, were at that time slain there in
battle. But they who wrote since Canutus times, termed it, Saint Edmunds
limit, and Saint Edmunds Dyke; and verily think, that King Canutus cast it up,
who being most devoted to Saint Edmund the Martyr granted unto the religious
Monks of Saint Edmunds Bury (for to make satisfaction for the wicked cruelty
of Swan his father wrought upon them) very great immunities, even as far as
to this Dyke: whence it is, that William of Malmesbury in his book Of Bishops
writes thus, The Customers and Toll gatherers, which in other places make
foul work and outrage, without respect or difference of right and wrong,
there in humble manner on this side Saint Edmunds Dike, surcease their quarrels
and braules. And certain it is that these two fore-fences last named were
called Saint Edmunds Dykes. For Matthew Florilegus has recorded that the said
battle against Aethelwolph, was fought between the two Dykes of Saint Edmund.

Burwell.
Nere unto Rech, stands Burwel, a Castle in later times of the Lord Tiptoft,
which in those most troublesome times of King Stephen Geffrey Mandevill Earl
of Essex,

Scarce two miles off, Lanheath.
stands Lanheath, where for these many years the Cottons, right worshipful
Gentlemen of Knights degree have dwelt: Wicken.
From which Wicken is not far distant, *
which came to the Family of the Peytons by a daughter and coheire of the
Gernons about Edward the Thirds time, Isleham. Peyton.
as afterward Isleham descended to them by a coheire of Bernard in Henry the
Sixth's time, which Knightly Family of Peytons flowred out of the same
Male-stocke, whence the Vffords Earls of Suffolk descended, as appears by
their Coate-armour, albeit they assumed the surname of Peyton according to the
use of that age, from their Manor of Peyton-hall in Boxford in the County of
Suffolk.

Upon the same Dyke also, Kirtling. Barons North.
is seated Kirtling, called likewise Catlidge, famous in these days by reason
of the principal house of the Barons North; since Queen Mary honored Sir
Edward North, with that title for his wisdom: but in times past it was famous
for a Synod held there, 977.
what time as the Clergy men were at hot strife among themselves about the
celebration of the feast of Easter.

The higher and Northerly part of this Shire is wholly divided into river
Isles: The Fennes and Isle of Ely.
and being distinguished by many Ditches, Channels and Draines, with a pleasant
green hew all Summer time contenteth the eyes of the beholders: but in Winter
wholly

They that inhabited this fennish Country and all the rest beside, (which from
the edge and borders of Suffolk, as far as to Wainflet in Lincolne-shire
contains threescore and eight miles, and millions of acres lying in these
four Shires, Cambridge, Huntingdon, North-hampton and Lincoln) were in the
Saxons time called Girvii, Girvi^.
that is, as some interpret it, Fen-men or Fen-dwellers. A kind of people
according to the nature of the place where they dwell rude, uncivil, and
envious to all others whom they call Vpland-men: who stalking on high upon
stilts, apply their minds, to grasing, fishing and fowling. The whole Region
it self, which in winter season Ouse, Grant, Nen, Welland, Glene, and Witham,
having not loades and sewers large enough to void away: But again when their
Streams are retired within their own Channels, it is so plenteous and rank
of a certain fat gross and full hey, (which they call Lid) that when they
have mowen down as much with the better as will serve their turns, they set
fire on the rest and burn it in November, that it may come up again in great
abundance. At which time a man may see this Fennish and moist Tract on a light
flaming fire all over every way, and wonder thereat. Great plenty it has
besides of Turfe and Sedge for the maintenance of fire: of reed also for to
thatch their Houses, yea and of Alders, beside other watery Shrubbes. Plinies
word) against the violent force of the waters rushing against the banks.
Whereof also as well here, as in other places there be baskets made, which
seeing the Britains call Bascades, I for my part, that I may note so much by
the way, do not understand the Poet Martial in that Distichon, unless he
means these, among the Presents and Gifts sent to and fro.

Barbara de pictis veni Bascauda Britannis,
Sed me jam mavult dicere Roma suam.
By barbarous name, a Baskaud I from painted Britans came,
But now Rome feign would call me hers, although I be the same.
Besides all this the herb, Scordium.
Scordiu^, which also is called Water Germa^der, grows plentifully here hard
by the ditches sides: but as for these Fenny Islands, Foelix a writer of There
is a Fen of exceeding great largeness which beginning at the banks of the
river Gront, arising somewhere with sedge plots, in other places with black
waters yielding a duskish vapor, with woods also among the Isles, and having
many winding turns of the bank, reaches out in a very long tract, from South
to North-East as far as to the Sea. And the very same Fenne William a Monk
of Crowland in the life of Guthlake has thus described in verse.

Est apud Angligenas a Grontae flumine, longo
Orb per anfractus stagnosos, and fluviales,
Circumfusapalus, Orientalisque propinqua
Littoribus Pelagi, sese distendit ab Austro
In longum versus Aquilonem, gurgite tetro,
Morbosos pisces vegetans, and arundine densa
Ventorum strepitus, quasi quaedam verba susurrans.
A spacious Fenne in England lies from Gront that rivers side,
Among the winding crankes of Lakes and Rivers far and wide,
Y' spread, and near unto the banks of Eastern Sea does stretch,
It self; and so from Southern side along North Eastward reach.
In muddy gulf unwholesome fish it breeds: as reeds do shake
There growing thick, of winds as words a whispering noise they make.
Join hereunto if you please thus much out of Henry of Huntingdon: This Fenny
country (says he) is passing rich and plenteous, yea and beautiful to behold,
watered with many Rivers running down to it, garnished with a number of Meres
both great and small, trimly adorned likewise with many Woods and Islands. And
for a small conclusion of this matter, take with you also these few words of
William of Malmesbury speaking of his time. So great store there is here of
Fishes that strangers coming hither make a wonder at it, and the Inhabitants
laugh thereat, to see them wonder. Neither is Water-Foule less cheap; so that
for one half penny and under, five men at the least may not only eat to slake
hunger and

As touching the drying up of this Fenny country, what discourse and arguing
oftentimes there has been either by way of sound and wholesome counsel, or of
a goodly pretense and show of a common good, even in the High Court of
Parliament, I list not to relate. Pausanias in Corinth.
But it is to be feared least (that which often has happened to the Pontine
Marshes of Italy) it would come again to the former state. So that many
think it the wisest and best course according to the sage admonition in like
case of Apollo his Oracle, Not to intermeddle at all with that which God has
ordained. Upon the natural strength of this place and plenty of all things
there, seditious Rebels have often presumed; and not only the English when
they banded themselves William Conqueror, but the Barons also whenever they
were Outlawed, from hence troubled and molested their Kings. But evermore they
had ill success, albeit otherwhiles they built fortresses both at Eryth and
also at Athered, at this day Audre, Audre.
where the easiest entrance is into this Isle. And even yet near unto Andre,
is to be seen a Military rampire of a mean height, but of a very large
compass, which they call Belsars-hils, of one Belisar, I wot not who.

Part of this Fenny country that lies more South and is the greatest by far,
which also is counted of this shire, was named in the English Saxon tongue
(...) now The Isle of Ely, Ely. Saint Etheldreda common^y, S. Audrye.
of the chief Island, which name Bid has derived from E^les, and thereupon
sometime termed it Insulam anguillariam, that is, The Isle of E^les. Polydore
Marish, others from Helig a British word betokening Willowes or Sallowes,
wherewith it does most of all abound. Part of this Region, we read that one
Tombert a Prince of the Southern Girvii gave as a dowry to his wife Audry, who
after she had left her second Egfrid, King of the Nordan humberland, being
fully resolved to serve Christ, built a Monastery for Nuns Votaries in the
principal Island of these, properly called (...) which was then reckoned at 600
Hides or Families; and of this Monastery, she also her self the first Abbess.
Yet was not this the first Church in the fenny country. For the book of Ely
records, that S. Austen of Canterbury founded a Church at Cradiden; which
Penda the Mercian afterward rased: and William of Malmesbury reports, that
Foelix Bishop of the East English had his first See at Soham, which yet is
within the Diocese of Norwich. Soham, says he, is a village situate near
unto a Fen, which was in times past dangerous for those that would pass into
Ely by water: now by reason of a way or causey made through the Fenny ground
overgrowne with Reeds, men may go over thither by At which time also that
Monastry of S. Audry was overthrown by the furious Danes: but Ethelwold Bishop
of Winchester reedified it: For he, by a composition between the King and him,
bought the whole Island a new, and having cast out the Priests thence, stored it
with Monks, unto whom King Edgar, as we read in his letters patents, granted
within the Fens, jurisdiction over the secular causes of two Hundreds, and
without the Fens, of two Hundreds and an half in Wichlaw, within the province
of the East Angles, which are called at this day, The liberties of S. Audry.
Afterward Kings and great Noble men enriched it with large revenewes: and
Earl Brithnoth especially, Being now ready to join battle 999. gave unto
the Church of Ely, Somersham, Spaldwic, Trumpinton, Ratindum, Heisbury,
Fulburn, Tinerston, Triplestow, and Impetum, (for that the Monks had in
magnificent manner entertained him) in case he should loose his life in that
battle. But his fortune was to die at Maldun, after he had fought with the
Danes 14. days together. And so rich was the Monastery, that the Abbot
thereof, as witnesses Malmsbury, laid up every year in his own purse a
thousand and four hundred pounds. And Richard the last Abbot son, to Earl
Gislebert, being over-tipled, as it were with wealth, disdaining to be under
the Bishop of Lincoln, dealt with the King, what by golden words, as the
Monks write, and what by great suite and politic means, that a Bishops See
might be erected here: which, he prevented by Herveie, who had been Bishop of
Bangor and by the Welshmen cast out of his own seat, the first Bishop of Ely:
unto whom and to his successors he laid for his Diocese Cambridge-shire,
which had belonged before unto the Bishop of Lincoln, Saint Audrie^ Liberty.
and confirmed certain Royalties in these Islands. To the Bishops of Lincoln,
from whose jurisdiction he had taken away this Island and Cambridge-shire, he
granted for to make amends, Ely book.
The Manor of Spaldwic: or as the book of Ely has, The Manor of Spaldwic
was given unto the Church of Lincoln for ever, in exchange for the Bishops
superintendency over the County of Cambridge. Herveie being now made Bishop,
sought by all means possible to augment the dignity of his Church.

Toll-free (these are the very words of the book of Ely:) He set it free from
the yoke of service of watch and ward, that it owed to the Castle of Norwich:
he made a way from Exning to Ely, through the Fennes, six miles in length; he
began the fair Palace at Ely for his Successors, and purchased to it fair
Lands and not a few Lordships. And his Successors by abridging the number of
Monks (for, from threescore and ten they brought them down to forty) flowed
with riches and wealth in great abundance even unto our time; and their
festival and solemn Holidays they celebrated with so sumptuous provision and
stately pomp, that they won the praise and prize from all the Abbaies in
England: whereupon a Poet also in that age wrote these verses not unproperly.

Pravisis aliis, Eliensia festa videre,
Est, quasi praevisa nocte, videre diem.
See, after others, Ely feasts, and surely thou will say,
That having seen the night before, thou see now the day.
The Church likewise, which now began for age and long continuance to decay,
The Lantern on the very top thereof, The Lantern.
just over the Quire, supported with eight pillars, and raised upon them right
artificially, by John Hothum the Bishop. Under the Church toward the North,
stands Saint Mary's Chapel a singular fine piece of work, built by Simon
Montacute, Bishop. On the South side, there is an huge heap Mount, having had
a wind mill upon it. And lastly, a Vine bearing fruit in great plenty, which
now is withered and gone. These 4. a Monk of this place in times past knit up
within this Rhyme.

Haec sunt Eliae,
Lanterna, Capella Mariae,
Atque molendinum,
Nec non dans vinea vinum.
These things you may at Ely see,
The Lantern, Chapel of Saint Marie,
A Winde-mill mounted up on hie,
A Vineyard yielding Wine, yearly.
As for Ely it self, it is a small City, nor greatly to be counted of,
either for beauty, or frequency and resort, as having an unwholesome Air by
reason of the Fens round about, although it be seated somewhat higher. Near to
it is Downham where the Bishop has his retyring House with a Park: near to
Downham is Cowney the ancientest seat of the Family surnamed for their
habitation here, L'isle and De Insula, and first planted here by Nigellus the
second Bishop of Ely their Allies in Chateries or Cheaterich is not far hence
Westward, were Alwena a devout woman founded a Nunnery upon a coppid ground
encompassed with Fens, while her husband founded Ramsey. But higher Northward
amidst the Fennes, there stood another Abbay of very great name, Thorney.
called Thorney, of thorns and bushes that grow thick about it, but in times
past Ankerige of Ankers or Eremites living there solitarily; where as we find
in Peterborough book Sexvulph a devout and religious man built a Monastery
with little Cells for Eremits: Which being afterward by the Danes thrown
down, Aetbelwold Bishop of Winchester (that he might promote the Monastical
profession) reedified, stored it with Monks, and compassed it round about
William of Malmesbury, Represents a very Paradise; for that in pleasure and
delight it resembles Heaven it self: in the very Marshes bearing Trees, that
for their straight tallness, and the same without knots, strive to touch the
Stars; a Plain is there as even as the Sea, which with green grass allureth
the eye, so smooth and level that if any walk along the fields they shall
find nothing to stumble at. There is not the least parcel of ground that lies
waste and void there. Here shall you find the earth rising somewhere for Apple
trees, there shall you have a field set with Vines, which either creep upon
the ground, or mount on high upon poles to support them. A mutual strife there
is between nature and husbandry, that what the one forgets, the other might
supply and produce. What will be said of the fair and beautiful buildings,
which it is a wonder to see how the ground amid those Fens

Touching Wisbich, Wisbich.
the Bishop of Elies Castle, about 13. miles off, situate among the fennes and
rivers, and made of late a prison to keep the Papists in hold, I have nothing
else to say, Walepoole.
but that this town together with Walepole, was in old time given by the owner
thereof unto the monastery of Ely, what time as he consecrated Alwin his little
son there to live a monks life: that King William the First built a Castle
there, when the outlawed Lords made rodes out of this fenny country: and that
in the year of our salvation 1236. when the Ocean being disquieted with
violent John Morton Bishop of Ely built within the rememberance of our great
grandfathers: who also drew as straight as a line in this fenny country a
ditch, Newleame.
which they call the Newleame for better conveyance and carriage by water, that
by this means the town being well frequented might gain the more and grow to
wealth. Which fell out quite contrary: For it stands now in no great steed,
and the neighbor inhabitants complain that the course of Nen into the Sea by
Clowcrosse, Clowcrosse.
is by this means altogether hindered and stopped.

The first Earl of Cambridge that I can find, Earl of Cambridge.
was William the brother of Ranulph Chester, as we read in a patent or
instrument of Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, bearing date in the year 1139.
Afterward, those of the royal blood in Scotland that were Earls of
Huntingdon, we may think to have been Earls of Cambridge also: For that it
appears certainly out of the Records of the realm, that David Earl of
Huntingdon, received the third penny of the County or Earldom of Cambridge.
Long time after, King Edward the Third advanced Sir John of Henault brother to
William the third Earl of Holland and of Henault to this honor, for the love
of Queen Philip his wife, who was cousin to the said John. For whose sake also
when John was revolted from him and took part with the French, he honored
with the same title William Marquess of Iuliers, the said Queen Philips
sisters son. Edmund of Langley, which after he had held four years (my
warrant I have out of an old manuscript, being in the hands of that skillful
Antiquary Francis Thinn) the Earl of Henault cousin to Queen Philip, came into
Parliament house, put in a claim for his right, and returned back well
contented. The said Edmund of Langly afterward Duke of York had two sons,
Edward Duke of York, who for a certain time held the Earldome of Cambridge,
and was slain in the battle of Agin-court: and Richard by the grace and
favor of King Henry the Fifth, and consent of his brother Edward, was created
Earl of Cambridge. But when he (ungrateful and ambitious man that he was)
contrived the destruction of that good and noble Cambridge died the same day
that he did, or lurked at least wise among other titles of his son Richard,
who was afterward Duke of York and restored to his blood and estate, as being
cousin and heir to his Uncle Edward Duke of York.

This Shire contains Parishes 163.

HVNTINGDON Comitatus qui pars fuir ICENORVM



NExt unto Cambridge-shire, lies HUNTINGDON-SHIRE, in the Saxon tongue (...);
so situate, that Southward it confineth upon Bedford-shire; Westward upon
Northamptonshire: like as Northwards, where by the River Or Aufon. 1. Nen.
Avon it is parted; and Eastward upon Cambridge-shire, a Country good for corn
and tillage: and toward the East, where it is fenny, very rich and plentiful
for the feeding of Cattaile: elsewhere Forest, until that king Henry the
Second, in the beginning of his reign disforested it, (as we find in an old
perambulation) all save Waybridge Sapple and Herthei, which were Woods of the
Lords demaine, and remain still forests.

The South part thereof; the River Ouse (that I have so often spoken of)
runs by, and bedecketh with flowers. On which River among other of less
note, there stand some Towns of good note. First, after it has left
Bedford-shire, and is entered into this County, Saint Needs.
it visits Saint Neots, commonly called Saint Needs, so named of Neotus, a
man both learned and holy; who travailed all his life time in propagating of
Christian Religion, whose body was translated from Neotstok in Cornwall hither,
and in honor of him, Alfrick converted the Palace of Earl Elfride unto a
Monastery. The which Dame Roisia Wife to Richard Lord of Clare, shortly after
the coming in of the Normas enriched with many fair Possessions; But before
it was named Ainulphsbury of one Ainulph likewise an holy and devout man,
Ainsbury.
which name continues still also in one part of it. A little beneath this, at
Aileweston a very small Village, there are two little Springs, the one fresh,
the other somewhat brackish: of which the neighbors give out, Wholesome and
medicinable wel^.
that this is good against scabs and leprosy, the other against the dimnesse
of the eyesight. From thence not far, Ouse passes to Bugden Lincoln, and
so by Hinchingbrok, a religious house sometimes of Nuns whom King William the
Conqueror translated hither from Eltesley in Cambridge-shire, and now the
dwelling house of the Cromwels, knights; comes to Huntingdon, Huntingdon.
in the English-Saxon tongue, as Marianus reports (...), in the public
seal Huntersdune, that is, the hill or down of hunters, as Henry Archdeacon
of this place, who flourished 400. years since, interprets it: whence it
used in their seal, an hunter; and Leland our Countriman alluding thereunto,
has coined a new Latin word for it, namely Venantodunum. This is the chief
Town of all this Shire, (to which it has given also the name) far excelling
all the Towns about it, the same Archdeacon says, as well for lightsome and
pleasant situation, as for the beauty In King Edward the Confessors time, (that
I may note so much out of Domesday book) There were in this Borrough four
Ferlings, that is, Quarters or Wards: In two of them were 116. Burgesses,
paying custom and gelt, and under them 100. Bordarij; in the other two 111.
Burgesses for all customs and the Kings gelt. It is seated upon the
North-banke of Ouse, somewhat high, stretching out in length Northward, adorned
with four Churches: and it had a little Abbay founded by Maude the Empress
and Eustace Lovetoft: the ruins whereof Eastward I have seen hard under the
Town. By the River near unto the Bridge which is fair built of stone, the
Mount and Plot of a Castle, is to be seen, which in the David the Scotishman,
unto whom, as an ancient Historiographer writes King Stephen had given the
Borough of Huntingdon for an augmentation of his estate, enlarged with many
new buildings and Bulwarks: but in the end King Henry the Second both because
it was a place of refuge for seditious Rebels, and for that the Scots and the
Saint Lizes had oftentimes raised quarrels and contention about it, to cut off
all occasions Lizes nor the Scottishmen should quarrel any more for it. From
these Castle hills, where there is a goodly prospect a great way off, a man may
behold below a meadow which they call Portsholme, environed round about with the
River Ouse, the same very exceeding large, and of all others that the Sun
ever shone upon, most fresh and beautiful: whereof in the Spring time this may
be truly said: Ver pingit vario gemmantia prata color:
The pleasant Spring fair flowers do yield,
Of diverse colors, in this field.


With such a delectable variety of gaye colors it pleases and contenteth the
eye. On the hither bank over against Huntingdon, stands the mother as it
were thereof, from whence it had his Original, called in Domesday book
Godmundcester, and at this day Good-man-chester, Godman-chester.
for Gormonchester: A very great country Town, and of as great name for
tillage; situate in an open ground, of a light mould, and bending to the Sun.
Neither is there a Town again in all England that has more stout and lusty
husbandmen, or more ploughs agoing: For, they make their boast that they have
in former time received the Kings of England as they passed in their progress
this way, Columella terms the near cousin of Wisdom) whether you respect
their skill therein, or their ability to bear the expenses, and their willing
mind withal to take the pains. Henry of Huntingdon before named, calls it a
Village, in his days, not unlovely: and truly writes, that in times past it
had been a noble City. For, to say nothing of Roman pieces of coin oftentimes
there ploughed up, nor of the distance in the old Itinerary, the very
signification of the name may probably prove, that this was the very same City,
Durosiponte.
which Antonine the Emperor termed DUROLIPONTE, amiss, in stead of
DUROSIPONTE. For Durosi-ponte (pardon me I pray you for A bridge over the water
Ose. And that this River is named indifferently and without distinction, Use,
Ise, Ose, and Ouse, all men confess. But when this name was under the Danes
quite abolished, it began to be called Gormoncester, of Gormon the Dane, unto
whom after agreement of peace King Aelfred granted these Provinces. Hereto,
this old Verse gives testimony.

Gormonis a castri nomine, nomen habet.
Gormonchester, at this hour,
Takes the name of Gormons Tower.
This is that Gormon of whom John Picus an old Author, writes in this wise:
King Athelstan. Whereupon he remained here; and the Provinces of the
East-English and of the Northumbrians were given to him: that continuing in his
allegiance, under the Kings protection, he might cherish and also maintain them
as his inheritance, which he had formerly overrun with spoil and robbery.
Neither would this be omitted, that some also of those ancient Writers have
termed this place Gumicester, and Gumicastrum, avoucheth withal, that Machutus
a Bishop had here his Episcopal See. And by the name of Gumicester

Ouse making haste speedily from hence, when he was about to enter into
Cambridgeshire, passes through most delightsome meadows hard by a proper and
fair town, which sometime in the English-Saxon tongue was called Sleep, Saint
Ives.
and now S. Ives, of Ivo a Persian Bishop, who, as they write, about the year
of Christ 600. travailed through England, preached diligently the Word of God,
and to this Town, wherein he left this life, left also his name. From whence
notwithstanding shortly after the religious persons translated his body to
Ramsey Abbay.

Turning aside from hence scarce three miles, Somersham.
we saw Somersham a fair dwelling house, of late days belonging to the
Bishops of Ely, which Earl Brithnot in the year 991. gave to Ely Church, and
James Stanley, the lavish, and expencefull Bishop, enlarged with new buildings.
A little above that most wealthy Abbay Ramsey was situate amiddest the Fennes,
where the Rivers become standing waters, when they have once found a soft kind
of Soil.

Ramsey.
Ramsey, that is, The Rams Isle, on the West side (for on other sides fennish
grounds through which one cannot pass, stretch out far and wide) is severed
from the firm ground almost two bow-shots off by certain uneven and quaggy
miry plots. Which place being won^ in times past to receive gently within the
bosom and brinkes thereof, Vessels arriving there with mild gales of wind in
a shallow River only: now through great labor and cost after the foul and
dirty quagmires aforesaid were stopped up with heaps of wood, gravel and
stones together, men may pass into on foot on the same side upon a dry
causey: and it lies out in length almost two miles, but spreads not all out
so much in breadth: which notwithstanding is beset round about with beautiful
rows of Alder-trees, and reed plots, that with Ramsey Mere.
Of which Meres, one is called after the name of the Island Ramsey Mere, far
excelling all the other waters adjoining, in beauty and fertility, on that side
Hakeds.
which the Inhabitants call Hakeds: and albeit the fowlers do continually
haunt the place and catch great store of young water-fowle, yet there is
abundance always that remains untaken. Furthermore that History shows at
large, how Ailwin a man of the blood royal, and for the special great
authority and favor that he had with the King, surnamed Healf-Koning, that
is, Half King, being admonished and moved thereunto by a Fishers dream built
it; how Oswald the Bishop furthered and enlarged Ailwins Tomb, for that it
exhibiteth unto us an unusual and strange title of a Dignity.

HIC REQUIESCIT AILWINUS INCLITI HERE RESTS AILWIN COUSIN TO From hence to
Peterborough, which is about ten miles off, King Canutus, because travailing
that way and finding it very combersome by reason of swelling Brooks
Kings-delfe, Kingsdelfe.
not far from that great Lake Wittlesmere. And as this Abbay did adorn the
East side of the Shire, Sawtry, commonly. Cunnington. Saltria. Turkill the Dane.
so, the middle thereof was beautified by Sal^rie, which the second Simon de
Sancto Lizio Earl of Huntingdon built. From which not far, is Cunnington,
holden anciently of the Honor of Huntingdon: where, within a four square
Trench, are to be seen express remains of an ancient Castle, which as also
Saltrie, was by the gift of Canutus, the seat of Turkill that Dane, who abode
here among the East English, and sent for Sueno King of Denmark to make
spoil of England. After whose departure, Waldeof the son of Siward Earl of
Northumberland enjoyed it, who married Judith Niece to William the Conqueror
by his sister David Earl of Huntingdon (who afterward obtained the Kingdom
of Scotland) being the younger son of Malcolm Can-mor, King of Scots, and of
Margaret his wife descended of the royal line of the English-Saxons: For, she
was Niece to King Edmund Iron-side by his son Edward surnamed, Edwardus Exul.
The Banished. David had a son named Henry, and Henry had another named David
Earl of Huntingdon, by one of whose daughters, Isabel, Cunnington and other
lands by right of marriage descended to Sir Robert Bruise: Bruise or Bruis.
from whose eldest son Robert surnamed the Noble, James King of Great
Britain lineally deriveth his Descent: and from Bernard his younger son,
unto whom this Cunnington with Exton fell, Sir Robert Cotton Knight is lineally
descended; who over and beside other virtues, being a singular lover and
searcher of Antiquities, having gathered with great charges from all places the
Monuments of venerable Antiquity, has here begun a famous Cabinet, whence
of his singular courtesy, he has oftentimes given me great light in these
darksome obscurities.

Mosses.
But these Quarters, considering the ground lying so low, and for many months
in the year surrounded and drowned, in some places also floting (as it were)
and hoven up with the waters, are not free from the offensive noisomnesse of
Meres and the unwholesome air of the Fennes. Here for six miles in length and
three in breadth that clear deep and fishfull Mere named Wittles-mere
spreads it self, Wittlesmere Lake.
which as Meres in this Tract, does sometimes in Calmes and fair weather
suddenly rise tempestuously, as it were, into violent water-quakes to the
danger of the poor fishermen, by reason, as some think, of evaporations
breaking violently out of the bowels of the earth. As for the unhealthinesse of
the place, whereunto only strangers, and not the natives there are subject,
who live long and healthfully, there is amends made, as they account it, by the
commodity of fishing, the plentiful feeding, and the abundance of turfe gotten
for fuel. For, King Cnut gave commandment by Turkill the Dane, of whom ere
while I spoke, That to every Village standing about the Fennes, there should
be set out a several Marsh: who so divided the ground, that each Village by
it self should have in proper use and occupation so much of the very maine
Marsh, as the firm ground of every such Village touched the Marsh lying just
against it. And be ordained that no Village might either dig or mow in the
Marsh of another without license, but that the pasture therein should lie all
in common, that is, Horn under horn, for the preservation of peace and
concord among them. But thus much of this matter.

Cnut, The little History of Ely.
sent for from Peterborough to Ramsey, were in passing over that Lake, There
fell upon them, as they were cheerful under sail and lifting up their voices
with joyful shoutings, The foundation of Saltry.
most untoward and unhappy winds, wherewith a turbulent and tempestuous storm
arose, that enclosed them on every side, so that laying aside all hope, they
were in utter despair of their life, security, or any help at all. But such
was the merciful clemency of Almighty God, that it forsook them not wholly,
nor suffered the most cruel Gulf of the waters to swallow them up all quite,
but by his providence some of them he delivered mercifully out of those furious
and raging waves: but others again according to his just and secret judgment
he permitted amiddest those billows to pass out of this frail and mortal
life. And when the fame of so fearful a danger was noised abroad and Ramsey
and Whittlesey, and afterward that workmen and laborers should skoure and
cleanse them: whereupon, as I have learned of ancient predecessors of good
credit, the said Ditch by some of the neighbor Inhabitants took the name
Swerdesdelfe, Swerdesdelfe differing from Kings Delfe.
upon that marking out by swords: and some would have it to be termed
Cnouts-delfe according to the name of the same King. Yet commonly at this day
they call it Steeds dike: and it is counted the limit and bound between this
County and Cambridge-shire.

Kimbolton.
Kinnibantum Castle, now called Kimbolton, the habitation in times past of the
Mandevilles, afterward of the Bo^uns and Staffords, and at this day of the
Wingfields, does make a fair show. Under which was Stoneley a pretty Abbay
founded by the Bigrames. A little from hence is Awkenbury, which King John gave
to David Earl of Huntingdon: and John surnamed the Scot, his son, Stephen
Segrave. Mat. Paris.
unto Sir Stephen Segrave: of whom I am the more willing to make mention, for
that he was one of those Courtiers who has taught us, That there is no power
always powerful. Hardly and with much ado he climbed to an eminent and high
estate, with great thought and care he kept it, and as suddenly he was
dejected from it: For, in his youth, of a Clerk he became a Knight, and albeit
he was but of mean But in the end he lost the Kings favor quite, and to his
dying day lay close in a Cloister: and who before time from a Clerkship betook
himself through arrogance to secular service, returning again to the office
of a Clerk, resumed the shaven crown which he had forsaken without the
counsel and advise of the Bishop. Leighton.
Not far from hence is Leighton, where Sir Gervase Clifton knight, lately
made Baron Clifton, began to build a goodly house, and close to it lies
Spaldwicke, which King Henry the First gave unto the Church of Lincoln for
amends of a loss, when he erected the Bishopric of Ely, taken out of the
Diocese Lincoln, as I have before showed.

But where the River Nen enters into this Shire, Elton.
it runs fast by Elton the seat of the ancient Family of the Sapcots, where
is a private Chapel of singular workmanship and most artificial glass
windows, erected by Lady Elizabeth Dinham the widow of Baron Fitz-warin,
married into the said Family. But a little higher, there stood a little City
more ancient than all these, Walmsford.
near unto Walmsford: which Henry of Huntingdon calls Caer Dorm and
Dormeceaster upon the River Nen, and reports to have been utterly rased
before his time. Durobrivae.
This was doubtless that DUROBRIVAE, that is, The River passage, that Antonine
the Emperor speaks of, and now in the very same sense is called Dornford
near unto Chesterton, which beside pieces of Huntingdon a Roman Portway: and a
little above Stilton, Stilton.
which in times past was called Stichilton, it is seen with an high bank, and
in an ancient Saxon Charter termed Ermingstreat. Ermingstreet
This Street now runs here through the midst of a four square Fort, the
North side whereof was fensed with Walls, all the other sides with a Rampire of
earth only. Near unto which R. Bevill, of an ancient house in this Shire.
Some verily think that this City took up both banks of the River; Caster in
Northamptonshire.
and there be of opinion that the little Village C^ster standing upon the
other bank was parcel thereof. Surely to this opinion of theirs makes much
the testimony of an ancient story, which shows that there was a place by Nen
called Dormund-caster, in which when Kinneburga had built a little Monastery,
it began to be called first Kinneburge-caster, and afterward short Caster.
This Kinneburga the most Christian daughter of the Pagan King Penda, and wife
to Alfred King of the Northumbrians ( changed her Princely State into the
service of Christ, if I may use the words of an ancient Writer) and governed
this Monastery of her own, as Which afterward, about the year of Salvation
1010. by the furious Danes was made level with the ground. But where this
River is ready to leave this County, it passes hard by an ancient house called
Bottle-bridge (so is it now termed short for Botolph-bridge) which the Draitons
and Lovets brought from R. Gimels by hereditary succession into the Family of
the Shirleies. Bottle Bridge.
And to this house adjoyneth Overton, now corruptly called Orton, which being
by felony forfait and confiscate, Nigellus.
Neele Lovetoft redeemed again of King John: and the said Noeles sister and
coheire being wedded unto Hubert alias Robert de Brounford, brought him
children, who assumed unto them the surname of Lovetoft.

Earls of Huntingdon.
This County of Huntingdon when the English-Saxons Empire began now to Siward an
Earl by Office, and not inheritance: For as yet there were no Earls in
England by inheritance, but the Rulers of Provinces, after the custom of that
age were termed Earls, with addition of the Earldom of this or that Province
whereof they had the rule for the time: as this Siward whiles he governed this
County was called Earl of Huntingdon; whereas afterward being Ruler of
Northumberland, they named him Earl of Northumberland. See the Earls of
Northampton.
He had a son named Waldeof, who under the Title of Earl had likewise the
government of this Province, standing in favor as he did with William the
Conqueror whose Niece Judith by his sister of the mothers side, he had
married, but by him beheaded for entering into a conspiracy against him. In the
last book cap. 16. John Forden in Scotocronico l. 8. c. 3.6. and 39.
The eldest daughter of this Waldeof (as William Gemiticensis or S. Liz took
to wife, together with the Earldome of Huntingdon, and of her begat a son
named Simon. But after that the said Simon was dead, David brother to Maud the
Holy, Queen of England (who afterward became King of Scots) married his wife
by whom he had a son named Henry. But in process of time, as fortune and
Princes favor varied, one while the Scots, another while the Sent Lizes
enjoyed this dignity: First Henry the son of David aforesaid: then Simon S.
Liz son of Simon the first: after him Malcolm King of Scots, son to Earl
Henry: and after his death Simon Sent Liz the third who dying without issue,
William King of Scots and brother to Malcolm succeeded: for, so wrote he that
then lived, Raphe de Diceto in the year 1185. When Simon (says he) the son
of Earl Simon was William King of the Scots. Then his brother David, and
David's son John surnamed Scot, Mat. Paris. 1243.
Earl of Chester, who dying without issue, and Alexander the third that had
married the daughter of our King Henry the Third, having for a time borne this
Title, the Scots by occasion of incident wars, lost that honor, and with it
a very fair inheritance in England. A good while after King Edward the Third
created Sir William Clinton Earl of Huntingdon who dyed issuelesse: And in his
room there was placed by King Richard the Second, Guiseard of Engolisme, a
Gascoine, who was his Governor in his minority: and after his death succeeded
John Holland, *
John his son (who was styled Duke of Excester, Earl of Huntingdon See Dukes
of Excester. Pa^. 26. H. 6.
Lord of Sparre, Admiral of England and Ireland, Lieutenant of Aquitane, and
Constable of the Tower of London) and his son likewise Henry, successively,
who were Dukes also of Excester. This is that very same Henry Duke of Excester
whom Philip Comines, as himself witnesses, saw begging bare foot in the Low
Lancaster, albeit he had married King Edward the Fourth his own sister. Then
Thomas Gray, who became afterward Marquess Dorset, a little while enjoyed that
honor. Also it is evident out of the Records, that William Herbert Earl of
Pembroch brought in again the Charter of creation, whereby his father was made
Earl of Pembroch, into the Chancery for to be cancelled: and that King Edward
the Fourth in the seventeenth of his Reign created him Earl of Huntingdon, at
such time as he granted the Title of Pembroch to the Prince his son.
Afterward King Henry the Eighth conferred that honor upon George Lord
Hastings: after whom succeeded his son Francis, and after him likewise his
son Henry, a right honorable Personage, commended George Hastings succeeded:
and after him his Grandchilde Henry by his son, who at this day enjoys the
said honor.

In this little Shire are numbered Parishes. 78.

CORITANI.
NOw must we pass on to the CORITANI, who beyond the ICENI dwelling further
within the Land, and spreading themselves very far through the Mediterranean
part of the Island, inhabited as far as to the German Ocean, to wit in these
Countries which now are commonly called NORTHAMPTONSHIRE, LEICHESTERSHIRE,
RUTLAND-SHIRE, LINCOLNSHIRE, NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE, and DERBY-SHIRE. With the
Etymology of this their name I will not once meddle, for fear least putting
down incertainties for certain and undoubted trueths, I may seem to slip
into an error. For, although this People were spread far and wide, which
GUR-TATI signifies in the British tongue, yet if I would boldly avouch, that
these were thence called CORITANI, should I not play hazard at all aventure?
Let them, for me, guess more safely, who can more

NORTHAMTONIAE COMITATVS DESCRIPTIO IN QVO CORITANI OLIM IN SEDERVNT


NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.
THis County of NORTHAMPTON, in the English-Saxon tongue (...), and
Northanton-shire, commonly called Northamptonshire, situate in the very middle
and heart, as it were, of England, from the South-West side, where it is
broadest, drawing it self narrower by little and little, reaches out in
length to the North-East. On the East lie Bedford and Avon the less, and
Welland, two Rivers. The East side thereof, from Ouse to Dowbridge, one of the
Roman high ways which they call Watling-streat runs through: The middle
and East part the River Nen, which by Writers is named also Aufona, with his
gentle stream parts in twain. A champian country it is, exceeding
populous, and passing well furnished with Noblemens and Gentlemen's houses,
replenished also with Towns and Churches, in so much as in some places there
are twenty, and in others thirty Steeples with Spires or square Towers within
view at once. The Soil very fertile both for Utopia of Sir Thomas More.
which according as that Hythodaus merrily said, Were wont to be so gentle and
fed with so little; but now in our days, as the report goes, begin to be so
ravenous and wild, that they devour men, they waste and depopulate fields,
houses, and Towneships.

On the South border, where the River Ouse so often mentioned first springs,
in a place rising with an easy ascent, and out of which there walme Springs in
great plenty, stands Brakley, as one would say a place full of Brake or
Fern, in old time a famous Market Town and staple as it were for wool: which
how large and wealthy Major, whom it has for the chief Magistrate. The
Zouches Lords of the place, founded a College there: from whom it came
successively as a possession in marriage right unto the Hollands and the
Lovels. But when Lord Lovell in King Henry the Seventh his time was attainted,
the Stanleies became Lords of it by the Kings gift. But the College there, at
this day ruinous, belongs to the Students of Mawdlen College in Oxford, who
use it for a retyring place. Neither came this place to the least name and
reputation that it had, by occasion of the memory of Saint Rumbald a young
Infant, who as we find written in his life, being a Kings son, so soon as
ever he was borne, after he had spoken I know not what holy words, and
professed

From hence Northward, when we had gone six miles forward, and all the way well
wooded, first we saw Astwell, where Sir T. Billing sometime Lord chief Justice
in the Kings Bench with great state dwelt: from whom it descended hereditarily
to the Shirleis by the ancient Family of the Lovels: then Wedon and Wapiham,
which the Family of the Pinkeneys held by Barony, Barony of the Pinkeneys.
until that H. de Pinkney ordained King Edward the First his heir. Whom being
a right good and excellent Prince many evil men made their heir; whereas
(according to Tacitus) a good father makes no Antonine the Emperor
mentions, though not in due place: For, I am of opinion, that this was the
very same, which now we call Torcester: and to prove it, there be some
arguments of moment as yet remaining. If Trimontium in Thracia had that name of
three hills, Triturrita in Tuskane of three Towers, and Tripolis likewise of
three Cities conjoined in one; I have no reason to doubt, that this TRIPONTIUM
Torcester the Roman Port way which in many places most evidently shows it
self between it and Stony stratford, is cut through by three special Channels
or streams that the little River there divides it self into; which in times
past, like as at this day had of necessity there several Bridges over them.
Now, if you ask a Britain, how he says in British [ Three Bridges] you shall
hear him by and by answer [ Taer ponte]: and there be certain honest men,
from whom I have received here pieces of Roman Coin, that constantly avouch,
the true name of this place to be Torcester, and think it was so called of
Towers. Howbeit Marianus names it Touecester, if the book be not faulty, in
whom we read, that this town was so fortified in the year of our Redemption
917. Edward the elder afterward compassed it about with a stone Wall; yet we
with all our seeking could see no tokens of any such Wall. Only there is a
Mount remaining cast up with men's hands, they call it Berihill, now turned into
private men's Gardens, and planted on every side with Chery trees. And very time
it self has so conquered and subdued the town, that beholden it is to the
situation, to the name, and old Coins other whiles here found, for that
esteem which it has of antiquity. For, no memorable thing there is in it but
one only Church that it has; and the same is a large and fair building,
wherein D. Sponde sometime the Parson thereof, by report, a good benefactor to
Church and town both, lies entombed within a tomb of fine and curious
Easton-Nesson, there is to be seen, a fair and beautiful dwelling house
belonging to the Knightly Family of the Farm^rs.

The River that waters Torcester, as it goes from hence toward Ouse, runs
beside Grafton, which now is reputed an Honor of the Kings, but in times past
was the seat of the Family de Widdevil: out of which came Richard, a man highly
renowned for his virtue and valor: who for that he took to wife Iaquet the
widow of John Duke of Bedford, and daughter to Peter of Luxenburgh, Earl of
Saint Paul, without the Kings license, was by King Henry the Sixth fined at a
thousand pounds of our money. Yet afterward he advanced the same Richard to
the honorable Title of Baron Widdevil de Rivers. With whose daughter Dame
Elizabeth, King Edward the Fourth Parliament 27. H. 6.
and verily he was the first of all our Kings since the Conquest that married
his subject. But thereby, he drew upon himself and his wives kinsfolk a world
of troubles, as ye may see in our Histories. The said Richard Widdevil Lord of
Rivers, Grafton, and de la Mote, by king Edward the Fourth now his son in Law,
was erected (these be the very words out of the Charter of his creation) to be
Earl Rivers, by cincture of the sword, To have unto him and his heirs, with
the Fee of 20. pounds, by the hands of the Sheriff of Northampton. And soon
after he was with exceeding great honor ordained High Constable of England, (I
speak out of the kings Patent it self) To occupy, manage, and execute that
Office, either by himself, or by sufficient Deputies for term of life,
receiving yearly two hundred pounds out of the 7. Edw. 4. Constable of England.
with full power and authority to take examinations, and to proceed in Causes
of and concerning the crime of high Treason, or the occasion thereof: also to
hear, examine, and in due time to determine the causes and businesses
aforesaid, with all and singular matters arising from them, incident to them,
or conjoined therewith, even summarily, and in any place whatsoever below,
without noise or formal order of Judgment, only upon sight of the Truth of
the fact, and with the Kings hand and power, if it shall be thought meet in
our behalf, without all appeal. Moreover about that time he was made Lord
Treasurer of England. But he having enjoyed these honors a small while, was
soon after in the quarrel of the king his son in Law, aforesaid, taken in
the battle at Edgcote, and beheaded. And albeit, in his sons this
offspring, as it were half dead, took an end, Anthony Earl Rivers was by
Richard the third made shorter by the head, Richard also and his other brethren
dead without issue: yet from the daughters there did spread forth most fair and
fruitful branches. For, out of them flowred the royal Race and line of
England, the Marquesses of Dorset, the Earls of Essex, Arundel, Earls of
Worcester, Earls of Derby, the last Duke of Buckingham, and Barons of Stafford.

Just behind Grafton lies Sacy Forest stored with Dear and fit for game.
Sacy Forest. Foresta de Salceto.
More Eastward, the Country all over is besprinkled with Villages and little
Towns, among which, these are of greatest name, Blisworth, the habitation of
the Wakes descended from that honorable race of the Barons of Wake and
Estotevile: Pateshull, which gave name to the most worshipful family in times
past of the Pateshuls: Greenes-Norton, so named of the Greenes men in the
foregoing age right famous for their wealth: But it was called in foretime (if
I be not deceived) Norton Dany, which those Greenes held by knights service, as
also a moity of Asheby Mares in this County, by Fines 18. Rich. 2.
To lift up their right hand toward the King upon Christmas Day every year,
wheresoever the King shall be in England. Also Wardon, an Hundred, which had
Lords descended from Sir Guy of Reinbudcourt a Norman, whose inheritance came
by the Folliots to Guiscard Leddet, whose Daughter Christian bare unto her
husband Henry de Braibrooke many children: yet Guiscard the eldest of them
took to him the surname of Leddet from his mother. But shortly after, those
fair lands and possessions were by the females parted between William and
John, both Latimers of Corby. From John, the Griphins in this Shire, and from
William those Latimers, Barons of good antiquity, in Yorkshire, deduced their
Descent.

Higher into the Country Northward is the head of the River Aufona (for Avon in
Nen: and from the West side of the Shire, holds on his course with many
reaches of his banks, after a sort through the middle part of this Shire; and
all the way along it does comfortable service. A notable River, I assure you,
and if I have any sight into these matters, fortified in times past with
garrisons by the Romans. For, when as that part of Britain on this side the
River, was now in Claudius the Emperors time brought subject to the Roman
government, so as the Inhabitants thereof were called Socij Romanorum, that is,
the Romans consorts or associates, and the Britans dwelling beyond the river
oftentimes invaded this their country, and with great violence made incursions,
and spoiled much: when as also that the Associates themselves who could P.
Ostorius (as says Tacitus) cinctos castris Antonaem ( Aufonas I would read if
I might be so bold) and Sabrinam cohibere parat, that is, if I understand the
place a right, He by placing Forts and Garrisons, hard by the Rivers Antonae,
or Aufona rather, and Severn, determined to restrain and keep in those
Britans on the further side; and these that were Provincials and associates,
from conjoyning their forces together, and helping one another against the
Romans. Now what River this ANTONA should be no man is able to tell. Lipsius
the very Phoebus of our age has either driven away this mist, or else verily a
cloud has dimmed mine eyesight. He points with his finger to Northampton;
and I am Antona is closely crept into Tacitus, in stead of Aufona, on which
Northampton stands. For the very navill, heart and middle of England is
counted to be nere unto it, where out of one hill spring three great Rivers
running diverse ways: Cherwell into the South; Leame, Westward, which as it
makes speed to Severn, is straight ways received by a second Aufon; and this
Aufona or Nen Eastward. Of which, these two Aufons so cross England
overthwart, that whosoever comes out of the North parts of the Island must of
necessity pass over one of these twain. When Ostorius therefore had fortified
Severne, and these two Aufons, he had no cause to fear any danger out of
Wales, or the North parts, to befall unto his people, either Romans or
associates; who at that time had reduced the nerest Tacitus himself
witnesses. Some of these Forts of Ostorius his making, may those great
fortifications and military Fenses seem to be, which are here seen at
Gildsborough and Dantrey, between the Springheads of the two Aufons which run
diverse ways, and where only there is passage into the hither part of Britain
without any rivers to hinder it. That fort at Gildsborough, is great and large,
but this at Dantrey is greater Spelwell, it encloseth within a bank cast up by
man's hand, more than one hundred acres of ground or thereabout. Within which
the country people other whiles find coined pieces of money of the Roman
Emperors, as proofs of the antiquity thereof. Much deceived are they
therefore, who will needs have it to be a work of the Danes, and that of
them, the town under it, was named Dantrey: which being a through-fare well
known at this day by reason of the Innes there, had a religious house of the
Austen Friars, that Sir H. de Fawesley founded, as I have read.

At the head of Aufona or Nen, stands Catesby that gave name to an ancient
Family, Robert Catesby of Ashby S. Ledger, the shame and indelible stain of his
house and name, detestably breathing forth savage cruelty in barbarous wise,
and compassing impiously the destruction of Prince and Country, devised lately
under a specious pretext of Religion.

Of whom, let all times be silent, least by making mention of him, the foul
stain and blot of our age appear unto Posterity; at the naming whereof we
cannot choose but with horror grieve and groan again, seeing the very dumb
and livelesse creatures seem to be moved and troubled at so hellish Villainy
imagined by him and his accomplices. Hard by it, is Fawesley, where have dwelt a
long time the Knightleies Knightleies of Gnowshall in the County of Stafford:
and more Eastward hard by Nen, as yet very small, there is Wedon in the street,
sometimes the royal seat of Wolpher K. of the Mercians, and converted into a
Monastery by his daughter Werburg a most holy Virgin: of whose miracles in
driving away Geese from hence, some credulous writers have made many a tale.
Verily I should wrong the Truth, if I should not think, (albeit I have thought
otherwise) that this Wedon is the very station that Antonine the Emperor
names BANNAVENNA, BENNAVENNA, Bannavenna, which untruly is called, Isannaventa
and Isanavatia.
BENNAVENTA, and once corruptly ISANNAVENTA; notwithstanding there now remain
no express tokens of that name, considering how Time changes all, both names
and things. For the distance from the next stations Aufon, the head whereof is
near unto it in some sort does plainly discover it self. Likewise, the high
Port-way or Roman street goes directly from hence Northward with a bridge or
causey often broken and worn out; but most of all over against a Village named
Creek, where it was of necessity that there should be a bridge; but in other
places the bridge shows it self also as far as to Dowbridge, near
Lilborne most apparently.

Somewhat more Northward we saw Althorp, the habitation of the Spensers
knights, allied to very many and those most honorable and worshipful families:
out of which house Sir Robert Spenser the fifth Knight in a successive
continued Descent, a respective James advanced to the honor of Baron Spenser
of Wormeleighton. Althorp, or Oldthorp. Baron Spenser. Sir Christopher Hatton.
He died anno 1591.
Hard by Althorp, Holdenby house, a fair pattern of stately and magnificent
building makes a fair glorious show, which Sir Chistopher Hatton one of
Queen Elizabeth's Privy Council, Lord Chancellor of England, and knight of
the Order of the Garter, built upon the lands and inheritance of his great
grandmother, heir unto the Family of the Holdenbeis, for the greatest and last
monument, (as himself afterward was wont to say) of his youth: A man, to say
nothing of him but that which in truth is due, for Religion and godliness
right devout, of approved faithfulness to the State, of incorrupt equity: for
almesdeeds of all others most bountiful; and one (which is not the least part
William Hatton, his adopted son, consecrated to his memory, in the Church of
Saint Paul in London.

Beneath these places Nen passes on forward with a still and small stream,
Northampton.
and anon takes in a small Brook from the North, and is thereby augmented:
where, at the very meeting and confluence of both, a City called after the
River Northafandon, and short, Northampton, is so seated, that on the West side
it is watered with the Brook, and on the South side with the foresaid Nen.
Which City I was of late easily induced to guess, to have been that ancient
BENNAVENTA; but if my conjecture missed the truth, the confession of my error
may salve it. As for the name, it may seem to have been imposed of the
situation thereof upon the North Aufon. The City it self which seems to have
been built all of stone, is, I assure you, for houses very fair, for circuit
of good largeness, and walled about: and from the Wall ye have a goodly
prospect every way to a wide and spacious plain Country.

On the West side, 1075. Register of Saint Andrews.
it has an old Castle, and the very antiquity thereof gives a grace unto it,
built by Simon de Sancto Lizio, commonly called Senlyz, the first of that name
Earl of Northampton: who also joined unto it a beautiful Church called Saint
Andrews, for a place of his own burial: and, as men say, reedified the Town:
Simon also the younger, his son, founded without the Town a Monastery
commonly called De Pratis.
De la prey, for Nuns. During the Saxons Heptarchie, it seems Sweno the
Dane in a furious and outrageous mood made most cruelly havocke throughout all
England: for then, as Henry of Huntingdon records, it was set on fire and
burnt to the ground. In the Reign of Saint Edward the Confessor, there were
in it, as we find in the Survey Book of England, LX. Burgesses in the Kings
Domaine, having as many Mansions: Of these, in King William the Conquerours
time, Fourteen lay waste and void, and forty seven remained. Over and above
these, there were in the new Borough forty Burgesses in the Domaine of King
William. After the Normans time, it valiantly withstood the Siege laid unto it
by the Barons, when they John for private causes; which notwithstanding they so
cloked with pretenses of Religion and the common good, that they termed
themselves, Gods host or Army.
The Army of God and the holy Church; at which time, they say, that Trench and
Rampire was made, which they call Hunshil: but it stood not out with like
success against Henry the third their lawful King, as it did against these
rebels: for, when those Barons being nuzzelled up in sedition, and rebellion,
from hence displaied their banners and sounded the battle against him, he
made a breach through the Wall, and soon won it by assault. After this,
diverse times, like as before the kings held their Parliaments here, because it
stands very nere in the midst of England: Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick,
after many a noble man slain, led away captive that most unhappy king Henry
the Sixth in a piteous spectacle, who was now the second time taken prisoner by
his subjects. To conclude, the Longitude of Northampton our Mathematicians have
described by 22. degrees and 29. scruples: and the Latitude by 52. degrees and
13. scruples. From hence Nen makes haste away by Castle Ashby, where Henry L.
Compton began to build a fair sightly house: *
close unto which lies Yardley Hastings, so named of the Hastings, Yardley.
Lord Parr of Horton.
sometimes ^arles of Pembroch, unto whom it belonged. And to turn a little
aside, I may not omit Horton, when as king Henry the Eighth created Sir W. Par
Catharin Par, Baron Par of Horton, which honor shortly vanished with him when
he left only daughters, who were married into the families of Tresham, and
Lane. But to return: Nen goes forward to Market Wellingborow, in old time
Wedlingborough, and Wodlingborough, made a market by K. John at the suit of the
Monks of Crowland; where there runs into it a Riveret coming down by
Rushton and Newton, belonging to the Treshams, by Geddington Aeleonor wife to
King Edward the First: by Boughton the seat of the Montacutes Knights:
Kettering. The book of Inquisit. in the Exchequer.
by Kettering a Market Town well frequented, near unto which stands Rouwell
much talked of for the horse Fair there kept: by Burton likewise the Barony
(if I mistake not the name) of Alane de Dinant: For, king Henry the First gave
unto him a Barony of that name in this Shire, for that in single fight he had
slain the French Kings Champion at Gizors: and by Harrouden, the Lord whereof
named Sir Nicolas Vaulx Captain of Guines in Picardy, Baron Vaulx.
king Henry the Eighth created Baron Vaulx of Harrouden.

From hence goes the Aufon or Nen to Higham, a Town in times past of the
Peverels, Higham Ferrers. Matthew Parker.
and after by them of the Ferrers, from whom it is named Higham Ferrers: who
had here also their Castle: the ruins and rubbish whereof are yet seen nere
unto the Church. But, the excellent ornament of this place was Henry Chicheley
Archbishop of Canterbury, who built All-soules College in Oxford, and another
here, wherein he placed Secular Clerks, and Prebendaries, and withal an
Hospital for the poor. Then runs it by Addington the possession in old
time of the Veres, and by Thorpston commonly called Thrapston, belonging
likewise to them: and over against it Draiton, the house in the foregoing age
of Sir H. Green: but afterward by his daughter, of John and Edward Staffords,
Earls of Wiltshire; but now the habitation of the Lord Mordaunt unto whom it
descended hereditarily from those Greenes noble Gentlemen and of right great
name in this Country in their time.

Then runs it, in manner round about a proper little Town which it gives
name unto, Oundale.
Oundale they now call it corruptly in stead of Avondale: where there is
nothing worth sight, but a fair Church, and a free School for the instruction
of children, and an Almeshouse for poor people, founded by Sir William Laxton,
sometime Major of London. Barnwell.
Near adjoining to this, stands Barnewell, a little Castle, which now of late
Sir Edward Mont-acute of the ancient family of the Mont-acutes, as may be
collected by his Arms, has repaired and beautified with new buildings. In
times past it was the possession of Berengary le Moigne, that is, Monk, and
not, as some think, of Berengary of Touraine, the great Clerk, whose opinion
of the Sacrament Rome.

Fotheringhay.
After this, it passes on by Fotheringhay Castle, environed on every side with
most pleasant meadows, which in the Reign of Henry the Third, when the strong
holds encouraged the Lords and Nobles to revolt, William Earl of Aumarl
surprised upon the sudden, and laid all the Country about waste, as Matthew of
Paris records. At which time it belonged unto the Earls of Huntingdon who
were of the royal Race of Scotland. A good while after, King Edward the Third
assigned it, as it were, for an inheritance or appennage as the French term
it, unto his son Edmund of Langley, Duke of York, who reedified the Castle,
and made the highest fortification Edward Duke of York in the second year of
Henry the Fifth his Reign, and in the year of Christ 1415. (as appears by an
inscription there in rude and barbarous Verses) founded a passing fair
Collegiat Church, wherein himself, when he was slain in the battle at
Ag^ncourt, as also Richard Duke of York, his brothers son, who lost his life
at Wakefield, and his wife Cecily Nevil, Cecily Duchess of York.
had stately and sumptuous Tombs, which were profanely subverted together with
the upper part of the Church, in King Edward the Sixth his time. Yet in
memorial of them, Queen Elizabeth coming thither commanded two

Keep beforesaid built like a fetter-locke occasioneth me to digress a
little, *
and I hope with your pardon, Fetter-locke.
when the gravest Authors in as small matters have done the like: Edmund of
Langley Duke of York who built that Keep, and garnished the glasse-windowes
there with Fetter-lockes, when he saw his sons being young scholars gazing
upon the painted windows, asked them what was Latin for a Fetter-locke? They
studying and looking silently one upon another, not able to answer: If you
cannot tell me, says he, I will tell you, Hic, haec, hoc Taceatis, that is,
Hic, haec, hoc, be silent and quiet: and therewithal added, God knows what
may happen hereafter. This King Edward the Fourth his great Grandchild
reported publicly, when he having attained the Crown created Richard his
younger son Duke York, and then commanding that he should use for his Badge
the Fetter-locke open to verify the presage of his great Grandfather. But
this by the way.

The said Cecily mother to King Edward the Fourth saw plainly within the
compass of a few years what disports unruly and powerful Fortune (pardon the
word, for I acknowledge that God rules all) makes herself out of the
miseries of the mighty. For she saw Richard Duke of York her husband, even
then when he thought himself sure of the Kingdom, and her son the Earl of
Rutland, slain together in a bloody fought field, and some few years after
her eldest son Edward the Fourth enjoying the regal Crown, deprived of the
same, recovering it again, and taken away by untimely death, when he had
before made away her second son and his George Duke of Clarence. After that,
she saw her other son Richard Duke of Gloucester aspiring to the Crown and
making way to it by that lamentable murdering of his Nephews, and slandering
of her his own Mother, (for he charged her openly with the greatest dishonor
incident to a Lady:) and afterward she saw him when he was possessed of the
Kingdom, within a while slain in battle: And these her miseries were so
linked together, that the longer she lived the greater sorrow she felt, and
every day was more doleful than other. As for that disastre which even here
befell unto another most mighty Prince Mary Queen of Scots, I had leifer it
should be enwrapped up in silence, than once spoken of: Let it be forgotten
quite, if it be possible: if not, yet be it hidden, as it may in silence. Under
the best Princes some

Nen being now come unto the skirts of Huntingdon-shire, running under a fair
stone Bridge at Walmesford, Durobrivae.
passes by DUROBRIVAE, a right ancient City, Dormancester, as I said before,
took up a great space of ground on both banks of the River in both Counties.
For, Caster.
the little Village Caster which stands a mile off from the River, may seem to
have been a part of it, by the pavements there found, wrought checker wise
with small square quarrels; although on the Church wall we read this
inscription bearing date of a later time.

XV. KL. MAII DEDICATIO HUJUS ECCLESIAE MCXXIIII. THE FIFTEENTH DAY BEFORE THE
KALENDS OF MAY, IN THE YEAR ONE THOUSAND ONE And doubtless, of greater name
and note it was: for in the corn fields adjoining, which in stead of
Dormanton, they call Normanton Fields, so many pieces of Roman Coin are
turned out of the ground, that a man would verily think they had been sowed
there: and two Rode-wayes, whereof the Causeys Forty-foot-way, because it was
forty foot broad, unto Stanford: the other named Long-ditch and High-streat by
Lollham-bridges, Lollham-Bridges.
(bridges I assure you of great antiquity, whereof eleven arches are in sight,
now chinking and chawning for age) through West Deeping, into Lincolnshire. At
the very division and parting of these two Port-waies stands Upton highly
situate, Upton.
whereupon it took also that name: where Sir Robert Wingfield Knight,
descended from that ancient Family of the Wingfields, which has brought forth
so many worshipful and worthy Knights, has a fair house with most lovely
walks.

Peterborough.
From DUROBRIVAE the River Aufon or Nen passes on to Peterburgh seated in
Medeswell, and a Town hard by it named thereupon Medeswelhamsted and
Medeshamsted; which Town, as we read in Robert de Swapham, was built in an
excellent fine place, having of the one side fennes, and passing good waters,
and of the other many goodly woods, meadows, and pastures: fair and beautiful
to the eye every way, and not accessable by land save only on the West side.
The River Nen runs by at the South side of the Borough; in the middle of
which River, there is a place as it were a gulf so deep and cold withal,
that even in Summer no swimmer is able to ducke or dive unto the bothom. Yet is
it never for all that frozen over in Winter: for there is a spring there,
whence the water welleth out. This place they Wolpher King of the Mercians
built there a Monastery in honor of Saint Peter. And seeing the place was all
a marish ground, he laid the foundation, as that Robert writes, with mighty
huge stones, such as eight yoke of Oxen would hardly draw one of them, which I
saw with mine own eyes, says he, when this Monastery was destroyed.
Afterward, of this Monastery dedicated to Saint Peter, it began to be called
PETRIBURGUS, or PETROPOLIS, that is, Peterborow or Burgh, and the said
Monastery was very famous and renowned. The original occasion, and the
building whereof, I have thought it worth my labor briefly to put down, out
of the said Robert de Swapham, a Writer of good antiquity. Peada, the son of
Penda, who was the first Christian King of the Mercians, in the year of
Medeshamsted in the Girvians or Fen-country, which he could not finish, for
that by the wicked practice of his mother, he was made away.

After Peada succeeded his brother Wolpher, who being most averse from
Christian Religion, murdered Wolphald and Rufin his own sons with cruel and
barbarous immanitie, because they had devoted themselves unto Christ, and
embraced his Religion. But himself some few years after, embracing Christian
Religion, for to expiate and wash away the stain of that his impiety with some
good and godly work, set in hand to build up this Monastery which his brother
had begun: which through the help of his brother Aetheldred, of Kineburga
also Kineswith his sisters, being fully finished in the year of our Lord 633.
he consecrated unto Saint Peter, endowed it with ample Revenewes, and ordained
Sexwulft a right godly and devout man (who principally advised him to this
work) the first Abbat thereof.

This Monastery flourished afterward, and had the name and opinion in the world
of great holiness, for the space of two hundred and fourteen years or
thereabout, until those most heavy and woeful times came of the Danes, who
made spoil and waste of all: For, then were the Monks massacred, and the
Monastery quite overthrown lay buried, as one would say, many years together
in the own rubbish and ruins. At the last, about the year of our Lord 960.
Ethelwold Winchester, who wholly gave himself to the furtherance of monastical
profession began to reedifie it, having the helping hand especially of King
Eadgar, and Adulph the Kings Chancellor, who upon a prick of conscience and
deep repentance, for that he and his wife together lying in bed asleep had
overlaid and

From which time, it was of high estimation and name, partly for the great
riches it had and in part for the large privileges which it enjoyed: although
in the reign of William the Conqueror, Herward an Englishman being proclaimed
traitor and outlawed, made a rode out of the Isle of Ely and rifled it of all
the riches that it had gathered together: Mont. Turold
against whom Turold the Abbot, erected the fort Mont-Turold: Yet was it
esteemed exceeding wealthy even unto our fathers days, when, King Henry the
Eighth thrust out the Monks in all places, alleging that they declining from
the ordinances, which those holy and ancient Monks held, wasted in
Rutland-shire for his Diocese: and placed withal a Deane and certain
Prebendaries. So that of a Monastery it became a Cathedral Church; which if
you well consider the building, is for the very antiquity thereof, goodly to
behold. The forefront carries a majesty with it, and the Cloisters are very
large, in the glasse-windowes whereof is represented the history of Wolpher the
founder, with the succession of the Abbots. Saint Mary's Chapel is a goodly
large building, full of curirious work, and the quire fair: wherein two as
unfortunate Queens as any other, Katherine of Spain repudiated by King Henry
the Eighth, and Mary Queen of

Beneath Peterburgh, The Fennes.
the river Aufon or Nen, which by this time is gone from his springhead much
about forty five miles, and carries along with him all rils, brooks, and land
floods occasioned by rain, that he has taken into his channels, is divided
sundry ways. And finding no way to carry his stream, by spreading his waters
all abroad in winter time, yea and other whiles most part of the year,
overfloweth all the plain country, so as it seems to be nothing but a vast
sea lying even and level, with some few Islands that bear up their heads and
appear above the water. The cause of such inundation the people inhabiting
thereby, allege to be this, for that of the three channels or draines, by which
so great store of water was Thorney Abbay, and then a part by Clow Cross and
Crowland: the second also by the trench cut out by Morton Bishop of Ely, called
the New leam, and then by Wisbich; have a long time been forlet and neglected:
and so the third which goes down by Horseybridge, Witlesmer, Ramsey-mere and
Salters-load, is not able to receive so much water: whereby it breaks forth
with more violence upon the flats adjoining. And the country complains for
trespass done unto them, as well by those that have not scoured the said
draines, as by them that have turned the same aside to their private uses: and
as the Reatines said some time, so do they, That Nature herself has well
provided for man's use; in that she has given all rivers their courses, and
issues; and as well But thus much of this matter may seem to some overmuch.

In this place is the County least in breadth: for between Nen and the River
Welland the one limit on the North side, there are scarce five miles. Upon
Welland, which Aethelward an old writer called Weolod, Braibroke. Lords of
Braibroke.
near unto the spring head, is Braibrock Castle, built by Robert May, alias,
De Braybroke, a most inward minion of King John: whose son Henry having
married Christian Ledet an inheritrice of a great estate, his eldest son
adopted himself into the surname of the Ledet: from one of whose Nieces by his
son, as I said before, it came unto the Latimers, and by them unto the
Griphins, whose inheritance now it is. Near unto it among the woods I saw some
Pipwell.
called in times past De Divisis, and afterward Pipwell; which William
Buttevillein founded in the reign of Henry the Second for Cistertian Monks.
Rockingham.
From thence might Rockingham be seen, were it not for the woods, a Castle
sometime of the Earls of Aumarle, built by King William the Conqueror, at what
time it was a wast, (as we find in his Domesday book) fortified with Rampire
and Bulwarks, and a duple range of Battlements, situate upon the side of an
hill Rockingham Forest.

Haringworth. See Ashby De la Zouch, in Leicester shire. Barons Zouch.
After this it runs beside Haringworth the seat in old time of the Cantlows
and now of the Lord Zouch: who descended from Eudo a younger son of Alan de
la Zouch, of Ashby De la Zouch, have grown up to a right honorable Family of
Barons; whose honor and state was much augmented by marriage with one of the
heirs of De Cantelupo. Deane.
Cantlow, as also with an other of Baron Saint Maur, who likewise drew his
Pedigree from the heir of the Lord Zouch de Ashby, and the Lovels Lords of
Castel-Cary in Somersetshire.

Here also I saw Deane, belonging in ancient times to the Deanes, afterward to
the Tindals, which place is worth the remembrance, if it were but for this,
that it is Brudenells: out of which Family Sir Edmund Brudenell, late deceased,
was a passing great lover and admirer of venerable Antiquity. Barons de Engain.
The Family likewise of Engain, which was both ancient and honorable had their
seat hereby at Blatherwic (where now the Staffords of knights degree inhabit,
who descended from Ralph the first Earl of Stafford) and those Engaines
changed their Castle named Humel before time, Or Hymell.
into a Monastery called Finisheved. Their issue male failed about two hundred
years since: but of their heirs the eldest was wedded unto Sir John
Goldington, the second to Sir Laurence Pabenham, and the third to Sir William
Bernak, all right worthy Knights.

Apthorpe.
Here also is to be seen Apthorp, the seat of a most worthy knight, Sir
Anthony whose father Sir Walter Mildmay, late one of Queen Elizabeth's Privy
Counsel, for his virtue, wisdom, piety, and bounty to learning and learned
men, by founding Emanuel College in Cambridge, has worthily deserved to be
registered among the best men in this our age.

Thornhaugh.
Hard by stands Thornhaugh sometimes belonging to the Family De Sancto
Medardo, contracted into Semar^, and now to the right honorable Sir William
Russell, son to Francis Earl of Bedford descended from Semare, whom King
James for his virtues and faithful service in Ireland whiles he was Lord
Deputy there, advanced to the Dignity of Baron Russell of Thornhaugh.

Welledon. Basset of Welledon.
Neither is the Town Welledon to be passed over in silence, considering that
Mawde the Daughter and heir of Geffrey de Ridell (who together with King Henry
the First his son was drowned) did descend to Richard Basset son of Ralph
Basset, Lord Justice of England, in whose race it continued unto King Henry the
Fourth his days: For then, by the females it accrued to the Kneveis and
Alesburies.

Welland being past Haringworth goes to visit Colliweston, where Lady Margaret
Countess of Richmond, King Henry the Seventh his mother built a goodly fair
and stately house: Under which, the neighbor inhabitants use to dig great
plenty of sclate stones for their buildings. Slate-stones.
From whence Wittering Heath, a plain, runs out far into the East,
wherein the people there dwelling, report, that the Burghley.
Now by this time is Welland come to Burghley whereof the most prudent and
right honorable Counselor Sir William Cecil, Lord high Treasurer of England,
yea a singular treasure and supporter of the same, received the Title of Baron
Burghley, for his great good deserts, at the hands of Queen Elizabeth. Which
Title he adorned with the luster of his virtues, and beautified this place
with magnificent sumptuous buildings, adjoining thereto a large Park
encompassed about with a stone wall of a great circuit. Beneath it, there are
ancient Quarries of stone at Bernack, out of which the Abbayes of Peterburgh
and of Ramsey were built. For here (to write the very words out of the History
of Ramsey) The toyling strength of the And thus we read in the Charter of
king Edward the Confessor: In consideration of four thousand Eeles in Lent,
the Monks of Ramsey shall have out of the Peter so much square astiler stone,
as they need, at Berneck, and of rough building stone for walls, at Burch. Under
Berneck that highway made by the Romans, which the neighbor Inhabitants,
Forti foot-(...)
of the breadth that it carries, call The forty foot-way, from Caster to
Stanford cutteth and divides this Shire, and is to be seen with an high
Causey, especially by the little Wood of Bernack, where it has a Beacon set
upon the very ridge, and so runs forth along by Burghley Park wall toward
Stanford.

Some five miles hence, Maxey. Peag-Kyrk. Ingulfus.
Welland running down by Maxey Castle, belonging sometime to the noble house
of Wake, and by Peag-Kirk, (where, in the Primitive Church of the English
Nation, Pega an holy woman who gave name to that place, and sister Guthlak,
with other Nuns and devout virgins by their life and example gave good
documents of piety and chastity; comes to the Fennes so often mentioned. And
for as much as the bank on the South side thereof is in many places neglected,
the River lies sore upon the lands thereabout with great detriment: and thus
being put out of his own Channel that before time went by Spalding, he enters
closely into Nen or Aufon, and over-chargeth it exceedingly.

Now the less Avon, which is the other of the limits, as I said, of this shire
Northward, but serves for a limit only about five or six miles in length,
breaking out of the ground at Avon-well by Naseby, near by the Springhead of
Welland, runs Westward by Suleby sometimes an Abbay of Black-Monkes,
Stanford.
and by Stanford upon Avon, The Caves.
the habitation of the Caves Family, out of which there is spread a notable
offspring with many branches in all that Tract adjoining: also by Lilborne, the
seat in times past of the Canvilles. Which, that it has been in old time a
Mansion place or Station of the Romans, I am induced to think, by the site
thereof hard by one of their Port-waies, by the ancient Trenches there, and a
little piked hill cast up: into which when of late days some dug in hope of
old hid treasure, in stead of gold they found coals. Bounds or Mere marl in
old time.
And when this river being as yet but small is once gone under Dowbridge, it
leaves Northamptonshire and enters Warwickshire. By those coals dug
forth from under the said hill, what if I should conjecture that this hill was
raised up for a limit or bound-marke, seeing Siculus Flaccus writes, that
either ashes, or coals, Lib. de Civi Dei 21. cap.
and S. Augustine writes thus of coals: Is it not a wonderful thing (says
he) whereas considering Coals be so brickle, that with the least blow they
break, with the least crushing they are crushed; yet no time, be it never so
long conquereth them: in so much as they that pitch Land-markes and limits,
were wont to couch them underneath, to convince any litigious fellow
whatsoever, that should come never so long time after, and avouch that a limit
was not there pitched. And so much the rather incline I to this my conjecture,
because they that have written of limits, do write that certain hillockes or
piles of earth which they termed Botontines, Botontines Hence perventure (...)
our Buttin^^
were set in limits: so that I suppose most of these mounts and round hills
which we every where see and Burrowes, were for this purpose raised, and that
ashes, coals, pot-sherds, etc. may be found under them, if they were dug
down a good depth into the earth.

The first Earl that this County had to my knowledge, Earls of Northamp
was Waldeof (son of that warlike Siward) who being also Earl of Huntingdon,
for his disloyal treachery unto William the Conqueror, lost his head: leaving
two daughters only behind him, by Judith the Conquerours Niece by a sister of
his mothers side. Simon de Saint Liz, The life of Waldeof.
being scornfully rejected by Judith the mother for that he was lame-legged,
married Mawd the eldest Daughter, and he built Saint Andrews Church and the
Castle at Northampton. After him succeeded his son, Simon the second, who a
long time was in suite about his mothers possessions with David King of Scots
his mothers second Stephen, in the year of our Lord 1152. departed this life
with this testimonial that went of him: A Youth full fraught with all
unlawful wickedness, and as full of all unseemely lewdness. His son Simon
the third, having gone to law with the Scots for his right to the Earldome of
Huntingdon, wasted all his estate, and through the gracious goodness of King
Henry the Second, married the Daughter and Heir of Gilbert de Gaunt Earl of
Lincoln: and in the Huntingdon, and disseized the Scots, dyed childelesse in
the year 1185. Whereas some have lately set down Sir Richard Gobion to have
been Earl of Northampton afterward, I find no warrant thereof either in
Record, or History: Only I find, that Sir Hugh Gobion was a Ringleader in
that rebellious rabble which held Northampton against king Henry the Third, and
that the inheritance of his house came shortly after by marriage to Butler of
Woodhall, and Turpin, etc. But this is most certain that King Edward the Third
created William de Bohun a man of approved valor, Earl of Northampton: and
when his elder brother Humfrey de Bohun, Earl of Hereford and of Essex, High
Constable also of England, was not sufficient in that warlike age, to bear
that charge of the Constable, he Humfrey succeeding in the Earldom of
Northampton, as also in the Earledomes of Hereford and of Essex, for that his
Uncle dyed with issue, begat two Daughters; the one bestowed in marriage upon
Thomas of Woodstocke, the youngest son of King Edward the Third; the other
upon Henry of Lancaster, Duke of Hereford, who afterward attained to the
Crown by the name of King Henry the Fourth. The Daughter of the said Thomas of
Woodstocke brought by her marriage this Title of Northampton with others, into
the Family of the Staffords. But when they afterward had lost their honors
and dignities, King Edward the Sixth honored Sir William Parr Earl of Essex,
a most accomplished Courtier, with the Title of Marquess of Northampton: who
within James in the year of our Salvation 1603. upon one and the same day
advanced Lord Henry Howard brother to the last Duke of Norfolk, a man of rare
and excellent wit, and sweet fluent eloquence, singularly adorned also with the
best sciences, prudent in counsel, and provident withal, to the state of
Baron Howard of Marnehill, and the right honorable name, title, style, and
Dignity of Earl of Northampton.

There belong unto this Shire Parishes 326.

LECESTRIAE COMITATVS. SIVE Leicestershyre. PARS OLIM CORITANORVM.



ON the North side of Northamptonshire boundeth LEICHESTERSHIRE, called in
that Book wherein William the Conqueror set down his Survey of England,
Ledecester-shire: a champian Country likewise throughout, bearing corn in
great plenty, but for the most part without Woods. It has bordering upon it on
the East side, both Rutland-shire and Lincolnshire, on the North Nottingham
and Derby-shires; and Warwickshire on the West. (For, the high Rode way made
by the Romans called Watling-streat, directly running along the West skirt,
separateth it from Warwickshire:) and on the South side, as I noted even now,
lies Northamptonshire. Through the middle part thereof passes the River Soar
taking his way toward the Trent: but over the East-part a little River called
Wreke gently wandereth, which at length finds his way into the foresaid Soar.

On the South side, where it is divided on the one hand with the River Avon the
less, and on the other with the River Welland, we meet with nothing worth
relation, unless it be, on Wellands bank, (whiles he is yet but small and
newly come from his Haverburgh commonly called Harborrow, a Town most
celebrate heereabout for a Fair of Cattaile there kept: and as for Carleton,
as one would say, the husband-mens Town, (that is not far from it) wherein
(I wot not whether it be worth the relating) all in manner that are borne,
whether it be by a peculiar property of the Soil, or the water, or else by
some other secret operation of nature, have an ill favored, untunable, and
harsh manner of speech, fetching their words with very much ado deep from out
of the throat, with a certain kind of wharling.

That Roman street way aforesaid, Watling street
(the causey whereof being in some other places quite worn and eaten away,
here most evidently shows itself) passes on directly as it were by a
straight line Northward, through the West side of this Province. Tamis to
Wales, purposely to seek out Towns of ancient memory: (laugh you will
perhaps, at this my painful and expencefull diligence, as vainly curious:)
neither could I repose my trust upon a more faithful guide for the finding out
of those said towns which Antonine the Emperor specifieth in his Itinerary.
This Street-way, being past Dowbridge, where it leaves Northamptonshire
behind it, is interrupted, first with the River Swift, that is indeed but
slow, although the name import swiftness, which it makes good only in the
Winter months. The Bridge over it now called Bransford and Bensford Bridge,
which here conjoined in times past this way, having been of long time broken
down, has been the cause that so famous a way Cester-Over.
it is repaired. Upon this way lies of the one side, Westward, Cester-Over,
(but it is in Warwickshire) a place worth the naming, were it but in regard of
the Lord thereof Sir Foulke Grevill, a right worshipful and worthy knight:
although the very name it self may witness the antiquity, for, our ancestors
added this word Cester to no other places but only cities. Cester.
On the other side of the way Eastward, hard by water Swift which springs
near Knaptoft the seat of the Turpins a knightly house descended from an heir
of the Gobions, lies Misterton belonging to the ancient family of the
Poulteneis, who took that name of Poulteney a place now decayed within the
said Lordship. Lutterworth.
Near to it is Lutterworth a Mercate Town the possession Verdons, which only
shows a fair Church which has been increased by the Feldings of knights
degree and ancient gentry in this Shire. That famous John Wickliffe was
sometime Parson of this Church, John Wickli^^^ died 1387.
a man of a singular, polite, and well wrought wit, most conversant also in the
holy Scripture: who for that he had sharpened the neb of his pen against the
Popes authority, the Church of Rome, and religious men, was not only in his
life time most grievously troubled, but also Council of Siena turned out of
his grave and openly burned. Neither is it to be forgotten that near to this
Town is a spring so cold that within a short time it turns strawes and
sticks into stones. A spring turning strawes and sticks into stones.


From that Bensford bridge, the foresaid old High way goes on to High-crosse,
so called, for that thereabout stood sometime a Cross, in stead of which, is
erected now a very high post with props and supporters thereto. The neighbors
there dwelling reported unto me, that the two principal Highways of England
did here cut one another overthwart, and that there stood a most flourishing
City there, named Cleycester, Cley Cester. Cleybrooke.
which had a Senate of Aldermen in it, and that Cleybrooke, almost a mile Etiam
ipsae periere ruinae, that is, Even the very ruins are perished and gone.
These presumptions together with the distance of this place from BANNAVENTA or
Wedon, which agrees just, and withal the said Bridge, leading hitherward,
called Bensford, are inducements unto me to think verily, that the station
BENNONES, Bennones.
or VENONES, was here, which Antonine the Emperor places next beyond
BANNAVENTA, especially seeing that Antonine shows how the way divided it
self here into two parts, which also goes commonly Lincoln, the Fosse way
leads directly to RATAE and to VERNOMETUM, of which I will speak anon: and
toward the Northwest, Watlingstreet goes as straight into Wales by
MANVESSEDUM, whereof I shall write in his due place in Warwickshire.

Higher, yet near the same streetside stands Hinkley, which had for Lord of
it, Hugh Grantmaismill, a Norman, high Steward or Seneschall of England, during
the Reigns of king William Rufus, and Henry the First. The said Hugh had two
daughters, Parnell, given in marriage to Robert Blanch-mains (so called of his
fair white hands) Earl of Leicester, together with the High-Stewardship of
England; and Alice, wedded to Roger Bigot. Verily, at the East end of the
Church, there are to be Hughes Castle. Three miles hence stands Bosworth, an
ancient Market Town, which liberty together with the Fair S. Richard
Harecourt obtained for it at the hands of king Edward the First. Under this
town in our great grandfathers days the kingdom of England lay hazarded upon
the chance of one battle: For, Henry Earl of Richmond, with a small power
encountered there in pitched field king Richard the Third, who had by most
wicked means usurped the kingdom: and whiles he resolved to die the more
valiantly, fighting for the liberty of his country, with his followers and
friends, the more happy success he had, and so overcame and slew the Usurper:
1487. Richard the Third slain.
and then being with joyful acclamations proclaimed King in Bernard Andreas of
Tholous, a Poet living in those days, in an Ode dedicated unto King Henry the
Seventh, as touching the Rose his Devise, writ these Verses, such as they are:
Ecce nunc omnes posuere venti
Murmuris, praeter Zephyrum tepentem:
Hic Rosas nutrit, nitidosque flores
Veris amoeni.
Behold now all the winds are laid,
But Zephyrus that blows full warm:
The Rose, and fair spring-floures in mead
He keeps fresh, and does no harm.


Street, unless it be Ashby de la Zouch, that lies a good way off: a most
pleasant Lordship now of the Earls of Huntingdon, *
but belonging in times past to the noble Family De la Zouch, who descended
from Alan Vicount of Rohan, Barons Zouch. De Ashby.
in Little Britain, and Constantia his wife daughter to Conan le Gross Earl
of Britain and Maude his wife the natural daughter of Henry the First. Of
this house Alane De la Zouch married one of the heirs of Roger Quincy Earl of
Winchester, and in her right came to a fair inheritance in this Country. But
when he had judicially sued John Earl of Warren, who chose rather to try the
Title by the sword point than by point of Law, he was slain by him even in
Westminster Hall, in the year of our Lord 1269. and some years after, the
Maures, The family of the Hollands.
of Castle Carry, and the Hollands. Yet their father first bestowed this Ashby
upon Sir Richard Mortimer of Richards Castle his cousin, whose younger issue
thereupon took the surname of Zouch, and were Lords of Ashby. But from Eudo a
younger son of Alane who was slain in Westminster Hall, the Lords Zouch of
Harringworth branched out, and have been for many Descents, Barons of the
Realm. Afterward in process of time Ashby came to the Hastings, who built a
fair large and stately house there, and Sir William Hastings procured unto the
Town the liberty of a Fair in the time of King Henry the Sixth. Here I may
not pass over the next neighbor Cole-Overton, now a seat of the Beaumontes
descended Thomas Beaumont Lord of Bachevill in Normandy, brother to the first
Vicount. This place has a Cole prefixed for the forename which Sir Thomas, as
some write, was he, who was slain manfully fighting at such time as the
French recovered Paris from the English in the time of King Henry the Sixth.
This place of the pit-coles (being of the nature of hardened Bitumen, Pit-cole
or stone cole.
which are dug up to the profit of the Lord, in so great a number that they
serve sufficiently for fuel to the neighbor Dwellers round about far and
near.

I said before that the River Soar did cut this Shire in the middle, which
springing not far from this Street, and increased with many small rils and
Brooks of running water, going a long Northward with a gentle stream, passes
under the West and Lege-Cestria, Leicester.
Leogora, Legeo cester, and Leicester. This Town makes an evident fair show
both of great antiquity and good building. In the year 680. when Sexwulph at
the commandment of King Etheldred divided the kingdom of the Mercians into
Bishoprics, he placed in this an Episcopal See, and was himself the first
Bishop that sat there: but a few years after, when the Sea was translated to
another place, this Dignity had an end, and therewith the stately part of the
Town by little and little was empaired, until that Edelfleda a most virtuous
and noble Lady in the year after our Saviors Nativity 914. repaired and
strongly walled it new about; in so much as Matthew of Paris in his lesser
Story wrote thus, Legecester is a right wealthy City and About the Normans
entering into this Land, it was well peopled and frequented, yea and had very
many Burgesses in it; out of whom they were bound by an ancient custom (as we
read in William the Conquerours book) To send twelve with the King so often
as he ^ent in person to the wars: But if he made a voyage by sea against his
enemies, they sent four horses to carry armor as far as to London. This
City paid yearly to the King 30. pounds by tale, and twenty in ora, that is,
Or in ore.
by weight, also 25. measures called Sextaries of honey. But in the time of King
Henry the Seconds Reign, it was sore overpressed with a world of great and
grievous calamities, and the walls thrown down, what time as Robert surnamed
Bossu, (that is, Crouch) Earl of Leicester conspired and rebelled against the
King. Which Matthew of Paris shows in these words: For the obstinate
stubbornness of Earl Robert spurning against the King, the noble City of
Leicester was besieged and overthrown by King Henry, and the Wall which seemed
indissoluble, was utterly cast down all round about. For, that I may add thus
much out of the lesser History abovesaid, when the Wall of the City wanting a
good foundation was undermined, and the props that sustained it at length
Miserable also was the imposition of a fine upon the Citizens at that time, and
their banishment as lamentable; who having obtained by paying sums of money
license to depart, took Sanctuary for extreme fear in Saint Albans and Saint
Edmundsbury. The Castle likewise was dismantled of all Fortifications, which
verily was a large and strong piece. Beneath which, there is a very fair
Hospital or house for receipt of poor people, and a Collegiat Church wherein
Henry Earl of Lancaster, and Henry of Lancaster his son, who was the first
Duke of Lancaster, lie buried. For, the said Duke when he was now stepped far
in years, of a pious mind of Leicester who lived in that age, writes thus in
his story. Henry the first Duke of Lancaster built a Collegiat Church and an
Hospital without the South Gate of Leicester; wherein he ordained a Deane
with 12. Canons Prebendaries, as many Vicars, and other Officers, an hundred
poor and feeble people, and ten poor able women to give attendance upon the
said feeble folk; and this Hospital he endowed with sufficient revenewes. *
As for this Hospital it continues in some good state, as an other Bede-house
in the Town built by W. Wigeston. But the Collegiat Church which was a
magnificent work, and the greatest ornament of Leicester was demolished when
religious houses were granted to the King.

At the other side of the City among most goodly and pleasant meadows which the
River Soar waters, there was an Abbay, called of that place, De Pree: of
which, the said Knighton has written thus, Robert de Bossu Earl of Leicester
(when he begun Gerondon Abbay for Cistertians) founded the Monastery of S. Mary
De Pratis, at Leicester, endowed it richly with Lands, Possessions and
Revenewes, and himself with the consent of Amiciae.
Amice his Wife became a Or Priest.
Chanon Regular in the same, and, for the space of fifteen years, in habit
of a Chanon served God there, and so slept in the Lord; That thus forsooth, he
might make amends by repentance in a Chanons weed of that offense; which
beforetime he had committed by rebelling with a traitorous mind against his
Liege Prince. What name Leicester had in the Romans time, it is not known; In
Ninnius, I think it to be that, which is called Caer Lerion: But, that Leir a
King, of whom there go many tales, built it, they that will, may believe it
for me. But the situation thereof upon the Foss-way, and the distance both
from BENNONES and VEROMETUM, agrees so just with the description of Antonine,
that I cannot but think it to be that RATAE which Ptolomee names RAGAE,
although there is neither tippe nor toe remaining in it of the name RATAE:
unless peradventure it be in that old long Ditch and Rampire which they call
Rawdikes, Or Road dikes.
scarce half a mile without the South Gate.

Here am I at a stand, and look about me what way to follow for the seeking
out of ancient Towns. Ranulph a Monk of Chester records, that the ancient
street way Lincoln, but he tells us not, through what Wastes. The common
voice goes that it went on still full North through Nottingham-shire: Antonine
the Emperor (if I have any insight at all) seems to insinuate, that it
passed North-Eastward through this County into Lincolnshire. And verily, this
way there are places of antique memory that by some of their remains and
tokens show themselves: but the other way, I could not my self ever yet meet
with any; what others have done I know not, and would willingly learn.

North-West from Leicester, and not far off is Grooby a large Lordship and
Manor which from Hugh Grantmaismill whom King William the Conqueror had
enriched with great possessions and revenewes, came by the Earls of Leicester,
and the Quincies, Ferrers: Ferrers and Greies de Grooby.
out of which the Lord Ferrers of Grooby flourished a long time in the
honorable state of Barons: and in the end, Isabel the only daughter remaining
of the right line, brought it by her marriage into the name of the Greies, from
whence it fell again at the last by Attainder into the Kings hands. But James
restored Sir Henry Gray a worthy Knight to the ancient honor of his noble
Progenitors, creating him Baron Gray of Grooby in the first year of his Reign.

Now let us return to the River Soar, Mont-Soar-hill.
which being past Leicester, first gives name to Montsorell, or rather
Mont-Soar-hill, a name compounded of Norman and English both: which now is
famous only for a Mercate there kept: but in old time most renowned for the
Castle, seated upon a steep and craggy Hill, hanging over the River, which
before time belonged to the Earls of Leicester, but afterward to Saer de
Quincy Earl of Winchester in the Barons war; at this day nothing but a rude
heap of rubbish: For, in the year 1217. the Inhabitants of the Town, when
after Historia Minor.
rased it down to the very ground, as being the Devils nest, and a Den of
thieves, robbers, and rebels. Somewhat higher on the other side of the River
stands Barrow: where is dug lime, commended above all other for the strong
binding thereof. After, some few miles from thence, Soar while he seeks
Trent, leaves Leichestershire, *
a little above Cotes now the habitation of the Family of Skipwith originally
descended out of Yorkshire, Skipwith.
and enriched many years since with fair Possessions in Lincolnshire, by an
heir of Ormesbie. On the opposite bank of Soar stands Lough-borrough a
Mercate Town, Lough-borrough.
which adorned one only man with the name of Baron, to wit, Sir Edward
Hastings; and that in the Reign of Queen Mary. But when she, of whom he was
most dearly loved, departed Stoke Pogeis in Buckingham-shire; where with poor
people he lived to God, and among them finished the course of his life
devoutly in Christ. That this Lough-borrow is that Town of the Kings named in
the Saxon Tongue (...), which as Marianus says Cuthwulph took from the
Britans in the year of Christ 572. the near affinity of the name may yield
some proof. But now among all the Towns of this Shire it rightfully
chalengeth the second place next unto Leicester, whether a man either regard
the bigness or building thereof, or the pleasant Woods about it. For, within
very little of it, the Forest Charnwood or Charley stretches it self out a
great way, Charnwood Forest.
wherein is seen Beaumanour Park, which the Lords of Beaumont (as I have
heard) fensed round about with a stone Wall. These Beaumonts descended from a
younger son of John County of Brene in France, who for his high honor, and
true valor was preferred to marry the heir of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, *
and with great pomp crowned King of Jerusalem in the year of our Lord 1248.
De Bello monte. Beaumont.
Hence it is that we see the Arms of Jerusalem so often quartered with those
of Beaumont in sundry places of England. Sir Henry Beaumont was the first that
planted himself in England about the year 1308. who advanced to the marriage
of an heir of Alexander Comine Earl of Boghan in Scotland (whose mother was
one of the heirs of Roger Quincy Earl of Winchester) entered upon a very
goodly and fair inheritance, and so a great Family was propagated from him.
He in the Reign of Edward the Third, for certain years was summoned to the
Parliament, by the name of Earl of Boghan, and John Lord Beamont in the Reign
of Henry the Sixth was for a time Constable of England, and the first to my
knowledge, that in England received at the Kings hands the state and Title of a
Vicount. The first Vicount of Honor in Englan^
But when William the last Vicount was dead without issue, his sister was
wedded to the Lord Lovell, and the whole inheritance afterward, which was rich
and great, by attainder of Lovell fell into the hands of King Henry the Seventh.

In this North part we meet with nothing at all worth the naming, unless it
be a Roise Verdon founded for Nuns and called it Grace-Dieu, now belonging to
a younger house of the Beaumonts: and where the Trent runs, hard by,
Dunnington.
is Dunnington, an ancient Castle built by the first Earls of Leicester: which
afterward came to John Lacy Earl of Lincoln, who procured unto it from King
Edward the First the privilege of keeping a Mercate and Fair. But when as in
that great proscription of the Barons under King Edward the Second the
hereditaments Thomas Earl of Lancaster, and Alice Lacy his Wife were seized
into the Kings hands, and alienated in diverse sorts, the King enforced her to
release this Manor unto Hugh Le Despenser the younger.

The East part of this Shire which is hilly and feeds great numbers of
Sheep, was adorned with two places of especial note; Vernometum or Verometum.
VERNOMETUM or VEROMETUM, whereof Antonine the Emperor has made mention, and
Burton-Lazers, both in the ages foregoing of very great name and reputation.
VERNOMETUM, which now has lost the name, seems to have stood (for I dare not
affirm it) in that place, which at this day men call Burrowhill and
Erd-burrow: For, between VEROMETUM and RATAE, according to Antonine his
reckoning are twelve Leicester to this place.

The name Burrow also that it has at this day came from (...), which in the
Saxon Tongue signifies, a place fortified, and under it a Town called
Borough belonging to an old Family of Gentlemen so surnamed. But, (that which
makes most for proof) in that very place there rises up an hill with a
steep and upright ascent on every side, but South Eastward: in the top whereof
appear the express tokens of a Town destroyed, a duple Trench, and the very
Tract where the Walls went, which enclosed about eighteen Acres of ground
within. At this day it is arable ground, and is nothing so famous, as in this,
that the youth dwelling round about were wont yearly to exercise themselves in
wrestling and other games in this place. What Vernometum signifies in the
ancient language of the Gaullois.
For, VERNOMETUM in the ancient Gauls language, which was the same that the old
Britans tongue, sounds as much as A great Temple; as Venantius Fortunatus in
the first book of his Songs plainly shows, writing of Vernometum a Town of
Gaul in these Verses.

Nomine Vernometum voluit vocitare vetustas,
Quod quasi fanum ingens Gallica lingua sonat.
In elder time this place they termed by name of VERNOMET,
Which sounds in language of the Gauls, as much as Temple Great.
Burton Lazers.
As for Burton, surnamed Lazers, of Lazers (for so they used to term folk
infected with the Elephantiasie or Leprosy) was a rich Spittle-house, or
Hospital, under the Master whereof, were in some sort all other small Spittles
or Lazer-houses in England, like as himself also was under the Master of the
Lazers in Jerusalem. It was founded in the first age of the Normans, by a
common contribution over all England, and the Mowbraies especially did set to
their helping hands. At which time the Leprosy which the learned term
Elephantiasis, Leprosy in England.
(because the skins of Lepres are like to that of Elephants) in grievous manner
by way of contagion ran over all England. For, it is verily thought that this
disease did then first creep out of Egypt into this Europe: first of all in
Pompeius Magnus his days: afterward, under Heraclius, and at other times as
we may see in the Histories, whether by celestial influence, or other hidden
causes I leave to the learned. But so far as I could hitherto read, it did
never set foot in England before that time. Besides these places before named
of great name and mark, we must not overpasse neither Melton Mowbray near
unto this Burton, Melton.
a Mercate Town bearing name of the Mowbraies sometime Lords thereof, wherein
is nothing more worth the seeing, Skeffington.
than a fair Church; nor Skeffington, standing farther off, which as it has
given name to a worshipful Family, *
so again it has received worship and credit from the same.

The River that waters this part of the Shire, is by the Inhabitants about it
called the Wreken, along which upon resemblance of the name I have sought
VERNOMETUM, but in vain. This Wreken gathers a strong stream by many lively
Brooks resorting unto it, Wimondham.
whereof one passes by Wimondham an ancient habitation Barkleis, well
increased by an heir of Dela-Laund, and so on by Melton Mowbray before
mentioned, by Kirkby Bellers; (where there was a Priory) having that addition
of the Bellers, a respective, rich, and noble Family in their time, Brookesby.
by Brokesby a seat now of the Villiers of an old Norman race, and descended
from an heir of Bellers: which Brokesby imparted formerly the surname to the
Brokesbies of especial antiquity in these parts. Then the Wreken speedeth by
Ratcliffe high mounted upon a cliffe and within few miles conjoyneth it self
to Soar, near unto Mont-Soar-hill, before mentioned.

Whatsoever of this Shire lies beyond the Wreken Northward, is not so
frequently inhabited, and part of it is called the Would, as being hilly without
wood; wherein Dalby a seat of the old Family of the Noels, of whom I shall
speak elsewhere, and Waltham on the Would, a mean Market, are most notable.
Through this part as I have been informed passes the Fosse-way, made by the
Romans from Lewing Bridge, by Segrave which gave surname to the honorable
Family often mentioned, and the Lodge on the Would toward the Vale of Bever, but
the Tract thereof as yet I know not.

This Shire has been more famous from time to time by reason of the Earls
thereof have been very renowned. Earls of Leicester.
And seeing it had under the Saxons government Earls by inheritance, I will
first reckon them up in order, as Thomas Talbot a skillful Antiquary has
delivered me a note of them out of the kings Records. In the time of Aethelbald
King of the Mercians, and in the year of our Redemption 716. Leofrick
Leicester, whom there succeeded in direct line Algar the first, Algar the
second, Leofrick the second, Leofstane, Leofrick the third buried in Coventry,
Algar the third, who had issue two sons, Aeadwin Earl of March, Morkar Earl
of Northumberland, and a daughter named Lucy, first married to Ivon Talboys of
Anjou, afterward to Roger of Romara, who begat of her William of Romara Earl
of Lincoln. Now when as the issue male of this Saxon Family failed, and the
name of the Saxons was trodden (as it were) under foot, Robert Beaumont a Norman
Lord of Pont Audomar and Earl of Mellent, (after that Simon an officiary Earl
of Leicester was dead) obtained his Earldom in the year of our Lord 1102. at
the bountiful hand of King Henry the First: The words of Henry Huntingdon in
his Epistle De Cor temptu mundi.
which Robert, A man for skill and knowledge excellent, After him succeeded
from father to son three Roberts, *
the first surnamed Bossu because he was crook-backed, who after he had
rebelled against King Henry the First, weary of his loose irregular life,
became a Chanon Regular; the second surnamed Blanch-maines of his
lily-white-hands, who sided with the young King against King Henry the Second,
and dyed in the expedition of King Richard the First to the Holy Land; the
third surnamed Fitz-Parnell, because his mother was Petronilla.
Parnels daughter and one of the heirs to Hugh Grant-maismill the last, in
whose right he was Seneschall or Steward of England,

A few years after, Simon Montfort descended from a base son of Robert King
of France, who had married the sister of Robert Fitz-Parnell, enjoyed this
honor. But after that he and his were expelled in the year 1200. as wholly
devoted to the French, Ranulph Earl of Chester attained unto this Dignity, not
in right of inheritance, Matthew Paris
but by his Princes favor. Howbeit, afterward Simon Montfort son of the
foresaid Simon obtained this honor, when Almarik his eldest brother surrendered
up his right before King Henry the Third. This Simon, stood in so gracious
favor with King Henry the Third, that he called him home again out of France
when he was banished, heaped upon him great wealth, admitted him unto the
Earldom Leicester, granted to him the Stewardship of England, and to honor
him the more gave him his own sister in marriage. But he, thus over-heaped
with honorable benefits, when he had no means to requite them (such is the
perverse wilfulness of men) began hatefully to malign him, See Eovesham in
Worcestershire.
yea and did most wickedly molest the good King having so well deserved, making
himself Ringleader to the rebellious Barons, and with them raising horrible
tempests of civil war, in which

As for his Honors and Possessions, King Henry the Third gave and granted
them to Edmund his own younger son Earl of Lancaster. So afterward this
honor lay as it were obscured among the Titles of the house of Lancaster: and
Mawde the daughter of Henry Duke of Lancaster being married to Henry Duke of
Bavaria, Earl of Henault, Holland, Zeland, etc. added unto his other Titles,
this of Earl of Leicester also: For, in the Charter dated the five and thirty
year of King Edward the Third, In the great Register of the Duchy.
he is in plain terms styled William Earl of Henhault and of Leicester: yea
and, as we find in the Inquisition made Anno 36. of the said King Edward the
Third, she by the name of Duchess of Bavaria, held the Castle, Manor,
Leicester. After whose decease without issue, that honor reverted to John of
Gaunt Duke of Lancaster who had wedded Blanch the other sister of Mawde. From
which time it became united to the House of Lancaster, until in our
remembrance it reflourished in L. Robert Dudley, who was by Queen Elizabeth
girt with the sword of the Earldom of Leicester, and extraordinarily
favored: whereupon the States General of the united Provinces in their great
troubles chose him triumphantly for their absolute Governor, and soon after
as contemptuously rejected him, reserving all Sovereignty to themselves. But
after a short time he passed out of this transitory life in the year 1588.
leaving the fame only of his greatness behind him.

Within this Shire are 200. Parish Churches.

RVTLANDIAE Omnium in Anglia Comitatu: um minimus Pars olim CORITANORVM.



RUTLAND, in the old English Saxon tongue (...), is environed within
Leichestershire, unless it be on the Southside, where it lies upon the river
Welland, and on the Eastside, where it butteth upon Lincolnshire. A Country
nothing inferior to Leichestershire either in fruitful quality of soil, or
pleasantness, but in quantity only, as being the least County of all
England. For, lying in form almost Rut so much land as he could ride about in
one day: and that he, forsooth, rode about this shire within the time
appointed, and so had it given him, and named it by his own name Rutland. But
let such fables be packing: I would not have the truth prejudiced with an
extravagant tale.

And where as the earth in this shire is every where red, The na^^ Rutland.
and so red that even the sheep fleeces are thereby colored red: whereas
also the English-Saxons called Red in their tongue Roet and Rud; may we not
suppose that this Country was named Rutland, as one would say a Redland? For,
as says the Poet.

Convenient rebus nomina saepe suis.
The names, as often times we see,
With things themselves full well agree.
Now, that places in all Nations have had their names of redness, Rutlan
Castle in Wales, built on a shore of red earth, Redbay, Redhill, Redland, The
Red Promontory, The Red Sea also betwixt Egypt and Arabia, Erytheia in Ionia,
and a number besides

Wash or Guash, a little river, which runs from the West Eastward through
the middle of it, divides it in twain. In the hithermore or South part rises
Uppingham upon an high ascent, Upping
whence that name was imposed, not memorable for any thing else, but because it
is counted a well frequented Market town, Okeham R. Ihonson a Minister of Gods
word, in a good and laudable intent, for the training up of children in good
literature lately erected, with the money he had gotten together by way of
collection. Under this stands Drystoke, which in no wise is to be passed over
with silence, considering it has been the habitation from old time of a right
ancient race of the Digbyes: which (I grieve to utter it, but all men know it)
has now caught a deep steine by Sir Everard Digby drawn into that cursed
crew, who most horribly complotted with one divelish flash of hellish
Gun-pouder to blow up both Prince, and Country. More Eastward upon the river
Welland, I saw nothing remarkable, unless it be Berohdon, now Barodon, which
Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick held, Fines 1
with South Leffingham, now South Luffenham, and other Hamelets, Edw. 3
by service to be the Kings Chamberlain in the Exchequer.

On the further part beyond the river, among the hills, there spreads below a
very pleasant and fruitful vale, named at this day The vale of Catmose,
happily of Coet maes, which signifies in the British tongue a field full of
woods. In the midst Okeham shows it self, which by the like reason may
seem to have taken the name from Oaks: where, hard by the Church which is
large and fair, remain the cracked and decaying walls of an old Castle: which,
Walkelin de Ferrari^s built in the first times of the Norman Kings. And that it
has been the dwelling place of the Ferrars, besides the credit of writers, and
general report, the great horse shoes, which in times past that family gave in
their arms, fastened upon the gate and in the hall, may sufficiently prove.
Afterward it belonged to the Lords of Tatteshall: But when King Richard the
second had promoted Edward, the Duke of Yorkes son, to the Earldom of
Rutland, he gave unto him this Castle also. But within our Fathers remembrance
it befell unto Thomas Cromwell, Barons Cromwell.
and was reputed See Earls of Essex.
whom King Henry the Eighth advanced to the highest pitch of dignity: and
streightwaies when by his plotting and attempting of many matters he had cast
himself into the tempestuous storms of envy and displeasure, bereft him on a
sudden both of life and dignity.

Burly.
Over against it Eastward, there stands Burley most daintily seated, and
overlooking the vale: A stately and sumptuous house now of the Haringtons, who
by marrying the daughter and heir of Colepeper, became Lords of so fair an
inheritance; that ever since they have flourished in these parts, like as
before time the Colepepers had done, unto whom by N. Green the wealthy and
goodly Livelod of the Bruses in part had descended. As for those Bruses, being
men of the chief Nobility Cottons of Connington in Huntingdon-shire (of whom I
have written already) and these Haringtons. Baron Harington.
In which regard and gracious respect King James advanced Sir John Harington
branched from that stem that the ancient Lords Harington, to the title of Baron
Harington of Exton, a town adjacent, where he has also an other fair house.

Moreover, on the East side, by the river Guash, stands Brigcasterton, whereof
I will say more afterward, and Rihall: where, when superstition had so
bewitched our ancestors, that the multitude of their pety Saints, had well
near taken quite away Tibba a pety Saint or Goddess, reputed to be the
tutelar patroness, of Hauking, The Faulkoners Saint. Baron Cecill de Essendon.
was of Foulers and Faulkoners worshipped as a second Diana: Essendon also is
near adjoining; the Lord whereof Sir Robert Cecil, a good son of a right
good father (the strength and stay of our Commonwealth in his time) was by
King James created Baron Cecil of Essendon in the first year of his reign.

This little County King Edward the Confessor, by his last Will and Testament
bequeathed unto his wife Eadith, Earls of Rutland.
yet with this condition, that after her death it should come to S. Peter of
Westminster. For, these be the very words of the said Testament. I will, that
after the death of Queen Eadith my wife, ROTELAND with all the appertenances
thereto, be given to my Monastery of the most blessed Saint Peter, and be yet
King William the Conqueror cancelled and made void this Testament, who
reserving a great part of it to himself, divided the rest between Countess
Judith, whose daughter was married to David King of Scots, Robert Mallet, Oger,
Gislebert of Gaunt, Earl Hugh, Aubrey the Clerk, and others: And unto
Westminster, first he left the Tithes, afterward the Church only of Okeham
and parcels thereunto appertaining.

This County has not had many Earls. The first Earl of Rutland, was Edward,
the first begotten Son of Edmund of Langley Duke of York, created by King
Richard the Second upon a singular favor that he cast unto him during his
Aumarle. This young man, wickedly projected with others a practice to make away
King Henry the Fourth, and straight ways with like levity discovered the same:
But after his Fathers death, being Duke of York lost his life fighting

Many years after, King Henry the Eighth, raised up Sir Thomas Mannours, to be
Earl of Rutland, who in right of his Grandmother Aeleonor was possessed of a
goodly and fair inheritance of the Barons Roos, lying in the countries round
about, and elsewhere. In his room succeeded his Son Henry, and after him
likewise Edward his Son, unto whom if I should say nothing else, that
commendation of the Poet was most aptly and truly appliable.


Nec sinit ingenium nobilitate premi.
His name so great with virtues good, he matcheth equally,
Nor suffers wit smuthring to lie under Nobility.
But he, by over hasty and untimely death, being received into Heaven, left
this dignity unto John his Brother: who also departing this life within a
while, has for his successor, Roger his Son, answerable in all points to his
ancient and right noble

This small Shire has Parish Churches 48.

LINCOLNIAE Comitatus vbi olim insederunt CORITANI



Upon Rutland on the East side, confineth the County of LINCOLN, called by the
English-Saxons (...), and by the Normans Nicol-shire after their coming into
the Land, with some transposition of letters, but usually LINCOLNE-SHIRE. A
very large Country, as reaching almost threescore miles in length, and carrying
in some places above thirty miles Humber an arm of the sea: on the West side
it butteth upon Nottingham-shire: and on the South it is severed from
Northamptonshire by the River Welland. This whole Shire is divided into three
parts, whereof one is called Holland: a second Kesteven, and the third Lindsey.
Holland, which Ingulph terms Holland lies to the sea, and like unto that
Holland in Germany, it is so thoroughly wet in most places with waters, that a
man's foot is ready to sink into it, Ingulph say that Holland is the right
name, and the same imposed upon it, of Hay which our Progenitors broadly
called Hoy.

This part throughout bears upon that ebbing and flowing arm of the Sea,
which Ptolomee calls METARIS, Metaris aestu^rium. The Washes.
instead of Maltraith, and we at this day, The Washes. A very large arm this
is and passing well known, at every tide and high sea covered all over with
water, but when the sea ebbeth, and the tide is past, a man may pass over it
as on dry land, but yet not without danger. Which, King John learned with his
loss. For, whilst he journied this way, when he warred upon the rebellious
Fosse-dyke, and Welstream he lost all his carriage and princely furniture, as
Matthew of Westminster writes.

This Country which the Ocean has laid to the land, as the Inhabitants
believe, by sands heaped and cast together, they it term Silt, is assailed on
the one side with the said Ocean sea, and in the other with a mighty confluence
of waters from out of the higher countries, in such sort that all the Winter
quarter the people of the country are feign to keep watch and ward
continually, and hardly with all the banks and dammes that they make against
the waters, are able to defend themselves from the great violence and outrage
thereof. The ground brings forth but small store of corn, but plenty of
grass, and is replenished abundantly with fish and water-fowle.

Certain it is, that the sea aforetime had entered farther up into the Country,
and that appears by those banks formerly raised against the waterwaves then
in-rushing, which are now two miles off from the shore, as also by the hills
near Sutterton, which they call Salt-Hils. Salt-hils.
But, of fresh water there is exceeding great want in all places: neither have
they any at all but rain water and that in pits, which if they be of any great
depth, presently become brackish, if shallow, they dry up as soon. Quicksands.
which have a wonderful force to draw to them and to hold fast, as both
Shepherds and their poor Sheep also find other whiles not without danger.

This Holland or Hoiland (whether you will) is divided into two parts. The
Lower and the Higher: The Lower has in it soul and slabby quavemires, yea and
most troublesome Fennes, which the very Inhabitants themselves for all their
stilts cannot Ely, with mighty piles and huge banks opposed against the same.
Of which, Southybanke is of greatest name; which least it should have a breach
made through it with that infinite mass of water that falls from the South
part, when the Rivers swell, and all is overflowne by inundation, the people
watch with great care and much fear, as against a dangerous enemy. And yet for
the draining away of this water, the neighbor Inhabitants at the common
charges of the country began to make a new channel at Clowcrosse in the year
1599. Near unto this bank aforesaid, Crowland.
we saw Crowland, which also is called Croyland, a Town of good note among the
Fenne-people, the name whereof sounds, as Ingulph the Abbat of A raw and
muddy Land: A place, as they write, much haunted in times past with I wot not
what sprites and fearful apparitions, before that Guthlake a right holy and
devout man led there an Eremits life. In whose memorial Aethelbald King of the
Mercians founded to the honor of God at his great charges, in the year of our
Salvation 716. an Abbay very famous both for opinion of the religious life of
the Monks, and also for their wealth. Concerning which, take here, if you
please, these Verses of Foelix a Monk of good antiquity, out of the life of
Guthlake.

Nunc exercet ibi se munificentia Regis,
Et magnum templum magno molimine condit.
At cum tam mollis, tam lubrica, tam male constans
Fundamenta palus non ferret saxea, palos
Praecipit infigi quercino robore caesos,
Leucarumque novem spacio rate fertur arena;
Inque solum mutatur humus, suffultaque tali
Cella basi, multo stat consummata labor.
His bounty now the King does there bestow,
An Abbay fair with much expense to rear.
But seeing that the waterish Fenne below,
Those ground-workes laid with stone uneath could bear,
(So quaving soft and moist the Bases were)
He caused piles made of good heart of oak,
Pitched down to be with maine commanders stroke.
Then nine leagues off, men sand in Barges brought,
Which once fast ramm'd by painful workmans hand,
Of rotten earth good solid ground was wrought;
On which for aye such works might firmly stand;
And thus by this devise of new plantation,
The Church stands firm and has a sure foundation.
The Devils of Crowland.
If I should exemplify unto you out of that Monk, the Devils of Crowland, with
their blabber lips, fire-spitting mouths, rough and skaly visages, beetle
heads, terrible teeth, sharp chins, hoarse throats, black skins,
crump-shoulders, side and gor-bellies, burning loins, crooked and hawm'd
legs, long tailed buttockes, and ugly mishapes, which heretofore walked and
wandered up and down in these places, and very much troubled holy Guthlake and
the Monks, you would laugh full merrily: and I might be thought a simple
sily-one full worthily. Howbeit, in regard Crowland lies so shut up and
divided round Venice. Three streets it has and those severed one from another
by water courses between, planted thick with willowes, and raised upon piles
or posts pitched and driven down deep into the standing waters, having over
them a triangle Bridge of admirable workmanship, under which for to receive the
fall of the waters meeting in one confluence, the Inhabitants report there was
a pit sunk of a mighty depth. Now, whereas beyond the Bridge in solum mutatur
humus (as that Monk said) that is, The mould is changed, and is become firm
and solid ground, there stood in times past that famous Abbay, and Skerries:)
yet the most gainful trade they have is by taking fish, and catching of
water-foule; and that is so great, that in the month of August, they will
spread a net and at once draw three thousand Mallards and wild Duckes and such
like together: and these pooles or watery plots

The private History of this Abbay I list not to relate (seeing it is commonly
extant and to be seen) out of Ingulph now printed and published: yet my mind
serves me well, briefly to record, that which Peter of Bloys Vice Chancellor
to King Henry the Second reported at large, as touching the new building of
this Abbay in the year of our Redemption 1112. to the end, that by this one
president we may learn, by what means and helps, so mighty, so huge, and so
fair religious houses Ioffrid the Abbat obtained of the Archbishops and
Bishops in England, An Indulgence for the third part of penance enjoined for
sins committed, unto every one that helped forward so holy a work. With this
Indulgence he sent out Monks every way and all about to gather money:
wherewith when he was now sufficiently furnished, to the end that he might
have an happy beginning of this work from some happy names of lucky presage,
he solemnly appointed the day of Saint Perpetua, and of Saint Felicity, on
which he would lay the first foundation. At which day there came flocking in
great numbers, the Nobles, the Prelates, and Commons of all the Country
thereabout. After the celebration of Divine Service, and Anthems sung in parts,
Abbat Ioffrid himself laid the first Corner Eastward; then the Noble men and
great persons every one in their degree couched their stones, and upon the said
stones some laid money, others their sealed Deeds of lands, Advousons of
Churches, of Tenths of their Sheep, and of the Tithes of their Churches, of
certain measures of wheat, and of a certain number of Workmen, as Masons and
Quarriers, whom they would pay. The common sort again and towneships for their
parts, offered with cheerful devotion, some money, others one days labor
every month until the work were finished, some the building of whole
Pillars, others of the bases to the said Pillars, and others again to make
certain parts of the walls, striving a vie who should do most. This done, the
Abbat after he had in a solemn speech commended their devout bounty to so
holy a works arose. From Crowland there goes a Cawsey planted on both sides
with Willowes, Welland and the deep Marshes, Northward: upon which, two miles
from Crowland, I saw the fragment of a Piramis with this Inscription.

(...).

I SAY, THAT SAINT GUTHLAKE,

Spalding.
Higher yet upon the same River is seated Spalding, enclosed round about with
Riverets and draines, a fairer Town I assure you than a man would look to
find in this Tract among such slabbes and water-plashes: where Ivo Talbois,
whom Ingulph elsewhere calls Earl of Anjou, gave an ancient Cell to the
Monks of Angiers in France. From hence as far as to Deeping, which is ten
miles off, Egelrick Abbat of Crowland, afterward Bishop of Durham, made for
the ease of travailers, as says Ingulphus, through the midst of a vast
Forest, and of most deep Fennes, a sound causey of wood and sand, after his
own name called Elrich-road; which notwithstanding at this day is not to be
seen.

In higher Hoiland that bends more into the North, first we have in sight
Kirkton, so named of the Church, which is passing fair; and then, where the
River Witham hemnd in strongly with banks on both sides runs in a maine and
full stream toward the sea, Boston.
flourishes Boston, more truly named Botolphs-towne. For, it carried that
name from one Botolph a most holy and devout Saxon, who at Icanhoe, had a
Witham, which has over it a wooden bridge of a great height; and well
frequented by the means of a commodious haven unto it: the Market place is
fair and large, and the Church makes a goodly show, as well for the
beautiful building as the greatness thereof: the towre-steeple of it, which
rises up to a mighty height, does, as one would say, salute passengers and
travailers a great way off, and gives direction also to the sailers. A
lamentable overthrow it sustained in the Reign of Edward the first. For, when
bad and Ruffian-like behavior rufled at that time over all England, certain
military lusty fellows having proclaimed here a Justs or running at Tilt, at
a Fair time, when there was much resort of people thither, came apparelled in
the Robbers in Monks habits.
set fire on the Town in most places thereof, brake in upon Merchants with
sudden violence, took away many things by force, burnt a great deal more; in
so much as our Historians write, that (as the ancient Writers record of Corinth
when it was destroyed) molten gold and silver ran down in a stream together.
The Ringleader Robert Chamberlan, after he had confessed the act, and what a
shameful deed had been committed, was hanged: yet could he not be wrought by
any means to disclose his accomplices in this foul fault. But happier times
raised Boston again out of the ashes, and a staple for wool here settled, did
very much enrich it, Stilyard.
and drew thither merchants of the Hanse Society, who had here their Guild. At
this day it is for building fair, and by good trade rich. For, the Inhabitants
give themselves The Register of Freston. Barons of Burton Croeun. De vallibus.
Nere unto this was the Barony de Croeun or de Credonio, out of which family,
Alan de Croeun founded the Priory of Freston; and at length Parnel heir of the
family being twice married transferred no small inheritance, first to the
Longchamps, which came to the Pedwardins; and secondly to John from whom the
Barons Roos are descended. Beyond it scarce six miles, reaches Holland: all
which Ivo Talboys of Anjo^ received at the bountiful hands of king William the
Conqueror, Herwardus Anglus.
but Herward an English man, of good hope and full of douty courage, being
son to Leofrick Lord of Brane or Burn not brooking his insolency, when he
saw his own and his Country men's safety now endangered; after he had received
the cincture with a military Belt by Brann Abbat of Peterborough, Ingulph of
Crowland.
whose stomach rose also against the Normans, raised war against him,
oftentimes put him to flight, and at length carried him away captive, and
suffered him not to be ransomed but with such conditions that he might be
received into the Kings favor, wherein he dyed his liege man. For so deserved
his valor, which is always commended Hugh Enermeve Lord of Deping enjoyed his
lands, which afterward, as I understand, was devolved upon the Family of Wake,
Barons de Wake.
which being mightily enriched with the Possessions of the Estotevills, was of
right great honor in these parts, until the Reign of Edward the Second: for
then, by an heir General, their inheritance came by right of marriage unto
Edmund of Woodstocke youngest son to King Edward the First, and Earl of
Kent. But of a younger son, the ancient Family of the Wakes of Blisworth in
Northamptonshire yet remaining is descended.

The second part of this Country commonly called Kesteven, Kesteven.
and by Aethelward an ancient Author, Ceostefnewood, adjoining to Hoiland on
the West side; is for air Welland stands Stanford, Stanford.
in the Saxon tongue (...), built of rough stone, whence it has the name. A
Town well peopled and of great resort, endowed also with sundry immunities,
and walled about; It gave Geld or Tribute, as we read in Domesday Book, for
twelve hundreds and an half, in the army, shipping, and Danegeld, and in it
were six Wards. What time as King Edward the elder fortified the South banks
of Rivers against the Danes breaking by force into the Land out of the North
parts, Marianus records, that he built a very strong Castle just over
against this Town also on the South bank (which now is Stanford Baron) yet
there appears not any one token thereof at this day: for, See Burghley in the
County of Northampton.
that Castle which in time of the civil War Stephen strengthened against
Henry of Anjou, was within the Town, as both the general report holds, and
the very plot also whereon it stood as yet remaining, shows. But soon after,
the said Henry, being now King of England, gave the whole Town of Stanford,
which was in his Demaine, excepting the fees or Feifs of the Barons and Knights
of the same Town, unto Richard de Humez or Homets, who was Constable to the
King, his Sovereign Lord, for his homage and service. And the same afterward,
held William Earl of Warren by the will and pleasure of King John.

Under the Reign of Edward the Third, An Academy or University begun at
Stanford.
an University, and public profession Oxford, a great number of Scholars
withdrew themselves hither: but after a small while they returned upon the
Kings Proclamation, to Oxford, and as they suddenly began, so they ended as
soon this new University: And thenceforward provided it was by oath, That no
Student in Oxford should publicly profess or read at Stanford to the
prejudice of Oxford. Nevertheless it flourished with fresh trading and
merchandise, until the civil war, between the two houses of Lancaster and
York, grew so hoar, that the Northren Soldiers breaking into the Town
destroyed all with fire and sword. Neither could it ever since that Alderman
and four and twenty Burgesses his brethren. Beautified it is with seven Parish
Churches or thereabout, and shows an old Hospital and that a very fair
house founded by William Brown a Burgess there, besides another new one on
this side the Bridge lately built by that Nestor of Britain, Sir William
Cecill Baron Burghley, what time as he raised that stately and Burghley,
whereof I have spoken already in Northamptonshire, who lies enterred here in
a goodly and gorgeous Tomb within the Parish Church of Saint George; a man (to
say nothing else of him) who by course of nature, and for his own glory lived
long enough, but in regard of his Country died oversoone.

Although some tokens remaining of antiquity, and the Commonly called High-Dike.
High Street, made by the Romans, which so soon as you are without the Town
leads you the direct way into the North, may sufficiently show, that
sometimes there was a Ferry or Waterfare here. Gausennae.
Yet that this Town should be that GAUSENNAE, which Antonine the Emperor
places not far from hence, the said tokens of Antiquity do not afford
sufficient proof. But seeing that a mile from hence there is a little Village
Bridge-casterton (which very name carries with it the mark of Antiquity)
where the River Guash or Wash crosses the said High Street; Bridge-Casterton.
the affinity of this name Guash with Gausenna, and the distance also making
not against it, has made me to think that Gausennae was it which now is
called Bridge-casterton, until time bring truth to light. If I should think,
that Stanford grew out of the ruins of this Town, and that this part of the
Shire was named Kesteven of GAUSENNAE, like as another part, Lindsey, of the
City Lindum, let this I pray you, be but mine opinion, and judge ye thereof
accordingly. It is supposed that this Gausennae was overthrown, when (as Henry
Archdeacon of Huntingdon writes) the Picts and Scots had spoiled all the
Country, as far as to Stanford: where Hengist and his English-Saxons

On the East side of Kesteven which bends toward Hoiland, as we go
Northward, these places stand in order: Deping.
First, Deping, that is to say, (as Ingulph interprets it), Deep Meadow:
Where, Richard de Rulos, Chamberlain to William Conqueror, excluding the
River Welland with raising up an high bank (for that it often overflowed) and
building upon the said Bank many Tenements, made a great Village. This Deping,
Deping fen.
or Deep Meadow, was very fitly so called, for, the plain lying under it, and
which takes up in compass many miles, is of all this fenny Country Clen,
which being held in with forced banks, Burn.
passes by from out of the West. Then have you Burn, well known by occasion
that King Edmund was crowned and the Wakes had a Castle there, who obtained
unto this Town, from King Edward the First, the liberty of a Mercate.

Lutterell. Sempringham.
More Eastward is Irnham, a seat of the Barony in times past of Sir Andrew
Lutterell. Beyond it is Sempringham, famous in these days by reason of that
passing fair house, which Edward Lord Clinton, afterward Earl of Lincoln
built; but renowned in old time for the religious Order of the Gilbertines,
instituted by Gilbert Lord of the place: wonderful man, and in custodia
mulierum gratiae singularis, that is, of singular grace in taking charge of
women, in the year after Christ's Nativity 1148. contrary to Justinians
Constitutions, which forbad Double Monasteries, that is to say, of men and
women together; howbeit, well backed with the authority of Eugenius the third,
Bishop of Rome, ordained a Sect consisting of men and women; which so grew and
increased, that himself laid the foundations of thirteen religious houses of
this Order, Gilbertine Freers and Sisters.
and whiles he lived had in them 700. Gilbertine Brethren, and eleven hundred
Sisters; but no honester than they should be, if we may believe Niele, a
scoffing Poet in those days, who wrote thus of them: Harum sunt quadam
steriles, quaedam parientes,
Virgineoque tamen nomine cuncta tegunt.
Qua pastoralis baculi dotatur honor,
Illa quidem melius, fertiliusque parit.

Donec eis aetas talia posse negat.
Some barren are of these, some fruitful be,
Yet they by name of Virgins cover all:
More fertile sure and better bears she,
Who blessed is once with croysier pastoral:
Now, scarce of them is found one barren Do,
Till age debar, whether they will or no.


Then see you Folkingham, Lords of Folkingham.
which also is now a Lordship of the Clintons, the Barony Gaunts, who were
descended from Gilbert de Gaunt, nephew to Baldwin Earl of Flaunders, unto
whom by the liberality of King William the Conqueror there fell great
revenewes. For, thus we read in an old manuscript: Memorandum, that with
William Conqueror there came in one Gilbert de Gaunt, unto whom the said
William gave the Manor of Folkingham, with all the Appertenances and the
Honor thereunto belonging: and they expelled a certain woman named Dunmoch.
Of the said Gilbert came one Walter de Gaunt his son and heir, and of the
said Walter came Gilbert de Gaunt his son and heir, also Robert de Gaunt a
younger son. And from the said Gilbert the son and heir, came Alice his
daughter and heir, who was espoused to Earl Simon, and she gave many
Tenements to religious men, and dyed without Robert de Gaunt aforesaid her
uncle: and of the foresaid Robert came Gilbert his son and heir, and of the
aforesaid, came another Gilbert his son and heir, and of the aforesaid, came
another Gilbert his son and heir, who gave the Manor of Folkingham with the
Appertenances to Edward the son of Henry King of England. Pl. 27. H. 3. Rot.
13. Linc.
This Gilbert as we find in the Plees, out of which this Pedigree is prooved,
claimed service against Will. de Scremby. And at length it came by gift of the
Prince to Sir Henry Beaumont: For, most certain it is, that he held it in the
Reign of Edward the Second. Inqui. 4.8.2. Screkingham.


Near unto this, is Screkingham, remarkable for the death of Alfrick the
second, Earl of Leicester, whom Hubba a Dane slew. Of which place, it seems
that Ingulph In Kesteven were slain three great Lords or petty Kings of the
Danes, whom they buried in a Village which was called before, Laundon, but now
for the Sepulture of three Kings, Tre-King-ham. And more into the East, is
Hather, in this regard only to be mentioned, Bussy. Sleford.
that the Busseis or Busleis here dwell, who deduce their Race from Roger de
Busly in the Conquerours time. Then Sleford, a Castle of the Bishops of
Lincoln, Baron Hussy.
built by Alexander the Bishop: where Sir John Hussy the first and last Baron
of that name created by King Henry the Eighth, built himself an house: who
having unwittingly and unadvisedly in the year 1537. engaged himself with the
common people in a tumultuous commotion, what time as the first dissension
brake out in England about Religion, lost his head. Not many miles from hence
stands Kime, Kime.
which gave name to a noble family called De Kime: but the possession of the
place came at length to the Umfranvils: of whom three were called to the
Parliament by the name of the Earls of Anguse in Scotland. But the first of
them, the learned in our common laws would not acknowledge to be Earl, (for
that Anguse was not within the limits of the Realm of England) until he
produced openly in Court the Kings Writ, by virtue whereof he had been summoned
by the King to the Parliament, under the Title of Earl of Anguse. From the
Umfravils this came unto the family of Talbois, Earls of Anguse.
of whom Gilbert was created by King Henry the Eighth Baron Talbois, whose two
sons dying without issue, the inheritance was by the females transferred to
the Dimocks, Temple Bruer.
Inglebeies, and others. More Westward we saw Temple that is, as I interpret
it, Temple in the Heath. For it seems to have been a Commaundery of the
Templers: considering that the decayed broken Walls of the Church there are
seen in form of the New Temple at London. Hard to it lies Blankenay, Barons
D'incourt.
the Barony in times past of the D'incourts, who flourished successively a long
time one after another from the Normans coming in unto King Henry the Sixth
his time: For then, their male line determined in one William, who had William
Lovell, the other to Sir Ralph Cromwell. Inquis. 21. H. 6.
The more willingly have I made mention of this Family, to give satisfaction in
some measure unto the longing desire of Edmond Baron D'eincourt, who long since
being careful and earnest about the preservation of the memory of his name, as
having no male Issue, put up an humble Petition to King Edward the Second,
Patent. 10* Edw. 2.
Whereas he foresaw that his surname and Arms after his death would be quite
forgotten, and yet heartily desired that after his decease they might be still
remembered, that he might be permitted to enfeoffe whomsoever it pleased him,
both in his Manours and Arms also. Which request he obtained, and it was
granted under the Kings Letters Patents: yet for all that is this surname now
quite gone (to my knowledge) and

In the West part of Kesteven and the very confines of this Shire and
Leicestershire, stands Belvoir, Belvoir or Bever Castle.
or Beauvoir Castle, so called of the fair prospect (what name soever it had
in old time) mounted upon the top of a good steep hill, built by Robert De
Todeneie a Norman Nobleman, Tony.
who also began the little Monastery adjoining, from whom by the Albeneies
out of little Britain, and the Barons Roos, it came by inheritance to the
Manors Earls of Rutland: of whom the first, that is to say, Thomas, as I have
been informed, raised it up again with newbuildings from the ground, when as
it had for many years lien buried as Thomas Lord Roos, who took part with
King Henry the Sixth, it was much defaced by William Lord Hastings, unto whom
(after that the said Baron Roos was attainted) King Edward the Fourth had
granted it with very fair Lands. But Edmond Baron Roos son of the said
Thomas, by the gracious favor of king Henry the seventh recovered this ancient
Inheritance again. Stones Astroites.
About this Castle are found the Stones called Astroites, which resemble little
Stars joined one with another, wherein are to be seen at every corner five
Beams or Rays, and in every Ray in the midst is small hollownesse. This
Stone among the Germans got his name of Victory, for that, as George Agricola
writes in his Sixth Book of Mineralls, they are of opinion, that whosoever
Germany, being put in vinegar, will stir out of his place, and turn it self
somewhat round, I could never yet make trial. Under this Castle lies a Vale
and presents a most pleasant prospect thereunto, The vale of Beaver.
whereupon it is commonly called, the Vale of Belver, which is very large and
passing pleasantly beautified with Corn fields, and no less rich in pastures;
lying stretched out in three Shires, of Leicester, Nottingham and Lincoln.

If not in this very place, yet hard by it, in all probability, stood that
MARGIDUNUM, Margidunum.
which Antonine the Emperor places next after VERNOMETUM, Paunton, between
which Antonine places it, may most plainly show. It should seem that ancient
name Margidunum was borrowed from Marga and the situation of it: Marga. i. Marle
Dunum.
For, Marga among the Britans is a kind of earth named Marle wherewith they
nourished and kept their grounds in heart: and DUNUM, which signifies an Hill,
agrees only to places higher mounted than others. And yet in this Etymology
of the name I am in a doubt, seeing that Marle in this place is very geason or
skant (happily because no man seeks for it) unless the Britans by the name
of Marga termed Plaister-stone, which is dug uppe hard by, as I have
learned: the use whereof in white pargetting and in making Pliny witnesses in
his Natural History.

River Witham.
Witham a River plentiful in Pikes but carrying a small stream, waters this
part of the Shire and on the North-side encloseth it. It has his beginning by
a Bitham.
not far from the ruins of Bitham Castle, which, as we find in an old
Pedigree King William the first gave to Stephen Earl of Albemarle and
Holdernesse, that he might from thence have wherewith to feed his son, as yet
a little infant, with fine wheat bread (considering that in Holdernesse they
did eat in those days oten bread only, although they use now such kind of
bread little or nothing at all. Matthew Paris.
) But in the reign of King Henry the Third, when William de Fortibus Earl of
Aumarle rebelliously kept this Castle, and thence forraged and wasted the
country about it, it was laid well near even with the ground. Afterward, this
was the capital seat, Colvill.
as it were, of the Barony of the Colvils, who along time flourished in very
great honor: but the right line had an end under King Edward the Third:
Gernons and those notable Bassets of Sapcot, in right of their wives entered
upon the inheritance.

This river Witham presently beneath his head has a town seated hard by it
named Paunton, Paunton.
which stands much upon the antiquity thereof, where are dug up oftentimes
pavements of the Romans wrought with checker work: and here had the river a
bridge over it in old time: Ad Pontes.
For, that this is the town AD PONTEM, which Antonine the Emperor placed seven
miles distant from MARGIDUNUM, the name Paunton, together with the distance not
only from Margidunum but also from Crococalana does easily convince:
Crococalana
for in Antonine, that town was called CROCOCALANA, which at this day is named
Ancaster, Ancaster.
and is no more but a long street, Highway passes: whereof the one part not
long since belonged to the Veseies, the other to the Cromwells. At the entry
into it on the South part, we saw a rampire with a ditch, and certain it is,
that aforetime it had been a Castle: like as on the other side Westward, is to
be seen a certain summer standing camp of the Romans. And it may seem that
it took a British name from the situation thereof. For it lies under an hill:
and Cruc-maur in British signifies a Great hill, like as Cruc-occhidient, a
mount in the West, as we read in Giraldus Cambrensis, and Ninnius: But what
should be the meaning of that Calana, let others look. The memory of antiquity
in this town is continued and maintained by the Roman Coins, by the vaults
under ground oftentimes discovered, by the site upon the High Street, and by
Lincoln through a green plain, which we call Ancaster-Heath; for, just so
many does Antonine reckon between Croco-calana and Lindum. But now return we
to the river.

After Paunton, Grantham.
we come to Grantham, a town of good resort, adorned and set out with a
School built by Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester, and with a fair Church,
having a spire-steeple of a mighty height, whereof there go many fabulous
tales.

Beneath it, near unto Herlaxton a little village, a brazen vessel in our
fathers time was turned up with a plough, A golden ^^^^met.
wherein a golden Helmet of a most antique fashion was found, set with precious
stones: which was given as a present to Catherine of wife and Dowager to King
Henry the Eighth. From hence Witham passes with a long course Northward not
far from Somerton Castle: Somerton.
which Antonine Becc, Durham book.
Bishop of Durham built, and gave to King Edward the First: but a little after
it was bestowed upon Sir Henry de Beaumont, who about that time came into
England and began the family of the Lords Beaumont: Lords of ^^^^^mont.
which in the foregoing age in some sort failed, when as the sister and heir
of the last Vicount was married to John Lord Lovel de Tichmersh. But of this
house I have spoken before in Leichestershire. From thence, the river bending
by little and little to the South-East, and passing through a Fenny Country,
discharges it self into the German Sea beneath Boston, after it has closed
in Kesteven on the North.

Witham, Lindsey*
lies the third part of this shire, named Lindsey, which, of the chief City
of the Shire Bid called Lindissi: and being greater than Hoiland and Kesteven,
butteth with a huge bowing front upon the Ocean, beating upon the East and
North sides thereof. On the West part it has the river Trent, and is severed
from Kesteven; on the South by that Witham aforesaid, and the Fosse Dike
anciently cast and scoured by King Henry the First for seven miles in length
from Witham Trent, Fosse dike. Hoveden.
that it might serve the Citizens of Lincoln for carriage of necessaries by
water.

Torksey.
Where this Dike enters into Trent, stands Torksey, in the Saxon language
(...), a little town, and in these days of small account, but in ancient
times very famous. Domesday book.
For, before the Normans coming in, as we find in that book wherein King
William the first set down his survey of England, there were numbered in it
two hundred Burgesses, who enjoyed many privileges, on this condition, that
they should transport the Kings Ambassadors whenever they came this way in
their own Barges along the Trent, and conduct them as far as YORK. But
where this Dike joyneth to Witham, there is the principal City of this Shire
placed: Ptolomee and Antonine the Emperor called LINDUM, the Britans LINDCOIT,
Lindum* Lincolne-Collis an hill.
of the woods (for which we find it elsewhere written amiss Luit-coit) Bid,
LINDE-COLLINUM, and LINDE COLLINA CIVITAS, whether it were of the situation
upon an hill, or because it has been a Colonie, I am not able to avouch. The
Saxons termed it (...), and (...), the Normans most corruptly Nichol, we
Lincoln, and the Latin writers Lincolnia: whereupon Alexander Necham in his
book entitled, Divine wisdom, writes thus, Lindisiae columen Lincolnia,
sive columna,
Munifica foelix gente, repleta bonis.
Lincoln the stay or pillar sure of Lindsey thou may be,
Blessed for thy people bounteous, and goods that are in thee.


Others will have it to take that name of the river Witham, which they say was
called by a more ancient name Lindis, but they have no authority to warrant
them. Neither am I of their judgment: For, Necham is against it, who four
hundred years ago called the said river, Witham in this verse.

Trenta tibi pisces mittit Lincolnia, sed te,
Nec dedigneris, Withama parvus adit.
The Trent unto thee sends fish, O Lincoln, well we see;
Yet little Witham, scorn it not, a riveret comes to thee.
I for my part would rather derive it from the British word Lhin, which with
the Britans signifies a Lake. For, I have been informed of the Citizens, that
Witham below the City, by Swanpole was broader than now it is, and yet is it
at this day of a good breadth: and to say nothing of Lindaw in Germany, by the
Lake Acronius, and of Linternum in Italy standing by a Lake; I see that in our
Britain, Tallhin, Glan-lhin, and Lhinlithquo, are towns by lakes sides. This
City it self being large, well inhabited and frequented, stands upon the
side of an hill, where Witham bends his Newport, the express tokens of a
rampire and deep ditches which are yet very evident, do plainly show.

In this City, Vortimer that warlike Britan, who many a time discomfited the
Saxons and put them to flight, ended his days, and was here contrary to his
own commandment, buried. For, he was in a full and assured hope persuaded,
that if he were enterred in the sea shore, his very ghost was able to protect
the Britans from the Saxons, as writes Ninius, the disciple of Elvodugus. But
the English Saxons after they had Lindum, first possessed themselves of the
South side of the hill, at the foot whereof they built, as it seems, the gate
yet standing compiled of vast stones; and with the ruins of that more ancient
Town fortified it. Afterward they went down lower to the river side, built
in a place that was called Wickanford, and walled Bid, Paulinus preached the
Word of God unto the Province of Lindsey, and first of all converted unto the
Lord, the Governor or Provost of Lincoln City, whose name was Blecca, with
his family. In which very City, he built also a Church of goodly stone work,
the roof whereof being either fallen for want of repair, or cast down by the
violent hand of enemies, the walls are seen standing to this day. After this
the Danes won it by assault once or twice: First, those troops of spoiling
mates, out of whose hands King Edmund Ironside wrested it by force: then
Canutus from whom Aetheldred regained it, when upon his return out of
Normandy, he valiantly forced Canutus to abandon the town, and beyond all hope
recovered England which before was lost. In the Reign of Edward the
Confessor, there were in it, as Domesday book records, a thousand and
seventy Mansions, with lodgings to give entertainment, and twelve Lage men
having Sac, and Soc. But in the Normans time, as says William of Malmesbury,
It was one of the best peopled Cities of England, and a place of traffic and
merchandise, for all comers by sea and land: and as the same Domesday book
says, there were at that time counted and taxed in this City 900. Burgesses:
and many Mansions were laid waste, 166. for the Castle, and other 74. without
the precinct of the Castle, not through the oppression of the Sheriff and his
Ministers, but by reason of mishap, poverty, and casualty by fire. The said
King William the Conqueror for the strengthening of it and terror of the
Citizens, raised a passing large and strong Castle upon the brow of the hill:
and almost at the very same Remigius Bishop of Dorchester for to give credit
and ornament thereto translated hither his Episcopal seat from Dorchester,
which was in the most remote corner of his Dioecesse and a small Town. And
when by this time that Church which Paulinus had built was quite gone to decay,
the same Remigius having purchased certain houses with grounds lying unto
them, in the very highest place of the City, near unto the Castle (as Henry of
Huntingdon says) mounting up aloft with high and stately towers, built in a
strong place a strong Church, in a fair plot a fair Church, and dedicated it
to the Virgin of Virgins; notwithstanding the Archbishop of York was enraged
thereat, who challenged to himself the propriety of the soil: and in it
ordained 44. Prebendaries. Which Church afterward being sorely defaced with
fire, as he says, Alexander that most bountiful Bishop of Lincoln repaired,
with skillful artificial workmanship. Of whom William of Malmesbury
reports, because for his little low stature he was a dwarf among men, his
mind labored to rise aloft and show it self to the world, with outward
works. And as concerning his bounty a Poet of that time among other things
wrote thus: Qui dare festinans gratis, ne danda rogentur,
Quod nondum dederat, nondum se credit habere.
Who hastening frankly for to give, for fear that folk should crave:
He never thought that he had that which yet he never gave.


Robert Bloet who sat there before Alexander, R. de Beaumeis, Hugh a Burgundian
and their Successors, by little and little brought this Church, which could
not be one Bishops work, to the stately magnificence that now it carries.
Certes, as it is built, it is all throughout not only most sumptuous, but also
passing beautiful, and that with rare and singular workmanship: but especially
that forefront at the West end, which in a sort ravisheth and allureth the
eyes of all that come toward it. In this Church, although there be diverse
Monuments of Bishops and others, yet these only seem memorable: That of
Copper wherein the bowels of that right noble and virtuous Queen Aeleonor wife
to King Edward the First are bestowed, who died at Hardby in this Shire: as
also these Nicolas Cantlow, one or two of the Family of Burghersh: Lady
Catherine Swinford the third wife of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster and mother
of the house of Somerset, with whom lies buried Joan her daughter, second wife
to Raulph Nevill the first Earl of Westmerland, who enriched her husband with
many happy children.

The Bishops Diocese of Lincoln not content with those streit limits,
wherewith Sidnacester, Sidnacester.
who had Episcopal jurisdiction over this shire contented themselves in the
Primitive Church of the English Nation, contained under it so many countries,
as that the greatness thereof was burdenous unto it: And although King Henry
the Second took out of it the Province of Ely, and King Henry the Eighth the
Bishoprics of Peterbourgh, and of Oxford, yet still at this day it is counted
the greatest Diocese by far of all England, both for jurisdiction and number
of shires: and the Bishop has in his Diocese one thousand two hundred forty
seven Parish Churches.

Many and great Bishops since Remigius his time have governed this See, whom to
reckon up is no part of my purpose. For, I will not insist either upon Robert
Bloet, Rufus wrung 50000. pounds, for securing his title in the very City of
Lincoln it self, which was found defective: nor upon that prodigal and
profuse Alexander, who in exceeding stately buildings was so excessively
delighted: ne yet upon Hugh the Burgundian Canonized a Saint, R. Hoveden.
whose corpse King John, with his Nobles and friends about him to perform (as
mine author says) a dutiful service to God and that holy Saint, late Bishop,
carried upon their shoulders to his burial. Howbeit, the memory of two
Prelates I must needs renew afresh: the one is Robert Grosthead, Grosthead, he
died ann. 1233. Matthew. Paris. Anonymus Chronographus.
a man so well seen both in literature and in the learned tongues, in that
age, as it is incredible: and to use the words of one then living, A terrible
reproover of the Pope, an adviser of his Prince and Sovereign, a lover of
verity, a corrector of Prelates, a director of Priests, an instructor of the
Clergy, a maintainer of Scholars, a Preacher to the people, a diligent
searcher into the Scriptures, a mallet of the Romanists, etc. The other is mine
own Praeceptor, whom in all duty I must ever love and honor, that right
reverend Father Thomas Cooper, who has notably well deserved both of all the
learned and also of the Church, in whose School I both confess and rejoice
that I received education. The City it self also flourished a long time: being
ordained by King Edward the Third for the Staple, The Staple.
as they term it, that is, the Mart, of Wool, Leather, Lead, etc. Which
although it has not been over-laied with any grievous calamities, as being
once only set on fire, once also besieged in vain by King Stephen, who was
there vanquished and taken prisoner, forced also and won by King Lewis of
France to challenge the Crown of England, defended it against him, without any
great damage; yet incredible it is how much it has been empaired by little
and little, conquered as it were with very age and time: so that of fifty
Churches which it had standing in our Great-grandfathers days, there are now
remaining scarce eighteen. It is remooved, that I may note this also, from the
Equator, 53. degrees and 12. scruples: and from the West point, 22. degrees
and 52. scruples.

Highdike.
As that Street-way called Highdike goes on directly from Stanford to Lincoln,
so from hence Northward it runs with an high and straight causey, (though
here and there it be interrupted) forward for ten miles space to a little
Village called the Spittle in the Street, and beyond: By the which as I passed,
I observed moreover, about three miles from Lincoln, another High-port-way
also, called Ould-street, to turn out of this High dike Westward, carrying a
bancke likewise evident to be seen, which, as I take it, went to AGELOCUM, the
next baiting town, or place of lodging, from LINDUM, in the time of the
Romans. But I will leave these, and proceed in the course that I have begun.

Witham being now past Lincoln, runs down not far from Wragbye, a member
of the Barony called Trusbut, Barons of Trusbut.
the title whereof is come by the Barons Roos unto the Mannours now Earls of
Rutland. Then approaches it to the ruins of a famous Abbay in times past
called (...), Bardney. Oswalds banner.
commonly Bardney; where Bid writes, King Oswald was Entombed, with a Banner
of gold and purple hanged over his Tomb. The writers in the foregoing age,
thought it not sufficient to celebrate the memory of this most Christian worthy
King Oswald, unless unto his glorious exploits they stitched also ridiculous
miracles. But that his hand remained here Nullo verme perit, nulla putredine
tabet
Dextra viri, nullo constringi frigore, nullo
Dissolvi fervore potest; sed semper eodem
Immutata statu persistit, mortua vivit.
The man's right hand by no worm perished is,
No rottenness does cause it putrify;
No binding cold can make it stark, ywis,

But always in one state persist it will
Such as it was: though dead, it lives still.


This Abbay, In the Appendix of Ingulp^
as writes Peter of Bloys, being sometime burnt down to the ground by the
Danes furious outrage, and for many revolutions of years altogether forlorn,
that noble and devout Earl of Lincoln Gilbert de Gaunt reedified, and in most
thankful affectionate mind assigned unto it with many other possessions, the
tithes of all his Manours wheresoever throughout England. Then, is Witham
increased with Ban a little River, which out of the midst of Lindsey runs
down, Hornecastle*
first by Horn Castle, which belonged in Alice.
Adeliza of Condie, and was laid even with the ground in the Reign of Stephen,
afterward became a capital seat of the Barony of Gerard de Rodes, and
pertains now, as I have heard, to the Bishop of Carlisle: From thence, by
Scrivelby, a Manor of the Dimockes who hold it hereditarily devolved upon them
from the Marmions, Dimockes. Inq. 23. E. 3.
by Sir J. Ludlow, and that by service, (to use now the Lawyers words) Of Grand
Serjeanty, The Kings Champion.
viz. That whenever any King of England is to be crowned, then the Lord of
this Manor, for the time being, or some one in his name (if himself be
unable) shall come well armed for the war, Fines Micha. Anno 1. H. 6.
mounted upon a good horse of service, in presence of the Sovereign Lord the
King upon his Coronation day; and cause Proclamation to be made, that if any
man will avouch that the said Sovereign Lord the King, has not right to his
Somewhat lower, Tatteshall.
The Ban at Tatteshall a little Town standing in a Marish Country, but very
commodiously, well known by reason of the Castle, built for the most part of
brick, and the Barons thereof, runs into Witham. They write that Eudo and
Pinso two Noblemen of Normandy, loving one another entirely as sworn brethren,
by the liberal gift of King William the Conqueror received many Lordships and
fair lands in this tract, which they parted so, as that Tatteshall fell to
Eudo, which he held by Barony, from whose posterity it came by Dryby and the
Bernacks unto Sir Raulph Cromwell, Cromwell.
whose son bearing the same name, and being under King Henry Pinso fell
Eresby, Eresby. Lords Willoughbey.
which is not far off: From whose progeny, the inheritance descended by the
Becks unto the Willoughbeies: unto whom there came also an increase both of
honor, and also of fair Livelods by their wives, not only from the Uffords
Earls of Suffolk; Lords Wels Lords de Engain.
but also from the Lords of Wells, who brought with them very fair
possessions and lands of the family de Engain Lords of ancient Nobility, and
from the first coming in of the Normans of great power in these parts. Among
these Willoughbeis one excelled all the rest in the Reign of Henry the Fifth,
named Sir Robert Willoughby, who for his martial prowess was created Earl of
Vandosme in France, and from these by the mothers side descended Peregrine
Berty, Baron Willoughby of Eresby, a man for his generous mind and military
valor renowned both in France, and the Low Countries. Witham now approaching
near unto the Sea, entertaineth out of the North another small namelesse
River; at the spring head whereof stands Bollingbroke Castle, situate upon a
low ground, and built of a soft and crumbling stone by William de Romara Earl
of Lincoln, taken from Alice Lacey by King Edward the Second, because she
married against his will; and ennobled in that Henry the Fourth, who thereof
was named Henry of Bollingbroke. Bollingbroke.
At which time it began to be reckoned among those Honorable Manours, which
are termed Honors. And Witham, after it has received this Riveret, having
passed through Boston, as I have said, discharges it self at length into the
German Sea.

From the mouth of Witham the shore shuts forth with a mighty swelling bent
into the German Sea, as far as to Humber a great Arm of the Sea, being every
where slashed and indented with many small Washes and places which the salt
water breaks into: and has but few Towns upon it, because there be few
Havens there: and the shelves or bars of sand lie every where anenst the
land. Yet of these Wainfleet.
some be memorable: and Wainefleet especially, if it were but for this cause
only, that it bred William Wainfleet Bishop of Winchester, a worthy Prelat,
founder of Mawdlen College in Oxford, a man that singularly well deserved of
learning. Alford. Baron Wells.
Then Alford, which for the Mercate is beholden to Lion Lord Wells, who
obtained for it this privilege from King Henry the Sixth. This Family of
Wells, was very ancient and honorable: and the last of that name had to wife
a daughter of King Edward the Fourth, and being by King Henry the Seventh
created Vicount Wells, died having no issue. But the inheritance, by the
Females came to the Willoughbeys, *
Dimockes, De la Launds, Hoes, and others. More inward are Driby and Ormesby
neighbor Towns, which gave sirnames to two great families in their Dribyes
descended the elder Lords Cromwell, now determined, and from Ormesbyes the
house of Skipwith, still continuing. After this, ye have Louth a little Mercate
Town well frequented, which had the name of Lud a small River, that runs
under Cokerington the capital place in times past of the Barony of Scoteney.
And then Grimsby, Grimsby.
which our Sabins or conceited persons dreaming what they list, and following
their own fancies, will have to be so called of one Grime a Merchant, who for
that he had brought up a little foundling of the Danes royal blood named
Haveloke, when it had been cast forth to perish, or to take his luck or
fortune, is much talked of, together with Haveloke that lucky foster-childe of
his: who having been first a skullen in the Kings kitchen, and afterward
promoted to the marriage Whitgift late Archbishop of Canterbury, a peerless
Prelate for piety and learning in our days.

Scarce six miles from hence, more within the country there shows it self an
ancient Castle, Castor. Thong-caster.
which at this day is called Castor, in the old English Saxons Tongue (...),
and Thong-caster, in British Caer Egarry: in both languages it is aptly named
so of the thing, Byrsa.
to wit, of an hide cut into pieces, like as Byrsa, that Castle or Citadell of
the Carthaginians so well known. For, our Annals record, that Hengist the
Picts and Scots, and received very large possessions in other places, obtained
also in this tract of Vortigern, so much ground as he could compass round
about with an Ox hide cut out into very small laners, that we call Thongs,
wherein he founded and built this Castle. Whence it is that one, who has
written in verse a Breviary of the British History, turned Virgils verses in
this manner.

Accepitque solum, facti de nomine In Virgil, Byrsam.
Thongum,
Taurino quantum poter at circundare tergo.
And ground he took, which Thong he called when he did first begin,
As much as he, a Bull hide cut could well enclose within.
From Grimsby, the Shore draws in with a great reach to make way for to admit
Humber, Thorton College.
by Thornton a religious house in times past instituted for the Worship of God,
by William the Gross Earl of Aumarle: also by Barton, where there is a very
Yorkshire. Barton upon Humber.
Hard by, Ankam a little muddy River, and therefore full of Eeles, emptieth it
self into Humber: near unto the springhead whereof is Merket-Rasin, so
called of a Mercate there well resorted unto. Somewhat higher stands Angotby,
now corruptly called Osgodby belonging in times past to the family of Semarc,
from whom it descended hereditarily to the Airmins: also Kelsay, a Lordship in
old time of the Hansards, men of great name in this shire, from whom in right
of the wives it came to the family of the Ascoghs, Knights. But after this,
Ankam has a bridge over it, at Glanford, a small Mercate Town, which the
common people, of the said bridge, so commonly call Brigg, that the true name
is almost quite forgotten. Kettleby. Tirwhitt.
Next unto it, within a Park I saw Kettleby the seat of the worshipful
ancient Tirwhits, Knights, descended from Grovil Oxenbridge, and Echingham. But
in times past it was the habitation, as a man may gather by the name, of one
Ketell (which was in the time of the Saxons and Danes an usual name). Bye what
it is.
For Bye in the English-Saxon language signifies A dwelling place, and Byan,
To dwell: whence it is that so many places both elsewhere in England, and here
especially in this Shire do end in Bie.

All this Tract-over at certain seasons, good God, what store of fowls (to
say nothing of fishes) is here to be found! I mean not those vulgar birds
which in other places are highly esteemed and bear a great price, Delicate
fowls.
as Teales, Quails, Woodcockes, Phesants, Partridges, etc. but such as we have
no Latin names for, the very delicate Knotts. Dotterell^.
I mean, Puitts, Godwitts, Knotts, that is to say Canutus or Knouts birds,
(for, out of Denmark they are thought to fly thither), Dotterels, so named of
their dotish foolishness, which being a kind of birds as it were of an apish
kind, ready to imitate what they see done, are caught by candle light
according to fowlers gesture; if he put forth an arm, they also stretch out a
wing: sets he forward his leg, or holds up his head, they likewise do
theirs: in brief, what ever the fowler does, the same also does this foolish
bird until it be hidden within the net. But these things I leave to their
observation, who either take pleasure earnestly to hunt after Natures works,
or being borne to pamper the belly delight

More Westward, the River Trent also after he has ended his long course, is
received into the Humber, after it has with his sandy bank bounded this shire
from Fossedike hither; Stow.
having run down first not far from Stow, where Godive the wife of Earl
Leofricke built a Monastery; which for the low site that it has under the
hills, Henry of Huntingdon says to have been founded Under the Promontory of
Lincoln: Then, Knath.
near unto Knath, now the habitation of Baron Willoughy of Parrham, in times
past of the family of the Barons Darcy, who had very much increase both in
honor and also of possessions by the daughter and heir of the Meinills. This
Family of the Darcyes proceeded from another more ancient, to wit, from one
whose name was Norman de Adrecy or Darcy de Nocton, Darcy de Nocton and Knath
who flourished in high reputation under King Henry the Third; and whose
successors endowed with lands the little Nunnery at Alvingham in this County.
But this dignity is as it were extinct, for that the last Norman in the right
line which is more ancient, Fines 29. E. 3.
left behind him only two sisters: of which the one was married to Roger
Pedwardine, the other to Peter of Limbergh.

Then runs the Trent down to Gainesborrow, Gainesborrow
a town ennobled by reason of the Danes ships that lay there at rode, and also
for the death of Suene Tiugs-Kege, a Danish Tyrant, who after he had robbed and
spoiled the country, as Matthew of Westminster writes, being here stabbed to
death by an unknown man, suffered due punishment at length for his wickedness
and villainy. Many a year after this, it became the William de Valence Earl of
Pembroch, who obtained for it of king Edward the First the liberty to keep a
Fair: From which Earl by the Scottish Earls of Athol, Barons Borrough.
and the Piercies, descended the Barons of Bourough who here dwelt: concerning
whom I have written already in Surry. In this part of the Shire stood long
since the City Sidnacester, Sidnacester.
which affoorded a See to the Bishops of this Tract, who were called the
Bishops of Lindifars: But this City is now so far out of all sight

Neither must I overpasse, that in this Quarter, at Melwood there flourished
the family of Saint Paul, corruptly called Sampoll, Knights; which I always
thought to have been of that ancient Castilion race of the Earls of Saint
Paul in France. But, the Coat Armor of Luxemburgh, which they bear, implies
that they are come out of France since that the said Castilion stock of Saint
Paul, Saint Paul.
was by marriage implanted into that of Luxemburgh, which happened two hundred
years since or thereabout.

Above this place the Rivers of Trent, Idell and Dane do so disport themselves
with Axelholme, Axelholme.
in the Saxon Tongue (...), which is a parcel of Lincolne-shire. It carries
in length from South to North ten miles, and in breadth not past half so much.
The flat and lower part of it toward the Rivers is marish ground, Gals, a shrub.
and brings forth an odoriferous kind of shrub which they term Gall. It
yields also Pets in the Mores, and dead roots of firwood which in burning
give a rank sweet savor. There also have been found great and long
firre-trees while they dug for Pet, both within the Isle, and also without, *
at La^ghton upon Trent bank, the old habitation of the family of D'alanson,
now contractly called Dalison. The middle parts of this Isle, where it rises
gently Alabaster stone, Alabastrites.
and yet the same being not very solid but brittle, is more meet for
pargetting and plaister-worke, than for other uses. The chief Town called in
old time Axel, is now named Axey, whence, by putting to the Saxon word Holme,
which they used for a River-Island, the name no doubt was compounded. But
scarce deserves it to be called a Town, it is so scatteringly inhabited: and
yet it is able to show the plot of ground where a Castle stood, that was rased
in the Barons war, and which belonged to the Mowbraies, who at that time
possessed a great part of the Isle.

In the year 1173. as writes an old Chronographer, Roger de Mowbray forsaking
Henry the Second, in regard of his son whom he had made King with him.
King, repaired the Castle at Kinard Ferry in the Isle of Axholme, which had
been of old time destroyed. Against whom a number of Lincolnshire men making
head, when they had passed over the water in barges, laid siege to the Castle,
forced the Constable thereof and all the soldiers to yield, and overthrew the
said Castle. Somewhat higher is Botterwic, the Lord whereof Sir Edmund
Sheffeld, King Edward the Sixth created the first Baron Sheffeld of Botherwic:
who for his country spent his life against the Rebels in Norfolk, having
begotten of Anne Vere the Earl of Oxfords daughter, a son named John, the
second Baron, and father to Edmund now Lord Sheffeld, a right honorable Knight
of the Garter, President of the Council established in the North. But more
into the North I saw Burton Stather standing upon Trent, whereof I have
hitherto read nothing memorable.

Earls of Lincoln.
This Shire glories in the Earls which have borne Title thereof. After Egga
who flourished in the year 710. and Morcar both Saxons, and who were Earls by
office, only, William de Romara a Norman, was the first Earl after the
Conquest, in whose room being dead (for neither his son, whereas he died
before his father, nor his grandchild enjoied this title) King Stephen placed
Gilbert de Gaunt. After whose decease Simon de Saint Lyz, 2. H. 2.
the younger, the son of Earl Simon, (you read the very words of Robert
Montensis, who lived about that time) Wanting lands, by the gracious gift of
King Henry the Second took his only daughter to wife, with her his honor
also. After this Lewis of France, who was by the seditious Barons brought into
England Gilbert out of the Family de Gaunt, with the sword of the Earldome of
Lincoln: but when the said Lewis was soon after expelled the land, no man
acknowledged him for Earl, and himself of his own accord relinquished that
title. Then Raulph the sixth Earl of Chester obtained this honor of King
Henry the Third, who Hawise or Avis his sister (the wife of Robert De Quincy)
by Charter, the Earldom of Lincoln, so far forth as appertained unto him,
that she might be Countess thereof: For in this tenor run the very words
of the Charter. She likewise bestowed it upon John de Lacy Constable of
Chester, and the heirs whom he should beget of the body of Margaret her
daughter. This John had issue Edmund, who dying before his mother left this
honor for Henry his son to enjoy, who was the last Earl of that line: For
when his sons were taken away by untimely death, and he had but one little
daughter only remaining alive named Alice, he affianced her, being but nine
years old, to Thomas the son of Edmund Earl of Lancaster, Lib. Monaster. de
Stanlow.
with this condition, That if he should fortune to dye without heirs of Edmund
Earl of Lancaster for ever. But the said Alice had no child at all by her
husband Thomas: But when Thomas her husband was beheaded, she that by her
light behavior had not a little steined her good name, took Sir Eubul le
Strange, with whom she had lived before time too familiarly, for her husband,
2. Edw. ^.
without the assent and privity of her Sovereign; who being hereat highly
offended, seized her possessions into his own hands. Yet both Sir Eubul
Strange, and Sir Hugh Frene her third husband, are in some Records named Earls
of Lincoln. After Alice, now very aged, was departed this life without issue,
Henry Earl of Lancaster Nephew to Edmund aforesaid by his second son, entered
upon Lancaster. Escaet. 1. E. 3. N. 134.
Howbeit the Kings of England at their pleasure have bestowed the name and
honor of Earls of Lincoln, as, See Dukes of Suffolk.
King Edward the Fourth gave it to Sir John De la Pole: and King Henry the
Eighth, to Henry Brandon, both the Sons of the Dukes of Suffolk, who both
ended this life without Issue; the first slain in the battle at Stoke, and
the other taken away by the sweating sickness. Anno 14. Elizabethae.
Afterward Queen Elizabeth promoted Edward Baron Clinton Lord high Admiral of
England, to the said honor, which his son Henry enjoys at this day.

There are in this Shire Parishes much about 630.

NOTINGAMIAE Comitatus olim pars CORITANORVM


NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE.
Upon the West side of Lincolne-shire confineth the County of NOTTINGHAM, in
the English Saxon tongue (...), and in English Nottingham-shire, being far
less in quantity; limited Northward with Yorkshire, Westward with
Darby-shire, and in some parts with Yorkshire, and on the South side with
Leichestershire. The South and East part thereof Trent, with other Riverets
resorting unto it. The West part is taken up with the Forest of Shirewood,
which stretches out a great way. This part because it is sandy, the
Inhabitants term The Sand, the other, for that it is Clayish, they call the
Clay: and so have divided their Country into these two parts.

The River Trent, The river Trent.
in the old English Saxon tongue (...) (which some Antiquaries of small note
and account have called Triginta in Latin, for the affinity of the French word
Trent that signifies that number Triginta, that is, thirty) having gone a long
journey, so soon as he is entered into this Shire, and has ( recepto Souro
flumine ex agro Leicestrensi, taking in the River Sour from the field of
Leicester) run Steanford, where I have learned there be many tokens remaining
of old antiquity, and pieces of Roman money oftentimes found; and then by
Clifton, which has given both habitation and surname also to the ancient
family of the Cliftons, much enriched by one of the heirs of Cressy, Lin a
riveret.
takes in from the West the little River Lin, which rising near unto Newsted,
that is, New place, where sometime King Henry the Second founded a small Abbay,
and which is now the dwelling house of the ancient Family of the Burons, Byron.
descended from Ralph de Buron, who at the first coming in of the Normans
flourished in great state, *
both in this Country and also in Lancashire; runs hard by Wallaton rich in
veins of cole, Wollaton*
where Sir Francis Willoughby a Knight nobly descended from the Greis Marquess
Dorset, in our days built out of

Then runs it by Linton or Lenton, Lenton.
much frequented and famous in old time for the Abbay there of the Holy
Trinity, founded by William Peverell, the base son of King William the
Conqueror; but now all the fame is only for a Fair there kept. Where, on the
other bank at the very meeting well near of Lin and Trent, the principal
Town that has given name unto the Shire is seated upon the side of an hill
now called Nottingham, Nottingham.
(by softning the old name a little) for (...); for, so the English Saxons
named it of certain caves and passages under the ground, Lin, for places of
receipt and refuge, yea and for habitations. And thereupon Asserius interprets
this Saxon word (...) in Latin Speluncarum domum, that is, An house of Dens
or Caves, and in the British Tui ogo bauc, which signifies the very self
same. The Town for the natural site thereof is right pleasant: as where, on
the one hand lie fair and large Meadows by the Rivers side, on the other, rise
hills with a gentle and easy ascent: and is plentifully provided of all things
beside, necessary for man's life. On the one side Shirewood yields store of
wood to maintain fire, although many use for that purpose stinking pit cole
dug forth of the ground: Trent serves it abundantly with fish. And hence
has been taken up this od barbarous Verse, Limpida sylva focum, Trent.
Triginta dat mihi piscem.
Shire-wood yields me fuel for fire,
As Trent yields fish, what I require.


At a word, for largeness, for building, for three fair Churches, a passing
spacious Aethered and Aelfrid so long, until they frustrate of their purpose
brake up their Siege, trussed up bag and baggage and dislodged. For when the
Danes had taken this Castle, Burthred King of the Mercians (as mine Author
Asserius writes) and the Mercians, address their messengers to Aethered King
of the West Saxons, and to Aelfred his brother, humbly beseeching them to come
and aid them, that so they might give battle to the forenamed Army, which
request they also easily obtained. For, those two brethren slacking no whit
their promise, having Mercia, and seeking with one accord jointly to encounter
the enemy, come as far as to Snottenga-ham. And when the Painims keeping
themselves within the defense of the Castle refused to give battle, and the
Christians with all their force could not batter the Wall, after peace
concluded between the Paganes and Mercians, those two brethren with their
bands returned home. But after this, King Edward the elder, built the Village
Bridgeford just over against it, and compassed the Town about with a wall,
which now is fallen down; and yet the remains thereof I have seen on the
South side. And within very few years after, in King Edward the Confessors
time, as we read in Domesday book, there were numbered in it one hundred and
seventy three Burgesses, and from the two Trent, the Fosse dike, and the way
toward York were warded and kept, that if any man hindered the passage of
vessels, he was to make amends with the payment of four pounds.

As for the Castle which now we see, it may be well of great name in regard
both of the Founder, and the worthiness also of the work: for William of
Normandy built it to bridle the English; and so strong it was, as William of
Newborough writes, as well by natural situation as hand labor, that it is
held impregnable (if it may have sufficient men to defend it) unless it be by
famine. Afterward also King Edward the Fourth bestowed great cost in the
repairing of it, and beautified it with fair buildings: whereto King Richard
also the Third set to his helping hand. Neither Anjou, at which time the
soldiers lying in Garrison set fire upon the buildings joining unto it. 1175.
Rog. Hoveden. Page 307.
Once also it was suddenly surprised by Earl Robert de Ferrarijs in the Barons
war, who spoiled the Inhabitants of all their goods. The Castellanes report
many stories of David King of the Scots prisoner in it, and of Roger Mortimer
Earl of March, taken here in a hollow secret passage under the ground, who
because he prised his faith and loyalty to his country lighter than Scottish
gold, and with a vaste mind designed other mischiefs, was afterward hanged.
Certes, in the first base Court of the Castle we David the Second, king of
Scots, who was there imprisoned. But in the upper part of the Castle which
rises up aloft upon a rock, we came also by many stairs into another Cave
likewise under the ground, Mortimers hole.
which they call Mortimers Hole, for that in it the foresaid Roger Mortimer lay
hidden, when as being guilty to himself of wickedness he stood in fear of
his life.

As for the position of Nottingham, it sees the North Pole elevated fifty
three Degrees, and has the Meridian two and twenty Degrees and fourteen
minutes

Pier pount.
From hence the Trent runs with a mild stream and passes forward by Holme,
called of the Lords thereof Holme De Petrae ponte.
Pierpount, whose Family is both ancient and Robert Pierpount was summoned by
King Edward the Third unto the high Court of Parliament, among the Barons of
the Kingdom; unto Shelford where Ralph Hanselin founded a Priory, Barony of
Sheleford.
and the Lords Bardolph had a mansion, but now the seat of the worshipful
stock of the Stanhopes, knights; whose state in this Tract has grown great
and their name renowned since they matched with an heir of Mallovell. From
whence he runs down with a rolling stream to Stoke, Battle of Stoke.
a little Village, but well known for no small overthrow and slaughter that
there happened: when Sir John de la pole Earl of Lincoln, who being by King
Richard the Third declared heir apparent to the Crown, seeing by the coming
of king Henry the Seventh himself debarred of the hope of the Kingdom, here
in Thurgarton where Sir Ralph D'eincourt founded a Priory, and somewhat higher
Southwell shows it self aloft, Suthwell.
with a Collegiat Church of Prebendaries consecrated to the blessed Virgin
Mary, a place not very fair in outward show, I must needs say, but strong,
ancient, and of great fame. Which, as they write, Paulinus the First Archbishop
of York founded, after he had baptized the Inhabitants of this Shire in the
River Trent, and so regenerated them to Christ. Since which time, the
Archbishops of York have had here a very fair and stately Palace and three
Parkes stored with Dear adjoining thereto. Tio-vul-Finga-cester.
That this is the City which Bid calls Tio-vul-Finga-cester, Paulinus
baptizing in the Trent near unto Tio-vul-Finga-cester, the private History of
this Church constantly avoucheth to have been done in this very place. From
thence out of the East, Snite a little Brook runs into Trent, which being
but small and shallow waters Langer, a place of name in regard of the
Tibetots or Tiptofts Lords thereof, Tiptofts.
who afterward became Earls of Worcester: also Wiverton, which from Heriz a
worshipful man long since in these parts, came by the Brets and Caltostes unto
the Chaworthes, Chaworths.
who fetch their name out of the Cahors in Quercy.
Cadurci in France, and derive their pedigree from the Lord of Walchervill.

Now does Trent divide it self, near Averham or Aram an ancient habitation of
Suttons Gentlemen of respective worth, and runs hard under a good great
Town called Newark, as one would say, The new work, of the new Castle, which
Castle so fresh and of so beautiful building, as Henry of Huntingdon terms
it, Alexander that bountiful minded Bishop of Lincoln built: which Prelate,
that I may use the words of an ancient Historian, carrying a most brave and
gallant mind, builded both this Castle and another also with most profuse and
lavish expense. And because such manner of sumptuous buildings little became
the gravity and dignity of a Bishop, he to take away the envy and hard conceit
of the world for such building, and to expiate, as it were, the offense that
grew thereby, founded as many Monasteries and filled them with religious
Brethren. Nevertheless, this vain prodigality and lavish spending that was in
a military Bishop, Stephen, who labored nothing more than to establish his
tottering estate in his Kingdom by seizing into his hands all the strongest
holds thereof, brought this Prelate, what with hard imprisoning, and, in a
sort, with famishing him, to that pass, that willed he nill'd he, 1216.
at length he yielded up unto him both this Castle, and that other at Sleford
in Lincolne-shire. Neither is there any other memorable matter here to be
related, but that King John finished in this place the most wearisome course of
his troublesome life; and King Edward the Sixth incorporated it of one
Alderman, and twelve Assistants. From hence the River gathering himself again
into one Channel, runs directly Northward, beset on both sides with
Villages; neither affoordeth it Littleborrough, Littleborrough.
a little Town in deed and truly answering to the name, where, as there is at
this day a Ferry much used, so there was in times past that Station, whereof
Antonine the Emperor once or twice made mention, Agelocum or Segelocum.
and which according to sundry Copies is called AGELOCUM or SEGELOCUM.

This Town have I heretofore sought for in vain, about the Country adjoining:
Highway, and also because the field lying to it shows express tokens of
Walls; and besides affoordeth unto Ploughmen every day many pieces of the
Roman Emperors Coin: which because Swine many times rooting into the ground
turn up with their snouts, the country people call Swinespeni^s. Who also
according to their simple capacity are of opinion, that their forefathers in
times past fensed and mounded that field with a stone. Wall against the water
of Trent that uses in Winter time to overflow and make great floods.

In the West part of this Shire, which they term The Sand, and where Erwash a
little Riveret hieth apace into Trent, Strelley, in old time Strellegh shows
it self, Strelleis, commonly called Sturleyes, Knights; one of the most
ancient Houses in all this Country. More inward, Shirewood.
the Forest Shirewood (which some expound by these Latin names Limpida Sylva,
that is, A Shire or Clear wood; others Praclara Sylva, in the same sense and
signification) in ancient times over-shadowed all the Country over with green
leaved branches, and the boughs and arms of trees twisted one within another,
so implicated the Woods together, that a man could scarcely go alone in the
beaten paths: But now the trees grow not so thick, yet has it an infinite
number of fallow Dear, yea and Stagges with their stately branching heads
feeding within it. Mansfield.
Some Towns also: among which Mansfield carries away the name, as maintaining
Graves of the great family of Mansfield in Germany, use as an argument to
prove the same, and set down that the first Earl of Mansfield was one of
King Arthurs Knights of the Round Table, borne and bred at this Mansfield.
Indeed our Kings used in old time to retire themselves hither for the love of
hunting: and, that you may read the very words out of an ancient Inquisition,
W. Fauconberge, tenebat Manerium de Cukeney in hoc Comitatu in Sergientia, per
Servitium ferrandi Palsredum Regis quando Rex veniret ad Mansfield, that is, W.
Fauconberge held the Manor of Cukeney in this County in Sergiency, by service
to shoe the Kings Palfrey when the King came to Mansfield. And the hereditary
Foresters Shirewood were men in their times of high estimation, viz. Sir
Gerarde de Normanvile in the time of the Conquest, the Cauzes and Birkins, L.
Everingham.
by whose heir it came to the Everinghams. Of which Family Sir Adam Everingham
was summoned to Parliaments in the Reigns of King Edward the Second, and King
Edward the Third: At which time they were seated at Laxton, anciently called
Lexinton, Lexinton.
where also flourished a great Family so surnamed, whose heirs were married
into the Houses of Sutton of Averham and Markham.

Out of this Wood there spring many Riverets that run into the Trent: but
Idle is thought to be the chief: Idle the river.
upon which near unto Idleton in the year 616. that felicity and prosperous
success which for a long time had accompanied Ethered that Northumberland, was
overtaken and forsook him quite. For, whereas before time he had always
fought his battles most fortunately, here (fortune turning her wheel) he
was by Redwald King of the East Angles vanquished and slain, who in his room
made Edwin then banished from the Kingdom, due unto him from his Ancesters,
Sovereign Ruler over the Northumbers. This little River Idle runs down not
far from Markham, Markham.
a Village verily but small to speak of, yet gave it name to the Family of the
Markhams, which for worth and antiquity has been very notable, being
descended from one of the heirs of Cressy, and formerly from an heir of
Lexinton, as I lately showed. The greatest ornament of this Family was Sir John
Markham, who sitting Lord chief Justice of England, Workensop, a Town well
known for the Liquorice that there grows and prospers passing well:
Workensop. Liquorice.
famous also for the Shrewsburies House which within our remembrance George
Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury built with that magnificence, as beseems so great
an Earl, and yet such as was not to be envied. This Workensop from the
Lovetofts first Lords thereof, under the Normans Reign, descended by the
Furnivalles and Nevil, unto the L. Talbots with a very goodly inheritance. S.
Mary of Radford.
Of which Lovetofts, G. Lovetoft in the time of King Henry the First, founded
here an Abbay, the ruins whereof I have seen toward the East side of the
Town, amidst most pleasant and plentiful pastures: and the West part of the
Church stands still passing fair to be seen with two tower steeples. A
little higher upon the same River I saw Blithe a famous Mercate Town, Blithe.
which Bulley or Busly, a Noble man of the Normans blood, fortified with a
Castle: but now the Roger Busly and Foulke De Lisieurs: and this is the
farthest Town almost in Nottingham-shire, Northward, unless it be Scroby a
little Town of the Archbishops of York, situate in the very confines and
frontiers of Yorkshire.

William surnamed the Conqueror appointed over this Shire William Peverell his
base son, Lords and Earls of Nottingham. Lib. M. Linton. Matthew. Paris. p.
126.

See Earls of Darby. Matthew. Paris. p. 204. Hoveden. page 373. b.


not with the Title of Earl, but of Lord of Nottingham: who had a son that
dyed before his father, and he likewise had a son of the same name, whom
king Henry the Second disinherited, for that he went about to poison Ranulph
Earl of Chester. Much about this time Robert de Ferrarijs, who rifled and
ransacked Nottingham, in a Donation which he made unto the Church of
Tuttesbury, styled himself thus, Robertus Comes junior de Nottingham, that is,
Robert the younger Earl of Nottingham. But afterward King Richard the First
gave and confirmed unto his brother John the Earldom and Castle of Nottingham
with all the Honor of Peverell. Many years after, King Richard the Second
honored John Lord Mowbray with this Title of Earl of Nottingham; who dying a
young man without issue, his brother Thomas succeeded after him: He being by
king Richard the Second created Earl Mareshall and Duke of Norfolk, and soon
after banished, begat Thomas Earl Mareshall, whom king Henry the Fourth
beheaded; and John Mowbray, who, as also his son and Nephew, Inq. 6. Rich. 2.
See Dukes of Norfolk.
were likewise Dukes of Norfolk and Earls of Nottingham. But Richard the
young son of King Edward the Fourth, being Duke of York had borne this Title
with others by his Wife the heir of the Mowbraies, but a small while, King
Richard the Third honored William Vicount Barkley descended from the Mowbraies
with this Title of Earl of Nottingham: and whereas he dyed without issue,
king Henry the Eighth bestowed the same honor upon his illegitimate son H.
Fitz Roy, when he created him Duke of Richmond; but he departed this life in
the flower of his age, leaving no child. Afterward this Title lay extinct,
until in the year of our Lord 1597. Queen Elizabeth by solemn investiture
adorned therewith Charles Lord Howard of Effingham, and High Admiral of
England, descended from the Mowbraies, in regard of his Armado in the year
1588. as also at the winning of Caliz in Spain, where he was Lord General of
the forces by sea, like as the Earl of Essex, of those by land.

There are in this County Parish Churches 168.

DARBY-SHIRE.
DARBY-SHIRE, called in old English-Saxon (...), lies close to
Nottingham-shire Westward, confining with Leichestershire upon the Southside,
like as with Staffordshire on the West, and Yorkshire in the North,
resembling, as it were, the form of a Triangle, but not with equal sides.
For, whereas about the point of it lying Southward it is scarce six miles
Derwent, that runs along the midst of it, divides it after a sort in two
parts, which River breaking out of the North limit thereof and taking his
course Southward, sometimes with his black waters stained with the Soil and
earth that it passes by, rumbleth down apace into the Trent: For, Trent
overthwarteth the said narrow point, that I spoke of, lying Southward. The East
side and the South parts are well manured, not unfruitful, and besides, well
stored with Parkes; The West part beyond Derwent which they call the Peake
being all of it hilly, or a stony and craggy ground, is more barraine: howbeit
rich in lead,

In the South corner the first place worth the naming that offers it self to
sight, Greisly Castle. The family of the Greisleys.
is Greisely Castle, more than broken down, which together with a little
Monastery was founded in times past in honor of Saint George, by the
Greiseleies Lords thereof, who fetching their descent from William the son of
Sir Niele of Grieseley, about the very Conquest of England by the Normans, have
flourished unto these days in great worship, the which they have not a little
augmented long since by marrying with the daughter and heir of the ancient
family of Gasteneys. Upon the River Dove, which until it enters into Trent
divides this Country from Staffordshire, we meet Ashburne a Mercate town,
where the house of the Cokains flourished a long time; and Norbury, where the
right ancient family of the Fitz-Herberts have long inhabited: out of which,
Sir Anthony Fitz-Herbert has deserved passing well of the knowledge and
profession of our Commons law: The family of the Shirleys.
Not far from which is Shirley an ancient Lordship of the well renowned
Family of the Shirleys, who derive their pedigree from one Fulcher: unto whom,
beside the antiquity of their house, much honor and fair lands have accrued by
marriage with the heirs of the Breoses, the Bassets of Brailesford, the
Stantons, Lovets, etc. And here stand round about many places which have given
name and Habitation to worshipful Families: as Longford, Bradburne, Kniveton,
from Knivetons of Mercaston and Bradley: of which house Saint Lo Kniveton is
one, *
to whose judicious and studious diligence I am deeply endebted: also
Keidelston, where the Cursons dwelt, as also at Crokhall. But whether Sir
Robert Curson knighted by King Henry the Seventh, Baron Curson.
made a Baron of the Empire by Maximilian the Emperor in the year 1500. for
his singular valor, and thereupon by King Henry the Eigth made a Baron of
England with a liberal pension assigned, was descended from these Cursons, I
dare not affirm. Hereby is Radborn, where Sir John Chandos knight, Lord of
the place, laid a goodly foundation of a great and stately house: from whom by
a daughter it came by hereditary succession unto the Poles, who dwell here at
this day. But these particularities I leave for him who

But upon Trent, Repton.
so soon as ever he has taken to him the river Dove, is Repandunum to be
seen, for so do our History-writers call it, the Saxons named it (...), and
we at this day Repton, which from a great and fair Town is become a poor
small Village. For, in old time very famous it was, by reason both of the
burial of Aethelbald that good King of the Mercians, who through the treachery
of his own Mercia: as also for the unfortunate calamity of Burthred the last
King of the Mercians, King Burthred.
who when he had enjoyed his kingdom partly by way of entreaty and partly by
means of bribery, full twenty years, was here deprived of his kingdom by
the Danes, or rather freed and exempted from the glittering misery of princely
State, and so became an example to teach men in how ticklish and slippery a
place they stand which are underpropped only with money. Melborn.
Then not far from Trent is Melborn a Castle of the Kings now decaying,
wherein John Duke of Burbon taken prisoner in the battle of Agincourt was
detained nineteen years under the custody of Sir Nicholas Montgomery the
younger. Scarce five miles hence Northward, the River Derwent has his walk;
Peak hills, being one while streitned between crags, and sometimes another
while watering and cherishing the fresh green meadows, by mossie and morish
grounds holds on his course for thirty miles or thereabout directly, as it
were, into the South. Howbeit in so long a course he passes by nothing worth
looking on, Chattesworth.
except Chattesworth, a very large, fair and stately house, which Sir William
Candish, Cavendish.
or Cavendish descended out of that ancient house of Gernon in Suffolk,
began, and which his Wife Elizabeth, and after Countess of Shrewesbury, has
of late with great charges fully finished.

But where Derwent turns somewhat Eastward, when it is once past Little
Chester, Little City, where old pieces of Roman money are often times gotten
out of the ground, Darby shows it self, in the English-Saxon Tongue named
(...), and by the Danes (as Athelward that ancient Writer witnesses) Deoraby,
the chief Town of all this Shire: which name, being taken from the River
Derwent and contracted from Derwentby, it has bestowed upon the whole County.
A proper Town it is, none of the least, not without good trade and resort unto
it. On the East side of it, the River Derwent making a very fair show, runs
down carrying a full and lofty stream under a beautiful stone Bridge, upon
which our devout forefathers erected a fair Chapel, which now is neglected
and goes to decay: Through the South part thereof runs a pretty clear
Riveret which Mertenbrooke. Five Churches there be in it: Of which the greatest
named All Hallowes, dedicated to the memory of All Saints, has a Tower Steeple
that for height and singular fine Workmanship excels. In which Church, the
Countess of Shrewesbury, of whom erewhile I spoke, trusting her self better
than her heirs, providently erected a Sepulture for her self, and as
religiously founded an Hospital hard by, for the maintenance of twelve poor
folk, eight men and four women.

Memorable in old time was this place, because it had been a lurking hole and
a Rendevous for the Danes, until Ethelfleda that victorious Lady of the
Mercians, by a sudden forceable surprise, made a slaughter of the Danes and
became Mistress of Edward the Confessor, as we find in Domesday book, it
had 143. Burgesses, whose number notwithstanding decreased so, that in William
the Conquerours Reign there remained only an hundred: And these paid unto the
King at the feast of Saint Martin 12. Thraves of corn, as it should seem.
Trabes of Corn. But now all the name and credit that it has, arises of the
Assisses there kept for the whole shire, and by the best ^appy ale, that is
brewed there: a drink so called, of the Danish word Oela somewhat wrested, and
not of Alica, Ale. Cervisia in latin, Curmi in Dioscorides: Ale in English, of
Oel, a Danish word.
as Ruellius deriveth it: the Britans termed it by an old word Kwrw, in stead
whereof Curmi is read amiss in Dioscorides; where he says, that the Hiberi
(perchance he would have said Hiberni, that is, The Irishmen) in lieu of wine
use Curmi, a kind of drink made of Barley. For, this is that Barly-wine of
ours, which Julian Apostata, calls merrily in an Epigramme, (...). This is
the ancient and peculiar drink of the Englishmen and Britans, yea and the same
very wholesome, howsoever Henry of Aurenches the Norman, Arch-poet to King Henry
the Third, did in his pleasant wit merrily jest upon it in these Verses,
Cervisiam plerique vocant: nil spissius illa
Dum bibitur, nil clarius est dum mingitur, unde
Constat, quod multas faeces in ventre relinquit.
Of this strange drink, so like to Stygian lake,
(Most term it Ale) I wot not what to make:
Folk drink it thick, and piss it passing thin,
Much dregs therefore must needs remain within.


Turnebus de Vino.
Turnebus that most learned Frenchman makes no doubt, but that men using to
drink hereof, if they could avoid surfeiting, would live longer than those
that drink wine: and that from hence it is, that many of us drinking Ale live
an hundred years. And yet Asclepiades in Plutarch ascribes this long life to
the coldness of the air, which keeps in and preserves the natural heat in
bodies, when he made report, that the Britans lived until they were an hundred
and twenty years old.

But the wealth of this Town consists much in buying of corn and selling it
again to the mountains: for all the Inhabitants be as it were a kind of
hucksters, or badgers. Not far from hence does Derwent carry his stream,
where by Elwaston Sir Raulph Montjoye had lands, Barons Montjoye.
in the time of Edward the First: from whence came Walter Blunt, whom King
Edward the Fourth advanced to the honor of Baron Montjoye with a pension:
whose posterity have equalled the nobility of their birth with the ornaments of
learning: and principally among them, Charles, late Earl of Devonshire, Baron
Montjoy, Lord Lieutenant General of Ireland, and Knight of the Order of the
Garter. Beneath this Elwaston, Derwent disburdeneth himself into the channel
of Trent, which within a while admits into it the River Erewash, that in
this part serves as a limit to divide this country from Nottingham-shire.
Near unto this River stands Riseley, a possession of the Willoughbeies: of
which family was that Sir Hugh Willoughby, as I have heard say, who whiles he
endeavored to discover the Frozen Sea near unto Wardhous in Scandia, was
frozen to death together with his company, Sandiacre, or as others will have
it, Saint Diacre, the seat of the Family of the Greies of Sandiacre: Greies of
Sandiacre.
whose inheritance Sir Edward Hilary in right of his wife was first possessed
of; and whose son became adopted into the name of the Greies: and a few
years after, the one of his daughters and heirs wedded to Sir John Leake, and
the other to John Welsh.

On the East side of this Shire there follow in order Northward these places,
Codenor Castle.
Codenor in old time Coutenoure Castle, which belonged to the Barons Gray,
called thereupon Lords Gray of Codenor; Barons Gray of Codenor.
whose inheritance in the foregoing age came to the Zouches by the marriage
that Sir John de la Zouch the second son of William Lord de la Zouch of
Haringworth, contracted with Elizabeth the heir of Henry Gray the Lord of
Codenor. Then, Winfeld, a very great and goodly Manor, where Raulph Lord
Cromwell in the Reign of Henry the Sixth built a sumptuous and stately house,
for those days. Alfreton.
After it, you see Alffreton, which men think to have been built by King
Alfred, and of him to have taken that name: which Town had also Lords,
entitled thereupon, de Alfreton: of whom the second named Robert, the son of
Ranulph, built in the most remote angle and nouke of this shire the little
Abbay De Bello capite, commonly called Beau-chiefe; but a few years after for
default of heirs males the Family of Chaworth and the Lathams in Lancashire
possessed their inheritance, by two daughters. The Barons of Alfreton coat of
Arms. Staveley.
These bare for their Arms, Two Chevero^s, as they term them, Or, in a
Shield Azur: which very same Coat the Musards, that is, The doubters changing
the colors only gave, who during the Reign of King Edward the First had an
end in Sir Nicholas Musard: Freshwell commonly.
and his eldest sister was married to Ancher Freschevill, whose posterity
flourishes here still at this day. Higher yet in the very East frontier of
this County, upon a rough and a craggy Soil stands Hardwic, which gave name
to a Family in which possessed the same: out of which descended Lady Elizabeth
Countess of Shrewesbury, who began to build there two goodly houses joining
in manner one to the other, which by reason of their lofty situation show
themselves, a far off to be seen, and yield a very goodly prospect. This now
gives the Title of Baron to Sir William Cavendish her second son, Baron
Cavendish.
whom King James of late has honored with the honor of Baron Cavendish of
Hardwic.

More inward in the Country, is seated Chester-field in Scardale, that is, in a
Dale compassed in with cragges and rocks: For, such rocks the Englishmen were
wont to term Scarres. Both the new name it self, and the ruins of the old
Walls do prove, that this Chester-field was of good antiquity: but the
ancient name thereof is by continuance of time worn out and quite lost. King
John made it a free Borough William Briewer his especial favorite. In
Writers it is famous only by occasion of the war betwixt King Henry the Third
and his Barons, wherein Robert Ferrars the last Earl of Darby of that name,
being taken prisoner and deprived of his honor by authority of the Parliament,
lived afterward as a private man: and his posterity flourished with the Title
only of Barons. Hard to this Chesterfield Westward lies Walton, Walton.
which from the Bretons came hereditarily by Loudham to the Foliambs men of
great name in this Tract: Sutton.
and Eastward Sutton, where the Leaks held a long time a worshipful port, in
Knights degree.

A little from hence is Bolsover an ancient Castle, situate somewhat with the
highest: which belonged to the Hastings Lords of Abergavenney, in right of
exchange Chester, unto whom this Castle had appertained, should be divided and
bestowed among distaves, assigned here and there other possessions unto the
sisters of John Scot the last Earl.

The West part beyond Derwent, which throughout rises high and peaketh up with
hills and mountains, whence in old time it was called in the old English tongue
Peac-lond, The Peake.
and is at this day, happily for that cause, named the Peake (for, that word
among us signifies to appear aloft) is severed from Staffordshire by the
Dove a most swift and clear River, of which I shall speak hereafter. This
part although in some place it has craggy, rough and bare scarres, and
cragges; yet by reason that under Wolves.
there is no more danger now from Wolves which in times past were hurtful and
noisome to this Country; and for the chasing away and taking of which some
there were that held lands here at Wormehill, who thereupon were surnamed
Wolve-hunt, as appears plainly in the Records of the Kingdom: Inq. 2. Ed. 2.
But so plentiful it is of lead, Lead. Brodaeus.
that the Alchymists, who condemn the Planets as convict of some crime unto
the metal mines, have upon a ridiculous error written, that Saturn, whom
they make the Lord and Dominatour of lead, is liberally affected to England, in
Pliny spoke of this Country when he said this, In Britain in the very crust
of the ground, without any deep mining, is gotten so great store of lead, that
there is a law expressly made of purpose, forbidding men to make more than to
a certain stint. For, in these mountains, fertile lead stones are daily
dug up in great abundance, which upon the hill tops lying open to the West
wind, near unto Creach and Workes-Worth (which hereupon took name of the
lead-workes) when the Western wind begins to blow (which wind of all
others they have by experience found to hold longest) they melt with mighty
great fires of wood into lead, in troughes or trenches which they dig of
purpose for it to run into, and so make Sowes. Neither only lead, but
Stibium also called in the Apothecaries shops Antimonium, Antimony.
is here found by it self in veins: which mineral the women of Greece used
in old time to color their eyebrows with, whereupon the Poet Ion, in Greek
terms it (...). Milstones.
Milstones likewise are here hewed out, as also Grindstones. Whetstones.
Fluores. Crystal.
to give an edge unto iron tools: and sometimes in these mines or quarries is
found a certain white Fluor (for such stones coming out of Mines, that be
like unto precious stones, learned mineral men call Fluores) which for all the
world resembles Crystal.

Besides Workes-worth, lately mentioned, we meet with never another place worth
the remembrance, unless it be Haddon by the River Wie, the seat for many
years together of the Vernons, Vernon.
who as they were very ancient so they became no less renowned in these parts,
in so much as Sir George Vernon knight, who lived in our time, for his
magnificent port that he carried, the open house that he kept, and his
commendable hospitality, gat the name among the multitude of a Pety King in the
Peake. By John Mannours son of Thomas Earl of Rutland, and to Sir Thomas
Stanley son of Edward Earl of Darby. There adjoyneth unto this, Bakewell
upon the same Riveret, which among these hills makes it self way into Derwent.
This was by the Saxons called (...): And Marianus writes, that King Edward the
Elder erected there a Borough. Now whether it borrowed this name or no of the
hot waters, which the ancient Englishmen, as also the Germans in their
language termed Bade and Baden, whence came Baden in Germany and Buda in
Hungary, I know not. Certes, at the springhead of Wie not far from hence,
there rise and walme up nine fountains of hot waters, Buxton.
the place at this day is called Buxton well: which George Earl of Shrewesbury
lately beautified with buildings, and so they are begun again to be
resorted unto, by concourse of the greatest Gentlemen and of the Nobility. At
which time that most unfortunate Lady, Mary Queen of Scots bad farewell unto
Buxton with this Distichon, by a little change of Caesar's Verses concerning
Feltria, in this wise: Buxtona a quae calidae celebrabere nomine lymphae,
Forte mihi posthac non adeunda, vale.
Buxton, that of great name shall be, for hot and wholesome baine,



But that these hot waters were known in old time, The Port-way or High paved
Street named Bath-gate, reaching for seven miles together from hence unto Burgh
a little Village does manifestly show. Near unto this Burgh there stands
upon the top of an hill an old Castle sometimes belonging to the Peverels,
called The Castle in the Peake, 46. Ed. 3.
and in Latin De Alto Pecco, which King Edward the Third together with a Manor
and an Honor, gave unto his son John Duke of Lancaster, what time as he
surrendered the Earldom of Richmond into the Kings hands. Under which, there
is a Cave or hole within the ground, called, saving your reverence, The Devils
Devils Arse in Peake.
that gapeth with a wide mouth, and has in it many turnings and retyring
rooms: wherein, forsooth, Gervase of Tilbury, whether for wane of knowing
truth, or upon a delight he had in fabling, has written, that a Shepherd
saw a very wide and large Country with Riverets and Brooks running here and
there through it, and huge Pooles of dead and standing waters. Notwithstanding,
by reason of these and such like fables, this Hole is reckoned for one of the
wonders of England: neither are there wanting the like tales of another Cave,
but especially of that which is called Elden Hole, Elden hole.
wherein there is nothing to be wondered at, but that it is of an huge
widnesse, exceeding steep, and of a mervailous depth. But whosoever have
written that there should be certain tunnels and breathing holes, Alexander
Necham, which he wrote as touching the Mervailes of England agree to any of
these two holes.

Est specus Aeolijs ventis obnoxia semper,
Impetus e gemino maximus ore venit.
Cogitur injectum velamen adire supernas
Parts, descensum impedit aura potens.
A Cave, to strong Aeolian winds always enthralled there is,
From twofold tunnell maine great blasts arise and never miss,
A cloth or garment cast therein, by force aloft is sent,
A mighty breath, or powrfull puff does hinder all descent.
But all the memorable matters in this high and rough stony little Country, one
has comprised in these four Verses.

Mira alto Pecco tria sunt, barathrum, specus, antrum;
Commoda tot, plumbum, gramen, ovile pecus.
Tot speciosa simul sunt, Castrum, Balnea, Chatsworth;
Plura sed occurrunt, quae speciosa minus.
There are in High Peake Wonders three,
A deep Hole, Cave and Den:
Commodities as many be,
Lead, Grass, and Sheep in pen.
And Beauties three there are withal
A Castle, Bath, Chatsworth:
With places more yet meet you shall
That are of meaner worth.
*
To these Wonders may be added a wonderful Well in the Peake Forest not far
from Buxtons which ordinarily ebbeth and flows four times in the space of
one hour or thereabout, A strange Well. Th. Fitz-Herbert. p. 223. Lords and
Earls of Darby. Simon Dunelm. Hovenden. Matthew Paris. 204.
keeping his just Tides: and I know not whether Tideswell a Mercate Town
hereby has his name thereof.

The Peverels who I have said before were Lords of Nottingham are also reported
to have been Lords of Darby. Afterward King Richard the First, gave and
confirmed John the Counties and Castles of Nottingham, Lancaster, Darby, etc.
with the honors thereto belonging, with the honor also of Peverell. After him
these were Earls of Derby out of the family of Ferrars (so far as I am able to
gather out of the Registers of Tutbury, Merivall, and Burton Monasteries)
William Ferrars, son to the Daughter and heir of Peverell, whom King John
with his own hand, (as we find in an ancient Charter) invested Earl of
Darby: Chart. antiq. 1. Ioban.
William his son who bruised with a fall out of his Coach died in the year
1254. And this Williams son, Robert; who in the Civil War lost this Title
and a great estate by forfeiture, in such sort as that none of his posterity,
although they lived in great port and reputation, were ever restored to that
honor again: But most of this Roberts possessions Edmund his own younger son:
and King Edward the Third (I write out of the very original Record) by
authority and advise of the Parliament, ordained Henry of Lancaster, the son
of Henry Earl of Lancaster, Earl of Darby, to him and his heirs, and withal
assigned unto him a thousand marks yearly during the life of his father Henry
Earl of Lancaster. From that time this Title was united to the line of
Lancaster, until King Henry the Seventh, bestowed the same upon Thomas Lord
Stanley, who before had wedded Margaret the Kings mother, to him and the heirs
males of his body. He had for his successor his Grandsonne Thomas begotten by
George his son of Joan the heir of the Lord Strange of Knocking: this Thomas
had by the sister of George Earl of Huntingdon, the third Earl of this
Family, highly commended for hospitality and affability, who by the Lady
Dorothy Daughter to the first Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, begat Henry the
fourth Earl, efts-once honorably employed, who left by Lady Margaret Daughter
of Henry Earl of Cumberland, Ferdinand, and William Darby. Ferdinand dyed in
strange manner, in the flower of his youth, leaving by Margaret his Wife
Daughter of Sir John Spenser of Althorp three Daughters, Anne married to Gray
Bruges, Lord Chandos, Francis Wife to Sir John Egerton, and Elizabeth Wife to
Henry Earl of Huntingdon. William the sixth Earl now enjoys that Honor
having issue by Elizabeth Daughter to Edward late Earl of Oxford.

Nottingham and Darby: of which they inhabited a part who in Bedes time were
called Mercij Aquilonares, Northren Mercians.
that is, The Northern Mercians, for that they dwelt beyond the Trent
Northward: and they held, as he says, The land of seven thousand Families.
This County holds in it Parishes 106.

CORNAVII.
HAving now travailed in order through the Countries of the ancient CORITANI, I
am to survey the Regions confining, which in ancient time the people called
CORNABII or CORNAVII, inhabited: The derivation or Etymology of whose name let
others sift out. As for my self, I could draw the force and signification of
that word to this and that diversely; but seeing none of them does aptly answer
to the nature of the place, or disposition of the people, I choose rather to
reject Ptolomees description the CORNAVII seem to have possessed, that is to
say, Warwickshire, Worcestershire, Staffordshire, Shrop-shire and Cheshire.
In which, there remains no footing at this day, of the name Cornavij,
although this name continued even until the declining State of the Roman
Empire. For, certain Companies and Regiments of the CORNAVII served in pay
under the later Emperors, as we may Notitia Provinciarum.

WARWICI Comitatus a cor: nauiis olim inha: bitatus



THe County of WARVVICK, which the old English Saxons as well as we called
WARVVICK-SHIRE, being bounded on the East side with Northamptonshire,
Leicestershire, and the Watling-street Way, which I spoke of: on the South with
Oxfordshire and Glocestershire, on the West, for the greatest part with
Worcestershire, and on the North Staffordshire, is divided into two parts,
the Feldon and Woodland, that is, into a plain Champian, and a woody Country:
which parts, the River Avon running crookedly from North-East to South-West,
does after a sort sever one from the other.

The Feldon, Feldon.
lies on this side Avon Southward, a plain Champian Country, and being rich
in Corn and green grass, yields a right goodly and pleasant prospect to
them that look down upon it from an Hill which they call Edgehill. Where
this hill ends nere unto Wormington, we saw a round Fort or military fense
cast up of a good bigness, which, as others of that kind, we may well think
to have been made for the present, and not long to continue, by occasion of
some enemies Rodway and Rodley: The Vale of Redhorse.
yea and a great part of the very Vale is thereupon termed The Vale of
Red-horse* of the shape of an Horse cut out in a red hill by the Country people
hard by Pillerton.

In this part the places worth naming are Shipston and Kinton, Shipston in
Worcestershire. Kinton. Compton.
the one in times past a Mercate of Sheep, the other of Kine, whereupon they
gat those names: also Compton in the Hole, so called for that it lies hidden
in a Valley under the Hills; yet has it delights and pleasures about it, and
from thence a noble Family has taken the name: out of which the most excellent
Prince Queen Elizabeth advanced Sir Henry Compton to the honor of a Baron in
the year of our Redemption Wormeleighton, so highly commended, and notorious
for good Sheepe-pasture, but now much more notable since that King James
created that right worshipful Sir Robert Spenser, of whom I have already
spoken, Baron Spenser of Wormeleighton. Shugbury. Stones Astroites Sigstean.
See in Lincolnshire. Leamington.
Moreover, Shugbury, where the stones called Astroites, resembling little
Stars, are found, which the Lords of the place surnamed thereupon Shugbury,
have long showed in their Coat Armor: Southam a Mercate Town well known: as
also Leamington (so called of Leame a small Brook that wandereth through this
part of the Shire) where there boyleth out a spring of salt water: and
Utrhindon, now Long Ichingdon, and Harbury. Neither verily are these two places
memorable for any other cause, but for that Fremund son Offa was betwixt them
villanously in times past slain by those that forelayed him, a man of great
renown and singular Piety to God ward, unto whom nothing else procured envy
and evil will, but because in an unhappy time he had by happy Conduct quelled
the audacious Courage of his enemies. Which Death of his notwithstanding turned
to his greater Glory. For, being buried at his Fathers Palace, Off-Church.
now called Off-Church, he lives yet unto Posterity, as who being raunged in
the Catalogue of our Saints has among the multitude received Divine Honors:
and whose life is by an ancient Writer set out in a good Poem, out of which
let it be no offense to put down these few Verses following touching the
Murderer, who upon an ambitious desire of a Kingdom,

Non spera^s vivo Fremundo, regis honor,
Optato se posse frui, molitur in ejus
Immeritam tacito mortem, gladioque profanus
Irruit exerto servus, Domini jacentis
Tale nihil veritum saevo caput amput at ictu.
Talis apud In some Copies Radford.
Wydford Fremendum palma coronat,
Dum simul and sontes occidit, and occidit insons.
Past hope, whiles Fremund lived, to speed of wished regalty,
All secret and unworthy means he plots to make him dye.
With naked sword, profane slave he, assaileth cowardly
His Lord unwares, and as he lay beheads him cruelly.
At Wydford thus Prince Fremund did this glorious crown attain,
Whiles slaying guilty folk, at once, himself is guiltless slain.
Fosse way.
Thus much of the Feldon, or Champion part, which, that ancient Fosse-way (a
thing that would not be overpassed) cutteth overthwart: the ridge whereof is
seen in pastures lying now out of the way, near unto Chesterton the
habitation of that ancient Family of the Peitoes, Peito.
out of which was that William Peito, a Franciscane Friar, whom Paul the
Fourth, Pope of Rome, of stomach to work Cardinal Pole displeasure (would you
think these heavenly Wights were so wrathful) created, though in vain,
Cardinal and ^egate of England having recalled Cardinal Pole to Rome before,
to be accused and charged as suspected corrupt Mary, albeit she were most
affectionately devoted to the Church of Rome, interposed or rather opposed her
self so, that Peito was forbidden to enter into England, and the power
Legantine left entire and whole to Cardinal Pole. Here I wot not whether it
would be material to relate, how in the Reign of Edward the Fourth certain
Writers in Books of purpose penned made complaint of Covetousness, Rosse and
T.B. against the destroyers of Villages.
how that she having assembled here about flocks of Sheep as a puissant
power of armed forces, besieged many Villages well peopled, drove out the
Husbandmen, won the said Villages, destroyed, rased, and depopulated them in
such miserable sort heereabout, that one of the said Writers a learned man in
those days cried out with the Poet in these terms.

Quid facerent hosts capta crudelius urbe?
What could more cruelly be done,
By enemies, to Cities won?
But nere unto the River Avon, where carrying as yet but a small stream he
closely enters into this County, first offers it self Rugby having a
Market in it standing chiefly of a number of Butchers. Then Newenham Regis,
that is, Kings Newenham standing upon the other side of the River, Newenham
Regis. Wholesome Wells.
where three fountains walme out of the ground streined, as it should seem,
through a vein of Alum; the water whereof

After it, Bagginton, which had a Castle to it, and belonged sometime to the
Bagottes, Bagginton.
as noble a Family then, a most other. Within a little whereof stands
Stoneley, where King Henry the Second founded an Abbay; and just over against
it stood in old time a Castle upon Avon called Stoneley-holme, Stoneley.
Register of Stoneley Abbay.
built in Holmeshull, which was destroyed when the flaming broiles of Danish
Wars under king Canutus caught hold of all England.

Then runs Avon unto the principal Town of the whole Shire, which we
Warwick, Warwick.
the Saxons (...), Ninnius and the Britans Caer Guarvic, and Caer Leon. All
which names, considering they seem to have sprung from Guarth a British word
which signifies a Garrison, or from Legions, that were set in certain
Skeptic than a Critic) that this is the very Town of Britain, Praesidium.
which the Romans called PRAESIDIUM, where, as we find in the Noticia, or
Abstract of Provinces, the Captain of the Dalmatian Horsemen abode under the
command of Dux Britanniae. This Cohort or Band was enrolled out of Dalmatia;
and (to note thus much by the way) such was the provident wisdom and forecast
of the Romans, that in all their Provinces they placed foreign Soldiers in
Garrison, who by reason of their diversity as well of manners as of language
from the natural Inhabitants, could not join with them in any conspiracy:
Florus lib. 4. c. ult.
for (as he writes) Nations not inured to the bridle of bondage, easily
otherwise Hereupon it was that there served in Britain, Foreign Soldiers in
Provinces.
out of Afric the Moors; out of Spain the Astures and Vettones; out of
Germany the Batavi, Nervij, Tungri, and Turnacenses; out of Gaul the Lingones,
Morini; and from other remoter places, Dalmatians, Thracians, Alani, etc. as I
will show in their proper places: But now to the matter. Neither let any man
think that the Britans got that word Guarth from the Frenchmen, seeing the
original is an Hebrew word (if we may believe Lazius) and in that Original
most Nations do accord.

But that this was PRAESIDIUM, that is, The Garrison Town, both the Authority
of our Chronicles teaches, which report that the Roman Legions had their
abode Norfolk, and on the other side from the West of Wales, which kind of
situation PRAESIDIUM a Town of Corsica, had, standing just in the midst of
the Island.

And no marvel is it that the Romans kept here Garrison and a standing
Company of Soldiers, seeing it stands over the River Avon upon a steep and
high Rock, and all the passages into it are wrought out of the very stone.
That it was fortified with a Wall and Ditches it is apparent; and toward the
South West it shows a Castle passing strong, as well by Nature as
handy-worke, the seat in times past of the Earls of Warwick. The Town it
self is adorned with fair houses, and is Ethelfled, Lady of the Mercians, who
repaired it (when as it was greatly decayed) in the year 911. In very good
state also it was upon the Normans entering into this land, and had many
Burgesses, as they term them: and twelve of them, as we find written in
King William the Conquerours Domesday Book, Were bound to accompany the King
of England into his Wars. He that upon warning given went not, paid an
hundred Shillings to the King: but if the King made a voyage by sea against his
enemies, they sent either four Boteswans, or four pound of Deniers. In this
Burgh the King has in his Demeines one hundred and thirteen Burgesses, and
the Kings Barons have an hundred and twelve. Roger the second, of the Normans
blood, Earl of Warwick, built afterward in the very heart of the Town a
most beautiful Mary: Which the Beauchamps that succeeded adorned with their
Tombs: but especially Richard Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, and Governor of
Normandy, who dyed at Roan in the year 1439. and after a sumptuous funeral
solemnized, in this Church lies entombed in a magnificent Tomb with this
Inscription.

Richard Beauchampe late Earl of Warwick, Lord Despenser, of Bergavenny, and
of many other great Lordships, whose body rests here under this Tomb, in a
full fair Vault of stone, set in the bare Roche. The which visited with long
sickness in the Castle of Rohan, therein deceased full Christianly the last
day of April, in the year of our Lord 1439. He being at that time Lieutenant
General of France, and of the Duchy of Normandy, by sufficient authority of
our Sovereign Lord King Henry the sixth. The which body by great deliberation
and worshipful conduct by sea and land, was brought to Warwick the fourth of
October, the year abovesaid, and was laid with full solemn exequies in a
fair Chest made of stone in the West Door of this Chapel, according to his
last Will and Testament, therein to rest Blacklow hill, which others call
Gaversden.
Near unto Warwick Northward is Blaclow hill to be seen, on which Piers de
Gaveston, whom King Edward the Second had raised from a base and low estate to
be Earl of Cornwall, was by the Nobles of the Kingdom beheaded: who
presuming of the Kings favor and fortunes indulgence, took unto him so great
and licencious liberty, that when he had once corrupted the Kings heart, he
despised all the best men, and proudly seized upon the estates of many, and as
he was a crafty and old beaten Fox sowed discords and variance between the
Prince and the Peers of the Realm.

Guy-cliffe.
Under this hill, hard by the River Avon stands Guy-cliffe, others call it
Gib-cliffe, Thomas Beau-foe descended from the ancient Normans line, and the
very seat it self of pleasantness. There have ye a shady little Wood, clear
and cristall Springs, mossie bottomes and caves, meadows always fresh and
green, the River rumbling here and there among the stones with his stream
making a mild noise and gentle whispering, and besides all this, solitary and
still quietness, things most grateful to the Muses. Here, as the report
goes, that valiant knight and noble Worthy so much celebrated, Sir Guy of
Warwick, after he had borne the brunt of sundry troubles, J. Rosse of
Warwick. Guy of Warwick.
and achieved many painful exploits, built a Chapel, led an Eremits life,
and in the end was buried. Howbeit, wiser men do think, that the place took
that name of later time by far, from Guy Beauchamp Earl of Warwick; and
certain it is, that Richard Beauchamp Earl of Warwick built Saint Margarets
Chapel here, and erected a mighty and giantlike statue of stone, resembling
the said Guy.

Charle-cot.
Avon now runs down from Warwick with a fuller stream by Charle-cot, the
habitation of the renowned ancient family of the Lucies knights, which place
long Charlecots: who upon a pious and devout mind founded a religious House at
Thellisford, for entertainment of poor folk and Pilgrims: For, that little
River was called Thelley, which by Compton Murdacke, the possession sometime of
the Murdackes, and now of the Vernaies, Knights, and by this, Stratford upon
Avon.
Thellisford goes into Avon, which within a while runs hard by Stratford, a
proper little mercate town, beholden for all the beauty that it has to two
men there bred and brought up, namely, John of Stratford Archbishop of
Canterbury, who built the Church; and Sir Hugh Clopton Major of London, who
over Avon made a stone Bridge supported with fourteen Arches, not without
exceeding great expenses. This Hugh was a younger brother, out of that ancient
family which from Clopton a Manor adjoining borrowed this surname, since the
time that Walter de Cocksfeld called Knight Mareschall settled and planted both
himself and his successors at Clopton. The inheritance of these Cloptons is
in our time descended to two sisters coheires: the one of which is married to
Sir George Carew knight, Vice chamberlain to our most gracious Lady Queen
Anne: Baron Carew of Clopton.
whom King James has entitled Baron Carew of Clopton, and whom I am the more
willing to name with honor in this respect, if there were none other, for that
he is a most affectionate lover of venerable antiquity. Neither sees Avon any
other memorable thing upon his banks, but Bitford a Mercate Town, and some
Country Villages being now ready to enter into Worcestershire.

Woodland, Woodland.
which beyond the River Avon spreads it self Northward much larger in
compass than the Feldon: and is for the most part thick set with Woods, and
yet not without pastures, corn fields, and sundry mines of Iron: This part, as
it is at this day called Woodland, so also it was in old time known by a more
ancient name Arden, but in the selfsame sense and signification, as I think.
For, Arden.
it seems that Arden among the ancient Britans and Gauls signified a Wood;
considering that we see a very great Wood in France named ARDEN, a Town in
Flanders hard by another Wood, called Ardenburg, and that famous Wood or Forest
in England by a clipped word likewise cleped DEN: Diana Ardwena.
to say nothing of that DIANA, which in the ancient inscriptions of Gaul is
surnamed ARDVVENA and ARDOINA, Of the Wood; and was the same Diana which in the
inscriptions of Italy went under the name of NEMORENSIS. Of this Forest,
Turkill of Arden, who flourished here in all honor under King Henry the
First, took his name: and his offspring which was of great worship and
reputation, spread very much over all England for many years successively
ensuing. In the West side of this Country, the River Arrow makes haste to
join himself in society with Avon, Studly.
by Studly Castle; belonging sometime to John the son of Corbutio. But
whether this River Arrow took name of swiftness, as Tigris in Mesopotamia
(for Arrow with us, like as Tigris among the Persians, betokens a shaft) or
contrariwise, of the still stream and slow course, which Are in the old French
and British Tongue implied,

Upon this River stands Coughton, Coughton. Throckmorton
the principal mansion house of the Throckmortons a family of Knights degree,
which being spread into a number of fair branches, and fruitful of fine wits,
flourished in this tract especially, ever since they matched in marriage with
the daughter and heir of Speney. Ousley.
Not far from hence is Ousley, which also was in ancient time well known by
the Lords thereof, the Butlers, Barons of Wem; from whom it was devolved
hereditarily to the Ferrars of Ousley. Whose inheritance, within a short time,
was divided between John Lord of Greistocke and Sir Raulph Nevill. Beauchamps
Court.
Beneath it, upon Arrow, stands Beauchamps-Court so named of Baron Beauchamp
of Powicke, from whom by the only daughter of Edward Willoughbey, Robert
Willoughbey Baron Broke, Grevills.
it came to Sir Foulque Grevill a right worshipful person both for his Knights
degree, and for kind courtesy: whose only son, carrying likewise the same
name, has consecrated himself so to true Virtue and Nobility, that in
nobility of mind he far surmounteth his parentage and unto whom for his
exceeding great deserts toward me, although my heart is not able either to
express or render condign thankfulness, yet in speech will I ever render

Under this Town there runs into Arrow, the River Al^e, which holding on
his course through the woods, Henley.
passes under Henley a pretty mercate town; a Castle joining whereunto
belonged the Family of the Mont-forts, being Noblemen of great name, which for
the pleasant situation among the Woods they called by a French name
Bell-desert, but this together with the ruins is now buried quite and scant to
be seen at all. These were descended not from the Almarian Family of the
Mont-sorts of France, but from Turstan de Bastanberg a Norman: whose
inheritance passed away at length by the daughters unto the Barons of Sudley,
and to the Frevills. In the very place where Arrow and this Alne do meet
together, Aulcester.
we saw Aulcester, by Matthew called (and that more rightly) Allencester, which
the inhabitants affirm to have been a most famous and ancient Town, and
thereupon they will have the name to be Ouldcester. This, (as we read in an
old Inquisition) was a Frank-burogh of our Lord King Henry the First, and the
same King gave that Burogh to Robert Corbet for his service, and when the said
Robert died, it came by descent to Sir William of Botereux, and to Sir Peter
Fitz-Herbert: A book in the Exchequer.
and when William of Botereux dyed, the moity of that Burogh fell by descent
into the hand of Sir Reginald of Botereux as to the heir, who now holds it:
and when Peter Fitz-Herbert died, that moity descended into the hand of
Herbert, the son of Peter: which Herbert gave it to Sir Robert de Chaundoys:
But now it is decayed and of a very great Town become a small Mercate of wares
and trade. Howbeit exceeding Arrow according to the name of the River, Arrow.
Burdet.
whose Lord Thomas Burdet for his dependence upon George Duke of Clarence,
words unadvisedly uttered, and hardly construed through the iniquity of the
time, lost his life. But by his grand daughter married to Edward Conway brother
to Sir Hugh Conway of Wales a gracious favorite of King Henry the Seventh, the
knightly Family of the Conwaies have ever since flourished and laudably
followed the profession of Arms.

But East from the river, and higher among the Woods, which now begin to grow
thin, Wroxhall. Badesley. Balshall. Register of the Templars, and Order of
Saint John of Jerusalem.
stand these towns under named, Wroxhall, where Hugh de Hatton founded a
little Priory; Badesley belonging in times past to the Clintons, now to the
Ferrars: Also Balshall, sometimes a Commandery of the Templars, which Roger de
Mowbray gave unto them; whose liberality to the order of Templars was so great,
that by a common consent in their Chapter they made a decree, that himself
might remit and pardon, any of the brotherhood whomsoever, in case he had
trespassed against the statutes and ordinances of that Order, and did withal
before him acknowledge the crime: yea and the Knights of the Order of Saint
John of Jerusalem, unto whom the Templars possessions in England were assigned
over (for our Ancestors in those days held it a deadly sin to profane
things consecrated to God) granted in token of thankfulness unto John Mowbray
of Axholme, See the Statute of Templars.
the successor of the foresaid Roger, that himself and his successors in
every of their Covents and assemblies should be

More North-east, where wild Brooks meeting together make a broad poole among
the Parkes, and so soon as they are kept in with banks run in a Channel, is
seated Kenelworth, Kenelworth commonly Killingworth.
in times past commonly called Kenelworde, but corruptly Killingworth: and of
it takes name a most ample, beautiful and strong Castle, encompassed all
about with Parkes, which neither Kenulph, nor Kenelm, ne yet Keneglise built,
as some do dream, but Geffrey Clinton Chamberlain unto King Henry the First,
and his son with him (as may be showed by good evidences) when he had founded
there before a Church for Chanons Regular. But Henry his Nephew in the second
degree, having no issue, sold it unto King Henry the Third, who gave it in
frank marriage Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester together with his sister
Aeleonor. And soon after when enmity was kindled between the King and Earl
Simon: and he slain in the bloody wars which he had raised upon fair
pretexts against his Sovereign, it endured six months fiege, and in the end
was surrendered up to the king aforesaid, Edmund his son Earl of Lancaster.
At which time, there went out and was proclaimed from hence an Edict, which our
Lawyers use to call Dictum de Kenelworth, whereby it was enacted, That
whosoever had took Arms against the King should pay every one of them five
years rent of their lands, etc. A severe, yet a good and wholesome course,
without effusion of blood against rebellious subjects, who compassing the
destruction of the State, built all their hopes upon nothing else but
dissentions. But this Castle through the bountiful munificence of Queen
Elizabeth, was given and granted to Robert Dudleie Earl of Leicester, who, to
repair and adorn it, spared for no cost: in so much as if a man consider
either the gallant building, or the large Parkes, it would scorn (as it were)
to

Next after this, to keep on the journey that my self made, I saw Solyhill:
but in it, Bremicham.
setting aside the Church, there is nothing worth sight: Then, Bremicham, full
of Inhabitants, and resounding with hammers and anvils, for the most of them
are Smiths. The lower part thereof stands very waterish: the upper rises
with fair buildings: for the credit and praise whereof, I may not reckon this
in the last place, that the Noble and martial Family of the Or Birmnighams.
Bremichams Earls of Louth, etc. in Ireland fetched their original and name
from hence. Then, in the utmost skirt of this Shire North-westward, Sutton
Colfield standing in a woody and on a churlish hard Soil, glories of John
Voisy Bishop of Excester there borne and bred: who in the Coleshull, a Town
sometime of the Clintons, and to Maxstocke Castle neighboring to it, which
acknowledged by a continual line of hereditary succession for his Lords, the
Limseies, who were also Lords of Wolverley, the Odingsells that came out of
Flanders, and the Clitons, men of greatest worth and worship in their times.

Lower yet, in the mids of this Woodland stands Coventrey so called, as we
take it, of a Covent of Monks, considering that we term in our tongue such a
brotherhood, a Covent and Coven: Honoriu^ 3. cap. 14. Decret.
and it is oftentimes in our Histories and Pontifical Decrees named Coventria:
as for example in this one passage: The Bishop of Coventrey is either beside
himself, or seems to have rejected knowledge and learning, too too much.
Vel non est compos sui Episcopus Conventrensis, vel nimis videtur a se
scientiam repulisse. Yet there be, that would have this name to be taken from
that little Brook that runs within the City at this day called Shirburn,
and in an ancient Charter of the Priory, is written Cuentford. Well, whence so
ever it was so called, in the foregoing age, growing wealthy by clothing and
making of Caps, it was the only Mart and City of trade in all these parts,
frequented also and peopled more than ordinarily a midland place: as being a
City very commodiously seated, large, sweet, and neat, fortified with strong
Walls, and set out with right goodly houses: among which there rise up on high
two Churches of rare workmanship, standing one hard by the other, and matched,
as it were, as concurrents, Holy Trinity, the other to Saint Michael. Yet has
it nothing within it, that one would say is of great antiquity. And the most
ancient monument of all, as it may seem, was the Monastery or Priory, the
ruins whereof I saw near unto those Churches: which Priory king Canutus
founded first for religious Nuns, who when they were within a while after
thrown out, in the year 1043 Leofricke Earl of the Of middle England.
Mercians enlarged, and in manner built anew, with so great a show and bravery
of gold and silver (these be the very words of William Malmesbury) that the
walls seemed too narrow for to receive the treasure of the Church, and the cost
bestowed there was wonderful to as many as beheld it: for, out of one beam
were scraped 50. Marks of silver. And he endowed it with so great livings,
that Robert de Limseie, Bishop of Lichfield Chester translated his See hither,
as it were to the golden sand of Lydia: to the end (for so writes the said
Malmesbury) that out of the very treasure of the Church he might by stealth
convey, wherewith to fill the Kings hand, wherewith to avoid the Popes
business, and wherewith to satisfy the greediness of the Romanists. But this
See, few years after was removed again to Lichfield: yet so, as that one and
the self same Bishop, carried the name both of Lichfield and of Coventry: The
first Lord of this City, so Lords of Coventry. 1050. Florilegus.
was this Leofricke, who being very much offended and angry with the Citizens,
oppressed them with most heavy tributes, which he would remit upon no other
condition, at the earnest suite of his wife Godiva, unless she would herself
ride on horseback naked through the greatest and most inhabited street of the
City: which she did in deed, and was so covered with her fair long hair, that
(if we may believe the common sort) she was seen of no body, and thus she
did set free her Citizens of Coventry from many payments for ever. From
Leofricke it came into the hands of the Earls of Chester, by Lucie his son
Algars daughter: for, she had been married to Ranulph the first of that name,
and the third Earl of Chester out of this line: who granted unto Coventrey the
same liberties that Lincoln had, and gave a Coventry came at length mediately
by the Earls of Arundell unto Roger Mont-hault, whose grand son Robert,
passed over all his right, for default of issue male of his body begotten, unto
Queen Isabel mother to King Edward the Third: To have and to hold during the
whole life of the Queen herself, and after her decease to remain unto John
of Eltham the said Kings brother, and to the heirs of his body begotten, and
for default, the remainder to Edward King of England etc. For thus is it to be
seen in the Fine, in the second year of King Edward the Third. Now, the said
John of Eltham was afterward Cornwall, and this place became annexed to the
Earldome of Cornwall. From which time it has flourished in great state: Kings
have bestowed sundry immunities upon it, and King Edward the Third especially,
who permitted them to choose a Major and two Bailiffes, and to build and
embattle a Wall about it: also king Henry the Sixth, who laying unto it
certain small Towns adjoining, granted, That it should be an entire County
corporate by it self, (the very words of the Charter run in that sort) in
deed and name, and distinct from the County of Warwick. At which time in lieu
of Bailiffes he ordained two Sheriffs, and the Citizens began to fortify
their City with a most strong Wall: wherein are beautiful Gates: and at one of
them called Gosford Gate, there hangs to be seen a mighty great Shield bone
of a wild which any man would think that either Guy of Warwick or else Diana
of the Forest ( Arden) slew in hunting, when he had turned up with his snout
that great pit or pond, which at this day is called Swansewell, but Swinsewell
in times past, as the authority of ancient Charters do prove.

As touching the Longitude of this City, it is 25. Degrees, and 52. Scruples:
and for the Latitude it is 52. Degrees, and 25. Scruples. Thus much of
Coventrey: yet have you not all this of me, but (willingly to acknowledge by
whom I have profited) of Henry Ferrars of Baddesley, a man both for parentage,
and for knowledge of antiquity very commendable; and my especial friend: who
both in this place and also elsewhere has at all times courteously showed me
the right way when I was out,

Ausley. Brand.
Near unto Coventrey North-west ward are placed Ausley Castle the habitation in
times past of the Hastings, who were Lords of Abergavenney: and Brand, the
dwelling place in old time of the Verdons: Eastward stands Caloughdon,
commonly Caledon; the ancient seat of the Lords Segrave, Caledon. Barons
Segrave.
from whom it descended to the Barons of Berkley, by one of the daughters of
Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk. These Segraves since the time that Stephen was
Lord chief Justice of England, flourished in the honorable estate of Barons,
became possessed of the Chaucombes Inheritance, whose Arms also they bare,
Segraves Coat of Arms.
viz. A Lion rampant, Argent crowned, Or, in a Shield Sable. But John the last
of them married Margaret Duchess of Northfolke, Daughter of Thomas and begat
Elizabeth a daughter, who brought into the Family of the Mowbraies the Dignity
of Marshall of England, and Title of Duke of Norfolk. Brinkl^ also is not
far from hence, where stood an ancient Castle of the Mowbraies, to which many
possessions and fair lands thereabout belonged: Brinklo Castle.
But the very rubbish of Comb Abbay.
as Comb Abbay is scant now apparent which the Camvills and Mowbraies endowed
with possessions, and out of the ruins and relics whereof, a fair house of
the Lord Haringtons in this very place is now raised. As you go Eastward, you
meet anon with Cester-Over, whereof I spoke incidently before, belonging to the
Grevills: near unto which the High port-way Watling-street, dividing this
shire Northward from Leichestershire, runs on forward by High-crosse,
whereof also I have already written, near unto Nun-Eaton, which in ancient
time was named Eaton. But when Amice wife to Robert Bossu Earl of Leicester,
as Henry Knighton writes, had founded a Monastery of Nuns, wherein her self
also became professed, it began of those Nuns to be called Nun-Eaton. And
famous it was in the former ages by reason of those religious Virgins
holiness, who devoting themselves continually to prayers, gave example of good
life.

A little from this there flourished sometimes Astley-Castle, Astley, or
Estley. Baron Astley.
the principal seat of the Family of Astley out of which flourished Barons
in the time of King Edward the First, Second, and Third: the heir whereof in
the end was the second wedded Wife of Reginald Lord Gray of Ruthin; from whom
came the Greies Marquesses of Dorset: some of whom were enterred in a most fine
and fair Collegiat Church which Thomas Lord Astley founded with a Deane and
Secular Chanons.

Mand^essedum. Mancester.
hard by Watling street (for so with the common people we call the Highway
made by the Romans) where as the river Anchor has a stone bridge over it,
stood MANDVESSEDUM a very ancient town, mentioned by Antonine the Emperor,
which being not altogether deprived of that name, is now called Mancester, and
in Ninnius his Catalogue Caer Mancegued. Which name, considering there is a
stone-quarry hard by, I may guess was imposed upon it, of the stones dug
forth and hewed out of it. For, out of the Glossaries of the British tongue, we
find, that Main in the British language signified a Stone, and Fosswad in the
Provincial tongue to dig out: which being joined together, may seem very
expressly to import that ancient name MANDVESSEDUM. But what, how Old-burie.
For on the one side, Atherstone a mercate town of good resort, where there
stood a Church of Augustine Friars, now turned into a Chapel (which
nevertheless acknowledges Mancester Church for her mother) and Nun-Eaton on
the other side, by their vicinity have left it bare and empty. Close unto
Atherstone stands Mery-Vale, Merivall.
where Robert Ferrars erected a Monastery to God and the blessed Virgin Mary,
wherein himself enwrapped in an Oxe-hide for a shrouding sheet was interred.

Pollesworth.
Northeastward is Pollesworth, where Modwena an Irish Virgin, of whom there
went so great a fame for her holy life, built a religious house for Nuns, which
R. Marmion a Noble man repaired, who had his Castle hard by at Stippershull.
Near unto this place also there flourished in the Saxons days, a town that
now is almost quite gone, Seckinton.
called then SECANDUNUM, and at this day Seckinton; where Aethelbald King of
the Mercians in civil war about the year of our Lord 749. was stabbed to
death by Beared: and soon after Offa slew Beared, so that as by bloody means
he invaded the Kingdom of Mercia, he likewise lost the same suddenly.

It remains now that we reckon up the Earls of Warwick: Earls of Warwick.
for, to pass over Guare, Morind, Guy of Warwick, of whose acts all England
resoundeth, and others of that stamp, whom pregnant wits have at one birth
bred and brought forth into the world: Henry the son of Roger de Beau-mont,
and brother to Robert Earl of Mellent, was the first Earl descended of
Normans blood: who had married Margaret the daughter of Ernulph de Hesdin Earl
of Perch, a most mighty and puissant

Out of this Family, there bare this Honorable title, Roger the son of
Henry, William the son of Roger, who died in the thirtieth year of King
Henry the Second, Walleran his brother, Henry the son of Walleran, Thomas his
son, who deceased without issue in the six and twentieth year of King Henry
the Third, leaving behind him Margery his sister, Placita E. 3. Rotulo 234.
who being Countess of Warwick, and barraine, departed this life: yet her two
husbands, first, John Marshall, then John de Plessetis or Plessey, in their
wives right and through their Princes favor mounted up to the Honorable
dignity of Earls of Warwick.

Now when these were departed without any issue by that Margery, Waller and
Margery succeeded them: After whom, dying also childlesse, his sister Alice
enjoyed the inheritance: Afterward her son William, called Malduit and
Manduit of Hanslap, who left this world and had no children. Then Isabell the
said William Malduits sister being bestowed in marriage upon William de
Beauchamp Lord of Elmesly, brought the Earldom of Warwick into the Family
of the Beauchamps; who, if I deceive not my self, for that they came of a
daughter of Ursus de Abtot, Rot. Parl. 23. H. 6.
gave the Bear for their cognizance, and left it to their posterity. Out of
this house there flourished six Earls and one Duke: William the son of
Isabell, John, Guy, Thomas, Thomas the younger, Richard and Henry, unto whom
King Henry the Sixth granted this pre-eminence and prerogative without any
precedent, Henricus Praecomes totius Anglia, and Comes Warwici, that is, Henry
chief Earl of all England, and Earl of Warwick: he nominated him also King
of the Isle of Wight, and afterward created him Duke of Warwick, and by these
express words of his Parent, granted, 24. H. 6.
That he should take his place in Parliaments and elsewhere next unto the Duke
of Norfolk and before the Duke of Buckingham. One only daughter he had named
Anne, whom in the Inquisitions we find entitled Countess of Warwick, and
she died a child. After her succeeded Richard Nevill who had married Anne
sister to the said Duke of Warwick, a man of an undaunted courage, but
wavering and untrustie, the very tennisse-ball, in some sort, of fortune; who
although he were no King, Anne his Wife by Act of Parliament was excluded and
debarred from all her lands for ever, and his two daughters, heirs to him, and
heirs apparent to their mother, Ann. 12. Ed. 4. Dead by Parliament.
being married to George Duke of Clarence, and Richard Duke of Gloucester, were
enabled to enjoy all the said lands, in such wise as if the said Anne their
mother were naturally dead. Whereupon the name, style and title of Earl of
Warwick Sarisbury was granted to George Duke of Clarence, who soon after was
unnaturally dispatched by a sweet death in a Butte of Malvesey by his
suspicious brother King Edward the Fourth: His young son Edward was styled
Earl of Warwick, and being but a very child was beheaded by King Henry the
Seventh to secure himself and his posterity.

Period of the civil war between Lancaster and York.
The death of this Edward our Ancestors accounted to be the full period, and
final end of the long lasting war between the two royal houses of
Lancaster and York. Wherein, as they reckoned, from the twenty eight year of
Henry the Sixth unto this, being the fifteenth of Henry the Seventh, there were
thirteen fields fought, three Kings of England, one Prince of Wales, twelve
Dukes, one Richard Nevill, that whip-king (as some termed him) had raised,
until that King Edward the Sixth conferred it upon John Dudley, that derived
his pedigree from the Beauchamps, who, like unto that Richard abovesaid, going
about in Queen Mary's days to turn and translate Scepters at his pleasure,
for his Traitorous deep ambition lost his head. But his sons, first John,
when his father was now Duke of Northumberland, by a courteous custom usually
received held this title for a while: and afterward Ambrose a most worthy
personage, both for warlike prowess and sweetness of nature through the
favor of Queen Elizabeth received in our remembrance, the Honor of Earl of
Warwick to him and his heirs males, and for defect of them, to Robert his
brother, and Ambrose bare with great commendation, and died without children in
the year one thousand five hundred eighty nine, shortly after his brother
Robert Earl of Leicester.

In this County there be Parish Churches 158.


THe second region of the ancient CORNAVII, having now changed the name, is
called in Latin Wigorniensis Comitatus, in the English Saxon tongue (...), and
now commonly of the principal Town in it WORCESTERSHIRE: the inhabitants
whereof, together with those who joining unto them round about in Bedes days,
before Wichij.
were termed Wiccii. Which name, if it were not given them of the river having
so many windings, which they dwell by (for such turnings and curving reaches of
a river, the English Saxons, as I have already said, called Wic) may seem to
have been derived of those Salt Pits, that the old Englishmen in their
language named Wiches. Salt Pits.
For there be here very notable Salt Pits, and many salt springs often times
have been found, which notwithstanding are stopped up, because it was provided
(as we read) that for the saving of woods salt should not be boiled but in
certain places. Neither let it seem strange, that places have their names
given them from Salt Pits, considering that we may meet with many such here
and there in every Tacitus writes, had a religious persuasion and belief,
that such places approach nearest to Heaven, and that men's prayers were no
where sooner heard of the gods.

This County, on which Warwickshire confineth on the East, Gloucestershire on
the South, bounded Westward with Hereford-shire and Shrop-shire, Northeast
with Stafford shire, to say all in one word, has so temperate an air and
soil so favorable, that for healthfulnesse and plenty, it is not inferior to
their neighbor Countries, King^ Norton.
and in one part for deinty Cheese surpasses them: yielding such store of
Pears, as none other the like; and albeit they are not so pleasing to these
deinty and delicate mouths, yet out of their winish juice, they make a bastard
kind Pyrry, Pyrry.
which they drink very much, although it be (as other drinks of that kind)
both cold and full of wind. Neither is it if you respect waters, less
pleasant and commodious: for, in every place there be passing sweet rivers,
which afford in great abundance the most delicate kind of Fishes. And to let
those run by that are of less account, Severne that noble and renowned river
carries his stream along, through the midst of the shire, from North to
South: and Avon, that comes down out of Warwickshire to meet with Severne,
waters the South part thereof.

Severn, Kidderminster. Beawdley.
first of all at his very entry, passes between Kidderminster and Beawdley.
This Beawdley worthily so called for the beautiful site thereof, stands most
pleasantly Wyre adjoining, which now in a manner be all gone. Whence our Poet
and Antiquary Leland wrote thus.

Delicium rerum Bellus Locus, undique floret
Fronde coronatus Virianae tempora Sylvae.
Beawdley a fine and deinty thing, is goodly to be seen,
All dight about with guirland fresh of Wire that Forest green.
But now is this little Town in speech and request only for the pleasantness
and beauty of it self; and withal for the Kings house Tiken-hall: which King
Arthur, at which time he granted some liberties to Beawdley. But farther from
the river bank, Eastward is Kidderminster over against it, called also
Kidelminster, a fair Town and has a great Mercate of all commodities, well
frequented, parted in twain by the little River Stowre that runs through
it: and the greatest ornaments now belonging thereto are first, a passing
beautiful Church, wherein some of the worshipful family Corkeseis lie buried,
and the goodly gallant house of the Blounts of knights degree, descended from
those of Kinlet: but in old time this place was of most note for the Lords
thereof, the Bissets, men in their time right honorable: whose rich possessions
being at length dismembered and divided among sisters, came partly to the Barons
of Abergevenny and in part to a Lazarhouse of women in Wilt-shire, which one of
the said sisters, being her self infected with the Leprosy built for them
that had the same disease, and enriched it with her own patrimony and child's
part. Afterward it came to have a Baron, for King Richard the Second created
Sir John Beauchamp Steward of his household, Baron Beauchamp of Kidderminster.
Baron Beauchamp of Kidderminster, by letters Patents; and is accounted the
first Baron so created. But he soon after by the Barons (who together

Hertlebury.
Severne turning his course somewhat awry from thence, saluteth Hertlebury a
Castle of the Bishops of Worcester not far distant, Holt, in old English, woods.
and goes amain to Holt Castle, so called of a very thick wood there,
belonging sometime to the Abtots; after to the Beauchamps; who springing from
William Beauchamp surnamed the Blind Baron, grew up afterward to be a most
honorable family; the inheritance whereof descended at length to Gyse and
Penyston: from hence runs Severne down, feeding such a number Lampreies.
as that Nature may seem in this place to have made a very pond or Stew for
them: such as the Romans devised in ancient times when they grew lavish in
riotous excess. These fishes we call Lampries of the Latin word Lampetra, as
one would say of licking the rocks, are like to Eeles, slippery and blackish,
howbeit beneath on their bellies, somewhat blew: on either side of their
throats they receive and let in water at seven holes, for that they want gils
altogether. Most commendable they are in the spring time, as being then very
sweet: for, in Summer, the inner nerve or string, which stands them instead of
a back bone, waxes hard. The Italians make them more delicate in taste, by a
special and peculiar seasoning: For they take a Lamprie and in Malvesy kill
it, the mouth they close up with a nutmeg, Apicius?

Beneath Holt, Severne opens his East bank to let in the river Salwarp
coming a pace toward him. *
This has his first veins out of Lickey hill most eminent in the North part
of this Shire, near unto which at Frankeley the family of the Litletons was
planted by John Litleton, Litleton.
alias Westcote the famous Lawyer, Justice in the Kings Bench in the time of
King Edward the fourth, to whose Treatise of Tenures the students of our Common
Law are no less beholden, than the Civilians to Justinians Institutes. Salwarp
which we speak of runs down by Bromesgrove a mercate town not of the
meanest reckoning and not far from Grafton the seat of a younger family of the
Talbots, Grafton.
since King Henry the Seventh gave it to Sir Gilbert Talbot, a younger son of
John, the second Earl of Shrewsbury: whom also for his martial valor and
singular wisdom he admitted into the society of the Order of the Garter, and
made Governor of Callis. Then runs Salwarp down to Droitwich ( Durt-wich
some term it, Durt-wich.
of the Salt pits and the wettish ground on which it stands, like as Hyetus
in B^etia took name of the durty situation) where three fountains yielding
plenty of water to make Salt of, Salt springs.
divided a sunder by a little brook of fresh water passing between, by a
peculiar gi^t of nature spring out: out of which Fekenham Forest.
Fekenham Forest (where trees grew sometime thicker) and the woods round about,
if men hold their peace, will by their thinness, make manifest *
But if I should write that the learned Canonist Richard de la Which Bishop of
Chichester, Richard de la Which.
here borne, obtained with his fervent prayers these Salt springs out of the
bowels of the earth, I fear me, least some might think me both over injurious
to the providence of God, and also too credulous of old wives traditions. Yet
were our ancestors in their pious devotion so hasty of belief, that they did
not only give credit hereto, yea and record it in their writings, but in
consideration hereof, yielded unto that Prelate in some sort divine honor,
when Pope Urban the Fourth had for his sanctity, and sincere integrity of life
canonized him a Saint. But before that ever this Richard was borne, Gervase of
Tilbury wrote thus of these Salt springs, though not altogether truly. In the
Bishopric of Worcester Moreover in the very Kings Domesday, we read thus. In
Which the King and Earl have eight salt pits, which in the whole week wherein
they boiled and wrought, yielded on the Friday sixteen Bullions.

Salwarp having now entertained a small brook descending from Chedesley, where
anciently the family of Foliot flourished, as afterward at Longdon, makes have
to Severne which has not passed four miles farther, Worcester.
before he runs hard by WORCESTER the principal City of this Shire; where he
seems to pass with a flower stream, as it were, admiring, and wondering
thereat all the while he passes by: and worthy it is I assure you of
admiration whether you respect either the antiquity, or the beauty thereof.
Certes, for antiquity the Emperor Antonine has made mention Ptolomee (in whom
through the negligence of the transcribers it is misplaced) under the name of
BRANOGENIUM, Branogenium.
after which name the Britans call it yet Care Wrangon. In the Catalogue of
Ninnius, it is named Caer Guorangon, and Caer Guorcon, the old English-Saxons
afterward called it (...), and (...); I dare not say of Wire that woody Forest
which in old time stretched far. Since the Conquest, the Latin writers named
it Vigornia and Wigornia. Which name Joseph the Monk of Excester a right
elegant Poet in those days was one of the first that used (if my memory fail
me not:) I mean him that is published under the name of Cornelius Nepos, in
these his elegant verses unto Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury.


Insula, jam meminit Wigornia, Cantia discit,
Romanus meditatur apex, and naufraga Petri
Ductorem in mediis expectat cymba procellis.
A mitre third now waits for thee, for still thine honor grows,
Thee Wigorne still remembereth, now Canterbury knows:
The Sea of Rome does think of thee, and Peter's ship in fear
Of wrack, amid the boistrous storms expects thee for to steare.
Probable it is, that the Romans built it, what time as they planted cities at
certain spaces and distances along the East bank of Severne, to keep in the
Britans beyond Severne, like as they did in Germany on the South bank of Rhene
to repress the incursions of the Germans. It stands, in a place rising
somewhat with a gentle ascent, by the rivers side that has a fair bridge with
a tower over it: proudly bearing it self in old time, as I find it written in
an ancient Manuscript roll, of the Romans wall: and even now also it is well
and strongly walled. But the fame and reputation that it now has, arises from
the Inhabitants, who are many in number, courteous and wealthy Sexwulph Bishop
of the Mercians erected there in the year of Christ 680. having built a
Cathedral Church at the South side of the City, which has been often
repaired, and which the Bishops and Monks by little and little have drawn out
in length Westward, almost to the very brinke of Severn. Truly it is a passing
fair and stately building adorned with the Monuments and Tombs of King John,
Arthur Prince of Wales, and diverse of the Beauchamps; and in these days, it is
no less notable by the Deane and Chapter, whom they call Prebendaries placed
therein, than it was in times past for the Monks, or the Cloister Priests:
For, presently upon the first foundation, like as in other religious Married
Priests. Register of Worcester Church. Ann. 964.
married Priests were placed here, who carrying a long time a great opinion of
holiness governed the Churches, until that Danstane Archbishop of Canterbury
had decreed in a Synod, That from thence forward the religious men in England
should live a single life. For then Oswald Bishop of this City who promoted the
Monastical life as busily as any whosoever, remooved the Priests, and brought
in Monks. Which King Eadgar testifies in these words, The Monasteries as well
of Monks, as of Virgins have been destroyed, and quite neglected throughout
England, which I have now determined to repair to the glory of God, for my
souls health, and so to multiply the number of Gods servants and hand-maides.
And now already I have set up seven and forty Monasteries with Monks and
Nuns in them; and if Christ spare me life so long, I Oswald in the Episcopal
See of (...) amply enlarged to the honor of Mary the holy Mother of God, and
by casting out those Clerks, etc. has with my assent and favor appointed
there Monks the religious servants of God; I my self do by my royal
authority confirm, and by the counsel and consent of my Peers and Nobles,
corroborate and consigne to those religious men living a sole and single life,
etc. Long time after when the state of the Church and Clergy here, partly by
the Danes incursion, and in part by civil dissentions, was so greatly weakened
and brought upon the very knees, that in lieu of that multitude of religious
persons whom Oswald had here placed, scarce twelve remained: Wolstan Bishop of
this Church about the year of the worlds redemption 1090. S. Wolstan.
put to his helping hand, raised it up again, and brought them to the number
of 50. yea and built a new Church for them. Wolstan I say, a man not so learned
(the times then were such) but of that simple sincerity without all hypocrisy,
so severe also and austere of life, that as he was terrible to the wicked, so
he was venerable to the good, and after his death the Church registered him in
the number of Saints. But King Henry the Eighth suppressed and expelled the
Monks after they had in all plenty and fullness lived more than 500. years,
and in their rooms he substituted a Deane and Prebendaries, and withal
erected a Grammar-schoole for the training up of youth. Hard by this Church the
bare name and plot of a Castle remains, which (as we William of Malmesburies
book of Bishops) Ursus appointed Sheriff of Worcestershire by William the
Conqueror, built under the very nose and in the mouth well near of the
Monks, in so much as he cut away from them a part of their Churchyard. But
this Castle through the iniquity of time and casuality of fire was consumed
many years ago. The City it self also has been burnt more than once: as
being set on fire in the year of Christ 1041. Marianus Huscarles.
by Hardy-Cnute, who exceedingly incensed against the Citizens, because they
had slain his Huscarles (for so they termed those domestical Gatherers of
the Danes tribute) did not only set fire on the City, but slew the Citizens
every mothers son, unless it were those that saved themselves in (...) an
Island compassed in with the River. Howbeit, as we find written in King
William the Conquerours Edward the Confessors time, It had many Burgesses, and
for fifteen Hides discharged it self: when the Mint went, every Minter gave
twenty shillings at London for to receive coining stamps of money. In the year
1113. a skarfire that came no man knew how, burnt the Castle, caught also with
the flames to the roofes of the Stephen, in the time of Civil Wars it was
twice on fire: Anno 15. Stephen R.
but most dangerously when King Stephen, who had to his own damage given this
City unto Wallerand Earl of Mellent, seized it into his own hands: howbeit he
was not able at that time to win the Castle. Nevertheless it raised it self
up again out of the ashes in a goodlier form always than it had before: and
flourished in a right good state of civil government, governed by two
Bailiffes chosen out of 24. Citizens, two Aldermen, and two Chamberlains, with
a Common Counsel consisting of 48. Citizens. As touching the Geographicall
position of this City, it is distant in Longitude from the West Meridian 21.
Degrees and 52. Minutes: and the North Pole is elevated 52. Degrees and 12.
Minutes.

Worcester the River Severn running on still Southward, Barons de Powicke.
passes beside Powicke, the seat in times past of Sir John Beauchamp, whom
King Henry the Sixth raised up to the state of a Baron: and within a small
time, the female heirs brought the inheritance to the Willoughbeies of Broke,
the Reads, and the Lygons: then runs it through most rich and redolent
meadows by Hanley Castle, Hanley.
belonging sometimes to the Earls of Gloucester, Upton.
and by Upton a Mercate Town of great name: where pieces of Roman money are
oftentimes found. Not far from hence upon the bank on the right hand,
Malvern hills.
the Severn beholds Malvern-Hills, hills in deed or rather great and high
mountains, which for the space of seven miles or thereabout, do as it were by
degrees rise higher and higher, dividing this Shire from the County of
Hereford. Hills, Gilbert Clare Earl of Gloucester did cast a Ditch in times
past, to make a partition between his possessions and the lands of the Church
of Worcester; a piece of work which is at this day seen not without wonder.
Over against those hills, Bredon hills.
and in like distance almost from the other bank, Bredon Hills being far
less, yet in emulation, as it were, to match them, mount aloft: among which
Elmsley Castle belonging sometimes to Ursus or Urso D' Abtot makes a goodly
show: Elmesley Castle.
by whose daughter and heir Emeline, it came hereditarily to the Beauchamps.
At the foot of these hills lies Bredon a Village, Bredon. The book of
Worcester.
concerning the Monastery whereof Offa King of the Mercians says thus: I Offa
King of the Mercians will give land containing seven times five Acres of
Tributaries unto the Monastery that is named Breodun in the Province Peter
Prince of the Apostles there and in that place standing, which Church Eanwulph
my grandfather erected to the praise and glory of the everliving God.

Under these Bredon hills Southward you see two villages named Washborne (whence
Washborne.
came the surname to a very ancient and worshipful Family in this Tract)
standing in a parcel of this Province dismembered as it were from the rest of
the body: Parcels of shires severed from the rest of the body.
of which kind there be other parcels here and there scattering all about. But
what should be the cause, I am not able to resolve, unless happily those that in
old time were governors, adjoined to their government their own lands that
lay near unto the Region which they then governed. Now Avon, from above
runs down and speeds Severn, Eovesham.
who in this shire waters Eovesham, so called, as the Monks write, of one
Eoves, Swinheard to Egwin Bishop of Worcester, whereas before time, the name of
it was E^th-home and Heath-field. The book of Evesham Monastery. About the
year 1157.
A very proper Town situate upon an hill arising from the River: in the
Suburb, as it were, whereof, was sometime Bengeworth Castle at the Bridge head;
which Castle William de Audevill the Abbot recovered by law against William
Beauchamp, utterly rased it, and caused the place to be hallowed for a
Churchyard. A Town this is, well known by reason of the Abbay, which that
noble Egwin, with the help of King Kenred the son of Wolpher King of the
Mercians founded about the year of our Lord 700. known likewise for the vale
under it, The Vale of Evesham.
named thereof, The Vale of Evesham, which for plentiful fertility has well
deserved Catiline, Simon Montfort.
Simon Montfort, Earl of Leicester. For, this man being of a lewd disposition
and profound perfidiousnesse, has taught us that which another truly said,
That good turns are so long acceptable, as they may be requitable. For, when
King Henry the Third had with full hand heaped Edward: and forthwith, the sink
of lawless rebels, being as it were pumped and emptied out of the common
weal, joyful peace which he had banished, shone again most comfortably on
every side. Upon the Charleton.
stands Charleton, the possession sometime of the ancient family of
Hansacres, Knights, but now of the Dinleies, or Dingleies, who being descended
from that ancient stock of the Dinleies in Lancashire, came unto this by
hereditary succession. More beneath, in the primitive Church of our English
Nation, there was another place wherein religious men lived to God, Flatbury.
then called (...), now, Flatbury: Pershor.
and near unto it Pershor, in the English Saxons language (...), taking the
name from Pears: which, as we read in that worthy Historiographer William of
Malmesbury, Egelward Duke of Dorset, a man bearing no nigardly mind, but
exceeding liberal, founded and finished in King Eadgars time. But what
detriment has it sustained? one part of it the ambition of the rich seized
upon, another part oblivion has buried;

Then receives Avon a Riveret from the North, upon which stands Hodington a
seat of the Winters, out of which were Robert Winter and his brother Thomas,
who when as they were of the hellish damned crew in the Gunpowder Treason, let
their memory lie damned. From thence Avon running gently down by Strensham the
habitation of the Russels, Knights by degree, of ancient descent, in the end
out-ladeth his own stream into Severn.

Near to these places, on this South side, is Oswaldslaw Hundred, so called of
Oswald Bishop of Worcester, Oswaldslaw Hundred.
who obtained it for himself of King Eadgar. The immunity Domesday book,
after this manner: The Church of Saint Mary of Worcester has the Hundred
called Oswaldslaw wherein lie 300. Hides, out of which the Bishop of the same
Church by ancient order and custom has all the revenewes of Soches and all
customs or duties there, appertaining to the Lords victual, and the Kings
service and his own: so that no Sheriff may hold there any action or suit,
neither in any plea nor in any other cause whatsoever. This witnesses the
whole County.

A place there is about this Shire, but precisely where it should be, is not
certainly known, Augustines oak.
called (...), that is, Augustines Oak, at which Augustine the Apostle of the
Englishmen and the Bishops of Britain met, and after they had disputed Anno
Christi 603.
touching the celebration of Easter, preaching God^ Word also to the English
Nation, and of administering Baptism according to the rites of the Roman
Church, in the end when they could not agree, they departed on both sides with
discontented minds, upon their dissenting opinions.

Earls of Worcester.

Or, D'Abtot.


This Province since the Normans coming in, had for the first Sheriff, Vrsus
or Vrso de Abtot, unto whom and his heirs, King William the Conqueror granted
that office together with fair and large possessions. After him succeeded his
son Roger, who (as William of Malmesbury the Historiographer reports)
enjoying his fathers possessions, through the high displeasure and indignation
of King Henry the first was disseized thereof, because in a furious fit of
anger he had commanded one of the Kings Officers But this Sheriffedome was by
Emeline this Rogers sister, translated hereditarily into the Family of the
Beauchamps. For, she was married to Walter Beauchamp, whom king Stephen, after
he had put down Miles of Gloucester, ordained Constable of England. Within some
few years king Stephen created Walleran Earl of Mellent Robert Bossu Earl of
Leicester, Robert de Monte.
the first Earl of Worcester, having given unto him the City of Worcester:
who afterward, became a Monk and died at Pratellae in Normandy, in the year
1166. As for his son Robert, who had wedded the daughter of Reginald Earl of
Cornwall, and advanced the Standard of rebellion against King Henry the Second,
and Peter his son, who in the year 1203. revolted to the French, neither of
them used the title of Worcester, but only of Mellent, so far as ever I
could yet read. For King Henry the Second who succeeded Stephen, would not
easily suffer that any under him should enjoy the honors received from Stephen
an usurper, and his enemy. For (as I find in the Annals of Waverley Abbay) he
put down those imaginary and counterfeit Earls, among whom King Neither to my
knowledge, was there any one that bare the title of the Earldome of Worcester,
until the days of King Richard the Second. For he bestowed it upon Sir Thomas
Percy, who, when he conspired against King Henry the Fourth, was taken at the
battle of Shrewsbury, and there beheaded. Then Sir Richard Beauchamp
descended from the Abtots, received afterward this honor at the hands of King
Henry the Fifth. Who shortly after in the French war lost his life at the siege
of Meaux in Brye, leaving one only daughter married to Sir Edward Nevill, from
whom descended the late Lords of Abergevenny. Afterward King Henry the Sixth
created John Tiptoft, Earl of Worcester: But when he presently taking part *
But after that this Edward died without issue, and the inheritance became
divided among the sisters of the said John Tiptoft Earl of Worcester, Orig. 1.
H. 7. R. 36.
of whom one was married to the Lord Roo^, another to Sir Edmund
Ingoldesthorpe, and the third to the Lord Dudley; Sir Charles Somerset, base
son to Henry Duke of Somerset, Lord Herbert, and Lord Chamberlain to King
Henry the Eighth,

There are in this Shire Parishes. 152.

STAFFORDIAE COMITATVS PARS olim Cornauiorum



THE third Region of the old CORNAVII, now called STAFFORDSHIRE, in the
English Saxons Language (...), Midland English men.
the Inhabitants whereof because they dwelt in the midst of England, are in
Bid termed Angli Mediterranei, that is, Midland Englishmen, having on the East
Warwickshire, and Darby-shire, on the South side Worcestershire, and Westward
Shropp-shire bordering upon it, reaches from South to North in form of a
Lozeng, broader in the midst and growing narrower at the ends. The North part
is full of Hills and so less fruitful: the middle being watered with the
River Trent is more plentiful, clad with Woods, and embroidered gallantly with
Corn fields and meadows: as is the South part likewise, which has Coals also
dug out of the earth and mines of Iron. Iron.
But whether more for their commodity or hinderance, I leave to the Inhabitants
who do, or shall best understand it.

In the South part in the very confines with Worcestershire upon the River
Stour stands Stourton Castle, sometimes belonging to the Earls of Warwick,
the natall Pole; Dudley castle.
and then Dudley Castle towreth up upon an hill built and named so of one Dudo,
or Dodo an English Saxon, about the year of our Salvation 700. In King William
the Conquerours days, as we find in his Domesday Book, William Fitz-Ausculph
possessed it: afterward it fell to Noble men surnamed Somery; and by an heir
general of them to Sir Richard Sutton knight descended from the Suttons of
Nottingham-shire: whose Posterity commonly called from that time Lords of
Dudley, but summoned to Parliament first by King Henry the Sixth, grew up to a
right honorable Family.

Under this lies Pensueth Chase, *
in former times better stored with game; wherein are many Cole-pits, in which,
as they reported to me, there continues a Shropp-shire, I saw Pateshull a
seat of the Astleies descended from honorable Progenitors; and Wrotesley an
habitation of a Race of Gentlemen so surnamed, out of which Sir Hugh Wrotesley,
for his approoved valor, was chosen by King Edward the Third Knight of the
Garter, at the first institution, and so accounted one of the founders of the
said honorable Order. Next after this, the memorable places that we meet with
in this Tract, more inwardly, are these, Chellington. Giffards.
Chellington, a fair house and Manor of the ancient Family of the Giffards:
Peter Corbuchin gave to Peter Giffard, upon whom also Richard Strongbow, that
Conqueror of Ireland, bestowed in free gift Tachmelin and other Possessions in
Ireland. *
Theoten hall, which is by interpretation, The habitation of Heathens, Tetnall.
or Pagans, at this day Tetnall embrued with Danish blood in the year 911. by
King Edward the Elder in a bloody Battle. Ulfrunes Hampton, so called of
Wulfruna a most godly and devout woman, who enriched the Town (called before
simply Hampton) with a religious House: Wolverhampton.
and for Wulfrunes Hampton it is corruptly called Wulver Hampton: The greatest
name and note whereof, arises by the Church there, annexed to the Warden or
Deane and Prebendaries of Windsor. Weddsborro^
Weadsbury, in these days Weddsborrow fortified in old Aethelfled Lady of the
Mercians: and Walshall a Mercate Town, none of the meanest. Tame River.
Near unto which the River Tame carries his stream, which rising not far
off, for certain miles wandereth through the East part of this Shire seeking
after Trent, Draiton Bass^^
near unto Draiton Basset, the seat of the Bassets, who springing out from
Turstan Lord of this place in the Reign of Henry the First, branched forth
Bassets.
For, from hence as from a stock flourished the Bassets of Welleden, of
Wiccomb, of Sapcot, of Cheddle, and others. But of this of Draiton, Raulph was
the last, who being a right renowned Baron had married the sister of John
Montfort Duke of Britain, and in the Reign of Richard the Second died without
issue.

Then Tame passing through the Bridge at Falkesley (over which an ancient high
way of the Romans went) runs hard under Tamworth, in the Saxon Tongue
(...), Tamworth.
Marianus calls it Tamawordia, a Town so placed in the Confines of the two
Shires, that the one part which belonged sometime to the Marmions, is counted
of Warwickshire, the other which pertained to the Hastings, of Staffordshire.
As for the name, it is taken from Tame the River running beside it, and of the
English Saxon Barton, Court, or Ferme-house, and also, an Holme or River
Island, or any place environed with water: seeing that Keyserwert and
Bomelswert in Germany, betoken as much as Caesar's Isle and Bomels Isle. Whiles
the Mercians Kingdom stood in state, this was a place of their Kings resiance,
and as we find in the Lieger Book of Worcester, a Town of very great resort
and passing well frequented. Afterward, when in the Danes War it was much
decayed, Aethelfled Lady of Mercia repaired and brought it again to the former
state: also Edith King Eadgars Sister, who refusing Marriage, for the opinion
that went of her for holiness was registered in the roll of Saints, founded
here a little house for Nuns and veiled Virgins, which after some years,
was translated to Pollesworth by the Marmions Normandy, Lords hereof; at what
time they erected here a Collegiat Church, wherein are seen some of their
Sepulchers; and builded a fair Castle, which from them by the Frevills came to
the house of those Ferrars, that descended from a younger brother of the Barons
Ferrars of Groby. The Kings Champion.
Those Marmions as we find written, were by inheritance the Kings Champions
of England. For, whenever any new king of England is crowned, the heir of
this Family was bound to ride armed in complete harneis upon a barbd horse into
the Kings hall, See in Lincolnshire.
and in a set form of words challenge to combat with whosoever durst oppose
himself against the kings right and Title. Inquisit. 2. E 3.
And verily it appears upon Records, that Alexander Frevill, under king
Edward the Third, by the same service, held this Castle. Howbeit Richard the
Second, when Baldwin Frevill exhibited his petition for the same, it was
adjudged from this Family to Sir John Dimock his competitor, descended also
from Marmion, as producing better Records and evidences.

At Falkesley Bridge aforesaid (that I may retire a little) that Roman High
way Watling street, Watling street.
of which I have already spoken and must often speak, enters into this Shire,
and cutting it through (as it were by a straight line) goes Westward into
Shropp-shire. Which Street I have I assure you thoroughly viewed and perused,
Etocetum.
to find out that ETOCETUM which Antonine the Emperor sets down for the
next station from MANVESSEDUM or Mancester in Warwickshire: and surely by good
hap I have now found it; and freely confess that heretofore Antonine
sets between MANVESSEDUM, and ETOCETUM, I lighted upon the carcass of an
old little Town upon the said High way, and scarce a mile Southward from
Lichfield, a Bishops See right well known. The name of the place at this day
is in our common language, Wall.
Wall, of the Relics of an old wall there remaining and taking up much about
two acres of ground, which they call Castle croft, as one would say, The Castle
Field. Over against which on the other side of the street the Inhabitants
relate by a tradition from their forefathers, that there stood an ancient
Town, destroyed long before the Conquest. And they show the very place, where
by the maine foundation they guess the Temple there stood, and with Watling
street, with Penck, and has upon it a Stone Bridge at PENNOCRUCIUM, so named
of the River, just at the same distance that Antonine sets down. Which has
not yet laid away so much as the name, for in steed of PENNOCRUCIUM it is now
called Penck-ridge. Penck-ridge.
But at this day it is little better than a Village, famous for an Horse-Faire
which the Lord of the place Hugh Blunt, obtained of King Edward the Second.
From hence, that way has nothing memorable upon it in this Shire, but a little
way off is Brewood a Mercate Town, where the Bishops of this Diocese had an
habitation before the Conquest: and then near unto Weston is a clear Poole
spread very broad, by which that notable way holds on a direct Oken-Yate in
Shrop-shire.

Now are we to visit the middle part of this Shire which Trent waters: in
the description whereof, I purpose to follow the course and windings of the
River, from the very spring and head thereof, The River Trent.
as my best guide. Trent that by his due right chalengeth to himself the third
place among all the Rivers of England, runs out of two Fountains being
near neighbors together in the North part of this shire among the moors.
Certain unskilful, and idle headed, have dreamed that it was so named of
Trent a French word that signifies Thirty, and thereupon also have feigned,
that thirty Rivers run into it, and as many kinds of fishes live therein,
the names whereof the people dwelling thereby were wont to sing in an English
rhyme: Trent, which the Hungarians avouch of their River Tibiscus, namely, that
two parts of it are water, and the third fish.

From his spring heads Trent trickleth down first Southward fetching many a
compass, not far from New Castle under Lime, New Castle under Lyme.
so called of another more ancient Castle that flourished in times past hard by
at Chesterton under Lime: where I saw tottered and torn the walls of a Castle;
which by the gift of King John, belonged first unto Ranulph Earl of Chester,
and afterward by the bounteous favor of King Henry the Third, Trentham.
unto the House of Lancaster. Thence by Trent-ham, sometime Tricing-ham, a
little Monastery of that holy virgin Saint Werburg of the blood royal, he
hasteneth to Stone a Mercate Town, Stone.
which having the beginning in the Stones, that our Ancestors after a solemn
sort had cast on a heap to notify the place where Wolpher that heathenish
King of the Mercians, most cruelly slew his two sons Wulfald and Rufin,
because they had taken upon them the profession of Christianity.

In which place when Posterity in memorial of them had consecrated a little
Church, straight ways there arose and grew up a Town, which of those stones,
had the name Stone given unto it, as the History of Peterborrough has
recorded. Beyond Stone runs Trent mildly by Sandon, the seat in times past
of the Staffords, most worthy Knights, Erdeswick.
but lately by inheritance from them, of Sampson Erdeswicke, a very great
lover, and diligent searcher of venerable Antiquity, and in this Hugh Vernon
Baron of Shipbroc, Names altered according to diverse habitations.
the name being changed, by the use of that age according to sundry
habitations, first into Holgrave, and afterward into Erdeswicke.

Here Trent turns his course aside Eastward, and on the South has
Canocwood, commonly called Cankwood, Cankwood.
spread far and wide, and at length entertaineth the River Sow, which breaks
out in a hard Country near Healy Castle, built by the Barons of Aldalegh, LL.
Audley.
or Audley, unto whom Hervey Lord Stafford gave that place; like as Theobald
Verdon, gave Aldelegh it self.

This has been a Family of high respect and great honor, *
and of the same stem Stanleies Earls of Darby derive their Descent. Strange
it is to read, what lands King Henry the Third confirmed unto Henry Audeley,
which were bestowed upon him by the bounty of the Peers; yea and private
Gentlemen, not only in England but also in Ireland, where Hugh Lacy Earl of
Vlster gave him lands with the Constableship of Vlster. So that doubtless he
was either a man of rare virtue, or Giffard of Brimsfield, of Baron Martin Lord
of Keimeis, and Barstaple; and a younger brother of this house with one of the
heirs of the Earl of Gloucester, and was by King Edward the Third created
Earl of Gloucester. About which time James Lord Audley flourished in Chivalry,
who (as the French write) being grievously wounded in the battle at Poitiers,
when the black Prince with many comfortable commendations had given him 400.
Marks of yearly revenewes; he bestowed the same forthwith upon his four
Esquires, who always valiantly attended him, and satisfied the Prince,
doubting that his gift was too little for so great service, with this answer,
dutifully acknowledging his bounty: It is meet that Whereupon the Prince
approving this prudent liberality, both confirmed his gift to his Esquires, and
assigned him moreover lands to the value of six hundred Marks yearly. But by
his daughter one of the coheires to her brother, the Title of Lord Audley came
afterward to the Touchets, and in them continues. Neither must I here pass
over in silence an house in this tract called Gerards Bromley, both for the
magnificence thereof, and also because it is the principal seat of Sir Thomas
Gerard, whom King James in the first year of his Reign created Baron Gerard
of Gerards Bromley.

This Sow as it were a parallel river unto Trent runs even with him, and
keeping an equal distance still from him, by Chebsey, which had in times past
for Lords thereof the Hastangs reputed among the prime Nobility in the time of
King Edward the First; Hastange.
not far from Eccleshall the habitation of the Bishop of Lichfield, and
Ellenhall which was sometime the seat of the Noels a worshipful house, Noel.
who founded here a Monastery at Raunton, Harcourt.
and from whom it descended hereditarily to the Harcourts, who being of the
ancient Norman nobility, flourished a long time in great dignity. But yet of
the male heirs of the Noels there remain still Sir Edward Noel of Dalby in
Leichestershire, and the Noels of Wellesborow in Leichestershire, with others.
Then runs Sow under Stafford, Stafford. Cap grave.
in times past called Statford, and before time Betheney, Bertelin reputed a
very holy man led in ancient times an Eremits life in serving God. And King
Edward the Elder built on the South bank of the River a Castle in the year of
Christ 914. Marianus.
What time as King William the Conqueror registered the Survey of all England,
as we read in his Domesday Book, The King had in it only 18. Burgesses in his
own domaine, and 20. Mansions of the honor of the Earl: it paid for all
customs nine pounds of deniers, and had thirteen Chanons, Prebendaries who
held in frank Almoine: and the King commanded a Castle to be made, which now
is destroyed. But then, *
as now also, it was the head Town of the whole Shire: howbeit the greatest
credit and honor thereof came from Stafford Castle adjoining, which the Barons
of Stafford, of whose progeny were the Dukes of Buckingham, built for their
John that it was made a Borough with ample liberties, caused it to be partly
fensed with a Wall, and erected a Priory of Black Chanons to the honor of
Saint Thomas of Canterbury: Beneath which, the Riveret Penke, which gave name
to Pennocrucium or Penkridge, whereof I have already spoken, joyneth with that
Sow aforesaid. And near unto the confluence of Sow and Trent stands Ticks
hall, Ticks hall.
the dwelling place of the Astons, a Family which for antiquity, kindred, and
alliance, is in these parts of great name.

Trent having harbored these rivers in his channel, passes now through the
mids of the Shire with a gentle stream, Chartley.
taking a view of Chartley Castle standing two miles aside from the bank on
the left hand: which Castle came from Raulph Earl of Chester, L. Ferrars of
Chartley.
who built it, unto the Ferrars by Agnes his sister, whom William Ferrars Earl
of Darby had married: out of whose Race the Lords Ferrars of Chartley
flourished: and Anne the Daughter of the last of them brought this Honor
D'Eureux her husband: from whom Robert D'Evereux Earl of Essex and Lord
Ferrars of Chartley is lineally descended.

On the right side of the river about the same distance, stands most
pleasantly among the woods, Beaudesert. L L. Paget.
Beaudesert, the lodge in times past of the Bishops of Lichfield, but now the
house of the Lord Paget. For Sir William Paget, who for his approoved wisdom
both at home and abroad, stood in high favor with King Henry the Eight, and
King Edward the Sixth, and obtained at their hands fair possessions, was by
the said K. Edward the Sixth created Lord Paget of Beaudesert. He was (that I
may note so much out of his Epitaph) Secretary, and Privy Counselor to King
Henry the Eighth, and appointed by his Testament Counselor and aidor to King
Edward Pagets, and for his virtue and studies of the best arts, is an honor to
his house, and in this respect deserves to be honorably remembered.

From thence may you descrie Lichfield, Lichfield.
scarce four miles from this right-side bank of Trent. Bid calls it
Licidfeld, which Rosse of Warwick interprets, Cadaverum campus, that is, The
field of dead bodies, and reports that a number of Christians were there
Martyred under the persecutor Dioclesian. This City is low seated, of a good
largeness and fair withal, divided into two parts with a shallow poole John,
founded for relief of the poor. The farther part is the less, but beautified
with a very goodly Cathedral Church, which being round about compassed with a
fair wall castle-like, and garnished beside with fair houses of Prebendaries,
and with the Bishops palace also, does mount upon high with three pyramids or
spires of stone making an excellent show, and for elegant and proportional
building, yields to few Cathedral Churches.

In this place many ages past, a Bishops See was established, for in the 656.
year Oswie King of Northumberland, having vanquished the Mercians, as then
Pagans, for the propagation of Christ's true religion, built here a Church, and
ordained Duina the first Bishop: whose successors found such favor at their
Princes hand, that they had not only the pre-eminence among all the Bishops of
the Mercians, and the greatest possessions given unto them for their use, as
Cankwood or Canock a very great wood, and other fair lands and Lordships; but
also this Church had an Archbishop that sat in it, namely Eadulph, unto whom
Pope Adrian granted an Archiepiscopall Pall, and subjected under him all the
Bishops of the Mercians and East Angles; moved thereunto with golden reasons
by Offa King of the Mercians, About the year 779. History of Rochester.
to spite Lambert the Archbishop of Canterbury, who had Charles the Great, if
he would invade England. But this Archiepiscopall dignity died together with
Offa and Eadulph. But, among all the Bishops of this See Cedda.
Chadd was of greatest fame, and canonized a Saint for his holiness, who, as Bede says, when riotous excess had not yet possessed the hearts of Bishops,
made himself a mansion house standing not far remote from the Church,
wherein he was wont secretly to pray and read, together with a few, that is to
say, seven or eight religious men, as often as he had any vacant time from
painful preaching and ministry of the word unto the people. Will. Malmesbur.
A.
In those days, Lichfield was a small town far short of the frequency of
Cities; the Country about it full of woods: and a little river runs hard by
it. The Church was seated in a narrow room, evidently showing the mean estate
and abstinence of our ancestors. When Peter Bishop of Lichfield translated his
See to Chester: but Robert Linsey his successor removed the same unto
Coventry.

A little after, Roger Clinton brought it back again to Lichfield, and
began to build in the year of Christ 1148. this most beautiful Church in
the honor of the Saint Ceda, or Chad: and repaired the Castle which now is
utterly vanished. As for the town, it was made first an Incorporation in our
Fathers remembrance by King Edward the Sixth, by the name of Bailiffs and
Burgesses. It sees the Pole Artick elevated two and fifty degrees and two and
forty minutes: and from the farthest point of the West counts one and twenty
degrees and twenty minutes. This Poole of Lichfield being by and by kept and
restreined within banks, and spreading broader the second time, but gathering
again into a channel is quickly swallowed into Trent, who continues his
course Eastward, until he meets with the river of Tame from the South: with
whom Trent being now coupled, turns aside his stream Northward through
places that yield great store Alabaster. Burton upon Trent.
that he might the sooner entertain Dow, and so almost insulateth or
encompasseth Burton, a Town in times past of name, by reason of workers in
Alabaster, a Castle of the Ferrars built in the Conquerors time, an ancient
Abbay founded by Ulfrick Spot Earl of Mercia, Who also it named Mowen.
and the retyring place of Modwen that holy Irish woman, who there dedicated
her self first to the service of God. Concerning which Abbay, 1904.
the Leger-booke of Abingdon records thus. A certain servitour of King
Aetheldred named Ulfrick Spot, built the Abbay of Burton, and gave unto it all
the inheritance that came by his Father, esteemed worth seven hundred pounds,
and that this his donation might stand good and sure, he gave unto King
Aetheldred three hundred Mankus of gold for his confirmation, and to every
Bishop five Mankus, and beside to Alfrick Archbishop Dumbleton. Whereby we may
understand, that there was a golden world then, and that gold swaied much yea
in Church matters, and among Churchmen. In this abbay, the said Modwen, whose
holiness was much celebrated in this tract, lay buried, and upon her Tomb
were engraven for an Epitaph these verses.

Ortum Modwennae dat Hibernia, Scotia finem.
Anglia dat tumulum, dat Deus astra poli.
Prima dedit vitam, sed mortem terra secunda,
Et terram terrae tertia dedit:
Auffert Lanfortin quam Tir Conell.
terra Conallea profert,
Foelix Burtonium virginis ossa tenet.
In Ireland Modwen who began, in Scotland took her end,
England on her a Tomb bestowed, to Heaven God did her send:
The first of these lands gave her life, the second wrought her death,
And earth to earth in decent sort, the third land did bequeath.
Lanfortin takes that away, which once Tir-Connell gave,
And Burton blessed, whose hap it is this virgins bones to have.
The River Blithe. Needwood Forest.
Near unto Burton, betwixt these three rivers, Dove, Trent and Blithe the which
waters and names Blithfield a fair house of the ancient and worthy Family
of the Bagots; Needwood a very large wood and full of parkes spreads it
self. Wherein

Mooreland.
The North part rises up and swells somewhat mountainous, with moors and
hills, but of no great bigness, which beginning here, runs like as Apennine
does in Italy, through the midst of England with a continued ridge, rising
more and more with diverse tops and cliffs one after another even as far as to
Scotland, although oftentimes they change their name. For here they are called
Mooreland, after a while the Peak, Blackstone edge, then Craven, anon as they
go further Stanmore, and at length being parted diversely, as it were into
horns, Cheviot. This Mooreland, so called for that it rises higher into hills
and mountains, and is withal less fruitful (which kind of places Moors) is
a small country verily, so hard, so comfortless, bare and cold, that it
keeps snow lying upon it a long while: in so much as that of a little country
village named Wotton lying here under Woverhill the neighbor inhabitants have
this rhyme rise in their mouth, as if God, forsooth, had never visited that
place.

Wotton under Wever,
Where God came never.
Yet in so hard a soil it breeds and feeds beasts of large bulk, and
fair spread. The people here dwelling observe, that when the wind sits
West, it is always rain: but the East and Southwinde, which in other places
brew and broach rain, bring fair weather, unless the wind turn from West
into the South: and this they ascribe unto the vicinity of the Irish Sea. Out
of these Moors most rivers in this shire do spring, but the chief are, Dove,
Hanse, Churnet, Teyn, Blithe, and Trent himself who receives every one of
them, The River Dove.
and conveieth them all to the Sea. Dow or Dove, whose banks are reared out of
solid hard lime stone, which they burn and use Nilus, and makes them so
fruitful that the inhabitants use commonly to chant this joyful note.

In April Doves flood,
Is worth a Kings good.
Trent being once up and over his banks flows upon the fields four or five
days together: Hans. Churnet. De-la-cres.
but now come we to the rivers that run into it. The first is Hans, which being
swallowed up under the ground, breaks up again three miles off. Then
admits he the fellowship of the river Churnet, who passes by De-la-Cres
Abbay, built by Ranulph the third of that name Earl of Chester: by Leike also
a well known Market town, Aulton.
and by Aulton a Castle in times past belonging to the Barons Verdon (who
founded here the Abbay of Croxden) from whom by the Furnivals it Talbots
Earls of Shrewsbury. Teyn.
A little below runs Teyn a small brook into Dove, which having his head
not far from Cheddle the ancient seat of the Bassets, who derive their pedigree
from the Bassets of Draiton, creeps on in such a winding and crooked channel,
that within one mile I was feign to pass over it four times. Checkley.
Near unto it in Checkley Churchyard, there stand three stones upright
erected in manner of a Pyramides; two of them have little images engraven upon
them: but that in the midst is highest. The inhabitants report by tradition,
that a battle was fought there between two hosts, of which the one was
armed, the other unarmed; and that in it were three Bishops slain, in
memorial of whom these stones were set up. But what Historical truth indeed
lies herein enfolded, I know not as yet: As for Blithe, it has in this
Moreland Careswell a Castler situate upon it which Sir William Careswell built
with great ponds having their heads made of square stones, and Draicot, which
gave surname to a family of great antiquity in this County.

But Dove after it has received Tine having a fair bridge made over it of
most hard stone, Utcester.
and defended with piles runs under Vtcester, in' the Saxons tongue (...),
and Vttoxather, situate upon the side of an hill with a gentle ascent: a town
more rich in gay flowring meadows, and in cattaile, than fair built; which
before I saw it (the name was so favorable to my conjecture) I thought, in
vain, to have been the ancient ETOCETUM. But now, time has taught me more
certeinty. After this, Tutesbury.
when Dove is now come nearer unto Trent, it visits Tutbury Castle,
Stutesbury, and from an Alabaster hill top on which it stands, threatens, as
it were, the whole country underneath. It was built together with a little
Monastery by Henry de Ferrars a Noble man of Normandy, unto whom King William
the First had given great lands and revenewes in this shire: all which Robert
de Ferrars Earl of Darby lost after he had revolted a second time from King
Henry the Third. For, this Robert, when, after many that he would continue ever
after loyal to his liege Lord, yet was the man of such a stirring and
restless spirit, that to break and knap in pieces quite that fortune which he
could not bend, he put on arms against his Sovereign, and being at length
taken prisoner (that I may use the very words of the Record, according to the
form of his obligation) made this great forfeiture both of his fortunes and
dignities. There is in some place of this shire a lake, if Alexander Necham
deceive us not, into which no wild beast will in any wise enter: but since the
place is uncertain and the thing it self more uncertain, I will only put
down underneath these his verses, In his book entitled the praises of Divine
wisdom.
before which he prefixed

De Lacu in Staffordia.
Rugitu Lacus est eventus praeco futuri,
Cujus aquis fera se credere nulla solet.
Instet odora canum virtus, mors instet acerba,
Non tamen intrabit exagitata lacum.
Of a Lake in Staffordshire.
A Lake there is that roreth loud, whereby things are fore-showne,
The water whereof once to take wild beasts were never known.
Let hounds, let death pursue apace them for to overtake,
For all this chase and hot pursuit, none enter will the Lake.
Gervase of Tilbury.
Of another Poole or Lake also in this Country thus writes Gervase of Tilbury
in his Otia Imperialia, unto Otho the fourth. In the Bishopric of Coventry
and County of Stafford, at the foot of an hill, which the inborne people of the
Country have named Mahull, there is a water spread abroad in manner of a Mere,
in the territory of a Village which they term Magdalea. In this Mere or
Marsh there is a most clear water (and an infinite number of woods beside But
whereabout this is I cannot yet learn by all my diligent inquiry.

Earls and Barons of Stafford.
As for the title of Stafford, it remains ever since Robert de Stafford, whom
King William of Normandy enriched with great possessions, even until our time
in his line and progeny. A family as noble and ancient as any other: but upon
which fortune has otherwhiles by turns both frowned and fawned. For, first
they were Barons of Stafford, then five of them Earls of Stafford, Ralfe
created by King Edward the Third, Earl of Stafford, who married the heir of
Sir Hugh Audley Earl of Gloucester, Hugh his son who died in Pilgrimage at
Rhodes, and his three sons successively, Thomas and William, both issuelesse,
and Edmund who married the daughter and heir of Thomas of Woodstock Duke of
Buckingham. See Dukes of Buckingham.
Afterward three of them were Dukes of Buckingham and Earls of Stafford, etc.
as is before showed. By the attainder of the last of them, those so great
inheritances which their most honorable marriages brought unto them, floted
away as it were, and scattered here and there. In lieu whereof has ensued a
more secure quietness, which can never cohabite with Greatness.

There are accounted in this Shire Parishes. 130.

SALOPIAE Comitatus quem CORNAUII olim inceluarunt descriptio



THe fourth Country of those, which, as I said, the CORNAVII in times past
inhabited, the English Saxons called (...) and (...), we SHROPP-SHIRE, and the
Latinists Comitatus Salopiensis, is far greater than the rest in quantity,
and not inferior to them either for plenty or pleasure. On the East side it
has Staffordshire, on Montgomery shire, and Denbigh-shire, on the South side
Worcester, Hereford, and Radnor-shires, and on the North Cheshire. It is
replenished with Towns and Castles standing thick on every side, by reason
that it was a Frontier Country, or (that I may use the term of Siculus
Flaccus) Ager arcifinius, in regard of repelling and repressing the Welshmen in
the Marches bordering heerupon: whereupon our Ancestors by an ancient word,
named the Confines of this Shire toward Wales the Marches, for that they were
bounds and limits between the Welsh and English, The Marcher^ L. Marchers.
Marchiones i^ old Histories.
and diverse Noblemen in this Tract were called Barons of the March, and Lords
Marchers, who had every one in their Territory a certain peculiar
jurisdiction, and in their own Courts ministered Marchiones de Marchia Walliae,
as Marquesses of the Marches of Wales, or Lords Marchers, as appears
evidently by the Red Book in the Kings Exchequer, where we read, how at the
Coronation of Queen Aeleonor, Wife to King Henry the Third, Marchiones de
Marchia Walliae, etc. that is, The Marquesses of the Marches of Wales, (or Lord
Marchers) John Fitz-Alane, Raulph Mortimer, John of Monmouth, and Walter
Clifford, The Canopy
said it was the right of the Marches to find silver spears and to bring them
for to support the four square purple silk cloth at the Coronation of Kings
and Queens of England. But the happy tranquillity of peace between Wales and
England, and the Kings authority has by little and little abrogated all those
royalties, prerogatives, and privileges, which the Lords Marchers enjoyed, and
insolently exercised over the poor Inhabitants in the Marches.

Neither yet do I think (I thought good to say so much aforehand) that all
this Country belonged anciently to the CORNAVII, but that part only which is
on this side Severn: as for that on the farther side of Severn, it pertained to
the ORDOVICES, who inhabited here a great Country in this Tract: a parcel
whereof, Severn, which belonged unto the Lords Marchers, 27. Hen. 8.
were not long since laid to this Shire by authority of the Parliament. For,
into these two parts the whole Shire may be fitly divided, seeing that the
River Severn cutteth it through in the mids from the West to the South-East.

In that part beyond Severn, the River Temd, in British Tifidia^c, for some
space makes the South limite, Clun River
into which at length the River Colun, in British Colunwy, and called
contractly Clun, issues it self. This River Clun breaking forth farther
within the Country, Bishops (...)
not far from a pretty Town well frequented, named Bishops Castle, (because
it belonged to the Bishops of Hereford whose Dioecese and jurisdiction is large
in this Shire) gives name to Coluno ca strum. Clun Castl^
Clun Castle: which, the Fitz Alans descended Alan the son of Flaold a Norman
(who were afterward Earls of Arundell) built, when they were Lords Marchers
against the Welshmen, and annoyed them with continual inrodes into their
Country. But where it meets with Temd, among diverse doubtful Fourds, there
mounteth up an Hill of a very ancient memory, which they call Caer Caradoc,
because about the year of our Salvation 53. Caer Caradoc. King Caratacus,
Tacitus.
Caratacus a most noble and renowned British King, raised in the front of
Ostorius Lieutenant for the Romans and the Legionary Roman Soldiers. Until
the Romans having forcibly broken through that fence of stones so rudely laid,
(the remains whereof are to be seen at this day) forced the unarmed Britans,
to quit the place, and Hie up to the mountains. Caratacus himself
notwithstanding escaped by flight, but his wife, daughter, and brethren were
taken prisoners: And he afterward, (as adversity in no place finds safety)
being delivered into the hands of Ostorius by Queen Cartismandua (unto whose
protection he had committed himself) was carried away to Rome, after he had
vexed and wearied the Romans in a long and troublesome war. Where he
obtained pardon for himself and his, Claudius the Emperor, not by way of any
base suppliant entreaty, but by a generous and honorable liberty of speech.
For the winning of this hill and taking of this King captive, See the 43. and
44. page.
it was decreed, that Ostorius should have Triumphall Ornaments: neither did
the Senate judge the taking of Caratacus less honorable, than when Publius
Scipio showed Siphax, and L. Paulus presented Perses, two vanquished Kings in
triumphant manner at Rome. And although the compiler of our History has made
mention neither of this War, nor of this worthy Britan, yet the memory
thereof is not quite gone with the common people. For, they confidently give
out by tradition, that a King was discomfited and put to flight upon this hill:
and in the British Book entitled Triades, among three of the most renowned
Britans for warlike exploits, Caradauc With the strong arm. Ludlow.
Vrichfras is named first; so that, as I think, we should make no doubt, but
that he was this very Caratacus. Then Ludlow, in British formerly named Dinan,
and in later ages Lys-twysoc, i. The Princes Palace, stands upon an hill at
the meeting of the same Temd with the River Corve, a Town more fair than
ancient. Roger Montgomery first laid unto it a Castle no less beautiful, than
strong, which hangs over Corve, and then raised a Wall about the Town that
takes about a mile in compass. But when his son Robert was attainted, King
Henry the First kept it in his own hands: and afterward, when it was
besieged, it valiantly endured the assaults of King Stephen: and during that
straight siege, Henry son of the King of Scots, Iron hooks. 1139.
being plucked from his saddle with an iron hooked engine, Stephen in person
rescued him, and with singular valor delivered him from so great a danger.
After this, King Henry the Second gave this Castle together with the Vale
underneath along Corve, which commonly is called Corves-dale, to Sir Foulque of
Dinan. Afterward it belonged to the Lacies of Ireland, and by a daughter fell
to Sir Geffrey de Ienevile a Poictevin, Jenevile.
or, as some will have it, of the house of Lorain: from whose heirs it
descended again by a daughter to the Mortimers, and from thence hereditarily,
to the Crown. Then the Inhabitants in process of time, built in the very
bosom of the Town, and on the highest ground a very fair Church, and the
only Church they have. And so it began to be of great account and to excel
other Stephen, Simon Montfort, and King Henry the Sixth it suffered much damage
in the civil Wars, yet it always flourished again: and now especially,
ever since that King Henry the Eighth ordained the Council of the Marches, The
Council in the Marches.
not unlike to those Parliaments in France: the Lord President whereof does for
the most part keep Courts and Term here: which a man could hardly have seen
at any time without Suites, whether it were for the great state and authority
that it carried, or because the Welshmen are so forward and hot to go to Law.
This Council consists of the Lord President, so many Counselors as it shall
please the Prince to appoint, a Secretary, an Attorney, a Sollicitour, and the
four Justices of the Counties in Wales.

Burford.
Somewhat lower, upon the River Temd, is seen Burford, which from Theodoricke
Say and his Posterity, came unto Robert Mortimer, and from his posterity
likewise unto Sir Geffrey Cornwaile, Cornwaile.
who derived his Descent from Richard Earl of Cornwall and King of the
Alemans: and his Race even unto these days has flourished Burford (but not in
the dignity of Parliamentary Barons) whereas it is holden (as we read in the
Inquisition) of the King for to find five men for the Army of Wales, Inquis.
40. Ed. 3
and by service of a Baronie. As for those (that I may note thus much by the
way) who held an entire and whole Barony, they were commonly in times past
reputed Barons; and as some learned in our common laws are of opinion, Baron
and Barony Conjugata.
Baron and Barony, like as Earl and Earldom, Duke and Dukedom, King and
Kingdom, were Conjugata, that is, Originally yoke-fellowes. When Temd now is
leaving Shropp-shire behind it, not far from the banks thereof, there raise
themselves up Northward certain hills of easy ascent, Cleehill.
Cleehill they call them, much commended for yielding the best Barley in great
plenty, neither are they without Cleybury, Hugh Mortimer built a Castle, which
King Henry the Second forthwith so rased (because it was a noursery of
sedition) that scarce there remain any tokens thereof at this day: also hard
by stands Kinlet where the Blunts flourished. Blunt in the Norman language
signifies yellow hair of the head. Bridg-North.
Their name in this Tract is very great, so surnamed at first of their yellow
hair; the Family noble and ancient, and the branches thereof far spread.
Then saw we on the right hand bank of Severn, Brug Morfe (commonly, but
corruptly called Bridg-North,) so called of Burg or Burrbugh, and Morfe, a
Forest adjoining, whereas before time it was named simply Burgh. A Town,
fortified with walls, a ditch, a stately Castle, and the Severn, which between
the Rocks runs down with a great fall: seated also upon a Rock,
Achelfleda Lady of the Mercians first built it, and Robert de Belesme Earl of
Shrewesbury walled it: who, trusting to the natural strength of the place
rebelled against King Henry the First, like as afterward Roger Mortimer against
King Henry the the Second: but both of them with ill success; for they were
both forced to yield, and submit themselves, absolutely to the Kings command.
At the Siege of this Castle, (as we read in our Annals) King Henry the Second
being levelled at with an arrow, had been shot therewith quite through the
body, had not Sir Hubert Syncter a noble and trusty Servitour to the King
interposed himself, De Saneta Clara.
and to save the King received both the arrow and his deaths wound withal.

Raulph de Pichford bare himself so valiantly here, that king Henry the First
gave unto him the little Burgh hard by, Lib. Inquis.
To hold by service, for to find dry wood for the great chamber of the Castle
of Burgh against the coming of his Sovereign Lord the King. Willey or
Willeley.
Willeley or Willey is not far from hence, the habitation in old time of Sir
Warner De Willeley, from whose Posterity by the Harleis and Peshall, it came to
the notable Family of Lacon; advanced by marriage long since with the heir of
Passelew, and of late by the Possession of Sir I. Blunt of Kinlet.

There be in like manner other Towns and Castles here and there in this
Tract, as Newcastle, Lib. Inquis.
Hopton Castle, Shipton, and upon the River Corve, Corvesham, which Walter
Clifford had by the gift of king Henry the Second, also Brancroft and Holgot,
commonly Howgate: which belonged sometime to the Manduits, then, to Robert
Blunt Bishop of Bath, Wenlock.
and afterward to the Lovells. More higher, are Wenlocke, now known for the
lime, but in king Richard the Seconds time for a mine of Copper there: William
Malmesbury.
But much more known in the Saxons days for a most ancient Nunnery, where
Milburga that most holy virgin lived in great devotion, and was entombed: the
which Nunnery Earl Roger de Montgomerie repaired and replenished with Monks.
Or Wivell.
In later times Sir John Winell, called also Wenlocke because he here
inhabited, *
for his faithful service to king Henry the Sixth, was by him advanced to the
state and honor of Baron Wenlocke, Lord Wenlocke.
and elected knight of the Garter; in whose cause he manfully lost his life in
the Battle of Tewkesbury, leaving no issue: but from his Lawleys of this
County are lineally descended. A little more West is Acton Burnell, Claus. 17.
Edw. 4.
a Castle of the Burnels, and after of the Lovels, made famous by the Court of
Parliament there held in the time of king Edward the First. This Family of the
Burnells was in old time of great name and antiquity, Acton Burnel
very much enriched also by that Bishop aforenamed. But it failed and had an
end in the Reign of Edward the Second, when Mawde the heir was married unto
John Lovell first, and John Haudlow, whose son Nicholas assumed to himself
the name of Burnell: from whom the Ratcliffes Earls of Sussex and others draw
their pedigree. Scarce a mile from hence stands Langley, Langley.
seated very flat and low in a Park full of Woods, the dwelling place of the
Leas, which may well challenge to be ranged among the Families that are of the
better worth and greater Antiquity in this Tract. Next unto these is Condover,
Condover.
a Manor sometimes of the Lovells, but of late, the possession of Thomas Owen,
Justice of the Common Pleas and a very great lover of learning. But he has now
taken his quiet sleep in Christ, and left his son Sir Roger Owen; for his
manifold learning, a right worthy son of so good a father. This is holden of
the King, as we read in the Records, In chief, to find two footmen one day
in the army of Which I note here once for all, to this end, that I may give to
understand, that Gentlemen and Noblemen heereabout held their inheritances of
the Kings of England by this tenure, to be ready in service with Soldiers for
defense of the Marches, whenever there should be any war between England
and Wales. Pichford.
Near unto this, there is a little Village named Pichford, that imparted the
name in times past to the ancient Family of Pichford: A fountain of Pitch, or
Birumen.
now the Possession of R. Oteley, which our Ancestors (for that they knew not
pitch from Bitumen) so called of a fountain of Bitumen there in a private man's
yard; upon which there rises and swimmeth a kind of liquid Bitumen daily,
skumme it off never so diligently, even as it does in the Lake Asphaltites in
Iewry, in a standing water about Samosata, and in a Agrigentum in Sicilie. But
whether this be good against the falling sickness, and have a powerful
property to draw, to close up wounds, etc. as that in Iewry, none that I know
as yet have made experiment. More Westward, you may see Pouderbach Castle,
Pouderbach.
now decayed and ruinous, called in times past Pulrebach the seat of Sir Raulph
Butler a younger son of Raulph Butler Lord Wem, from whom the Butlers of
Woodhall in Hertford-shire are lineally descended. Beneath this, Huckstow
Forest, spreads a great way among the mountains: where, at Stipperstons bill
there be great heaps of stones, Stipperstons.
and little rocks as it were, that rise thick together: the Or Welshmen.
Britans call them Carneddau tewion. But whereas as these seem natural I dare
not with others so much as conjecture, that these were any of those stones
which Giraldus seems to note in these words: Harald in person being himself
the last footeman in marching with footmen, and light Armours, and victuals
answerable for service in Wales, valiantly went round about and passed through
all Wales, so as that he left but few or none alive. And for a perpetual
memory of this Victory, you may find very many stones in Wales erected after
the antique manner upon hillockes, in those places wherein he had been
Conqueror, having these words engraven.

HIC FVIT VICTOR HARALDVS.
Here was Harald Conqueror.
Caurse. Routon.
More Northward, Caurse Castle stands, which was the Barony of Sir Peter
Corbet; from whom it came to the Barons of Stafford: and Routon Castle near
unto it, the most ancient of all the rest, toward the West borders of the
Shire, not far from Severn, which Castle sometimes belonged to the Corbets,
and now to the ancient Family of the Listers. Before time it was the possession
of John le Strange of Knocking; in despite of whom Lhewellin Prince of Wales
laid it even with the ground, as we read in the life of Sir Foulque Fitz-Warin.
It flourished also in the Romans time under the Rutunium.
termed by Antonine the Emperor, RUTUNIUM. Neither can we mistake herein,
seeing both the name and that distance from URICONIUM a town full well known,
which he puts down, do most exactly agree. Near unto this are Abberbury
Castle and Watlesbury, which is come from the Corbets to the notable Leightons
Knights. As for the name, it seems to have taken it from that High Port-way
called Watling street, which went this way into the farthest part of Wales (as
Ranulph of Chester writes) by two little Towns, of that street called
Strettons: between which in a valley, are yet to be seen the rubbish of an
old Castle called Brocards Castle, Brocards Castle.
and the same set amiddest green meadows, that before time were fish-pooles.
But these Castles with others which I am scarce able to number and reckon up,
for the most part of them are now ruinate not by the fury of war, but now at
length conquered even with secure peace, and process of time.

Now crossing over Severne unto that part of the shire on this side the River,
which I said did properly belong to the ancient CORNAVII. This again is
divided after a Terne running from the North Southward: so called, for that it
issues out of a very large Poole in Staffordshire, such as they of the North
parts call Tearnes. In the hither part of these twain, which lies East, near
to the place where Terne discharges his waters into Severn stood the ancient
URICONIUM (for so Antonine the Emperor terms it) which Ptolomee calls
VIROCONIUM, Uriconium.
Ninnius, Wroxcester.
Caer Vruach, the old English Saxons (...), we Wreckceter and Wroxcester. This
was the chief City of the CORNAVII, built as it seems by the Romans, what
time as they fortified this bank of Severn in this place where the river is
full of fourds, as it is not elsewhere lower toward the mouth thereof. But this
being sore shaken in the Saxons war, fell to utter decay in the Danish
broiles: and The old work of Wroxceter) This Wall was built of rough stone
distinguished outwardly with seven rows of British brickes in equal distance,
and brought up with arched work inwardly.

I conjecture, by the uneven ground, by the Rampires and the rubbish of the
wall here and there on either side, that the Castle stood in that very place
where these ruins remain. But where the plot of the City lay (and that was of
a great compass) the Soil is more blackish than elsewhere, and plentifully
yields the best Port-way of those Romans, known by the name of Watling
street, went, as I have heard say, directly (albeit the ridge thereof now
appears not) either through a fourd or over a Bridge (the foundations whereof
were of late, a little higher, discovered, when they did set a Wear in the
River) unto the Strattons, Strattons.
that is to say, Towns upon the Street, whereof I spoke even now. The ancient
name of this decayed URICONIUM, shows it self very apparently in an hill
loftily mounting near thereunto, Wreken-hill.
called Wreken hill (some Writers term it Gilberts hill) from the top whereof,
which lies in a plain pleasant level, there is a very delightful prospect
into the Country beneath on every side.

This Hill runs out in length a good space, as it were attired, on the
sides, Severn rolleth down with his stream, at Buldewas, Bildas.
commonly Bildas, there flourished a fair Abbay, the Sepulture in times past
of the noble Family of the Burnels, Patrons thereof. Higher into the Country
there is a Mansion or Baiting Town named Watling street of the situation upon
the foresaid Rode way or street. Dalaley.
And hard by it are seen the Relics of Castle Dalaley, which after that
Richard Earl of Arundell was attainted, King Richard the Second by authority
of the Parliament annexed to the Principality of Chester, which he had then
erected.

And not far from the foot of the foresaid Wreken, in an hollow Valley, by
that high street before mentioned, Oken-yate, a little Village well known for
the plentiful Antonine places VSOCONA both from URICONIUM and also from
PENNOCRUCIUM that no man need to doubt, Usocona. Oken-yate.
but that this Oken-yate was that USOCONA. Neither does the name it self
gainesay it: for, this word Is, which in the British tongue signifies Low,
may seem added for to note the low situation thereof. On the other side,
Charleton.
beneath this Hill, appears Charleton Castle, in ancient times belonging to
the Charletons, Lords of Powis: and more Eastward next of all unto
Staffordshire, Tong-Castle, called in old time Toang, Tongue.
which the Vernons not long since repaired, as also the College within the
Town, which the Pembridges, as I have read, first founded. Neither have the
Inhabitants any thing here more worth showing, than a Bell for the bigness
thereof very famous in all those parts adjoining. Hard to this, lies
Albrighton, which in the Reign of King Edward the First, was the seat of Sir
Raulph de Pichford, but now of the Talbotts, branched from the Family of the
Earls of Shrewesbury. But above Tongue was Lilleshul Abbay in a woodland
Country, founded by the family of Beaumeis, whose heir was married into the
house of De La Zouch. But seeing there is little left but ruins, I will leave
it and proceed forward.

Beyond the river Terne, Draiton.
on the brinke thereof stands Draiton, where in the civil wars between the
houses of Lancaster and York, a field was fought that cost many a Gentleman of
Cheshire his life. 1459.
For they, although the battle was given up almost on even hand, when they
could not agree among themselves but took part with both sides, were slain by
heaps and numbers on either side. Beneath this Draiton, and nere enough to
Terne, lies Hodnet, wherein dwelt sometimes Gentlemen of the same name, Inq.
2.10. E. 2.
from whom hereditarily it is come by the Ludlows unto the Vernons. It was held
in times past, of the Honor of Mont-Gomery, by service, to be Seneschall or
Steward of the same Honor. After this, Terne, having passed hand by certain
little rural Towns, takes in unto him the Riveret Roden, and when he has
gone a few Uriconium, of which I spoke even now, falls into the Severn. Upon
this Roden, whiles he is but new come from his spring head, stands Wem, Wem.
where are to be seen the tokens of a Castle long since begun there to be
built.

This was the Barony, after the first entry of the Normans, of William
Pantulph, from whose Posterity it came at length to the Butlers, and from them
by the Ferrars of Ousley, and the Barons of Greystock, unto the Barons D'acre
of Gillesland. Within a little of this, upon an high hill well wooded, or upon
a cliffe rather which sometime was called Radcliffe, stood a Castle mounted
aloft, called of the reddish stone Red-Castle, Red-castle.
and in the Normans language Castle Rous, the seat in old time of the Audleies,
through the liberal bounty of Lady Maude Le Strange. But now there remains
Bery, as one would say Burgh, and they report that it was a most famous place
in King Arthurs days, as the common sort ascribe whatsoever is ancient and
strange to King Arthurs glory.

Morton Corbet.
Then, upon the same River Morton Corbet, anciently an house of the Family of
Turet, afterward a Castle of the Corbets, shows it self, where within our
remembrance, Robert Corbet, carried away with the affectionate delight of
Architecture, Corbets are of ancient Nobility in this Shire, and held Lordships
by service, of Roger Montgomery Earl of this County, about the coming in of
the Normans, for Roger the son of Corbet held Huelebec, Hundeslit, Acton,
Fernleg, etc. Robert, Corbet, a forename.
the son of Corbet, held land in Ulestanton, Rotlinghop, Branten, and Udecot.
And in later ages this family far and fairly propagated received increase
both of revenew and great alliance by the marriage of an heir of Hopton. *
More Southward stands Arcoll the habitation of the Newports knights of great
worship, descended from the Barons Gray of Codnor, and the Lords of Mothwy: and
Hagmond Abbay, which the Lords Fitz Alanes if they did not found, yet they most
especially endowed.

Not much lower upon Severn stands most pleasantly the famousest City (for so
it was called in Domesday book) of this Shire (risen by the ruin of Old
Uriconium) Shrewsbury and Shrowsbury, having mollified the name, Shrewsbury.
whereas our Ancestors called it (...), for that it was anciently a very
thicket of shrobs upon an hill. In which sense both the Greeks termed their
Bessa, and our Welsh Britans named this also Pengwerne, that is, The high plot
planted with Alders, and a Palace so named continued here a long time. But
whence it is that it is called now in the British tongue Ymwithig, and by the
Normans Scropesbery, Sloppesbery, and Salop, and in the Latin tongue Salopia, I
am altogether ignorant, unless it should be the ancient name Scobbes-beng
diversely distorted and dis-jointed. Yet some skillful in the British tongue,
think verily it is called Ymwithig, as one would say, Placentia or Plaisance,
of a British word Mewithau, and that their Poets the Bardi so Severn, having
two very fair Bridges upon it, gathering himself in manner round in form of
a circle, so compasses it, that were it not for a small bank of firm land,
it might go for an Island. And thence it is that Leland the Antiquarian Poet
wrote thus: Edita Penguerni late fastigia splendent,
Urbs sita lunat^ veluti mediamnis in orb,
Colle tumet modico, duplici quoque ponte superbit,
Accipiens patria sibi lingua nomen ab alnis.
Shrewsbury do shine both far and nere,
A Town within a River set, an Island as it were,
Mounted upon a pretty hill, and Bridges has it twain,
The name it took of Alder trees in British tongue they said.


Neither is it strengthened only by nature, but fortified also by art: for
Roger of Montgomery, unto whom by the Conquerors gift it was allotted, pulling
down 50. houses or thereabout, built a strong stately Castle on the North side
upon a rising rock, and Robert his son when he revolted from King Henry the
First, walled it about, John. At the first entering of the Normans it was a City
well inhabited and of good trade. For, as we read in Domesday book, In King
Edward the Confessors time it paid Gelt according to an hundred Hides: In the
Conquerours time, it paid yearly seven pounds and sixteen shillings de Gablo:
They were reckoned to be two hundred and fifty two Citizens: whereof twelve
were bound to watch about the Kings of England when they lay at this City, and
as many to accompany them when they went forth on hunting. Which I would verily
think to have been ordained, because not many years before Edricke Streona
Duke of the Mercians, a man notoriously disteined with wickedness, Ashelm, and
slew him as he rode on hunting. At which time (as that Book shows) the
custom was in this City, That a woman taking, howsoever it were, a husband, if
she were a widow, gave unto the King twenty shillings; if a maid, ten, in
what manner soever she took a man. But to return unto our matter, the said
Earl Roger not only fortified it, but also adorned it with other buildings
both public and private, yea and founded a very goodly Abbay to the honor of
Saint Peter and Saint Paul, unto which he granted many Possessions, and
therewith, Saint Gregory's Church, And namely in that tenor, (I exemplify the
words out of the private History of the said Abbay) That when the Chanons who
held Prebends therein should any of them die, Prebend^ passing hereditarily.
the said Prebends should come unto the Demaine and Possession of the Whereupon
arose no small controversy: For, the sons of the said Chanons sued the
Monks at Law, that they might succeed in their fathers Prebends. For, at that
time, the Chanons and Priests in England were married, and it grew to be a
custom, that Ecclesiastical livings should descend by inheritance to the next
of the blood. But this controversy was decided under King Henry the First, and
concluded it was, that the heir should not succeed in Ecclesiastical Livings;
yea Dominicans, Franciscans, and Augustine Friars, which the Charletons,
Jenevils, and Staffords founded, there were two Collegiat Churches erected,
Saint Chadds with a Deane and ten Prebendaries, and Saint Mary's with a Deane
likewise and nine Prebendaries. And even at this day, a fair and goodly City
it is, well frequented and traded, full of good merchandise, and by reason of
the Citizens painful diligence, with cloth making and traffic with Welshmen,
rich and wealthy. For, hither, almost all the commodities of Wales, do conflow
as it were to a common Mart of both Nations. Whereupon it is inhabited both
with Thomas Aston the first head Schoolmaster a right good man procured by his
means a very honest Salarie and Stipend for the Teachers. It shall not now I
hope be impertinent to note, that when diverse of the Nobility conspired
against King Henry the Fourth with a purpose to advance Edmund Mortimer Earl
of March to the Crown, *
as the undoubtfull and right heir, Battle of Shrewsbury. 1463.
whose father King Richard the Second had also declared heir apparent: and Sir
Henry Percy called Hote-spurre then addressed himself to give the Shrewsbury:
upon a sudden all their designs were dashed, as it were, from above. For the
King with speedy marches was upon his back before he imagined. To whom yet
the young Hote-spurre with courageous resolution gave battle, and after a
long and doubtful fight, wherein the Scotishmen, which followed him, showed
much manly valor, (when the Earl of Worcester his Uncle, and the Earl of
Dunbar were taken) he despairing of Victory ran undaunted upon his own death
amiddest the thickest of his enemies. Of this battle the place is called
Battaile-field. Battailefield.
Where the King after Victory erected a Chapel and one or two Priests, to
pray for their souls, who were there slain. As for the position of this
Shrewsbury, it is from the Islands Azores twenty Degrees, and seven and thirty
minutes

From out of this city (I wot not whether it may be thought worth my labor, or
pertinent to my purpose to relate so much) brake forth the last time, namely in
the year of our Salvation 1551. The British sweat, or sweating sickness.
that dismal disease, The English Sweat, which presently dispersed over the
whole Realm, made great mortality of people especially those of middle age:
for, as many as were taken suddenly with this Sweat, within one four and
twenty hours either dyed or recovered. But a present remedy was found, namely
that such as in the day time fell into it, should presently in their clothes as
they were go to bed; if by night and in bed, should there rest, lie still
Hieronymus Fracastorius.
standing so much upon plastre (and yet it is but in few places of that
nature.) In certain moist Constitutions of weather (say they) it happens
that vapors arise out of that kind of Soil, which although they be most
subtle, yet they are corrupt* which cause likewise a subtle contagion, and
the same is proportionate either unto the spirits or to the thin froth that
floateth upon the blood. But whatsoever the cause is, no doubt there is an
Analogy between it and the subtle parts of blood: by reason whereof within
one day the Patient either mends or ends. As for the cause let others Scorpio.
A second time yet more mildly, although the plague accompanied it, in the
thirty three year after, anno 1518. upon a great opposition of the same
Planets in Scorpio and Ta^rus, at which time it plagued the Netherlands and
high Almaine also. Last of all, three and thirty years after that, in that
year 1551. when another conjunction of those Planets in Scorpio took their
effects. But perhaps I have insisted too long herein; for, these may seem
vain toies to such as attribute nothing at all to celestial influence, and
learned experience.

Near unto this City, Severne fetches many a compass, turning and winding
in and out, but specially at Rossall, where he makes such a curving reach
that he Rates commonly, Flotes.
to wit, Flotes, certain pieces of timber joined together with rough plankes
and raf^ers running overthwart, which serve to convey burdens down the River
with the stream: the use and name whereof our countrymen have brought from
Rhene in Germany, and term them as the Germans do Flores. By the River
side, stand Shrawerden, Shrawerden.
a Castle sometime of the Earls of Arundell, but afterward, belonging to Sir
Thomas Bromley, Knocking.
late Lord Chancellor of England: Knocking Castle, built by the Lords Le
Strange, from whom it descended hereditarily unto the Stanleies Earls of
Darbie; Nesse.
and near unto it Nesse, over which there mounteth up Cheswarden, King Henry
the Second gave unto John Le Strange; Barons Le Strange.
from whom by diverse branches are sprung the most Honorable families of the
Stranges de Knocking, Avindelegh, Ellesmere, Blackmere, Lutheham and
Hunstanston in Norfolk. Now from those of Knocking, 20. Ed. 4.
when as the last died without any issue male, the inheritance descended by
Joan a sole daughter, and the wife of George Stanley, unto the house of Darby.
Farther from the River, Oswestre.
even upon the West frontier of the shire, lies Oswestre, or Oswaldstre, in
British Croix Oswalds, a little Town enclosed with a ditch and a wall,
fortified also with a pretty Castle: and in it there is great traffic,
especially of Welsh Cottons of a slight and thin web, Welsh Cortons.
which you may call in Latin Levidensas, Oswald King of the Northumbers
(whereas before time it was called Maserfield) whom Penda the Pagan Prince of
the Mercians both slew here in a bloody battle, 642.
and after he had slain him, with monstrous cruelty tare in pieces. Whence a
Christian Poet of good antiquity versified thus of him.

Cujus and abscissum caput, abscissosque lacertos, Oswald slain.

Et tribus affixos palis pendere cruentus
Penda jubet: per quod reliquis exempla relinquat
Terroris manifesta sui, regemque beatum

Ultor enim fratris minime timet Oswius illum,
Imo timere facit: nec Rex miser, imo beatus
Est, qui font boni fruitur semel and sine fine.
Whose head and limbs dismembered thus, that bloody Penda takes,
And causes to be hanged up, fast fixed on three stakes:
His meaning was hereby to strike a terror to the rest,
And make him seem a wretched wight, who was a King much blessed.
But this his purpose fail's in both. Oswy, his brother dear,

Nor miserable is this Prince, but happy we may say,
Who now enjoy's the spring of good, and shall enjoy for aye.
This Town seems to have had the first original from devotion and religion:
for, See in Norhthumberland.
the Christians of that age, counted it a most holy place; and Bid has
recorded, Oswald was slain, strange miracles have been wrought. But Madoc
brother of Mereduc (as Caradoc of Lancarvan writes) built it, and the Norman
Fitz-Allans, who were Lords afterward thereof, and Earls of Arundell, walled
it about* The Ecclipses of the sun in Aries have been most dangerous unto it:
Ecclipses in Aries.
for, in the years of our Lord 1542. and 1567. when the Ecclipses of the sun
in Aries wrought their effects, it suffered very grievous loss by fire. And
namely after this later Eclipse, the fire spread it self so far, that there
were burnt within the Town and suburbs about two hundred houses. A little
beneath this Northwestward there is an hill entrenched round about with a
threefold ditch (they call it Hen-Dinas, that is, The old palace) The neighbor
dwellers say confidently, it has been a City: but others Camps of Penda, or
Oswald. Scarce three miles from hence stands Whittington, Whittington.
a Castle not long ago of the Fitz-Guarins, who deduced their pedigree from
Sir Guarin de Metz, a Loraineis: but he took to wife the daughter and heir of
William Peverell, who is reported to have built Whittington, and begat Fulke
the Father of that most renowned Sir Fulke Fitz-Warin, The life of Fulke,
written in French.
of whose doubtful deeds and variable adventures in the wars our Ancestors
spoke great wonders, and Poems were composed. In the reign of Henry the Third,
I find that license was granted unto Foulk Fitz-Warin to strengthen the Castle
of Whittington, in competent manner, as appears out of the Close rolls in
the fifth of King Henry the Third. The dignity of these Barons Fitz-Warins,
Barons Fitzwarin.
had an end in an heir Female, and in the Hancford unto the Bourchiers now
Earls of Bath. Beneath this Whittington, one Wrenoc son of Meuric held
lands, who for his service ought to be Latimer, Latimer what it signifies.
that is, Truchman or Interpreter, between the English and the Welshmen. This
note I out of an old Inquisition, that men may understand what the said name
Latimer imports: which no man almost knew heretofore, and yet it has been a
surname very current and rise in this kingdom. At the North-west border of
this shire, there offer themselves to be seen, first Shenton the seat of the
respective family of the Needhams; White-Church. Album Monasterium.
Blackemere an ancient Manor of the Lords Le Strange; and then Whitchurch, or
Album Monasterium, where I saw some Monuments of the Talbots, but principally
of that renowned English Achilles Sir John Talbot the first Shrewsbury out of
this house: whose Epitaph, that the reader may see the form of the
Inscriptions, according to that age, I will here put down, although it is
little beseeming so worthy and heroical a Knight.

ORATE PRO ANIMA PRAENOBILIS DOMINI, DOMINI JOANNIS TALBOTT QVONDAM COMITIS
SALOPIAE, DOMINI TALBOTT, DOMINI FURNIVALL, DOMINI VERDON, DOMINI STRANGE DE
BLACK-MERE, ET MARESCALLI FRANCIAE, QUI

That is: Pray for the Soul of the right Noble Lord, Sir John Talbot,
sometimes Earl of Shrewsburie, Lord Talbot, Lord Furnivall, Lord Verdon, Lord
Strange de Black-Mere, and Mareshall of France: Who died in the battle at
Burdews. VII. IULII, M.CCCC. LIII.

Unto this Family of the Talbots there accrued by marriage-right the
inheritance of the Barons Le Strange of Blackmere, who were surnamed Le Strange
commonly, and Extranei in Latin records, for that they were strangers brought
hither by King Henry Blackmere were much enriched by an heir of W. de
Albo-monasterio, or this Whit-Church, and also by one of the heirs of John
Lord Giffard of Brimsfield, of ancient Nobility in Gloucestershire, by the
only daughter of Walter Lord Clifford.

More Westward lies Ellesmer a little territory, Ellesmer. 1205.
but rich and fruitful, which, as the Chronology of Chester testifies, King
John gave with the Castle, to Lhewellin Prince of North Wales in marriage, with
Joane his base daughter. Afterward in the time of King Henry the Third it came
to the Family of the Stranges. But now it has his Baron Sir Thomas Egerton,
Baron of Ellesmer.
a man whom for his singular wisdom and sincere equity Queen Elizabeth chose
to be Lord Keeper of the great Seal, and King Ellesmer.

Now let us briefly add somewhat of the Earls of Shrewsbury: Earls of
Shrewsbury.
Roger de Belesmo, otherwise, Montgomery, was created the first Earl of
Shrewsbury by King William the Conqueror, unto whom he allotted also the
greatest part of this Shire. After him succeeded first, H. Huntingdot in his
book of the miseries of life.
his eldest son Hugh, slain in Wales without issue. Then Robert another of
his sons, a man outragiously cruel toward his own sons and hostages,
whose eyes with his own hands he plucked out and gelded. But afterward being
convict of high Treason, he was kept in perpetual prison by King Henry the
first, and so suffered condign punishment for his notorious wickedness. Then
was Adeliza for her dowry. Many ages after, King Henry the Sixth in the 20.
year of his reign, promoted to this honor John Lord Talbot, whom both Nature
bred, and his disposition inured unto warlike prowess. And in the 24. year of
his reign he bestowed moreover upon the same John, See in Ireland
whom in the Patent he calls Earl of Shrewsbery, and of Weisford, the title
of Earl of Waterford, the Barony of Dongarvan, and the Seneschalsie or
Stewardship of Ireland. But when he was slain at Castilion upon Dordon near
Bordeaux together with his younger son Sir John Talbot Vicount L'isle, after
he had four and twenty years together marched with victorious arms over a
great part of France; his son John by the daughter and one of the heirs of
Sir Thomas Nevill Lord Furnivall, succeeded: Ormond came John the third Earl
of Shrewsbury, and Sir Gilbert Talbot Captain of Callis, from whom the Talbots
of Graston descended. This third John had by his wife Katherine daughter to H.
Duke of Buckingham, George the fourth Earl, who served King Henry the Seventh
valiantly and constantly at the battle of Stoke. And he by Anne his wife,
daughter of William Lord Hastings, had Francis the fifth Earl who begat of
Mary daughter to Thomas Lord Dacre of Gillesland George the sixth Earl, aman
of approoved fidelity in weighty affairs of State, whose son Gilbert by his
wife Gertrud daughter to Thomas Earl of Rutland, the seventh Earl maintains

In this region there are Parishes much about 170.

CESTRIAE Comitatus-(Romany Legionibus-et Colonijis olim insignis) vera et.
obseluta descriptio


CHES-SHIRE.
THE fifth and last of those Countries, which in old time the CORNAVII held, is
the County of CHESTER; in the Saxons Tongue (...), commonly CHES-SHIRE, and The
County Palatine of Chester, (for that the Earls thereof had Royalties and
princely Privileges belonging to them; and all the Inhabitants owed Allegiance
and fealty to them, as they did to the King.) As for this Palatine, County
Palatine.
that I may rehearse again, that which I have said before of this name, was in
times past common to all those, who bare any Office in the Kings Court or
Palace: and in that age Comes Palatinus, was a Title of Dignity conferred upon
him who before was Palatinus, Petr. Pitbaus in the description of Campaine.
with authority to hear and determine Causes in his own Territory; and as
well his Nobles, whom they called Barons, as his Vassals were bound to repair
to the Palace of the said Count, both to give him advise and also to give their
attendance, and furnish his Court with their presence.

This Country (as William of Malmesbury says) Is scarce of Corn, Joh. Tilius.
but especially of Howbeit Ranulph the Monk of Chester, affirms the
contrary: Whatsoever Malmesbury dreamd (says he) upon the relation of others,
it abounds with all kind of victuals, plenteous in Corn, flesh, fish, and
salmons especially, of the very best: it maintains trade with many
commodities, and makes good return. For why, in the Confines thereof it has
salt pits, mines, and metals. And this moreover will I add: the grass and
fodder there, is of that goodness and virtue, that cheeses be made here in
great number of a most pleasing and delicate taste, The most commendable
Cheeses.
such as all England again affords not the like; no, though the best
dayriwomen otherwise and skilfullest in cheese making be had from hence. And
whiles I am writing this, I cannot choose but mervaile by the way at that which
Strabo writes, That in his time some Britans could not skill of making Cheese:
and that Pliny afterward wondered: That barbarous Nations, who lived of
milk, either knew not or despised, for so many ages, the commodity of Cheese,
who otherwise had the feat of crudding it to a pleasant tartness, and to fat
bu^yr. Whereby it may be gathered, that the devise of making Cheese came into
Britain from the Romans. But howsoever this Region in fertility of soil
comes behind many Countries in England, yet has it always bred and reared
more Gentry than the rest: For, you have not in all England again any one
Province beside, that in old time either brought more valorous Gentlemen into
the field, or had more Families in it of Knights degree. On the Southside it is
hemmed in with Shropp shire, on the Eastside with Staffordshire and
Darby-shire, on the North Lancashire, and on the West, with Denbigh and
Flint-shires. Toward the North-West it runs far into the sea with a long
cantle Wirrall.
or Promontory, which being enclosed within two Creekes receives the Ocean on
both sides entering into the land: into which two Creekes also all the Rivers of
this Shire do discharge themselves. Into that Creek which is more Western
passes the River Dee that divides the country from Denbigh-shire: into that
on the Eastside, both Wever, which runs through the mids of the Shire, and
Mersey also, that parts it from Lancashire, issue themselves. Neither see I
any better way of describing this County, than if I follow the very tracts of
these Rivers. For, all the places of greatest note, are situate by the sides of
them. But before I enter into any particular description, I will first Lucian
the Monk, thus much in commendation of Ches-shire: for he is a rare Author and
lived a little after the Conquest. If any man be desirous (says he) either
fully, Lucian the Monk, of the praise of Chester.
or as near as may be, to treat of the Inhabitants, according to the
disposition of their manners, in respect of others that live in sundry places
of the Realm. They are found to be partly different from the rest of English,
partly better, and partly equal unto them. But they seem especially (the best
point to be considered in general trial of manners) in Chester enclosed upon
one side with the limite of the Wood Lime, by a certain distinct privilege
from all other Englishmen is free, and by the Indulgences of Kings and
Excellencies of Earls has been wont in Assemblies of the people to attend
upon the Earls sword rather than the Kings Crown: and within their precinct
to hear, and determine the greatest matters with more liberty. Chester it
self is a place of receipt for the Irish, a neighbor to the Welsh, and
plentifully served with Corn by the English: Finely seated, with Gates
anciently built, approoved in hard and dangerous difficulties. In regard of the
River and prospect of the eye together, worthy according to the name to be
called a City: guarded with watch of holy and religious men, and, through the
mercy of our Savior, always fensed and fortified with the merciful
assistance of the Almighty.

Deva.
The River The River Dee.
Dee, called in Latin Deva, in British Dyffyr-dwy, that is, the water of Dwy,
breeding very great plenty of Salmons, arises out of two fountains in Wales;
Dwy in their tongue signifies Two. Yet others, observing also the
signification of the word, interpret it Black-water, others again, Gods water,
or Divine water. But although Ausonius notes that a Spring hallowed to the
Gods was named Diuvona in the ancient Gauls tongue (which was all one with the
British) and in old time all Rivers were reputed, Divona.
(...), that is, Descending from Heaven, yea and our Britans yielded divine
honor unto Rivers, as Gildas writes, yet I see not why they should attribute
Divinity to this River Dwy above all others. The Thessalians, as we read, gave
to the River Paeneus divine honor, for the pleasantness thereof; the
Scythians to Danubius for the largeness; the Germans to Rhene because it was
counted a judge in the question of true and undefiled wedlock: Giraldus
Cambrensis recorded, who in some sort believed it: Or else, because they
observed that contrary to the wonted manner of other Rivers, upon the fall of
much rain it arose but little, and so often as the South wind beats long
upon it, it swells and extraordinarily overfloweth the grounds adjoining.
Peradventure also the Christian Britans thought the water of this River to be
holy: For, it is written, that when they stood ready to join battle Christ's
most sacred and precious blood. But, Dee which seems to rush rather than to
run out of Wales, no sooner is entered into Cheshire but he passes more mildely
with a slower stream by BONIUM, Bonium.
in some written copies of Antonine, BOVIUM, a City that had been of great name
in that age, and afterward a famous Monastery. Of the Chore or quire whereof,
it was called by the Britans Bon-chor and Banchor, Banchor.
of the ancient English (...), and Banchor, and among many good and godly men,
it fostered and brought up (as some write) that most wicked Arch-heretick
Pelagius, who injuriously derogating from the grace of God, troubled a long
time the West Church with his pestiferous Doctrine. Prosper Aquitanus in this
Verse of his, terms him the British Adder, or Land-snake.

Pestifero vomuit coluber sermon Britannus.
A British Snake, with venomous tongue,
Has vomited his poison strong.
Bid, There was such a number of Monks that being divided into seven
portions, which had every of them a several head and Ruler over them, yet
every one of these had no fewer than three hundred men who were wont to live
all of their handy labor, Of whom Edilfred King of the Nordan-humbers slew 12.
hundred, because they had implored in their prayers Christ's assistance for the
Christian Britans against the English-Saxons, Monkery.
then infidels. The profession of this Monastical life (that I may digress a
little) began, when Pagan Tyrans enraged against Christians pursued them with
bloody persecutions. For then good devout men, that they might serve God in
more safety and security, Egypt, Rutilius Claudius.
and not (as the Painims are wont with open mouth to give it out) for to enwrap
themselves willingly in more miseries because they would not be in misery.

Where they scattered themselves among Mountains and Deserts, living in caves
and little cells here and there in holy meditations. At first solitary and
alone, whereupon in Greek they were called Monachi, that is, Monks: but after
they thought it better (as the sociable nature of mankind required) to meet
together at certain times to serve God, and at length they began to cohabite
and live together for mutual comfort, rather than like wild beasts to walk
up and down in the Deserts. Their profession was to pray, and by the labor of
their own hands, to get Athanasius first brought this kind of Monks
consisting of Laymen into the West Church. Whereunto after that Saint Austen in
Afric, Saint Martin in France, and Congell in Britain and Ireland had
adjoined the function of Regular Clergy: It is incredible, how far and wide
they spread, how many and how great Coenobies were built for them, so called of
their communion of life; as also Monasteries, for that they kept still a
certain show of solitary living: and in those days none were more sacred and
holy than they, and accordingly they were reputed; considering how by their
prayers to God, by their example, Doctrine, labor, and industry, they did
exceeding much good not only to themselves, but also to all mankind. rebus
cessere secundis, that is, Gave backward in time of prosperity. Now let me
return unto my matter, craving your pardon for this short digression.

After these days, this Monastery fell utterly to ruin; That Banchor of which
Saint Bernard speaks in the life of Malachie was in Ireland
for, in the time of William of Malmesbury who lived presently after the
Normans coming in, There remained here, as he says, so many tokens of
Antiquity, so many walls of Churches half down, so many windings and
turnings of Gates, such heaps of rubbish and rammell, as hardly a man should
have found elsewhere. But now is left to be seen scarcely the face and
outward show of a dead City or Monastery, and the names only remain of two
Gates Port Hoghan and Port Cleis, which stand a mile asunder, between which
are found Bonium or Banchor is of Flintshire.
But, that I may tell you of one thing, this BoNIUM or Banchor is not reckoned
within this County but in Flintshire; a piece whereof severed (as it were) from
the rest lies here between Cheshire and Shropp-shire.

Dee, where he enters first into this shire sees above him not far from his
bank, Malpas, upon an high hill: which had in it a Castle; and for the bad,
narrow, and combrous way was termed in Latin Mala platea, that is, Ilstreet,
and thence also took this later name Mal-pas from the Normans, Out of the Roll
of Domesday of Chel-shire, Barons of Mal-pas.
whereas in times past the Englishmen, almost in the very same sense, called it
Depenbach. The Barony hereof Hugh Earl of Chester gave to Robert Fitzhugh: In
the Reign of Henry the Second, William Patricke the son of William Patricke
held the same: of whose line Robert Patricke David of Mal-pas by Per breve
recognitionis.
a Writ of Recognisance, gat the one half of that Town which was Gilbert
Clerks: But a great part of this Barony went afterward hereditarily to those
Suttons that are Barons of Dudley: and a part also thereof came to Urian
Sampier. And from Philip a younger son of David of Mal-pas, is descended that
worshipful family of the Egertons, who took this name from the place of their
habitation: like as from other places, Cotgrave, Overton, Codington, and
Golborn. As touching the name of this place, give me leave before I depart
hence, in this serious work, to insert a pretty jest out of Giraldus
Cambrensis. It happened, says he, in our dates, that a certain Jew travailing
toward Shrewsbury, with the Archdeacon of this place, Itinerar. lib. 2. cap.
13.
whose surname was Peche, that is, Sin, and a Deane named Devil; when he
heard by chance the Archdeacon telling, That his Archdeaconry began at a
place called Il-street, and reached as far as to Mal-pas toward Chester: He
considering and understanding withal as well the Archdeacons surname as the
Deanes, came out with this pleasant and merry conceit, Would it not be a
wonder (quoth he) and my fortune very good, if ever I get safe again out of
this country, where Sin is the Archdeacon, and

Shoclach.
From hence Dee runs down amain by Shoclach, where sometime was a Castle,
by Aldford, belonging in times past to the Arderns; by Poulefourd, where in the
Reign of Henry the Third, Sir Raulph of Ormesby had his Castle, and by Eaton
the seat of the famous Family of Gros-venour, Gros-venour.
that is, The great Hunter, whose posterity now corruptly go under the name of
Gravenor.

Somewhat higher, upon the same River near unto Dee-mouth, which Ptolomee
calls SETEIA for Deia, stands the noble City which the said Ptolomee named
DEUNANA, Deunana. Deva.
Antonine the Emperor DEVA, of the River, the Britans Caer-Legion, Caer-Leon
Vaur, Caer-Leon ar Dufyr Dwy, and by way of excellency Caer, like as our
Ancestors, the English Saxons (...), of the Legions Camp, and we more short,
Chester.
West-Chester, of the West situation, and simply Chester, according to the
Verse.

Cestria de castris nomen quasi Castria sumpsit.
Chester of Castria took the name,
As if that Castria were the same.
For these British names, without all doubt were derived from the Twentieth
Legion Victrix: This Legion in the year that Galba the Emperor was the second
time Consul, together with Titus Vinius, was transported over into Britain
which being out of awe and therefore dreaded of the Lieutenants, as well those
which had been Consuls as Pretours, had Julius Agricola appointed Lieutenant
over it by Vespasian the Emperor; was at length placed and seated in this City
which I suppose was not built many years before, and set as one would say at
the back of the ORDOVICES, to restrain them: although there are some, who
avouch it to be of greater antiquity, as they say than the Moon: as founded
forsooth by Leon-Vaur the Giant, I know not how many hundred years before. But
the very name it self might give the check unto these trivial Antiquaries,
and withhold them from Leon-Vaur in British signifies A great Legion. Now,
whether it stands more with reason and equity, that a City should take name of
a Great Legion, than of Leon a Giant, let the learned judge; seeing, that in
the part of Spain called Tarraconensis, there is a Realm now called Leon of
the seventh Legion Germanica; considering also, that the twentieth Legion,
which they termed Britannica, Valens Victrix, and some falsely Valeria
Victrix, abode in this City, as Ptolomee, Antonine, and the ancient Coin of
Septimius Geta do prove: by which, it appears for certain, that this City
also was a Colony: For, in the reverse or backside thereof stands this
Inscription COL. DIUANA LEG. XX. VICTRIX. Chester, a Colony of the Romans.
But to testify the Romans magnificence, there are remaining indeed Ranulph a
Monk of this City shall tell you out of his Polychronicon in these his own
words. There be ways here under the ground vaulted marveilously with stone
work, chambers having arched roofes over Julius Caesar and other famous
persons, and stumped with their inscriptions. Likewise Roger of Chester in his
Policraticon, When I behold (says he) the ground work of buildings in the
streets laid with monstrous big stones, it seems that it has been founded
by the painful labor of Romans or Giants, rather than by the sweat of
Britans. This City built in form of a quadrant, four square, is enclosed with
a wall that takes up more than two miles in compass, *
and has eleven parishes. But that of S. John's without the Northgate was the
fairest, being a stately and solemn building, as appears by the remains,
wherein were anciently Prebendaries, and, as some write, the Bishops See. Near
unto the River stands the Castle upon a rocky hill, built by the Earls:
Courts Palatine, and the Assizes, as they call them, are kept twice a year.

The houses are very fair built and along the chief streets are galleries or
walking places, The Rows.
they call them Rows having shops on both sides, through which a man may walk
dry from one end unto the other. But it has not continued evermore in one
tenor of prosperity. First it was rased by Egfrid King of Northumberland, then
by the Danes, yet reedified again by Aedelfled Lady of the Mercians: and soon
after it saw King Eadgar in magnificent manner triumphing over the British
Princes. For, Marianus Scotus.
sitting himself in a Barge at the fore-decke, Kennadie King of the Scots,
Malcoline King of Cumberland, About the year.
Macon King of Mann and of the Islands, with all the Princes of Wales brought
to do homage, 960.
and like watermen working at the Ore, rowed him along Dee, in a triumphant
show, to his great glory and joy of the beholders.

Certain years after, and namely about the year of our Redemption 1094. when
as in a devour and religious emulation, as one says, Princes strove avie, That
Cathedral Churches and Minsters should be erected in a more decent and
seemly form, Churches repaired. Rodulphus Glaber.
and when as Christendom rouzed as it were her self, and casting away her old
habiliments, did put on every where the bright and white robe of Churches; Hugh
the first of the Norman blood, that was Earl of Chester, repaired the Church
which Earl Loefrick had formerly founded in honor of the Virgin Saint
Werburga, and by the advice of Anselm, whom he had procured to come out of
Normandy granted the same unto Monks. And now, it is notorious for the Tomb
of Henry the Fourth, Emperor of Almaine, Peter Bishop of Lichfield, translated
from Lichfield hither: but when it was brought to Coventry, and from thence
into the ancient seat again, West-Chester lay a long time berest of this
Episcopal Dignity, until in our fathers days King Henry the Eighth, having
thrust out the Monks, ordained Prebendaries, and restored a Bishopagaine,
under whom for his Dioecesse he appointed this County, Lancashire, Richmond,
etc. and appointed the same to be within the Province of the Archbishop of
York. But return we now to matters of greater antiquity. When as now the
said Cathedral Church was built, the Earls that were of the Normans For as
the Bishop held of the King that which belongs to his Bishopric (these are
the words of Domesday book made by King William the Conqueror) so the Earls
with their men held of the King wholly, all the rest, of the City. It paid Geld
or Tribute for fifty hides: and four hundred and thirty and one houses were
thus Geldable: and seven Mint-masters. When the King himself in person came
thither every Carrucata yielded unto him two hundred Hestas, and one turn full
of Ale, and one Rusca of butyr. And in the same place, for the reedification of
the City wall and the bridge, the Provost gave warning by an edict, that out of
every hide in the County one man should come: and look whose man came not, his
Lord or Master was sined in forty shillings to the King and the Earl. If I
should particulate the scufflings and skirmishes Hanbrid beyond the Bridge,
whereupon the Welshmen call it Treboeth, that is, The burnt town, as also the
Wall made there of Welshmens skuls that went a great length, I should seem to
forget my self and thrust my sicle into the Historians Harvest.

But ever since the said time, has Chester notably flourished, and King Henry
the Dee, has by little withdrawn himself back, and affoordeth not unto the
City the commodity of an Haven, as heretofore. The Longitude of this place is
twenty Degrees and three and twenty Scruples: the Latitude three and fifty
Degrees and eleven Scruples. If you desire to know more touching this City,
have here these reports out of Lucian that Monk abovesaid, who lived almost
five hundred years ago. First, it is to be considered, that Chester is built
as a City, the site whereof inviteth and allureth the eye, which being situate
in the West parts of Britain, was in time past a place India, on the West
toward Ireland, North-Eastward the greater Norway, and Southward that straight
and narrow Angle, which divine severity, by reason of civil and home-discords,
has left unto the Britans. Which long since by their bitter variance have
caused the name of Britain to be changed into the name of England. Over and
beside, Chester has by Gods gift a River to enrich and adorn it, the same
fair and fishfull, hard by the City Walls: and on the South side a rode and
harbor for ships coming from Gascoine, Spain, and Germany, which with the
help and direction of Christ, by the labor and wisdom of Merchants, repair
and refresh the heart of the City with many good things: that we being
comforted every way by our Gods Grace, may also drink

From the City, North-Westward, there shoots out a languet of land, or
Promontory of the maine land into the Sea, enclosed on the one side with Dee
mouth, on the other side with the River Mersey: Wirall.
we call it Wirall: the Welsh Britans, for that it is an Angle, term it
Kill-gury. In old time it was all forest and not inhabited, Edward the Third
disforested it: Yet now, beset it is with Towns on every side: howbeit more
beholding to the Sea than to the Soil: for, the land bears small plenty on
Corn, the water yields great store of fish. At the entry into it on the
South side stands Shotwich a Castle of the Kings, upon the salt water: Upon
the North stands Hooten, a Manor, which in King Richard the Second his
time, came to the Stanleies, who fetch their Pedigree from Alane Silvestre upon
whom Ranulph the first of that name, Earl of Chester, conferred the
Bailly-wick of the Forest of Wirall, by delivering unto him an horn. Close
unto this is Poole, from whence the Lords of the place that have a long time
flourished, took their name: and hard by it Stanlaw, as the Monks Law, what
it is.
A Stony hill: where John Lacy Connestable of Chester founded a little
Monastery, which afterward by reason of inundations was translated to Whaley in
Lancashire. 1173.


In the utmost brinke of this Promontory, lies a small, hungry, barren, and
sandy Il-bre.
called Il-bre, which had sometime a little Cell of Monks in it. More within
the Country and Eastward from Wirall, you meet with a famous Forest, named the
Forest of Delamere, the Foresters whereof by hereditary succ^ssion, are the
Dawns of Vtkimon, descended of a worshipful stock, from Ranulph de Kingleigh,
unto whom Ranulph the first, Earl of Chester gave that Forestership, to be
held by right of inheritance. In this Forest Aedelfled, the famous Mercian
Lady, built a little City called (...), that is, by interpretation, Happy
Town, which now having quite lost it self has likewise lost that name, and
is but an heap of rubbish and rammell, which they call, The Chamber in the
Forest. And about a mile or two from hence, are to be seen the ruins of
Finborrow, Finborrow.
another Town built by the same Lady Aedelfled.

Through the upper part of this Forest the River Wever runs, which arises
out of a Poole in the South side of the Shire at Ridly, Ridly.
the dwelling house of the worship^ull Family of the Egertons: who flowered out
of the Barons of Melpas, as I have said. Near hereunto is Bunbury contractly
so called for Boniface Bury, for Saint Boniface was the Patron Saint there,
where the Egertous built a College for Priests. Over against which is Beeston
which gave surname to an ancient family, and where upon a steep rising hill,
Beeston.
Beeston Castle towereth aloft with a turretted wall of a great circuit. This
Castle the last Ranulph Earl of Chester built: whereof Leland our Countriman
being rapt both with a Poetical and Prophetical fury, writes thus.

Assyrio rediens victor Ranulphus ab orb,
Hoc posuit Castrum terrorem gentibus olim
Vic^uis, patriaeque suae memorabile vallum.
Nunc licet indignas patiatur fracta ruinas,
Tempus erit quando rursus caput exeret altum,
Vatibus antiquis si fas mihi credere vati.
When Ranulph from Assyria returned with victory;
As well the neighbor Nations to curb and terrify,

Whilom a stately things, but now the pride thereof is razed.
And yet though at this present time, it be in mean estate
With crackes and breaches much defaced, and foully ruinate;
The day will come when it again the head aloft shall heave,
If ancient Prophets I my self a Prophet, may believe.
But to return to the River, Wever first holds his course Southward, not
far from Woodhay, Woodhay.
where dwelt a long time that family of the Wilburhams knights in great
reputation; Bulkley.
also by Bulkeley and Cholmondley which imparted their names to worshipful
Baddeley the habitation in times past of the ancient Family de Praerijs: of the
other, from Cumbermer, in which William Malbedeng founded a little religious
house. 1134.
Where this River comes to the South limit of this Shire, it passes through
low places; wherein, as also els^where, Trees under g^ound.
the people find oftentimes and get out of the ground, trees that have lien
buried, as it is thought, there, ever since Noah's flood. But afterward,
watering fruitful fields, he takes to him out of the East a riveret by which
stands Wibbenbury, so called of Wibba, King of the Mercians. Hard to it lie,
Hatherton, the seat in old time of the Orbetes, then of the Corbetts, but now
of the Smithes; Dodinton, the possession of the Delvesies; Batherton, of the
Griphins; Shavinton of the Wodenoths Wever down by Nant-wich, Saltpits.
not far from Middlewich, and so to Northwich. These are very famous
Salt-wiches, five or six miles distant asunder, where brine or salt water is
drawn out of Pittes, which they power not upon wood while it burns; as the
ancient Gauls and Germans were Custom for salt called Salarium. For, there
went a notable high way from Middlewich to Northwich, raised with gravel to
such an height, that a man may easily acknowledge that it was a work of the
Romans, seeing that all this Country over, gravel is so scarce: and from
thence at this day it is carried to private men's uses.

Matthew Paris writes, that King Henry the Third stopped up these Salt Pits,
when in hostile manner he wasted this Shire: because the Welshmen, so
tumultuous in those days, should not have any victuals or provision from
thence. But Nantwich, Nantwich.
which the River Wever first visits, is reputed the greatest and fairest
built Town of all this Shire after Chester, the Britans call it Hellath wen,
that is, The white Which, or Salt pit, because the whitest salt is there
boiled: and such as writ in Latin named it Vicus Malbanus, happily of one
William named Malbedeng and Malbanc, unto whom, at the Normans Conquest of
England, it was allotted. It has one only Salt pit, they call it the Brine
pit, about some fourteen foot from the River, out of which they convey
salt water by troughes of wood into houses adjoining, wherein there stand
little barrels pitched fast in the ground, which they fill with that water, and
at the ringing of a bell, they begin Wallers, with little wooden rakes fetch
up the salt from the bothom, and put it in baskets, they call them Salt
barowes, out of which the liquor runs, and the pure salt remains. The
Church (and but one they have) is passing fair, and belonged, as I have heard,
unto to Abbay of Cumbermer: from hence, Wever holding on his course crooked
enough, is augmented with a brook coming out of the East, which runs down
from Crew, a place inhabited in old time by a notable family of that name. And
farther yet from the West side of the River, Calveley.
Calveley shows it self, which gave both habitation and name to the worthy
Family of the Calveleys, out of which in Richard the Second, Sir Hugh Calveley
Knight, was for his Chivalry in France so renowned, that there occurred no
hardy exploit but his prowess would go through it. From thence Wever hieth
apace by Minshall, the house of the Minshuls, Vale Royal.
and by Vale Royal, an Abbay founded by King Edward the First in a most
pleasant valley, where now dwells the ancient Family of the Holcrofts, unto
Northwich, Northwich.
in British called Hellath Du, that is, The black salt pit: where also very
near the brinke of the river Dan, there is a most plentiful and deep
Brine-pit, with stairs made about it, by which they that draw water out of it
in lether buckets, ascend half naked into the troughes, and power it
thereinto, by which it is carried into the which houses, about which there
stand on every side many stakes and piles of Wever receives into his Channel
the River Dan, whose tract and stream I will now follow.

This Dan or more truly Daven, flowing out of those hills which on the East
side sever Staffordshire from Ches-shire, runs along to CONDATE a town
mentioned by Antonine the Emperor, now called corruptly Congleton, the middle
whereof the little brook Howty, on the East side Daning-schow, and Northward
Dan it self, waters. And albeit this Town for the greatness and frequency
thereof, has deserved to have a Major and six Aldermen, yet has it but a
Chapel and no more: and the same made of timber, unless it be the quire and
a little Towre-steeple, which acknowledges Astbury about two miles off, her
Mother Church: which verily is a very Breretons, or Venables, which are the
most noble Families in those parts, and indeed such Bars do they bear in
their Coats of Arms, but in diverse colors.

Then comes Daven to Davenport, commonly Damport, which has adopted into her
own name a notable family: and Holmeschappell, a Town well known to
waifaring men: where within the remembrance of our Grandfathers, I. Needham
built a Bridge: Near unto which, at Rudheath there was sometimes a place of
refuge and Sanctuary as well for the Inhabitants of this Shire as strangers,
who had trespassed against the laws; that there they might abide in security
for a year and a day. Then runs it under Kinderton the old seat of the
ancient race of the Venables; who ever since the first coming in of the
Normans have been of name and reputation here, Barons of Kinderton. Beneath
this, Southward, the little river Croco runs also into Dan, which flowing
out of the Poole called Bagmere passes by Brereton: which, as it has given
name to the worshipful, ancient and numerous family of the Breretons knights;
so Sir William Brereton knight, has of late added very much credit and honor
to the place, by a magnificent and sumptuous house that he has there built. A
wonder it is that I shall tell you, and yet no other than I have heard verified
upon the credit of many credible persons, and commonly believed: That before
any heir of this house of the Breretons dies, there be seen in a Poole
adjoining, bodies of trees swimming for certain days together. Like unto that
which Leonardus Vairus reports from the testimony of Cardinal Granvell, Lib.
2. de Fascino.
that near unto the Abbay of Saint Maurice in Burgundy, there is a fishpond,
in which are fishes put according to the number of the Monks of that place:
And if any one of them happen to be sick, there is a fish seen also to
floate, and swim above the water half dead: and if the Monk shall dye, the
said fish a few days before dies.

As touching these matters, if they be true, I wrote not what to say: for, I
am no Wisard to interpret such strange wonders; But these and such like things
are done either by the holy trutelar Angels of men, Angels, Devils.
or else by the devils who by Gods permission mightily show their power in this
inferior world. For, both the sorts of them being intelligent natures, upon a
deliberate purpose and to some certain end, and

Croke the Riveret aforesaid, being past Brereton, within a while after
visits Middlewich, Middlewich.
near unto his confluence with Dan, where there be two Wells of sale water
parted one from the other by a small Brook; Sheatbes they call them: the one
stands not open, but at certain set times, because folk willingly steal the
Water thereof, as being of greater virtue and efficacy. From hence runs Dan
to Bostoke, Bostock.
in times past Botestoc, the ancient seat of the Family of the Bostokes
Knights, which by the marriage with A^ne only Daughter of Raulph, Adam
Bostokes knight, passed together with a very great livelode unto Sir John
Savage. Out of this ancient house of the Bostokes, as out of a stock, sprung a
goodly number of the same name, in Ches-shire, Shropp-shire, Barkshire and
elsewhere.

When as Dan now, beneath Northwich that I spoke of, has united his steame
with Wever, Pever.
then Wever runs forthright, and takes in from the East, Pever, that
flows hard by Pever and gives it the name: where, that ancient notable
Family of Meinilwarin, commonly Manewaring is seated; out of which Raulph
married the daughter of Hugh Kevelioc Earl of Chester, as appears by an old
Charter in the custody of Ranulph the heir now of the samehouse.

Wever by Winington which gave both habitation and name to the renowned family
of the Winingtons; and not far from Merbury, which being so called of a Mere
under it, conferred likewise the name upon that respective ancient Family of
the Merburies. Hence the River holds on his course near unto Dutton, Dutton.
the Inheritance of that great and worthy Family of Duttons, who derive their
descent from one Hudard, allied to the Earls of Chester: and who by an old
order and custom have great authority over all the pipers, fiddlers, and
minstrels Duttons a young Gentleman full of spirit and active withal, having
hastily gathered a tumultuary power of those kind of people, Chronicle of
Walls.
valiantly delivered Ranulph the last Earl of Chester from danger, when he
was beset with Welsh enemies. Neither must I pass over in silence Nether
Whitley in this tract, Towchet.
out of which came the Tuschetts or Towchetts, who are now Barons Audley. By
this time Wever aforesaid flowing between Prodesham a Castle of ancient note
and Clifton, Rock-Savage.
now Rock-Savage, an house of the Savages new built, who here by marriage
attained to rich and fair revenewes; enters at length into Mersey mouth. And
this is so called of the River Mersey, which running as a bounder between
Ches-shire and Lancashire, is there at length discharged into the Sea, after it
has among other small towns of meaner note watered Stockport, which had
sometime a Baron, of the Earls of Chester, and Warburgton so named of S.
Werburgh, the habitation of a family thereof surnamed, but branched from the
Duttons: Hereby it entertaineth the River Bollin out of that spacious Forest of
Maclesfield. Upon this Bollin stands Maclesfield one of the fairest Towns of
this Country, Maclesfield.
which gave name unto that Forest: where T. Savage, first Bishop of London, and
afterward Archbishop of York, built a College, wherein some of that Race of
the Savages lie entombed: also Dunham, which from Sir Hamon of Masey, by the
Fittones and Venables descended hereditarily unto the Family of Booth. From
thence Mersey comes Thelwall before it be far past Knotsford, that is,
Canutus his Foord; which is divided into the upper and the nether: also to Lee;
from whence there is a Family bearing the same surname, that is not only of
gentle blood and of especial note, but also far and fairly propagated into
a number of branches. Thelwall.
As for Thelwall, now it is an obscure Village, but in times past a large
Town, built by King Edward the elder, and so called, as Florilegus witnesses,
of bodies of trees the boughs being cut off, firmly fastened in the ground
wherewith he walled it round. For the Saxons in their tongue called the
Trunkes and bodies of Trees, (...), and a Wall, as we do now.

Runkhorne. Elfled or Ethelfled
At the very mouth of the River stands Runkborne, founded in the same age by
Edelflede commonly called E^fled, and brought now by the mutability of time to
a few cotages. This lady Edelfleda (to tell you at once, of whom I have often
made mention) sister to K. Edward the elder, and wife to Ethelred a pe^y King
of the Mercians, after her husbands death, governed the Mercians in most
dangerous and troublesome times, for eight years, with high commendation:
touching whom these laudatory Verses in praise of her, we read in the History
of Henry of Huntingdon.

O Elfleda potens, o terror virgo virorum,
Victrix naturae, nomine digna viri.
Te, quo splendidior fieres, natura puellam,
Te probitas fecit nomen habere viri.
Te mutare decet, sed solam, nomina sexus,
Tu regina potens, Rexque trophaea parans,
Jam nec Caesarci tantum meruere triumphi,
Caesare splendidior virgo virago, vale.
O mighty Elfled, vigin pure, that men do terrify,
And nature pass, right worthy thou, in name, man to be.
To grace thee more, dame Nature once thee shaped a maiden brave,
But virtue thee has caused now the name of man to have.
It thee becomes, but thee alone, the name of Sex to change:
Of great Queens and triumphant Kings thou stand in the range.
From Caesar's triumphs for desert thou bear away the bell,
No Caesar ever was thy match: Thus, Manly-maide, fare well.
Runckhorne, somewhat within the Country, Haulton, the Town and Castle both
show themselves, which Hugh Lupus Earl of Chester gave unto Niel a Norman, to
be by tenure and service Constable of Chester: by whose posterity, through the
variable change of times, it is come unto the House of Lancaster. Neither would
this be overpassed in silence, that William the said Nieles son, founded the
Abbay adjoining, at Norton, which now appertains to the Broks of ancient
descent. Whether I should place in this Shire, or elsewhere the CANGI, an
ancient Nation of Britans, that have been so much and so long sought for, I
have as long and as much doubted: For continuance of time has now so obscured
them, that hitherto by no footings they could be traced and found out. And
albeit Justus Lipsius that Flower

IMP. DOMIT. AUG. GER. DE CEANG. But on the other.

In the year of Christ 78.
Which Monument seems to have been erected for a Victory over the Cangi.
Heereto makes also the very site upon the Irish sea: Anno. 51.
For, thus writes Tacitus in the 12. book of his Annals. Whiles Nero was
Emperor; There was an Army led by Ostorius against the Cangi: the fields were
wasted, booties raised every where, for that the enemies durst not come into
the field: but if they attempted closely and by stealth to cut off the Army as
it marched, they paid for their deceitful cunning. Now were they no sooner
come near But by the inscription abovesaid, it should seem that they were not
subdued before Domitians time: and then by computation of the times; when as
that most warlicke Julius Agricola was Propretour in Britain. Ptolomee
likewise placed the Promontory KARRAN^N, that is, of the Cangi on this shore.
Neither dare I seek elsewhere than in this tract that Station CONGANII, where,
in the declining estate of the Roman Empire, a Company or Band called Vigiles,
that is, Watchmen, with their Captain under the Dux Britanniae, kept watch and
ward. Notwithstanding I leave to every man for me his own judgment herein,
as in all things else of this nature.

Earls of Chester.
king William the first created Hugh surnamed Lupus, son to the Vicount of
Auranches in Normandy the first hereditary Earl of Chester and Count Palatine,
and gave unto him and his heirs all this County to be holden as freely by his
sword, as the King himself held England by his Crown (For these are the words
of the Donation:) who forthwith appointed under him these Barons, viz. Niele
Baron of Haulton, whose posterity afterward took the name of Lacies, for that
the Lacies inheritance Barons to the Earls of Chester.
and were Earls of Lincoln: Robert Baron of Mont-hault, Seneschall of the
County of Chester, the last of whose line, having no issue, ordained by his
last Will Isabel Queen of England, and John of Eltham Earl of Cornwall, his
heirs: William Malbedeng Baron of Malbanc, whose nephews daughters, by
marriage brought the inheritance to the Vernons and Bassets: Richard Vernon
Baron of Shipbroke, whose inheritance for default of heirs males in the end
came by the sisters unto the Wilburbams, Staffords, and Littleburies: Robert
Fitzhugh Baron of Malpas, who, as it seems, dyed, as I said before, without
issue: Hamon de Masey, whose possessions descended to the Fittons of Bollin:
Gilbert Venables Baron of Kinderton, whose Stockeport; to whom at length the
Warrens of Pointon, budded out of the honorable family of the Earls of Warren
and Surry, in right of marriage succeeded. And these were all the Barons of the
Earls of Chester that ever I could hitherto find: Who, as it is written in an
old Book, Had their free Courts of all Plees and Suits or Complaints, except
those Plees which belong unto the Earls sword. And their Office was, To assist
the Earl in Council, to yield him dutiful attendance, and oftentimes to
repair unto his Court for to do him honor, and, as we find in old parchment
Records, Bound they were in time of war in Wales, to find for every Knights
fee, one horse with caparison and furniture, or else two without, within the
Divisions of Ches-shire: Also, Haubergella.
Haubergeons, and defend their Lands and possessions.
Foces by their own bodies.

After Hugh the first Earl beforesaid, succeeded Richard his son, who is his
tender years perished by shipwreck, together with William the only son of
King Henry the First, and other Noblemen between Normandy and England in the
year 1120. After Richard, succeeded Ranulph de Meschines, the third Earl,
son to the sister of Earl Hugh: and left behind him his son Ranulph,
named de Gernonijs, the fourth Earl of Chester, a Warlike man, and who at the
Siege of Lincoln took King Stephen Prisoner. Hugh surnamed Keveltoc, his
son was the Fifth Earl; who died in the year 1181. and left his son
Ranulph named de Blundevill the sixth Chartley and Beeston, and the Abbay also
De la Cresse, died without children, and left four sisters to be his heirs,
Maude the wife of David Earl of Huntingdon, Mabile espoused to William D'
Albeney Earl of Arundell, Agnes married to William Ferrars Earl of Darby, and
Avis wedded to Robert de Quincy. After Ranulph the sixth Earl, there succeeded
in the Earldom John surnamed the Scot, the son of Earl David by the said
Maude the eldest daughter. Who being deceased likewise without any issue, King
Henry the Third casting his eye upon so fair and large an inheritance, laid it
unto the Domaine of the Crown, and assigned other revenewes elsewhere to the
heirs: not willing, as the King himself was wont to say, that so great an
estate should be divided among distaves. And the Kings themselves,
Palatineship, continued here the ancient rights and Palatine privileges, and
Courts, like as the Kings of France did in the County of Champan. Afterward,
this honor of Chester was deferred upon the Kings eldest sons, and first
unto to Edward, King Henry the Third his son, who being taken prisoner by the
Barons and kept in ward delivered it up for his ransom unto Simon Montford
Earl of Leicester: But when Simon was soon after slain, it returned quickly
again unto the blood Royal, and King Edward the Second summoned his eldest
son, being but a child, unto the Parliament by the Titles of Earls of
Chester and Flint. Afterward, King Richard the Secondary by authority of the
Parliament, made it of an Earldome a Principality, Leon with the territories of
Bromfield and Yale, Chircke Castle with Chircke land, Oswalds-street Castle,
the whole hundred and eleven towns belonging to that Castle, with the Castles
of Isabell and Delaley, and other goodly lands, which, by reason that Richard
Earl of Arundell stood Richard himself was styled Prince of Chester: but
within few years after, that Title vanished away, after that King Henry, the
Fourth had once repealed the Laws of the said Parliament, and it became again
a County or Earldom Palatine: and at this day retains the jurisdiction
Palatine: and for the administration thereof, it has a Chamberlain who has
all jurisdiction of a Chancellor within the said County Palatine, a Justice
for matters in Common Plees, and Plees of the Crown, to be heard and
determined in the said Country, two Barons of the Exchequer, Sergeants at Law,
a Sheriff, and Attorney, an Eschetour, etc. And the Inhabitants of the said
County for the enjoying of their liberties were Mize, as the County of Flint
being a parcel thereof about 2000. marks, if I have not bin misinformed.

This County contains about 68. Parishes.

The Kingdom of the Mercians.
NOw have I superficially surveyed the Regions of the CORNAVII, which together
with the CORITANI, DOBUNI, and CATVELLANI, made that Kingdom in the Saxons
Heptarchie, which they called (...), and (...), the Latin Writers Mercia of
(...), an old English word, that signified a Limite; for, all the other
Kingdoms bordered and confined upon it. This was the largest Kingdom by far
of all the rest, begun by Crida the Saxon, about the year of our Lord 586.
augmented by Penda,

SILURES.
I Think it now my best way, before I treat of the other parts of England, to
digress a while and turn a little aside toward Wales, called in Latin
Cambria, or Wallia, where the ancient Britans have yet their seat and abode:
neither shall I in so doing, as I think, digress, but directly follow the
order of nature. For, it lies adjacent to the CORNAVII, and seems, as it
were, of right

WALES therefore, Wales.
which name comprised in times past before the Conquest, the whole Country
beyond Severn, but afterward reached not so far, was when the Romans ruled
in Britain, inhabited by three sorts of people, the SILURES, Silures. Dimetae.
Ordovices.
DIMETAE, and ORDOVICES. For, these held not Severn, Hereford-shire, and
Monmouth-shire, which have been now long reckoned among the Counties of
England. And to begin first with those that we first come unto and which lie
next unto us; the SILURES, according to Ptolomees description, inhabited those
Regions which in Welsh are called by one name Deheubarth, that is, the
Southpart, and at this day by new names, Hereford-shire, Radnor-shire,
Brecknock-shire, Monmouth-shire, and Glamorgan-shire, wherein are as yet some
remains also of the name SILURES. Tacitus.
But touching the original of the people, Tacitus ghesseth by their colored
faces, their countenances, their curled hair, and their situation over against
Spain, that they had their original from the Spaniards: But Florianus del
campo a Spaniard flatly affirms it, who troubles and toileth himself
exceedingly to find the Silures in Spain, and thrusts upon us, I know not
what, of Soloria and Siloria in Biscaie. But to speak of the nature of these
Silures: they were a Nation very great (for as we may Pliny and Tacitus, they
seem to have possessed all South Wales) fierce, valiant, given to war,
impatient of servitude, forward to adventure with a resolution (the Romans
call it Pervicacia) and who would not be brought in either with fair means
or soul; in all and every of which qualities their Posterity have in no point
as yet degenerated from their Ancestors. Caratacus, provoked also and
exasperated with a word that Claudius the Emperor let fall, who had said,
These were so to be destroyed, and their name to be extinguished as the
Sugambri had been rooted out aforetime, annoied the Romans with so dangerous
a War, by intercepting their Bands of auxiliary forces, by putting to flight
that Legion over which Marius Valens was Captain, and by wasting the lands of
their Associates; that P. Ostorious Propraetor of Britain Veranius also
Governor under Nero, assailed them in vain: For, whereas we read in Tacitus;
illum modicis excursibus sylvas populatum esse, that is, That he made spoil
and forraied the woods with small outrodes; read in lieu of Sylvas, that is,
woods, Siluras, that is, The Silures, as our friend that most learned Lipsius
does, and you shall read aright. Yet was not this War hushed and finished
before the time of Vespasian. For then, Julius Frontinus subdued them by force,
and kept them Iuvenal against Crispine, to these SILURES.

magna qui voce solebat
Silures mistaken for Siluros.
Vendere municipes, fracta de merce Siluros.
who with loud voice, was wont, and knew full well,
Of broken ware, his country fish, the Sturgions for to sell.
As though our Silures being taken prisoners were set to sale at Rome: upon my
credit he has not attained to the right and proper sense of the Poet: For by
that word Siluros he that will read the place and weigh it well, shall easily
perceive he spoke of fishes, and not of men.



HEREFORD-SHIRE.
THE County which we call HEREFORD-SHIRE, and the Britans name Erei^uc, lying
in compass round, as it were a Circle, is bounded on the East side with
Worcester, and Glocester-shires, on the South with Monmouth-shire, on the West
side with Radnor and Brecknor-shires, and on the North with Shropshire; This
Country besides that it is right pleasant, is for Wye-Lug and Munow, which
after they have watered the most flowring meddowes and fruitful corn fields,
at length meet together and in one channel pass on to the Severn sea.

Munow springing out of Hatterell hills, The River Munow.
which resembling a chair do rise aloft, and sense this shire on the
South-West, as it descends down, first strugleth to pass Blestium.
a town which Antonine the Emperor so places that for situation and distance
it can be no other than that, which standing by the side of this River is in
British called Castle Hean, that is, The Old Castle, Old town.
and in English, The Old Town: A poor small Village now, but this new name is
a good proof for the antiquity thereof: for, in both tongues it sounds as
much as an Old Castle or town. Alterynnis.
Next unto this Old Town, Alterynnis lies in manner of a River-Island,
insulated within waters: the seat in old time of that ancient family of the
Sitsilts or Cecils, knights, whence my right honorable Patron, The seat of the
Cecils.
accomplished with all the ornaments of virtue, wisdom, and Nobility, Sir
William Cecil, Baron of Burghley, and Lord high Treasurer of England derived
his descent.

Munow turning Eastward, for a good space separateth this Country from
Monmouth-shire and at Castle Map-harald, Harald Ewias. The Family of Ewias.
Their coat of Arms.
or Harold Ewias, is increased with the River Dor. This Ewias Castle (that I
may speak out of K. William the First his Book) was repaired by Alured of
Marleberg. Afterward it pertained to one Harold a Gentleman, who in a Shield
argent bare a Fesse Geules between three Estoiles Sable for his Arms: of whom
it began to be called Harold Ewias: but Sibyll his niece in the second
degree and one of the heirs, Tregoz and Grandison. Page 286. Snod hill.
by her marriage transferred it to the Lords of Tregoz, from whom it came at
length to the Lords of Grandison descended out of Burgundy. But of them
elsewhere. Now the said Dor, which running down from the North by Snodhill, a
Castle, and the Barony sometime of Robert Chandos (where is a quary of
excellent Vale, Marble.
which of the River the Britans call Diffrin Door: but the Englishmen that they
might seem to express the force of that word termed it the Gilden Vale,
Gilden Vale.
which name it may by good right and justly have, for the golden, wealthy and
pleasant fertility thereof. For, the hills that compass it in, on both sides
are clad with woods; under the woods lie corn fields on either hand, and under
those fields most gay and gallant meadows: then runs in the midst between
them a most clear and crystal River, on which Robert Lord of Ewias placed a
fair Monastery, wherein most of the Nobility and Gentry of these parts were
interred.

Part of this shire, which from this Vale declineth and bends Eastward, is
now called Irchenfeld, Irchenfeld.
in Domesday Book Archenfeld, which, as our Historians write, was laid
Camalac also a Britan Bishop was carried away prisoner. Kilpect.
In this part stood Kilpeck a Castle of great name, and the seat it was of the
noble Family of the Kilpecks, who were as some say the Champions to the Kings
of England in the first age of the Normans: And I my self also will easily
assent unto them. In the Reign of Edward the First, there dwelt here Sir
Robert Wallerond, whose nephew Alane Plugenet lived in the honorable state of
a Baron. In this Archenfeld likewise, as we read in Domesday book, The men
of Archenfeld, whenever the Army marches forward against the enemy by a
custom make the Avantgard, and in the return homeward, the Rereward.

The river Wy. Clifford Castle.
As Munow runs along the lower part of this shire, so Wy with a bending
course cutteth over the midst; upon which River in the very West limit
Clifford Castle stands; which William Fitz Osborn Earl of Hereford built
upon his own West (as it is in King William the Conquerours book) but Raulph
de Todenay held it. Afterward Walter the son of Richard Fitz Punt a Norman;
for he was surnamed De Clifford, The Clifford Inquis. 26. E. 1.
and from him the right honorable family of the Earls of Cumberland do truly
deduce their descent. But in the days of King Edward the First, John Giffard
who married the heir of Walter L. Clifford had it in his hands. Then Wy with a
crooked and winding stream rolleth down by Whitney, which has given name to
a worshipful Family, and by Bradwardin Castle, which gave both original and
name to that famous Thomas Bradwardin Archbishop of Canterbury, who for his
variety of knowledge, and profound learning, was in that age termed The
Profound Doctor: The Profound Doctor.
and so at length comes to Hereford the head City of this Country.

How far that little Region Archenfeld reached I know not, but the affinity
between these names, Ereinuc, Archenfeld, the town ARICONIUM, of which
Antonine in the description of this Tract makes mention, Hereford.
and Hareford or Hereford, which now is the chief City of the Shire, have by
little and little induced me to this opinion, that I think every one of these
was derived from ARICONIUM. Yet do I not think that Ariconium and Hereford
were both one and the same: but like as Basil in Germany challenged unto it the
name of Augusta Rauracorum, and Baldach in Assyria the name of Babylon, ^or
that as one had original from the ruins of Babylon, so the other from the
ruins of Augusta: even so this Hariford of ours, (for so the common people
call it) derived both name and beginning, in mine opinion, Kenchester.
being called Kenchester, and shows to the beholders some ruins of walls,
which they term Kenchester walls; about which are often dug up four
square paving stones of Checker work, British-brickes, pieces of Roman money
and other such like remains of Antiquity. But Hereford, her daughter, which
more expressly resembles the name thereof, stands Eastward scarce three
Italian miles from it, seated among most pleasant meadows and as plentiful
corn fields, compassed almost round about with Rivers, on the North side and
on the West with one that has no name, on the South side with Wy, Hereford was
known, called the place Tresawith, of Beech trees: and Hereford of an Old way:
and the Saxons themselves (...) of ferns. 793.
The greatest increase, if I be not deceived, that it had, came by Religion and
by the Martyrdom of Ethelbert King of the East England. S. Ethelbert Martyr.
Who when he wooed himself the daughter of Offa K. of the Mercians, was
villanously forlaid and murdered by the procurement of Quendred, Offaes wife,
respecting more the countries of the East England, than the honest and
honorable match of her daughter: Ethelbert being registered in the Catalogue of
Martyrs, had a Church here built and dedicated unto him by Milfrid a pety K. of
the country, wherein when a Bishops See was established, it grew to great
wealth, first, through the devout liberality of the Mercians, and then of the
West Saxons kings: for they at length were possessed Malmesbury, where he
writes, That Athelistan the West Saxon brought the Lords of Wales in this City
of so hard pass, that by way of Tribute they were to pay every year (besides
Hounds and Hawks) twenty pounds of gold, and three hundred pound of silver by
weight. This City as far as I can read, had never any misfortune, unless
it were in the year of our Lord 1055. wherein Gruffith Prince of South Wales,
and Algar an English man, rebelling against King Edward the Confessor, after
they had put to flight Earl Ralph, sacked the City, destroyed the Cathedral
Church, and led away captive Leofgar the Bishop. But Harold straightwaies after
that he and daunted their audacious courage, fensed it, as Floriacensis says,
with a broad and high Rampire. Hence it Malmesbury writes thus in his
treatise of Bishops, Hereford is no great City, and yet by the height of those
steep and upright banks cast up, it shows that it has been some great
thing: and, as we read in the Domesday book of King William the Conqueror:
there were in all but an hundred and three men within the Walls and without.

The Normans afterward near the East end of the Church along the side of Wy,
built a mighty great and strong Castle: the work as some report, of Earl
Miles, which now yields to Time, and runs to ruin. After this, they
walled the City about. Bishop Reinelm, in the reign of Henry the First
founded that beautiful Cathedral Church, which now we see there, whose
successors enlarged Dioecese, there are in this Church, a Deane, two
Archdeacons, a Chaunter, a Chancellor, 2 Treasurer and eight and twenty
Prebendaries. In the Church, I saw in manner no Monuments, but the Bishops
Tombs. And I have heard that Thomas Cantlow the Bishop, a man of Noble birth,
had here a very stately and sumptuous Sepulcher, who for his holiness being
canonized a Saint, went within a little of surmounting that princely Martyr
King Ethelbert, such was the opinion of singular piety and devotion.
Geographers measure the position or site of this City by the Longitude of
twenty degrees and four and twenty scruples: and by the Latitude of two and
fifty

Wy is not gone full three miles from hence, but he intercepteth by the way the
river Lug, who running down a maine out of Radnor hills, with a still course
passes through the mids of this country, from the North-west of the
South-east. At the first entrance, Brampton Brian.
it sees a far off, Brampton Brian Castle, which, a famous family named
hereof de Brampton, wherein the forname was usually Brian, held by continual
succession unto the time of King Edward the First: but now, by the female
heirs it is come to R. Harleie: Wigmore.
near at hand it beholds Wigmore, in the English Saxons tongue (...),
repaired in elder times by King Edward the elder, afterward, fortified by
William Earl of Hereford with a Castle, in the wast of a ground Domesday
book) which was called Marestun, in the tenure of Radulph de Mortimer, Barons
Mortimer.
from whom those Mortimers that were afterward Earls of March lineally
descended, of whom, you may read more in Radnor-shire. Three miles off, there
is another neighbor Castle, Richards Castle. Lords of Richards Castle.
called Richards Castle, the possession first of the Says, then of the
Mortimers, and afterward of the Talbots by hereditarie succession. At length
by the heirs of Sir John Talbot, the inheritance was divided between Sir
Guarin Archdeacon and Sir Matthew Gurnay. Beneath this Castle, Nature, who no
where disporteth her self more in showing wonders, then in waters, has
brought forth a pretty well, which is always full of little bones, or as some
think, of small frogbones, although they be from time to time drawn quite out
of it, whence it is commonly Bone well. Bone well.
And not far off, is placed Croft Castle, the possession of that very ancient
family of the Crofts Knights, who have there now a long time flourished in
great and good esteem.

Thence passes Wy to Lemster, Lemster.
which also was called Leon Minister, and Lions Monastery, of a Lion that
appeared to a religious man in a vision (as some have dreamed.) But whereas the
Britans call it Lhan Lieni: which signifies a Church of Nuns, and Merewalc a
King of the Mercians, built here a Church for Nuns (that afterward became a
Cell belonging to the Monastery of Reading) to seek any other original of the
name, than from those Nuns: what were it else but to hunt after the winds?
Yet there want not some, who derive it from Line, whereof the best kind
grows here. The greatest name and same that it has at this day is of the
wool in the territories round about, Lemster Ore the best wool. Lemster bread
and Webley Ale.
( Lemister Ore they call it) which setting aside that of Apulia and Tarentum
all Europe counts to be the very best. so renowned also it is for Wheat, and
bread of the Finest flower, that Lemster bread and Weabley Ale (a town
belonging to the noble Family D'Eureux) are grown unto a common proverb. By
reason of these commodities the Lemster were so frequented, that they of
Hereford and Worcester complaining that the confluence of people thither
impaired their mercates, procured that by Royal authority the market day was
changed. Now have I nothing more concerning Lemster, but that William Breosa
Lord of Brecknock, when he revolted from King John, Webley.
did set it on fire and defaced it. As for that Webley aforesaid, it is situate
more within the Country, Barons Verdons.
and was the Baronie of the Verdons: the first of which house named Bertram de
Verdon came into England with the Normans; whose posterity by marriage with an
inheretrice of Laceies of Trim in Ireland, were for a good while hereditary
Constables of Ireland: and at last the possessions were by the daughters
devolved to the Furnivalls, Burghersh, Ferrars of Groby, Crop-hulls, Crop-hulls
by the Ferrars of Chartly, unto D'Eureux Earls of Essex. Near neighbors unto
Webley, more Westward are these places, Huntingdon Castle, the possession in
times past of the Bohuns Earls of Hereford and of Essex: Kinnersley, belonging
to the ancient Family De la-bere, and Erdsley: where the ancient Family of
the Baskervills, Basservile. See Gemition, lib. ult.
have long inhabited, which bred in old time so many worthy Knights, who
deduce their pedigree from a Neice of Dame Gunora that most famous Lady in
Normandy, and long ago flourished in this Country and Shrop-shire adjoining,
and held, (that I may note so much by the way) the Hamelet of Lanton in chief,
Fin. Hilarii 20. Ed. 3.
as of the Honor of Montgomery, by the service of giving to the King a
barbdheaded Arrow, whenever he comes into those parts to hunt in Cornedon
Chase.

Lugg hasteneth now to Wy, first by Hampton, where that worthy Knight Sir
Rouland Lenthal, who (being Master of the Wardrobe unto King Henry the Fourth,
had married one of the heirs of Thomas Earl of Arundell) built a passing
fair house, which the Coningsberes (men of good worship and great name in this
tract) have now a good long time inhabited: Marden. Sutton.
then, by Marden and Southton, or Sutton: of which twain, Sutton shows some
small remains of King Offaes Palace, so infamous for the murdering of
Ethelbert: and Marden is counted famous for the Tomb of the said Ethelbert,
who had lien here a long time without any glorious memorial, before that he
was translated to Hereford.

Near unto the place where Lugg and Wy meet together, Eastward, a hill which
Marcley hill, Marcley hill.
in the year of our redemption, 1571. (as though it had wakened upon the
sudden out of a deep sleep) roused it self up, and for the space of three
days together mooving and showing it self (as mighty and huge an heap as it
was) with roaring noise in a fearful sort, and overturning all things that
stood in the way, A Mountain mooving.
advanced it self forward to the wondrous astonishment of the beholders: by
that kind of Earthquake which as I deem, natural Philosophers call
Brasmatias. And not far from this hill, toward the East also, under Malvern
hills (which in this place bound the East part of this shire) stands Ledbury
upon the River Ledden, a Town well known, which Edwin the Saxon, a man of
great power, gave unto the Church of Hereford, being assuredly persuaded that
by Saint Ethelberts intercession Wy now carrying a full stream, after it has
entertained Lugg runs down with more bendings and bowings, first by Holm
Lacy, the feate of the ancient and noble Family of Scudamore unto which
accrewed much more worship by marriage with an heir out of the race of Ewias
in this shire, Scudamore or Escudamor.
and Huntercombe, etc. else where. From hence passes Wy down between Rosse,
made a free Borough by King Henry the Third, now well known by reason of iron
Smiths and Wilton over against it, Wilton. Barons Gray de Wilton.
a most ancient Castle of the Greis, whence so many worthy Barons of that name
have drawn their original. This was built as men say by Hugh de Long-champ,
but upon public and certain credit of Records it appears, that King John
gave Wilton with the Castle to H. de Longchamp; and that by marriage Fitzhugh,
and likewise not long after to Reinold Gray in the days of King Edward the
first. Goderich Castle.
Now, when Wy has a little beneath saluted Goderick Castle, which King John
gave unto William Earl Mareschall, and was afterward for a time the principal
seat of the Talbots, he speedeth himself to Monmouth-shire, and bids
Hereford-shire farewell.

When the state of the English-Saxons was now more than declining to the
downe-fall, *
Ralph son to Walter Medantinus by Goda King Edward the Confessours^ sister,
Earls of Hereford.
governed this County, as an Official Earl: but the infamous for base
cowardice, was by William the Conqueror remooved, and William Fitz-Osbern of
Crepon a martial Norman who had subdued the Isle of Wight, and was near
allied De Bretevill succeeded, and soon after for conspiracy against the
Conqueror was condemned to perpetual prison, and therein died leaving no
lawful issue. Then King Stephen granted to Robert Le Bossu Earl of Leicester
who had married Emme or Itta (as some call her) heir of Bretevill (to use the
words of the Grant) the Borough of Hereford, with the Castle, Constables of
England.
and the whole County of Hereford, but all in vain. For Maude the Empress who
contended with King Stephen for the Crown, advanced Miles the son of Walter
Constable of Gloucester unto this Honor, and also granted to him
Constabulariam Curiae suae, i. The Constableship of her Court, whereupon his
posterity Magistratus Marescalsiae Curiaenostrae. Howbeit, Stephen afterward
stripped him out of these Honors which he had received from her.

This Miles had five sons; Roger, Walter, Henry, William, and Mahel, men of
especial note, who were cut off every one issuelesse by untimely death, after
they had all but William, succeeded one another in their Fathers inheritance.
Unto Roger King Henry the Second among other things gave, The Mote of Hereford
with the whole Castle, and the third penny issuing out of the revenewes of Plees
of the whole County of Hereford, whereof he made him Earl. But after Roger was
deceased, the same King, if we may believe Robert Abbot De Monte, kept the
Earldom of Hereford to

The eldest sister of these named Margaret, 1156.
was married to Humfrey Bohun the third of that name, and his heirs were high
Constables of England, namely, Humfrey Bohun the Fourth; 2. Par. Chart an. 1.
Reg. Joan. Matthew. Paris Joan. The book of Walden. The book of Lanthony
M^^nastery.
Henry his son, unto whom King John granted twenty pounds yearly to be
received out of the third penny of the County of Hereford, whereof he made him
Earl. This Henry married the sister and heir of William Mandevill Earl of
Essex, and died in the fourth year of Henry the Third his reign: Humfrey the
Fifth his son, who was also Earl of Essex: whose son Humfrey the Sixth of
that forename died before his Father, having first begotten Humfrey the Seventh
by a daughter and one of the heirs of William Breos Lord of Brecknock: His
son Humfrey Burrowbrig, leaving by Elizabeth his wife, daughter unto King
Edward the First and the Earl of Hollands widow, among other children, namely,
John Bohun, Humfrey the Ninth, both Earls of Hereford and Essex, and dying
without issue: and William Earl of Northampton, unto whom Elizabeth a daughter
and one of the heirs of Giles Lord Badlesmer, bare Humfrey Bohun the Tenth and
last of the Bohuns who was Earl of Hereford, Essex, and Northampton, who left
two Daughters, Aeleonor the Wife of Thomas of Woodstock Duke of Gloucester, and
Mary, wedded to Henry of Lancaster Earl of Darby, who was created Duke of
Hereford, and afterward Crowned King of England. Henry the Fourth King of
England.
But after this, Edward Stafford last Duke of Buckingham was styled Earl of
Hereford, for that he descended from Thomas of Woodstock his Daughter, who was
after remarried to Sir William Burchier called Earl of Ew. And in our memory,
King Edward the Sixth Honored Walter D'Eureux, the Lord Ferrars of Chartley
descended by the Bourgchiers from the Bohuns, with the title of Vicount
Hereford, whose Grand-sonne Walter Hereford, Queen Elizabeth created
afterward Earl of Essex.

There are contained in this County Parishes 176.

RADNOR Comitatus quem SILVRES Osim Incosuerunt


RADNOR-SHIRE.
Upon Hereford-shire, on the North-West, joyneth Radnor-shire, in the British
tongue, Sire Maiseveth; in form three square, and the farther West it goes,
the narrower still it grows. On the South Side, the River Wy separateth it
from Brecknock-shire, and on the North part, lies Montgomery-shire. The East
and South parts thereof be more fruitful than the rest, which lying uneven
and rough with Mountains, Marchers, now all buried well near, in their own
ruins, Castle Pain; built and so named of Pain a Norman, and Castle Colwen,
which, if I be not deceived, was sometime called the Castle of Maud in
Colewent. Castle Colwe or Mauds Castle in Colwe^^
For a very famous Castle that was, and Robert de Todeney a great Noble man, in
the reign of Edward the Second was Lord of it. It is verily thought, that it
belonged aforetime to the Breoses, Lords of Brechnoc, and to have taken the
name from Maude of Saint Valeric, a Breos, who discovered a rebellious mind
against King John. Which Castle being cast down by the Welsh, King Henry the
Third, in the year 1231. reedified strongly with stone, Matthew. Paris
and called it in despite of Lhewellin Prince of Wales Maugre Lhewellin. But
of especial name is Radnor the principal Town of the whole Shire, Radnor
in British Maiseveth, fair built, as the manner of that Country is, with
thatched houses. In times past it was firmly fensed with a Wall and Castle:
Owen Glendour.
but after that Owen Glendower dwy that notable Rebel had burnt it, it began
by little and little to decrease, and grow to decay, tasting of the same
fortune that the mother thereof did before, I mean Old Radnor, called in
British Maiseveth hean, and for the high situation Pencrag; Rhese Ap Gruffin
had set on fire. If I should say, that this Maiseveth or Radnor was that
ancient City MAGI, which Antonine the Emperor seems to call MAGNOS, where,
as we find in the book of Notices, the Commander of the Pacensian Regiment
lay in garrison, under the Lieutenant, or Lord General of Britain, in the
reign of Theodosius the younger; in mine own opinion surely, and perhaps in
other men's conceit also, I should not vary from the truth. For we read in
Writers of the middle age, Magesetae.
of inhabitants of this coast called MAGESETAE; also of Earls Masegetenses and
Magesetenses: and the distance, if it be counted both from Gobannium or
Abergevenny, and also from Brangonium or Worcester, differs scarce an hair
breadth from Antonines computation. Scarce three Prestaine.
you see Prestaine, in British Lhan Andre, that is, Saint Andrews Church; which
of a very little village within the memory of our Grandfathers, is by the
means of Richard Martin Bishop of Saint David's, grown now to be so great a
mercate Town and fair withal, that at this day it dammereth and dimmeth the
light in some sort of Radnor. From whence also scarce four miles off, stands
Knighton, Knighton.
a Town able to match with Prestaine, called in British, as I have heard say
Trebuclo, in steed of Trefyclaudh, of a famous ditch lying under it, which Offa
King of the Mercians with admirable work and labor, caused to be cast from
Dee-Mouth unto Wy-Mouth, by this Town, for the space of foureskore and ten
miles, to separate the Britans from his Englishmen: whereupon, in British it is
called Claudh Offa, that is, Offaes ditch. Concerning which, John of Salisbury
in his Policraticon writes thus. Harald ordained a law, that what Welshmen
soever should be found with a weapon, Offa dike.
on this side the limit which he had set them, that is to say, Offaes Dike, he
should have his right hand cut off by the Kings Officers.

When ye are past this place, all the ground that lies toward the West and
South limits, being for the most part barren, lean, and hungry, is of the
inhabitants Melienith, for that the Mountains be of a yellowish color. Yet
remain there many footings as it were of Castles to be seen here and there,
but especially Kevenles and Timbod which standing upon a sharp poynted hill,
Lhewellin Prince of Wales overthrew in the year 1260.

This Melienith reaches as far as to the River Wy, which cutteth overthwart
the West corner of this shire, and being hindered in his stream with stones
lying in his way, upon a sudden for want of ground to glide on, has a mighty
and violent downfall: whereupon the place is termed, Raihader Gowy, that is,
The fall or Fludgates of Wy: And I cannot tell, whether thereupon that British
word Raihader, the English men forged this name first for the whole shire, and
afterward for the chief Floudgate or fall of the water there was a Castle
which Rhese Prince of Southwales (as we read) repaired under King Richard the
First. Hard by, there is in some sort a vast and wide wilderness, hideous
after a sort to behold, by reason of the turning and crooked by-waies and
craggie Mountains, into which as the safest place of refuge, Vortigern.
Vortigern that pestilent wretch and bane of his native Country, odious both to
God and man, and (whose memory the Britains may wish damned) withdrew himself,
when after he had called the Saxons into this Island, and in horrible incest
married his own daughter. And here he fell at length too too late into
serious consideration of the greatness of his vile and wicked acts. But by
revenging fire from Heaven, the flying dart of God above, he was burnt with his
City Caer Guortigern, Vortigern the last Monarch of British blood, but also
Lhewellin the last Prince of Wales of the British race being forelaid, Lewellin.
was slain by Adam Francton in the year of our Redemption 1282. Of the said
Vortigern, Ninnius names a little Country here Guortiger-maur; neither is
that name as yet altogether lost: but of the Ci^ie, there remains no memory
at all, but our of writers. Some are of opinion, that Guthremion Castle arose
out of the ruins and rubbish thereof, which in the year 1201. the Welsh for
malice they bare to Roger Lord Mortimer and in spite of him laid even with the
ground. Moreover, this part of the Country was in old time called Guarthenion,
Guarthenion.
as Ninnius restifieth, who wrote, that the said wicked Vortigern, German, did
not only not turn from his lewd and licentious life to the worship and
service of God, but also let fly slanderous speeches against that most holy
man: Wherefore, Vortimer the son of Vortigern, Guarish in British, slander,
and Eniawn, just.
as Ninnius says, for the slander which his Father had raised of Saint German,
decreed, that he should have the land as his own for ever, wherein he had
suffered so reproachful an abuse: whereupon, and to the ened that Saint German
might be had in memory, it was called Guarthenion, which signifies in English,
A slander justly retorted.

Earls of March.
The Mortimers, descended from the Niece of Gonora Wife of Richard the First,
Duke of Normandy, were the first Normans that having discomfited the English
Saxon Edricke Sylvaticus, that is, The wild, won a great part of this little
Country to Roger Mortimer Lord of Wigmore, Earl of this Welsh limit, or,
according to the common speech, Earl of March, who soon after was sentenced
to death, because he had insulted upon the Commonwealth, favored the Scots to
the prejudice of England, conversed over familiarly with the ^ings mother, and
contrived the destruction and death of King Edward the Second, The book of
Lanthony Abbay.
the Kings Father. He by his Wife Joan Jenevell, (who brought him rich
revenewes, as well in Ireland as in England) had Edmund his Son, who felt the
smart of his Fathers wickedness, and lost both patrimony and title of Earl.
Howbeit, his Son Roger was fully restored, recovered the title of March and
was chosen a fellow of the order of the Garter, See Earls of Ulster.
at the first institution thereof. This Roger begat of Philip Montacute, Edmund
Earl of March: and he took to Wife Philip the only daughter of Leonell Duke
of Clarence the third son of King Edward the Third, whereby came unto him the
Earldome of Vlster in Ireland Clare. After he had ended his life in Ireland
where he governed with great commendation; his son Roger succeeded, being
both Earl of March and Vlster, whom King Richard the Second declared heir
apparent, and his successor to the Crown, as being in right of his Mother the
next and undoubted heir. But he dying before king Richard, left issue, Edmund
and Anne. Edmund, in regard of his Royal blood and right to the Crown stood
greatly suspected to Henry the Fourth, who had usurped the kingdom; and by
him was first exposed unto dangers, in so much as he was taken by Owen Glendour
a Rebel, and afterward whereas the Percies purposed to advance his right, he
was conveyed into Ireland, kept almost twenty years prisoner in the Castle of
Trim suffering all miseries incident to Princes

She was married to Richard Earl of Cambridge, in whose right, his heirs and
posterity were Earls of March, and made claim to the kingdom, which in the
end also they obtained, as we will show in another place. In which respect
King Edward the Fourth created his eldest Son being Prince of Wales, See in
Yorke-shire, toward the end.
Duke of Cornwall, etc. Earl of March also, for a further augmentation of his
Honor. As for the title of Rad-nor, no man ever bare it to my knowledge.

In this are Parishes 52.

BRECKNOC Comitaus pars Osim SILVRVM


BRECHNOCK-SHIRE.
BEneath Radnor-shire Southward lies BRECHNOCK-SHIRE, in the British
Brechineau so named, as the Welshmen relate, of a Prince named Brechanius, whom
they report to have had a great, and an holy Offspring, to wit, twenty four
Daughters all Saints. Far greater this is than Radnor-shire, but thicker set
with high Hills; yet are the valleies fruitful every where. On the East side
it is bounded Hereford-shire. On the South with Monmo^th, and Glamorgan-shires:
and on the West with Caermarden-shire. But seeing there is nothing memorable or
material to the description of this small Province, which is not set down by
the curious diligence of Giraldus Cambrensis who was an Archdeacon hereof
above four hundred years since. I think I may do well for my self to hold
my peace a while, and to admit him with his style into the fellowship of this
labor.

Brecknocke, says he, in his Book called Itinerarium Cambriae, is a Country
having sufficient store of Corn; and if there be any defect thereof, it is
plentifully supplied out of (...), that is, shaped with two capes) resembling
the form of a Chair. And for that the Chair stands very high and upon a
steep downfall, by a common term it was assigned to Arthur the greatest and

On the North side, as he said, it is more open and plain, namely where the
River Wy severeth it from Radnor-shire, by which stand two Towns well known
for their antiquity, Buelth and Hay. Buelth is pleasantly situate with Woods
about it, fortified Breoses and Mortimers, when as Rhese ap Gruffin had rased
the ancient Castle. Now, the Mercate much resorted unto makes it more famous
thereabout, but in times past it seems to have been for the own worth of
great name, because Ptolomee observed the position thereof according to the
Longitude and Latitude: Bulleum.
who called it BULLEUM Silurum. Of this town the country lying round about it,
being rough and full of hills; is named Buelth: wherein, when as the Saxons were
now spoiling and harrying the whole Island, and Vortigern had withdrawn
himself into these parts, Pascentius his son ruled all as Lord, by the
permission of Aurelius Ambrose, as Ninnius writes, who in his Chapter of
Mervails, reports I wot not what wondrous thing here, of a heap of Arthurs
hound. And as for Hay, Hay.
which in British is called Trekethle, that is, The Town in a grove of Hasell
trees, in the very utmost skirt of this Shire next unto Hereford-shire, it
stands hard by the river Wye: well known, as it seems to the Romans, whose
coins is often dug up there, and it shows also by the ruins, that in old
time it was walled. But being now as it were decayed it complains of that
most lewd Rebel Owen Glendowerdwy for his furious outrages, who in wasting
and spoiling all those Countries,

As this River Wy washes the North side of this Shire, so does Vske a notable
River likewise run through the midst thereof, which Vske springing out of
the Blacke-Mountaine, Brecknock.
passes along with a shallow stream, beside Brechnock the Shire Town,
standing in the very heart in manner of the Country, which the Britans call
Aber-Hodney, because the two Rivers Hodney and Uske do meet in that place.
That this Town was inhabited in the Romans time, appears by the Coins of
Roman Emperors now and then dug up here. Bernard Newmarch, who conquered
this little Shire, built here a goodly great Castle, which the Breoses and
Bohuns repaired: Dominicans appointed a Collegiat Church of fourteen
Prebendaries, which he translated hither from Aberguilly in Caer-Marden-shire.

Two miles hence Eastward, there spreads it self abroad a large Poole, which
the Britans call Linsavethan and Linsavathen, Linsavethen Mere.
that is, A Lake of standing water, Giraldus terms it Clamosum, that is,
Clamorous, or Crying loud, because it makes a strange noise like thunder, as
often as the Ice thereon does thaw. In English we name it Brecknock-Meere.
Brecknock Mere.
Two miles it is in length and as much in breadth: breeding in times past many
Otters, now full of Pearches, Tenches, and Eeles, which the Fishers rowing in
small pliant botes do take.

Leveney a little River, after it is run into this Poole keeps his own hew
and color still by himself; as disdaining to be mingled therewith, (which the
very color shows) is thought to carry out his own water entertained a while
there by the way, and no more than he brought in with him. It has been a
current speech of long continuance among the neighbors thereabout, that where
now the Mere is, there was in times past a City, which being swallowed up in
an earthquake, resigned up the place unto the waters. And beside other reasons,
they allege this for one, that all the high ways of this shire come directly
hither on every side. Which if it be true, what other City should a man think
stood by the River Leveney, than LOVENTIUM, which Ptolomee places in this
tract: Loventium.
and in no place hitherto could I find Marianus Scotus (which I had almost
forgotten) seems to call this Lake Bricena^ Mere, Bricenaw Mere.
who records that Edelfled the Mercian Lady, in the year 913. entered into
the land of the Britans to win by assault a Castle at Bricenau Mere; and that
she took there the King of the Britans wife prisoner. Whether this Castle were
Brechnock it self or Castle Dinas, Brecknock.
which stands over it upon a rockey hill, and which the higher it rises the
slenderer and smaller it becomes, it is not certainly known. Blean Leveney.
But that Blean Laveney Castle hard by, was the chief place of the Barony,
that Petre Fitz Herbert the son of Herbert Lord of Dean-forest by Lucy the
daughter of Miles Earl of Hereford held, appears evidently upon Record.

Lords of Brechnock.
In the Reign of King William Rufus, Bernard Newmarch the Norman, a man both
hardy and politic withal, having levied a great Army of Englishmen and
Normans together, was the first that entered into this territory by force and
arms, won it and wrested it out of the Welshmens hands by bloody encounters,
raised fortresses here for his fellow soldiers (among which the chief were
the Aubreeis, Gunters, Haverds, Waldbeofes and Prichards) allotted lands and
lordships, and that he might set sure footing, and establish his seat among
the Welsh, who repined maliciously at him, he took to wife Nesta the daughter
of Gruffin: who being a woman of a shameless and revengefull spirit, both
bereft her self of her own good name, and also defeated her son of his
inheritance. For, when Mahel the said Bernards only son, iram atque animos a
crimine s^mens, growing angry and stomackfull upon this imputation, took her
corporal oath before King Henry the Second, and protested that her son Mahel
was Bernard her Husband: whereupon Mahel being disinherited, Sibyl his sister
entered upon that fair Inheritance, and with the same enriched her Husband
Miles, Earl of Hereford. But after that five sons of Miles died without
issue, Called also Braus and Breus.
this Brechnock-shire in the partition of the inheritance fell to Bertha his
daughter: who by Philip de Breos had a son William de Breos Lord of
Brechnock, upon whom the seditious spirit and shrewd tongue of his wife drew a
world of calamities. For when she had with her intemperate and unbridled
language contumeliously abused King John, Red Book in the Exchequer.
the King thereupon (because her Husband William was very deeply indebted unto
him) fell to be quick and rigorous in demanding the debt: But he, not able to
make payment, after he had shifted it off many times, and Hay, Brecknock and
Radnor, and put them into his hands. But soon after, levying certain forces,
such as he could muster up in haste, upon a sudden, surprised them, slew the
Garrison Soldiers and wrested the said pieces perforce from them, burnt the
Town of Lemster, and thus killing, slaying and driving away booties, he made
foul work and havocke every way, with all such outrages as Rebels do
commonly commit. But when the King pursued him, he conveyed himself and all
that he had into Ireland, complotted and combined with the Kings enemies there:
yet under a color, as if he would make submission, he came unto the King
upon protection and assurance given of safety when he was upon his return
Giles, Bishop of Hereford, by the favor and consent of King John, having
recovered his fathers inheritance neglecting his nephew the right heir, left
it unto his brother Reginald, whose son William, Lhelin Prince of Wales
having taken him in bed with his wife, hanged. But by the daughters of that
William, the Mortimers, Cantelows, and Bohuns Earls of Hereford entered upon a
great and goodly inheritance. And this Brechnock Bohuns, and in the end by them
unto the Staffords: and when Edward Stafford Duke of Buckingham was attainted,
many very goodly revenewes fell unto the King in this Shire, and elsewhere.

It reckons Parishes 61.



MONMOUTH-SHIRE.
BEneath Brechnock and Hereford-shire Southward, lies the County of Monmouth,
commonly called in English MONMOUTH-SHIRE, in times past Went-set and
Wents-land, in British Guent, of an ancient City so called. It is enclosed on
the North side with the River Munow that separateth it from Hereford-shire: on
the East side with Wye running between Gloucestershire: on the West with the
River Remney, which severeth it from Glamorgan-shire, and on the South with the
Severn sea, whereinto the said Rivers together with Vske, that cutteth through
the midst of the Country, are discharged. As for commodities necessary to
man's life, it has not only sufficient for it self, but also affoordeth them
in plentiful manner to the neighbors adjoining. The East part is full of
grass and woods: the West is somewhat hilly and stony, yet not unthankefull to
the Husbandman. The people, as says Giraldus writing of his own age, most
inured to martial conflicts, is in feats of strength and valor right
commendable, and for skill of archery and shooting far surpassing any Country
in Wales.

Ewias toward the North-West, Ewias Lacy.
not far from the River Munow, among Hatterell hills which because they rise
up in height like a chair, they call Munith Cader, Lanthony. Barons Lacy.
there stood Lanthony a little ancient Abbay, which Walter Lacy founded; unto
whom William Earl of Hereford gave fair lands here, and from whom are
descended those renowned Lacies, worthily reputed among the most noble
Conquerours of Ireland. The situation of which Abbay Giraldus Cambrensis, who
knew it better than I, shall pensile it out unto you for me. In the most deep
Valley of Ewias, says he, which is about an arrow-shoote over, stands a
Church of Saint John Baptist, Saint John Baptist.
enclosed on every side in a round compass, with hills mounting up into the
air, covered with lead, and built sightly, as the nature of the place would
permit, with an Hodney running along the botome of the Vale, whereof and of
Hodney together, it is called Lanhodeny: For, Lhan signifies, a Church or
Ecclesiastical place. But if we will speak more exquisitely, it may be said,
that the proper name of that place is in Welsh Nanthodeny: For even to this
day, they that dwell thereabout call it Lhan Devi Nanthodeny. Hodney.
That is, David's Church upon the River Hodeney. Now, the rain, Horizon or
kenning of their sight. And it is between one and three of the clock, or
thereabout in a fair clear day, ere they can see here the body of the Sun,
so much ado he has to get above the hill tops by that time. And a little
after. The unto him of such things there as were worth relation, when he had
spent the most part of But hereof enough, if not too much.

Grossemont. Skinffrith.
By the River Munow are to be seen Grossemont and Skinffrith Castles belonging
in times past by the grant of King John to the Breoses, afterward to Hubert de
Burgh, Earl of Kent, who, that he might calm the Court-tempests of
displeasure and for the renewing of peace and recovering former favor,
Historia Minor Matthew. Paris.
resigned both these and withal Blanc-castle and Hanfield into the hands of
King Henry the Third.

In the other corner North-Eastward, Munow and Wye at their confluence do
compass almost round about the chief Town of the Shire, and give it the
name. For in the British tongue it is called Mongwy, Monmouth.
and in ours Monmouth. On the Northside, where it is not defended with the
Rivers, it was fortified with a wall and ditch. In the midst of the Town
hard by the Mercate place stands a Castle, which, as it is thought, John
Baron of Monmouth built, from whom it came to the house of Lancaster, after
that King Henry the Third had taken from him all his inheritance; for that he
had sided with the Barons and stood rebelliously against him, or rather, as we
read in the Kings Prerogative, because his heirs had given their faith and
France. And ever since that time, the Town has flourished and been of name
in regard of their privileges and immunities granted unto them by the Family
of Lancaster. But for no one thing it is so much renowned, as for this, that it
was the birth place of King Henry the Fifth that Triumpher over France, and the
second ornament of English Nation. That Henry I say, who by force of arms and
military prowess maugre the French, conquered France and brought Charles the
Sixth King of France to that extremity, that after a sort he surrendered up his
Crown unto him. In regard of whose success and fortunate exploits in War,
John Seward a Poet in those days not of the lowest rank, in a joily lofty
verse thus speaks to the English: Ite per extremum Tanain, pigrosque Triones,
Ite per arentem Lybiam, superate calores
Solis, and arcanos Nili deprendite fontes,
Herc^leum finem, Bacchi transcurrite metas;
Angli juris erit quicquid complectitur orbis.
Anglis rubra dabunt pretiosas aequora conchas,
Indus ebur, ramos Panchaia, vellera Seres:
Dum viget Henricus, dum noster vivit Achilles,
Est etenim lauds long transgressus avitas.
Pass on to Tanais far remote, to frozen Northren Coast:
Through Libye dry, beyond the line where Suns heat parcheth most.
On forth and find where all the springs of Nilus hidden lie,
Those pillars fixed by Hercules, and bounds that mount on hie
Surpass; the Limit-markes also which father Bacchus pight;
For why? what all the earth contains is under Englands right.
To English shall the Red Sea yield the precious pearely wilke,
Indy yvory, sweet-frank-incense Panchaea, Seres silk,
Whiles Henry lives, that Champion Achilles-like of ours,
For he the praises far surmounts of his Progenitors.


Geffrey Ap-Arthur, or of Monmouth.
Monmouth glories also that Geffrey Ap Arthur or Arthurius Bishop of Asaph the
compiler of the British History was borne and bred there: a man to say truth
well skilled

From hence Wy with many windings and turnings runs down Southward,
yielding very great plenty of delicate Salmons from September to April. And is
at this day the bound between Gloucestershire and Monmouth-shire, in times
past between the Welsh and Englishmen, according to this Verse of Nechams
making.

Inde vagos vaga Cambrenses, hinc respicit Anglos.
By Wales on this side runs Wy,

Who when he is come almost unto his mouth, Chepstow.
runs by Chepstow, that is, if one interpret it after the Saxons tongue, a
Market: The Britans call it Castle-went. A famous Town this is and of good
resort, situate upon the side of an Hill, rising from the very River, fortified
round about with a Wall of a large circuit, which includes within it both
fields and orchyards. It has a very spacious Castle situate over the River:
and just against it stood a Priory: the better part whereof being pulled down,
the rest is converted into a Parish Church. As for the Bridge that stands
over Wy, it is of timber and very high built, because the River at every tide
rises to a great height.

Pembroch out of the Family of Clare, Earls of Strigh^ll or Pembrock.
who of Strighull Castle their seat a little way off, were commonly called
Earls of Strighull and of Pembrock. The last of whom named Richard, a man of
an invincible courage, and having wonderful strong arms and long withal,
surnamed Strongbow, because he shot in a bow of exceeding great bent, and did
nothing but with strong arm, was the first that by his valor made way for the
English into Ireland. By a daughter of his it came to the Bigots, etc. but now
it belongs to the Earls of Worcester. This Town is not very ancient to
speak of. For, many there be that constantly affirm, and not without good
reason, that not many ages ago it had his beginning from VENTA a very ancient
City, that in the days of Antonine the Emperor Venta.
(as one would say) the principal City of the Silures: Which name neither
hostile fury nor length of time has as yet discontinued: for it is called even
at this day Caer went, Caer-went.
that is, The City Went. But, as for the City it self, either time or
hostility has so carried it away, that now were it not only for the ruinate
walls, the checker work, pavements and pieces of Roman money, it would not
appear there was such a City. It took up in compass above a mile: on the
South side a great part of the Wall stands, and there remain little better
than the rubbish of three Bulwarks. And yet of how great account it was in
ancient times, we may gather, if it were but by this, that before the name of
Monmouth once heard of, all this Guent, Went-set and Wents-land. Moreover, as
we read in the life of Tathaius a British Saint; The Book of Landaffe Church.
it was an Academy, that is to say, a place dedicated to the study of good
letters, which the said Tathaie whom King Caradock the son of Inirius
procured to come thither out of the desert wilderness, governed with great
commendation, and there founded a Church.

Five miles from hence Westward, Strighull Castle.
is seated Strighull Castle, at the foot of the mountains, we call it at this
day Strugle, the Normans named it Estrighill: which as we read in King
William the First his Domesday book, William Fitz Osborn Earl of Hereford
built: and afterward it became the seat of the Earls of Pembrock out of the
house of Clare. Whereupon they were usually called Earls of Strighull, as I
even

Beneath these places upon the Severn sea, Portskeweth.
nere unto Wy-mouth, stands Portskeweth, which Marianus names Potescith: who
has recorded, that Harald in the year 1065. erected a Fort there against the
Welshmen, *
which they streightwaies under the conduct of Caradock, Sudbroke.
overthrew. And adjoining to it is Sudbrok, the Church whereof called Trinity
Chapel stands so near the sea, that the vicinity of so tyrannous a
neighbor, has spoiled it of half the Church-yarde, as it has done also of
an old Fortification, Francis Bishop of Landaffe (by whose information I write
this) imparted unto me of his kindness one of the greatest pieces that ever I
saw coined of Corinthian copper by the City of Elaia in the lesser Asia to the
honor of the Emperor Severus with this Greek Inscription, Coin of Severus.
(...) (...) (...) that is, THE EMPEROR CAESAR. LUCIUS SEPTIMIUS SEVERUS
PERTINAX. And Of the Elaians, which kind of great pieces the Italians call
Medaglionj, Medailes.
and were extraordinary coins, not for common use, but coined by the Emperors
either to be distributed by the way of Largess in triumphs, or to be sent
for tokens to men well deserving, or else by free Cities to the glory and
memory of good Princes. What name this place anciently had, is hard to be
found, but it seems to have been the Port and landing place for Venta
Silurum, when as it is but two miles from it.

Then Throgoy, a little River near unto Caldecot enters into the Severn Sea,
where we saw the wall of a Castle that belonged to the High Constables of
England: Inq. 3. E. I.
and Wondy and Penbow, Woundy.
the seats in times past of the noble Family of Saint Maur, now corruptly
named Seimor. For, G. Mareshall Earl of Pembrock about the year of our Lord
1240. was bound for the winning of Wondy out of the Welsh men's hands, to aid
William Seimor. From him descended Roger de Saint Maur Knight, who married one
of the heirs of I. Beauchamp of Hach, a very noble Baron, who derived his
Pedigree from Sibyl Heir unto William Mareshall, that most puissant Earl of
Pembrock, from William Ferrars Earl of Darby, from Hugh de Vivon, and William
Mallet, men in times past most highly renowned.

The Nobility of all these and of others besides, as may be evidently showed,
has Edward Saint Maur or Seimor, The Family of Saint Maur or Seimor.
now Earl of Hartford, a singular favourer of virtue and good learning, worthy
in that behalf to be honored and commended to posterity.

The Moore.
Beneath this, lies spread for many miles together a Mersh, they call it the
Moore, which, when I lately revised this work, suffered a lamentable loss:
For when the Severn Sea at a spring Tide in the change of the Moon what being
driven back for three days together with a South-West Wind, An Inundation in
January. 1607.
and what with a very strong pirry from the sea troubling it, swelled and raged
so high, that with surging billows it came rolling and in-rushing amain upon
this Tract lying so low, as also upon the like flats in Somersetshire over
against it, that it overflowed all, subverted Goldclyffe aloft, Gold-cliffe.
that is, as Giralaus says, A Golden Cliffe, so called, because the stones
there, of a golden color, by reverberation of the Sun shining full upon
them, glitter with a wonderful brightness: neither can I be easily persuaded
(says he) that Nature has given this brightness in vain unto the stones,
and that there should be a flower here without fruit, were there any man
that would search into the Veins there, and using the direction of Art enter
in the inmost and secretest bowels of the Earth.

Near to this place there remain the Relics of a Priory, that acknowledge
Chandos for their founders and Patron. Passing thence by the Merish Country, we
came to the mouth of the River Isca, River Uske.
which the Britans name Usk and Wijsk, and some Writers term it Osca. This
River as it runs through the midst, as I said before, of this County,
flows hard by three Towns of especial antiquity.

Antonine the Emperor calls GOBANIUM, at the very meeting of Uske and
Geveny, whereof it had the name: and even at this day, keeping the ancient
name, as it were, safe and sound is termed Aber-Gevenny, Abergevenny.
and short Aber-genny, which signifies the confluents of Gevenny or Gobanny.
Fortified it is with Walls and a Castle, which as says Giraldus of all the
Castles in Wales has been most defamed and stained with the foul note of
treason. First, by William, Earl Miles his son, afterward by William Breos:
for both of them after they had trained thither, under a pretense of
friendship, certain of the Nobles and chief Gentlemen of Wales, with promise
of safe conduct, villanously slew them. But they escaped not the just judgment
and vengeance of God. For, William after he had been stripped of all his
goods, and lost his wife and some of his children, who were famished to death,
died in banishment: the other William, being brained with a stone, whiles
Breulais Castle was on fire, suffered in the end due punishment for his wicked
deserts. The first Lord to my knowledge of Aber Gevenny was one Sir Hameline
Balun who made Brien of Wallingford or Brient de L'isle called also the
Fitz-Count his heir. He having built here a Lazarhouse for his two sons
that were Lepres, ordained Walter the son of Miles Earl of Hereford, heir
of the greatest part of his inheritance. After him succeeded his brother Henry,
slain by the Welshmen, who seized upon his lands, which the Kings Lieutenants
and Captains could not defend without great peril and danger. By a sister of
this Henry it Breoses, and from them in right of marriage, by the Cantelowes to
the Hastings, Lords of Abergevenny.
which Hastings being Earls of Pembrock enjoyed it for diverse descents, and
John Hastings having then no child borne devised both it, and the Earldom of
Pembrock as much as in him lay to his cousin Sir William Beauchamp,
conditionally that he should bear his Arms. And when the last Hastings ended
his life issuelesse, Reginald Lord Gray of Ruthin being found his Heir, passed
over the Barony of Aber-gevenny to the said William Beauchamp who was summoned
afterward to Parliament by the name of W. Beauchamp de Abergevenny. Clausae 49.
Edw. 3.
He entailed the said Barony, reserving an estate to himself and his wife,
and to the lawful issue male of their bodies; and for default of such issue,
to his brother Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick and his William Beauchamp Lord
of Abergevenny, had a son named Richard, *
who for his martial valor was created Earl of Worcester, and slain in the
French wars, leaving one only daughter, whom Sir Edward Nevill, took to
wife* Since which time the Nevils have enjoyed the honorable title of the
Barons of Abergevenny (howbeit the Castle was by virtue of the entaile
aforesaid detained from them a long time.) The fourth Baron of this house dying
in our remembrance, left one only daughter Mary, married to Sir Thomas Fane
Knight, betwixt whom being the heir general, and Edward Nevill the next heir
male (unto whom by a will and the same ratified by authority of the Parliament,
the Castle of Abergevenny and the greatest part of the lands was fallen) there
was great competition, for the Abergevenny argued in the High Court of
Parliament in the second year of King James; and their several claims
debated seven several days by the learned Counsel of both parts, before the
Lords of the Parliament. Yet when as the question of precise right in law was
not sufficiently cleared, but both of them in regard of the nobility and honor
of their family were thought of every one right worthy of honorable title; and
whereas it appeared evidently by most certain proofs, that the title as well
of the Barony of Abergevenny, as of Le Despenser appertained hereditarily to
this Family. The Lords humbly and earnestly besought the King, that both
parties might be ennobled by way of restitution, who graciously assented
thereunto. Hereupon the Lord Chancellor proposed unto the Lords, first whether
the heir male Abergevenny or the heir female: and the most voices carried it,
that the title of the Barony of Abergevenny should be restored unto the heir
male. And when he propounded secondly, whether the title of the Barony Le
Despenser should be restored unto the female, they all with one accord gave
their full consent. Which being declared unto the King, he confirmed their
determination with his gracious approbation and royal assent. Then was Edward
Nevill by the Abergavenney, and in his Parliament Robes between two Barons, as
the manner is, brought into the house, and placed in his seat above the Baron
Audley. And at the very same time, were the letters Patents read, whereby the
King restored, erected, preferred, etc. Mary Fane, Baroness Le Despenser.
to the state, degree, title, style, name, honor, and dignity of Baroness
Le-Despenser, To have and to hold the foresaid state and unto the above named
Mary and her heirs, and that her heirs, successively should be Barons
Le-Despenser, etc. And upon a new question moved, unto whether the Barony of
Abergavenney, or the Barony Le-Despenser, the priority of place was due. The
Lords referred this point to the Commissioners for the Office of the Earl
Mareschall of England, who after mature deliberation Le-Despenser, set down
under their hands and signed with their seals, which was read before the Lords
of the Parliament, and by order from them entered into the Journall Book, out
of which I have summarily thus much exemplified: John Hastings (for I have no
reason to pass it over in silence) held this Castle by homage, Wardship, and
marriage when it happened (as we read in the Inquisition) and if there should
chance any war between the King of England and the Prince of Wales, 6. Ed. 2.
he was to keep the Country of Over-went at his own charges in the best
manner he can, for his own commodity, the Kings behoof, and the Realm of
Englands defense.

Burrium.
The second little City which Antonine named BURRIUM, and sets down
Gobannium, stands where the River Birthin and Uske meet in one stream. The
Britans at this day, by transposing of the letters, call it Brunebegy for
Burenbegy, and Caer Uske: Giraldus terms it Castrum Oscae, that is, The
Castle of Uske, Uske.
and we Englishmen, Uske. At this day it can show nothing but the ruins of a
large and strong Castle, situate most pleasantly between the River Uske, and
Oilwy a Riveret, which beneath it runs from the East by Ragland, a fair
house of the Earl of Worcesters, built Castle-like.

The third City which Antonine names ISCA, and LEGIO SECUNDA, is on the other
side of Uske twelve Italian miles just distant from BURRIUM, Isca Legionis.
C^er Lheon ar Uske.
as he has put it down. The Britans call it Caer Leon, and Caer LEON ar
Uske, that is, The City of the Legion upon Uske, of the second Legion Augusta,
which also is called Britannica Secunda. This Legion being ordained by the
Emperor Augustus, and translated by Claudius out of Germany into Britain,
under the conduct of Vespasian, being ready at his command, when he aspired to
be Emperor, and which procured the Legions in Britain to take his part, was
here at last placed in Garrison by Julius Frontinus (as it seems) against the
Silures. How great this ISCA was in those days listen unto our Girald out of
his Book called Itinerarium Cambriae, who thus describes it out of the
ruins. It was an ancient and Authenticke City excellently well built in old
time by the Romans with brick Walls. Here may a man see many footings of
the antique nobility and dignity it had, mighty and huge Palaces with golden
pinacles

Thus much out of Giraldus. But for the avouching and confirming of the
Antiquity of this place, I think it not impertinent to adjoyne here those
antique Inscriptions lately dug forth of the ground, which the right
reverend Father in God Francis Godwin Bishop of Landaffe, a passing great lover
of venerable Antiquity Haterianus the Lieutenant General of Augustus and
Propretour of the Province Cilicia.



The next year following, These Inscriptions are to be seen at Mathern in the
Bishop of Landaffes house.
hard by, was this Table also gotten out of the ground, which prooveth that the
foresaid Image was the personage of Diana: and that her Temple was repaired by
Titus Flavius Posthumous Varus, an old soldier happily of a Band of the second
Legion.

T. FL. POSTUMIUS VARUS
V. C. LEG. TEMPL. DIANAE
RESTITUIT. Veteranu^ Cohortis.

Also, a votive Altar, out of which GETA the name of Caesar may seem then
Antonine Bassianus, and proclaimed an Enemy, yet so, as by the tract of the
letters it is in some sort apparent.

PRO SALUTE AUGG. N. N.

SEVERI ET ANTONINI ET GETAE CAES.

P. SALTIENUS P. F. MAECIA THALAMUS HADRI. PRAEF. LEG. II. AUG. C. VAMPEIANO,
In printed Copies, Claudius Pompeianum and L^llianus Avitus Coss. Anno Christi
210.
ET LUCILIAN.

This most beautiful Altar also though maimed and dismembered, was there found,
which I think is thus to be made up.



Also these fragments.

Centurio.
7. VECILIANA. VIII. 7. VALOR. MAXSIMI. Moreover a little before the coming in
of the English Saxons, There was a School here of 200. Philosophers, who
being skillful in Astronomy and all other Arts, diligently a rare Author and
hard to be found; Thomas James.
out of whom Thomas James of Oxford (a learned man and a true lover of Books,
who wholly addicted to learning, and now laboriously searching the Libraries of
England, to the public good purposes that (God bless his labor, which will
be to the great benefit of all Students) has copied out very many notes for
me. In the Reign of Henry the Second (what time Giraldus wrote) it seems
that this City was of good strength. For Yrwith of Caer Leon a courageous and
hardy Britan, defended it a great while against the English, until he was
vanquished by the King, and so disseized of the possession thereof. But now,
that it may serve for an ensample, that as well Cities have fatal periods of
their flourishing Julians, an house of the late Sir William Herbert Knight,
was, by report, sometime within the very City, where Saint Julius the Martyrs
Church stood, which now is much about a mile out of the Town. Also, out of the
ruins thereof a little beneath, Newport.
at the mouth of Vske, grew up Newport, which Giraldus names in Latin Novus
Burgus, a Town of later time built, and not unknown, by reason of the Castle
and commodiousnesse of the Harbor: in which place there was in times past some
one of these Roman High ways or Streets, whereof Necham has made mention in
these Verses, Intrat, and auget aquas Sabrini fluminis Osca,
Praceps, testis erit Julia Strata mihi.
Vske into Severn headlong runs and makes his stream to swell,
Witness with me is Julia Street, that knows it full well.


This Julia Strata, was no doubt some Port-high way, and (if we may be allowed
to make a conjecture) what great absurdity were it to say, that it was cast up
and made by Julius Fr^ntinus the vanquisher of the Silures? There creeps,
says Giraldus, in that is, The Fourd under the top of a Rock. Which when
Henry the Second King of England chanced at a venture to pass over, even then
when it was almost grown out of remembrance, the Welshmen, who were Merlin
Silvester, the British Apollo, had prophesied, that then the Welshmens power
should be brought under, when a stout Prince with a freckled face (and such a
one was King Henry the Second) should pass over that Foord.

Under the Saxons Heptarchy, this Region was subject to the mountain Welshmen
whom the English called (...)) who notwithstanding, Dun-settan.
as the ancient laws do show, were under the command of the West Saxons. But
at the first coming in of the Normans, the Lords Merchers most grievously
plagued and annoyed them, but especially Hamelin Balun, of whom I spoke, Hugh
Lacy, Walter and Gilbert, both surnamed of the house of Clare, Miles of
Gloucester, Robert Chandos, Pain Fitz-Iohn, Richard Fitz Punt, and Brien of
Wallingford: unto whom after that the Kings had once given whatsoever they
could get and hold in this tract by subduing the Welsh, some of these before
named by little and little reduced under their subjection the upper part of
this Shire which they called Over-went: others the lower part which they termed
Nether-went. And this Shire is not accounted among the Shires of Wales.

This Shire contains Parish Churches 127.


THE last Country of the Silures was that, Whence came the name of Glamorgan.
I think, which we at this day call GLAMORGAN-SHIRE, the Britans Morganuc,
Glath-Morgan, and Glad Vorganuc, that is, The Region of Morganuc: so named, as
most suppose, of one Morgan a Prince, as others think of Morgan an Abbay. But
if I derived it from Mor, which in the British tongue signifies The Sea; I
know not verily whether I should dally with the Morlais, was of Ptolomee and
the ancient Gauls termed Vorganium or Morganium (for M. and V. consonant are
often changed one for another in this tongue) and whence I pray you but from
the sea? And this our Morganuc also lies upon the sea: for, stretching out
directly more in length, than it spreads in breadth, on the South side it is
accoasted with the Severn sea. But where it looks toward the Land, it has on
the East side Monmouth-shire, on the North Brechnock-shire, and on the West
Caermarden-shire bordering upon it.

The North part by reason of the Mountains is rough and unpleasant, which as
Cato judged to be the best, and for the which, Pliny so highly commends
Italy. For, this part of the Country is most pleasant and fruitful,
beautified also on every side with a number of Towns.

Jestine a great Lord in the Reign of William Rufus, The subduing of
Glamorgan-shire. Robert Fitz-Haimon.
after he had rebelled against Rhese his Prince, and not able to make his part
good with him, very rashly, and inconsiderately (which he afterward repented
too late) sent Enion a Nobleman to whom he had affianced his daughter; to
procure Robert Fitz Haimon son to Haimon Dentatus Lord of Corboil in
Normandy, to come out of England and aid him against Rhese: who forthwith
having mustered certain forces, and taking for to associate him in his journey
twelve Knights, 12. Knights.
first gave Rhese Battle and slew him, and afterward being allured with the
fertility of the Country, whereof before hand he made full account to be Lord,
turning his power upon Jestine himself, because he had not kept touch with
Enion nor performed his promise, easily thrust him out of his ancient
Inheritance, and shared the Country among his Companions. The hard and barraine
hill Country he granted to the said Enion, the more fertile parts he divided
between him and those twelve Knights whom he termed Peers, on this condition,
that they should hold them in Fee, and vassallage of him as their chief Lord,
to maintain one another in common with their aides and auxiliary forces; to
defend every one his Caerdiffe.
and to be present and assist him in his Courts in the administration of
Justice. It shall not be amiss to put down their names out of a little
Pamphlet, which Sir Edward Stradling or Sir Edward Mounsel both Knights men of
ancient descent and most skillful in Antiquity, I wot not whether (for it goes
abroad under both their names) wrote concerning this matter. And these be their
names, William of London, or de Londres. Richard Granvil. Pain Turbervill.
Oliver Saint John. Robert de Saint Quintin. Roger Bekeroul. William Easterling,
for that he was borne in Germany, whose heirs are now called Stradlings.
Gilbert Hamfranvill. Richard Siward. John Fleming. Peter Soore. Reinald Sully.


The River Remnie falling from the Mountains, is the limite on the East side,
whereby this Country is divided from Monmouth-shire; and Remnie in the British
tongue signifies to Divide.

Not far from it where the River holds on his course through places hardly
passable, among the hills, in a Marish ground are to be seen the tottering
walls of Caer-philli Castle, Caer Philli.
which has been of so huge a bigness, and such a wonderful piece of work
beside, that all men well near say, it was a garrison fort of the Romans. John
Sanford a man singular well learned, and of exact judgment) who diligently
took view of it. In later ages it was the possession of the Clares Earls of
Gloucester descended from Fitz-Haimon aforesaid; neither do any of our
Chronicles make mention thereof before king Edward the Seconds time. For then,
after that the Spensers by underhand practices had set the King, Queen, and
Barons at debate, the Barons besieged a long time Hugh Spenser the younger whom
they called Hugolin herein, and could not prevail. By this river also (but the
place is not certainly known) Faustus a very good son, as Ninnius writes,
of Vortigern so bad a father, built a great Place; where, with other holy men
he prayed daily unto God, that himself, whom his father, committing most
abominable incest had begotten of his own daughter might not be punished
grievously for his fathers faults, also that his father might at length repent
heartily, and his native Country be eased from the bloody wars of the Saxons.
A little beneath, has Ptolomee placed the mouth of RATOSTABIUS or RATOSTABIUS,
The mouth of Ratostabius Traith Taff.
using a maimed word in stead of Traith Taff, that is, The sandy Trith of the
River Taff. For, there the said River Taff, sliding down from the Hills,
runs toward the Sea, by Landaff, Landaff.
that is, The Church by Taff, a small City and of small reputation, situate
somewhat low, yet a Bishops See, having within the Dioecesse 154. Parishes, and
Telean Bishop of the same: which Church German and Lupus, French Bishops, then
erected, when as they had suppressed the Heresy of Pelagius that was
dangerously spread all Britain over, History of Landaff.
and preferred Dubricius a most holy man to be the first Bishop there, unto
whom Meurioke a British Lord freely gave all the land that lies between the
Rivers Taff and Elei. Caerdiffe.
From hence goes Taff, to Caer diff, called of the Britans Caerdid a proper
fine Town (as Towns go in this Country) and a very commodious Haven: which
the foresaid, Fitz Haimon, fortified with a Wall and Castle, that it might be
both a seat for war and a Court of Justice: wherein, beside a Band of choice
soldiers those twelve Knights were bound to keep Castle-guard. Howbeit a Yuor
Bach a British Mountainer, a little man of person but of great and resolute
courage, marching with a Band of men by night, without any stir suddenly
surprised, took Prisoner William Earl of Gloucester, Fitz Haimons daughters
son, together with his wife and young son, and detained them in hold with
him, until he had made him full satisfaction for all wrongs and losses. But
how, Robert Curthose, Robert Curthose Duke of Normandy.
William the Conquerours eldest son, a man over venterous and fool hardy in
warlique exploits, quite put by his hope of the Crown of England by his
younger brethren and bereft of both his eyes, lived until he was an old man in
this Castle, you may see if you please in our Historians, and understand
withal, that royal Parentage is never assured either of ends, or safe
security.

Scarce three miles from the mouth of Taff, in the very bending in of the
shore, there lie aflote as it were two small, but pleasant Islands, separated
one from another and from the maine Land with narrow in-lets of the Sea. Sully,
happily so called of the Silures.
The hithermore is called Sullie, of the Town right over against it, which
took the name, as it is thought, Robert Sully (for it fell to his part in the
division) if you would not rather have him to take his name of it. Barry.
The farther more is named Barry, of Baruch an holy man buried there, who as he
gave name to the place, so the place gave the surname afterward to the Lords
thereof. For that noble Family of Vicounts Barries in Ireland had their
original from hence. In a Rock, or cliffe hereof by the sea side, says
Giraldus, there appears a very little chincke into which if you lay your ear
you shall hear a noise as it were of Smithes at work, one while the blowing
of bellows, another while the striking of sledge and hammer, sometime the
sound of the Grindstone and iron tools rubbing against it, the hissing sparks
also of steele-gads within holes, as they are beaten, yea and the puffing noise
of fire burning in the furnace. Now, I should easily be persuaded that such a
Not unlike to this was the place which Clemens Alexandrinus makes mention of
in the seventh Book of his Stromata in these words. They that have written
Histories do say, A wonderful Cave or hole.
that in the Isle of Britain, there is a certain hole or Cave under the
bottom of an hill, and on the top thereof a gaping chaune or chinck: And
whenever the wind is gathered into that hole, and tossed to and fro in the
womb or concavity thereof, there is heard above a sound of Cymbals. For, the
wind driven back gives the stronger sound.

Beyond these Islands, the Shire runs directly Westward, and gives entrance
Cowbridge.
upon which more within the Land, stands Cowbridge (the Britans, of the
Stone Bridge call it Pont-van) a Merdare Town, and the second of those three
which Fitz Haimon the Conqueror kept for himself. Now, whereas Antonine the
Emperor in this very Coast, at the same distance from ISCA, Bovium.
placed BOVIUM, which also is corruptly read BOMIUM, my conjecture liked me so
well, that I have been of opinion, this Town was the said BOVIUM: but seeing
that three miles from hence there stands Bovirion, which fitly accords in
sound with Bovium, so love me truth, I dare not seek for BOVIUM elsewhere.
And that it is no strange and new thing that places should be fitted with
names from Kine and Oxen, I report me to Bosphorus in Thracia, Bovianum
Samnium, and Bauli in Italy, as it were, Boalia, if we may believe Symmachus.
But let this one argument serve for all; fifteen miles from BOVIUM, has
Antonine placed, even with a Latin name the Town NIDUM, which although our
Antiquaries have been this great while a hunting after in vain: yet, at the
very same distance there shows it self Neath, Neath.
a Town very well known, retaining still the old name, in manner whole and
sound: and here at La^twit, that is, The Church of Iltut, that joyneth close
thereto, are seen the foundations of many houses, for it had diverse Streets in
old time. A little from hence in the very bout well near of the shore stands
Saint Donats Castle, Saint Donats. Stradling.
a fair Habitation of the ancient and notable Family of the Stradlings: near
unto which, were very lately dug Antique pieces of coin.
antique pieces of Roman money, but those especially of the thirty Tyrants,
yea and some of Aemilianus and Marius, which are seldom found. The River Ogmor
somewhat higher, Ogmor river.
makes himself way into the Sea, falling down from the mountains by Coitie,
which belonged sometimes to the Turbevills, afterward to the Gamages, and now
to Sir Robert Sidney Vicount Lisle, in right of his wife: also by Ogmor Castle,
which came from the Family of London to the Duchy of Lancaster. A fountain
ebbing and flowing.
Some few miles from hence there is a Well at Newton (as Sir John Stradling a
very learned Knight has signified unto me) a little Town, on the bank of the
River Ogmor Westward, an hundred paces well near from Severn side, in a sandy
plain. The water thereof is none of the cleerest, Sandfords well.
yet pure enough and good for use: It never springs reason of the Veins of
water coming in from above by showers, and otherwise. Many of the Inhabitants
thereabout men of good credit constantly avouched thus much unto me. But

Te Nova-Villa fremens, odioso murmr Nympha
Inclamat Sabrina: Soloque inimica propinquo,
Evomit infestas ructu violenter arenas.
Damna pari sentit vitinia sort: sedilla
Fonticulum causata tuum. Quem virgo, legendo
Littus, ad amplexus vocitat: latet ille vocatus
Antro, and luctatur contra. Namque astus utrique est
Continuo motu refluus, tamen ordine dispar.
Nympha fluit propius: Fons defluit. Illa recedit.
Isteredit. Sic livor inest and pugna perennis.
With troublous noise and roaring loud, the Severn Nymph does cry,
New-towne, on thee; and bearing spite unto the ground thereby,
Casts up and sends with violence maine drifts of hurtful sand.
The neighbor parts feel equal loss, by this her heavy hand:
But on thy little Well she lays the weight, which she would woo
And feign embrace, as Virgin she along the shore does go.
Called though he be, he lurkes in den, and striveth hard again,
For, ebb and flow continually by tides they keep, both twain
Yet diversely: for as the Nymph does rise, the Spring does fall,
Go she back, he comes on, in spite and fight continual.
A fountain at Cales or Cadiz.
The like Fountain Polybius reports to be at Cadyz, and this reason he
gives thereof, namely that the wind or air, when it is deprived of his
wonted issues, returns within forth, and so by shutting and stopping up the
passages and veins of the Spring, keeps in the waters, and contrariwise when
the surface thereof is void and empty of water the veins of the source or
Spring are unstopped and set free, and so the water then boileth up in great
abundance. From hence coasting along the shore, you come within the sight of
Kinefeage, the Castle in old time of Fitz-Haimon himself; also of Margan, hard
by the sea side, sometime an Abbay founded by William Earl of Gloucester, but
now the Habitation of the worshipful Family of the Maunsells, Knights. Near
Margan, in the very top of an Hill called Mynyd Margan, there is erected of
exceeding hard grit, a Monument or gravestone, four foot long, and one foot
broad with an Inscription, which whosoever shall happen to read, the ignorant
common people dwelling thereabout, give it out upon a credulous error, that
he shall be sure to dye within a little while after. Let the Reader therefore
look to himself, if any dare read it; for, let him assure himself that he
shall for certain dye after it.

CAERMARDI^ Comitatus in quo DIMETAE Olim habitarunt.




Those latter words I read thus Aeternali in domo, that is, In an eternal
house: For, Eternal habitations.
were termed AETERNALES DOMUS, that is, Eternal habitations. Moreover,
between Margan and Kingseage by the high way side, there lies a stone four
foot long with this Inscription.

PUNP ^IUS CAR ANTOPIUS. Landaff did write to me, who gave order that the
draught of this Inscription should be taken likewise for my sake. PIM BIS AN
CAR ANTOPIUS, that is, The five fingers of friends or neighbors killed us. It
is verily thought to be the Sepulcher of Prince Morgan, from whom the Country
took name, who was slain, as they would have it, eight hundred years before
Christ's Nativity. But Antiquaries know full well, that these Characters and
forms of letters be of a far later date.

After you are past Margan, Nidus flu. i. the river Neath.
the shore shoots forth into the North-East, by Aber-Avon, a small Mercate
Town upon the River Avons mouth (whereof it took the Nid or Neath infamous
for a quick-sand, upon which stands an ancient Town of the same name, which
Antonine the Emperor in his Itinerary called NIDUM. Which, when Fitz-Haimon
made himself Lord of this Country, fell in the partition to Richard Granvills
share, Nidum the town Neath.
who having founded an Abbay under the very Towns side, and consecrated his
own portion to God and to the Monks, returned again to his own ancient and
fair inheritance, which he had in England.

Logho^* Gower.
Beyond this River Neath, whatsoever lies between it and the River Loghor,
which boundeth this shire in the West, we call Gower: the Britans and Ninnius,
Guhir: wherein, as he says, the sons of Keian the Scot planted themselves,
and took up a large room, Th. Walsingh.
until that by Cuneda a British Lord they were driven out. In the Reign of
Henry the First, Henry Earl of Warwick won it from the Welsh, but by a
conveyance and composition, passed between William Earl of Warwick and King
Henry the Second, Book of Neth Monastery. Joh. R. 5.
it came to the Crown. Afterward King John gave it unto William Breos who had
taken Arthur Earl of Britain prisoner, to be held by service of one Knight
for all service: and his heirs successively held it not without troubles unto
King Edward the Seconds days: for then, William Breos, when he had alienated
and Hugh Spenser in possession thereof, to curry favor with the King. And this
was one cause, among other things, that the Nobles hated the Spensers so
deadly, and rashly shook off their Allegiance to the King. Howbeit this Gower
came to the Mowbraies by an heir of Breos. This is now divided into the East
part and the West. Swinsey.
In the East part Swinesey, is of great account, a Town so called by the
Englishmen, of Sea-Swine, but the Britans Aber-Taw of the River Taw running by
it; which, the foresaid Henry, Earl of Warwick fortified. But there is a
Town far more ancient than this by the River Loghor, which Antonine the
Emperor called LEUCARUM, Leucarum Loghor.
and we, by the whole name, Loghor. Where, a little after the Howel Ap Meredic
invading the Englishmen on a sudden, with a power of the mountainers slew
diverse men of quality and good account. Beneath this, lies West-Gower, and by
reason of two arms of the Sea winding in, on either side one, it becomes a
Biland, more memorable for the fruitfulness, than the Towns in it, and in
times past of great name, in regard of Kined canonized a Saint, who lived here
a solitary life: of whom if you desire to know more, read our Countryman
Capgrave, who has set out his miracle with great commendation.

Since this Country was first conquered by the English. The Lords thereof were
those that lineally descended from Fitz-Haimon, Lords of Glamorgan-shire.
as Earl of Gloucester, Clares, Spensers, and one or two Nevils: and by a
daughter of Nevill, who came likewise of the Spensers blood, Richard the Third
King of England: But when he was slain, king Henry the Seventh entered upon the
inheritance of this Country, and gave it to his uncle Iaspar Duke of Bedford:
and when he dyed without issue, the king resumed it unto his own hands, and
left it to his son king Henry the Eighth: whose son king Edward the Sixth
sold the greatest part thereof to Sir William Herbert, whom he had created
Earl of Pembrock and Baron of Cardiff. But of the race of those twelve knights
there remain only in this shire the Stradlings, a notable house and of long
continuance, the Turbervills, and some of the Flemings: the greatest man of
which house dwells at Flemingston, now corruptly called Flemston, as one
Flemingstone which took the name of them. And in England, there are remaining
yet the Lord Saint John of Bletso, the Granvills in Devonshire; and the
Siwards, as I am informed, in Somersetshire. The issue male of all the rest is
long since extinct and worn out, and their lands by daughters passed over to
diverse houses with sundry alterations.

Parishes 118.

DIMETAE.
Pliny was of opinion that the SILURES inhabited also the other part beside of
this Country, West-Wales.
which bearing out farther Westward, is called in English by some, West-Wales,
and contains Caermarden-shire, Pembrock-shire, and Cardigan-shire: But
Ptolomee, who knew Britain far better, placed here another people, whom he
called DIMETAE, and DEMETAE. Gildas likewise and Ninnius DEMETIA for this
Tract. Whereupon, the Britans that inhabit it, changing M. into F. according
to the propriety of their tongue commonly call it at this day Difed.

If it would not be thought strained curiosity, I would derive this
denomination of the Demetae, from Deheu Mead, that is, A plain champion
toward the South: like as the Britans themselves have named all this
South Wales, Deheubarth, that is, The South part: yea and those verily who
inhabited another champion Country in Britain were called in old time, Meatae.

CAERMARDEN-SHIRE.
CAERMARDEN-SHIRE, Caer Marden-shire.
is plenteous enough in Corn, stored abundantly with Cartaile and in some
places yields pit cole for fuel. On the East side it is limited with
Glamorgan, and Brechnock-shires, on the West with Pembrock-shire, on the North
with Cardigan-shire severed from it by the River Tivie running between, and on
the South with the Ocean, which

Upon this Bay, Kidwelly.
Kidwelly first offers it self to our sight, the Territory whereof, K^tani
the Scot his sons held for a time, until they were driven out by Cuneda the
Britan. But now it is counted part of the inheritance of the Duchy of
Lancaster by the heirs of Maurice of London or De Londres: who making an
outroad hither out of Glamorgan-shire, after a dangerous war made himself Lord
hereof, and fortified old Kidwelly with a wall and Castle to it, which now for
very age is grown to decay and stands, as it were, forlet and forlorn. For,
the Inhabitants having passed over Vendraeth Vehan, built a new Kidwelly,
entised thither by the commodity of the haven, which notwithstanding at this
day being choked with shelves and bars, is at this present of no great use.
Whiles Maurice of London invaded these parts, Guenliana, a woman of manly
courage.
Guenliana the wife of Prince Gruffin, a stout and resolute woman in the
highest degree, to recover the losses and declining state of her husband, came
with displaied banner into the field and fiercely assailed him, but the
success not answerable to her courage, she with her son Morgan, and other
men of especial note (as Girald records) was slain in battle. By Hawis or
Avis the daughter and heir of Sir Thomas of London: this passing fair and
large patrimony, together with the Title of Lord of Ogmor and Kidwelly came
unto Patricke-Chaworth, and by his son Patrickes Henry Earl of Lancaster.
Now the heirs of the said Maurice of London (as we learn out of an old
Inquisition) for this inheritance, Lords of Og^mor and Kidwelly.
were bound to this service, that if their Sovereign Lord the King, or his
chief Justice came into the parts about Kidwelly with an Army, they should
conduct the foresaid Army with their banners and their people through the
midst of Nethland as far as to Loghar. A few miles beneath Kidwelly, River
Tovie.
the River Tovie, which Ptolomee calls TOBIUS falls into the the Sea, after
he has passed through this Region from North-East to South, first by
Lanandiffry, so called, as men think, of Rivers meeting together; which Hoel
the son of Rhese overthrew for malice that he bare unto the English: Dinevor.
then by Dinevor, a princely Castle, standing aloft upon the top of an hill,
and belonging unto the Caer Marden, which the Britans themselves call
Caer-Firdhin, Maredunum. Caer merdin.
Ptolomee, MARIDUNUM, Antonine, MURIDUNUM, who ends his Journeies there, and
through negligence of the transcribers is in this place not well used. For they
have confounded the Journeies from Galena to Isca, and from Maridunum to
Viriconium. This is the chief City of the country, for meadows and woods
pleasant, and in regard of antiquity to be respected; Compassed about very
properly, as Giraldus says, with brick walls, which are partly yet standing
upon the famous river Tovit, able to bear small ships, although there be now a
bar of sand cast up against the very mouth thereof. Merlin.
In this City was borne the Divinour or Prophet.
Tages of the Britans, I mean Merlin: For like as Tages being the son of an
evil Angel Tuscans the art of Sooth saying, so this Merlin the son of an
Incubus Spirit, devised for our Britans prophesies, nay rather mere
fantastical dreams. Whereby, in this Island he has been accounted among the
credulous and unskilful people a most renowned Prophet. Straight after the
Normans entering into Wales, this City was reduced (but I wot not by whose
conduct) under their Gruffin ap Rise, then by Rise the said Gruffins brother:
at which time, Henry Turbervill an Englishman succored the Castle, and hewed
down the Bridge. But afterward by the means of Gilbert de Clare, who
fortified both the walls thereof, and the Castles adjoining, it was freed from
these miseries: and being once eased of all grievances, and in security,
endured afterward more easily from time to time the tempests of war and all
assaults: And the Princes of Wales of the English blood, I mean the first
begotten sons of the Kings of England, ordained here their Chauncery and
Exchequer, for all South Wales.

Cantred Bitham. Cantred.
Near unto this City on the East side lies Cantred-Bichan, that is, The less
Hundred (for the Britans term a portion of land that contains 100. Villages
a Cantred) in which, beside the ruins of Careg Castle situate upon a Rock,
rising on every side steep and upright, Caves under the ground.
there are many under-mines or caves of very great wideness within the ground,
now covered all over with green-sord and turfe, wherein it is thought the
multitude unable to bear arms hid themselves, during the heat of war:
there is also here a Fountain, that as Giraldus writes, Twice in four and
twenty hours ebbing and twice flowing resembles the unstable motions of the
maine Sea.

Cantredmaur.
But on the North-East side, there stretches it self a great way out,
Cantredmaur, that is, The great hundred, a most safe refuge for the Britans in
times past, as being Talcharn and Lhan-Stephan Castles upon rocks of the Sea,
Talcharn. Lhan-Stephan.
which are most notable witnesses of martial valor and prowess as well in
the English as in the Welsh. Beneath Talcharn, Taff sheddeth it self into the
Sea, by the side whereof was in times past that famous Twy Gwin ar Taff, Taff
River.
that is, The white house upon the River Taff, because it was built of white
Hazels for a summer house: where, in the year of our Redemption 914. Haelius.
Hoel, surnamed Dha, that is, Good, Prince of Wales, in a frequent Assembly of
his States (for there met there beside others, of the Clergy one hundred and
forty) abrogated the ancient ordinances, and established new laws for his
Subjects, as the Prooeme to the White land, Whiteland.
was built. Not far from whence is Killmayn Lhoyd; where, of late days
certain country people happened upon an earthen Vessel, in which was hourded a
mighty deal of Roman Coin, Pieces of Roman Coin.
of embased silver: from the time of Commodus the Roman Emperor, who first
embased silver, unto the fifth Tribuneship of Gordian the third, which fell
just with the year of Christ 243. Among these, were certain pieces of Helvius
Pertinax, of Marcus Opellius, of Antoninus Diadumenianus, of Julius Verus
Maximus the son of Maximinus, of Calius Balbivus, of Clodius Pupienus, of
Aquilia Severa the wife of Elagabalus and of Sall. Barbia Orbiana, which among
Antiquaries are of greatest price and estimation, as being most rare of all
others. Tivy, that separateth this County from Cardigan-shire, New Castle.
there stands New Castle (for so they call it at this day) which Sir Rhise ap
Thomas that warlike Knight who assisted Henry the Seventh when he gat the
Crown, and was by him right worthily admitted unto the Society of the Knights
of the Garter, renewed: whereas before time it was named Elmelin. Which name,
if the Englishmen gave unto it of Elme-trees, their conjecture is not to be
rejected, Loventium.
who will have it to be that LOVENTIUM of the DIMETAE, whereof Ptolomee makes
mention: For, the Britans call Elmes Llwiffen. But seeing I can find by no
record in Histories, which if the Normans first wrested this Country out of the
hands of the Princes of Wales, I am to proceed now orderly Pembroch-shire.

It has Parishes 87.

PENBROK Comitatus olim Pars DEMETARVM


PENBROKE-SHIRE.
THE Sea now retyring Southward, and with a mighty compass and sundry Bays
incurving the shores, presses on every side upon the County of PENBROKE,
commonly called PENBROKE-SHIRE, which in the old Books is named Legalis
Comitatus.
The lawful County of Pembroch, and of some, West-Wales; unless it be in the
East side, where Caermarden-shire, Cardigan-shire boundeth upon it. A Country
plentiful in Corn, stored with Cattaile, and full of marle, and such kind of
fatty earth to make the ground fertile, and not destitute of pit cole. This
Land, as says Giraldus, is apt to bear Wheat, plentifully served with
seafish and saleable wine, and (that which is far above the rest, by reason
that Ireland confineth so near upon it) of a very temperate and wholesome air.

First and foremost upon the shore descending Southward, Tenby,
Tenby a proper fine Town well governed by a Major, and strongly walled toward
the Land, looks down into the sea from a dry cliffe, very famous because it
is a commodious road for ships, and for abundance also of fish there taken;
whereupon in the British tongue it Tenby-y-Piscoid, and has for Magistrates a
Major and a Bailiffe. From thence the shore giving back Westward, Manober
Castle.
shows the Relics of Manober Castle, which Giraldus calls, The Mansion of
Pyrhus, in whose time as himself writes, It was notably fortified with Towers
and Bulwarks, having on the West side a large Haven, and on the North-West and
North under the very walls, an excellent fish-poole, goodly to behold, as well
for the beauty thereof, as the depth of the water.

From hence runs the shore along not many miles continuate, but at length
the land shrinketh back on both sides giving place unto the sea, which
encroching upon it a great way, Milford Haven.
makes the Haven which the Englishmen call Milford Haven, than which there is
not another in all Europe more noble or safer, such variety it Hic exarmatum
terris cingentibus aequor,
Clauditur, and placidam discit servare quietem.
The Sea disarmed here of winds, within high bank and hill,
Enclosed is, and learnes thereby to be both calm and still.


For to make use of the Mariners words and their distinct terms, there are
reckoned within it 16. Creekes, 5. Baies, and 13. Rodes, known every one by
their several Pembroke.
in the most pleasant Country of all Wales, stands Penbroke the Shire-towne,
one direct street upon a long narrow point all rock, and a forked arm of
Milford Haven ebbing and flowing close to the Town walls on both sides. It
has a Castle but now ruinate, and two Parish Churches within the walls, and is
incorporate of a Major, Bailiffes and Burgesses. But hear Giraldus who thus
describes it, A Dimetia seated upon the ridge of a certain craggy and long
shaped Rock: And therefore, the Britans called it Penbro, which signifies as
much as a head of the Sea, and we in our tongue Penbroke. Arnulph of
Montgomery brother to Robert Earl of Shrewsbury, first in the time of King
Henry the First fortified this place with a Castle, a very weak and slender
thing, God wot, of stakes and turfes, which Girald of Windsor, his Constable
and Captain, to be kept with a Garrison of few Soldiers: and immediately, the
Welshmen of all South Wales laid siege unto the said Castle. The beginning of
the Giralds family in Ireland.
But such resistance made Girald and his company, more upon a resolute courage
than with any forcible strength, that they missed of their purpose and
dislodged. Afterward, the said Girald fortified both Town and Castle; from
whence he invaded the Country, round about it, far and near: and at length,
that as well his own estate, as theirs that were his followers and dependants,
might the better grow to greatness in these parts he took to wife Nesta
sister to Gruffin the Prince, of whom he begat a goodly fair Progeny, by the
which (as says that Giraldus who descended from him) The Englishmen both For,
all those noble families of Giralds or Giraldines in Ireland, whom they call
Fitz Girald, fetch their descent from the said Girald. The Roll of Services.
In regard of the tenure of this Castle and Town, of the Castle and Town
likewise of Tinbigh, of the Grange of Kings Wood, of the Commot of Croytarath,
and of the Manors of Castle Martin and Tregoire, Reinold Gray at the Coronation
of King Henry the Fourth made suite to carry the second sword: but in vain:
For, answer was made, that those Castles and Possessions were in the Kings
hands, as Pembroke Town still is.

Upon another Creek also of this haven, Carew Castle shows it self, which
gave both name and original to the notable Family de Carew, Carew Castle.
who avouch themselves to de Montgomery; and have been persuaded, that they
are descended from that Arnulph de Montgomery, of whom I spoke erewhile.

Into this Haven there discharge themselves with their out-lets joined almost
in one, Gledawgh.
two rivers, which the Britans term Gledawh, that is, if you interpret it,
Swords: whereupon themselves use to term it Aber du gledhaw, that is, The
outlet of two swords. Hard by the more Easterly of them stands Slebach, a
Commandery in times past of Saint John's Knights of Jerusalem, which with other
lands, Wizo and Walter his son, gave in old time unto that holy Order of
Knighthood, that they might serve as Gods Knights to recover the Holy Land.
That part of this Country which lies beyond the Haven, and has only these
two Rivers to water it, the Britans Ros, making the name answerable to the
thing, for that it lies for the most part all low on a flat, and green plain.

Flemings in Wales.
This Tract was inhabited by Flemings out of the Low Countries, who by the
permission of King Henry the First were planted here, when the Ocean by making
breaches in the banks had overwhelmed a great part of the said Low Countries.
These are distinctly known still from the Welsh, both by their speech and
manners, and so near joined they are in society of the same language with
Englishmen, who come nighest of any Nation to the low Dutch Tongue, that this
their little Country is termed by the Britans Little England beyond Wales.
Little England beyond Wales.
A Nation this is, as says Giraldus, strong and stout, and continually enured
in wars with the Welsh: a Nation and which in the time of Giraldus, was
wonderful skillful in Sooth-saying by the Inspection of Beasts inwards: whose
work also is here seen (as they are a people passing industrious) namely,
The Flemish High way reaching out a great length. The Welshmen have many a time
banded all their Forces in one, and to recover this country belonging sometimes
unto their ancestors, have violently set upon these Flemings William Rufus, the
Historian Malmesbury writes thus. Many a time and often King William Rufus had
but And in the fifth book, King Henry with many a warlike expedition went
about to force the Welsh men, who ever and anon rose up in Rebellion, for to
yield and submit themselves: and resting in the end upon this good and wholesome
policy, for to take down and abate their swelling pride, he brought over
thither all the Flemings that dwelt in England. For, a number of them who in
those days, in regard of his Moth^rs (...) Ros a Country in Wales, as it were
^^to a common avoidance, thereby both to purge and cleanse his own Kingdom,
and also to quail and repress the rash boldness of his enemies there. By the
more westward of these two Rivers, Harford we^
is Harford West, called by the English men in times past Haversord, and by the
Britans Hulphord, a fair Town and of great resort, situate upon an hill side,
having scarce one even street, but is steep one way or other, which being a
County by it self, has for Magistrates, a Major, a Sheriff, and two
Bailiffs. The report goes, that the Earls of Clare fortified it with Rampire
and Wall on the Filium Tan credi.
and we read that Richard Earl of Clare made R. Fitz-Tancred, Castellan of
this Castle.

Beyond Ros, there shoots out with a mighty front far into the West Ocean,
a great Promontory, Octopitarum
which Ptolomee called OCTOPITARUM, the Britans Pebidiauc, and Cantred Devi; we
Saint David's land. A stony, barren, and unfruitful ground, as Giraldus says,
Saint David Laud.
Neither clad with Woods, nor garnished here and there with Rivers, ne yet
adorned with Medows, lying always open to winds only and storms. Yet a
retyring place for most holy men, and a nurserie of them. For, Calphurnius a
Britain Priest, as some (I know not how truly) have written, here in the vale
of Ros begat of his Wife Concha Sister to Saint Martin of Tours, Saint Patr^^
Patricke the Apostle of Ireland and Devi Isca Legionum into the most remote
and farthest angle hereof, even to Menew, or Menevia: which afterward the
Britans, of his name called Twy Dewy, that is, Devi his house, the Saxons Dauy
(...), Saint David
the English men at this day Saint David's; and was for a long time an
Archbishops See. But by occasion of a pestilence that contagiously raged in
this Country, whereby the Pall was translated into little Britain in France,
to Dole, this Archiepiscopall dignity had an end. Yet in the foregoing ages the
Welsh men commensed an action here about against the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Metropolitan of England and Wales, but they were cast in the Law. What this
Saint David's was, and what manner of thing in times past, a man can hardly tell,
considering Andrew, and David: which, having been many times overthrown, Petre
the Bishop, in the reign of King John, and his successors, erected in that
form which now it shows, in the vale (as they term it of Ros) under the
Town: and hard by it stands the Bishops Palace, and fair houses of the
Chaunter (who is next unto the Bishop, for there is no Deane here) of the
Chauncellor, Treasurer, and four Archdeacons who be of the number of the XXII.
Canons, all enclosed round within a strong and seemly wall, whereupon they
call it the Close.

This Promontorie thrusts it self so far Westward, that in a clear
Sunshine Ireland, and from hence is the shortest cut to Ireland: and by Plinies
measure, which he took false, was from the Silures (for, he thought that the
Silures reached thus far) thirty miles. But that this land ran out farther,
and that the form of the Promontory has been changed, it may be gathered out
of these words of Giraldus. What time (says he) as King Henry the Second made
his abode in Ireland, Bodies of trees in the Sea.
by reason of an extraordinary violence of storms, the sandy shores of this
coast were Neither were these two lands severed here with any great Sea
between, as may appear by a word that King William Rufus cast out: who when
he kenned Ireland from the rocks Giraldus) that he could easily make a bridge
with English Sips; on which he might pass over the Sea on foot into Ireland.

Falcons.
A noble kind of Falcons have their Airies here and breed in the Rocks, which
King Henry the Second, as the same Giraldus writes, was wont to prefer
before all others. For, of that kind are those, if the inhabitants thereby do
not deceive me, which the skillful Faulconers call Peregrines: for, they have
(that I may use no other words than the verses of Augustus Thuanus Esmerius
that most excellent P^et of our age in that golden book entitled
HIERACOSOPHIOY.

Depressus capitis vertex, oblongique tot^
Corpore pennarum series, pallentia crura,
Et graciles digiti ac sparsi, naresque rotundae.
Head flat and low, the plume in rewes along
The body laid: legs pale and wan are found.
With slender claws and talons there among
And those wide spread: the bill is hooked round.
But from this Promontory, as the land draws backward, the Sea with great
violence and assault of waters inrusheth upon a little Region called Keimes,
Keimes Barony. Fisgard.
which is reputed Barony. In it stands, First, Fishgard, so called in English
of the taking of fish, in British Abergwain, that is, the mouth of the River
Gwain, situate upon a steep Cliffe, New-port.
where there is a very commodious harbor and rode for Ships: then Newport at
the foot of an high Mountain by the River Neverns side, in British
Tref-draeth, i. the Town upon the sands, and in Latin Records, Novus Burgus;
which Martin of Tours built, his posterity made an incorporation, adorned with
privileges, and set over it for government a Portgreve and Bailive: erected
also for themselves a Castle over the Town, Saint Dogmael the Welsh call him
Saint Tegwel. Lords of Keimes. Martins.
which was their principal seat. Who founded likewise Saint Dogmales Abbay
according to the order of Tours, by the River Tivy low in a vale environed with
hills, unto which the Borrough adjoining (as many other Towns unto Martin of
Tours first wrested out of the Welsh men's hands by force and arms, from whose
heirs successively called Martins, it came by marriage to the Barons of
Audley, who held it a long time, until that in the reign of Henry the eighth,
William Owen that derived his pedigree from a daughter of Sir Nicholas Martin
Knight, after long suit in law for his right, in the end obtained it, and left
it to his son George: who being a singular lover of venerable antiquity has
informed me, that in this Barony over and above three Borroughs, Newport,
Fishgard, and Saint Dogmaels, there are twenty Knights fees, and twenty six
Parishes.

Kilgarran.
More inward, upon the River Tivy aforesaid is Kilgarran, which shows the
relics Girald: but being at this day reduced unto one only street, it is
famous for nothing else but the most plentiful fishing of Salmon. For there,
have you that notable Salmon Leap, where the River from on high falls
downright, and the Salmons from out of the Ocean coveting to come up further
into the River, Salmons leap.
bend back their tail to the mouth, other whiles also to make a greater leap
up, hold fast their tail in the mouth, and as they unloose themselves from
such a circle, they give a jerk, as if a twig bended into a rondle were
sudainely let go, and so with the admiration of the beholders mount and whip
themselves aloft from beneath, as Ausonius has most elegantly written.

Nec te paniceo rutilantem viscere Salma,
Transierim, latae cujus vaga verbera caudae
Gurgite de medio summas reseruntur in undas.

(Salmon) that art, whose jerkes and friskes full often,
From mids of stream and channel deep therein
With broad tail flirt, to floating waves aloft.
There have been diverse Earls of Pembroke out of sundry houses. Earls of
Penbroke.
As for Arnulph of Montgomery, who first won it, and was afterward outlawed,
and his Castellan Girald, whom King Henry the First made afterward President
over the whole Country, I dare searcely affirm that they were Earls. The
first that was styled Earl of Penbroke was Gilbert, surnamed Strongbow son
of Gislebert de Clare, Richard Strongbow, the renowned Conqueror of Ireland,
who as Giraldus says, was descended ex clara Clarentium familia, that is, out
of the noble Family of Clare or Clarence. His only daughter Isabell brought
the same honor to her Husband William named Mareschall (for that his
Ancestors had been by inheritance Mareschals of the Kings Palace) a man, most
glorious both in war and peace, and Protector of the Kingdom in the minority
of King Henry the Third. Concerning whom this pithie Epitaph is extant in
Rodburns Annals.

Sum quem Saturnum sibi sensit Hibernia, Solemn

Whom Ireland once a Saturn found, England a Sun to be,
Whom Normandy a Mercury, and France Mars, I am he.
After him his five sons were successively one after another Earls of
Penbroke, viz. William called The younger; Richard, who after he had rebelled
against King Henry the Third went into Ireland, See Page 407.
where he was slain in battle; Gilbert, who in a Tournament at Ware was
unhorsed and so killed; Walter, and Anselme, who enjoyed the honor but a few
days, who every one dying in a short space without William de Valentia, of the
house of Lusignian in Poicta his brother by the mother side, who had to wife
Joan the daughter of Gwarin de Mont-chensy: by the daughter of the foresaid
William Mareschall. After William of Valence, succeeded his son Aimar, who
under King Edward the First was Regent of Scotland: whose eldest sister
Elizabeth, and one of his heirs wedded unto John Lord Hastings, brought this
Dignity unto a new Family: For, Laurence Hastings his grandsonne, Lord of
Welshford and Abergevenny was made Earl of Penbroke by virtue of King Edward
the Third his Brieffe. The Copy whereof I think good to set down here, that
we may see what was the right by heirs general in these honorary Titles. Rex
omnibus ad The King, to all unto whom, etc. Greeting. Know ye, that the good
presage of circumspection and virtue, which we have conceived by the towardly
youth and happy beginnings of our most welbeloved cousin Laurence Hastings,
induce us worthily to countenance him, with our especial grace and favor, in
those things which concern the due preservation and maintenance of his honor.
Whereas therefore, the inheritance of Aimar of Valence sometime Earl of
Penbroke (as he was styled) deceased long since without heir Laurence who
succeeds the said Aimar in part of the inheritance, is descended from the
elder sister of Aimar aforesaid, and so by the avouching of the learned with
whom we consulted about this matter, the prerogative both of name and honor
is due unto him. We deem it just and due, that the same Laurence claiming his
Title from the elder sister, assume and have the name of Earl of Penbroke,
which the said Aimar had whiles he lived. Which verily we, as much as lies in
us, confirm, ratify, and also approve unto him: willing and granting, that
the said Laurence, have and hold the prerogative and honor of Earl Palatine
in those lands which he holds of the said Aimars inheritance, so fully and
after the same manner, as the same had and held them, at the time of his death.
In witness the King, at Mont-Martin, the thirteenth day of October, and in the
thirteenth of our Reign.

After Laurence succeeded his son John, who being taken prisoner by the
Spaniards in a battle at sea, and in the end ransomed, died in France in the
year 1375. After him followed his son John, who in a running at Tilt at
Woodstocke was slain by Sir John Saint John casually in the year 1391. And it
was observed that for five generations together in this Family (I know not by
what destiny) the father never saw his son. Now, for default of his issue,
there fell very many possessions and fair revenewes into the Kings hands, Some
write that John Duke of Bedford was first for a short time Earl of Penbroke.
as our Lawyers use to speak: and the Castle of Penbroke was granted unto
Francis At-Court, a Courtier in especial great favor, Pembroke. Not long
after, Humfrey son to King Henry the Fourth before he was Duke of Gloucester,
received this title of his brother King Henry the Fifth, and before his death
King Henry the Sixth granted the same in reversion (a thing not before heard
of) to William de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, after whose downfall, the said
King, when he had enabled Edmund of Hadham, and Jasper of Hatfield, the sons
of Queen Katharin his mother to be his lawful half brethren; created
Jasper, Earl of Penbroke, and Edmund, Earl of Richmond with pre-eminence to
take place above all Earls. For Kings have absolute authority in dispensing
honors. But King Edward the Fourth depriving Jasper of all his honors by
attaindour and forfeiture, gave the Title of Pembroke to Sir William for his
good service against Jasper in Wales, but he shortly after lost his life at
the battle of Banbury. Then succeeded his son, bearing the same name, whom
King Edward the Fourth when he had recovered the Kingdom, invested in the
Earldom of Huntingdon, and bestowed the Title of Penbroke, being surrendered,
upon his eldest son and heir Edward Prince of Wales.

A long time after King Henry the Eighth invested Anne Bollen (to whom he was
affianced) Marchioness of Pembroke with a mantle and Coronet in regard both of
her Nobility, and also her virtues (for so run the words of the Patent). At
length king Edward the Sixth adorned Sir William Herbert Lord of Caerdiffe with
the Title of Earl of Penbroke: after whom succeeded his son Henry who was
Lord President under Queen Elizabeth. And now his son William richly
accomplished with all laudable endowments of body and mind enjoys the same
Title. This Family of the Herberts in these parts of Wales is honorable, and
of great antiquity. As lineally propagated from Henry Fitz Herbert Chamberlain
to king Henry the First, who married the said kings Paramor, the mother of
Reginald Earl of Cornwall, as I was first informed by Robert Glover a man
passing skillful in the study of Genealogies, by whose untimely death that
knowledge has sustained a great loss.

There are in this Shire Parishes 145.

CARDIGAN-SHIRE.
FRom Saint David's Promontory the shore being driven back aslope Eastward,
lets in the Sea within a vast and crooked Bay, upon which lies the third
Region of the Dimetae, in English called CARDIGAN-SHIRE, Cardigan-shire.
in British Sire Aber-Tivi, by old Latin Writers Ceretica (if any man think)
of King Caratacus, this may seem a conjecture proceeding out Caratacus, King
Caratacus.
so worthily renowned, was the Sovereign Ruler in these parts. A plain and
champion Country it is Westward, where it lies to the Sea, as also on the
South side, where the River Tivie separateth it from Caermarden-shire: But in
the East and North sides, which bound upon Brechnock and Montgomery-shires:
there is a continued range, or ridge of hills that shoot along, yielding goodly
pasture ground, under which there be spread sundry large Pooles. That in
ancient times this Shire, as the rest also of Wales, was not planted and
garnished with Cities but with little cottages, it may be gathered by that
speech of their Prince Caratacus, who being taken Prisoner, Rome, Zonaras.
What mean you (says he) when ye have these and such like stately buildings
of your own, to covet our small cottages? Howbeit the places here of most
Antiquity let us briefly view over.

The River Tivie, Tuerobius (...) river.
which Ptolomee calls TUEROBIUS, but corruptly, in stead of Dwr-Tivius, that
is, The River Tivie, issues out of the Poole Lin-Tivy, beneath the hills:
whereof I spoke before: first cumbred, as it were, with stones in the way, and
rumbling with a great noise without any channel, and so passes through a very
stony tract (near unto which at Rosse, Rosse. Strat-fleur.
the Mountainers keep the greatest Fair for cattaile in all those parts)
until it come to Strat-fleur, a Monastery long since of the Cluniack Monks,
compassed about with hills. From thence, being received within a channel,
Tregaron, and Lhan-Devi-brevi, built and so named in memorial of David Bishop
of Menevia, where he in a frequent Synod refuted the Pelagian Heresy
springing up again in Britain, both by the holy Scriptures and also by a
miracle, while the earth whereon he stood as he preached, arose up under his
feet, by report, to an hillocke. Thus far and somewhat farther also Tivie
holds on his course Southward to Lan-Beder a little Mercate Town. From hence
Tivie turning his stream Westward carries a broader channel, Kilgarran. The
Salmons leap.
and near unto Kilgarran falls down right headlong (as it were) from aloft,
and makes that Salmons Leap, whereof I spoke ere while. For, exceeding great
store of Salmons it yields, and was in times past the only British River, as
Giraldus Cambrensis was of opinion, that Bevers in it. Castore^ Bevers.
This Beaver is a creature living both on land and water, footed before like a
Dog and behind like a Goose, with an ash-colored skin somewhat blackish,
having a long tail, broad and griftly, which in his floting he uses in lieu
of a stern. Concerning the subtle wiliness of which creatures, the said
Giraldus has observed many things, but at this day none of them are here to
be seen.

Scarce two miles from hence stands upon a steep bank Cardigan, Cardigan.
which the Britans name Aber-Tivy, that is, Tivy-mouth, the Shire-towne,
strongly fortified by Gilbert the son of Richard De Clare, which afterward
being by treason yielded up, Rhise Ap Gruffin rased; Fitz-Stephen.
when he had taken prisoner Robert Fitz-Stephen, whom some call Stephanides:
who (after he had stood a long time at the devotion of the

From Tivie mouth, the shore gently gives back, and opens for it self the
passage The River S^^ccia.
among which in the upper part of the Shire, STUCCIA, whereof Ptolomee makes
mention, is most memorable, when as the name of it continues after a sort,
Y-stwith.
whole at this day, being called in common speech, Ystwith: at the head whereof
are veins of Lead, and at the mouth the Town Aber-y-stwith, the most populous
and plenteous place of the whole Shire, which that noble Gilbert de Clare also
fensed with walls, and Walter Bec an Englishman defended a great while against
the Welsh right manfully. Hard hereunto lies Lhan Badern vaur, that is, The
Church of Pattern the great, who being borne in little Britain, as we read in
his life, both governed the Church by feeding, and fed it by governing. Unto
whose memory the posterity consecrated here as well a Church, as also an
Episcopal See. But the Bishopric, Roger Hoveden writes, quite decayed many
years since when the people had wickedly slain their Pastor.

The river Ridol.
At the same mouth also the River Ridol discharges it self into the Irish sea.
This River, descending out of Plinlimon, an exceeding steep and high hill,
that encloseth the North part of the Shire, and powers out of his lap those
most noble Rivers Severn and Wy, whereof I have already often spoken. And not
much above Y-stwith mouth, the River Devi that serves in stead of a limite
between this and Merionith-shire, is lodged also within the Sea.

Scarce had the Normans settled their Kingdom in Britain, when they assailed
this Coast with a Fleet by Sea, and that verily with good success. For, by
little, William Rufus, they wrested the maritime Coasts out of the Welshmens
hands: but the greatest part thereof they granted unto Cadugan Ap Blethin,
Lords of Cardigan-shire.
a right wise and prudent Britain: who was highly esteemed, and of great power
throughout all Wales, and evermore showed much favor and friendship to the
English. But when his son Oen, a furious and heady young man, who could at no
hand away with peace, infested the Englishmen and Flemings newly come thither
with continual invations, the unhappy father was fined with the loss of his
lands, and punished for the offenses of his son, who was himself also
constreined to relinquish his native Country and to fly into Ireland. Then
this Cardigan-shire was given by King Henry the First unto Gilbert de Clare,
who placed Garrisons and Cadugan with his son Oen, received into favor again
by the English, recovered also his own lands and inheritance. But Oen
returning to his old bias and rebelling afresh, was slain by Girald the
Castellan of Penbroke, whose wife Nesta he had carried away and ravished. And
his father being had away into England, long expected for a change of better
fortune, and at length in his old age being restored to his own home and
friends, was upon the sudden by Madoc his Nephew stabbed through the body.
After this, Roger de Clare through the liberality of King Henry the Second had
Cardigan-shire bestowed upon him: but when Richard of Clare, his Nephew, if I
be not deceived, whiles he came hither by land was slain by the Welsh, Rhise
Prince of South Wales, having made a great

There are in this Shire Parishes 64.


THese Countries of the Silures and Dimetae, which we have hitherto travailed
over, the Posterity, when Wales was subject to three Princes, called in their
tongue Deheu-barth, that is, The part lying on the right hand: and Englishmen,
South Wales, as ^ath been said before. The other two Principalities, which
they term Guineth and Powis, we North Wales and Powisland, were inhabited in
ancient times by the ORDOVICES, Ordovices.
who also be named ORDEVICES, ORDOVICAE, and in some places although most
corruptly, Ordolucae. A puissant and courageous Nation, by reason they keep
wholly in a mountainous Country, and take heart even of the Soil; and which
continued the longest free from the yoke both of Romans and also of English
dominion: neither was it subdued by the Romans, before the days of the
Emperor Domitiane: (For, then Julius Agricola conquered almost the whole
Edward the First. For a long time they lived in a lawless kind of liberty, as
bearing themselves bold both upon their own valor, and the strength of the
Country, hard to be won: and which may seem after a sort naturally
accommodated for ambushments, and to prolong wars.

To lay out and limite the bounds of the ORDEVICES in a generality, is not so
hard a matter; but to set down the true etymology and reason of their name, I
think it very difficult. Yet have I conceived this conjecture, that Devi, that
arising from two springs near together, take their course diverse ways; and
considering that Oar-Devi in their British tongue signifies Upon, or, above
Devi, they were thence named Ordevices: like as the Aruerni had that name,
because they dwelt upon the river Garumna, the Armorici their name, for that
they inhabited upon the Seaside, and the Horesci theirs, because their
inhabitation was upon the river Eske. Neither is the very name of Ordevices
quite vanished without any remains thereof, in this Tract: For, a great part
of Ardudwy, whereof it may seem the Romans have made these terms Ordovic
and Ordevices carrying a softer and gentler sound. But, the whole Country
(excepting one small Shire) is called of the Latin Writers by one name of a
later stamp, Veneti. Guineth.
Guinethia, and Venedotia, and of the Britans Guineth, and Vannes.
Veneti of Armorica as some think, who, as Caesar writes, Were wont very often
to sail unto Britain. But if I might be allowed to change one only letter,
I would suppose, that this name was known to the Greeks, and to Pausanias,
who in his Arcadica records, that Antoninus Pius the Emperor grievously
punished the Brigantes, for that they had made inrodes into GENOUNIA a Province
of the Romans in Britain. Genounia.
Certes, if it might be lawful to read Genouthia, for Genounia, so near
Guinethia, and this Guinethia bordereth so near to the Brigantes, that unless
Pausanias meant this region, let Sibylla her self declare where it was, and
what it should be. But these Countries belonged to the old ORDOVICES which are
now called in English by new names, Montgomery-shire, Merioneth-shire,
Caernarvon-shire, Denbigh-shire, and Flint-shire.

MONGOMERY Comitatus qui olim pars ORDOVICVM.


MONTGOMERY-SHIRE.
MONTGOMERY-SHIRE, in British Sire Tre-Faldwin, so called of the principal
Town therein, bounded on the South Side with Cardigan and Radnor-shires, on
the East with Shropp-shire, on the North with Denbigh-shire, and on the West
with Merionith: although it has many an high Hill in it, yet by reason of
plentiful Valleies, it is a good Country as well for Corn as Pasture: and in
old time a fruitful Giraldus says, by natures workmanship pourtraying, as
it were, in a picture their noble shapes, were very commendable as well for the
Membrosa sua majestate.
Majesty of their making and big limbs, as for their incomparable
swiftness. In the utmost corner of this Shire Westward, where it ends
pointwise in manner of a Cone or Pine apple, stands Machleneth, happily that
which the Romans called MAGLONA: where under the General of Britain in the
time of the Emperor Theodosius the younger lay in Garrison the Captain of the
Regiment of the Solenses, for to repress and keep under the Mountainers: and
two miles from hence near unto Penal, there is a place to be seen, named
Keven that is, The back or ridge of a City, where pieces of Roman Coin are
other whiles dug up, and a circular form of Walls of no small circuit, are
apparently seen by the remains.

Five miles hence, the Hill Plinlimon whereof I spoke, raises it self up to a
wonderful height, The head of Severn.
and on that part where it boundeth one side of this shire, it powers forth
SABRINA, the greatest River in Britain next to Thamis, which the Britans
term Haffren, Severn.
and Englishmen Severn. Whence the name was derived I could never read. For,
that seems to smell of a fable, which Geffrey has devised of the Virgin
Sabrina therein drowned, and which a late Poet following his steps has
delivered thus in Verse.

-- In flumen pracipitatur Abren,
Nomen Abren fluvio de virgin, nomen eidem
Nomine corrupto, deinde Sabrina datur.
Into the stream was Abren headlong cast;
The River then taking that Virgins name,
Hight Abren, and thereof Sabrin at last,
Which term in speech corrupt implies the same.
Shropp-shire, Worcestershire, and last of all Gloucestershire, infusing a
certain vital moisture into the soil every where as he passes, until at
length he mildely discharges himself into the Severn Sea. But in this shire
it being overshadowed with Woods, after much struggling he gets out
Northward by Lanidlos, Trenewith, Newtowne.
or Newtowne, and Caer-fuse, which, as they say, is both ancient, and enjoys
also ancient privileges; and not far from his East bank, leaves behind
him the Castle, and Town of Montgomery upon the rising of a Rock, having a
Montgomery, and the Latins Mons Gomericus, of Roger de Montgomery Earl of
Shrewesbury; who winning much land heereabout from the Welsh, built it, as we
find in Domesday book. But when his son Robert was attainted for Rebellion,
King Henry the First gave this Castle, and the honor of Montgomery to Baldwin
Bollers in marriage with Sybill of Falais his Niece. According to whose name
the Welshmen call the Tre-Faldwin, that is, Baldwins Town. From this Baldwin
descended Vital Engain who claimed this Honor as right Heir in the time of
king Henry the Third. About which time, the said king Henry the Third raised it
up again out of the very ashes: For, the Welsh had slain the Garrison
Soldiers and overthrown it; and so it lay desolate for many years, and
Florilegus fableth, That he, of the situation of the place then first named it
Montgomery. Certain it is, Anno xj.
that the said king then granted by his Patent, That the Borough of Montgomery
should be a free Borough, with other Liberties. Now the Herber^s are here
seated, branched out from a brother of Sir William Herbert the first Earl of
Penbroke of that name.

Corndon hill.
Hard by this, Corndon Hill mounteth up to a very great height, in the top
whereof are placed certain stones in a round circle like a Coronet, whence it
takes that name, in memorial as it should seem of some victory. A little
higher, Severn glideth down by Trellin, that is, The Town by a Poole,
whereupon it is called Welsh Poole in English. Welsh Poole.
It has a Castle joining unto it on the South side, called Castle Coch of a
kind of reddish stone wherewith it is built, Red Castle.
which within the compass of one wall, contains two Castles: the one
belonged to the Lord of Powis, the other to the Baron Dudley. Cadugane the
son of Blethin, that renowned Britan, of whom I spoke, whiles he was busy
about the building of this Castle, was, as we find in the Epitome of
Lancarbanensis, slain by his nephew Madock. Right over against this
Buttington, well known by reason of the Danes wintering there; out of which,
Adhered Earl of the Mercians expelled them in the year of Christ 894. as
Marianus writes. Severn being past these places, turns by little and little
Eastward, that he may the sooner entertain the small River Tanet, which being
once received into his society, he goes on forward to Shropp-shire.

That MEDIOLANUM a Town of the Ordovices, which both Antonine the Emperor,
and Ptolomee speak of, stood in this Shire, I am in a manner persuaded, upon
probability. The footings whereof, I have sought after with all diligence, but
little or nothing have I found of it; For time consumes the very carcasses
even of Antonine places on either side, be so well known, to wit, BONIUM, now
Bangor by Dee on the one side, and RUTUNIUM, now Rowton Castle on the other
side (for he sets it twelve Italian miles distant from this, and from the
other twenty) The lines of Position, if I may so term them, or of the
distance rather, do cut one another cross between Matrafall and Lan-vethlin,
Matrafall.
which are scarce three miles asunder, and show as it were demonstratively the
site of our Mediolanum. For, this cannot choose but be an infallible way to
find out the situation of a third place, by two others that are known, when
as there are neither hills interposed, nor any troublous turnings of the ways.
As for this Matrafall, which stands five miles Westward Severn, although it
be now but a bare name, was sometime the regal seat of the Princes of Powis
(which may be an argument of the antiquity thereof) and the same much spoken
of by Writers, who record, that after the Princes had once forsaken it, Robert
De veteri Ponte. Lan-vethlin.
Vipont an Englishman built a Castle. But Lan-vethlin, that is, Vethlius
Church, being a little Mercate Town, although it be somewhat farther off from
the crosse-meeting of the said lines, yet comes it far nearer in
resemblance of name to Mediolanum. For, of Methlin, by the propriety of the
British tongue, is made Vethlin, like as of Caer-Merden, is come Caer Verden,
and of Ar-mon, Arvon. Neither does Methlin, more jarre and disagree in sound
from Mediolanum, than either Millano in Italy, Le Million in Xantoigne, or
Methlen in the Lowcountries, which Cities Mediolanum. Which of these
conjectures comes nearer to the truth, judge you: for me it is enough to give
my guess. If I should say, that either Duke Medus, or Prince Olanus built this
Mediolanum of ours, and those Cities of the same name in Gaul, or that whiles
they Sus mediatim Lanata, that is, That a Sow half fleeced with wool, was
dug up, might I not be thought (think you) to catch at Clouds, and fish for
Nifles? Yet notwithstanding the Italians write as much of their Mediolanum. But
seeing that most true it is, that these Cities were built by nations of the
same language (and that the Gauls and Britans spoke all one language I have
prooved already) it is probable enough, that for one, and the same cause they
had also one and the same denomination. Howbeit, this our Mediolanum, in
nothing so far as I know, agrees with that of Italy, unless it be, that
both of them are seated upon a plain between two riverets: and a learned
Italian derived the name of their Mediolanum hence, because it is a City
standing in the midst between Lanas, that is, little rivers, according
Alcester not far off.

This County has adorned no Earl with the name, Earl of Montgomery.
title, and Honor thereof until of late, our Sovereign King James created
Philip Herbert, second Son of Henry Earl of Penbroke by Mary Sidney, for the
singular love and affectionate favor toward him, and for the great hope that
he conceived of his virtues, both Baron Herbert of Shurland, and also Earl of
Montgomery, upon one and the same day at Greenwich, Princes of Powise.
in the year 1605. But, the Princes of Powis, descended from the third Son
of Rotherike the great, held this shire with others in a perpetual line of
succession (although Roger and Hugh of Montgomery, had encroched upon some part
Oen ap Gruffin, ap Guenwinwyn, Lords of Powise.
the last Lord of Powis of the British blood (for the name of Prince had long
before been worn out of use) left one only daughter named Hawise, whom Sir
John Charleton an English man, the Kings Servitour or Gentleman of the Privy
Chamber,
Valect married, and in right of his wife, was by King Edward the Second made
Lord of Powise; who (as I have seen in very many places) gave for his Arms, a
Lion Geules Rampant, in a shield, Or, which he received from his wifes
Progenitors. Of his posterity there were four males that bare this Honorable
title, until that in Edward, the succession of males had an end: for he, the
said Edward, begat of Aeleonor the daughter and one of the heirs of Thomas
Holland Earl of Kent, Jane, Wife to Sir John Gray Knight, and Joice married
unto John Lord Tiptoft, Dupli. Norm. 6. Henr. 5.
from whom the Barons of Dudley and others derive their descent. The said Sir
John Gray, for his martial prowess, and by the bountiful favor of King
Henry the Fifth, Earl of Tanquervill.
received the Earldom of Tanquervill in Normandy, to have unto him and his
heirs males, by delivering one Bassinet at the Castle of Roan every year on
Saint Georges day. This John had a son named Henry, Lord of Powis, in whose
race the title of Powis with the Honor thereof continued until Edward Gray
died well near in our time, leaving no issue lawfully begotten.

This Shire has Parishes 47.

MERIONITH Comitatus olim pars ORDOVICVM


MERIONETH-SHIRE.
FFrom the backeside of Montgomery-shire, MERIONETH-SHIRE, in British
Sire-Verioneth, in Latin Mervinia, and as Giraldus calls it, Terra filiorum
Canaeni, that is, Canaens sons Land, reaches to that crooked Bay, I spoke
of, and to the maine Sea, which on the West side beats so sore upon it, that
it is verily thought to have carried away by violence Cardigan-shire, by the
river Dovy; on the North it boundeth upon Caer-narvon, and Denbigh-shires. As
for the inland part, Mountains exceeding high.
it so rises with mountains standing one by another in plumps, that as
Giraldus says, it is the roughest and most unpleasant Country to see to, in
all Wales. For, it has in it mountains of a wonderful height, yet narrow and
passing sharp at the top in manner of a needle, and those verily not
scattering, here and there one, but standing very thick together, and so even
in height that Shepherds talking together, or railing one at another on the
tops of them if happily they appoint the field to encounter and meet together,
they can hardly do it from morning till night. But let the Reader herein
rely upon Giraldus credit. Eadgar imposed upon Ludwall Prince of these
Countries to present three hundred Wolves yearly unto him by way of Tribute.
Wolves in England destroyed.
For, when, as William of Malmesbury writes, he had for three years performed
this, at the fourth year, he gave over, upon his protestation, that he could
find no more. Yet long time after this, there remained some still, See
Derby-shire and York shire*
as appears for certain, by irreproveable testimonies of Record.

The inhabitants, who for the most part wholly betake themselves to breeding
and feeding of cattaile, and live upon white mea^es, as butter, cheese, etc.
(how ever Strabo Mouthwy.
Eastward where Dovy runs, stands Mouthwy a Commot very well known, which
fell for a childs part of inheritance to William, alias, Wilcock of Mouthwy, a
younger son of Gruffeth Ap Gwenwynwin Lord of Powis: and by his sons daughter
it came unto Sir Hugh Burgh, and by his sons daughters likewise unto the
Families of Newport, Leighton, Lingein, and Mitton, of especial respect in
these parts. Dolegethle.
Where the ^iver Avon runs down more Westward, there is Dolegethle a
Ardudwy, the Castle Arlech, in times past, named Caer Colun stands advanced
upon a very steep rock, and looks down into the sea from aloft, which
being built, as the Inhabitants report, by King Edward the First, took name of
the situation. For, Arlech in the British tongue signifies as much, as upon a
Stony rock. Whiles England was disjointed, and lay torn with civil broiles,
David Ap Ienkin Ap Enion a noble Gentleman of Wales, who took part with the
house of Lancaster, defended it stoutly against King Edward the Fourth: until
that Sir William Herbert Earl of Pembrock making his way with much ado
through the midst of these mountains of Wales, no less passable than the
Alps, assaulted this Castle in such Le Herbert. Herberts way.


A little higher, in the very confines of the Shires, two notable arms of the
Sea Traith Maur, and Traith Bachan, that is, The greater Wash, and the less.

Fastineog.
And not far from hence, near unto a little Village called Fastineog, there
is a street or Port-way paved with stone, that passes through these cumber^ome
and in manner, unpassable Mountains. Which considering that the Britans name
it Sarn Helen, Helens street.
that is, Helens Street, it is not to be thought, but that Helena mother to
Constantine the Great, who did many such like famous works throughout the
Roman Empire, laid the same with stone. Neither stands far from it
Caer-Gai, that is, The Castle of Caius, built by one Caius a Roman, touching
whom the common people dwelling thereby report great wonders.

The Sources of Dee.
In the East side of the Shire, the River Dee springs out of two Fountains,
whence some think it took the name, for, they call it Dwy, which word
imports also among them the number of two (although others would needs have
it so termed of some Divinity, other of the black color) and forthwith
passes entire and whole through Lhintegid, Pimble-meare.
in English Pimble-Meare, and Plenlin-Meare; a Lake spreading far in length
and breadth: and so runs out of it with as great a stream as it entered in.
For, neither shall a man see in Dee the fishes called Guiniad, which are
peculiar to the Meare, Guiniad fishes.
nor yet Salmons in the Meare, which nevertheless are commonly taken in the
River. But see if you please the description of this Lake or Meare, in verse by
the Antiquarian Poet.

Hispida qua tellus Mervinia respicit Eurum,
Est locus antiquo Penlinum nomine dictus,
Hic lacus illimeis in valle Tegeius alta
Late expandit aquas, and vastum conficit orbem,
Excipiens gremio latices, qui font perenni
Vicinis recidunt de montibus, atque sonoris
Illecebris captas demulcent suaviter aures:
Illud habet certe lacus admirabile dictu,
Quantumvis magna pluvia non astuat: atqui
Aere turbato, si ventus murmura tollat,
Excrescit subito rapidis violentior undis,
Et tumido superat contempias flumine ripas.
On the East side of Merioneth, a Country rough that is,
A place there lies by ancient name cleped Penlin, ywis,
Whereas, within a Valley deep, there spreads far a Lake
With waters clear without all mud, which compass huge does take.
Receiving sundry pirles to it and many a running rill,
That spring and fall continually from every neighbor hill.
And with shrill noise and pleasant sounds allured ears do fill.
And verily a wonder't is, of this Lake strange to tell,
Although the rain power down amain, the waters never swell.
But if the air much troubled be, and winds aloft do blow,
It swelles at once, no stream so much, and banks does overflow.
Bala.
On the browe, or edge hereof stands Bala a little Town, endowed with many
immunities, but peopled with few inhabitants, and as rudely and unhandsomely
built, nevertheless it is the chief Mercate Town for these Mountainers.

Hugh Earl of Chester was the first of the Normans that took this Country,
and held it with planting Garrisons, what time as he kept Gruffin Ap Conan, that
is, the Conan prisoner: But Gruffin afterward recovered it with the rest of
his Principality, and left it unto his heirs, until it came unto the fatal
Periode, and so ended in Lhewellin.

It reckons Churches 37.

CAERNARVO^ Comitatus pars olim ORDOVICVM



ABove Merionith-shire, lies that Country which the Britans call Sire
Caer-ar-von, and English men CAER-NARVON-SHIRE, of the principal Town
therein; and before that Wales was laid out into Shires, they termed it, by
the name of Snowden-Forest, and the Latin Historians Snaudonia, of that
Forest, and Ar-vonia, out of the British name because it has Mona, that is,
Anglesey just over against it. The North Merioneth-shire, Conway Ri^
and the East with Denbigh-shire, from which it is severed by the River Conwy.
On that part which looks toward the Sea, especially where it shoots forth a
great way South-west with a Promontorie and stretches out the shores with
crooked turning full against OCTOPITARUM, or Saint David's Land, it is of a very
fruitful soil and garnished all a long with pretty Towns.

As for the more inland part of the Shire, Nature has loftily areared it up
far and near with Mountains standing thick one by another, as if she would
here have compacted the joints of this Island within the bowels of the earth:
and made The Alps Britany.
if he please, term these Mountains, the British Alps: for besides that they
are the greatest of the whole Island, they are no less steep also with
cragged and rent Rocks on every side than the Alps of Italy, yea and all of
them compass one Mountain round about, which over-topping the rest so towreth
up with his head aloft in the air, as he may seem not to threaten the Sky,
but to thrust his

Whence it is, that all these hills are in British by one name termed Craig
Eriry, in English Snow-don, Snow-don hills.
which in both languages, sound as much as Snowie Mountains: like as Niphates
in Armenia, and Imaus in Scythia, took their names, as Pliny witnesses of
Snow. Nevertheless, so rank are they with grass, that it is a very common
speech among the Welsh, That the Mountains Eriry will yield sufficient pasture
for all the Cattaile in Wales, if they were put upon them together. Concerning
the two Meares on the top of these, in the one of which floreth a wandering
Island, Giraldus, have believed it for a verity. Yet certain it is, that
there be in the very top of these Mountains Pooles in deed and standing
Waters: whereupon Gervase of Tilbury in his Book entitled Otia Imperialia,
writes thus.

In the Land of Wales within the bounds of great Britain, there be high Hills
that have laid their foundations upon most hard Rocks, and in the top
thereof the earth is crusted over with such a coat of waterish moisture, that
wheresoever a man do but lightly set his foot, he shall perceive the ground
to stir the length of a stones cast from him: whereupon when These
Mountainers John Salisbury in his Polycraticon, by a new forged Latin name
termed Nivicollinos, Nivicollini.
that is, Snow-down inhabitants, of whom in King Henry the Second his days he
wrote thus.

The Snow-downe Britans make inrodes, and being now come out of their Caves and
lurking

But come we down now from the Mountains into the Champion Plains, which
because we find no where else but by the Sea side, it may suffice to coast
only along the shore. The Promontory which I said before shoots out toward
the South-west, Canganum.
is in Ptolomee called according to the diversity of copies, CANGANUM,
JANGANUM, and LANGANUM. Which is the truest name I know not, Lhein, Lhein.
which runs forth with a narrow and even by-land, having larger and more
open fields than the rest of the Country, and the same yielding Barley most
plenteously. Two little Towns it shows and no more, that are memorable.
Farther within upon the Creek, Pulhely. Nevin.
is Pullhely, that is, that Salt Meare or Poole: more outward, by the Irish Sea
(hat beats upon the other side of the Bi-land) is Nevin, a Village having a
Merket kept in it: wherein the Nobility of England, in the year of our Lord
1284. in a Triumph over the Welsh did celebrate the memory of Arthur the great,
as Florilegus writes, with Iustes, Tournaments and festival pomp. If any
other Towns flourished here, then were they destroyed, when Hugh Earl
Chester, The life of Gruffin.
Robert of Rudland, and Guarin of Salop, entering into this Country first of all
the Normans, so wasted this Promontory, that for the space of seven whole
years, it lay dispeopled and desolate.

From Nevin, the shore pointed and endented with one or two elbowes lying out
into the sea tends Northward, and then turning afront North-east, by a narrow
sea or Frith (they call it Menai) it serves the Isle Anglesey from the firm
land. Menai.
Upon this straight or narrow sea stood SEGONTIUM, Segontium.
a City which Antonine the Emperor makes mention of: some relics of the
walls I saw near unto a little Church built in honor of Saint Pulblicius.
Lhan Beblin.
It took the name of a River running by the side of it, which yet at this day
is called Seiont, and issues out of the Poole Lin-Peru. In Tor-coch; Tor-coch
fishes.
of the belly that is somewhat red. Now, seeing that in an ancient copy of
Ptolomee, SETANTIORUM PORTUS is here placed, which according to other copies is
set farther off, if I should read in stead of it, SEGONTIORUM PORTUS, that is,
the Haven of the Segontians, and say it stood upon the mouth of this River, I
should perhaps aim at the truth: if not, yet should I obtain pardon for my
conjecture of a courteous Reader.

This City Ninnius called Caer Custenith; and he that wrote the life of
Gruffin the Son of Conan, records, that Hugh Earl of Chester built a
Castle in Hean Caer Custenith, that is, as the Latin Interpreter transl^teth
it, in the ancient City of Constantine And Matthew of Westminster writes
(but let him make it good if he can) that the body of Constantius, Father to
Constantine the Great was here found in the year of our Lord 1283. and
honorably bestowed in the Church of the new City by the commandment of King
Edward the First. Who out of the ruins of this Town, at the same time raised
the City Caer-narvon somewhat higher, upon the Rivers mouth, so, as that on
the West and North-sides it is watered therewith. Which, Caer-narvon.
as it was called Caer-narvon because it stands right over against the Island
Mona (for so much does the word import) so, it has communicated that name unto
the whole Country; for, hereupon the English men call it Caer-narvon-shire.
This is encompassed with a very small circuit of walls about it and in
Caer-narvon; who also was of the English line the first Prince of Wales; and
also the Princes of Wales had here their Chauncerie, their Exchequer, and
their Justice for North Wales. About seven miles hence by the same narrow Sea
stands Bangor or Banchor low seated, Banchor as or would say Pe^^chor, that
is, principal Qui as others thin
enclosed on the South side with a Mountain of great height, on the North
with a little hill: so called A choro pulchro, that is, of a fair quire, or as
some would have it, quasi Locus Chori, that is, as if it were the place of a
quire. Which being a Bishops See, has within the Diocese thereof 96. Parishes.
The Church, was consecrated unto Daniel sometime Bishop thereof: but that which
now stands is of no especial fair building: for, Owen Glendoverdwy Deney
Bishop of the same repaired about the time of King Henry the Seventh, yet it
scarcely recovered the former dignity. Now the Town is small, The life of
Gruffin.
but in times past so large, that for the greatness thereof it was called
Banchor Vaur, that is, Great Banchor, and Hugh Earl of Chester fortified it
with a Castle, whereof I could find no footings at all, though I sought them
with all diligent inquiry: But that Castle was situate upon the very entry of
the said narrow Sea. Over the Menay, or straight hereby, King Edward the First,
that he might transport his Army into Mona, or Anglesey (whereof I must treat
anon in Suctonius Paulinus conveyed over his Roman Soldiers long before into
Mona, his Horsemen at a Fourd, and the Footmen in little flat botomed boats,
as we read in Tacitus. From hence the shore raising it self with a bending
ascent, runs on by Penmaen-maur, Pen-maen-maur.
that is, The great stony head, a very exceeding high and steep Rock, which
hanging over the Sea when it is flood, affourdeth a very narrow path way for
passengers, having on the one side huge stones over their heads, as if they
were ready to fall upon them, on the other side the raging Ocean lying of a
wonderful steep depth under it. But after a man has passed over this,
together with Pen-maen bychan, that is, the lesser stony head, he shall come to
an open broad plain, that reaches as far Conwey Rive^
which limiteth this Shire on the East side. This River in Ptolomee after a
corrupt manner of writing Greek, is called TOISOVIUS, for CONOVIUS. It issues
out of a Poole of the same name in the South border of the Shire, and being
pent in, and, as it were, strangled runs apace within a very narrow channel,
as far almost as to the mouth thereof, breeding certain Shell-fishes, which
being conceived of an Heavenly deaw, Pearls. Conwey Town.
bring forth Pearls; and there, gives he name unto the Town CONOVIUM which
Antonine mentions. And although it now lie all along, and that name there be
utterly extinct, yet by a new name it does covertly implie the antiquity. For a
very small and poor village standing among the rubbish thereof is called Caer
hean, that is, the ancient City. Out of the Aber-Conwey, that is, the mouth of
Conwey; which place Hugh of Chester had before-time fortified. But this New
Conovium, or Aber-Conwey, being strongly situated and fensed both with walls,
and also with a very proper Castle by the Rivers side, deserves the name
rather of a pretty City than of a Town, but that it is not replenished with
Inhabitants.

Opposite unto this Town, and yet on this side of the River which is passed by
ferry, and not by bridge, reaches out a huge Promontory with a bending elbow
as if nature purposed to make there a road and harbor for Ships) which is also
counted part of this Shire, Gogarth.
and is named Gogarth: wherein stood Diganwy, an ancient City just Conwey,
where it issues into the Sea: which was burnt many years ago with lightning.
Dictum.
And I am of opinion, that it was the City DICTUM; where, under the later
Emperors the Captain over the band of the Nervians Dictenses kept their
guard. Diganwy. Ganoc.
And for that, afterward it was called Diganwy, who sees not that the said
Canwey came of Conwey, and from thence the English name Ganoc? For, so was that
Castle called, which afterward King Henry the Third built in that

Straight after the Normans coming into this Island, Gruffin ap Conan,
governed this Country, who being not able to repress the English troops who
swarmed into Wales, yielded otherwhiles unto the tempest: and at length when
with his integrity and uprightness he had regained the favor of King Henry
the First, he easily also recovered his own lands of the English, and left
them to his heirs successively, until the time of Lhewelyn ap Gruffith, who
when he had provoked his own Brethren with wrongs, and the English men with
inrodes, was brought to this pass, that he held this hilly Country together
with the Isle Anglesey of King Edward the First as Tenant in Fee, and paid for
it yearly a thousand Marks. Which conditions

It has in it Parish Churches 68.

ANGLESEY Conitatus, olim MONA INSULA Druidum seeds, Britannice Tir Mon


THE ISLE MONA, or of ANGLESEY.
THe County of Caer-Nar-von, which I last ran through, took name as I said
erewhile, of the chief Town therein: Isle Mona which lies over against it:
and requires, as it were of right, that I should treat of it in his due place,
which unwillingly heretofore (I confess) I referred to the out Islands:
whereas by right, it is to be placed among the Shires. This Isle called of the
Romans MONA, Mona. Anglesey.
of the Britans Mon, and Tir-Mon, that is, the land of Mon and Ynis Dowil, that
is, A shadowy or dark Island, of the ancient Anglo-Saxons (...), and at last,
after that the English men became Lords of it (...)-ea, and (...), as one would
say, The English men's Island, being severed from the Continent of Britain with
the small narrow straight of Menai, and on all parts Giraldus says, the ground
may seem dry and stony, nothing sightly and unpleasant, and for the outward
quality resembles wholly the land Pebidia^c, that lies hard unto Saint
David's: yet for the inward gift of nature, it is far unlike. For, above all
the Coasts of Wales it is without comparison most plentiful of Wheat, in so
much as by way of a Proverb they are wont to say of it in the Welsh language,
Mon Mam Cymbry, which is as much in English, As Mon is the mother of Wales:
because when all other Countries round about do fail, this alone with the
exceeding fat soil, and plentiful increase of Corn was wont to sustain all
Wales. In Cattaile also it is passing rich, and sends out

This is that most notable Isle MONA, Druid^.
the ancient seat of the Druides, attempted first by Paulinus Suetonius, and
brought under the Roman Empire by Julius Agricola. This Suetonius Paulinus
under the reign of Nero, as Tacitus writes, made all preparation to invade
the Isle Mona inhabited by a strong and stout Nation, and then the receptacle
of Fugitives. He built Flat-bothom vessels, because the Sea is shalow, the
landing-shore uncertain. Thus their footmen passed over, and after them the
Horsemen following by Paulinus was busy in these exploits, news came unto him
of a sudden revolt through the whole Province, which stayed his enterprise.
Afterward, as the same Tacitus writes, Julius Agricola, purposed

Many ages after, it was Conquered by the English men, and took their name, as
being called in old time in the Saxons language (...), now commonly Anglesey,
as one would say, The English men's Island. But seeing that Humfrey Lhuid in a
very learned Epistle to that learned Ortelius, has restored this Island to the
due name and dignity, there is no reason that any man here should require my
diligence. Yet thus much will I add unto the rest. When the Empire of the
Romans in Britain now was in declining and going downward, some out of
Ireland, entered in by stealth into this Isle also and nestled there. For,
besides certain Mounts of earth entrenched about, which they call The Irish
men's cotages, there is a place also, named In Hericy of the Irish men, who as
we find it recorded in the book of Triades, under the leading of Sirigus, put
the Britans to flight in that place.

Neither was it grievously infested only by the English men, but also by the
Norvegians. Likewise in the year of our redemption 1000. King Aethelreds
fleet having skoured the Seas round about the said Isle, wasted it in all
hostile manner. After this, the two Norman Hughes, the one Earl of Chester, and
the other Earl of Shrewsburie greatly afflicted it, and built Castle
Aber-Llienioc for to restrain and keep under the Inhabitants. But Magnus the
Norwegian arriving here at the very same time, shot the said Hugh Earl of
Shrewsbury through with an Arrow, and after he had ransacked the Island,
departed. The English men moreover afterward Beaumarish, which King Edward the
First built in the East Side of the Isle upon a marish ground, and for the
situation thereof gave it this goodly fair name, whereas before time it was
called Bonover, who also fortified it with a Castle, which notwithstanding may
seem never to have been finished: the Governor whereof is the right
Worshipful Sir Richard Bulkley Knight, whose courtesy toward me when I came
to visit these places, I cannot choose but evermore acknowledge with most
hearty thankfulness.

Lhan-vays.
Hard unto Beau-Marish, lies Lhan-vays, a famous religious house in times past
of the Friars Minors, unto whom the Kings of England showed themselves very
bountiful Patrons, as well in regard of the Friars holiness, who there
conversed, as also because there (that I may speak out of the public records
of the Kingdom) were buried a daughter of King John, 2. Pars Pat. anno 2. H. 5.
a son of the King of the Danes, the bodies also of the Lord Clifford, and of
other Lords, Knights, and Squires, who in the time of the noble and renowned
Kings of England, were slain in the Wars against the Welsh.

Newburg.
The next Town in name to Beau-Marish, is Newburg called in British Rossur
standing ten miles off Westward, which having been a long time greatly annoyed
with heaps Aber-fraw.
Aber-fraw is not far from hence, which is now but an obscure and mean
Town, yet in times past it excelled all the rest far in worth and dignity,
as having Guineth, or North Wales. And in the utmost Promontorie Westward, Holy
head.
which we call Holy-head, there stands a little poor Town, Saint Kibie. As
touching the Islands a^^joyning to A^^glesey, See among the British Isles.
in British Caer-Guby so named of Kibie a right holy man, and a disciple of
Saint Hilarie of Poitiers, who therein devoted himself to the service of God,
and from whence there is an usual passage over into Ireland. All the rest of
this Island is well bespred with Villages, which because they have in them
nothing materially memorable, I will cross over into the Continent, and view
Denbigh-shire.

In this County there are reckoned Parishes 74.

DENBIGH Comitatus pars Olim ORDOVICVM


DENBIGH-SHIRE.
ON this side of the River Conwey, DENBIGH-SHIRE, in Welsh Sire Denbigh,
retyreth more within the Country from the Sea, and shoots Eastward in one
place as far as to the River Dee. On the North North-West, first the Sea for
a small space, and then Flint-shire, on the West Merionith and
Montgomery-shires, on the East Cheshire, and Shropp-shire encompasse Dee, it
finds her far more kind.

The West part, but that it is somewhat more plentiful and pleasant toward the
sea side, is but here and there inhabited, and mounteth up more with bare and
hungry hills: but yet the painful diligence and witty industry of the
husbandmen has begun a good while since to overcome this leanness of the
soil, where the hills settle any thing flattish, as in other parts of Wales
likewise. For, after they have with a broad kind of spade pared away the upper
coat, as it were, or sord of the Virgil and Horace. Among these Hills there is
a place commonly called Cerigy Drudion, that is, The stones of the Druidae, and
certain little columns or pillars are seen at Yvoellas, with inscriptions in
them of strange Characters, which some imagine to have been erected by the
Druides: and not far from Clocainog, this inscription is read in a stone.

AMILLIN TOVISATOC. By the Vale side where these mountains begin now to wax
thinner, Denbigh.
upon the hanging of a rock stands Denbigh, called of our Britans by a more
ancient name, Cled Fryn-yn Ross, that is, A rough hill in Ross, for so they
call that part of the Shire: which King Edward the First gave with other fair
lands and possessions to David the brother of Lhewellin. But when he soon
after being found guilty of high treason was beheaded, Henry Lacy Earl of
Lincoln obtained it by the grant of the said Edward: and he fortified it with
a wall about, not large in circuit, but strong, and on the South side with a
proper Castle, strengthened with high Towers. In the well whereof, after that
his only son fortuned to be drowned, the most sorrowful father conceived
such grief, that he gave over the work and left it unfinished. And after his
death, the Town with the rest of the possessions descended unto the house of
Lancaster by his daughter Alice, who survived: From whom notwithstanding it
came first through the liberality of King Edward the Second (when the said
house was dejected) unto Hugh Spenser Earl of Winchester; then, to Roger
Mortimer by covenant and composition with King Edward the Third: and the said
Mortimers Arms are to be seen upon the chief gate. But after that he was
executed, Ross, and Riewinoc, etc. were granted to William Montacute after
Earl of Salisbury, for supprising of Mortimer, and shortly after it was
restored unto the Mortimers, and by them at length descended to the Family of
York. At which time, they of the House of Lancaster for the malice they bare
unto Edward the Fourth, who was of the family of York, did much hurt unto it.
And then, either because the inhabitants like not the steep situation thereof
(for the carriage up and Robert Earl of Leicester, and partly with the money
which they have gathered of many well disposed throughout England: For, the
said Robert, in the year 1564. was created by Queen Elizabeth Baron of
Deubigh, to him and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten. Neither is there
any one Barony in all England that has more Gentlemen

Diffrin Cluid.
Now are we come into the very heart of the shire, where Nature having removed
the hills out of the way on both sides, to show what she could do in a rough
country, has spread beneath them a most beautiful pleasant vale reaching 17.
miles in length from South to North, and five miles or thereabout in breadth,
which lies open only toward the sea and the clearing North wind: otherwise
environed it is on every side with high hills, and those from the East side,
as it were embatled. For such is the wonderful workmanship of nature, that the
tops of these mountains resemble in fashion the battlement of walls. Among
which the highest is Moilenlly, on the top whereof I saw a warlike fense with
trench and rampire; also a little fountain Cluid River.
The river Cluid, increased with beckes and brooks resorting unto it from the
hills on each side, does from the very springhead part it in twain running
through the midst of it, whence in ancient time it was named Strat Cluid; For,
Marianus makes mention of a King of the Strat-Clud of the Welsh; and at this
day it is commonly Diffryn Cluid, that is, The Vale of Cluid: wherein, as some
have recorded, certain Britans which came out of Scotland, after they had
driven forth the English, erected a petty Kingdom. On the East bank of Cluid,
in the South part of the vale, stands Ruthin, in Latin writers Ruthunia, in
British Ruthun, the greatest market town in all the Vale, full of Inhabitants,
and well replenished with buildings; famous also not long since by reason of a
large and very fair Castle able to receive and entertain a great household.
Which with the Town, Reginald Gray to whom King Edward the First granted it,
and Roger Gray, built, having obtained license of the King, the Bishop of Saint
Asaph, and the Parson of the Church of Lhan-Ruth, in whose Parish the place is
sited. Unto him in recompense for his part of the good Edward the First had
given in manner the whole Vale: and it was the seat of his heirs, men of great
honor; and at length styled with the Title of Earl of Kent, until that
Richard Gray Earl of Kent and Lord of Ruthin having no issue nor care of his
brother Henry, passed away for a sum of money this his ancient inheritance
unto King Henry the Seventh: But of late days the bounteous magnificence of
Queen Elizabeth bestowed it upon Ambrose Dudley Earl of Warwick, together
with rich revenewes in the Vale.

When you ascend out of the vale Eastward, you come to Yale, a little hilly
country, and in comparison of the Regions beneath and round about it passing
high, so that no river from elsewhere comes into it, and it sends forth
some from it. By reason Alen, which rising first in it, undermineth the ground
and once or twice hides himself, I know not. The Mountains are full of Neat,
sheep, and Goats: the valleys in some plenteous enough of Corn, especially
Alen. But the more Westerly part is not so fruitful, and in some places is a
very heath, and altogether barraine. Neither has it any thing memorable, save
only a little Abbay, now wholly decayed, but standing most richly and
pleasantly in a Vale, which among the woody hills cutteth it self overthwart
in manner of a cross, Valle Cruel^. Vale of the Cross.
whereupon it was called in Latin Vallis Crucis, that is, The Vale of the
Cross, and in British Lhane-Gwest.

From hence more Eastward, the Territory called in Welsh Mailor Gymraig, that
is, Welsh Mailor, in English Bromfield, reaches as far as to the river Dee.
A small Territory, Lead. Wrexham
but very rich and pleasant, plentiful withal of Lead, especially near unto
Moinglath, a little Town which took the name of Mines. Here is Wrexham
Leonis Castrum, happily so called of the twenty Legion denominated Victrix,
which a little higher on the other bank of Dee lay garrisoned: now it goes
commonly under the name of Holt: Holt*
and is thought to have been re-edified of late by Sir William Stanley, and
long since by John Earl of Warren, who being a Guardian of trust unto Madock a
Welsh Lord, conveyed falsely from his Ward, this Lordship together with Yale
unto himself. But from the Earls of Warren, it came unto the Fitz-Alans
Earls of Arundell, *
and from them to Sir William Beauchamp Baron of Abergevenney, and afterward to
Sir William Stanley Chamberlain to King

Beneath Bromfield, Southward lies Chirke, in Welsh Gwain, being also very
hilly, but well known in elder ages for two Castles, Chirkes.
Chirke which gave it the name, built by Roger Mortimer, Castle Dinas Bran.
and Castle Dinas Bran, situate in the hanging of a mighty high hill pointed in
the top: where of note there remains nothing but the very ruins. The common
sort affirm, that Brennius the General of the Galls both built and so named
it: others interpret the name to this sense, The Castle of the Kings Palace.
For, Bren in British signifies a King: Bren. Brennus*
whence perhaps that most puissant King of Gauls and Britans both, was by way
of excellency called Brennus: But others again draw this name from the high
situation upon an hill, which the Britans term Bren, and in mine opinion this
their conjecture carries with it more probability. In the time of King Henry
the Third, it was the mansion place of Gruffith Ap Madoc, who when he took
part with the English against the Welsh, was wont here to make his abode: but
after his death, Roger Mortimer who had the charge and tuition of his son
Lhewellin, like as John Earl of Warren, of whom I spoke seized Bromfield; so
he seized also this Chirck, into his possession.

When the State of the Welsh by reason of their own civil dissensions, and
the Chester and of Warren, the Mortimers, Lacy, and the Greies, that I spoke
of, first of all the Normans brought this little Country of Denbigh by little
and little into their own hands and left possession thereof to their heirs.
Neither was it made a Shire before King Henry the Eighth his days: at which
time Radnor, Brechnock, and Montgomery, by authority of the Parliament were
ordained to be Shires.

In this Shire there be Parishes 57,

FLINT Comitatus quem ORDOVICES Olim Incosuerunt


FLINT-SHIRE.
RIGHT over against Denbigh-shire North-East-ward lies FLINT-SHIRE, a small
Territory, more in length than in breadth: hemmed in on the North side with the
Irish Sea, or rather with an Arm of the same: on the East with Cheshire, on
other parts with Denbigh-shire. It is no mountain Dee an Arm of the Sea,
especially every first Year that they be new broken uppe and sown, bear in
some places Barley, in others Wheat, but generally throughout Rye with twenty
fold increase and better, and afterward four or five Crops together of Otes.

In the Confines of this Shire and Denbigh-shire where the hills grow more
flat and plain with a softer fall, and an easier descent down into the Vale,
in the very gullet and entry thereof, Varis*
the Romans placed a little City named VARIS, which Antonine the Emperor
places nineteen miles from CONOVIUM. This without any maime of the name is
called at this day Bod-Vari, Bod-vari.
that is, Mansion Vari, and the next little hill hard by which the inhabitants
thereabout commonly call Moyly Gaer, that is, The Mountain of the City,
shows the footings of a City indeed, that has been destroyed. But what the
name should signify it appears not. I for my part have been of opinion
elsewhere, that Varia in the old British language signified a Passage, and
accordingly have interpreted these words Durnovaria and Isannaevaria, The
passage of a water, and the passage of Isanna. And for this opinion of mine
makes well the situation of VARIS in that place where only there lies open
an easy passage betwixt the hills. And not three miles from hence stands
Caer-wisk, Caer-wisk.
the name whereof although it makes some show of Antiquity, yet found I
nothing ancient there, nor worth the observation.

Beneath this VARIS, or Bodvari, in the vale glideth Cluid, and streightwayes
Elwy a little Rivere^ conjoyneth it self with it, where there is a Bishops
See. This place the Britans call, according to the River Llan-Elwy, the
Englishmen of Asaph the Patron thereof Saint Asaph. Saint Asaph.
And the Historiographers, Asaphensis. Neither is the Town for any beauty it
has, nor the Church for building or bravery memorable: yet something would be
said of it, in regard of Antiquity.

For, Capgrave.
about the year of our Redemption 560. Kentigern Bishop of Glasco, being fled
hither out of Scotland placed here a Bishops See, and erected a Monastery,
Asaph a most godly and upright man Governor over this Monastery, of whom it
took the name which now it has. The Bishop of this See has under his
Jurisdiction about 128. Parishes, the Ecclesiastical Benefices whereof, were
wont to be bestowed, when the Sea was void by the Archbishop of Canterbury,
without interruption until the time of King Henry the Eighth, Canterbury.

Above this, Ruthlan.
Ruthlan, taking the name of the ruddy and red bank of C^uid, on which it
stands, makes a good show with a Castle, but now almost consumed by very age.
Lhewellin Ap Sisil Prince of Wales, first built it; and Robert surnamed de
Nephew of Hugh Earl of Chester, was the first that by force won it from the
Welsh, as being Captain Lieutenant to the said Hugh, who fortified it with new
works, and bulwarks: Afterward (as Rob. Abbat de Monte has written) King
Henry the Second, when he had repaired this Castle gave it unto Hugh Beauchamp.

Beneath this, Cluid streightwayes emptieth it self into the Sea; And albeit
the Valley at the very mouth seems to carry a lower level and to lie under
the Sea, yet the water never overfloweth into the Vale; but as it were, by a
natural obstacle, sta^eth within the very brinkes of the shore, not without
the exceeding great admiration of Gods Providence. From hence the shore tending
by little and little Eastward, Disart Castle, so called because it was situate
on the rising of a cliffe, Basing work.
or as some would have it, as it were Desert: then by Basing work, which also
King Henry the Second granted unto Hugh Beauchamp.

Haly-well.
Beneath this we saw the little Town Haly-well, as one would say, holy well,
where there is that fountain frequented by Pilgrims for the memorial of the
Christian Virgin Winefride, Saint Winefrid.
ravished there perforce and beheaded by a Tyranne, as also for the moss there
growing of a most sweet and pleasant smell. Out of which Well there gusheth
forth a Brook among stones, which represent bloody spots upon them; and it
carries so violent a stream that presently it is able to drive a mill. Over
the very Well there stands a Chapel built of stone right curiously wrought,
Winefride, how her head was cut off, and set on again by Saint Benn^. Near
unto this place in the time of Giraldus, who yet knew not this Well, There was,
as himself writes, a rich Vein and gainefull Mine of silver, where men in
seeking after silver pierced and pried into the very bowels of the Earth.

This part of the Country, because it smileth so pleasantly upon the beholders
with a beautiful show, and was long since subject unto Englishmen, the Welsh
named Teg-Engle, that is, Fair England. But whereas one has termed it
Tegenia, and thought that the Igeni there planted themselves, take heed I
advise you, that you be not overhasty to believe him. Certes, the name of the
Iceni wrong put down Flint.
Then upon the shore, you may see Flint Castle, which King Henry the Second
began, and King Edward the First finished: and it gave the name unto this
Shire: *
where King Richard the Second circumvented by them who should have been most
trusty, was cunningly induced to renounce the Crown as unable for certain
defects to rule; and was delivered into the hands of Henry of Lancaster Duke of
Hereford, who soon after claimed the Kingdom and Crown being then void by
his cession, as his inheritance descended from King Henry the Third, and to
this his devised claim the Parliament assented, and he was established in the
Kingdom. After Flint by the East border of the Shire, near to Chesshire,
stands Hawarden commonly called Harden-Castle, Harden.
not far from the shore; David Lhewellins brother had led away prisoner Roger
Clifford, Justice of Wales, he raised thereby a most bloody War against
himself and his people, wherein the Princedome of the Welsh Nation was utterly
overthrown. But this Castle anciently holden by the Seneschalship of the
Earls of Chester, was Barons of Mont-hault* Or de monte Alto.
the seat of the Barons de Mount-hauls, who grew up to a most honorable
family, and gave for their Arms in A Shield Azure a Lion rampant Argent: and
bettered their dignity and estate by marriage with Cecily one of the coheires
of Hugh D'Albeney Earl of Arundell. But in the end, for default of male issue
Robert the last Baron of this race, made it over as I have said already, to
Isabell Queen of England wife to King Edward the Second. Howbeit the
possession of the Castle was transferred Stanleys, now Earls of Darby.

Through the South part of this Shire lying beneath these places above named,
wandereth Ale^ a little River: near unto which in an hill hard by Kilken, a
small Hope Castle.
Upon this Alen, stands Hope Castle in Welsh Caer-Gurle, in which King Edward
the First retired himself when the Welshmen had upon the sudden set upon his
soldiers being out of array: and where good milstones are wrought out of the
rock: Milstones. Mold.
also, Mold, in Welsh Guide Cruc a Castle, belonging in ancient time to the
Barons of Monthault: both which places show many tokens of Antiquity.

Near unto Hope, a certain Gardener, when I was first writing this work,
digging somewhat deep into the ground, happened upon a very ancient piece of
work, concerning which there grew many diverse opinions of sundry men: But M.
Vitruvius Pollio, shall very well perceive, it was nothing else but a Stouph or
hot house begun by the Romans, who as their riotous excess grew together
with their wealth, Bathes or hot waters.
used Bathes exceeding much. In length it was five elns, in breadth four, and
about half an eln deep, enclosed with Walls of hard stone, the paving laid
with brick pargetted with lime mortar: the arched roof over it supported with
small pillars made of brick, which roof was of tiles pargetted over likewise
very smoothe, having holes here and there through it, wherein were placed
certain earthen pipes of Potters work, by which the heat was conveyed, and
so as he says, Volvebant hypocausta vaporem, that is, the Stuples did send
away a waulming hot vapor. And who would not Giraldus wondered at especially
in Isca? writing thus as he did of the Romans works. That (says he) which a
man would judge among other things notable, there may you see on every side
Stouphs made with marveilous great skill, breathing out heat closely at
certain holes in the sides, and narrow tunnels. Whose work this was the tiles
there did declare being imprinted with these words LEGIO XX. that is, The
twentieth Legion, which, as I have showed already before, abode at Chester
scarce six miles a side from hence.

Near unto this River Alen, in a certain straight set about with woods
stands Coles-hull, Coles-hul.
Giraldus terms it Carbonarium collem, that is, Coals Hill, where when
Essex, who in right of inheritance was Standerd-bearer to the Kings of England.
For which cause he being afterward charged with treason, and by his challenger
overcome in combat, had his goods confiscate and seized into the Kings hands,
and he displeased with himself for his cowardice, put on a coule, and became a
Monk.

Another little parcel there is of this Shire on this side the River Dee,
dismembered English Mailor
which the English call English Mailor. Of this I treated in the County of
Chester, whiles I spoke of Bangor: and there is no reason to iterate the same
here which has been already spoken of before. Neither does it afford any
thing in it worth the reporting, Ha-meere.
unless it be Han-meere, by ae Meres side, whereof a right ancient and
worshipful Family there dwelling, took their surname.

The Earls of Chester as they skirmished by occasions, Earls of Chester.
and advantage of opportunity with the Welsh, were the first Normans that
brought this Country under their subjection, whereupon we read in ancient
Records. The County of Flint appertains to the Dignity of the sword of
Chester: and the eldest sons of the K.K. Chester and of Flint. But
notwithstanding King Edward the First, supposing it would be very commodious
both for the maintenance of his own power and also to keep under the Welsh,
held in his own hands both this and all the sea Coast of Wales. As for the
inland Countries, he gave them to his Nobles as he thought good: following
Augustus, The prudent policy of Edward the First.
who undertook himself to govern the Provinces that were strongest and lay
outmost, but permitted Proconsuls by lot to rule the rest. Which he did in show
to defend the Empire, but in very deed to have all the arms and martial men
under his own command.

In this County of Flint there be Parishes in all. 28.

PRINCES OF WALES.
AS concerning the Princes of Wales of British blood in ancient times, you may
read in the History of Wales published in print: For my part I think it
requisite and pertinent to my intended purpose to set down summarily those of
latter days, descended

King Edward the First, unto whom his Father King Henry the Third had granted
the Principality of Wales, when he had obtained the Crown, and Lhewellin Ap.
Gryffith the last Prince of the British race was slain, and thereby the
sinnewes as it were of the Principality were cut: in the twelfth year of his
Reign, united the same unto the Kingdom of England: See page 114
And the whole Province swear fealty and allegiance unto Caernarvon his Son
whom he made Prince of Wales. But King Edward the Second conferred not upon his
Son Edward, the title of Prince of Wales, but only the name of Earl of
Chester and of Flint, so far as I ever could learn out of the Records, and
by that title summoned him to Parliament being then nine years old. King
Edward the Third first Created his eldest Son Edward surnamed the Black
Prince the Mirour of Chivalry (being then Duke of Cornwall and Earl of
Chester) Prince of Wales by solemn investure, See page 164
with a cap of estate, and Coronet set on his head, Afterward a golden vierge
was used.
a gold ring put upon his finger, and Bordeaux the said Princes Son, as heir
apparent to the Crown, who was deposed from his Kingdom by King Henry the
Fourth, and having no issue was cruelly dispatched by violent death. The said
King Henry the Fourth at the formal request of the Lords and Commons bestowed
Tewkesbury who made him away, ordained in his room, Edward his own Son,
Arthur, Prince of Wales, and when he was dead, Henry, his other Son well
known in the world by the name of King Henry the Eighth. Every one of these
had the Principality of Wales given unto them by the foresaid solemn
investure, and delivery of a Patent, To hold to themselves and their Heirs,
Kings of England. For Kings would not bereave themselves of so excellent an
occasion to do well by their Eldest or, that you may read it abridged out of
the Act of Parliament. The Kings Country This Act, and the calm command of
King Henry the Seventh preparing way for it, effected that in a short time,
which the violent power of other Kings arms, and especially of Henry the
Fourth with Brigantes.

BRIGANTES.
BRITAIN, which hitherto has, as it were, launched out with huge
Promontories, looking on the one side toward Germany, on the other side toward
Ireland, now as if it were afraid of the Sea violently inrushing upon it
withdraws it self farther in, and by making larger separations of lands
retireth back, gathered into a far narrower breadth. For, it is not past one
hundred miles broad from coast to coast, which on both sides pass on in a
manner with straight and direct shores Northward, as BRIGANTES. For, Pliny
writes, that they dwelt from the East Sea to the West. A nation this was right
valiant, populous withal, and of especial note among ancient Authors,
Brigantes whereof they took name.
who all do name them, BRIGANTES, unless it be Stephanus only, in his book
Of Cities; who called them BRIGAE: in which place, that which he wrote of them
is defective at this day in the books, by reason that the sentence is
imperfect. If I should think that these were called Brigantes, of Briga, which
in the ancient Spanish tongue signified A City, I should not satisfy my
self; seeing it appears for certain out of Strabo, that it is a mere
Spanish word. If I were of opinion with Goropius that out of the Low Dutch
tongue, they were termed Brigantes, as one would say Freehands, should I not
obtrude upon you his dreams for dainties? Howsoever the case stands, our
Britanes, or Welsh-men, if they see any of a bad disposition, and audaciously
playing lawless and lewd parts, use to say of them by way of a Wharret
Brigans, that is, They play the Brigants. And the Frenchmen at this day,
alluding as it seems to the ancient language of the Gauls, usually term
such lewd fellows Brigans like as Pirates Ships, Brigantins. See Pasquier i^
Les Recherche de France. lib. cap. 40.
But whether the force of the word was such in old time in the Gauls or
Britanes language, or whether our Brigantes were such like men, I dare not
determine. Yet, if my memory fail me not, Strabo calls the Brigantes (a
people about Alps) Grassatores, that is, Robbers, and Julius a Belgian a young
man of desperate boldness, who counted power, authority, honesty, and virtue
to be nothing but naked names, is in Tacitus surnamed Briganticus. Brigantes
may seem to have been tainted, when they so robbed and spoiled the neighbor
inhabitants, that the Emperor Antoninus Pius for this cause took away a great
part of their Country from them, as Pausanias witnesses, who writes thus of
them: (...) Antoninus Pius cut the Brigantes in Britain short, of a great part
of their Country, because they began to take arms and in hostile manner to
invade Genunia, a Region subject to the Romans. Neither will any, I hope, take
this as a reproach: Surely I should seem far unlike my self, if I fell now
to tax ignominiously any private person, much less a Nation. Neither was this
counted a reproachful imputation in that warlike age, when all Nations
reckoned that their right, which they could win, or hold by might Roberies,
says Caesar, among the Germans are not noted with infamy, such I mean as are
committed without the borders of every State, and they allow the practice
thereof to exercise their youth withal, and to keep them from idleness. And
for a reason not unlike, the Paeones, among the Greeks are so called, quia
Percussores, that is, because they were cutters: Reinerus Reinecciu^.
The Quadi among the Germans, and the Chaldaei likewise, are reported to have
gotten those names, because they used to rob and kill.

Now, in that Florianus Del-Campe, a Spaniard, has with too much affectation
derived our Brigantes from Spain into Ireland, and from thence into Britain,
grounding upon no other conjecture, but that he found the City Brigantia in
his own country Spain; he has I fear me, swarved from the truth. For in
case our Brigantes and those in Ireland had not the same name both for one
cause, I had rather with my friend, the right learned Thomas Savil judge, that
as well diverse of our Brigantes, as also other nations of Britain, from the
first coming of the Romans hither, departed into Ireland, some for Yet are
they in Ireland called Brigantes in some Copies.
and others again, because they would not by their good will loose that
liberty in their old age, which by nature they were endowed with in their
childhood. But that Claudius the Emperor was the first of all the Romans who
set upon these our Brigantes, and brought them under the Roman dominion,
Seneca in his Play shows by these verses: Ille Britannos
Ultra noti littora Ponti and caerueleos
Scuta Brigantes, dare Romulaeis colla catenis
Jussit, and ipsum nova Romanae jura securis
Tremere Oceanum.
The Brigants such as seated are beyond the known Seacoast,
And Brigants with blew painted shields, he forced with his host,
To yield their necks in Roman chains, as captive to be led;
And even the Ocean this new power of Romane-ax to dred.


And yet I have been of this mind, that they were not then conquered, but
committed themselves rather into the tuition and protection of the Romans.
For, that which he Poetically endited, the Historiographers do not mention.
Tacitus records how by occasion at that time of certain discords risen among
the Brigantes, Ostorius who now made preparation for new wars, was hindered
and pulled back, which he with the execution of a few, easily appeased. At
which time, the Brigantes had Cartismandua, a right noble and puissant Lady for
their Queen, who intercepted Caratacus, and delivered him into the Romans
hands. Hereupon ensued wealth of wealth and prosperity, riotous and
incontinent life: in so much, as forsaking her Husband Venutius his bed, she
joined her self in marriage with Vellocatus his Esquire, and made Venutius.
Venutius again for his part pricked forward with shameful disgrace, by the
help of friends whom he procured, and the rebellion withal of the Brigantes
themselves, Cartismandu^. Tacitus.
brought Cartismandua into great extremities. Then, Venutius, and the war
with the Romans: who were not able to subdue the Brigantes before the time of
Vespasian. For, then Petilius Cerealis having invaded this Country, fought many
battles, and some of them very bloody: and either conquered, or else wasted a
great part of the Brigantes* Tacitus writes, that this Queen of the Brigantes
delivered Caracus prisoner unto Claudius the Emperor, there is in that
excellent author a manifest (...), The putting of one time for another.
and the same noted a good while since by Iustus Lipsius deeply insighted in
understanding old authors. For, neither was this Caratacus Prince of the
Silures and Ordevices led in pomp at that triumph of Claudius, nor yet
Caratacus the Son of Cunobelinus (for so is he called in the Roman Fasti,
whom Dio names Catacratus.) Of whom Aulus Plautius, if not in the very same
year, yet in the next following triumphed by way of Ovation. But let others
sift out these matters, and thereof I have already said somewhat. In the
Emperor Hadrians time, when, as Aelius Spartianus says, The Britains could
not be contained under the Romans dominion, it may seem that these our
Brigantes revoited from the Romans and made a turbulent insurrection. For, had
it not been so, there was no cause why Iuvenall who then lived should thus
write.

Dirue Maurorum attegias, and castra Brigantum.

Down with the Brigantes forts and holds.
Neither afterward in the time of Antoninus Pius, was their courage, as it
Genunia, or Guinethia, a Province confederate with the Romans.

If I durst by our Critickes good leave (who in these days presuming so much
of their great wits are supercriticall) me thinks, I could here clear Tacitus
of a fault or two, which sits close to him, as concerning the Brigantes. The
one is in the twelfth Book of his Annals, where I would read, (for Venutius
out of the State of the Iugantes) out of the State of the Brigantes: A place in
Tacitus corrected.
Tacitus himself seems to insinuate in the third Book of his Histories* The
other, in the life of Agricola. The Brigantes, says he, under the leading of a
Woman, burnt the Colonie, etc. Where truth would have you read, The
Trinobantes. For he speaks of Queen Boadicia, who had nothing to do with
the Brigantes. But, the Trinobantes, she stirred indeed to rebellion, and
burnt the Colonie Maldon.
Camalodunum.

But, this Country of theirs so exceeding large, which the further it goes the
narrower it waxes, rises on high in the mids with continued ridges and edges
Apenninus) which make a partition between those Counties into which it is now
divided. For, beneath those hills toward the East and the German Sea, lies
Yorke-shire, and the Bishopric of Duresme; and on the West side, Lancashire,
Westmorland, and Cumberland, all which Countries in the first infancy of the
English-Saxons Empire, were contained within the Kingdom of the Deiri. For,
they call these Countries, the Kingdom of the Nordanhumbers, and divided them
in two parts; Deira, called in that age (...), which is nearer unto us and on
this side Tine; and Bernicia, which lying beyond Tine, reached as far as
Edenborrough Frith in Scotland: which parts although they had their several
Kings for a long time, yet at length grew all to be one Kingdom. And, that I
may note this one thing by the way, whereas in the life of Charles the Great it
is read thus, Eardulph King of the Nordanhumbers, that is, De-Irland, being
driven out of his Country unto Charles the Great, etc. We must read jointly,
Dierland, and understand the place of this Country, and not of Ireland, as some
have misconceived.

EBORACENSIS Comitatus pars Occiden^a^is vulgo WEST RIDING


YORKE-SHIRE.
THE County of YORK, in the Saxon Tongue (...), and (...), commonly
YORKE-SHIRE, the greatest Shire by far, of all England, is thought to be in
a temperate measure fruitful. If in one place there be stony and sandy
barraine ground, in another place there are for it Corne-fields as rich and
fruitful: if Lancashire and Westmorland.

On the North side it has the Bishopric of Durham, which the River Tees with
a continued course separateth from it. On the East side the German Sea lies
sore upon it: and the South side is enclosed first with Cheshire and
Darby-shire, then with Nottingham-shire, and after, with Lincolnshire, where
that famous arm of the Sea Humber flows between, Humber.
into which all the Rivers well near that water this shire empty themselves,
as it were, into their common receptacle.

This whole Shire is divided into three parts: which according to three
Quarters of the world are called The West Riding, The East Riding, and The
North Riding. West Riding, for a good while is compassed in with the River
First called Ure and Your West Riding.
Ouse, with the bound of Lancashire, and with the South limits of the shire,
and bears toward the West and South. East Riding, looks to the Sunne-rising
and the Ocean, which together with the River Derwent encloseth it. North Riding
reaches Northward, hemmed in, as it were, with the River Tees with Derwent and
a long race of the River Ouse. In that West part, out of the Western
Mountains or Hills in the Ouse alone entertaineth every one, and carries
them all with him unto Humber. Neither can I see any fitter way to describe
this part, than to follow the streams of Done, Calder, Are, Wherse, Nid and
Ouse, which springing out of these Hills, are the Rivers of most account, and
run by places likewise of greatest importance.

The River Danus, The river Do^
commonly called Don, and Dune, so termed, as it should seem for that it is
carried in a channel somewhat flat, shallow and low by the ground (for so much
signifies Dan in the British language) after it has saluted Wortley, Wortley.
which gave surname to a worshipful Family, Wentworth.
as also Wentworth hard by, whence beside other Gentlemen as well in this
Country, as elsewhere, the Barons of Wentworth have Sheafield.
runs first by Sheafield a Town of great name (like as other small Towns
adjoining) for the Smithes therein (considering there be many iron Mines
thereabout) fortified also with a strong and ancient Castle, Furnivall.
which in right line descended from the Lovetofts, the Lords Furnivall, and
Thomas Lord Nevill of Furnivall, unto the Talbots, Earls of Shrewesbury. From
thence Don clad with alders, Rotheram.
and other trees goes to Rotheram, which glories in Thomas Rotheram sometime
Archbishop of York, a wise man, bearing the name of the Town, being borne
therein, and a singular benefactor thereunto, who founded and endowed there a
College with three Schools in it to teach children writing, Grammar, and
Music, which the greedy iniquity of these our times has

Then looks it up to Connisborrow or Conines-borrough an ancient Castle,
Connis-borrow. Florilegus. 487.
in the British tongue Caer Conan, seated upon a Rock, into which, what time
as Aurelius Ambrosius had so discomfited and scattered the English Saxons at
Maisbelly, that they took them to their heels, and fled every man the next
way he could find, Hengest their Captain retired himself for safety: and
few days after brought his men Coningsborough in latter ages was the
possession of the Earls of Warren. Afterward, he runs under Sprotburg the
ancient seat of that ancient family of the Fitz-Williams Knights, who are most
honorably allied and of kin to the noblest houses of England, and from whom
descended Sir William Fitz-Williams Earl of Southampton, The Family of
Fitz-Williams.
William Fitz-Williams late Lord Deputy of Ireland. But in process of time
this is fallen to the Copleys, like as Elmesly with other possessions of theirs
in this Tract, are come by right of inheritance to the Savils.

From hence Done running with a divided stream hard to an old town, gives it
his own name, which we at this day call Dan-castre, the Scots Don-Castle, the
Saxons Dona-(...), Dan-castre.
Ninius, Caer Daun, but Antonine the Emperor DANUM, like as the book of
Notices: which has recorded that the Captain of the Crispinian Horsemen, lay
there in Garrison under the General of Britain. This about the year of our
Lord 759. was so burnt with fire from heaven, and lay so buried under the own
ruins, that it could scarce breath again. A large plot it shows yet, where
a Citadell Georges, a fair Church, and the only Church they have in the Town.

Tickhill.
Beneath this Town Southward scarce five miles off is Tickhill, which I am not
willing to omit, an old town, fensed with as old a Castle, large enough, but
having only a single Wall about it, and with an high Mount whereon stands a
round Keep. It carried in old time such a Dignity with it, that the Manours
and Lords belonging thereto were called The Honor of Tickhill. In the Reign
of Henry the First Roger Busly held the possession thereof: Afterward the
Earls of Ewe in Normandy were long since Lords of it by the gift of King
Stephen. Pla^. anno. 3. Joan. Reg. Pl. M. 4. H. 3.
Then King Richard the First gave it unto John his brother. In the Barons War
Robert de Vipont detained Ewe, King Henry the Third put into his hands, the
Castle of Carleol, and the County. But when the King of France would not
restore unto the English again their possessions in France, the King of
England retained it unto himself, when as John Earl of Ewe in the right of
Alice his great Grandmother claimed of King Edward the First restitution
thereof. At length Richard the Second King of England liberally gave it unto
John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster.

But now by this time Done that often rises here and overfloweth the fields,
gathering his divided waters into one stream again, when he has for a while
run in one Channel through Hatfeld Chase (where there is great game and
hunting of Idel a River in Nottingham-shire, on the other to Are, that he and
they together may fall into Humber. In which very place there are environed
with these rivers Diche-marc^ and Marshland, Marshland.
little Mersh Countries or River-Islands rather, taking up in circuit much
about fifteen miles, most plentiful of green grass, passing good for
feeding of Cattaile, and on every side garnished, as it were, with pretty
Towns. Yet some of the Inhabitants are of opinion, that the land there, is
hollow and hanging, yea and that, as the waters rise, the same also is heaved
up: a thing that Pomponius Mela has written concerning Antrum an Isle in
France.

But among those Beakes and Brooks that convey their streams hither, I must
Went, Nosthill. Saint Oswalds.
which flows out of a standing Poole near unto Nosthill, where sometime
stood an Abbay consecrated to Oswald, both a King and a Saint which A.
Confessor to King Henry the First reedified. But since the dissolution it
Gargraves, Knights of especial good respect.

Calder springing in the very Confines of Lancashire, The River Calder.
runs along certain Towns of no account; among which, at Gretland in the
top of an Hill (whereunto there is no ascent but of one side) was dug up
this Votive Altar; erected, as it should seem, to the tutelar God of the whole
State of the Brigants: which Altar was to be seen at Bradley, in the house of
the right worshipful Sir John Savill Knight, Baron of the Exchequer, but now
among Sir Robert Cottons Antiquities.

On the other side.

DUI CI. BRIG. ET NUMBER. AUGG. T. AUR. AURELIAN US DD PRO SE ET SUIS. S. M. A. G.
S.

ANTONINO III. Anno Christi 209.
ET GET. COSS.

That is, To the God of the whole Communalty and state of the Brigantes, and to
the sacred Majesty of the Augusti, Titus Aurelius Aurelianus has dedicated for
himself (The letters that be last of all pass my skill altogether) When
Antonine the third time, and Geta were Consuls.

Now whether that DUI, DVI. The Genii of Places.
be God, whom the Britans now call Diw, or a peculiar local God, or Genius of
the Brigantes, I leave for to be discussed by them, that are better learned.
Like as the souls are divided and distributed among them that are borne (says
Symmachus) even so are Fatal Genij, Lib. Ep. 40.
among Nations. And the divine mind allotteth sundry keepers and Guardians to
particular Countries. For, thus they were in old time persuaded in their
Divinity, and thus they believed. And, to say nothing of foreign Nations,
whose History is very full of such peculiar and local Gods; the Britans had in
that part which now is called ESSEX, ANDATES: in Cumberland, BELLO-TUCADRUS:
Northumberland, VITERINUS, and MOGONTUS, as shall appear more evidently out of
those Inscriptions, which I will set down in due place. Servius Honoratus
likewise has well and truly observed, that these Local or Topic Gods do
never pass unto other Countries. But to return unto the River Calder: which
when by the coming in of other waters he is grown big and carries a
fuller stream, has a fair Bridge over it at Eland: near unto which, at
Grimscarre, were brickes found with this Inscription.

For, the Romans flourishing in military prowess, in great wisdom and
policy exercised both their Legions and Cohorts in time of peace, Vopiscus in
Probus.
to withstand Idleness; by casting of ditches, making of Highways, baking of
brickes, building of Bridges, etc.

Calder afterward among the very Hills leaves on the left hand Halifax a most
famous Town, Halifax. Some would have it to be called aforetime, the Chapel
in the Grove.
lying from West to East upon the steep descent of an Hill. And Horton, as
some of the Inhabitants do report, who tell this pretty story also, touching
the alteration of the name.

A certain Clerk, as they call him, was far in love with a maiden who when
he might not have his purpose of her, for all the fair means and enticements
Horton being but a little Village before, grew up to a great Town, Fax, what
it is.
and was called by a new name Halig-Fax, or Hali-fex, that is Holy hair. For,
the Englishmen dwelling beyond Trent, called the hair of the head Fax. Whence
also there is a Family in this Country, of Gentlemen, named Faire-fax, of the
fair bush of their hair. They therefore, which by resemblance of the name
gather this to be Ptolomees Olicana, Halifax law.
be far deceived. Now this place is become famous as well among the
multitude by reason of a Law there, whereby they behead streightwaies whosoever
are taken stealing: as also amongst the learned: for they report that Joannes
de Sacro Bosco the Author of the Sphaere, was here borne: yet more famous it
is, for the greatness of the Parish, which reckons in it eleven Chapels;
That barraine places give a good edge to industry: and that hence it is, that
Norinberg in Germany, Venice and Genua in Italy, and Limoges in France,
situate all in barraine places are become right flourishing Cities. Six miles
from hence and not far from the right side of the River Calder, near unto
Almond-bury a little Town, Almond-bury.
standing upon an high and steep Hill which has no easy passage on even
ground unto it but of one side, are seen the manifest tokens of a Rampire,
some ruins of walls and of a Castle, which was guarded about with a triple
strength of Forts and Bulwarks. Some will have this also to have been
OLICANA: Cambodunum.
But the truth says otherwise, and namely that it is CAMBODUNUM, Ptolomee
calls amiss CAMULODUNUM, and Beda by a word divided CAMPO-DUNUM.

This is prooved by the distance thereof, on the one side from MANCUNIUM, on
the other from CALCARIA, according to which Antonine places it. Moreover, it
seems to have flourished in very great honor, when the English Saxons first
began to rule. For, the Kings Town it was, and had in it a Cathedral Church
built by Paulinus the Apostle of these parts, and the same dedicated to Saint
Alban: whence in stead of Albon-bury, it is now called Almon-bury. But when
Ceadwall the Britan and Penda the Mercian made sharp war upon Edwin the
Prince of these Countries, it was set on fire by the enemy, as Beda writes,
which the very Stephen, as I have read, confirmed unto Henry Lacy.

Whitly, Whitley.
the habitation of an ancient and notable Family of Beaumont, which
notwithstanding is different from that House of the Barons and Vicounts
Beau-mont, yet it was of great name in this Tract before their coming into
England.

Calder now leaving these places behind him, Kirkley.
and having passed by Kirkley an house in times past of religious Nuns; and
the Tomb of Robin Hood that right good and honest Robber (in which regard he
is so much spoken of) goes to Dewsborrough seated under an high Hill.
Dewsborrough.
Whether it had the name of DVI that tutelar God of the place, of whom I wrote
a little before, I am not able to say: Surely the name is not unlike, for it
sounds as much as Duis Burgh, and flourished at the PAULINUS HIC PRAEDICAVIT
ET CELEBRAVIT. PAULINUS HERE PREACHED AND CELEBRATED DIVINE SERVICE.

And that this Paulinus was the first Archbishop of York, about the year of
our Calder running by Thornhill (which from Knights of that surname is
descended to the Savills) passes hard by Wakefield a Town famous for
clothing, Wakefield.
for greatness, for fair building, a well frequented Mercate, and a Bridge:
upon which King Edward the Fourth erected a beautiful Chapel, in memorial
of those that lost their lives there in battle. The Possession sometime this
was of the Earls of Warren and of Surry, as also Sandall Castle adjoining,
which John Earl of Warren (who was always fleshly lustful) built, when he
had used the wife of Thomas Earl of Lancaster more familiarly than honesty
would require, to the end he might deteine and keep her in it securely, from
her Husband. 1460.
By this Towns side, when the civil war was hot here, Richard Duke of
York, father to King Edward the Fourth (who chose rather to hazard his
fortune: than to stay the good time thereof) was slain in the field by those
that took part with the House of Lancaster. The Tract lying here round about
for a great way together, is called The Seigniory or Lordship of Wakefield, and
has always for the Seneschall or Steward one of the better sort of Gentlemen
dwelling thereby. Which Office the Savills have oftentimes borne, who are here
a very great and numerous Family, and at this day Sir John Savill Knight
bears it, The Savils. Howley.
who has a very sightly fair house not far off at Howley, which makes a
goodly show. Calder is gone scarce five miles farther, when he betaketh both
his water and his name also to the River Are. Where, at their Medley, Medley.
in times past (...), so called for the situation, as it were, in the midst
between two Rivers. The seat it was in the age aforegoing, of Sir Robert
Waterton Master of the Horse to King Henry the Fourth, but now of Sir John
Savill a right worshipful Knight, and a most worthy Baron of the Kings
Exchequer, whom I acknowledge full gladly in his love and courtesy to have
favored me, and out of his learning to have furthered The River Are.
This river Are springing out of the bothom of the hill Pennigent, which among
the Western hills mounteth aloft above the rest, does forthwith so sport
himself with winding in and out, as doubtful whether he should return back
to his springhead, or run on still to the sea, that my self in going
directly forward on my way was feign to pass over it seven times in an hours
riding. It is so calm, and mild, and carries so gentle and slow a stream,
that it seems not to run at all but to stand still, whence I suppose it
took the name. For, as I have said before, Ara in the British tongue
betokens Mild, Still, and Slow; whereupon that slow River in France Araris
has his name. Araris in France. Craven.
The Country lying about the head of this River, is called in our tongue
Craven, perchance of the British word Crage, that is, a Stone. For, the whole
Tract there, is rough all over and unpleasant to see to, with craggy stones,
hanging rocks, and rugged ways: in the midst whereof, as it were in a
lurking hole, Skipton.
not far from Are, stands Skipton: and lies hidden and enclosed among
steep Hills, Latium.
in like manner as Latium in Italy, which Varro supposes to have been so
called, because it lies close under Apennine and the Alps. The Town (for the
manner of their building among these Hills) is fair enough, and has a very
proper and a strong Castle, which Robert de Rumeley built, by whose posterity
it came by inheritance to the Earls of Aumarle. And when their inheritance for
default of heirs fell by escheat into the Kings hands, Robert de Clifford,
whose heirs are now Earls of Cumberland, by way of exchange obtained of
Marches of Wales.

When Are is once past Craven, he spreads broader and passes by more
pleasant fields lying on each side of it, Kigheley.
and Kigheley among them, which gave name to the worshipful Family of
Kigheley, so surnamed thereof. Of which Family, Henry Kigheley obtained of king
Edward the First for this Manor of his The Liberty of a Mercate and Fair, and
free warren. So that no man might enter into those lands to bunt and chase in
them, or to take any thing that pertained to the Warren, without the license
and good will of Henry himself and his Successors. Which was counted in that
age for a special Free Warren was. But the male issue of this Family in the
right line ended in Henry Kigheley of Inskip. Howbeit, the daughters and heirs
were wedded to William Cavendish, now Baron Cavendish of Hardwick, and to
Thomas Worseley of Boothes. From hence Are passes beside Kirkstall, an Abbay
in times past of no small reckoning, founded by Henry Lacy, in the year 1147.
Leedes.
and at length visits Leedes, in the Saxon tongue (...), which became a house
of the Kings, when CAMBODUNUM was by the enemy burnt to the ground: now a rich
Town by reason of clothing, where Oswy king of Northumberland put to flight
Penda the Mercian: And, as Bede says, this was to the great profit of both
Nations: for he both delivered his own people from the hostile spoiling of the
miscreants, The very place wherein they joined battle, Winwidfield.
the writers call Winwidfield, which name I suppose was given it of the
Victory: like as a place in Westphalia, where Quintilius Varus with his legions
was slain, is in the Dutch tongue called Winfield, that is, The fields of
victory, as that most learned man and my very good friend Abraham Ortelius has
observed. The little Region or Territory about it, was in times past by an old
name called Elmet: Elme^.
which Eadwin king of Northumberland, the son of AElla, after he had
expelled Cereticus a British king, Ninius. Calx viva.
conquered in the year of Christ 620. Herein is dug limestone every where,
which is burnt at Brotherton, and Knottingley and at certain set times, as it
were, at Faires, a mighty quantity thereof is conveied Wakefield, Sandall, and
Stanbridge: and so is sold unto this Western Country which is hilly and
somewhat cold, for to manure and enrich their Corn fields. But let us leave
these things to Husbandmen: as for my self I profess my ignorance therein,
and will go forward as I began.

Are entertaineth Calder aforesaid with his water as his Guest, where near
unto the meeting of both Rivers, Castleford.
stands Castleford a little Village, Marianus names it Casterford: who
reports, that the Citizens of York slew many of king Ethelreds Army there,
whom in their pursuit they set upon and charged here and there at advantages;
what time as he invaded and overranne this Country for breaking the allegiance
they had sworn unto him. But in Antonine, this place is called by a more
ancient name LEGEOLIUM and LAGETIUM: Legeolium*
Wherein beside express and notable tokens of Antiquity, a mighty number of
Roman pieces of money (the common people there term them, Sarasins head) were
found at Beanfield (a place so called now of Beans) hard by the Church: The
distance also Roger Hoveden in plain terms calls it A City.

From hence Are being now bigger, after it has received Calder unto it,
leaves on the left hand Brotherton a little Town; in which Queen Margaret,
turning thither out of the way as she road on hunting, was delivered of child,
and brought forth unto her Husband king Edward the First, Thomas de Brotherton,
so named of the place, who was afterward Earl of Norfolk; and Mareshall of
England. And not far beneath, Are after it has received into it Dan, loses
himself in Ouse. On the right hand, where a yellower kind of mark is found,
which being cast and spread upon Ponttract, T. de castle ford.
commonly called Pontfret, situate not far from the river bank, which Town
gat life, as it were, by the death of old Legeolium. In the Saxons time it was
called Kirkby, but the Normans of a broken Bridge named it in French Pontfract.
Upon this occasion, it is commonly thought, that the wooden Bridge over Are
hard by, was broken, Saint Willi^^ of York.
when a mighty multitude of people accompanied William Archibishop a great
number fell into the River, and yet by reason that the Archbishop shed many a
tear at this accident, and called upon God for help: there was not one of
them that perished. Seated it is in a very pleasant place, that brings forth
Liquirice and Lacy the Norman.
well fortified with ditches and bulwarks. Hildebert Lacy a Norman, unto whom
king William the First, after that Alricke the Saxon was thrust out, had given
this Town with the land about it, first built this Castle. But Henry Lacy his
nephew, Placit. 11.
came into the field at the battle of Trenchbrey (I speak out of the Pleas)
against King Henry the First: wherefore he was disseised of the Barony of
Pontfract, and the King gave the Honor to Wido de Lavall, who held it until
King Stephens days: at which time, the said Henry made an entry into the
Barony, and by mediation of the King compounded with Wido, for an hundred and
fifty pounds. This Henry had a son named Robert; who having no issue, left
Albreda Lizours his sister by the mothers side, and not by the father, to be
his heir, because he had none other so near in blood unto him: whereby she,
after Roberts death, kept both inheritances in her hand, namely of her brother
Lacies, and her father Lizours. And these be the very words of the book of the
Monastery of Stanlow. The book Stanlow M^^nastery.
This Albreda, was married to Richard Fitz Eustach, Constable of Chester, whose
Heirs assumed unto them the name of Lacies, and flourished under the title of
Earls of Lincoln. See Earls ^ Lincoln.
By a daughter of the last of these Lacies, this goodly inheritance by a deed
of conveyance was devolved in the end to the Earls of Lancaster, who enlarged
the Castle very much, and Queen Elizabeth likewise bestowed great cost in
repairing it, and began to build a fair Chapel. Thomas Earl of Lancaster,
Thomas (...) of Lancaste^
the first of Lancastrian House that in right of his wife possessed it, stained
and embrewed the same with his own blood. For, King Edward the Second to free
himself from rebellion and contempt showed upon him a good example of wholesome
severity, and beheaded him here. Whom notwithstanding standing the common
people enrolled in the Beadroll of Saints. Here also was that Richard the
Second King of England; whom King Henry the Fourth deposed from Richard the
Third caused Antonie Earl Rivers, King Edward the Fifth his Uncle by the
mothers side, and Sir Richard Gray knight, half brother to the same King by
the mothers side, both innocent persons, to loose their heads. For the Usurper
feared, least those courageous and resolute men would stop his passage,
aspiring as he did by wicked means to the Crown; As for the Abbay, which the
Lacies here founded for religious persons, and the Hospital which Sir Robert
Knolles erected for poor people, I let pass wittingly, seeing there is scarce
any rubbish now remaining of those good works.

From LEGEOLIUM or Castleford abovesaid, leaving behind us Shirburne, a little
Town but well inhabited, which took name of the clear bourne or Riveret, and
which King Athelstane granted unto the Archbishops of York, by the high ridge
or Port way raised up of a great height, Aberford.
we came to Aberford, a little Village situate upon the said way, famous only
for making of pinnes, which by women's judgment are especially commended as the
best. Under this the little River Coc (in books, named Cokarus) runs, and
in the descent down thereunto, the foundations of an old Castle, Carry Castle.
which they call Castle Carry, are to be seen. Scarce two miles from hence, at
the spring head of Coc, Barwic in Elmet.
stands Barwic in Elmet the royal house or seat, by report, in times past of
the kings of Northumberland, which was environed about with Hesselwood the
principal seat of that worthy and right ancient family of the Vavasours,
Hesselwood. Vavasores or Valvaforces.
who by their Office (for the kings Valvasors in times past they were) took to
them this name: and in the latter days of King Edward the First Sir William
Vavasor was called among other Barons of the Realm unto the high Court of
Parliament, as appears in the very Writs, as they call them, of Summons.
Under this place lies that most famous delfe or quarry of stone, Petres-post.
called Peter's post, for that with the stones hewed out of it, by the liberal
grant of the Vavasors, that stately and sumptuous Church of Sant Peter's at
York was reedified.

From Aberford the said Riveret Coc speedeth immediately to the River Wherf,
Towton a little country Village, was (as I may truly say) that our English
Pharsalia. In no place ever saw our England such puissant forces, The battle
at Towton.
so much Gentry and Nobility together: an hundred thousand fighting men, and no
fewer, of the one side and the other: Never were there leaders and Captains on
both parts more fierce, hardy, and resolute, never more cheerful and forward
to fight; who upon Palm Sunday, in the year 1461. in battle array with
banner displaied, entered the field and encountered. And when they had continued
a doubtful and variable fight a great part of the day, at length the
Lancastrians not able to abide any longer the violence of their enemies York,
being eager upon execution, followed them in chase so hotely, that they had the
killing of a number of Noblemen and Gentlemen, and thirty thousand Englishmen
were that day left dead in the field. But I leave this to the Historians.
Somewhat lower, near unto Shirburne, at Huddleston a little Village, is a
famous stone quarry, A quarry of stone.
out of which the stones when they are newly hewn be very soft, but after they
be seasoned with wind and weather, they become of themselves exceeding solid
and hard. But (to return) Coc making no long course sheadeth himself into
Wherf.

The River Wherf.
This Wherf or Wharf, in the English Saxons language (...), comes down out of
Craven, and for a great while runs in a parallel distance even with Are. If
a man should think the name to be wrested from the word Guer, which in
British signifies Swift and violent, verily, the nature of that River
concurreth with his opinion; Ouse is almost fifty miles, he passes only by
little Towns Kilnesey Cra^^^
running down by Kilnesey Cragge, the highest and steepest rock that ever I
saw in a midland Country by Burnsall, where Sir William Craven Knight and
Alderman of London there borne, is now building of a Stone bridge: who also
hard by, of a pious mind and beneficial to his Country has of late founded a
Grammar School; also by Barden-Towre, a little turret belonging to the Earl
of Cumberland, where there is round about good store of game and hunting of fat
Dear: by Bolton, where sometime stood a little Abbay: by Bethmesley, the seat
of the notable Family of Claphams, out of which came John Clapham a worthy
Warrior, in the civil broiles between Lancaster and York. From thence
comes he to Ilekeley, Ilekeley. Olicana.
which considering the site in respect of York out of Ptolomee, Severus time
reedified by the means of Of him U^^pian makes mention lib. ^ de Vulgari and
pupillari substitutione.
Virius Lupus, Lieutenant General and Propraetor then of Britain, this
inscription lately dug up hard by the Church does plainly show.

IM. SEVERUS. AUG. ET ANTONINUS Legato.
LEG. EORUM Pro Praetor^
PR. PR. That the second Cohort of the Lingones abode here, an Altar bears
witness, which I saw there, upholding now the stairs of an house, and having
this Inscription set upon it by the Captain of the second Cohort of the
Lingones, to VERBEIA, happily the Nymph or Goddess of Wherf, the River running
thereby, which River

VERBEIAE SACRUM CLODIUS FRONTO For, Rivers, as Gildas writes, in that age,
had by the blind and ignorant people of And Seneca shows, that in times
past, Altars were erected unto them: Epist. 41.
We worship, says he, The heads of great Rivers, and the sudden breaking forth
of an huge River out of an hidden and secret place has Altars consecrated unto
it. Again, All waters, as Servius Honoratus says, had their several Nymphs,
to take the rule and protection of them. Moreover in a Wall of the Church is
fastened this broken and unperfect Inscription.

But in the very Church it self, whiles I sought diligently for monuments of
Roman Adam Midleton: who seems to have flourished under King Edward the
First, and whose posterity remains yet in the Country hereby, at Stubbam.

Otley.
More beneath stands Otley a Town of the Archbishops of York: but it has
nothing memorable, unless it be one high and hard craggy cliffe, called
Chevin under which it is situate. Chevin. Chervin, what it signifies.
For, the ridge of an hill, the Britans term Chevin: whence I may conjecture
that that continued ridge of mountains in France, where in old time they spoke
the same language that Britans did, Gevenna.
was called Gevenna and Gebenna. After this, Wherf runs hard by, with his
banks on both sides reared up, and consisting of that Limestone which makes
grounds fat and fertile: where I saw Harewood Castle of good strength, Harewood.
which by the alteration of times, has often changed his Lords.

Placit. 1. Joan. Rot. 10. in D. Monstr. le Droit. 35. F. 1.
Long since it belonged to the Curcies, but by Alice an inheritrice it came to
Warin Fitz-Gerold, who had taken her to wife; whose daughter Margerie and one
of his heirs, being endowed with a very great estate of living, was first
married unto Baldwin de Rivers or Red^ers.
Ripariis, the Earls son of Devon-shire, who dyed before his father:
afterward to Folque de Brent, by the beneficial favor of King John, for his
approved service in pilling, polling, and spoiling most cruelly. But when at
length Isabell de Rivers or Red^ers.
Ripariis Countess of Devon-shire departed this life without issue: This
Castle fell unto Robert de L'isle the son of Warin, as unto her cousin in
blood and one Aldborrough, it descended to the ^ithers, as I am informed by
Francis Thinn, who very diligently and judiciously has a long time hunted
after Pedigree antiquities. Neither is Gawthorp adjoining hereby to be
concealed in silence, when as the ancient Family of Gascoignes descended out of
Gascoigne Gascoignes.
has made it famous both with their virtue and Antiquity.

From hence runs Wherf hard by Wetherby, Wetherby.
a Mercate Town of good note, which has no antiquity at all to show, but a
place only, beneath it (they call it usually now, Saint Helens Fourd) where the
high Roman street crossed over the river. From thence he passes down by
Tadcaster, Tadcaster.
a very little town, yet I cannot but think as well by the distance from
other places, as by the nature of the soil, and by the name, that it was
CALCARIA. Calcaria.
For, it is about nine Italian miles from York, according as Antonine has set
CALCARIA. Also the limestone which is the very soader and binder of all mortar,
and hardly elsewhere in this tract to be found, here is dug York and the
whole Country bordering round about, for use in building. Considering then that
the said Lime, was by the Britans and Saxons in old time, Calcarienses. De
Decurionibu L. 27. The Roman language in Provinces.
and is by the Northren Englishmen called after the Roman name Calc (For, that
imperious City Rome, imposed not their yoke only, but their language also upon
the subdued Nations) seeing also that in the Code of Theodosius, those be
termed Calcarienses who are the burners of limestone: it may not seem absurd,
if the Etymology of the name be fetched from Calx, that is, Chalk or Lime:
even as Chalcis, Augustine. lib.19 de Civitate Dei
of (...), that is, brass, Ammon of (...), that is, Sand, Pteleon, of (...),
that is, Elmes, and Calcaria a City of Cliveland, happily of Calx, that is, Lime,
took their names: especially seeing that Bid calls it also Calca-cester.
Where he Heina the first woman in this Country that put on the Veil and
religious habit of a Nun, retired her self apart to this City, and therein
made her abode. Moreover, an Hill near to the Town is called Kelc-bar, in
which there lies couched somewhat of the ancient name. Neither are there other
arguments wanting, to prove the antiquity thereof: For, to say nothing how it
is situate upon a port high way, there be pieces of the Roman Emperors money
oftentimes dug up, and the tokens of the Trenches and Banks that compassed
it about, the plot also where an old Castle stood, yet remaining, out of the
relics whereof, not many years ago was a Bridge built, which when Wherf is
once passed under, he becomes more still, and so gently intermingleth his
water with Ouse. And verily a thing Wherf being increased with so many waters,
in Summer time runs so shallow under this Bridge, that one coming hither
about Midsommer, when he saw it, pretily and merrily versified thus: Nil
Tadcaster habet Musis, vel carmine dignum,
Praeter magnifice structum sine flumine pontem.
Naught has Tadcaster worth my Muse, and that my verse deserv's, Itinerarium.
T. Edes.

Unless a fair Bridge stately built, the which no river serv's.


But had he come in Winter time, he should have seen the Bridge (so great as
it

Quae Tadcaster erat sine flumine, pulvere plena;
Nunc habet immensum fluvium, and pro pulvere lutum.
Somewhat higher Nid a muddy river runs down, The river Nid.
well beset with woods on either side, out of the bottom of Craven hills, first
by Niderdale, a vale unto which it Rippley.
and from thence carries his stream by Rippley a Mercate Town, where the
Inglebeys a Family of great antiquity, flourished in good reputation.
Afterward, with his deep channel he fenseth Gnaresburg commonly called
Knarsborow Castle, Knarsborrow Castle.
situate upon a most ragged and rough Rock, whence also it has the name:
which, Serle de Burgh, Uncle by the fathers side to Eustace Vescy built, as the
tradition holds: Afterward it became the seat of the Estoteviles, and now is
counted Lancaster. Under it there is a well, in which the waters spring not up
out of the veins of the earth, but distill and trickle down dropping from the
rocks hanging over it, Dropping well. A Well turning wood into stone.
whence they call it Dropping well: into which what wood soever is put, will in
short space be covered over with a stony bark and turn into stone, as it has
been often observed. In the Territory there by Liquirice grows in great
abundance, and a yellower and softer kind of marle is there found, passing
good to make the ground fertile. The Keeper or chief Ranger of the Forest
adjoining, was in times past one Gamell: whose posterity, of their habitation
at Screven assumed the name of Screven: and from them descended the Slingsbey,
who received this Forestership of king Edward the First, and to this day live
here Nid having passed by these places not far from Allerton, the seat of a
very ancient and famous family of the Malliveries, who in old Deeds and Records
are called Mali Leporarij, goes on a little way, and then meeting Ouse,
augmenteth the stream of Ouse by his confluence.

As for Ure, he also springing out of these Western hills, but on the other
side of the Country, in North-Ricding, when by this name he has watered the
North part of the Shire, a little before he comes to Rippon, serves for the
limite dividing the North and West Ridings one from another. This Rippon, in
the Saxon tongue (...), being placed between Ure and Skell a rill, is beholden
to religious Houses for all the dignity it had, and especially to a Monastery
built in the primitive Church Wilfride Archbishop of York, and that with such
arched and embowed Vaults, with such floorings and stories of stone-worke, with
such turnings and windings in and out of Galleries (so says William of
Malmesbury) that it was wonderful: Which, the Danes afterward, being so
violent and outrageous that they spared neither God nor man, raced, together
with the Town. Yet flourished it again, repaired by means of Odo Archbishop
of Canterbury: who being a very great master of ceremonial mysteries,
translated from hence to Canterbury the Relics of Wilfride. But since the
Normans arrival, it prospered most, when the Castles as one says, of Monks
began to be built in greater number: For then both the Town grew famous
partly under the chief Magistrate, whom they call by an old Wakeman.
Wakeman as one would say, Watchman, and partly by their industry in clothing
which at this day is much diminished: and the Monastery likewise under the
tuition and protection of the Archbishops of York began marveilously to
reflourish. Besides, a very fair Church was there also built, at the
charitable charges of the Noblemen and Gentry dwelling thereabout, and of their
own Treasurer: which with three high Spire-steeples does welcome those that
come to the town, and did as it were emulate in workmanship, the wealthy
Abbay of Fountains, built within the sight of it by Thurstin Archbishop of
York. On the one side of this Church we saw a little College of ^inging men,
which Henry Bath Archbishop of York erected: on the other side a very great
mount of earth called Hilshow, cast up, Saint Wilfrides Needle.
by the Danes. Within the Church, Saint Wilfrides Needle, was in our
Grandfathers remembrance, very famous: A narrow hole this was, in the Crowdes
or close vaulted room under the ground, whereby women's honesty was tried: For,
such as were chaste did easily pass through, but as many as had played false,
were miraculously, I know not how, held fast and could not creep through. The
Abbay Fountains aforesaid, most pleasantly seated in a right plentiful
Country, and having Lead mines near it, had the original from twelve precise
Monks of York, who fervently, zealous, to serve God in a more strict kind of
life, forsook their cloistures and addicted themselves to the ordinances of
Saint Bernard. For whom, after they had reaped many Harvests of troubles,
Thurstine Archbishop of York built Clarevalle, and in a few years became a
mother to many others, as Kirkstall, Salley, Meaux, etc. I have made more
willingly mention of these, because Saint Bernard in his Epistles so highly
approved their life, and discipline.

Ure a little Town called Burrow bridge, of the bridge that is made over the
River: which now is built very high and fair of stone work, but in King
Edward the Second his time, it seems to have been of wood. For, we read,
that when the Nobles of England disquieted the King and troubled the State,
Humfrey Bohun Earl of Hereford in his going over it; was at a chinke thereof
thrust through the body about his groine, by a soldier lying close under the
Bridge. Near unto this Bridge Westward, we saw in three diverse little fields,
four huge stones, of Pyramidall form, but very rudely wrought, set as it were
in a straight and direct line. Pyramides.
The two Pyramides in the midst whereof the one was lately pulled down by
some that hoped, though in vain, to find treasure, Devils bolts.
who call them the Devils Bolts which they shot at ancient Cities and therewith
overthrew them. Yet will not I pass over this, that very many and those
learned men think they are not made of natural stone indeed, but compounded
of pure sand, lime, vitriol (whereof also they say there be certain small
grains within) and some unctuous matter. Of such a kind there were in Rome
cisternes, so firmly compact of very strong lime and sand, as Pliny writes,
that

A little Eastward from this Bridge, Is-Urium.
IS-URIUM BRIGANTUM an ancient City, so called of the River Ure running by it,
flourished in ancient times, but was rased to the very ground many ages past.
Nevertheless the Village risen up near the place, gives testimony of the
Antiquity thereof, for it is called Ealdburgh and Aldborrow. Aldborrow. i. Old
Borrow.
But, in that very plot of ground where the said City stood, are now arable
grounds and pastures, so that scarce any footing thereof does appear. Surely,
the very credit of Writers should have had much ado to make us believe, that
this had been IS-URIUM, but that URE the Rivers name, the Roman Coin daily
dug up, and the distance according to Antonines account betwixt this and
York, warranted it. For, by that Ure (which the Saxons afterward named Ouse
because it has entertained Ousburne a little River) is gone sixteen Italian
miles from hence, Eboracum. York.
he runs through the City EBORACUM or EBURACUM, which Ptolomee in the
second book of his Great Construction calls BRIGANTIUM (if the said book
be not corrupted) because it was the chief City of the Brigantes. Ninnius
calls it Caer Ebrauc, the Britans Caer Effroc, the Saxons (...) and (...),
and we at this day, York.

The British History reports, that it took name of King Ebra^c the Founder:
yet give me leave to deem conjecturally, without the prejudice to others that
the name EB-URACUM is derived from nothing else but from the River Ure, Ure, or
along the side of Ure: for, even so the EBUROVICES in France, were seated by
the River Eure, near unto Eureux in Normandy: Semblably the EB-URONES in the
Netherlands, near unto the river Our in the Dioecese of Lhuick: and EB-LANA
in Ireland stands hard by the river Lefny. This is the second City of
England, the fairest in all this Country, and a singular safeguard and ornament
both, to all the North parts. A pleasant place, large, and stately, well
fortified, beautifully adorned as well with private as pulique buildings, rich,
populous, and to the greater dignity thereto it has an Archiepiscopall See.
Ure, which now is called Ouse, flowing with a gentle stream from the North
part Southward cutteth it as I said in twain, and divides it, as it were,
into two Cities, which are conjoined with a stone Bridge, having the mightiest
Arch one of them, that ever I saw.

The West part, nothing so populous, is compassed in with a very fair Wall and
the River together, fouresquarewise, and gives entrance to those that come
thither at one only Gate, named Mikel Bar, as one would say, The great Gate.
From which a long street and a broad, reaches to the very Bridge, and the
same street The old Bale; which, William Melton Archbishop, as we read in
the Archbishops lives, strongly enclosed, first, with thick planckes,
eighteen foot long; afterward with a stone wall: yet there is nothing of all
that, now to be seen.

The East side wherein the houses stand very thick and the streets be
narrower, in form resembles as it were a lentill, and is fortified also with
very strong walls and on the South-East, Fosse-river.
defended with the deep channel of Fosse a muddy River, Ouse: where at their
confluence, and meeting together, right over against the Mount that I spoke of,
King William the Conqueror in a very convenient place raised a most strong
Castle to awe the Citizens. Upon which, time has now a great while without
impeachment wrought his will; ever since that Englishmen fell to neglect strong
Holds, as receptacles for those whose hearts would not serve to fight in open
field.

On this side also toward the North-East, stands the Cathedral Church
dedicated Peter, an excellent fair Fabrique and a stately; near unto which,
without the Walls of the City, but yet enclosed within walls and by the
River, flourished a renowned Abbay called Saint Mary's, which Alan the Third,
Earl of Little Britain in Armorica and of Richmund, built and endowed with
rich livings: but now it is converted into the Princes house, and is commonly
called The Manor. The Manor.


Whence I should fetch the original of York but from the Romans I cannot
tell, seeing the Britans before the Romans coming had no other Towns, than
woods fensed with trenches and rampire, as Caesar and Strabo unreprovable
Authors do testify. To say nothing therefore of King Ebrauk, whom some men
both curious Eboracum (for so is York in Latin termed) to have been the
Founder thereof: most certain it is, that the Sixth Legion Victrix, which
Hadrian there Emperor brought out of Germany over into Britain was placed
here in Garrison. And that it was a Colony of the Romans, it appears both by
the authority of Ptolomee, and Antonine, and also by an ancient Inscription,
which I saw in a certain Aldermans house there in these words.

M. VEREC. DIOGENES IIIII I VIR As also by a piece of money coined by the
Emperor Severius, in the reverse whereof we read.

COL. EBORACUM. LEG. VI. VICTRIX. That Victor whom Andre^ Scot set forth of
late.
that Victor in his History of the Caesar's, has called York Municipium or
free town of Britain, being, as it was a Colony, I require farther time to
deliberate thereupon, unless it were, that the inhabitants of York, like as
sometime the Praenestines did choose rather from a Colony to be brought unto
the state of a free-Burgh. For, Colonies having, as Agellius writes, laws,
customs and rights at the will of the people of Rome and not at their own
pleasure, seemed more obnoxious, and their condition not so free: whereas free
Cities, such as in Latin are named Municipia, used rights, Laws and orders of
their own, and the Citizens or Burgesses thereof were partakers with the
people of Rome in their honorable Offices only, and bound of necessity to
nothing else. No mervaile therefore, if Colonies Colony, and a Municipium, or
Free City. Severus*
Howbeit out of that piece of money I dare not constantly affirm, that Severus
first conducted and planted this Colony, seeing that Ptolomee and Antonine
himself writes it was the seat of the sixth Legion in the Antonines time. But
we read that Severus had his Palace in this City, and here at the hour of
death gave up his last breath with these words: I entered upon a state every
where troublesome, and I leave it peaceable even to the Britans. His body was
carried forth here to the funeral fire by the soldiers, after the military
fashion, and committed to the flames, honored with Ackham, where is to be
seen a great Mount of earth raised up, which as Raulph Niger has recorded,
was in his time, of Severus, called Sivers. His ashes being bestowed in a
little golden pot, or vessel of the Porphyrite stone, were carried to Rome,
and shrined there in the Monument of the Antonines. At which time there was in
this City the Temple of Goddess Bellona. The Temple of Bellona.
For, Spartianus speaking of Severus and this very City, says thus, When
Severus returned and came into the City, purposing to offer sacrifice, he was
led first of all to the Temple of Bellona, by the error of a rusticall Augur
or Soothsaying Priest. At which time the Tribunal or Justice Haul of this City
was in this respect most happy, because therein sat to minister justice
Aemelius Paulus Papinianus, as Forcatulus witnesses. And from this place it
was, for certain, that Severus and Antoninus Emperors being consulted in a
case or question of Right, gave forth their Imperial constitution De rei
Vindicatione. L.I.C. Constantius
An hundred years or thereabout after the death of Severus, Fl. Valerius
Constantius surnamed Chlorus, an Emperor surpassing in all virtue and
Christian piety, who came hither When the Gods, as the Panegyrist says, called
him now to the inmost entry and door of the earth, ended his life also in this
City and was deified, as we may see by ancient Coins. And albeit Florilegus
records, that his Tomb was found in Wales, as I have said; yet men of
credit have informed me, that in our fathers remembrance, when Abbaies were
suppressed and pulled down, Constantius was supposed to have been buried,
there was found a Lamp burning: for, Lazius writes, that in ancient time they
preserved light in Sepulchers, by resolving gold artificially into a liquid and
fatty substance, which should continue burning a long time and for many ages
together.

This Emperor begat of his former wife Helena CONSTANTINE THE GREAT,
Constantine the Great.
THE DELIVERER OF ROME CITY, as ancient inscriptions give testimony, THE
FOUNDER OF PEACE, AND THE REPAIRER OF THE COMMON York at his fathers last
gasp, and forthwith proclaimed Emperor, The soldiers, as the Panegyricall
Orator says, regarding rather the good of the State, than private affections,
cast the purple robe upon him, whiles he wept and put spurs to his horse, to
avoid the importunity of the Army attempting and requiring so instantly to make
him Emperor: But the happiness of the State overcame his modesty. Whence it
is that the Author of the Panegyricall oration cries out in these words, O
fortunate Britain and now blessed above all lands, which first saw
Constantine Emperor.

Hence it may be gathered, in what, and how great estimation York was in those
Constantius adorned and graced with an Episcopal See: But yet, that Ta^rinus
the Martyr Bishop of Eureux sat here and governed, Vincentii Speculum
historiale.
I will not say as others do. For, Vincentius out of whom they sucked this
error, would by his own words convince me of untruth. But when the Romans
were departed and had left Britain for a prey to barbarous Nations, this City
sore afflicted with many calamities, suffered her part also of miseries, and
was little or nothing better about the end of the Scottish or Saxons Wars,
than a poor small shadow of a great name. For, when Paulinus preached
Christian Religion to the English Saxons in this Country, it lay so desolate,
that there remained not so much as a Edwin to be baptized in. Who in the year
after Christ's Birth 627. built a little Oratory of wood: and when as afterward
he went in hand with building a greater Church of stone, scarce had he laid the
foundation thereof, when he was prevented by death and left it to be finished
by his Successor Oswald. Ever since that time, Scotland in times past, subject
to the Archbishop of York.
the Ecclesiastical Dignity in this Church increased, and by a Pall sent unto
it from Honorius the Pope, became a Metropolitan City; which beside twelve
Bishoprics in England, exercised the power of a Primate over all the Bishops
of Scotland. But many years since, Scotland withdrew it self from this her
Metropolitan: and the Metropolitan City it self has so devoured other
Bishoprics adjoining, being but little to say truth and of small account,
that it Durrham, of Chester, of Carlisle, and of Man, or Sodorensis in the Isle
of Man. And the Archbishop Egbert, who flourished about the year of our
Salvation 740. erected at York, See in Scotland. A Library. Flaccus Alcwinus
or Albinus flourished. anno. 780.
A most famous Library, the Cabinet as I may so term it (these be the words of
William of Malmesbury) and Closet of all liberal Arts. Touching which Library,
Alcwin of York Schoolmaster to Charles the Great, first Founder of the
University of Paris, and the only Honor of this City, in an Epistle to the
said Charles wrote thus. Give me the books of deeper and more exquisite
scholasticall learning, such as I had in mine own Country by the good and most
devout industry of the Archbishop Egbert. And if it please your wisdom, I
will send back some of your own servants, who York walls; but that streams
of Paradise may be also at Towers.

Then also it was that Princes bestowed many and great livings and lands upon
the Church of York, especially Ulphus the son of Toral (I note so much out
of an old book, that there may plainly appear a custom of our ancestour in
endowing Churches with livings). This Ulphus aforesaid ruled in the West part
of Deira, and by reason of the debate that was like to arise between his
sons the elder and the younger, about their Lordships and Signiories after
his death, forthwith he made them all alike. For, without delay he went to
York, took the horn with him out of which he was wont to Peter Prince of
the Apostles, kneeling upon his knees he drank, and thereby enfeoffed them in
all his lands and revenewes. Which horn was there kept as a monument (as I
have heard) until our fathers days.

I might seem to speak in derogation of the Clergy, if I should report what
secret heart-burnings, or rather open enmities flashed out between the
Archbishops of York and of Canterbury upon worldly ambition; whiles with great
wast of their wealth, but more loss of their credit and reputation, they
bickered most eagerly about the Primacy. For, the Church of York, as he
writes, ( inferior though it were unto that of Canterbury in riches) yet
being equal in dignity, albeit of later time Canterbury has, confirmed also
with the like authority of Apostolical Privileges, took it ill to be
subject unto that of Canterbury by virtue of a Decree of Alexander of Rome, who
ordained, That the Church of York ought to be subject unto Canterbury, and in
all things to obey the constitutions of the as Primate of all Britain, in such
matters as appertain to Christian Religion. Concerning the Archbishops of
York, it is no part verily of my purpose to write any thing here, although
there be very many of them who deserve for their virtue and piety to be
renowned. Let it suffice to note in a word, that from Paulinus the first
Archbishop, consecrated in the year of our Redemption 625. there have sitten
in that See threescore and five Archbishops, unto the year 1606. in which D.
Tobie Matthew a most reverend Prelate, The sixty six Archbishop.
for the ornaments of virtue and piety, for learned eloquence, and continual
exercise of teaching, was translated hither from the Bishopric of Durrham.

This City for a time flourished very notably under the English Saxons
dominion, Alcuine aforesaid in his Epistle to Egelred King of Northumberland
may seem to have presaged before What signifies (says he) that raining of
blood which in Lent we saw at York the head City of the whole Kingdom, in
Saint Peter's Church, to fall down violently in threatening wise from the top of
the roufe, in the North part of the house, and that in a fair day. May it not
be thought, that blood is coming upon the Land from the North parts? Verily
soon after it was embrued with blood, and did pine away with most miserable
calamities, when the Danes spoiled, wasted, and murrhered all where ever they
came. And verily in the year 867. the Osbright and Ella Kings of
Northumberland, whiles they pursewed the Danes easily brake into the City: who
being both of them slain in a most bloody battle in the very midst of the
City, left the victory unto the Danes. Whereupon William of Malmesbury writes
in this manner, York, always exposed first to the rage of the Northren
Nations, sustained the barbarous assaults of the Danes, and groaned being
pitteously shaken with manifold ruins. But as the very same Author
witnesses, King Athelstone won it perforce out of the Danes hands, and
overthrew the Castle quite, which they had here fortified. Neither for all
this, was it altogether free from wars in the times next ensuing whiles that
age ran fatal for the destruction of Cities.

Sueno the Dane had landed in these parts with a Danish Fleet of 240. Alfred
of B^^verley, in t^^ Library of (...) Lord Burg^^ Treasurer (...) England.
Sail, the Normans lying in Garrison, who kept two Forts within the City,
fearing least the houses in the Suburbs might stand the enemy in stead to fill
up the Ditches withal, set them on fire: but by reason the wind rose highly,
the fire was so carried and spread throughout that City, that now it was set a
burning, when the Danes breaking in upon them made pitiful slaughter in every
place, having put the Normans to the sword, and keeping alive William Mallet
and Gilbert Gant two principal persons, that they might be tithed with the
soldiers. For, Decimatio^ Execution (...) very tenth (...)
every tenth man of the Normans they chose out by lot, to be executed.
Whereupon William the Conqueror was so incensed with desire of revenge, that
he showed his cruelty upon the Citizens by putting them all to death, as if
they had taken part with the Danes: and upon the City it self by setting it on
fire afresh; and as William of Malmesbury says, He so depopulated and defaced
the Villages adjoining, and the sinews of that fertile Region were so cut by
the spoils there committed and booties raised, and the ground for the space of
threescore miles lay so untilled, that if a stranger had then seen the Cities
that in times were of high account, the Towers which with their lofty tops
threatened the sky, and the fields that were rich in pastures, he could not
but sigh and lament, yea and if an ancient inhabitant had beheld the same, he
could not have known them. How great York had been aforetime, Domesday book
shall tell you in these words. In King Edward the Confessors time, there were
in York City six Divisions or Shires, besides that of the Archbishops. One
was laid waste, for the Castles or Forts. In the five Divisions were 1428.
dwelling Mansions to give entertainment: And, in the Archbishops Shire or
Division 200. dwelling Mansions likewise. After these woeful overthrowes our
countryman Necham thus versified of it.

Visito quam foelix Ebrancus condidit urbem,
Petro se debet pontificalis apex.
Civibus hac toties viduata, novisque repleta,
Diruta prospexit moenia saepe sua.
Quid manus hostilis queat, est experta frequenter,
Sed quid? nunc pacis otia longa fovent.
The City that Great Ebrauk built, I come now for to view,
Whereof the Sea pontifical, is to Saint Peter due.
This, many times laid desolate, and peopled new has been,
Her walls cast down and ruinate full often has it seen.
What mischief hostile hands could work, not once nor twice it found,
What then? since now, long time of peace, does keep it safe and sound.
For, in his time, when after these troublesome storms a most pleasant calm
of peace presently ensued, it rose of it self again and flourished afresh,
although the Scots and Rebels both, did oftentimes make full account to destroy
it. But under the Reign of King Stephen, it caught exceeding great harm by
casualty of fire, wherein were consumed the Cathedral Church, the Abbay of
Saint Mary and other religious houses: yea and that noble and most furnished
Library (as it is thought) which Alcuin has recorded to have been founded by
Archbishop Egeldred his Praeceptour. Mary it quickly recovered the former
dignity by new buildings: but the Cathedral Church lay longer ere it held up
head again, and not before King Edward the First his time: For then, John
Roman Treasurer of the Church laid the foundation of a new work, which his
son John, William Melton, and John Thoresby, all of them Archbishops, brought
by little and little to that perfection and beauty which now it shows, yet
not without the helping hand of the Nobility and Gentry thereabout, especially
of the Percies and the Vavasours, which the arms of their houses standing in
the very Church, and their images at the West gate of the Church do show,
Percies pourtraied with a piece of timber, and Vavasours with a stone in their
hands, for that the one supplied the stone, the other Aeneas Sylvius,
Commentar* of Pope Pius. Lib. prim.
who was Pope Pius the second, and that upon the Popes own relation, For
workmanship and greatness, is memorable over all the world, and the Chapel
most lightsome, the glasse-windowes whereof are fast bound between pillars
that be most slender in the mids. This Chapel is that most dainty and
beautiful Chapter House, in which this verse stands painted in golden letters.

Ut Rosa flos florum, sic est Domus ista Domorum.
The flower of flowers, a Rose men call:
So is this house of housen all.
About the same time also, the Citizens fensed the City round about with new
walls and many towers and bulwarks set orderly in diverse places, yea and
ordained very good and wholesome laws for the government thereof. King Richard
the Second granted it to be a County incorporate by it self, and King Richard
the Third began to repair the Castle. And that nothing might be wanting,
King Henry the Eighth within the memory of our fathers, The Council
established in the North.
appointed here a Council not unlike to the Parliaments in France, for to
decide and determine the causes and controversies of these North parts
according to equity and conscience, which consists of a Lord President,
certain Counselors at the Princes pleasure, a Secretary and Ansty, others the
Ancienty of the Antiquity, but other have derived it very probably from the
Dutch word Anstossen, which betokens limits. And now for a conclusion have
here what Master John Jonston of Aberden has but a while since written in
verse, of York.

Praesidet extremis Arctoae finibus orae
Urbs vetus, in veteri facta subinde nova.
Romany Aquilis quondam Ducibusque superba.
Quam post barbarica diripuere manus.

Fulmina in hanc Martis detonuere sui.
Post diras rerum clades, totque aspera fata,
Blandius aspirans aura serena subit.
LONDINUM caput est, and regni urbs prima Britanni:
EBORACUM a prima jure secunda venit.
In parts remote of Northren tract, there stands as sovereign,
A City old, but yet of old eftsoons made new again.
Whilom of Roman Legions and Captains proud it was:

The Picts so fierce, the Scots and Danes, Normans and Englishmen,
Against it their bolts of dreadful war have thundered now and then.
Yet after sundry bitter blasts, and many a cursed clap,
A milder gale of peaceful days, has brought it better hap.
Of British Kingdom LONDON is chief seat and principal,
And unto it there goes by right York City next of all.
Ouse now leaving York, being otherwhiles disquieted and troubled with that
whirling encounter of contrary waters, and forceable eddies which some call
Higra, Bishops Thorpe, Bishops Thorpe.
called Saint Andrews Thorpe, before that Walter Gray Archbishop of York
purchased it with ready money, and to prevent the Kings Officers who are wont
rigorously to seize upon Bishops Temporalties when the Sea is vacant, gave it
to the Deane and Chapter of York, with this condition, that they should
always yield it to his Successors. Of whom, Richard Le Sicrope Archbishop of
York, a man of a fiery spirit, and ready to entertain rebellion, was condemned
in this very place, of high Treason by King Henry the Fourth, against whom he
had raised an insurrection. Cawood.
Afterward Cawood a Castle of the Archbishops stands upon the same River,
which King Athelstan, as I have read, gave unto the Church: Just against which
on the other side of the River lies Ricall, Harald Haardread arrived with a
great Fleet of Danes. Then Ouse passes hard by Selby a little Town, well
peopled and of good resort; where King Henry the First was borne, and where his
father King William the First built a fair Abbay in memory of Saint German,
who happily confuted that venomous Pelagian Heresy, which oftentimes (as the
Serpent Hydra) grew to an head again in Britain. The Abbats of this Church,
as also of Saint Mary's in York, were the only Abbats in the North parts that
had place in the Parliament house. And so Ouse at length speedeth away to
Humber, leaving first Escricke a seat of the Lascelles sometimes to be
remembered for that King James advanced Sir Thomas Knivet the owner thereof Lord
Knivet to the honor of Baron Knivet of Escricke, L. Knivet.
in the year 1607. And Drax, a little Village famous long since for a
Monastery founded there by Sir William Painell, and whereas William of Newburgh
writes, Philip of Tollevilla had a Castle most strongly fensed, with Rivers,
Woods, and Marshes about it, which he, confident upon the courage of his
followers, and his provision of victuals and armor, defended against King
Stephen; until it was won by assault.

EBORACENSIS Comitatus (ovius Incolae olin Brigantes appellabantur) pars
Orientalis, vulgo EAST RIDING


EAST RIDING.
EAST RIDING the second part of this Region, wherein Ptolomee placed the
PARISI, lies Eastward from York. On the North side and the West, it is
bounded with the River East Riding.
Darwent, that runs down with a winding course: on the South with the Salt
water of Humber, and on the East with the German Ocean. Upon the Sea side and
along Darwent Yorkes would. Darwent springing not far from the shore, first
takes his way Westward: then, he windeth into the South by Aiton and Malton;
whereof, because they belong to the North part of the Shire, I will speak in
due place. No sooner is he entered into this Quarter, but down he runs not
far from the ruins of the old Castle Montferrant. Montferrant History of
Meaux.
The Lords whereof were in times past the Fossards, men of noble parentage and
wealthy withal: But when William Fossard Ward to the King, being committed
unto William le Gross Earl of Aumarle as to his Guardian, and now come to his
years, abused his sister; the Earl in wreckfull de Torneham, bare a daughter
married to Peter de de Malolacu.
Mauley: whose heirs and successors being bettered in their estate by this
inheritance of the Fossards, became great and honorable Barons. Not far from
hence is situate upon the River side, Kirkham, as one would say of
Church-place: For, a Priory of Chanons was there founded by Walter Espec a man
of high place and calling, by whose daughter a great estate accrewed to the
family of the Lord Rosses. Then, but somewhat lower, Darwent had a City of his
own name, which Antonine the Emperor Notices makes mention of a Captain
over the Company Derventiensis under the General of Britain, that resided in
it; and in the Saxons Empire it seems to have been that Town, where the
King used to lie, which Bid says, was situate near unto the River
Doroventio. In which, as he also writes, Eumer, that murderous Villain
thrust at Edwin King of Northumberland with a sword and had run him through,
but that one of his men stepped between, and saved the Kings life with the
loss of his own. Yet could I never have said precisely which was the very
place, had not that most judicious Robert Marshall given me a light thereof.
For, he gave me to understand, that just at the very same distance from York
which I spoke Darwent, a little Town named Auldby, that is, if you interpret
the Saxon word, The old Habitation: where, are extant yet in sight some tokens
of Antiquity, and upon a very high Hill near unto the River, the rubbish of an
ancient Fortification, so that it cannot choose, but to have been the said City
Derventio. From hence glideth the River hard under Stanford-Bridge, which also
of the battle there fought is called Battlebridge. Battlebridge.
For, at that Bridge, Harald King of England, after a great execution done upon
the Danes flew in a pight field Harald Hardread King of Norway, who with a
Fleet of 200. sail grievously annoyed the Isle of Britain, and was now landed
at Richall, spoiling and wasting all in his way. The King of England who having
the honor of the field, Adam Bremensis records. This field was foughten
scarce nine days before the arrival of William Conqueror, what time the
dissolute and roiotous life of the Englishmen, seemed to foretell their
imminent overthrow and destruction. But of this I have spoken before.

Derwent, which when it is increased with rain, and as it were provoked to
anger does oftentimes contemn his banks and surround the meadows lying about
it, passing from hence by Wreshil a proper and a strong Castle, which Sir
Thomas Percy Earl of Worcester built, runs amain under Babthorpe, which
yields both name and habitation to a worshipful Family of Knights degree:
and so at length discharges himself into Ouse. Out of this stock it was (for
let us not think much to tell of those who performed faithful service to
their Prince and Country) that both father and son fighting together under
the banner of King Henry the Sixth lost their lives in the Battle of Saint
Albans, and were there buried together with this Epitaph: Cum patre Radulpho
Babthorp jacet ecce Radulphus
Filius, hoc duro marmore pressus humo,
Henrici Sexti dapifer, pater Armiger ejus,
Mors satis id docuit, fidus uterque fuit. etc.
Behold where two Raulph Babthorps, both the son and father lie,
Under a stone of marble hard, interred in this mould dry:
To Henry the Sixth the father Squire, the Son he Sewer was,
Both true to Prince, and for his sake they both their life did pass.


Howden.
And now Ouse by this time carrying a fuller stream, runs near Howden a
Mercate Town, famous not so much for any beauty in it, or great resort
thereto, as because it has given name to a little Territory adjoining, called
of it Howdenshire, and had therein not long since a pretty Collegiat Church of
five Prebendaries: unto which joyneth the Bishops house of Durrham who have
great lands thereabout. One of which, namely Walter Skirlaw, who flourished
about the year of our Lord 1390. as we read in the book of Durrham, built a
very great and large steeple to this Church, that if there happened by chance
any inundation, it might serve the inhabitants for a place of refuge to save
themselves in. Metham.
And not far from hence stands Metham, which gave Methams.

Now the River Ouse being very broad, swift and roaring besides, out powers his
stream into the Frith or salt water ABUS: Abus. Humber^.
For so calls Ptolomee that arm of the Sea, which the English Saxons and we
term Humber, whereof also the Country beyond it, by a general name was
called Northumberland. Both these names may seem to have been drawn with
some little change, from the British word Aber, which among them signifies the
mouth of a River: and I would think it was imposed upon this River by way of
excellency: because Ure or Ouse having entertained and lodged many Rivers,
carries them all with him along into this, yea and other Rivers of right great
name are emptied into it. And verily it is one of the broadest Necham writes
thus of it.

Fluctibus aequoreis nautis suspectior Humber,
Dedignans Urbes visere rura colit.
More feared of shipmen Humber stream, than waves of sea so deep;
Disdaining cities great to see, near country towns does keep.
And following the British History, as if it had been so called of a King of
the Hunnes, he adds this moreover.


Submersus, nomen contulit Humbris aquae.
A Prince of Hunnes, whiles that he showed his back to Locrine brave,
Was drowned here, and so the name, to Humber water gave.
Touching whom, another Poet also: Dum fugit, obstat ei flumen, submergitur
illic;
Deque suo tribuit nomine nomen aquae.
Whiles he turned back, and took his flight, the River stopped the same,



Neither were there indeed any Cities seen to stand by this Arm of the Sea in
Nechams days: but before and after, there flourished one or two Cities in
these places. Under the Roman Empire, not far from the bank, by Foulness a
River of small account, where Wighton a little Town of Husbandry well
inhabited is now seen, stood, as we may well think, in old time DELGOVITIA:
and that I may not take hold of the distance from DERVENTIO for a proof, both
the resemblance, and the signification also of the name, do concur. For,
Delgwe in the British tongue signifies The Statues or Images of the Heathen
Gods, and in a small Village Godmundingham, Bid.
and now is called in the same sense Gods Church or habitation.
Godmanham. Neither doubt I, but that even when the Britans flourished, it was
some famous Oracle much frequented when superstition spread, and swaying among
all Nations had wholly possessed the weak minds of ignorant people. But when
Paulinus preached Christ, unto Northumberland men, Coy-fi, who had been a
Pontife or Bishop of the heathen rites and ceremonies, after he had once
embraced Christian Religion, First of all profaned this Temple, the very
habitation of impiety, by launcing a spear against it, yea he destroyed it,
and as Bede writes, Set it on fire, with all the enclosures and Hull bends
his course to Humber, Drifeild.
which River has his spring head near unto Driffeild, a Village well known,
by reason of the Tomb of Alfred that most learned King of Northumberland; and
the mounts that be raised here and there about it. The said River hasteneth
thitherward, not far from Leckenfielde, an house of the Percies Earls of
Northumberland: near unto which, stands the dwelling place of a very famous
and ancient Progeny of the Hothams at Schorburg; together with the rubbish of
an old Castle of Peter Mauley at Garthum. And now approaches the River Hull
nearer unto Beverley, Beverley.
in the English Saxon tongue called (...), which Bid seems to name, the
Monastery in Deirwand, that is, In the word of the Deiri, Betnatia.
although it affords nothing of greater antiquity, than that John surnamed de
Beverley, Archbishop of York, a man as Bede witnesses, both godly and
learned, after he had given over his Bishopric, as weary of this world, came
hither, and ended his life in contemplation, about the year of our Redemption
721. The life of John of Beverley.
The Kings held the memorial of this John so sacred and reverend, especially
King Athelstan who honored him as his tutelar Saint, after he had put the
Danes to flight, that they endowed this place with many and those very great
privileges, Pat. 5. H. 4.
and Athelstane granted them liberties in these general words, All Is free make
I thee, as heart may think, or eye may see. Yea and there

HAEC SEEDS LAPIDEA Freedstoll DICITUR.i. PACIS CATHEDRA, AD QUAM REUS FUGIENDO
PERVENIENS OMNIMODAM HABET SECURITATEM.

That is,

This seat of Stone is called Freedstooll, that is, The unto which what
Offender soever flies and comes, has all manner of security.

Hereby, the Town grew great, and daily there flocked hither a number to
dwell as inmates; and the Townsmen for conveyance of commodities by sea made a
channel for a water course out of the River Hull sufficient to carry boats and
barges. Hull river.
For the chief Magistracy there, it had twelve Wardens; afterward Governors
and Wardens. And now, by the gracious grant of Queen Elizabeth, a Major and
Governors. The Register of Meaux Abbay.
there flourished Meaux Abbay, so called of one Gamell borne at Meaux in
France, who obtained it at William the Conquerours hands for a place to dwell
in: and here was founded an Abbay for the Monks of the Cluniacke order by
William Le Gross Earl of Aulbemarle, to be released of his vow that he had
made to visit Jerusalem. A little lower runs out in a great length
Cottingham, a country Town of husbandry, Cottingham.
where by license granted from King John, Robert Estotevill the Lord thereof
built a Castle now utterly fallen to ruin. Estotevill.
Which Robert, was descended from Robert Grondebeofe, or Grandebeofe a Baron of
Normandy, and a man of great name and reputation: whose inheritance fell by
marriage to the Lord de Wake, Wake.
and by a daughter of John de Wake it came to Edmund Earl of Kent, who had a
daughter named Joane wife unto that most warlique Knight Edward Prince of
Wales, who so often victoriously vanquished the French in diverse places. The
River Hull aforesaid, after it has passed six miles from hence sheddeth
himself into Humber, and near unto his mouth has a Town of his own name
called Kingston upon Hull, Kingston upon Hull.
but commonly Hull. This Town fetches the beginning from no great antiquity:
For, King Edward the First, who in regard of his Princely virtues deserves to
be ranged among the principal and best Kings that ever were, Placit. Anno.
44. Edw. 3. Ebo^. 24.
having well viewed and considered the opportunity of the place which before
time was called Wike, had it by right of exchange from the Abbat of Meaux, and
in lieu of the Pro Vaccariis and Beycariis.
Beasts stals and sheep pastures, as I conceive it, which there Kingston, as
one would say, The Kings Town; and there, as we read in the Records of the
Kingdom, he made an haven and free Burgh, the Inhabitants thereof also, free
Burgesses, and he granted diverse liberties unto them. And by little and little
it rose to that dignity, that for stately and sumptuous buildings, for strong
block-houses, for well furnished ships, for store of Merchants and abundance of
all things it is become now the most famous town of merchandise in these
parts. All which the inhabitants ascribe partly to Michael de la-Pole, who
obtained their privileges for them, after that King Richard the Second had
promoted him to the honor of Earl of Suffolk, and partly their gainful
trade by Island fish dried and hardened which they term Stockfish: whereby
they gathered a maine Warden or Custos: then Bailives, afterward a Major and
Bailives: and in the end they obtained of K. Henry the Sixth that they might
have a Major and a Sheriff, and that the very town should be a County, as our
lawyers use to say incorporate by it self. Neither will I think it much to
note, although in Barbarous terms, out of the book of Meaux Abbay, De la
Pole.
as touching the Major of this City. William De la Pole knight, was beforetime
a merchant at Ravens-rod, skillful in merchandise and inferior to no English
merchant whatsoever. He making his aboade afterward at Kingston upon Hull, was
the first Major that ever the said town had: he began also and founded the
monastery of Saint Michael hard by the said King-ston, which now is an house of
the Carthusian or Charter House Sir Michael De la Pole Earl of Suffolk, who
caused the said Monastery to be inhabited by Carthusian Monks. And verily
William De la Pole aforesaid, lent many thousand pounds of gold unto King
Edward, whiles he made his aboade at Antwerp in Brabant, wherefore the King in
recompense of the said gold, made him Lord chief Baron of his Exchequer,
conferred upon him the whole Seignorie or Lordship of Holdernes, together with
other lands belonging unto the Crown; and that by the Kings Charter, yea and
ordained that he should be reputed a Baneret. Yet if any man make doubt hereof,
the Records I hope may satisfy him fully, Cl. 5. E.R. 3. M. 28. Valectus or
Valettus. I. Tisius.
in which William De la Pole is in plain terms called Dilectus Valectus, et
Mercator noster, that is, Our wellbeloved Valect and our Merchant: now, Valect,
to tell you once for all, was in those days an honorable title Gentlemen of
the Bedchamber.

From Hull, Ocellum. Holdernesse.
a Promontorie runs on forward and shoots out a far into the sea, which
Ptolomee calls OCELLVM, we Holdernesse, and a certain monk, Cavam Deiram,
as it were, the hollow Country of the Deirians, in the same signification that
Coelosyria is so termed, as one would say Holow Syria. In this Promontory, the
first town we meet with in the winding shore is Headon, Headon.
in times past (if we list to believe fame that uses to amplify the truth,
and which for my part I will not discredit) risen to exceeding great account by
the industry of merchants and Hull, and the choking up of the haven which has
impoverished it, that it can show scarce any whit of the ancient state it had.
Although King John granted unto Baldwin Earl of Aulbemarle and of Holdernesse,
and to his wife Hawis, free Burgage here, so that the Burgers might hold in
free Burgage, with those customs that York and Nichol, that is, Lincoln. Yet
now it begins by little and little to revive again, in hope to recover the
former dignity.

There stands hard by the Pomontorie, Praetorium. Patrington.
an ancient town, which Antonine the Emperor called PRAETORIVM, but we in our
age Patrington, like as the Italians Praetorium, into Petrovina. That I do not
mistake herein, both the distance from DELGOVITIA, and the very name yet
remaining does prove: which also in some sort implies, that this is the very
same that in Ptolomees copies is written PETVARIA corruptly, for Praetorium.
But whether this name were given it, either from Praetorium, that is, the hall
of Justice, or from some large and stately house, such as the Romans termed
Praetoria, it does not appear for certain. The inhabitants glory much yet as
touching their Antiquity and the commodiousnesse of the haven in ancient times:
and they may as well glory for the pleasantness thereof. For, it has a most
delectable prospect: on the one side lies the maine sea brimme upon it, on the
other Humber Antonine the Emperor followed, here ends. For, Ulpian has
written, that such high ways commonly end at the sea, at rivers, or at Cities.

Somewhat lower stands Winsted, the habitation of the Hildeards knights of
ancient descent: and higher into the Country, Rosse: from whence the honorable
family Rosse took their name, Winsted. Barons de Rosse.
like as they were seated there in times past: and hard by the seaside,
Grimstons-garth: where the Grimstons for a long time have lived in good
reputation: and a little from hence stands Rise, the mansion house in old
time of certain noble men bearing the name of Falconberg. And then, in the
very neck of the promontorie, where it draws in most narrow into a sharp
point, Ravenspur and Ravens-burg. Kelnsey.
and is called Spurnhead, is KELNSEY a little village: which plainly shows
that this is the very OCELLVM mentioned by Ptolomee: for, as from OCELLVM
Kelnsey is derived: so Ocellum doubtless, was made of Y-kill, which as I have
said before signifies in the British tongue a Promontory or narrow neck of
land.

From Spurn-head, the shore withdraws it self back by little and little,
and gently bending inward shoots Northward by Overthorne and Witherensey two
little Churches, Sisters Kirkes. Constable.
called of the sisters that built them Sisters kirks: and not far from
Constable-Burton, so called of the Lords thereof, who being by marriages linked
to right honorable houses, flourish at this day in great worship: and out of
which family Robert (as we read in the book of the Abbay of Meaux) was one
of the Earl of Aulbemarls knights, who being aged and full of days took upon
him the Cross and went with King Richard in his voyage toward the holy land.
Then, by Skipsey, which Dru the first Lord of Holdernesse fortified with a
Castle. When the shore begins to spread again and bear out into the sea,
it makes room for a bay or the barborous Creek; Sinus salutari^. Suerby.
others, SALVTAREM, that is, the safe Creek. But neither of them both better
expresses the nature of the Greek word, than the very name of a little
village in the nouke thereof, which we call Sureby. For, that which is safe
and sure from danger, the Britans and French men both, term Seur, as we
Englishmen ( sure) who peradventure did borrow this word from the Britans.
There is no cause therefore, why we should doubt, but that this creek was that
very EYAIMENON of the GABRANTOVICI, Gabrantovici.
who dwelt there abouts. Hard by, stands Bridlington a town very well known
by reason of John of Bridlington a poetical monkish prophet Driffield, was
there a ditch cast up and brought on by the Earls of Holdernesse, to confine
and bound their lands, which they called Earls Dyke. But whence this little
nation here inhabiting were named GABRANTOVICI, I dare not search, unless
happily it were of goats which the Britans term Gaffran, and whereof there
is not greater store in all Britain than hereabout. Neither ought this
derivation of the name to seem absurd, seeing that Aegira in Achaia borrows
the name of goats, Nebrodes in Sicily of fallow Dear, Flamborrough-head.
and Boeotia in Greece, of Kine and Oxen. That little Promontory which with his
bent made this creek, is commonly called Flamborough head, and in the Flam:
and Mariners paint this creek in their sea-cards with a blazing flame on the
head. Yet others are of opinion, that this name arrived in this Island with the
English out of Angloen in Denmark, the ancient seat of the English nation;
for, there is a town called Flemsburg, Flamborough.
and that the Englishmen from hence called it so: like as the Gauls, as Livie
witnesses, termed Mediolanum, that is, Millan, in Itali^, after the name of
Mediolanum in Gaul, which they had left behind them. Flamborrough, where an
other notable house of the Constables had anciently their seat, Constable de
Flamborough.
which some do derive from the Lacies Constables of Chester. Being in these
parts I could learn nothing for all the inquiry that I made, as touching the
bournes commonly called Vipseys, Vipseys waters.
which (as Walter of Heminburgh has recorded) flow every other year out of
blind springs and run with a forcible and violent stream toward the sea
nere unto this Promontory. Yet take here with you, that which William
Newbrigensis who was borne near that place writes of them. Those famous
waters which commonly are called Vipseys, rise out of the earth from many
sources not continually, but every second year, and being grown unto a great
bourn run down by the lower grounds into the sea. Which when they are dry,
it is a good sign: for, their breaking out and flowing is said to be an
infallible token portending some dearth to ensue.

From thence the shore is drawn in, whereby there runs forth into the sea a
certain shelfe or slang, like unto an out-thrust tongue, such as Englishmen in
old File, whereupon the little village there Filey took name: and more within
the land you see Flixton, where, in King Athelstanes time was built an
Hospital, for the defense (thus word for word it is recorded) of wayfaring
people passing that way from Wolves, least they should be devoured. Whereby it
appears for certain, that in those days Wolves made foul work in this
Tract, Wolves.
which now are no where to be seen in England, no not in the very marches
toward Scotland; and yet within Scotland there be numbers of them in most
places.

This little territory or Seigniory of Holdernesse, Earls of Aumarle and
Holdernesse.
King William the First gave to Drugh Buerer a Fleming, upon whom also he had
bestowed his Niece in marriage; whom when he had made away by poison and
thereupon fled to save himself, Stephen the son of Odo, Fitz. Odo. An
ancient Genealogy or pedigree.
Lord of Aulbemarle in Normandy who was descended from the Earls of
Champaigne: whom King William the First because he was his Nephew by the half
sister of the mothers side, as they write, made Earl of Aulbemarle: whose
posterity in England retained the Title, although Aulbemarle be a place in
Normandy. His successor was William surnamed Le Gross: Cr^ssu^.
whose only daughter Avis was married to three husbands one after another,
namely to William Magnavill Earl of Essex, to Baldwine De Beton, and William
Forts, or de Fortibus, by this last husband only she had issue William, who
also had a son named William. His only daughter Avelin, being the wedded
wife of Edmund Crouchbacke, Gibbosus.
Earl of Lancaster, dyed without children. And so, Meaux Abbay, for default of
heirs, the Earldome of Aulbemarle and honor of Holdernesse, were seized into
the Kings hands. Howbeit in the ages ensuing King Richard the Second created
Thomas of Woodstocke his Uncle, and afterward Edward Plantagenet Earl of
Rutland, the Duke of Yorkes son, Duke of Aulbemarle, in his fathers life
time: likewise King Henry the Fourth made his own son Thomas, Duke of
Clarence and Earl of Aulbemarle: which Title King Henry the Sixth afterward
added unto the style of Richard Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, for the greater
augmentation of his honor.

EBORACENSIS Comi^a^us pars Septentrionalis vulgo NORTH RIDING


NORTH RIDING.
SCarce two miles above Flamborrough-head, begins the NORTH RIDING or the
North part of this Country, North Riding.
which affronting the other parts, and beginning at the Sea, is stretched out
Westward, and carries a very long Tract with it (though not so broad) for
threescore miles together, even as far as to Westmorland: limited on the one
side with Derwent, Ure, on the other side with Tees running all along it, which
on the North Coast separateth it from the Bishopric of Durrham. And very
fitly may this part be divided into, Blackamore, Cliveland,
Northallverton-shire, and Richmond-shire.

That which lies East, and bends toward the Sea is called Blackamore, that
is, The black moorish land: For it is mountanous and craggy. The Sea coast
thereof, has Scarborrough Castle, Scarborrough Castle.
for the greatest ornament a very goodly and famous thing, in old time called
(...), that is, A Burgh upon the Scar, or steep Rock. The description whereof
have here out of William of Newburgh his History. A Rock of a wonderful
height and bigness, which by reason of steep cragges and cliffes, almost
William Le Gross, Earl of Aulbemarle and Holdernesse viewing well, and seeing
it to be a convenient Henry the Second caused to be built in the same place a
great and goodly Castle; after he had now brought under the Nobles of England,
who during the loose government of King Stephen had consumed the lands of the
Crown: but especially amongst others, that William abovesaid of Aulbemarle,
who had in this Tract ruled and reigned like a King, and possessed himself of
this place as his own.

Touching the most project boldness of Thomas Stafford, who to the end he
might overthrow himself with great attempts, with a few Frenchmen surprised
Mary's Reign and held it for two days together, I need not to speak: See
Dier 144.
ne yet of Sherleis, a Gentleman of France, who having accompanied him, was
judicially endited and convict of high treason, albeit he was a forrainer,
because he had done against the duty of his Allegiance, the peace then
between the Kingdom of England and of France being in force. These are
matters better known than that the World can take notice of them by any
writings of mine. Yet may this seem a thing worth my labor and expedient, The
gainful fishing for Herrings.
to note, how the Hollanders and Zelanders use to take marveilous plenty of
herrings (call them in Latin Haleces, Leucomenida, or Chalcides, which of them
you please) upon this coast, and make a very gainful trade thereof, having
anciently first obtained license by an ancient

These Herrings (pardon me I pray you if briefly by way of digression I do
make Scarborrough, and Tamis mouth.

Afterward by force of some great storm, they are carried into the British
sea, and there until Christmas offer themselves to the fishers nets; from
hence dividing Ambrose. Fishes (says he) by infinite numbers, meeting, as one
would say, by common consent out of many places from sundry creekes of the Sea,
with a joint flote, as it were, make toward the blastes of the North wind, and
by a certain direction and instinct of Nature haste into that Sea of the
Northren parts. A man that saw the manner of them would say a certain tide
were coming down from Hexameron. lib. 5. cap. 80.
they rush so forward and cut the waves, as they pass, with a violent power,
through Propontis into Pontus Euxinus. But to my matter again.

From thence, the shore indented and interlaced with rocks, bends in, as
far as to the River Teise, The River Teise.
and by a compass that the said shore fetches, there is made a Bay about a
mile broad, which of that Outlaw Robert Hood, so much talked of, we call Robin
Hoods Bay. Robbin Hoods Bay.
For he (as John Major the Scotishman writes) flourished in the Reign of
Richard the First; and the said Author sets him out with this commendation,
that He was indeed an Arch-Robber but the gentellest Thief that ever was.
Dunum.
Then DUNUS SINUS, a creek mentioned by Ptolomee streightwaies by giving back
of the shore on both sides shows it self; near unto Dunesley a little
village, Dunsley. Whitby.
and hard by it, Whitby, in the English Saxon tongue (...); which Beda
expounds to be, The Bay of a Watch-Towre. Neither will I call that
interpretation into question, although in our language it does resemble Sinum
Salutis, that is, The Bay of health; so, that I would say this very same was
Salutaris Sinus, that is, The Bay of safety, but that the situation in the
Geographer did persuade me otherwise. Here are found certain stones fashioned
like Serpents folded and wrapped round as in a wreathe even the very pastimes
of Nature disporting her self: Stony Serpents of Hildas.
who, as one says, when she is wearied as it were with serious works,
forgeth and shapeth some things by way of game and recreation. A man would
think verily they had been sometime Serpents, which, a Hilda, as if she had
thus transformed and changed them: who in our Primitive Church withstood to her
power the shoring and shaving of Priests, and the celebration of Easter
according to the order of Rome, when a Synod was held touching these matters
in the year of our Lord 664. in the Abbay which she had built in this place,
and whereof herself was first Governesse. Unto whose holiness also they
ascribe, that those wild Geese, which in Winter time fly by flocks unto
Pooles and Rivers that are not frozen over, in the South parts; whiles they
fly over certain fields here adjoining, suddenly fall down to the ground,
Geese falling down.
to the exceeding great admiration of all men: a thing that I Sympathies and
Antipathies, as all men acknowledge, for their preservation. Afterward
Edelfleda King Oswins daughter enriched this Abbay with most large revenewes,
where also she solemnized her fathers funeral obsequies. But at length the
Danes robbing and spoiling where ever they came, utterly overthrew it: and
although Serle Percie reedified it, being immediately upon the coming in of
the Normans head-ruler of the same; yet now it scarce affords any footing at
all of the ancient dignity. Hard by, upon a steep hill, howbeit between two
others higher than it, Duke Wade from whom the families of the Wades derive*
toward the Sea, stood by report, the Castle of Wada a Saxon Duke, who in
Ethered, gave battle unto King Ardulph at Whalley in Lancashire: but with so
disasterous success, that after his own power was discomfited and put to
flight, himself was feign to fly: and afterward by a languishing sickness
ended his life; and here within the hill between two entire and solid stones
about seven foot high lies entombed: which stones because they stand eleven
foot asunder, the people doubt not to affirm, that he was a mighty Giant.
Near unto this place, long time after, Peter Mauley*
de Maloulacy built a Castle, which being full as it were of grace and beauty
he named in French Moult-Grace, as we read in the History of Meaulx, but
because it became a most Moul grave Castle.
by change of one letter termed it Moult-grave, by which name although the
reason thereof be not so well known, the world takes knowledge of it. This
Peter de Mololacu, commonly called Mauley (that I may in this point satisfy
the curious) borne in Poictou in France, married the only daughter of Robert
de Turnham, in the Reign of King Richard the First: in whose right he entered
upon a very great inheritance here: Barons of Mauley.
after whom succeeded in order seven Peter's called Lords Mauley: who give for
their Arms A Bend Sables in an Eschocheon Or. But when the seventh dyed
issuelesse, this the Manours of Dancaster, Bainton, Bridesalle, etc. were
parted by the sisters, between the families of the Salvains and Bigots.

Geat.
as elsewhere in this shore, is found black Amber or Geate: Some take it to be
Gagates, Gagates.
which in old time they held to be one of the rare gems and precious stones. It
grows among the cliffes and rocks, where they chinke and gape asunder.
Before it be polished, it is of a reddish and rusty color: but after it be
once polished, it becomes, as says Solinus, as a Others are opinion that our
pit cole o^ stone cole wa^ the old Gagates.
Gemme of a bright radiant black color. Touching which, Rhemnius Palamon out
of Dionysius Afer thus versifieth: Praefulget nigro splendore Gagates.
Hic lapis ardescens austro perfus^s aquarum,

Attritus rapit hic teneras seu succina fr^ndes.
The Geat is black and shines passing bright,
Which Stone in water dipped and drencht, takes fire and burns light.
In oil, a wonder for to see, the flame is quickly done,
And like to Amber rub it hard, small sticks it catches soon.


And Marbodaeus in his little book of precious stones,
Sed genus eximium foecunda Britannia mittit,
Lucidus and niger est, levis and lavissimu^ idem:
Vicinas paleas trabit attritu calefactus,
Ardet aqua lotus, restinguitur unctus olivo.
Geat is a Stone, and Gemme well nere, that men in Lycia find,
But fruitful Britan yields the best simply of all that kind.
Of color black, yet bright it is, most smoothe and light withal;
Well rubbed and enchaul'd thereby, thin strawes and fescues small
That are near hand it draws thereto: it burns in water drencht,
Anoint the same with fatty oil, the flame streigthwaies is quenched.


Hear also what Solinus says; In Britain there is great store of Gagates, or
Geat, and an excellent stone it is: If you demand the color, it is a bright
radiant black: if the quality, it is in manner nothing weighty: If the nature,
it burns in water, and is quenched with oil: if the virtue, being made hot
with rubbing, it holds such things as are applied thereto. Whitby the shore
gives back Westward: Cliveland.
by which lies Cliveland, taking that name as it seems of steep banks,
which in our language we call Cliffes; for, there run all along the side
thereof cliffie hills; at the foot of which, the country spreads into a
Plain full of fertile fields.

Upon the shore, Sken grave a little Village is much benefited by taking great
store of fish: where also, by report, was caught a Seaman about 70. years
since, that for certain days together fed of raw fishes: but espying his
opportunity escaped away unto his proper element again. Whenever the winds
are laid, and that upon still weather the sea is most calm, and the water
lies as one would say level and plain without any noise: there is heard
here many times on a sudden a great way Sken-grave, is situate Kilton Castle
within a Park, which belonged sometime to the habitation of the Thwengs, whose
patrimony descended to the Barons of Lumley, Hilton, and Daubeneie: And there
joyneth almost close unto it Skeleton Castle, appertaining to the ancient family
of the Barons Brus, Brius of Skeleton.
who derive their descent from Robert Brus the Norman. The said Robert had two
sons, Adam Lord of Skeleton, and Robert of Anan-dale in Scotland: from whom is
descended the royal stem of Scotland. But Peter Brus the fifth Lord of Skeleton
died Agnes, wife to Walter Falconberg: Lucie, Barons Falconberg.
wedded to Marmaduke Thweng, of whom is come the Baron Lumley: Margaret,
married to Robert Ros; and Laderina to John Belle-eau, men in that age of
honorable reputation. The heirs successively of Walter Falconberg flourished
a long time; but in the end by a female, the possessions came to Sir William
Nevill, who was a redoubted Knight for martial prowess, and by King Edward
the Fourth advanced to the title of Earl of Kent. And his daughters were
bestowed in marriage upon Sir John Cogniers, N. Bedhowing, and R. Strangwaies.

Near unto Hunt-cliffe, and not far from the shore there appear aloft at a
vale water certain Rocks, about which the fishes that we call Seals, short
(as some Sea-veales, meet together in droves to sleep and sun themselves:
and upon that rock which is next unto the shore, there lies one, as it were
to keep the Centinell: and as any man approaches near, he either by throwing
down a big stone, or by tumbling himself into the water with a great noise,
gives a signal to the rest to look unto themselves and get into the water.
Most afraid they be of men: against whom when they chase them, they being
destitute of water fling backward with their hinder feet a cloud, as it were,
of sand and gravel stones, yea and often times drive them away: For women they
care not so much: and therefore whosoever would take them, use to be clad in
women's apparel. In the same coast are found stones, some of yellowish, others
of a reddish color, and

Hard by, at Huntly Nabb, the shore that lay for a great way in length open,
rises Wilton Castle, sometime the Bulmers: and above it at Dobham the river
Tees voideth into the Sea after it has lodged sundry rivers, and at the last
one that is namelesse, Yare. Stokesley.
beside Yare a mercate town well known, which river waters Stokesley, a
little mercate town, likewise that has a long time appertained to the Noble
family of Eure. Beneath which places, Wharton Castle belonging in times past to
Menill, and Harlsey to the family of Hotham and afterward to Stragwaies, now
wrestle with old age, and hardly hold up their heads.

The mouth of Tees aforesaid, suspected in times past of sailers, is now found
to be a sure road and harbor: and to give direction for safe access and
entrance unto it, there are erected on both sides thereof within our
remembrance high turrets with light. Gisburgh.
Four miles from this Tees mouth, stands Gisburgh on high; now a small
town, but whiles it stood in flourishing estate, it was right glorious for a
very fair and rich Abbay, built by Robert de Brus, Lord of the place, about
the year of our Salvation 1119, and for the common burial place of all the
gentry and nobility in this tract; which also brought forth Walter de Heminford
no unlearned Historiographer. Puteoli in Italy, which in regard of healthy
situation it also far excels. The air is mollified and made more mild by
the mountains seated between it, and what way the sea yields a cold and
winterly disposition: the soil fruitful and plenteous in grass affords
delectable flowers a great part of the year, and richly abounds with veins
of metal and Alum-earth of sundry colors, but especially of ocher and murray,
likewise of iron, out of which they have now begun to try very good Alum, and
Coperose. Which with learned skill and cunning not many years since, Sir
Thomas Chal^ner Knight (a learned searcher into natures works, and unto whose
charge, our most high and Onusbery hill or Rosebery-Topping.
Not far off, Onusbery or Rosebery Topping mounteth up a mighty height, and
makes a goodly show a far off, serving unto sailers for a mark of
direction, and to the neighbor inhabitants for a prognostication: For, so
often as the head thereof has his cloudy cap on, lightly there follows
rain: whereupon they when Rosebery Topping wears a cap: Let Cliveland then
beware a clap. Near unto the top of it, out of an huge rock there flows a
spring of water medicinable for diseased eyes: and from hence there is a most
goodly and pleasant prospect down into the valleys below lying a great way
about, to the hills full of grass, green meddowes, delightsome pastures,
fruitful corn fields, riverets stored with fish, the river Tees mouth full of
rodes and harbors, the ground plain and open without danger of inundation,
and into the sea with ships therein under sail. Beneath it, stands Kildale,
a Castle of the Percies Earls of Northumberland: and more Eastward Danby,
which from Brus also by the Thwengs came unto the Baron Latimers, from whose
heir descended the Willoughbeies, Barons of Brook. But Danby with other
possessions was sold to the Nevills, of which family Sir George Nevill was by
King Henry the sixth called among the Barons to the Parliaments, under the name
of Lord Latimer, in whose progeny and posterity this dignity has continued
unto our days. There remains nothing else here for me to note, but that the
Barons Meinill held certain lands in this shire of the Archbishops of
Canterbury, The History of Canterbury.
and for the same, the Coigniers, Strangwaies and Darcies, descended from shall
have the Wardship (these be the very words of the Praerogative) of all their
lands who hold of him in chief by Knights service, Praerogativae Reg. 17. Ed.
2.
of which themselves as tenants shall be seized in their Demesne as of Fae, the
day whereon they die, of whomsoever they held by the like service, so that
themselves notwithstanding hold of the King any tenement of the ancient demesne
of the Crown, unto the full and lawful age of the heir: Yet are excepted
these Fees and others of the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of
Durrham, between Tine and Tees, etc. so that they may have the Wardship of
such lands, although elsewhere they held of the King.

Farther within the country among the mountains of Blaca amore, there offers
Pickering; a good big town belonging to the Duchy of Lancaster, situate
upon an hill and fortified with an old Castle, unto which a number of small
villages lying there round about do appertain: whereupon the country
adjoining is commonly called Pickering Lith, The Liberty of Pickering, and
Forest of Pickering, the which King Henry the Third gave unto his younger son
Edmund, Earl of Lancaster. Wherein, near unto the river Darwent stands
Atton, that gave name unto the right noble family of the Attons Knights,
descended from the Lords Vescy: the inheritance of which family, was by the
daughters parted between Edward John, the Evers, and the Coigniers. Now from
Edward Saint John a great portion thereof came by a daughter to Henry
Bromflet. 17. Hen. 6. Bromfleet Lord Vescy.
Which Henry verily was summoned to the High court of Parliament by these
express terms, elsewhere not to be found in Summons. Our Will is, that both
ye and your heirs males, of your body lawfully issuing, be Barons of Vescy.
Afterward, that title passed away by a daughter to the Cliffords. On the
otherside, four miles from Pickering, near unto Dow, a swift running riveret,
lies Kirkby-Morside hard unto the hills, whereof it had that name, a Market
town not of the meanest reckoning, and the possession sometime of the
Estotevilles.

Behind these, Westward, Rhidal lies low, a goodly, pleasant and plentiful
vale Rhie: A place (as says William of Newburrough) wast, desolate, and full
of horror, before that Walter Espec had granted it to the Monks of the
Cluniak order, and founded there an Abbay. In this vale is Elmesly seated,
which, if I deceive not my self, Bid called Vlmetum; where, that Robert
called de Rosse, surnamed Fursan built a Castle; nere unto which the river
Recall hides it self under the ground. More beneath, hard by the river side
stands Riton, an ancient possession of the ancient family of the Percihaies,
commonly named Percies. From thence Rhie carries with him the streams of many
a brook into Derwent, which waters in this vale Malton a Market town well
known and frequented, for corn, horses, fish, and Escaetria ^. Edw. 2 n. 63.
Barons Vescy
as I have heard say, in old time to the Vescies, Barons in these parts of
great estate and honor. Their pedigree as appears evidently by the Kings
records, is derived from William Tyson, who being Lord of Malton and of
Alnewicke in Northumberland, was slain in the battle at Hastings against the
Normans. Whose only daughter was given in marriage to Ivo de Vescy a Norman,
and he left behind him his only daughter likewise named Beatrice, with who^
Eustach the son of Fitz John Mon^^uli.
with one eye contracted marriage, who in the reign of Stephen founded the
religious houses at Malton, and Watton. For, his second wife daughter to
William, Constable of Chester, was Lady of Watton. William the son of
Eustach by Beatrice, Vescy, and the Arms, a Cross-floury Argent, in a shield
Gueles. This William begat of Beatrice daughter to Robert Estotevill of
Knaresburg, two sons, Eustach de Vescy, who took to wife Margaret daughter
to William King of the Scots, and Sir Warin de Vescy Knapton. As for Eustach,
father he was of William, who begat John, that died without issue, The Vescies
coat of Arms. Matthew. Paris. M.S.
and William, so renowned for his exploits in Ireland; and these changed the
Arms of their house, into a shield Or with a cross Sables. But William, after
that his legitimate son John, died in the war of Wales, granted unto King
Edward certain lands in Ireland, that his illegitimate son William surnamed
of Kildare, might inherit his fathers estate. And he ordained Anthony Bec
Bishop of Durrham his feofie in trust to the use of his son: but he was
scarce trusty as touching Alnewic, Eltham in Kent, and other lands; which he is
reported to have conveied indirectly to his own use. This illegitimate son
young Vescy was slain in the Battle of Sterling in Scotland. And at length
the title fell back unto the Attons, considering that Margaret the only
daughter of Sir Gwarin Vescy was wedded unto Gilbert de Atton. But, hereof
enough if not too much, and of it I have spoken before. Near unto this vale
there flourished two famous Abbaies, Newborrough (unto which we are indebted
for William of Newborrough, a learned and diligent writer of the English
History) now, the habitation of the worshipful family of Bellasise, descended
out of the Bishopric of Durrham: and Bellelanda commonly Biland, Mowbraie.
both founded and endowed by Robert Mowbray. This family of the Mowbraies was
for power, nobility, and wealth comparable to any other, and possessed very
fair lands with the Castles of Slingesby, Threske, and others in this Tract.
The original of this race if you desire to understand, I will compendiously de
Mowbray Earl of Northumberland, and R. In other places he is named De
Fronte-bovis.
de Grunde-beofe for their disloialtie were dissezed of all their possessions,
King Henry the First bestowed a great part thereof upon Nigell, or Niele de
Albenie of the same family that the Albeneis Earls of Arundell were descended;
a man of very high birth in Normandy, who had bin Bowbearer to King William
Rufus: and so enriched him thereby, The Register of Fountains Abbay.
that he held in England 140. Knights fees, and in Normandy 120. He commanded
also that Roger his son should assume the name of Mowbray: from whom flowred
out the Mowbraies Earls of Nottingham, and Dukes of Norfolk. To these
Mowbraies also belonged in times past Gilling Castle standing hard by: but now
unto that ancient and worshipful family, which of their fair bush of hair
got Fairfax. Fair-fax. Fax.
For Fax in the old English tongue signifies hairs, or the hair of the head:
whereupon our progenitors called a Comet or blasing star, A Faxed star,
like as a place, whereof I have spoken before, Haly-fax, of holy hairs.

Then beneath these, Southward, lies Calaterium Nemus, commonly called, The
Forest of Galtres, shaded in some places with trees, in other some a wet flat,
full of moist and moorish quavemires: very notorious in these days by reason
of a solemn horse running, A solemn Horse-running.
wherein the horse that outrunneth the rest has for his prise a little golden
bell. It is almost incredible what a multitude of people conflow hither from
all parts to these games, and what great wagers are laid on the horses heads
for their swift running. In this Forest stands Creac, which Egfrid King
Sherry-Hutton, a very proper Castle built by Sir Bertrand Bulmer, and reedified
by Raulph Nevil, the first Earl of Westmorland. Near unto which stands
Hinderskell a little Castle, built by the Barons of Greystocke, which others
call Hunderd-skell, of a number of fountains that spring up and rise there.

Behind the hills Westward, where the country spreads it self out again
into a more fresh and plain champion, lies Alverton-shire, commonly called
Northallerton-shire, North-Al^erton shire.
a little country watered with the riveret Wiske, and taking the name of
Northalverton a town, sometime called (...), which is nothing else but a long
broad street; howbeit, having in it on S. Bartholomewes day the greatest Fair
of Kine and Oxen, and of most resort, that ever I saw in all my life. King
William Rufus gave this with the territory adjoining unto the Church of
Durrham, to the Bishops of which See it is very much beholden. For, William
Comin who by force held the Bishopric of Durrham, built the Castle there, and
granted it unto his nephew, that Hugh Pudsey Bishop of Durrham fortified the
town, Cap. 126.
having obtained license of the King, that among those unlawful castles, which
by Commandment were then destroyed in many places of England, this only
should have the privilege to stand still: which notwithstanding, the King
commanded afterward to be laid even with the ground. Battle of Standard.
Hard by this, was that field foughten, which they commonly call the Battle
of the Standard: in which, David King of Scots, who with his unexampled cruelty
had made this country almost a wilderness, was after so great a slaughter of
his people put to flight; that then and never before our countrymen thought
they were fully revenged. A confused multitude untrained, is an impediment to
it self, in prosperous success to hurt others; and in adverse fortune, to
escape it self. This was called The battle of the Standard, because the
English keeping themselves close together about the standard received the first
onset and shock of the Scottish, endured it, and at length put them to flight.
And this Standard as I have seen it pictured in ancient books, was a mighty
huge chariot supported with wheels, wherein was set a pole of a great height
in manner of a mast, and upon the very top thereof stood a cross to be seen,
and under the cross hung a banner. This when it was advanced was a token, that
every one Carrocium of the Italians, which might never be brought abroad but in
the greatest extremity and danger of the whole state.

Within this little shire also, Threske, commonly called Thruske is worth to be
mentioned: which had sometime a most strong Castle out of which Roger Mowbray
displaied his banner of rebellion, and called in the king of Scots to the
overthrow of his own native Country: what time as King Henry the Second had
rashly and inconsiderately dug, as it were, his own grave, by investing his
son King, in equal authority with himself. But this rebellion was in the
end quenched with blood, Henry Percie, Earl of Northumberland slain by
Rebels.
Earl of Northumberland, who was Lieutenant of these parts, and slew him in
this place: and having John Egremond to be their leader, took arms against
their Country and their Prince: but a few days after they felt the smart of
their lawless insolency grievously and justly as they Soureby and Brakenbake,
belonging to a very ancient and right worshipful family of the L^scelles: also
more Southward Sezay, sometime of the Darels (from whence a great family
branched) and afterward the Dawnies who for a long time flourished here
maintaining the degree and dignity of Knights right worthily.

Earls and Dukes of York.
The first and only Earl of York (after William Mallet, and one or two
Estotevils of the Norman blood, who they say were Sheriffs by inheritance) was
Otho son to Henry Leo Duke of Bavar and Saxony, by Maude the daughter of Henry
the Second, King of England, who was afterward proclaimed Emperor and styled
by the name of Otho the fourth. From whose brother William, another son of
Maud, are descended Langley, fifth Edward the Third, Duke of York: who by a
second daughter of Peter King of Castile and of Leon had two sons. Edward the
eldest, in his fathers life time, was first Earl of Cambridge, afterward Duke
of Aumarle, and in the end Duke of York; who manfully fighting in the battle
at Agincourt in France lost his life, leaving no children: and Richard his
second son Earl of Cambridge, who having married Anne sister of Edmund
Mortimer, Earl of March.
whose grandmother likewise was the only daughter of Leonell Duke of Clarence,
and practicing to advance Edmund his wives brother to the royal dignity, was
streightwaies intercepted and beheaded, as if he had been corrupted by the
French to destroy King Henry the Fifth.

Richard, was restored in blood through the exceeding, but unadvised favor of
King Henry the Sixth: Parliament. 10. Hen. 6.
as being son to Richard Earl of Cambridge brother to Edward Duke of York,
and cousin also to Edmund Earl of March. And now being Duke of York, Earl of
March and of Vlster, Lord of Wigmore, Clare, Trim, and Conaght, he bare
himself so lofty, that shortly he made claim openly in Parliament, against
King Henry the Sixth, as in his own right, for the Crown: which he had
closely affected by indirect courses before in making complaints of the
misgovernment of the State, spreading seditious rumors, scattering Libels
abroad, complotting secret Conspiracies, and stirring up tumults, yea and open
Wars: laying down his Title thus, as being the son of Anne Mortimer,
Philip the daughter and sole heir of Leonel Duke of Clarence, third son of
King Edward the Third, and therefore to be preferred by very good right, in
succession of the Kingdom, before the children of John of Gaunt the fourth
son of the said Edward the Third. And when answer was made unto him, that
the Nobles of the Realm and the Duke himself had sworn Allegiance unto the
King, Out of the Rols of the Parliament. 39. of Hen. the 6.
that the Kingdom by authority of Parliament had been conferred and entailed
upon Henry the Fourth and his heirs; that the Duke claiming his Title, from
the Duke of Clarence never took upon him the Arms of the Duke of Clarence,
that Henry the Fourth held the Crown in right from King Henry the Third; he
easily avoided all these allegations: namely, that the said oath unto the King
Arms of the Duke of Clarence which were his by right he forbear of purpose to
give them until then; like as he did, to claim his right to the Imperial
Crown: And as for the right or Title derived from king Henry the Third, it was
a mere ridiculous devise and manifest untruth to cloak the violent usurpation
of Henry the Fourth, and therefore condemned of all men. Albeit these plees in
the behalf of the Duke of York stood directly with law: Richard Duke of York
should be proclaimed heir apparent of the Kingdom, he and his heirs to
succeed after him: provided always, that neither of them should plot or
practice ought to the destruction of the other. Howbeit the Duke immediately
was transported so headlong with ambition, War between the House of Lancaster
and York, or the red Rose and the white.
that he went about to preoccupate and forestall his own hopes, and so he
raised that deadly War between the Houses of York and Lancaster,
distinguished by the white and red Rose, wherein himself soon after lost his
life at Wakefield, King Henry the Sixth was four times taken Prisoner, and in
the end despoiled both of his Edward Earl of March son to the said Richard,
obtained the Crown, and being deposed from the same, recovered it again (thus
inconstant fortune disported herself, See page 570.
lifting up and throwing down Princes at her pleasure) many Princes of the
royal blood, and a number of the Nobility lost their lives: those hereditary
and rich Provinces in France belonging to the Kings of England were Edward now
being established in his royal Throne, and in the rank of Kings carrying the
name of Edward the Fourth, gave unto Richard his second son the Title of Duke
of York, who together with king Edward the Fifth his brother was by their
Uncle Richard the Third murdered. Then king Henry the Seventh granted the same
Title unto his younger son, who afterward was crowned king of England by the
name of Henry the Eight. And even now of late King James invested Charles his
second son (whom before, 1604.
he had created in Scotland Duke of Albany, Marquess of Ormond, Earl of
Rosse and Baron of Ardmanoch) a child not full four years of age, Duke of
York, by after he had according to the order with due complements made the day
before, both him and eleven more of Noble Parentage, Knights of the Bath.

Reckoned there are in this County Parishes 459. under which he very many
Chapels, for number of Inhabitants equal unto great Parishes.

RICHMOND-SHIRE.
THE rest of this Country which lies toward the North-West and carries a
great compass, is called Richmond-shire, or Richmount-shire, taking the name
from a Castle, which Alan Earl of little Britain had built: unto whom William
the Conqueror gave this Shire (which before time belonged to Eadwin an
Englishman) by these short letters Richmond Fees. I William surnamed Bastard,
King of England, do give and grant unto thee my Nephew Alane Earl of
Britain, He was his son in law.
and to thine heirs for ever, all and every the Manor houses and lands which
late belonged to Earl Eadwin in Yorke-shire, with the Knights fees and other
liberties and customs, as freely and in as honorable wise, as the said Eadwin
held the same: Given at our Leaguer before the City of York.

This Shire most of it lies very high, with ragged rocks and swelling
mountains, whose sloping sides in some places bear good grass, the bottomes
and valleys are not altogether unfruitful. The hills themselves within, are
stored with lead, Copper, lead, and stone-cole, or pit-cole.
pit-coale, and Coper. For, in a Charter of king Edward the Fourth, there is
Mine or Delfe of Copper, near unto the very town of Richmond. But
covetousness, which drives men even as far as to hell has not yet pierced
into these hills, affrighted perchance with the difficulty of carriage:
whereas there have been found in the tops of these mountains, as also in
other places stones like unto sea winkles or cockles and other sea fish, Stone
cocles and winkles.
if they be not the wonders of nature, I will with Orosius a Christian
Historiographer deem them to be undoubted tokens of the general deluge that
surrounded the face of the whole earth in Noah's time. When the Sea (says he)
in Noah's days overflowed all the earth, and brought a general flood, so that
the whole Globe thereof, being therewith surrounded and covered, there was one
face, as of the Firmament, so also of the Sea. The soundest Writers most
evidently teach, That all

Where this Country bordereth upon Lancashire; amongst the mountains it is in
most places so waste, solitary, unpleasant, and unsightly, so mute and still
also, that the borderers dwelling thereby have called certain Riverets
creeping this way, Hell-beckes.
Hell-beckes. But especially that, about the head of the River Ure, which
having

The River Ure, which we have often spoken of before, has his fall here out
of the Western Mountains; and first of all cutting through the midst of the
Vale called Wentsedale, Wentsedale.
whiles it is yet but small as being near unto his Springhead, where great
flocks of Sheep do pasture, and which in some places bears Lead stones
plentifully, is increased by a little River coming out of the South called
Baint, which with a great noise streameth out of the Poole Semer. Ure, they
call Baintbrig, there lay in old time a Garrison of the Romans: whereof the
very Relics are at this day remaining. For, on the top of an hill, which of
a Fort, or Burge they now call Burgh, appear the ground works of an ancient
Hold, containing about five acres of ground in compass; and beneath it
Eastward, many tokens of some old habitation Winged Victory supporting the same.

IMP CAES. L. SEPTIMIO PIO PERTINACI AUGU. -- IMP CAESARI. M. AURELIO

The name of Geta rased out.
BRACCHIO CAEMENTICIUM VI NER VIORUM SUB CURALA SENECINON

Bracchium.
By this we may guess, that the said hold at Burgh, was in times past named
BRACCHIUM, Nervians lay there in Garrison who may seem to have had also their
place of Summer aboade in that high hill hard by fensed with a bank and trench
about it, which now they term Ethelbury. And not long since, there was dug
up the Statue of Aurelius Commodus the Emperor: The statue of Emperor
Commodus.
who, as Lampridius writes, was surnamed by his flattering clawbackes,
BRITANNICUS, even when the Britans would have elected an Emperor against him.
And then it may seem, was this Statue of his set up, when he prizing himself
more than a man, proceeded to that folly, that he gave commandment he should
be called, The Roman Hercules, Jupiters son. For, he was portraied
Hercules, and his right hand armed with a club: under which there lay, as I
have heard, such a mangled Inscription as this, broken here and there with
void places between: the draught whereof was badly taken out, and before I
came hither was utterly spoiled.

-- CAESARI, AUGUSTO
MARCI AURELII FILIO
--
SEN IONIS AMPLISSIMI
VENTS PIUS.
Nappa, an house built with turrets, and the chief seat of the Medcalfs,
thought to be at this day the greatest family for multitude of the same name,
The great family of the Medcalfes.
in all England: for, I have heard that Sir Christopher Medcalfe knight, and
the top of this kindred being of late high-Sheriffe of the shire, accompanied
with three hundred men of the same house all on horsback and in a livery, met
and received the Justices of Assizes, and so brought them to York. From hence
runs Ure down a maine, Creifishes.
full of Creifishes, ever since Sir Christopher Medcalfe in our remembrance
brought that kind of fish hither out of the South part of England: and
between two rocks, whereof the place is named Att-scarre, it runs head
long down, Bolton Castle.
not far from Bolton, a stately Castle, the ancient seat of the Barons Scrops,
and Richard Lord le Scrope, Barons le Scrope.
and Chancellor of England under king Richard the Second built with exceeding
great cost: and now bending his course Eastward, comes to Midelham, Midleham.
the honor, whereof (as we read in the Genealogy or Pedigree of the Nevils)
Alan Earl of Richmond bestowed upon his younger brother Rinebald, with all the
lands, which before their coming belonged to Gilpatrick the Dane. Lords of
Midleham.
His nephew by his son Raulph, named Robert Fitz-Raulph, had all Wentsedale
also by gift of Conan Earl of Britain and of Richmond: and at Midleham raised
a most strong Castle. His son Ranulph erected a little Abbay for Chanons at
Coverham (called now short, Corham) in Coverdale: whose son Raulph had a
daughter named Mary, Genealogia antiqua. Coverham.
who being wedded to Robert Lord Nevill with this Nevils. Which Robert Nevill
having had many children by his wife, was taken in adultery unknown; and by
the husband of the adulteress: being for revenge berest of his genitours,
shortly after dyed with extremity of pain.

Then Ure after it has passed a few miles forward waters Iervis or Iorvalle
Abbay of Cistertians founded first at Fors, and after translated hither by
Stephen Earl of Britain and Richmond, Masham.
but now wholly ruinated; and after that, Masham, which was the possession of
the Scropes of Masham; who as they sprung from the stock of the Scropes of
Bolton, so they were by marriages ingraffed again into the same. On the other
side of this River but more inward stands Snath, Snath.
the principal house of Latimer, Barons Latimer.
who derived their noble descent from George Nevill, younger son of Raulph
Nevill the first Earl of Westmorland, and he received this Title of honor
from king Henry the Sixth; when as the ancienter house of the Latimers expired
in a female, and so by a continued succession they have flourished unto these
our days: when for default of male issue of the last Baron Latimer, that
goodly and rich inheritance was divided among his daughters, married into the
families of the Percies, Cecils, D'anvers and Cornwallis. Neither are there any
other places in this part of the shire worth the naming that Ure runs by,
Tanfeld.
unless it be Tanfeld, the habitation in times past of the Gernegans knights:
from whom it descended to the Marmions: Marmions. Inq. 6. H. 6.
the last of whom left for his heir Amice second wife to John Lord Gray of
Rotherfeld: by whom he had two sons; John that assumed the surname of Marmion
and died issuelesse: and Robert who left behind him one only daughter and
sole heir Elizabeth, wife to Sir Henry Fitzhugh, a noble Baron.

After this, Swale a sacred River.
Ure entertaineth the River Swale, so called (as Th. Spot writes) of his
swiftness, self, into it with a maine and violent stream: which Swale
runs down Eastward out of the West Mountains also, scarce five miles above
the head of Ure: a River reputed very sacred amongst the ancient English, for
that in it, when the English Saxons first embraced Christianity, there were in
one day baptized with festival joy by Paulinus the Archbishop of York, See
page 136.
above ten thousand men, besides women and little children. This Swale
passes down Swal-dale; having good plenty of grass, Marrick.
but as great want of wood: first, by Marrick, where there stood an Abbay,
built by the Asks men in old time of great name: also by Mask, a place full of
lead ore.

Then runs it through Richmond, Richmond.
the chief town of the Country, having but a small circuit of walls, but yet
by reason of the Suburbs lying out in length at three Alan the first Earl
thereof built, reposing small trust in Gilling (a place or Manor house of his
hard by) to withstand the violence of the Danes and English, Gilling.
whom the Normans had despoiled of their inheritance, and he adorned it with
this name, as one would say, The rich Mount: he fensed it with a wall and a
most strong Castle, which being set upon a rock, from an high looks down to
Swale, that with a mighty rumbling noise rusheth rather than runs among the
stones. For, the said house or Manor place of Gilling was more holy in regard
of devout religion, than sure and strong for any fortification it had, ever
since that therein ( Beda calls it Gethling) Oswy King of Northumberland
being entertained guest-wise, was by his host forelaid and murdered: for the
expiation Ravenswath. Barons Fitzhugh.
Ravenswath Castle shows it self compassed with a good large wall, but now
fallen, which was the seat of the Barons named Fitzhugh, extracted from the
ancient line of the English Nation: who were Lords of the place before the
Normans Conquest, and lived in great name unto King Henry the Seventh his
days, enriched with fair possessions by marriage with the heirs of the noble
houses of Furneaux, and Marmion: which came at last by the females unto the
Fienes Lords Dacres in the South, and to the Parrs. Three miles beneath
Richmond, Swale runs by that ancient City which Ptolomee and Antonine call
CATURACTONIUM and CATARRACTON, Caturactonium. Catarrick.
but Bid Catarractan, and in another place, the Village near Catarracta:
whereupon I suppose it had the name of Catarracta, that is, a Fludfall, or
water-fall, considering hard by there is such a fall, but nearer unto Richmond;
where, Swale rusheth rather than runs as I have said with foaming waters,
meeting here and there with rocks, whereby his stream is interrupted and
broken. And wherefore should he call it the Town near unto Catarracta, if
there were not there a water-fall? That it was in those days a most famous
City may be gathered out of Ptolomee: because he took there an observation of
the heavens position: for, in the second book and 6. chapter of his Great
Construction, he describes and sets down the 24. Parallele, through
Catarractonium in Britain, and makes it to be distant from the Equator 57.
degrees: yet in his Geographicall Tables he defines

-- Magnum nil nisi Nomen habet.
Nothing has the same
But only a great name.
Catarrick bridge.
For it is but a small Village, called Catarrick and Catarrick-bridge; howbeit
well known both by the situation thereof nere unto the High street way which
the Romans made, that here passes over the river; and also by the heaps of
rubbish here and there dispersed, which carry some show of Antiquity,
especially about Kettercikswart Burghale, somewhat farther off from the Bridge,
and more Eastward hard by the river, where we beheld a mighty Mount and four
Bulwarks raised as it were with exceeding great labor up to a great height.
What sorrow it sustained in times past at the Picts and Saxons hands, when with
fire and sword they made foul havocke of all the Cities in Britain, I cannot
certainly tell: but it seems to have flourished after the Saxon Empire was
established: (Although Bid in every place calls it Vicum, that is, a
Village) until that in the year 769. it was set on fire and burnt by Eanred
or Beanred the Tyrant, who pitifully mangled the Kingdom of Northumberland.
But both he straight after miserably perished by fire; and Catarractoninum also
began to revive again out of the very ashes: For, in the 77. Etheldred
solemnized here his marriage with the daughter of Offa King of the Mercians.
Notwithstanding, it continued not long in good and flourishing estate: for, in
that confusion immediately ensuing of the Danes who laid all waste, it was
quite destroyed.

Swale drives on with a long course, not without some lets here and there in
his stream, Hornby.
not far from Hornby Castle, belonging to the Family of Saint Quintin, which
afterward came to the Cogniers: and sees nothing besides fresh pastures,
country houses, and Villages, unless it be Bedal, standing by another River
running into him: Fitz-Alan.
which Bedal glories much of a Baron it had named Sir Brian Fitz-Alan who
flourished in the days of King Edward the First, in regard of his worth, and
his ancient Nobility, as descended from the Earls of Britain, and Richmond:
But for default of heirs males the inheritance came by the daughters, to
Stapletons, and the Greies of Rotherfeld. By this time Swale having left
Richmond-shire behind, comes nearer unto Ure or Ouse, where he visits
Topcliffe the chief seat of the Percies; Marianus calls it (...); who
writes, that in the year of our Redemption 949. the States of Northumberland
bound themselves there by an oath of Allegiance unto King Eldred the
West Saxon. And at the very confluence of these Rivers stands Mitton, a small
Village, but remarkable by no small slaughter. For, the Scottish in the year
1319. when the pestilence had consumed in manner all the manhood of England,
having made an inrode thus far robbing and ransacking all where they came,
soon discomfited and put to flight no small power of Priests and country
people, which the Archbishop of York had led forth, with banner displaied into
the field. But to return back again to our matter. From CATARACTONIUM, the
high street or Port way divided it self in twain: where it takes Caldwell.
Aldburgh.
it leads by Caldwell and Aldburgh, which betokens An old Borough. By what
name it was known in ancient times I cannot easily guess. By the great ruins
it should seem to have been some notable place: and near at hand there is
seen a ditch by Stanwig a little Village, that runs eight miles in length
between the River Tees and Swale. Where the said High way goes Northwestward
about twelve miles off you meet with Bows, which also is written Bowgh; now, a
little Village: where in the ages aforegoing the Earls of Richmond had a pretty
Castelet, a certain custom called Thorough-toll, and there Furcas, i. power
to hang. But that in old time it was called in Antonines Itinerary, LAVATRAE
and LEVATRAE, both the account of distance, and the site thereof by Hadrian the
Emperor.

IMP. CAESARI DIVI TRAIANI PARTHICI. Max. filio
DIVI NERVAE NEPOTI TRAIANO. Hadria
NO AUG. PONT. MAXIM. --

IO. SEV.
This fragment also was there dug up.

--
--

FRONTINUS.
COH. I. THRAC.
--
Whiles under Severus the Emperor, Virius Lupus ruled as Lieutenant General
Thracians lay here in Garrison: for whose sake, he reedified the Bath or hot
house: as appears by this inscription, which from hence has been translated
to Cunnington, unto the house of that right worshipful and learned Sir Robert
Cotton, Knight.

Forte Dia Fortunae.
DAE. i. FORTUNAE VIRIUS LUPUS LEG. AUG. PR. PR. Here must I cause them to
forgo their error, who by this Inscription falsely copied forth, Bathea.
whiles they read untruly BALINGIUM, for BALINEUM, are of opinion, that the
name of the place was BALINGIUM. But if a man look nearer to the words, he
shall find it most evidently engraven in the stone BALINEUM: which word they
used in old time, Balineum or Balneum.
as the learned know, for BALNEUM, that is, A BATH, or Hote-house: who also are
not ignorant that soldiers, as well as others, used ordinarily to bathe, both
for health, and cleanliness: as who every day, before they did eat, in that
age were wont to bathe: as also, that such like bathing houses both public
and private were made every where with so great cost and superfluous excess,
Seneca.
That he thought himself poor and a very beggar, who had not the walls of
his In which Bathes men and women both, washed one with another: albeit this
had oftentimes been prohibited as well by the Imperial laws, as the Synodall
decrees.

In the declining estate of the Roman Empire the Company or Band of the
Exploratores, with their Captain kept their station here, under the dispose
of the General of Britain: as appears for certain out of the NOTICE of
Provinces, where it is named LAVATRES. But whereas such Bathes as these, were
called also in Latin Lavacra, some Critic, no doubt, will pronounce, that
this place was named LAVATRAE in stead of LAVACRA: yet would I rather have it
take the name of a little river running near by, which, as I hear say, is
called Laver. As for the later Bows, considering the old Town was here burnt
down to the ground (as the inhabitants with one voice do report) I would
think, it grew upon that occasion. For, that which is burnt with fire the
Britans still at this day, do term Boeth; and by the same word, the Suburbs
of Chester beyond the River Dee, which the Englishmen call Hanbridge, the
Britans or Welshmen name Treboeth, that is, The burnt Town, because in a
tumult of the Welshmen it was consumed with fire.

Here begins to rise that high hilly and solitary Country exposed to wind
and rain, Stane More.
which because it is stony, is called in our native language Stane more. All
here round about is nothing but a wild Desert, unless it be an homely
Hostelry, Spittle on Stane More.
or Inn, in the very midst thereof, called The Spitle on Stane more, for to
Rerecrosse, the Scots Reicrosse, as one would say, The Kings Cross. Which
Cross, Hector Boethius the Scottish Writer records to have been erected as a
mere stone confining England and Scotland; what time as King William the
Conqueror Maiden Castle.
which at this day they call Maiden-Castle. From whence, as the borderers
reported, the said High way went with many windings in and out, as far as to
Caer Vorran in Northumberland.

There have been diverse Earls of Richmond according as the Princes favor
inclined, Earls of Richmond.
and those out of diverse families: whom I will notwithstanding set down as
exactly and truly as I can, in their right order. The first Earls were out of
the house of little Britain in France, whose descent is confusedly intricate
amongst Haulte Britain, and another of Base Britain for many years, and
every one of their children had their part in Gavell kind, and were styled
Earls of Britain without distinction. But of these the first Earl of
Richmond, Guil. G^mit. L. 7 c. 34.
according to our Writers and Records, was Alane surnamed Feregaunt, that is,
The Red, son of Hoel Earl of Britain, descended from Hawise great Aunt to
William Conqueror, who gave this Country unto him by name of the lands of
Earl Eadwin in Yorke-shire, and withal bestowed his daughter upon him by whom
he had no issue. Book of Richmond Fees. Register of Swasey.
He built Richmond Castle, as is before specified, to defend himself from
disinherited and outlawed Englishmen in those parts: and dying left Britain to
his son Conan Le Gross by a second Alane the Black son of Eudo son of
Geffrey Earl of Britain and Hawise aforesaid, succeeded in Richmond, and he
having no child, lest it to Stephen his brother. This Stephen begat Alan
surnamed Le Savage his son and successor, who assisted king Stephen against
Maude the Empress in the battle at Lincoln, Overus de S. Martino is about
this time named Earl of Richmond.
and married Bertha one of the heirs of Conan Le Gross Earl of Hault
Britain by whom he had Conan Le Petit Earl of both Britains by hereditary
right, as well as of Richmond. He by the assistance of King Henry the Second
of England dispossessed Endo Vicount of Porhoet his Father in Law who usurped
the Title of Britain in right of the said Bertha his Wife: and ended his life
leaving only one daughter Constance by Margaret sister to Malcolne king of the
Scots. Geffrey third Constance, whereby he was Earl of Britain and Richmond;
and begat of her Arthur who succeeded him, and as the French write was made
away by King John his Uncle. True it is indeed, that for this cause, the French
called King John into question, as Duke of Normandy: And notwithstanding he was
absent, and not heard once to plead, neither confessing ought, nor convicted,
yet by a definitive sentence they condemned him, and awarded from him, Normandy
and his hereditary possessions in France: Normandy awarded away from the K.K.
of England.
Albeit himself had promised, under safe conduct to appear in personally at
Paris, there, to make answer as touching the death of Arthur: who as a Liege
subject had bound himself by oath to be true and loyal considering that a
greater dignity drowneth the lesser; and now one and the same person was both
King of England and Duke of Normandy. But whither do I digress? After Arthur,
these succeeded orderly in the Earldome of Richmond. Guy Vicount of Thovars,
unto whom the foresaid Constance was secondly married. Ranulph the third, Earl
of Chester, the third husband of the said Constance. Peter of Dreux, descended
from the blood royal of France; who wedded Alice the only daughter of
Constance by her husband abovenamed Guy. Then upon dislike of the house of
Britain, Peter Savoy, Uncle by the mothers side unto Eleonor the wife of king
Henry the Third, was made Earl of Richmond, who for fear of the Nobles and
Commons of England that murmured against strangers preferred to honors in
England, voluntarily surrendered up this Honor which was restored to John Earl
of Britain, son to Peter of Dreux. After whom succeeded John his son, the
first Duke of Britain, who wedded Beatrice daughter to Henry the Third King of
England. Whose son Arthur was Duke of Britain, Robert de Arthois was not
Earl of Richmond as Frossard writes, but of Beaumont.

The book of Tenures or Fees of Richmond.


and as some write, Earl of Richmond. Certes, John of Britain his younger
brother, immediately after the fathers death, bare this honorable Title. And
he added unto the ancient Arms of Drewx with the Canton of Britain, the Lions
of England in Bordeur. He was Guardian of Scotland under King Edward the
Second, and there taken and detained prisoner for three years space, and dyed
at length without issue, in the Reign of Edward the Third. And John Duke of
Britain, his nephew, the son of Arthur succeeded in this Earldom. After
his decease without children, when there was hot contention about the Duchy
of Britain, between John Earl of Montfort of the half blood, and Joane his
brothers daughter and heir of the whole blood married to Charles of Bloys:
King Edward the Third affecting the said John Earl of Montfort, and to
strengthen his own party in France, favored the Title of the said John Earl
of Montfort for that he was a man and nearer in degree, and therefore seemed to
have better right and to be preferred before his Niece (to whom the Parliament
of France had adjudged it) and which is more for that he swear fealty to him as
King of France, for the Duchy of Britain. In these respects he granted the
Earldome of Richmond unto the said John until he might recover his own
possessions in France, which being soon after recovered by aid of the
English, the said King bestowed it upon John of Gaunt his son. And he
afterward surrendered it again into the King his fathers hands for other
possessions. Who forthwith created John Earl of Montfort The valiant Earl of
Richmond unto whom he had given his daughter to wife, that thereby he might
more surely oblige unto him a warlique person, and then ill affected to the
French. But in the fourth year of Richard the Second he by authority of the
Parliament forfaited his Earldome because he adhered unto the French King
against England: howbeit he kept still the bare Title, and left it unto his
posterity: But the possession was granted to Dame Ioane of Britain his sister,
and the widow of Ralph Lord Basset of Draiton. After her decease first Ralph
Nevill Earl of Westmorland, had the Castle and Earldome of Richmond for the
term of his own life, by the gift of King Henry the Fourth. And after him
John Duke of Bedford. Then king Henry the Sixth conferred the Title of Richmond
upon Edmund of Hadham his half brother by the mothers side, with this special
and peculiar prerogative, To take his place in Parliament next unto Dukes.
After him succeeded Henry his son who was King of England by the name of
Henry the Seventh. But during his exile George Duke of Clarence, and Richard
Duke of Gloucester received the Signiory of Richmond, but not the Title from
their brother king Edward the Fourth. Last of all Henry the base son of king
Henry the Eighth was by his father invested Duke of Richmond, who departed this
life without issue 1535. Duke of Richmond.
As for Sir Thomas Gray who was made Baron of Richmount by king Henry the
Sixth, was not Lord of this Richmond, but of a place in Bedfordshire called
Rugemound, and Richmount Greies.

There are contained in this Shire Parishes 104. beside Chapels.

BISHOPRIC OF DVRHAM.
THe Bishopric of Durham or Duresme, bordering on the North side upon
Yorke-shire is shaped in fashion of a triangle, the utmost angle whereof is
made up, toward the West, where the Northren limit and the Springhead of Tees
do meet. One of the sides which lies Southward is bounded in with the
continued course of the river Tees running down along Derwent, then, with
Derwent it self, until it has taken unto it Chopwell a little river, and
afterward with the river Tine. The Sea coast fashioneth out the Base of the
Triangle which lies Eastward, and the German Ocean with a mighty roaring, and
forcible violence bears thereupon.

On that part where it gathers narrow to the Western angle, the fields are
naked and barren, the woods very thin, the hills bare without grass, but not
without mines of iron. As for the Valleys, they are reasonably grassie, and
that high hill which I termed the Apennine of England, cutteth in twain this
angle. But on the East Bitumen, others, to be Gagates, and some again the
L^pis Thracius; all which that great Philosopher in Minerals, George Agricola,
has prooved to be one and the same thing. Surely this of ours, is nothing else
but Bitumen, or a clammy kind of cley hardened with heat under the earth, and so
thoroughly concocted: For, it yields the smell of Bitumen, and if water be
sprinkled upon it, it burns more vehemently and the cleerer: but, whether it
may be Obsidianus lopi Canole cole*
I have not yet tried. And if the Stone called Obsidianus be in our country, I
would take that to be it, which is found in other places of England, and
commonly called Canole cole: For it is hard, bright, light, and somewhat easy
to be cloven piece meal into flakes, and being once kindled it burns very
quickly. But let us leave these matters to those that search more deeply into
Natures closets.

All this country with other territories also thereto adjoining the Monastical
writers term the Land, Saint Cuthberts Patrimony.
or Patrimony of Saint Cuthbert. For, so they called whatsoever belonged to
the Church of Durham, whereof S. Cuthbert was the Patron: who in the primitive
state of the English Church, being Bishop of Lindefarn, led all his life in
such holiness and so sincerely, that he was enrolled among the English Saints.
Our Edgfride bestowed upon Cuthbert himself whiles he lived, great revenewes
in the very City of York, and Creake also whereof I spoke, and the City
Luguballia, as we read in the History of Durham. King Aelfred and Guthrun the
Dane, whom he made Lieutenant of Northumberland, gave afterward all the Lands
between the Rivers Were and Tine unto Cuthbert, and to those who ministered in
his Church, to have and to hold for ever, as (These be the very words in
effect of an ancient Book) whence they might have sufficient maintenance to
live upon, and not be pinched with poverty: over and besides, they ordained his
Church to be a safe Sanctuary for all fugitives: that whosoever for any cause
fled unto his Corpse, should have peaceable being for 37. days, and the same
liberty never for any occasion to be infringed or denied. Edward and
Athelstan, Kings; Knute also or Canutus the Dane, who came on his bare feet to
Cuthberts William the Conqueror, since whose time it has always been deemed
a County Palatine: yea and some of the Bishops, as Counts Palatine have
engraven in their seals a Knight or man at arms in complete harness sitting
upon an horse all trapped, with one hand brandishing a sword, and in the other
holding out the Arms of the Bishopric.

The Bishops also have had their royalties and princely rights, so that the
goods of outlawed and attainted persons out of the Kings protection, fell into
their hands and not into the Kings: yea and the Commons of that Province
standing upon their privileges have refused to serve in war under the King
in Scotland. For, they pleaded That they were Haliwerke folks, and held their
lands to defend the Corpse of Saint Cuthbert; neither ought they to go out of
the precincts of the Bishopric, namely beyond Tine and Teese, for King or
Bishop. But King Edward the First, was the first that abridged them of these
liberties. For, when as he interposed himself as Arbitratour between the
Bishop Antony Bec, and the Priour who contended most egerly about certain
lands, and they would not stand to his award, He seized, as says mine
Author, the liberty of the Bishopric into his own hand, and there were many
corners searched, many flawes found, and the Liberty in many points much
impaired. Howbeit, the Church afterward recovered her rights, and held them
inviolate unto the days of King Edward the Sixth, unto whom, upon the
dissolution Mary by the same authority repealed this Act, and restored all
things safe and sound unto the Church again, which it enjoys at this day.
For, the Bishop, James Pilkinton of late time entered his action against Queen
Elizabeth, about the possessions and goods of Charles Nevill Earl of
Westmorland and of others that stood attainted for treason in this precinct,
because they had most wickedly levied war against their native Country: and
he the said Bishop had followed the suit to a trial, if the authority of
Parliament had not interposed and adjudged the same for that time, unto the
Queen, because to her exceeding great charges she had delivered both Bishop
and Bishopric from the outrage

The river that boundeth the South part of this country, is called by Latin
writers Teisis, The River Teise, or Teisis.
and Teesa, commonly Tees: by Polydore Virgill the Italian (whose mind ran
of Athesis in his own country Italy) without any reason, Athesis. In Ptolomee
it seems to be called, (...) and (...): and yet I think that in him it is
removed out of his proper place through the negligence of transcribers. For,
considering that he has placed TUESIS and TINA in the more remote part of
Britain, where the Scots now inhabit; and seeing that this Region is enclosed
within Tees and Tine; If I durst, as a Critic, correct that ancient
Geographer, I would recall them home Stanemore, and carrying with him away in
his channel along, many brooks and beckes on each side, and running through
rocks (out of which at Egleston, where there is a marble Quarroy, and where
Conan Earl of Britain, and Richmond founded a small Abbay) first beats upon
Bernard Castle, built and so named by Bernard Balliol the great grandfathers
father of John Balliol King of the Scots. But this John Balliol, whom King
Edward the First had declared King of Scotland, lost the same with other his
possessions, because he had broken his allegiance which he swear unto Edward.
At which time Antony Bishop of Durrham, took this Castle (as witnesses the
book of Duresme) with the appertinences thereto from him, and conferred the
same upon the Earl of Warwick: as Herkes also and Hertnes, which he gave
unto Robert Clifford: Kewerston also, which he bestowed upon Geffrey of
Hertpole, which and Christopher Seton. But a few years after, Lewis Beaumount
the Bishop, a man royally descended, but altogether unlettered, brought his
action for this Castle and the rest of those possessions, and obtained his
suite, by virtue of judgment given in this tenor, The Bishop of Durham ought
to have the forfeiture of Wars within the Liberties of his Bishopric, as
the King has it without. Stretlham.
Hard by it is Stretlham seen, where dwelt for a long time the worshipful
family of the Bows, Bows.
Knights: who from time to time in the greatest troubles have performed passing
good service to Prince and Country: and derive their pedigree from W. de Bows,
unto whom, as I have read, Alanus Niger Earl of Britain and Richmond granted,
that he might give for his Arms, The Ermin.
Scutcheon of Bows therein.

Not full five miles from hence, stands somewhat farther from Tees bank
Standrop, which also is called Stainthorpe, that is, Stony Village, a little
Mercate Town, where there was a Collegiat Church, founded by the Nevills, and
was their Buriall-place. Near unto it is Raby, Raby Castle.
whch Cnut or Canute the Danish King gave freely unto the Church of Durham
together with the land lying round about it, and Stanthorpe, to be held for
ever. Since which time, as mine Author informs me, The Family of the
Nevills, or De nova villa, held Raby of the Church, paying yearly for it four
pounds and a Stagge. The family of the Nevils.
These Nevilles deduce their Descent from Waltheof Earl of Northumberland, out
of whose posterity, when Robert the son of Maldred, See in Westmorland.
Raby had married the daughter of Geffrey Nevill the Norman (whose Grandsire
Gilbert Nevill is reported to have been Admiral to King William the
Conqueror) their succeeding Progeny took unto them the name of Nevilles, and
grew up into a most numerous honorable, and mighty house: who erected here a
great and spacious Castle, which was the first and principal seat. These two
places Stainthorpe and Raby are severed one from another only by a little rill
which after some few miles runs into Tees, near unto Selaby, where now is
the habitation of the Brakenburies, Selaby.
a Family of right good note both in regard of their own Antiquity, as also
for their marriages contracted with the heirs of Denton and of Wicliff.

Tees passing on from thence by Sockburne, the dwelling house of the ancient
and noble Family of the Coigniers, Barons Coigniers.
out of which were the Barons Coigniers of Hornby (whose inheritance much
bettered by matching in marriage with the heirs of the Lord Darcy of Metnill,
and of William Nevill Earl of Kent, and Lord of Fauconberg, is descended from
them in the memory of our fathers, to the Atherstons and the Darcies) holds
his course near unto Derlington, Derlington.
a Mercate Town of good resort, which Seir, an English Saxon the son of
Ulph, having obtained leave of King Etheldred gave unto the Church of Durham:
and Hugh Pudsey adorned it with a fair Church and other edifices.

In this Town field are three pittes of a wonderful depth, the common people
Hell-Kettles, Hell Kettles, Deep pits.
because the water in them by the Antiperistasis or reverberation of the cold
air striking thereupon, waxes hot. The wiser sort and men of better
judgment do think, they came by the sinking down of the ground swallowed up
in some earthquake, Earthquake.
and that by a good probable reason. For, thus we read in the Chronicles of
Tinmouth. In the year of our Lord 1179. on Christmas day, at Oxenhall in the
Territory of Derlington, within the Bishopric of Durham, the ground heaved it
self up aloft like unto an high Tower, and so continued all that day as it
were unmovable, until the evening: and then, fell with so horrible a noise,
that it made all the neighbor dwellers afraid: and the earth swallowed it up
and made in the same place a deep pit, which is there to be seen for a
testimony, unto this day. That these Pittes have Cuthbert Tonstall first
observed, by finding that Goose in the River Tees, which he for the better
trial and experience of these Pits, had marked and let down into them.

Beyond Derlington, Certain Gentlemen called Sur.
Tees has no Towns of any great account standing upon it, but gliding along
the skirtes of green fields, Teis i. upon Teis, sometime flourished here.
and by country Villages, winding in

From hence the shore coasteth Northward, holding on entire still, save that it
is interrupted with one or two little Brooks and no more, Gretham.
near unto Gretham; where Robert Bishop of Durham having the Manor given
freely unto him by Sir Peter de Montfort, founded a goodly Hospital. Next unto
it is Claxton, which gave name unto a Family of good and ancient note, in this
Tract: whereof, I have been the more willing to make mention, because of the
same house was T. Claxton, an affectionate lover of venerable Antiquity. From
thence, the shore shoots forth Tees mouth, on which stands very
commodiously Hartlepoole, Hartlepoole.
a good Town of trade, and a safe harbor for shipping. Bid seems to call
it (...), which Henry of Huntingdon, interprets The Hearts or Stagges Island,
where he writes, that Heiu a religious woman founded a Monastery in times
past. If Heorteu be not rather the name of that little Territory, which the
Book of D^resme seems to implie and in another place calls Heortnesse, A
Promontory in our language is called Nesse.
because it lies out somewhat far into the Sea. From this for fifteen miles
together the shore being in no place broken off, but here and there
embroidered as it were and garnished with Towns, smileth pleasantly upon those
that sail that way, until it opens it self to make room for the River
VEDRA; The river Vedra, or Were.
so Ptolomee calls that, which Bid names Wirus, the Saxons (...); and we
Were. This river first grows into one out of three riverets Burden-hop,
Wel-hop, and Kel-hop, in the utmost part of this Country Westward: which when
they are joined in one channel is called by one name Were, and speedeth into
the East, by vast moors and heathes, Witton.
by great Parkes of the Bishops, and by Witton a little Castle or pile
belonging to the Lords Evers, Barons Evers. or D'Eure.
who are Noblemen in this Country of great antiquity, as descended from the
Lords of Clavering and Warkworth, as also from the Vescyes and the Attons, by
Daughters: renowned for their martial prowess, which Scotland may well
witness. For, King Edward the First, gave unto them for their valiant service
Kettnes a little Town in Scotland, and King Henry the

Then Were after a few miles takes into him from the South Gaunlesse a
Riveret; where, at the very meeting of them both together, there stands upon
an high hill Aukland so called of Oaks (like as Sarron in Greece) which shows
an house of the Bishops stately built with Turrets by Antony Bec, Auk-land.
and withal a beautiful Bridge, made by Walter Skirlaw a Bishop of Durham
about the year 1400. who also enlarged this house and built the Bridge over
Tees at Yare. From hence Were turns his course Northward, that he might water
this shire the longer, and then forthwith looks up to the remains of an
ancient City not now a dying, but dead many Antonine the Emperor called
VINOVIUM, Vinovium.
Ptolomee BINOVIUM, in whom it is so thrust out of his own place, and set as
it were in another Climate, that it would for ever have lien hid, had not
Antonine pointed at it with his finger. Binchester.
We call it at this day Binchester, and it has in it a very few houses: yet
it is very well known to them that dwell thereabout, both by reason of the
heaps of rubbish, and the relics of walls yet to be seen, as also for
pieces of Roman Coin often dug up there, which they call Binchester
Penies, yea and for the Inscriptions of the Romans, amongst which I happened
of late when I was there upon an Altar with this Inscription.

As concerning the Mother Goddesses. See in Lancashire.
MATRIB. Q. LO -- CL. QUIN TIANUS -- COS V. S. L. M. Anno Christi. 236.

Votum solvit. li ben. merito.i. Paid his vow willingly and duly.


Another stone also was here lately gotten out of the ground, but defaced with

-- -- TRIB. COHOR. I. CARTOV -- MARTI VICTORI GENIO LOCI. Neither have I read
any thing else of it, but that an old book makes mention, how the Earls of
Northumberland, long since plucked away this with other Villages from the
Church, what time as that accursed and unsatiable hunger after Gold swallowed
up also the sacred patrimony of the Church.

On the other bank of Were, Branspath Castle.
among the mounting Hills appears Branspeth Castle, which the Bulmers built,
and the daughter of Sir Bertram Bulmer coupled Geffrey Nevill, adjoined with
other great Possessions unto the Family of the Nevills. Within a while after
Were runs down much troubled and hindered in his Course with many great
Stones apparent above the water, which unless the River do rise and swell
with great store of rain, are never over covered: and upon which (a thing that
happens not elsewhere) if ye power water, and temper it a little with them,
it sucketh in a saltish quality. Nay, that which more is, at Butterby a little
Village, when the River in Summer time is very ebb and shallow, Salt stones.
there issues out of those stones a certain salt reddish water, which by the
heat of the Sun waxes so white, and withal grows to a thick substance,
that the people dwelling thereby gather from hence salt sufficiently

And now the River, as though it purposed to make an Island, compasses almost
on every side the chief City of this Province standing on an hill, whence the
Saxons gave it the name Dunholm. For, as you may gather out of Bid, they
called an hill Dun, and a river Island Holme. Dunelmus. Durham, or Duresme.
Hereof, the Latin Writers have made DUNELMUM, the Normans Duresme, but the
common people most corruptly name it Durham. It is seated on high, and passing
strongly withal, yet takes it up no great circuit of ground; shaped in form,
as one would say, of an egg, environed on every side save on the North with
the River, and fortified with a wall. Toward the South side almost, whereas the
River fetches it self about, stands the Cathedral

In the midst there is a Castle placed, as it were between two stone bridges
over the river, the one Eastward, the other Westward. From the Castle Northward
is seen a spacious Mercate-place and Saint Nicholas Church: from whence there
runs out a great length North-East a Suburb compassed on two sides the
River: Lindisfarn driven hither, and thither by the Danes Wars, wandered up
and down without any certain place of abode with the corpse of Saint Cuthbert,
at length here they settled themselves by divine direction, about the year of
our Salvation 995. But hear the whole matter out of mine Author of Durham.
All the people accompanying the corpse of that most holy Father Cuthbert came
into Dunholme, a place verily strong of it self by nature, but not easily to
be inhabited, as being wholly beset on every side with a most thick Wood:
only in the midst was a little Plain, which was wont to be tilled and
sowed Aldwin built afterward a fair Church of stone. The foresaid Prelate
therefore, through the help of all the people and the assistance of Uthred
Earl of Northumberland, stocked up all the Wood and in short time made the
whole place habitable. To conclude, the people generally from the River Coqued
as far as to Tees, came right willingly, as well to this work, as after that
to build a Church: and until it was finished ceased not to follow that
business devoutly. Wherefore after the Wood was quite grub'd up, and every one
had their mansion places assigned out by lot; The said Bishop in a fervent love
to Christ and Saint Cuthbert, upon an honest and godly intent began (no small
piece of work) to build a Church, and endeavored by all means to finish the
same. Thus far mine Author.

Not many years after, those Englishmen who could not endure the insolent
command of the Normans, presuming upon the natural strength of the place,
chose it for their chief Hold and seat of resistance, yea and from thence
troubled the Conqueror not a little. For, William Gemeticensis writes thus.
They went into a part of the Country which for waters and woods was
inaccessible, raising a Castle with a most strong trench and rampire, which
they called Dunholme: out of which making many rodes sundry ways, for a
certain space they kept themselves close there, waiting for the coming of
Swene King of the Danes. But when that fell not out according to their
expectation, they provided for themselves by flight: and King William coming
to Durham, granted many privileges for establishing the liberty of the Church,
and built the Cuthberts shrine.

When this Castle was once built, William of Malmesbury who lived about that
time, describes this City in these words. Durham is a pretty hill rising by
little and little from one plain of the Valley with a gentle ascent, until it
come to be a mount: and although by reason of the rough and steep situation
of the Rocks, there is no way for the enemy to enter it; yet they of these
days have erected a Castle upon the hill. At the very foot and bottom of the
Castle, runs a River, wherein is great store of fish, but of Salmons
especially. At the same time well near (as that ancient Book reports)
William de the Bishop, who gathered again the dispersed Monks hither (for,
the Danes in every place had overthrown their Cloistures) pulled down that
Church which Aldwin had formerly built, and began the foundation of another
of a fairer work, which his successor Ralph finished. And after that,
Nicholas Feruham Bishop, and Thomas Mescomb Prior, adjoined a new Fabrique or
frame unto it, in the year of Christ 1242. And a good while after, W. Skirlaw
the Bishop, built at the West end of the Church a fair piece of work which
they call Gallilee, Gallilee.
whereinto he translated the marble Tomb of Venerable Bede. In which place
Hugh Pudsey, began in times past an house, wherein (I use the words of an
ancient Book) women might lawfully enter, For no woman might enter into Durham
Church.
that whereas they had not corporal access unto the

But, that Ralph the Bishop aforesaid, as our Historian writes, reduced the
place ^etweene the Church and the Castle, which had been taken up with many
dwelling houses, Which wall now by little and little gives place unto time,
and never that I could hear, suffered any assault of enemy.

For, when David Brus, King of Scots, had forraied the Country with fire and
sword, Beere-parke. 1346.
as far as to Beanparke or Beereparke, which is a Park near unto the City,
whiles King Edward the Third besieged Calais, Henry Percy and William Zouch
Archbishop of York, with their Companies of men mustered up in haste,
encountered The Battle at Nevils Cross. Battle of Nevils Cross
For, the chiefest of the Scottish Nobility being slain, and the King taken
prisoner at this field, they were enforced to yield much ground within their
Confines, yea and to render many Castles. But this may suffice as touching
Durham: which I will take my leave of, if you think good, with a Distichon of
Necham, and an Hexastichon of John Jonston.


Qua floret sancta religionis apex.
VEDRA ruens rapidis modo cursibus, agmine leni,
Seque minor celebres suspicit urbe viros,
Quos dedit ipsa olim, quorum and tegit ossa sepulta;
Magnus ubi sacro marmore BEDA cubat.
Se jactant aliae vel religione, vel armis;
Haec armis cluit, haec religione potens.
Durham by art and site of place well fensed now farewell,
Where for devout Religion the Mitre does excel.
The River Were that ran most swift ere while, with stream now soft
And channel less, to famous men in town looks up aloft;
Whom once it bred: and of whose bones in grave it is possessed:
Where under sacred marble stone, Great Beda now does rest.
Of Arms or of Religion, may other boast, I grant:
For Arms and for Religion both, this City makes her vaunt.
Edward the Sixth, when private greediness edged by Churchmen did grind the
Church, and withdrew much from God, wherewith Christian Piety had formerly
honored God. But Queen Mary repealed that Statute and restored the said
Bishopric with all the Possessions, and Franchises thereof, that God might
enjoy his own. The Longitude of this City is 22. Degrees. The Latitude 54.

Beneath Durham, that I many not overpasse it, Shrirburne Hospital.
stands Eastward a very fair Hospital, which Hugh Pudsey that most wealthy
Bishop, and Earl of Northumberland, so long as it was, Being very indulgently
compassionate to Lepres (as Neubrigensis writes) built with cost (I must
needs say profuse enough) but in some sort not so honest: as who laid no
small deall of other men's right (so great was his power) upon Howbeit he
assigned unto it revenewes to maintain threescore and five Lepres, besides
Mass Priests.

From Durham Were carries his stream Northward with a more direct course, by
Finchdale; Finchdale.
where, in the Reign of King Henry the Second Goodrick a man of the ancient
Christian simplicity, and austerity wholly devoted to the service of God, led a
solitary life and ended his days: being buried in the same place, wherein, as
that William of Neuborrow says, he was wont either to lie prostrate whiles he
prayed, or to lay him down when he was sick. Who with this his devout
simplicity, drew men into so great an admiration of him, that R. brother unto
that rich Bishop Hugh Pudsey

Lumley. Barons Lumley.
From thence Were passes by Lumley Castle standing within a Park, the ancient
seat of the Lumleies, who descended from Liulph, a man in this tract of right
great Nobility in the time of King Edward the Confessor, who married Aldgitha
the daughter of Aldred Earl of Northumberland. Of these Lumleies, Marmaduke
assumed unto him his mothers Coat of Arms (in whose right he was seized of a
goodly inheritance of the Thwengs) namely, Argent of Fesse Gueles between
three Poppinjaes Vert, whereas the Lumleies before time had borne for their
Arms, Six Poppinjaes Argent, in Gueles. For she was the eldest daughter of Sir
Marmaduke Thweng Lord of Kilton, and one of the heirs of Thomas Thweng her
brother. But Ralph Marmaduke was the first Baron Lumley, created by King
Richard the Second: which honor John the ninth from him enjoyed in our days a
man most honorable for all the ornaments of true Nobility.

Just over against this place, not far from the other bank of the River
stands Chester upon the Street, Chester upon the street. Condercum.
as one would say, the Castle or little City by the Port way side: the Saxons
called it (...): whereupon, I would deem it to be CONDERCUM, in which as the
book of Notices records, the first wing of the Astures, in the Romans time
kept station and lay in Garrison, within the Line or precinct (as that book
says) of the WALL. For it is but a few miles distant from that famous WALL,
whereof I am to speak hereafter. The Bishops of Lindifarre lived obscurely
Cuthbert, whiles the raging storms of the Danes were up, for the space of an
hundred and thirteen years. In memory whereof, when Egelricke Bishop of
Durham laid the foundation of a new Church in that place, he found such a
mighty mass of money buried within the ground, as is thought by the Romans,
that wallowing now in wealth, he gave over his Bishopric: and being returned
to Peterborrow whereof he had been Abbot before, made causeies through the
Fennes and raised other Works, not without exceeding great charges.

And a long time after Anthony Bec, Bishop of Durham and Patriarch of Jerusalem
erected here a Collegiat Church, a Deane, and seven Prebends. In which Church,
Lumley abovesaid placed and ranged in goodly order the Monuments of his
Ancestors in a continued line of succession even from Liulph unto these our
days; which he had either gotten together out of Monasteries that were
subverted, or caused to be made a new. And further within, almost in the
midst of the Triangle, there is another little Village also known of late by
reason of the College of a Deane and Prebendaries founded by that Antony Bec at
Lanchester, which I once thought to have been LONGOVICUM a station of the
Romans.

But let us return unto Were, which now at length turns his course Eastward,
and running beside Hilton a Castle of the Hiltons, Hilton Castle.
a Family of ancient Gentry; venteth his waters with a vast mouth into the sea
at Wiran-muth, as Bede terms it, Monks Were-mouth, because it belonged to
the Monks. Touching which mouth or outlet, thus writes William of
Malmesbury. This Were where he enters into the Sea, entertaineth Ships
brought in with a fair Gale of Wind, within the gentle and quiet bosom of
his Outlet. Both the Banks whereof, Benedict Bishop beautified with Churches
and built Abbaies there, one in the name of Saint Peter and the other of Saint
Paul. The painful industry of this man he will wonder at, who shall read his
life; for that he brought hither great store of books, and was the first man
that ever procured Masons and Glasiers for windows to come into England.
Glasiers, first in England.


Five miles higher, the River Tine does also unlade it self, which together
with Derwent for a good way lineth out (as it were) the North side of this
Country. Upon Derwent which has his spring head near unto the top of the
Triangle, there stands nothing of note, Ebchester. Saint Ebba.
unless it be a little Village which now they call Ebchester, of Ebba a
virgin of the blood royal of the Northumbers, of whom there went so great a
name and opinion for her sanctimony and devotion about the year 630. Saint
Tabbs.
which the common sort usually call Saint Tabbs for Saint Ebbes.

But by Tine there is situate a memorable Town called Gateshead in the English
Saxon tongue (...), and by Latin Historians, Caprae Caput, which is the same,
as one would say, Goats head: and is as it were the Suburbs of Newcastle,
standing on the hither side of Tine, whereunto also it was annexed by King
Edward the Sixth, when the Bishopric was dissolved. But Queen Mary soon
after restored it again unto the Church. The common people think it is far
more ancient than Newcastle it self. And if I also should say, that this and
Newcastle together (for one Town it may seem in old time to have been,
divided only by the River) Frontier Station, which under the later Emperors
they called GABROSENTUM, and was kept by the second Band of the Thracians, and
that it retained still the ancient name in sense and signification, whereas,
New Castle has gotten once or twice a new name, I hope my opinion would be
nothing dissonant from the truth: For, Gaffr in the British tongue signifies a
Goat, and Hen in ordinary speech is used for Pen, which betokens an Head: and
in the very same signification our old Historiographers term it in Latin
Caprae Caput, like as Brundusium, in the Messapians Language took that name,
from a Stagges head. I would think that this name was given unto this place,
by occasion of some Inn that had a Goats head for the sign: even as Gallus
Gallinaccus, that is, The Housecocke, Tres Sorores, that is, Three and Pirum,
that is, The Pear, Places in Afric, Spain, and Italy, whereof Antonine
makes mention: which, of such signs (as some learned men suppose) took their
names. And our Historians all with one accord, name this Town Caprae Caput,
when they record, that Walcher Bishop of Durham, whom King William the First
had made Governor over Northumberland with the authority of an Earl, was
slain in this place by the furious multitude, for misgoverning the Country.

Beneath this Town, Girwy. Iarrow. Bid.
almost at the very mouth of Tine, is to be seen Girwy, now Iarrow, the native
soil of venerable Bede, where also in ancient times flourished a little
Monastery: The Founder whereof and the time of the foundation, this inscription
shows, which is yet extant in the Church wall.

DEDICATIO BASILICAE S. PAULI VIII. KL. MA II. ANNO XVI. ECFRIDI REG. CEOLFRIDI
ABB. EIUSDEMQ. ECCLES. DEO AUCTORE, CONDITORIS ANNO IIII. Basilica) were termed
BASILICAE, Basilicae.
for that the Basilicae of the Gentiles which were large and spacious Hauls,
wherein Magistrates sat in judgment and ministered Justice, were converted into
Christian Churches. Whence Ausonius wrote thus, Basilica olim negotijs plena,
etc. The Basilica [or Haull of Justice] in times past full of businesses, is
now as or else because they were built in form somewhat long, in manner of
those Basilicae.

Saint Bede.
Here our Bid, the singular glory and ornament of England, who for his Piety
and learning got the surname of VENERABILIS, bestowed all diligence, as
himself says, in meditation of the Scriptures, and amid the most boisterous
billows and surging waves of Barbarism wrote many most learned Volumes. When
he was once dead, there was buried with him, as William of Malmesbury says,
all the knowledge, well near of Acts and Monuments, until our time. For, when
there succeeded ever one more lazy than another, the heat of good studies was
abated, and cooled through the whole Land. And the Danes for their part,
plagued this holy place in such wise, that shortly Walcher the Bishop assigned
this place for them: Only walls, as says mine Author, were standing without
any roof, and it scarcely retained any sign of the ancient dignity: howbeit
for all that, they framing a roof over head of rough hewn wood such as they
could get, and thatching it with straw, began to celebrate Divine Service
therein.

Bishops of Durham.
I need not to make a Catalogue of the Bishops of Durham who are reputed
Count-Palatines. Let it suffice to intimate thus much, that since the first
time, a See was here erected, in the year of our Redemption 995. there have
sitten in it 35. Bishops unto our days. Of which these were most eminent: Hugh
Pudsey nobly Stephen: who for a thousand and thirteen pounds presently
disbursed, purchased of King Richard the First, the Country of Northumberland
for his life; See the Earls of Northumberland.
and Sathbrege, to his successors for ever, and built that goodly Hospital
whereof I spoke: between whom and the Archbishop there arose a most bitter
controversy, Whiles (as he writes of them) hic praesse, ille non subesse, and
neuter prodesse contenderet, that is, One would be superior, the other would
not be inferior, and neither of them would do any good. Antony Bec,
Patriarch of Jerusalem, who spent infinite sums of money, upon vast
buildings, and glorious furniture. Thomas Wolsey Cardinal, who in his high
prosperity wanted nothing but moderation (but his History is sufficiently
known.) And Cuthbert Tunstall, who dyed in our time,

In this Province and in Northumberland beside very many Chapels, are counted
Parish Churches 118.

LANCASTRIAE Comitalus palatinus olim pars BRIGANTUM


LANCA-SHIRE.
I Must now turn the course of my journey another way, unto the rest of the
BRIGANTES, who were planted on the farther side of the Hills toward the Irish
Sea: and first unto LANCA-SHIRE, which I go unto (God speed me well) after a
sort somewhat against my will: For I fear me that I shall not satisfy my
self, and much less the Reader. Lanca-shire men, I will proceed, in hope that
Gods assistance, which hitherto has been favorable unto me, will not now
fail me.

Under those mountains, which (as I have often said heretofore) shoot along
through the middle of England, and interpose themselves as umpires and Bounders
between diverse shires, Lanca-shire lies toward the West, in the English Saxon
tongue (...), commonly termed Lonka-shire, Lanca-shire, and The County Palatine
of Lancaster, because it is notably known by the title of a County Palatine.
It Yorke-shire on the East side, and the Irish sea on the West, that on the
South side where it boundeth upon Cheshire it is broader, and by little and
little the more Northward it goes, where it confineth upon Westmorland, the
narrower it grows. And there, by an Arm of the sea insinuating it self, is
interrupted, and has a good part of it which butteth upon Cumberland, beyond
the said Arm.

Where the ground is plain and champion, it yields good store of Barley and
Wheat: that which lies at the botom of the hills, is better for Otes: The
soil every where is meetely good and tolerable, unless it be in certain
moist places and unwholesome called Mosses, Mosses.
which notwithstanding make amends for these their discommodities, with more
plentiful commodities. For, if their upper coat be Cespites.
Turffes for fuel, and some times underground trees, or which have lien a
long time buried there. Underneath also in diverse places they affourd abundance
of marle, which serves in stead of mucke to enrich their grounds. Whereby, the
soil that in man's opinion was held most unapt to bear Corn, begins now to
be so kind and arable, that it may be justly thought, men's idleness in times
past was greater than any natural barrainesse of the soil. But a man may
judge of the goodness of the soil, partly by the constitution and complexion
of the Inhabitants, who are to see to, passing fair and beautiful, and in
part, if you please, by the Cattaile. For, Lanca-shire b^ufes.
in their Kine and Oxen which have goodly heads and fair spread horns, and
are in body well proportionate withal, Mago the Carthaginian does require, as
Columella specifieth out of him.

On the South part, it is separated from Cheshire with the River Mersey which
springing forth of the midland hills, having passed a little from his head,
becomes a bound to distinguish the Shires, and with a slow current runs
Westward, calling as it were, other rivers (to use the words of the Poet) into
his sky colored and azure lap, and forthwith gladly bids welcome unto
Irwell from the North, which river brings along with him all the rivers of
this Eastern part. Among these, Roch is of greatest name, Rochdale.
which has standing upon it in the Vale, Rochdale a Mercate Irwell it self
has situate upon it Bury a Mercate Town nothing inferior to the other: and
hard by, whiles I carefully sought for COCCIUM, Cockley.
mentioned by Antonine the Emperor, I saw Cockley, a Chapel built of timber,
beset round about with trees: Also Turton Chapel among very steep downfalls,
and overgrowne unpleasant places: Turton Tower, and Entweissoll a proper fair
house: which had in times past Gentlemen of that name, as Turton is the Orell.
But, where Irke and Irwell meet together, on the left hand bank raised of a
reddish kind of stone, scarce three miles from Mersey, flourished that Town
of right great antiquity which we now call Manchester, and Antonine the
Emperor called MANCUNIUM, Mancunium.
and MANUCIUM, according to the variety of the Copies. This retaining the first
part of his ancient name, far excels the Towns lying round about it, for
the beautiful show it carries, for resort unto it, and for clothing: in
regard also of the Mercate-place, the fair Church, and College, founded by
Thomas Lord De-la-ware, a Priest (the last heir male of his Family) and
summoned to the Parliament among the Lords Temporal by the name of Magister
Thomas de-la-ware. For he descended from the Greleies, who were the ancient
Lords of this Town, and by Ioane sister of the said Sir Thomas, it came to
Wests now Lords De-la-ware. But, in the foregoing age, this Town was of far
greater account, both for certain woollen clothes there wrought and in great
request commonly called Manchester Cottons, and also for the liberty of a
Sanctuary, which under King Henry the Eighth, was by Parliamentary authority,
translated to Chester. In a Park of the Earl of Derbies near adjoining,
called Alparke, where the Brook Medlocke enters into Irwell, I saw the plot
and groundworke of an ancient Fortress built four square, commonly called
Mancastle: which I will not in any wise say, was that ancient MANCUNIUM, it is
contained in so narrow a piece of ground, but rather the Fort of Mancunium, and
station of Candidus a Centurion.

Centurionis,
^ CANDIDI FIDES XX. IIII. As for this other; John Dee that most famous
Mathematician, and Warden of Manchester College, who had a sight of the same
here, copied it out for me.

COHO. I. FRISIN ^ MASA VONIS Both which may seem erected in honor of those
Centurious, for their loyalty and honesty so many years approoved.

In the year of our Salvation 920. King Edward the Elder, as Marianus writes,
sent an Army of Mercians into Northumberland, To reedifie the City of
Manchester, and to place a Garrison there (for it belonged formerly unto the
Kings of Northumberland) and seems to have been quite destroyed in the
Danish war: against Manchester, that is, as they expound it, The City of Men,
and in this conceit which implies their own commendation, they wonderfully
please Main a British word which signifies a Stone: For, upon a stony hill it
is seated, and beneath the very Town, at Colyhurst, there are very good and
famous quarries of stone.

But, to return again. Mersey now by this time carrying a fuller stream by
reason of Irwell consociating with him, holds on in his journey toward the
Ocean, by Trafford, Trafford.
from whence the Traffords a Family of great good note took their name as they
had their habitation: also by Chatmosse, a low mossie ground, lying a great
Mosses when they come.
as we call Mosses, or else standing Meeres. Which if it be true, we need
not mervaile that so many trees in the like places every where Fur trees in
Caesar's time grew not in Britain.
which notwithstanding Caesar denies to have grown in Britain. I know it is
an opinion current with the most, that these trees overturned with the force of
waters, have lien ever since Noah's Flood, when

Such mighty trees also are found oftentimes in Holland, a Country of Germany:
which the learned men there, suppose were either undermined by waves working
into the shore, or by winds driven forward and brought unto those lower and
moist places; where they settled and sunk down. But let the curious company of
Philosophers search into these matters to whom I commend them, and to their
further inquiry, whether there are not Subterranean trees growing under earth,
as well as plants and other Creatures. After Chatmosse, Holcroft shows it
self, which, as it afforded Holecroft.
so it gave the name also, to that right ancient family of the Holcrofts: whose
estate in old time was much amended by marriage with one of the heirs of
Culchit a place seated hard by, which Gilbert de Culchit held, Of the Fee of
Almaricke Butler, as he himself did of the Earl of Ferrars, in King Henry
the Third his time. Whose eldest daughter and heir, when Richard Fitzhugh of
Hindley had married, he assumed to himself the name of Culchith: like as his
brother Thomas, who wedded the second daughter, was of the possession, called
Holcroft: another also by the same reason was named de Peasfalong, and a fourth
de Riseley. Which I note, that the Reader may understand, how our Ancestors,
as they were in other

Here lie there round about every way little Towns, which (as throughout this
whole County, and Cheshire, and other Northren parts) as they imparted their
names to worshipful houses, so they to have their Lords even unto these days,
men of the very same name with them. As for example, Aston of Aston: Atherton
of And an endless piece of work it were to name them one by one, neither is
it any part of my purpose to reckon up all families of name and worship, but to
take a view and survey of the more ancient places. And as virtue and wealth
laid the foundations of these and such like Families in these North Countries,
and elsewhere (that I may speak it once for all) and provident moderation with
simplicity standing contented with their own estate, both preserved and
increased them: So, in the South part of England, riotous expense and
superfluity, usurious contracts, voluptuous and vicious life, together with
indirect courses and crafty dealings; have in short space utterly overthrown
most Mersey, which now by this time runs down by Warrington, a Town known
by reason of the Lords thereof surnamed Pincerne.
Butlers, who obtained of King Edward the First the liberty of a Mercate for
it: Winwicke.
From which, Northward, Winwicke is not far distant: a place among other fat
Benefices of England of greatest name: in the upmost part of the Church
whereof, are read these rude Verses engraven in an old Character, concerning
King Oswald.

Hic locus Oswalde quondam placuit tibi valde.
Northanhumbrorum fuer as Rex, nuncque Polorum
Regna tenes, loco passus Marcelde vocato.
This place sometime thee pleased well, Oswald,
King thou had been once of Northumberland,
Thou sufferedst in a place Marcelde called,
Thy Kingdom now is heaven, that aye does stand.
From Warrington, the River M^rsey spreading abroad, and straightwaies drawing
in himself again, with a wide and open outlet, very commodious for
merchandise Litherpoole, called in the elder ages (...), commonly Lirpoole is
seated, so named, as it is thought, of the water spreading it self in manner
of a Poole: whence there is a convenient passage over into Ireland and much
frequented, and in that respect more notorious, than for any Antiquity. For,
there is no mention extant thereof any where in ancient Writers, but that Roger
of Poictiers, who was Lord, as they spoke in those days, of the Honor of
Lancaster, built a Castle here. Whereof the worthy family of the Molineaux
Knights have had the custody now a long time, whose chief seat is hard by at
Sefion, which, the said Roger of Poictiers gave unto Vivian de Molineaux,
shortly after the first entry of the Normans. For, all that Territory between
the two Rivers Ribel and Mersey, Roger held: as appears evidently by the
authentical Record of Domesday book. Near unto Seston, Alt a little River
seeks a way into the Sea, and when he has found it, gives name to a small
Village Attmouth standing by, and has Ferneby near unto it: wherein the moist
and mossie soil turffes are dug up, which serve the inhabitants for fuel
and candle light. Under the said turfes, there is a certain dead and blackish
water, upon which there swimmeth, I wot not what unctuous matter, and in it
swim little fishes that are caught by the diggers of turfe: Fishes dug out
of the ground.
So that we may say, there be fishes dug here out of the earth, no less
than about Heraclea, and Ti^s in Pontus. And no mervaile, seeing that in such
watery places fishes otherwhiles seeking for moisture get under the ground, and
men Paphlagonia many and those good fishes are gotten by digging in places
nothing watery, there is some secret and peculiar reason thereof in Nature: and
pleasantly wrote Seneca, Why should not fishes enter and pass into the land,
if we pass over the Sea?

Ormeskirke a mercate town, Ormeskirk.
well known by reason of the sepulture there of the Stanleys, Earls of Derby,
whose chief seat Latham is hard by: a stately house, which they have enlarged
continually, ever since King Henry the Fourth his days, what time Sir John
Stanley knight, father to John Lord deputy of Ireland, descended of the same
stem whence the Barons de Audley, married the daughter and heir of Sir
Thomas Latham, a right noble knight, who brought to him for her dowry this
fair inheritance, Stanleys Earls of Derby.
with many other possessions. And from that time have the Stanleys planted
their seat here: of whom Thomas, the Stanley, was by King Henry the seventh
created Earl of Derby; and had issue by Eleonor Nevill daughter to the Earl
of Salisbury, George Lord Strange, for he had wedded Joan the only daughter
and heir of John Baron Le Strange of Knockin, who dying in his fathers life
time, begat a son named Thomas, the second Earl of Derby; unto whom Anne,
the daughter of Edward Lord Hastings, bare Edward the third Earl of Derby, who
begat of Dorothea, daughter of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, Henry the fourth
Earl; who married Margaret, daughter of Henry Clifford Earl of Cumberland,
mother unto Ferdinando the fifth Earl lately deceased, and to William now the
sixth Earl, who succeeded his brother: but I forget my self now, when as I
have formerly remembered as

Duglesse a riveret, Duglesse a riveret.
creeps and steals along quietly by this place; near unto which our noble
Arthur, as Ninnius writes, put the Saxons to flight in a memorable battle.
Wiggin.
At the head hereof stands the town Wiggin, called in ancient times (...):
of which name I have nothing else to say, but that in Lancashire they call
buildings and houses Biggins: Biggin, what it is.
neither of the town, but that it is fair, and a Corporation also with a
Mayor and Burgesses: and the parson of the Church, as I have learned, is Lord
of the town. The family of the Hollands.
Hard by it Holland shows it self, out of a younger brother, whereof that
most noble and renowned race of the Hollands Earls of Kent, and Dukes also of
Surry and Excester, fetched both their original and their surname. But Lovels,
brought unto them an addition of possessions, The Hollands coat of Arms.
with her Arms, viz. in a shield Azure With flowers de Lyz.
florete Argent a Lion rampant gardant Arg. Near unto the mouth of Duglesse is
Merton, a very great and large poole, which emptieth it self into this river,
and then straight ways meets with the river Ribell, near his outlet; for
this is the next river after Mersey that runs into the sea, and has not yet
lost quite his former ancient name; for Ptolomee calls the salt water or arm
of the sea here BELLISAMA, Bellisama.
and we Ribell, perhaps by addition of the Saxon word The unto it, that
signifies a River. This river coming with a quick and hasty stream out of
the hills in Yorke-shire, takes his course first Ingleborow hill at the spring
head, which I wondered at to see how it ascends as it were by degrees with a
huge and mighty ridge Westward, and at the farthest end mounteth up into the
air, as if an other hill were set upon the head of it: Penigent.
Penigent, happily so called of his whitish and snowy top, for so Pengwin
signifies in the british tongue: and he rises aloft with an huge bulk,
howbeit not altogether so high as the other. But when Ribell comes into
Lancashire (for those two stand in Yorke-shire) Pendle-hill advances it self
up to the sky with a lofty head, Pendle hill.
and in the very top thereof brings forth a peculiar plant, Clowdesbery.
which, as though it came out of the clouds, they term Clowdes-bery. But
this mountain is most notorious for the harm that it did not long since to
the country Apennine: whence comes this vulgar Rhyme.

Ingleborow, Pendle, and Penigent,
Are the highest hills between Scotland and Trent.
As also that the reader may understand, as I said before, why the highest
Alps Penninae, Penninae Alps.
and why the very top of the hills, named Pennum, and Apennini, Pen in British
what it is. Clithero. Whaley.
were of them so termed. For Pen in the British tongue signifies the tops of
hills. By an out corner or parcel of Pendle hill, stands Clithero castle,
built by the Lacies near unto Ribell, and a neighbor unto it Whaley, in the
Saxon tongue Walalez, famous for the monastery that the said Lacies founded,
which was translated from Stanlaw in Cheshire hither, in the year 1296. where
in the year 798. duke Wade unfortunately gave battle to Ardulph King of
Northumberland, at Billangho, which is more short called Langho. This Ribell no
sooner turns into the West, Riblechester.
but imparteth his name to a small town, which in our age is called
Riblechester:

It is written upon a wall in Rome,
Ribchester was as rich as any town in Christendom.
And the port high ways came directly hither, rai^ed up with eminent cause is:
one from York, another out of the North, through Bowland-Forrest, a spacious
piece of ground, which as yet is most evidently to be seen for many miles
together. But the country folk have so disfigured the inscriptions, that
although I did see many, yet Salesbury hall, an house of that ancient family of
the Talbots, standing near by, I saw the base or foot of a pillar with this
inscription.

DEO MARTI, ET VICTORIAE DD. AUGG. ET. CC -- NN In a wall near unto it, there
is another great stone infixed, showing in the forepart Cupid and another
little image; out of the backe-side or reverse whereof this was exemplified for
me: but the inscription carries no sense with it, which because it troubled me
a long time, I will set down here underneath, to see what the opinion of other
men is of it.

SEOESAM For mine own part, I can make nothing else thereof, but that most of
these words were the British names of places adjoining. In the year 1603. when
I went a second time to see this place, I happened upon the greatest and fairest
Altar that ever I saw, dedicated to the Mother Goddesses by a Captain of the
Asturians, with this inscription.

In the house of Thomas Rhodes.
INGENVIVS Happily, Decurio Alae Asturum, susceptum solvit (^. votum) libens,
lubens, merito.
DEC. AL. AST. SS. LL. M. Concerning these DEABUS, Deae Matres. Mother Goddesses.

See in the Bishopric of Durham.

Plutarch in M. Marcellus.


or DEIS MATRIBUS, that is, Mothers Goddesses, what they were I cannot find
out with all my searching: for in the volumes of Inscriptions gathered through
the world, save in another Altar besides found among us, they are not
mentioned, as far as I remember. Only I read that Enguium, a little town in
Sicily, was ennobled for the presence of the MOTHER GODDESSES, wherein were
showed certain spears and brazen helmets, which Metio and Ulysses consecrated
to those Goddesses.

Another little Altar I saw there, cast out among rubbish stone, with this
inscription.

PACIFE TO MARTI ELEGAUR BA POS UIT EX VO TO. Altars of the Gentiles. Genes. 8.
In these altars the posterity no doubt imitated Noah, even after they had
fallen away and revolted from the true worship of God. Neither erected they
altars to their Gods only, but also unto their Emperors by way of servile
flattery, with this impious title, NUMINI MAIESTATIQUE EORUM, that is, unto
their GODHEAD and Majesty. Unto these they kneeled in humble manner, these they
clasped about and embraced as they prayed, before these they took their
oaths: and in one word, in these and in their sacrifices consisted the maine
substance of all their religion, so far forth, that whosoever had no altar of
their own, they

Moreover, very lately, and but the other day, a stone was dug up here,
wherein was engraven the naked portract or image of a man on horseback,
without saddle, without bridle, with both hands seeming to lance his spear,
and ready to ride over a naked man lying down along at his foot, who holds
before I wot not what four square piece. Between the horse and him that lies
along are these letters D.M. and under him so lying, are read these words CALL.
Happily C. Al. for Centurio Alae Sarmatarum.
All the letters beside, which were many, are so worn out and gone, that they
could not be read, neither list I to guess any farther what they were. That
ALA SARMATARUM, that is, a wing of Sarmatian horsemen abode in this place, it
may seem, as well by that former inscription, as by this, that many years
before was found hard by.

HIS. TERRIS. TEGITUR.
AEL. MATRONA QU --
Out of William Lambards notes.
VIX. AN. XXVIII. M. II. D. VIII.
ET. M. JULIUS MAXIMUS. FILL.
VIX. AN. VI. M. III. D. XX. ET CAME
PANIA. DUBBA. MATTER
VIX. AN. L. JULIUS. MAXIMUS
-- ALAE. SAR. CONJUX
CONJUGI. INCOMPARABILI
ET. FILIO. PATRI. PIENTIS
SIMO. ET SOCERAE. TENA
CISSIMAE MEMORIAE. P.
But hence have we no light at all toward the finding out of the ancient name
of this place which now is in question, unless it has now and then changed
the name, which otherwhiles usually happens. For in this place Ptolomy has
set RIGODUNUM: if for RIBODUNUM, Ribodunum.
the name is not altogether unlike to Ribbechester: and just at this distance
from Mancunium, Coccium.
that is, Manchester, that is to say 18. miles off, does Antonine place COCCIM,
which also in some copies we read GOCCIUM.

But when the flourishing fortune of this City, having run the full and
fatal period, was faded, either by war, or earthquake, as the common sort
do think, somewhat lower where Ribell suffers the violence of the flowing
tides of the Sea, and is called of the Geographer BELLISAMA AESTUARIUM, that
is, the salt water BELLISAMA, near unto Peneworth, Penworth, otherwise called
Penverdant. Preston.
where in the Conquerors reign there was a little castle (as appears by the
Records of the said King) out of the fall of Riblechester arose in steed of it
her daughter Preston, a great, and (for these Countries) a fair town, and well
inhabited, so called of religious men; for in our speech the name sounds as
much as Priests town. Beneath this Ribell, Derwen a rill comes in with his
water: and the first mercate town that he waters is Blacke-borne, so called
of the Blacke-water, Lacies, gave name unto Blackburne-shire, a little
territory adjoining; Houghton.
from thence it runs by Houghton-towre, which communicated the name unto a
notable family that long time dwelt in it: and by Waleton, which William,
Walton.
Lord of Lancaster, King Stephens son, gave unto Walter de Walton: and
afterward it was the possession of the ancient race of the Langtons, who
descended from the said Waltons. But now let us return.

The said Preston whereof I spoke, is by the common people called Preston in
Andernesse, for Acmundes-nesse, Ander-nesse.
for so the English Saxons termed this part of the shire, which lying between
the two rivers, Ribel and Cocar, stretches out with a promontory in manner of
a nose, which afterward they also called Acmundernesse. Wherein were no more
but 16. villages inhabited in King William the Conquerors time; the rest lay
wast, as we read in Doomes-day book, and Roger of Poictiers held the same.

But afterward it belonged to Theobald Walter: from whom the Bottelers of
Ireland derive their beginning: for thus we read in a Charter of K. Richard
the first, Know ye, that we have given, and by this present Charter confirmed
unto Theobald This part yields plenty of oats, but not so apt to bear
barley. Howbeit it is full of fresh pastures, especially to the sea side, where
it is partly Champion ground, The file.
and thereupon it seems that a good part of it is called The File, for the
Field (and yet in the Kings Rolls it goes under the Latin name LIMA, that is,
a File, namely, that Smithes tool or instrument wherewith Iron, or any other
thing is smoothed.) But because elsewhere it is marish ground, they hold it not
very wholesome. Wie, a little river speedily cutting over this part, comes
rolling down out of Wierdale, Grenhaugh c^^stle.
a very solitary place, and runs by Grenhaugh Castle, which Thomas Stanley,
the first Earl of Derby out of this family, built: what time as he stood in
fear of certain outlawed Gentlemen of this shire, whose possessions King
Henry the seventh had freely given unto him. For many an assault they gave him,
and other whiles in hostile manner made inrodes into his lands, until the
moderate carriage of the good and worthy man, and process of time pacified
these quarrels.

Here along the sea shore, A new mann of making (...).
you may see in many places heaps of sand, whereupon they power water, until
it gather a saltish humor, which afterward with turfes they boil until it
be white salt. There be also here uncertain sands not to be trusted, but
ready to catch and swallow (they call them Quicksands) so dangerous for
Sidonius his words) they suffer not shipwreck, and be cast away on the land.
But especially about the mouth of Cocar, Quicksands.
where, as it were, in a field of Syrts or Quicksands, Cokar sand Abbey, an
Abbey not long since of the Cluniack Monks, built by Ranulph de Meschines, but
open to the violence of winds, stood between the mouths of Cocar and Lune or
Lone, The river Lu^^ or Lone. Salmons.
and has a bleake prospect into the wide Irish sea. This river Lone, commonly
called Lune, springing out of the mountains of Westmorland, running Southward
in a channel now broad, now narrow, with many a reach in and out hindering his
stream, enricheth the dwellers thereby in Summer time with great Lune is
entered into Lancashire, Lace, a little brook from out of the East, Over-burrow
joyneth his stream with it. In which place now stands Over-Burrow, a very
small village of husbandmen; which, as the inhabitants informed me, had been
sometimes a great City, and took up all those large fields between Lacce and
Lone, and after it had suffered all miseries that follow famine, was driven to
composition through extremity. This tradition they received from their
ancestors, delivered as it were from hand to hand unto them. And in very truth
by diverse and sundry monuments exceeding ancient, by engraven stones, pavements
of Burrow, which with us signifies a Burgh, that place should seem to be of
great antiquity. But if it recover the ancient name, it may thank other and
not me, although I have sought as narrowly, and diligently for it, as for Ants
paths: neither is any man to think, that the several names of every town in
Britain are precisely noted and set done in Ptolomee, Antonine, The Notice of
Provinces, and other approved and principal Authors. But if a man may go by
guess, I would willingly think that it was BREMETONACUM (which Jerome Surita,
a Spaniard, in his notes upon Antonine, Bremetonacum.
or Rible-chester deemeth truly to be a different place from BREMENTURACUM)
and that by the distance from COCCIUM, or Rible-chester.

Burrow the river Lune runs beside Thurland Tunstalls, a fortress built by
Sir Thomas Tunstall in the time of King Henry the fourth, when the King had
given him License to fortify and kernel his mansion house; Kernellare what it
is. Hornby castl^ Barons Mon^^Eagle.
that is, to embatle it: also by Hornby a fair castle, which glories much of
the first founder, N. de Mont Begone, and of the Lords thereof, The Harringtons
and Stanleys, Barons Stanleyes of Mont-Eagle, descended from Thomas Stanley,
the first Earl of Derby of that house, and advanced to that title by King
Henry the eighth, of whom the third and the last Baron Morley, mother to Sir
William Parker, whom in that regard King James commanded to be summoned to
Parliament by the title of Lord Mont-Eagle, and whom we and all our posterity
may acknowledge to have been borne for the good of all Britain. For, by a
short letter, obscurely penned, and secretly sent unto him, and by him
dutifully discovered, in a happy hour was detected, at the very last hour, in
a manner, when the whole State was at the point to perish by the most horrible
and detestable treason, that ever any barbarous impiety could contrive: what
time certain godless and irreligious monsters of men, The Gunpowder treason.
masking under the mantle

Lone having passed on some few miles from hence, comes within the sight of
Lancaster, Lancaster.
standing on his South bank, the chief town of this region: which the
inhabitants more truly call Loncaster, as the Scots also, who name it
Loncastell, of the River Lone. Both the name still remaining, and the river
running under it, do argue in some sort that it is LONGOVICUM, where, under
the Lieutenant General of Britain, as we find in the Notice of Provinces, a
company of the Longovicarians, who of the place borrowed that name, kept their
station. Although the town Poictiers. A little beneath which, by a fair
bridge over Lone, in the descent and side of the hill where it is steepest,
hangs a piece of a most ancient wall of Roman work, seeming ready to reele;
Weary wall they call it, after a later British name, as it should seem, of this
town. For they called it Caer Werid, as one would say, The Green City,
happily of that fresh green hill. But I leave this to others. John Lord of
Moriton and of Lancaster, afterward King of England, confirmed by Charter to
his Burgesses of Lancaster, all the liberties which he had granted unto the
Burgesses of Bristoll. And King Edward the third in the six and thirtieth
year of his reign, granted unto the Mayor and Bailives, and Commonalty of the
town of Lancaster, that Plees and Sessions should not elsewhere be holden.
This town sees the Pole Arcticke

Whiles I looked round about from the top of the said castle hill, to see the
mouth of Lone, Fournesse.
that issues it self into the sea a little lower, Fornesse the other part of
this shire appeared in sight, which the sea has after a sort violently rent
apart from the rest. For when as the shore did from hence shoot out a maine
way into the West, the Ocean, as it were much displeased and angry hereat,
obstinately ceased not to flash and mangle it, nay, which is more, has with
his fell flowing at boisterous tides devoured the shore: and thereby makes
three wide cre^kes or bays; Kent-sand, at which the river Ken powers it self
forth; Leven-sand, and Dudden-sand: between which (two) the land bears out
so much, that thereupon it took the name. For with us in our language,
For-nesse and Foreland is all one with the Latin Promontorium anterius (that
is, a Fore-promontory.) All this part, unless it Forness-fells. Among which
the Britans lived safe a great while, trusting upon these strong natural
fenses: although the victorious English Saxons made way through all in the end.
For in the year 228. after there coming in, I gather that the Britans had
their abode here, because Egfride King of Northumberland, Carthmell.
gave unto Holy Saint Cuthbert, the land called Carthmell, and all the Britans
in it (thus we find written in his life) and it is very well known that
Carthmell is a part of this shire by Kentsand, and a little town in it
retains yet the same name: Wherein William Mareschall the elder, Earl of
Pembroch built a Ptolomee SETANTIORUM (...), that is, The Setantians Mere, as
some Copies have; and not Setantiorum (...), that is, The Setantians Haven, I
durst boldly avouch that these Britans here were called SETANTII. For among
these mountains the greatest standing water in all England, now called
Winander-mere; Winandermere.
in the English Saxon (...) (happily of his winding and turning in and out) lies
stretched out for the space of ten miles or thereabout with crooked banks, and
is all paved (as it were) with stone in the bottom: in some places of
wonderful depth, and breeding a peculiar kind of fish found no where else,
The fish Chare.
which the inhabitants there by call A Chare. And a little village standing
hard by carries the name thereof: In which Eathred King of Northumberland,

Betwixt this Mere and the river Dudden, the promontory runs out, which we
commonly call Fornesse, and has the Island Walney, as a fore-fence or
countremure lying along by it, with a small arm of the sea between: The
gullet or entry into which is defended with a fort, called the Pile of
Fouldrey, standing in the midst of the waves upon a rock, erected there by the
Abbot of Fornesse, in the first year of King Edward the third.

As for the Promontory it self, The book of Fournesse.
there is nothing worth the sight in it, unless it be Bekensgill, or
translated rather from Tulket in Andernesse. Out of the Monks whereof, and
from no place else (as they themselves have reported) the Bishops of the Isle
of Man (that lies just over against) were by an ancient custom wont to be
elected: as having been the mother (as it were) of many Monasteries in the
said Man, Aldingham. Harringtons.
and in Ireland. More Eastward stands Aldingham, an ancient hereditament
belonging to the family of the Haveringtons, or Harringtons, unto whom it came
from the Flemmings, by the Cancefelds; and whose inheritance descended by a
daughter unto William Bonvill of Somersetshire, and at last Greies, Marquesses
of Dorset. And somewhat higher is Ulverston, in this regard not to be passed
over in silence, for that King Edward the third gave a moity thereof unto Sir
John Coupland, a most brave warrior: whom also he advanced to the dignity of a
Banaret, because in the battle at Durham, he took David the second King of
the Scots prisoner. But after his decease, the same King granted it with other
fair lands in this tract, and the title also of Earl of Bedford, unto
Ingelram Lord Coucy of France, as who had married his daughter Isabel, and
whose ancestors in right of Christiana Lindsey, had great revenewes in England.

Touching the noble men which have borne the title of Lancaster, Lords of
La^^caster.
there were in the first infancy of the Norman Empire three styled Lords of the
Honor of Lancaster: Pictavensis, or of Poictiers
Poictou, the son of Roger Mont-gomery, who was surnamed Pictavensis, as
William of Malmesbury writes, because he had married a wife from out of
Poictou in France. But when he had by his perfidious disloyalty lost this
honor, William the son of King Stephen, and Earl of Moriton and Warren, had
King Richard declared his singular love to his brother John. For beside
Ireland, Walter Hemingford. To. Hoveden page 373. b.
and the Earldom of Moriton in Normandy, he heaped upon him so many dignities
in England, that he was in manner a Tetrarch there: Finally, he conferred upon
him Cornwall, Lancaster, Notingham, Derby, with the country adjoining, and many
more beside. A good while after King Henry the third, the son of John, first
advanced Edmund his second son, called by some Crouth-backe, to the title of
Earl of Lancaster, unto whom he conveyed and made over the inheritances and
Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester, Robert Ferrars Earl of Derby, and John of
Monmouth, because they had risen, and rebelliously born arms against him: and
he gave this Honor of Lancaster unto him in these words, The Honor, County,
Castle and Town of Lancaster, with the Cow-pastures, and forests of Wiresdale,
and Lownsdale, New castle under Lime, the manor, forest, and Castle of
Pickering, the manor of Scaleby, the town of Gomicester, and the rents of the
town of Huntendon, etc. After he the said Edmund had missed the kingdom of
Sicily, in which the Pope had invested him in vain by a ring, and not without
ridiculous disgrace to the English nation, caused in honor of him certain
pieces of gold to be stamped, with this title, AIMUNDUS REX SICILIAE, Earl of
Lancaster, King of Sicily.
having first cunningly sucked a great mass of money Avelina, daughter and
heir to William de Fortibus Earl of Albemarle, was dead issuelesse, who
nevertheless in her Will had made him her heir) married Blanch of Artois, of
the royal family of France, to his second wife, and by her had Thomas, Henry,
and John, that died an infant. Thomas was the second Earl of Lancaster, who
took to wife Alice, the only daughter and heir of Henry Lacy Earl of
Lincoln: who by her deed passed over unto the house of Lancaster her own
inheritance, and her mothers, that which belonged to the family of Long Espee,
who were Earls of Salisbury, like as her father the said Henry Lacy had made
the like conveiance before of his own lands, in case Alice should dye without
issue, as it afterward happened. But this Thomas, for behaving himself
insolently toward his sovereign Edward the second, Patricke De Cadurcis.
Chaworth, who brought unto him not only her own patrimony, but also great
inheritances in Wales, of Mauric of London, and of Siward, from whom she
descended. This Henry left behind him Henry his only son, whom King Edward
the third from an Earl raised unto the honor of a Duke: Dukes of Lancaster.
and he was second man of all our Nobility Maude and Blanch, between whom the
inheritance was divided. Maud was married to William of Bavaria, who was Earl
of Holland, Zeland, Frisland, Henault, and in his wives right, of Leicester.
And when as she deceased without children, John of Gaunt, so called because he
was borne at Gaunt in Flanders, fourth son of King Edward the third, who had
married Blanch, the other daughter of Henry aforesaid, entered upon the whole
inheritance: and now being for wealth equivalent to many Kings, and created
withal by his father Duke of Lancaster, he obtained also at his hands great
roialties; for he, having related what noble service he had performed to his
country, at home and abroad County We have granted for us and our heirs,
unto our foresaid son, that he may have for term of his life, his Chancery
within the County of Lancaster, and his writs to be sealed under his own seal
to be appointed for the office of the Chancellor: also Justices of his own,
as well to hold Plees of the Crown, as also other plees whatsoever touching
common Law: also the hearing and deciding of the same, yea and the making of
all executions whatsoever, by virtue of their own writs and officers there.

Moreover, all other liberties and Roialties whatsoever to a County Palatine
belonging, as freely and in as ample manner, as the Earl of Chester within the
same County of Chester Neither was he Duke of Lancaster only, but also by his
marriage with Constance the daughter of Peter King of Leon and Castile, John of
Gau King of Castile.
he for a time was styled by the name of King of Leon and of Castile. But by a
composition he gave this over; and in the thirteenth year of King Richard the
Second, by consent of Parliament was created Duke of Aquitaine, to have and
hold the same for term of life of the King of England, as King of France: but
to the universal dislike of Aquitaine, repining, and affirming that their
Seigniory was inseparably annexed to the Crown of England. At which time his
style ran thus, John, son to the King of England, Duke of Aquitaine and of
Lancaster, Earl of Derby, Lincoln, and Leicester, and high Steward of England.

King Henry the fourth.
Henry of Bollinbroke his son succeeded in the Dukedom of Lancaster, who
when he had dispossessed Richard the second, and obtained the Kingdom of
England; he considering that being now King he could not bear the title of
Duke of Lancaster, and unwilling that the said title should be discontinued,
ordained by assent of Parliament, that Henry his eldest son should enjoy the
same, and be styled, Prince of Wales, Duke of Aquitain, Lancaster, and
Cornwall, and Earl of Chester: and also that the liberties and franchises of
the Duchy of Lancaster, should remain to his said son severed from the
Crown of England: and to make better assurance to himself, his heirs and
successors in these inheritances, by authority of Parliament he ordained in
these words. Parliament Roll 1. H. 4.
We, not willing that our said inheritance, or the liberties

After this, K. Henry the fifth by authority of Parliament dissevered from the
crown and annexed unto this Duchy a very great and large inheritance, which
had descended unto him in right of his mother Dame Mary, who was daughter and
one of the heirs of Humfrey Bohun Earl of Hereford. In this form and estate
it remained under Henry the fifth, and Henry the sixth: but King Edward the
fourth in the first notwithstanding forthwith separated. And so it continues,
having several officers, A Chancellor, an Attorney, a Receiver, a Clerk of
the Court, six Assistants, a Messenger, two Auditors, 23. Receivers, and three
Supervisors, etc.

There are counted in this shire, beside very many Chapels, Parishes 36. and
no more: but those wonderful populous, and which for multitude of inhabitants,
far exceed the greatest parishes elsewhere.

WESTMORLANDIAE Comitatus qui olim Spectaint ad BRIGANTAS


WEST-MOR-LAND.
BEYOND the furthest part of Lancashire more Northward, lies another lesser
country of the Brigantes, called by late Latin writers Westmaria, and
Westmorlandia, in our tongue West-more-land, and of some later Latin writers
Westmoria: bounded on the West and North side with Cumberland, Moors: and
West-more-land is nothing else with us, but A western moorish country. Let
that dream therefore as touching King Marius, be excluded out of the school
of reverend antiquity, who forsooth, as our Chroniclers have dreamed, subdued
the Picts, and called this country after his own name.

Lone and Winander mere, is reputed fruitful enough in the valleys, although
it can show many felles, The Barony of Kendale.
with rough and stony rocks, lying ever bare without grass: and is all
termed by one name, The Barony of Kendale and Candale, that is, The Dale by
Can: for it took name of the river Can, which running rough upon stones,
cutteth through it. On the west bank whereof stands Kandale or Kendale,
called also Kirk by Kandale, a town of very great trade and resort, with two
broad and long streets crossing the one over the other; and a place for
excellent clothing, and for industry so surpassing, that in regard thereof it
carries a great name: For the inhabitants have great traffic and vent of
their woollen clothes throughout all parts of Lords of Kendale.

History of Fournesse.


They count it also much for their credit, that it has dignified Barons and
Earls with the title thereof. As for their Barons, they were the offspring of
Iuo Taleboys: of whose race, William, by consent of King Henry the second,
called himself William of Lancaster, The family o^ Lancaster.
whose Niece and heir was wedded unto Gilbert, the son of Roger
Fitz-Reinfrid, by whose daughters (after her son William was dead) the
inheritance went to Peter Brus, Lord of Skeleton, the second of that forename,
and unto William Lindesay; L.Par of Kendale.
from whom by the mothers side, as we learn out of the Lieger book of Fornesse
Abbey, Ingelram Lord of Coucy in France, fetched his descent. By which Peter
Brus his daughter, the sister and heir of Peter Brus the third, came this
Barony to the Rosses of Work, and from them by right of inheritance Parres, of
whom Sir William Par was made Lord Par by King Henry the eighth. As for the
Castle, the ancient seat of these Lords, standing over against the town, it
runs to decay through age and neglect. As for Earls of Kendale, Earls of
Ke^dale.
there have been three in number: John Duke of Bedford, advanced to that
honor by his brother King Henry the fifth: John Duke of Somerset: and John de
Foix, of that most noble and honorable family of the Foix in France, whom King
Henry the sixth, for his faithful service in the French wars, had preferred
to that dignity. Whence perhaps it is, that some of this house of Foix in
France, retain the name still of Candale. As for any glory else of antiquity,
Kendall to my knowledge challenges none. And yet I was once of opinion, that
it was CONCANGII, Catadupe or Forses.
Somewhat beneath, in the river Can, are two Catadupae, or water falls, where
the waters have a downfall with a mighty noise: the one is by Levens, a little
village; the other more Southward, near to Betham; which to the neighbor
inhabitants are as good as true prognostications: for when that which stands
North from them sounds more clear and aloud in their ears, they look
certainly for fair weather: when that on the South side does the same, they
expect no other Winster, and the spacious Lake Winander-mere, whereof I spoke
erewhile, and Eastward with the river Lone or Lune.

At the upper corner of Winander-mere lies the dead carcass, as one would
say, of an ancient City, with great ruins of walls, and many heaps of rubbish
one from another, remaining of buildings without the walls yet to be seen.
The fortress thereof was somewhat long, fensed with a ditch and rampire; for
it took up in length 132. Else, and in breadth 80. That it had been the Romans
work is evident, Ambleside. Amboglana.
unless a man would guess at it, and think it were that AMBOGLANA, whereof
the book of Notices makes mention, seeing at this day it is called Ambleside.

On the East side the river Lone serves for a limit, and after his name the
tract lying about it is called Lonsdale: the principal town whereof is Kirkby
Lonsdale, Lone, the country spreads broader, and the hills shoot out with
many turnings, between which there lie some valleys mavelous steep and
deep withal, with many hollow places in manner of caves. Among these hills
that notable river Eden, which Ptolomee calls ITUNA, showing his head first
in Yorkshire, carrying a small and faint stream in the beginning, but
afterward growing by little and little bigger, with sundry beckes still
augmenting it, seeks a way Northwest, by Pendragon Castle, which has nothing
left unto it unconsumed by time, besides the bare name, Baron Whatton.
and an heap of stones: From thence he passes by Wharton Hall, the seat of
the Barons Wharton; of whom the first was Sir Thomas Wharton, advanced to that
dignity by King Henry the Eighth, whom succeeded his son of the Kirkby
Stephen, a mercate town well known, and both the Musgraves, two little
villages, which gave name unto that martial and warlike family of the
Musgraves: out of which in the reign of King Edward the third, Thomas Musgrave
flourished, and was by solemn writ of summons called to the Parliament in the
rank of Barons: and these Musgraves had their principal habitation in Heartly
castle adjoining. Heartly castle.


Here Eden does, as it were, make stay with his stream, to give meeting unto
other petty rivers: upon one of which, scarce two miles off from Eden it self,
stood VERTERAE, a town of ancient memory, mentioned by Antonine the Emperor,
Directores. But now the town is decayed, and become a small poor village
fensed with a little Fortress, and the name turned into Burgh, for it is
commonly named Burgus subs^xeto. Burgh under Stanmore. Burgus. Vegetius lib. 4.
cap. 10.
Burgh under Stanemore. For in the time of the later Emperors (and willing I
am to note so much once for all) little castles, meet for war occasions, and
furnished with store of corn, began to be termed Burgi, that is, Burghs, by
a new name: which after that the Empire was translated into the East, the
Germans and others may seem to have borrowed of the Greek word (...). Hence
also came the name of Burgundians, because they inhabited Burghs; for so in
that age they used to call Burgh, but that in the beginning of the Norman
government, the Northren English conspired here against William the
Conqueror. That this Burgh was VERTERAE, I dare be bold to affirm, because
Levatrae of the one side, and from Brovonacum on the other, being reduced into
Italian miles, does exactly agree with Antonines numbers: and for that the high
street of the Romans, as yet evidently apparent by the ridges thereof, leads
this way to BROVONACUM by ABALLABA, whereof mention is made in the book of
Notices, which has hitherto kept the ancient name so well, that it does most
evidently descrie and show it self, yea in some sort remove all doubt.
Aballaba. Apelby.
For we call it short in steed of ABALLABA Apelby. Memorable is it, for the
antiquity and situation only. In the Romans time, no doubt, the Aurelian Maures
kept a station there. It stands also in a pleasant site, encompassed for the
most Eden: but so slenderly inhabited, and the building so simple, that were it
not that by reason of the antiquity it had deserved to be counted the chief
town of the shire, and to have Sessions and Assizes kept in the castle, which
is the common jail for malefactors, it would be little better than a village.
For all the beauty of it is in one broad street, which from North to South
rises with an easy ascent of the hill: in the upper part whereof stands the
castle aloft, environed wholly almost with the river. In the nether end of it
is the Church, and thereby a school, which Robert Langton and Miles Spenser,
Doctors of the law founded; the Master whereof is Reginald Bainbrige, a right
learned man, who governs the same with great commendation; and who of his
courtesy has exemplified for me many antique Newborrough calls this town
and Burgh Princely holds, where he writes that William King of Scots,
surprised them on the sudden, a little before himself was taken prisoner at
Alnewick. Which King John afterward having recovered, gave liberally unto
Robert Vipont, in consideration of his singular good service to him and the
state. From hence the river with his full course passes directly North-west by
Buley, a castle of the Bishops of Carlisle; and by Kirby Thore, under which are
seen great ruins of an old town, and pieces of Roman coin otherwhiles dug
up; and not long since this inscription.

DEO BELATV CADRO LIB VOTV M. FECIT. IOLVS. But tract of time has quite
out-worne the old name, and it is called at this day Whealop-Castle. Whellep
castle. Gallatum.
If I might without prejudice to the Judges of antiquity, I would say it were
GALLAGUM mentioned by Ptolomee, which Antonine names GALLATUM, Wall. Thus they
called GALENA Wallingford, and Gall Sever Wall of Sever, Gall dour Wall-broke,
etc. Doubtless it was a place in old time of better note, seeing that from
hence there leads a paved street ( Maiden way they call it) to Caer Vorran
near the Picts wall, Maiden way.
20. miles or thereabouts in length, by fells, wastes, and moors. Along which
street I would willingly think, were placed those Stations and Mansions
mentioned by Antonine in the ninth journey of Britain; although no man is able
precisely to say in what places they stood: and no marvel, considering that
time, which devoureth and consumes all things, has continually fed upon their
carcases so many ages together. Whellop, hard by Crawdundale, there are evident
remains of ditches, trenches, and mounts cast up: and among them this Roman
inscription (the draught whereof Reginald Bainbrig before named, head
schoolmaster of Applebey, took out for me) was engraven in a craggie rock,
the forepart of which was quite eaten out with continuance of time, or thrust
out by the root of a tree there growing.

-- VARRONIVS -- ECTVS LEG. XX. V. V. -- AEL. LVCANVS -- P. LEG. II. AVG. C.
That is to say, by my reading -- Varronius Praefectus legionis vicesimae
valentis captain of the xx. legion valens victrix -- Aelius Lucanus Captain
of the second legion Augusta, encamped, or did some such thing. For the
twentieth legion called Valens victrix, which kept resience at DEVA, that is,
Westchester: and the second legion named Augusta, that abode at ISCA, that is,
Caer-Leon in Wales, may seem to have been employed against the enemies in
these parts, and here to have stayed and kept their standing camp for a time,
and that their Captains or Collonells in memorial hereof engraved this upon
the cragge. The just time I may not easily set down. Yet to the pointing out
of the very time, there remain to be seen in a rock there by, these great
capital letters engraven, CN. OCT. Severus unto Gordian and afterward, the
letter A. in all the inscriptions of that age, every where in this Island,
wants the overthwart little line or stroke, and is made thus, A. for A.
A.

Eden holds on his course from hence, not far from Howgill castle,
belonging to the family of the Sandfords: but the Roman highway goes
straight into the West by Whinfield, Northren men call that a whin, which the
Southern men a burre. Brovoniacum. Brougham.
a large Park shaded with trees, hard by BROVONIACUM, standing twenty Italian
miles, or seventeene English miles from VERTERAE, as Antonine has set it, who
also has called it Brovocum, like as the book of Notices, Broconiacum;
Defensors had here their abode. The beauty and buildings of this town
although time has consumed, yet the name remains almost untouched, for we
call it Brogham. Here the river Eimot, flowing out of a great lake, and for a
good space dividing this shire from Cumberland, receives the river Loder into
it: near unto the spring head whereof, hard by Shape, in times past Hepe, a
little monastery built by Thomas the son of Gospatrick, son of Orms, there
is a Well or Fountain, which after the manner of Euripus ebbeth and flows
many times in a day: also there be huge stones in form of Pyramides, some 9.
foot high, and fourteen foot thick, ranged directly as it were in a row, for a
mile in length, with equal distance almost between: which may seem to have
been Loder, there is a place bearing the same name, which, like as Stricland
near unto it, has imparted their names to families of ancient gentry and
worship. Somewhat above, where Loder and Eimot meet in one channel, in the
year of our Lord 1602. there was a stone gotten out of the ground, erected in
the honor of Constantine the Great, with these words.

IMP. C. VAL. CONSTANTINO Pientissimo Augusto.
PIENT. AUG. When Eimot has served a good while for a limit between this
shire and Cumberland, near unto Isan-parles, Isan-parles.
a rock full well known unto the neighbor inhabitants, whereunto nature has
left difficult passage, and there framed sundry caves, and thosefull of winding
crankes, a place of safe refuge in time of danger: he lodges himself after
some few miles, both with his own stream, and with the waters of other rivers
also, in Eden, so soon as he has entertained Blencarne, a brook that Hanging
walls of Mark Antony.

Fines Term. Mich. R. 6. H. 8.

Vipounts Arms.

Earls of Westmorland.


the people call them the hanging walls of Marcantoniby, that is, of Mark
Antony, as they would have it.

As for such as have borne the title of Westmorland, the first Lord, to my
knowledge, was Robert de Vipont, who bare Guels, six Annulets Or in his coat
armor. For King John gave unto him the balliwicke and revenues of Westmorland,
by the service of four Knights: whereupon the Cliffords his successors, until
our days held the office of the Sherifdome of Westmorland. For Robert de
Vipont, the last of that name, left behind him only two daughters, Isabel wife
to Roger Lord Clifford, and Idonea married unto Sir Roger Leybourne. Long time
after, K. Richard the second Raby the first Earl of Westmorland, a man of the
greatest and most ancient birth of English nobility, as descended from Ucthred
Earl of Northumberland: whose heirs successively by his former wife Margaret,
daughter to the Earl of Stafford, flourished in that honor, until that
Charles by his wilful stomach, and wicked conspiracy, casting off his
allegiance to Q. Elizabeth, and covering treason under the mantle of religion,
most shamefully dishonored that most noble house, and foully steined his own
reputation by actual rebellion, in the year 1599. Whereupon he fled into the
Low countries, led a miserable life, and died as miserably. Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster, had so fair issue, and the name of Nevill thereby so greatly
multiplied, that almost at one and the same time there flourished out, beside
the Earl of Westmorland, an Earl of Salisbury, an Earl of Warwick, an Earl
of Kent, Marquess Montacute, a Duke of Bedford, Lord Latimer, and Lord
Abergevenny, all Nevils.

In this shire are contained Parishes 26.

CVMBRIA Sive CVMBERLANDIA Quae olim pars Brigantum


CUMBER-LAND.
WEstward, Northward from Westmorland lies CUMBERLAND, the utmost region this
way of the realm of England, as that which on the North side boundeth upon
Scotland: on the South Kumbri, and Kambri. For the Histories testify, that the
Britans remained here a long time, maugre the English Saxons, howsoever they
stormed thereat: yea and Marianus himself records as much, who termed this
country Cumbrorum terram, that is, The land of the Cumbri, or Britans: to say
nothing of the places, that every where here bear British names, as
Caer-Luel, Caer-dronoc, Pen-rith, Pen-rodoc, etc. which most evidently declare
the same, and as clearly prove mine assertion.



The South part of this shire is called Copeland, Copeland.
and Coupland, for that it bears up the head aloft with sharp edged and
pointed hills, which the Britans term Copa: or, as others would have it,
named Copeland, as one would say Coperland, of rich mines of copper therein.

In this part, at the very mouth of the river Duden, whereby it is severed
apart from Lancashire, Millum castle*
stands Millum Castle, belonging to the ancient house of the Hodlestones;
from whence as the shore fetches about with a bent Northward, two rivers very
commodiously enclose within them Ravenglasse, Raven-glas.
a station or road for ships, where also, as I have learned, were to be ^eene
Roman inscriptions: some will have Aven-glasse, as one would say, the blew
river, and they talk much of King Eueling, Hard-knot near Wrinofe.
that here had his Court and royal palace. One of these rivers named Eske
springs up at the foot of Hard-knot, an high steep mountain; in the top
whereof were discovered of late huge stones and foundations of a castle, not
without great wonder; considering it is so steep and upright, that one can
hardly ascend up to it.

Somewhat higher, Irt a riveret.
Irt a little river makes way toward the sea, wherein the muscles and cochles,
after they have with a kind of yawning or gaping sucked in dew, which they
lust after to conceive by, See Pliny. Pearls.
bring forth pearls; or, to speak as the Poet does, Shell-berries; which the
inhabitants there by search after at a low water, and Marbodaeus seems to
speak in this verse, Gignis and insignes antiqua Britannia baccas.
And Britanie of ancient fame
Breeds and brings forth pearls of great name.


Now by this time the shore extends out more and more, and encloseth
Westward, Saint Bega call St. Bees. Saint Bees.
For Bega, a devout and religious Irish woman, led there a solitary life; unto
whose holiness are ascribed certain vain miracles, as the taming of a wild
bull, and the procuring of a mighty deep snow, which in the longest summers
day by her prayers fell, and lay thick upon the valleys and tops of hills.
Scarce a mile hence stands Egremont Castle on the top of an hill, Egremont
castle. Lords of Copeland. Liber Inq.
the seat in times past of William de Meschines, unto whom King Henry the
first gave it, to hold by one knights service, and that he should serve at the
Kings commandment in the army for Wales and Scotland. Who left behind him a
daughter, the wife of William Fitz-Duncan, of the blood royal Lucies: from
them likewise by the Moltons and Fitz-waters, the title of Egremont descended
unto the Ratcliffes Earls of Sussex. And yet Sir Thomas Percie, through the
favor of King Henry the sixth, enjoyed it for a time, being summoned to the
Parliament by the name of Th. Percie of Egremont.

From hence the shore drawing it self back by little and little, and as it
appears by the heaps of rubbish, The sea side fensed.
it has been fortified all along by the Romans, wheresoever there was easy
landing. For it was the outmost bound of the Roman Empire, and the Scots lay
sorest upon this coast, and infested it most, when (as it were with continual
surges of war) they flowed and flocked hither by Moresby.
and certain it is that Moresby, a little village where is a road for ships,
was one of these fortifications. For there are many monuments of antiquity, as
vaults under the ground, great foundations, many caves, which they use to
term Picts-Holes; many fragments of stones with inscriptions engraven in them
are there often times found in the ground: of which upon one I read this,
LUCIUS SEVERINUS ORDINATUS, on another, COH. VII. And this Altar I saw lately
dug out there, with a little horned image representing Sylvanus, erected to
his honor by the second Cohort of the Lingones.

Deo Sylvano Cohors secunda Lingonum, cui praest G. Pompeius M. Saturninus.
DEO SILVAN -- As also this fragment, which I. Fletcher Lord of the place
transcribed out for me, and sent unto me.

-- -- OB PROSPE. RITATEM CVLMINIS INSTITVTI. Morbium.
But no stone hitherto has been found, that assures us that it was MORBIUM,
Cataphractarii horsemen, or men at arms served, notwithstanding the name in
some sort implies as much. Neither is Hay-castle which I saw hard by, to be
passed over with silence, Hay castle.
a place verily to be regarded for antiquity sake, which by report of the
inhabitants belonged successively in elder time to Gentlemen surnamed Moresby
and Distinton.

Derwent hides himself in the Ocean, which having his first beginning in
Borrodale, a valley hemmed in with crooked hills, creeps between the
mountains called Derwent Fels; wherein at Newlands and elsewhere, copper mines
were discovered by Thomas Shurland, Copper or brass mines.
and Daniel Hotchstat^er, a German of Auspurge, in our days: and yet the same
were known before, as appears by closse rowles of King Henry the third n.
18. Upon the discovery of these mines, there was a memorable case in law
between the late QUEEN ELIZABETH of sacred memory, Veins of gold gold and
silver.
and Thomas Percie Earl of Northumberland, in whose Lordship they were found:
but in regard of the Queens royal prerogative, and for that there were in
them veins of gold and silver, they were adjudged to the Queen. But hereby it
is well Cicero wrote in his Epistles unto Atticus: This is for certain known,
says he, that there is not in the Island Britain so much as one scruple of
silver. See Ploidens Reports.
Neither would Caesar, if he had known of these mines, have written, That the
Britans had use of copper brought in to them from other parts beyond sea,
seeing that the mines not only serve all England over, but also afford great
plenty beside, that is carried yearly forth of the realm.

Here also is commonly found that mineral kind of earth, or hardened glittering
stone (we call it Black-lead) with which Painters use to draw their lines, and
make pictures of one color in their first draughts: which whether it be
Pnigitis or Melanteria, spoken of by Dioscorides, or Ochre, a kind of earth so
burnt with heat, that it Derwent, after it has passed through these hills,
spreads abroad into a large lake, Bid terms it praegrande stagnum, that
is, a very great poole, wherein are three Islands eminent above the water: The
one has an house in it of the Ratcliffes, a family of Knights degree: the
second is inhabited by the Dutch Mineral men: the third is thought to be that,
wherein, as Bede writes, Saint Herbert lived an Heremeticall life. On the very
skirt of this bottom, in a pleasant soil compassed about with deawie hills;
and fensed on the North side with that high mountain Skiddaw, Keswike.
lies Keswike, a little town which King Edward the first made a mercate, by
the procurement of S. Thomas of Derwentwater Ratcliffs: It was well known many
years ago by reason of the mines of copper, as we may see in a certain
Charter of King Edward the fourth, and is at this day much inhabited by
Mineral men, who have here their smelting house by Derwent side, which with
his forcible stream, and their ingenuous inventions, serves them in notable
steed for easy bellows works, hammer works, forge works, and sawing of
boords, Skiddaw hill.
not without admiration of such as behold it. As for that mountain Skiddaw
aforesaid, it rises up to such an height with two heads like unto Parnassus,
and with a kind of emulation beholds Scruffel hill before it in Anandale
within Scotland, that

If Skiddaw has a cap,
Scruffell wots full well of that.
Like as there goes also this usual byword concerning the height as well of
this hill, as of other twain in this tract.


Are the highest hills in all England.
From hence Derwent sometimes within a narrow channel, other whiles with a
broader stream, speedeth him very fast Northward, to entertain Cockar. Which
when they meet, do encompasse almost round about Cokarmouth a mercate town
of good wealth, and a castle of the Earls of Northumberland. The town is
Molions, Humfranvills, Lucies, and Percies. Opposite unto this, beyond the
river two miles off, lies the carcass of an ancient castle, called Papcastle,
which by a number of monuments lays claim to be a Roman antiquity:
whether this were Guasmoric, Guasmoric.
which, as Ninnius writes, King Vortigern built near unto Luguballhia, and
the Englishmen of old time called Palme-castle, I cannot so easily affirm.
Where among many monuments of antiquity, was found a broad vessel of a
greenish stone, Sacrarium Regenerationis, for which purpose it serves now at
Brid-kirke, that is, at S. Brigids Church hard by, I dare not say. But I have
read that Fonts were adorned with the pictures of holy men, to the end that
such as were baptized might afterward have before their eyes, whose deeds they
were to imitate, as says Pontius Paulinus. Epist. ad Sever.
For in the first plantation of Christianity among the Gentiles, such only as
were of full age, after they were instructed in the Principles of Christian
Religion, were admitted to Baptism; and that but twice in the year, at Easter
and Whitsontide, Catechumeni, or hearers.
except upon urgent necessity. At which times, they which were to be baptized
were attired in white garments exorcised, and exsuffled,

(...) But what they signify, or what nations characters they should be, I
know not, let the learned determine thereof. The first and eighth differ not
much from that which in the time of the Emperor Constantine the great,
Christians used for the name of Christ: the rest in form, though not in sound,
come very near unto those which are seen in the tomb of Gormon, a King of
the Danes, at Ielling in Denmark, the which Peter of Lindeberge did put forth,
in the year 1591.

These places which erewhile I have named, together with a fourth part of the
Baronie of Egremond, Wigton, Lewsewater, Aspatric, Uldal, etc. a right fair
and goodly inheritance, Maud Lucie (who was the heir of Anthony Molton or de
Lucie her brother) gave unto her husband Henry Percie Earl of Northumberland;
and albeit she Percies her heirs, upon this condition, That they should bear
quarterly the Lucies Arms, Arms of the Lucies and Percies.
sz. three Pikes.
Luces Argent in a shield Gueles, with their own Arms: or that I may use the
words of the original, On condition, to give their own arms Gueles with three
Luces.
Luces Argent, together with; and the same condition by a fine levied.

Afterward Derwent having gathered his waters into one stream, enters into
the Ocean at Wirkinton, a place famous for taking of Salmons, and now the seat
of the ancient family of the Curwens Knights, Culwen, commonly Curwen.
who fetch their descent from Gospatric Earl of Northumberland, and their
surname they took by covenant and composition from Culwen a family in
Galloway, the heir whereof they had married; and here have they a stately
house built Castle-like, and from whom (without offense or vanity be it spoken)
my self am descended by the mothers side.

Stilico the potent Commander in the Roman state, what time as the Scots
annoyed these coasts out of Ireland. For thus speaks Britain of her self,
in Claudian. Under Honorius and Arcdius.


Me quo que vicinis pereuntem gentibus, in quit,
Munivit Stilico, totam cum Scotus Hibernem
Movit, and infesto spumavit remige Thetis.
And me likewise at hands (quoth she) to perish, through despite
Of neighbour-Nations, Stilico fensed against their might,

There are also as yet, such continued ruins and broken walls to be seen as
far as to Elne Mouth, which river holding no long course, has at his spring
head Ierby, a good big mercate town standing upon it. I judge it to have been
that ARBEIA, where the Baccarii Tigrienses kept their standing guard: and at
his mouth Elenborrough, that is, the Burgh upon Elen, where the first band of
the Dolmatians together with their Captain in old time made their abode. The
near resemblance of the name Elenborough with OLENACUM, where the First
Herculean Wing lay in Garrison in the time of Theodosius the younger, Olenacum.
is some motive to think that this was I. Sinhous, a very honest man, in whose
grounds they are dug up, keeps charily, and has placed orderly about his
house. In the mids of his yard there stands erected a most beautiful four
square Altar of a reddish stone, right artificially in antique work engraven,
Robert Cotton of Connington Knight, a singular lover of antiquity, what time as
he and I together, of an affectionate love to illustrate our native country,
made a survey of these coasts, in the year of our redemption 1599. not without
the sweet food and contentment of our minds. And I cannot choose but with
thankful heart remember that very good and worthy Gentleman; not only in this
regard that most kindly he gave us right courteous and friendly entertainment,
but also for that being himself well learned, he is a lover of ancient
literature, and most diligently preserves these inscriptions, which by others
that are



Decurions were in free towns (called Municipia) the same that Senators were
in Rome and Colonies, Decuriones. Isidor. l. 9. c. 4.
so called, because they executed the office of Curiae, whereupon they were
named also Curiales, who had the ordering and managing of civil offices.

On the backside of this Altar in the upper edge and border thereof, are read,
as you see, these two words, VOLANTII VIVAS; which do perplexe me, neither can
I expound them, unless the Decurions, Gentlemen, and Commons (for of these
three Municipium, or free Corporation) added this as a well-wishing, and votive
inscription unto G. Cornelius Peregrinus (who restored houses, habitations and
Decurions) that so bounteous and beneficial a man VOLANTII VIVERET, that is,
might live at Volantium. Hence I suppose, if conjecture may carry it, that
VOLANTIUM in times past was the name of the place. Volantium.
Underneath are engraven instruments belonging to sacrifice, an Axe or Cleaver,
and a chopping Knife. On the left side, a Mallet and a great Basin: in that on
the right side, a platter, a dish, and a pear, if my sight serve me well; or
as others would have it, a drinking cup or jugge; for these were vessels
pertaining to sacrifice: and others beside, as a Cruet, an Incense pan or
Censer, a footlesse pot, the Priests miter, etc. which I have seen expressly
Old Carlisle, and is now to be seen in the Barhouses house at Ilkirk: an
inscription it had with that intricate connection of letters one in another, as
the Graver has here very lively portraied, and thus it seems they are to be
read.

Iovi Optimo Maximo. Under Commodus Anno Christi 193.
Ala Augusta ob virtutem appellata, cui praest Publius Aelius, Publii filius
Sergia Magnus de Mursa ex Pannonia inferiore Praefectus. Aproniano (and
fortasse) Bradua Consulibus.

Augusta, the Captain whereof is Publius Aelius, son of Publius Magnus of
Mursa, from out of the lower Pannonia, Prefect. When Apronianus, and (happily)
Bradua were Consuls.

The third Altar, with an inscription to Belatucadrus the tutelar God of the
place, is in this wise to be read.

Belatucadro Julius Civilis Optio, id est, Excubiis Praefectus, votum solvit
libens, merito. Unto Belatucadrus, Iulius-Civilis Opi^o, that is, Prefect over
the watch and ward, has In the fourth Altar, which is of all the rest the
fairest, there is no difficulty at all, and this is the tenor of it.

Diis, Deabusque Publius Posthumous Acilianus Praefectus Cohortis primae
Delmatarum. To the Gods and Goddesses, Publius Posthumous Acilianus, Prefect or
Captain of the first Cohort of the Dalmatians. Gentiles or Heathen altars.
like as they did the beasts for sacrifice, and themselves: and then they used
with frankincense and wine to make supplication, See in Lancashire*
to kill, and offer their sacrifices: yea, and their manner was to enhuile or
anoint their very altars all over. Concerning the demolishing and overthrow of
which, as Christian religion came in place and began to prevail, Prudentius

Exercere manum non poenitet, and lapis illic
Si stetit antiquus, quem cingere sueverat error
Fasciolis, aut gallinae pulmone rigare,
Frangitur. --
Men thought not much their hands thus to employ,
And if in place some antique stone there stood,
Which folk were wont in error, with much joy
To garnish round with ribbands, and with blood
Of Hens to imbrue, they brake it in that mood.
These inscriptions likewise hereunder I saw there.

Publii filius.
PROSA -- ANTONINI AV-PII F -- P. AVLVS P. F. PALATINA POSTHVMIVS ACILIANVS
PRAEF. COH. I. DELMATAR.

Diis Manibus
D M INGENVI. AN. X. IVL. SIMPLEX PATER Faciendum curavit.
F C.

D M. MORI REGIS FILII HEREDES EIVS SVBSTITVE RVNT VIX. A. LXX.

HICEXSEGERE FATA -- ENVS SC GERMA -- -- S REG VIX. AN -- S VIX AN -- -- IX --

D M LVCA. VIX ANN. IS XX.

D M

There is a stone also here seen, workmanly cut, and erected for some victory
of the Emperors; in which two winged Genii hold up between them a guirland,
as here is represented.



for the victory of the Augusti (or Emperors) our Lords.

When the shore has passed on right forward a little way from hence, it
bends so back again with an arm of the sea retiring inward, that it may
seem to be that MORICAMBE which Ptolomee sets here, Moricambe.
the nature of the place and the name do so just agree. For a crooked creek
it is of salt water, and Moricambe in the British tongue signifies a crooked
sea. Hard by this, David the first King of Scots built the Abbey de Ulmo, Holme
Cultrain.
commonly called Holme Cultrain: and the Abbots thereof erected Ulstey a
fortress near unto it, for a treasury and place of surety to lay up their
books, charters, and evidences, against the sudden invasions of the Scottish:
Michael Scotus.
which Michael professing here a religious life, was so wholly possessed with
the study of the Mathematics and other abstruse arts, about the year of our
Lord 1290. that being taken of the common people for a Necromancer, there went
a name of him (such was their credulity) that he wrought diverse wonders and
miracles. Beneath this Abbey, the brook called Waver runs into the said
arm of the sea; which brook takes into it the riveret Wiza, at the head
whereof lie the very bones and pitiful relics of an ancient City: which
shows unto us, that there is nothing upon earth, but the same is subject to
mortality. The neighbors call it at this day Old Carlisle. What name it had in
old time I know not, unless it were Castra Exploratorum.
that is, The Espialls or Discoverers Castle. The distance put down by
Antonine (who does not so much seek after the shortest ways, See as touching
the Areans afterward in the Picts Wall.
as reckon up the places of greater note and name) as well from Bulgium as
Lugo-vallum suiteth thereto very aptly; the situation also to discover and
descry afar off is passing fit and commodious: for seated it is upon the top of
a good high hill, from whence a man may easily take a full view of all the
country round about. Howbeit, most certain it is that the wing of Horsemen,
which for their valor was named AUGUSTA, Ala Augusta Gordiana at Il-Kirk.
and AUGUSTA GORDIANA, kept resiance here in Gordian the Emperors time, as
appears evidently by these inscriptions, which I saw hard by.

Iovi optimo maximo.
I O M. ALA AUG. OB -- RTUT. APPEL. CUI PRAEEST TIB. CL. TIB. F. P IN- G- N
JUSTINUS PRAEF. Iovi optimo maximo.
FUSCIANO II SILANO II COS.

DM MABLI NIVSSEC VNDVS Iovi optimo maximo.
EQUIS ALE AUG STE STIP

This votive altar also of a rude stone was erected for the happy health of
the Emperor Gordian the third, and his wife Furia Sabina Tranquilla, and their
whole family, by the troup of horsemen surnamed Augusta Gordiana, when Aemilius
Chrispinus a native of Africa governed the same under Nonnius Philippus
Lieutenant general of Britain in the year of Christ 243. as appears by the
Consuls therein specified.

An. Christ. 243
I O M PRO SALUTE IMPERATORIS M. ANTONI GORDIANI. P. F. INVICTI AUG ET SABINIAE
TUR IAE TRANQUILE CONJUGI EJUS TO TA QUE DOMU DIVIN. EORUM A LA AUG. GORDIA. OB
VIRTUTEM APPELLATA POSUIT: CUI PRAEEST AEMILIUS CRISPINUS PRAEF. From hence
also were altars brought, which are erected in the high way by Wigton, Wigton.
in the sides whereof are to be seen a drinking cup or mazar, a footlesse
pot, a Thoresby, Thoresby.
with this inscription, to the honor of Philip the Emperor and his son, who
flourished about the year of our Lord 248.

IMP CAES. M. JUL PHILIPPO This also with others Oswald Dikes a learned
minister of Gods word copied out for me, and now is to be seen in the house of
T. Dikes Gentleman at Wardal.

DEO SANCTO BELA TUCADRO AURELIUS For Aram ex vot^.
ARAE X VOTO POSUIT LL. MM.

DEO CE AIIO AUR M RTI. ET MS Besides an infinite number of pety images,
statues of horsemen, Aegles, Lions, Ganimedes, and many other monuments of
antiquity, which are daily discovered. Which the Scots call Solway Frith.
and a great frith or arm of the Sea lies under it, being now the common
limit confining England and Scotland, serving in times past to make a
separation between the Roman Province, and the Picts. Blatum-Bulgium.
Upon this stands that ancient town, BLATUM-BULGIUM (happily of Butch a
Britain word, that signifies a separation) from which, as from the most
remote place, and the limit of the Roman province, Antonine the Emperor
begins his journies through Britain. Bulnesse*
The inhabitants at this day call it Bulnesse: and as small a village as it is,
yet has it a pile, and in token of the antiquity thereof, besides the tracts
of streets, ruinous walls, and an haven now stopped up with mud; there led a
paved highway from hence along the seashore, as far as to Elen Borrough,

Beyond this a mile (as is to be seen by the foundations at a nepe tide)
began that WALL, The beginning of the Picts Wall.
the most renowned work of the Romans, which was the bound in times past of
the Roman province; raised of purpose to seclude and keep out the barbarous
nations, that in this tract, were evermore barking and baying (as an ancient
writer says) about the Roman Empire. I marvailed at first, why they built here
so great fortifications, Solway Frith.
considering that for eight miles, or thereabout, there lies opposite a very
great frith and arm of the sea: but now I understand, that at every ebb the
water is so low, that the borderers and beast-stealers may easily wade over.
That the form of these shores has bin changed, it does evidently appear by
the tree roots Trees within the ground.
I know not whether I may relate here, which the inhabitants reported
concerning trees without boughs under the ground, oftentimes found out here in
the mosses, by the direction of dew in summer: for they have observed that the
dew never stands on that ground under which they lie.

By the same Frith, more within the land stands Drumbough Castle, belonging
of later time to the Lords of Dacre, a station in times past of the Romans.
Some will have it to have been EXPLORATORUM CASTRA, notwithstanding the
distance utterly controuleth it. There was also another station of the Romans
beside it, Burgh upon sands.
which now being changed into a new name is called Burgh upon Sands: Barony of
Burgh, the which R. Meschines, 1307. Called Morvils de Burgh upon Sands.
Lord of Cumberland, gave unto Robert de Trivers: but from him it came to the
Morvils: the last of which house, named Hugh, left behind him a daughter, who
by her second husband, Thomas de Molton had issue Thomas Molton, Lord of this
place: whose son Thomas, by marriage with the heir of Hubert de Vaulx
adjoined Gilles-land to his possessions: Liber. Inq.
which in the end were devolved all unto Ranulph Dacre, who married M. the
heir of Moulton. Edward the first.
that triumphant Conqueror of his enemies, was here taken out of this world by
untimely death. A right noble and worthy Prince, to whom God proportioned most
princely presence and personage, as a right worthy seat to entertain so
heroical a mind. For he not only in regard of fortitude and wisdom, but
also for a beautiful and a personal presence was in all points answerable to
the height of royal majesty: whom fortune also in the very prime and flower of
his age inured to many a war, and exercised in most dangerous troubles of the
State, whiles she framed and fitted him for the Empire of Britain: which he,
being Solway Frith.
Under this Burgh, within the very Frith where the salt water ebbeth and
flows, the Englishmen and Scottish, by report of the inhabitants, fought with
their fleets at full Sea, and also with their horsemen and footmen at the ebb.
A thing which may seem no less mavelous than that which Pliny has
reported, not without wonder, of the like place in Caramania. This arm of the
sea both nations call Solway Frith, of Solway a town in Scotland standing upon
it. The river Ituna, or Eden. History of Malrosse.
But Ptolomee more truly terms it ITUNA: For Eden, that notable river,
which wandreth through Westmorland, and the inner parts of this shire, powers

This river Eden when it is entered into this shire, receives from the West the
river Eimot, flowing out of Ulse, a great lake heretofore mentioned: near unto
the bank whereof, Dacre. Barons Dacre.
hard by the riveret Dacor, stands Dacre Castle, of signal note, for that it
has given surname to the honorable family of the Barons Dacre; and mentioned
anciently by Bid, for that it had a monastery in those days; as also by
William of Malmesbury, in regard that Constantine King of Scots, and Eugenius
or Ewain King

Not much higher, and not far from the confluence of Eimot and Loder, where
is seen that round trench of earth, which the country people term Arthurs
Table, stands Penrith, which is, if you interpret it out of the British
language, The Red head or hill (for the soil, and the stones there are of a
reddish color:) but commonly called Perith: a little town, and of indifferent
trade, fortified on the West side with a castle of the Kings, which in the
reign of King Henry the sixth was repaired out of the ruins of a Roman fort
thereby called Maburg, adorned with a proper Church: and the mercate place is
large, with an edifice of timber therein, for the use of those took from him
Werk in Tividale, Perith, and the Church of Simondburne. But for the commodious
use of this Town, Perith.
William Stricland, Bishop of Carlisle, descended from a worshipful Family in
this tract, at his own charges caused a channel for a watercourse to be made
out of Petter-rill, that is, the little Petter, Called in old time Haia de
Plompton.
which near unto the bank had Plumpton park, a very large plot of ground which
the Kings of England allotted in old time for wild beasts, but King Henry Old
Perith: Petriana.
For the fragment of an antique inscription erected by ULPIUS TRAIANUS,
EMERITUS an old discharged and pensionary soldier of the Petreian wing, does
convince and prove that the wing Petriana made abode here. But behold both it
and others which we copied out here.

-- Annos.
F P. C.

D M. AICETU OS MATTER VIXIT Happily, Faciendum procuravit.
A XXXXV ET LATTIO FILL. VIX A XII. LIMISIUS CONJU. ET FILIAE PIENTISSIMIS
POSUIT.

Peradventure in Cohorte.
C. CARVETIOR QUESTORIO VIXIT AN XXXXV MARTIOLA FILIA ET HERE IS PONEN Dum.
-- CURAVIT.

D M. CROTILO GERMANUS VIX ANIS XXVI. GRECA VIX ANIS IIII. VINDICIANUS Fratri
and filiae Titulum posuit.
FRA. ET FILL. TIT. PO.

After that Eden has now given Eimot entertainment, he turns his course
Northward, by both the Salkelds, watering as he goes obscure small villages,
and fortresses. Amongst which at the less Salkeld, there be erected in manner
of a circle seventy seven stones, every one ten foot high, and a special one
by it self before them, at the very entrance rises fifteen foot in height.
This stone the common people thereby dwelling, name Long Megge, like as the
rest, her daughters. And within that ring or circle, are heaps of stones,
under which, they say, lie covered the bodies of men slain. And verily there
is reason to think that this was a

From thence passes Eden by Kirk-Oswald, Kirk Oswald.
consecrated to Saint Oswald, the possession in old time of that Sir Hugh
Morvill, who with his associates slew Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury: and in
memorial of this fact, the sword which he then used, Armanthwayt. Corby
castle.
was kept here a long time: and so goes on by Armanthwayte, a Castle of the
Skeltons, by Corby Castle; belonging to the worthy and ancient family of the
Salkelds, Wetherall.
well advanced by marriage with the heir of Rosgill; by Wetherall, Virosidum.
Thence by Warwic (VIROSIDUM, as I supposed) where the sixth Cohort of the
Nervians in old time held their station within the limit of that Wall against
the Picts and Scots: and there in the latter age was built a very strong bridge
of stone, Linstock. Crosby.
at the charges of the Salkelds and Richmonds: by Linstock castle also
belonging to the Bishop of Carlisle in the Barony of Crosby, which Waldeof, the
son of Earl Gospatrick, Lord of Allerdale granted unto the church of
Carlisle. And Eden being ready to lodge himself in his own arm of the sea,
takes in two rivers at once, namely, Peterill and Caud, which keeping an
equal distance asunder march along from the South, and hold as it were a
parallel pace just together. By Peterill, beside PETRIANAE, which I spoke of,
stands Greistock, a castle belonging not long since to an honorable house,
which derived their first descent from one Ranulph Fitz-Walter: Greystock. The
ancient Genealogy. Barons de Greystock.
of which line William, called de Greistock, wedded Mary a daughter and one of
the coheires of Sir Roger Merley, Lord of Morpath: and he had a son named
John, who being childlesse, by license of King Edward the first, conveyed his
inheritance to Ralph Granthorpe, the son of William, and his Aunts son by
the fathers side: whose male progeny flourished a long time in honor Greistock,
but about King Henry the seventh his days expired and came to an end, and so
the inheritance came by marriage unto the Barons of Dacre: and the female
heirs general of the last Baron Dacre, were married unto Philip Earl of
Arundell, and Lord William Howard, sons of Thomas Howard, late Duke of
Norfolk.

Mines of Brass.
Upon Caud, beside the coper mines near unto Caudbeck, stands Highgate, a
castle of the Richmonds, of ancient descent, and a proper fine castle of the
Bishops of Carlisle, Congavata.
called the Rose castle: it seems also that CONGAVATA was hereabout, in which
the second band of the Lergi served in garrison: for Congavata in the British
tongue signifies, The valley by Gavata, which now is called short Caud. But
the very place where this town stood I cannot precisely point out. Betwixt the
meeting of Carlisle.
the ancient City Carlisle is passing commodiously and pleasantly seated, guarded
on the North side with the channel of Eden, on the East with Peterill, on the
West with Caud: and beside these natural fenses it is fortified with strong
walls of stone, with a castle and a citadell, as they term it. In fashion it
lies somewhat long, running out from West to East: on the West side is the
Castle of a good large compass, which King Richard the third, as appears by
his Arms, repaired. In the midst almost of the City, rises on high the
Cathedral Church, the upper part whereof being the newer, is very artificially
and curiously wrought: yet the nether part is much more ancient. But on the
East side it is defended with the Citadel, that K. Henry the eighth built
strongly with sundry bulwarks. The Romans and Britans Luguvallum.
and LUGU-BALLIUM, or LUGU-BALIA: the English Saxons, Luell, as Bede
witnesses: Ptolomee, as some think, LEUCOPIBIA. Ninnius, Caer Lualid: the
ridiculous prophesies of the Britans, termed it The City of Duball, we,
Carlisle, and Latin writers by a newer name, Carleolum. For our
Historiographers accord with common consent, that Luguballia and Carleolum were
the same. But in searching out the Etymology thereof, good God, how has Leland
bestirred him, being in the end driven to this point, that he thought verily
Eden was called Lugus, and Ballum came from Vallis, that is, a vale, so that
Lugu-ballum sounds as much as the Vale by Lugus. But I, if so be I may also
hatch a conjecture, would rather suppose, but without prejudice, that the said
termination Vallum and Vallia, Vallum or Trench, that stands apparent a
little from the City. For that Picts Wall, which was afterward set upon the
Trench, or rampire of Severus, appears somewhat beyond the River Eden, which
now has a wooden bridge over it, near unto a little Stanwicke, and went over
the very river just against the Castle: where within the channel of the river,
mighty stones, the remains thereof, are yet extant. Also Lugus or Lucus
amongst the ancient Celis, or Gauls, who spoke the same language that once the
Britans did, Lucus and Lugus what they signify among the Britans and old Gauls.
signifies a Tower, as we may learn by Pomponius Mela. For that which in
Antonine is named LUGO-AUGUSTI, he calls TURRIM AUGUSTI, that is, The Tower
of Augustus: so that Luga-Vallum is as much to say, as the Tower or Fort by the
wall. From this original if the Frenchmen had derived Lugudunum, as it were,
The tower on an hill; and Lucotecia, (for so in old time they called that city
which we do^ Lutetia) that is Paris, Lugdunum. Lucotecia or Lutetia in France.

The old Itinerarie lately imprinted, shows that Lugdunum implies, a
Desirable hill.


as it were, The fair (for so those words signify in the British tongue)
peradventure they had aimed nearer unto the mark, than in fetching the one
from Lutum, that is, Dirt, and that other from Lugdus an imagined King. That
this Carlisle flourished in the time of the Romans, diverse tokens of antiquity
now and then dug up there, and the famous mention of it in those days, do
sufficiently prove. After the furious outrages also of the Picts and Scots were
allayed, it retained some part still of the ancient dignity, and was counted a
City. For in the year of Christ 619. Egfrid King of Northumberland passed a
gift unto that holy Saint Cuthbert, in this form, I have given unto him also
the City called Luguballia, and ^5. miles round about it: at which time also it
was walled strong. The Citizens, says Bid, brought Cuthbert to see the who at
the very same time, as says the book of Durham, ordained there a Covent of
Nuns, with an Abbess and Schools. Afterward being defaced and brought to
exceeding ruin by the Danes, it lay about 200. years buried under his own
ashes: until it began again to flourish under the government and favor of
King William Rufus, who repaired it with new edifices, built the Castle, and
placed a Colony there first of Flemmings (whom streightwaies upon better advice
he removed into Wales) but afterward of Southern Englishmen. Then was there
seen, as William of Malmesbury writes, A dining chamber after the Roman
fashion, built of stone, and arched with vaults, so that no spiteful force of
tempests, MARII VICTORIAE, that is, ^o the victory of Marius. This Marius some
will needs have to be Arviragus the Britan: others, that Marius, who being
proclaimed Emperor against Gallienus, was named to be of wonderful strength,
that as writers report of him, He had in his fingers no veins, but all
sinews. Yet have I learned, that another, making mention of this stone, says
it was not inscribed MARII VICTORIAE, but MARTI VICTORI, that is, To victorious
Mars, which perhaps may better content some, and seem to come nearer unto the
truth. Or de Micenis.
Carlisle being now better peopled, and of greater resort, had, as they write,
for Earl* or more truly for Lord thereof, Ralph Or de Micenis.
Meschines; from whom came the Earls of Chester: and at Artalph for the first
Bishop. Which the Monks of Durham have written was prejudicial to their
Church, when Ranulph (say they) Bishop of Durham was banished, and the Church
had none to defend her, certain Bishops laid Carlisle and Tividale to their
Dioeceses. But how the Scottish under the reign of Stephen won this City, and
King Henry the second recovered it: how also King Henry the third committed the
castle of Carlisle and the County to Robert Vipont: how likewise in the year
1292. it was burnt, together with the Cathedral Church and the Suburbs: and
how Robert Bri^ King of Scots, in the year 1315. land siege unto it in vain,
you may find in the common Chronicles. And yet it seems it would quit my
pains to adjoyne here two inscriptions Citadell, but made in the worse age.

DIIS MANIBU SMARCI TROJANI AUGUSTINANI Tumulum.
TUM. FA CIENDUM CUR A VIT AFEL. AMMILLUSIMA CONJUX Carissima.
KARISS. Whereunto is adjoined the image of a man of Arms on horseback, armed
at all pieces, with a lance in his hand. As for the other, it stands in the
garden of Thomas Middleton, in a very large and fair letter, thus.

LEG. VI VIC. P. F. Which is, as I guess, Legio Sexta, Victrix, Pia, Felix:
the rest let some other decipher.

Andrew Harcla Earl of Carlisle.
The only Earl that Carlisle had, was Sir Andrew de Harcla, whom King Edward
for his laudable and good service performed against Thomas Earl of Lancaster,
and other his abetters, in vanquishing the Kings enemies and disloiall
subjects, and in delivering them up into the Kings hands when they were
vanquished, gi^t with a sword, and created Earl under the honor and name of
the Earl of Carlisle: Who notwithstanding proved a wretched Traitor himself,
unthankful and disloyally false both to his Prince and country: and being
afterward apprehended, was with shame and reproach paid duly for the desert
of his perfidious ingratitude, degraded in this manner: first by cutting off his
spurs with an hatchet, afterward disgirded of his military Or girdle.
Belt: then dispoiled of his shoes and gantlets: last of all, and was drawn

As for the position of Carlisle, the Meridian is distant from the utmost line
of the West 21. degrees and 31. minutes; and elevation of the North pole 54.
degrees and 55. minutes: and so with these encomiasticall verses of M. I.
Ionston, Ibid Carlisle adue.

CARLEOLUM.
Romany quondam statio tutissima signis,
Ultimaque Ausonidum meta, labosque Ducum
Especula lay vicinos prospicit agros,
Hic ciet and pugnas, arcet and inde metus.
Gens acri ingenio, studiis asperrima belli,
Doctaque bellaci fig ere tela manu.

Nunc iterum priscis additur imperiis.
Quid? Roman putas extrema hic limina mundi?
Mundum retro alium surgere nonne vides?
Sit vidisse satis; docuit nam Scotica virtus
Immensis animis hic posuisse modum.
CARLISLE.

The farthest bound and Captains toil of that victorious nation.
From prospect high, far all abroad it looks to neighbor fields:
Hence fight and skirmish it maintains, and thence all danger shields.
People quick witted, fierce in field, in martial feats well seen,
Expert likewise right skilfully to fight with weapons keen.
Whilom the Kings of Scots it held, whiles their state stood upright,
And once again to ancient crown it now reverts by right.
What? Roman Caesar think thou the world has here an end?
And see thou not another world behind does yet extend?

Such haughty minds to gage themselves, and here to make default.
If you now cross over the river Eden, you may see hard by the bank
Rowcliffe, a little castle erected not long since by the Lords de Dacres for
the defense of their Tenants. And above it the two rivers, Eske and Leven,
running jointly together enter at one out-gate into the Solway Frith. As for
Eske, he rumbleth down out of Scotland, and for certain miles together
confesses himself to be within the English dominion, and entertaineth the
river Kirsop, where the English and Scottish parted asunder of late, not by
waters, but by mutual fear one of another, having made Kirsop, where is now
seen by Nether-By a little village with a few cottages in it, where are such
strange and great ruins of an ancient City, and the name of Eske running
before it does sound so near, that we may imagine AESICA stood there: wherein
the Tribune of the first band of the Astures kept watch and ward in old time
against the Northren enemies. But now dwells here the chief of the Grayhams
family, Grayhams.
very famous among the Borderers for their martial disposition: and in a wall
of his house this Roman inscription is set up, in memorial of Hadrian the
Emperor, by the Legion surnamed Augusta Secunda.

IMP. CAES. TRA. HADRIANO AUG. LEG. II. AUG. F. But where the River Lidd and
Eske conjoine their streams, Barony of Liddel. Liddesdale.
there was sometimes, as I have heard, Liddel castle, and the Barony of the
Estotevils, who held lands in Cornage; which Earl Ranulph, as I read in an old
Inquisition, gave unto Turgill Brundas: But from Estotevill it came
hereditarily unto the Wakes, and by them unto the Earls of Kent of the blood
royal. And John Earl of Kent granted it unto King Edward the third, and King
Richard the second, unto John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster. Beyond this river
Eske, the land for certain miles together is accounted English ^attaile at
Sol^m moss. 1542.
wherein Solom Moss became very famous, by reason especially of so many of the
Scottish Nobility taken there prisoners in the year 1543. What time as the
Scottish resolute to set upon Sir Thomas Wharton, Lord warden of the English
marches: so soon as they understood that their King had committed the command
of the army to Oliver Sincler (whom they disdained) they conceived such
indignation thereat, that with their own shame and loss, breaking their
arraies in tumultuous manner, they made a general confusion of all: which the
English beholding from the higher ground, forthwith charged violently upon
them, and put them to flight: many they took prisoners, who flinging away their
weapons, yielded Batable ground, Batable ground.
as one would say, Litigious; because the English and the Scottish have
litigiously contended about it. For the inhabitants on both sides, as borderers
in all other parts, are a military kind of men, nimble, wily, always in
readiness for any service, Leven.
yea and by reason of often skirmishes, passing well experienced. Leven, the
other river whereof I spoke, springing in the limit just of both kingdoms,
runs by no memorable place, unless it be Beucastle (as they commonly call
it) a Castle of the Kings, which standing in a wild and solitary country, has
been defended only by Bueth-castle, so that the name may seem to have come
from that Bueth, who about King Henry the first his days, after a sort ruled
all in this tract. Certain it is that in the reign of Edward the third it was
the patrimony of Sir John of Strivelin a Baron, who married the daughter and
one of the heirs of Adam of Swinborne. In the Church, now much decayed, there
is laid for a gravestone this old inscription, translated thither from some
other place.

LEG. II. AUG. In the Churchyard there is erected a Cross about 20. foot
high, all of one entire four square stone, very artificially cut and engraven,
but the letters are so worn and gone, that they cannot be read. But whereas the
Cross is chequy, in that manner as the shield of Arms belonging to the family
of Vaulx, sometime Lords in this tract, we may well think that it was erected
by them.

More into the South, and farther within the country lies the Barony of
Gillesland; a little region so encombred, by reason of sudden rising brooks,
which they call Gilles, that I would have deemed it took the name of them, had
I not read in a book, belonging to the Abbey of Lanercost, that one Gill
Fitz-Bueth, who is called also Gilbert in a Charter of King Henry the second,
held it as Lord in old time, of whom it is probable this name was rather given
to it. Through this Gillesland, the wall of Severus, that most famous monument
of all Britain, runs straight, as it were by a line, Scalby Castle.
from Carlisle Eastward, by Stanwicks, a little village; by Scalby castle,
belonging in times past to the Tilliols (sometimes a name in this tract of good
worship and reputation) from whom it came to the Pickerings; then Cambec, a
small Dacre built Askerton castle, Askerton.
a little pile, where the Governor of Gillesland, whom they call
Land-Sergeant, had a ward. Beneath the wall it conjoyneth it self with the
river Irthing, where stands Irthington a chief Manor, as they term it, of
this Barony of Gillesland: Castle-steed. Near unto it, is Brampton a little
mercate town, Brampton. Brementuracum.
which we suppose to be BREMETURACUM, at the very line and range of the wall,
for it is scarce a mile from the said wall: where in times past, lay the first
Band of the Tungri out of Germany in the declining state of the Roman Empire,
and a company of Armaturae, under the general of Britain. These were horsemen
armed at all pieces. But whether these Armatures were Duplar or Simplar,
Armaturae Veget. l. 2. c. 7.
it is doubtful. Duplar or Duple Armaturae they were called in those days,
who had double allowances of corn: Simplar, that had but single. Neither
verily must I overpasse in silence, that hard by Brampton, there mounteth up an
high hill, fortified Mote: from which there is a fair prospect every way into
the country. Beneath this, and by Castle-steeds, like as at Trederman joining
unto it, were found these inscriptions, exemplified for me by the hand of the
right honorable Lord William Howard of Naworth, third son unto Thomas late
Duke of Norfolk, a singular lover of venerable antiquity, and learned
withal, who in these parts in right of his wife, a sister and one of the
heirs of the last Lord Dacre, enjoieth fair possessions.



This stone also was found there in an old Hot-house: wherein by ill fortune
the



Near to Brampton, Gelt a riveret runs down, by the bank whereof in a
crag called Helbecke, are read these antiquities (wherein the words hang not
well together) erected, as it seems, by a Lieutenant of the second Legion
Augusta, under Agricola the Propraetour: and others beside, which the injury
of time has envied us.

Perhaps Propraetore.


In the same rock these words also are read, written in a more modern and
newer letter.

OFFICIUM ROMANORUM. This Gelt emptieth himself into the river Irthing, which
with a swift and angry stream holds his course by Naworth Castle, belonging
unto the Lord William aforesaid, who now repaireth it: but lately to the Barons
of Dacre, of whom when the last died in his tender years, Leonard Dacre his
Uncle, who chose rather to try the title of inheritance with his Prince by
force of arms, than with his Nieces by wager of law, seized into his hands
this Castle, and levied a band of rebels against his Prince: whom the Lord of
Hunsdon, with the garrison soldiers of Berwick Irthing, was lately found this
fair votive altar, erected to the Goddess Nymphe of the Brigantes, for the
health of the Empress Plautilla, wife to M. Aurelius Antoninus Severus, and
the whole Imperial family, by M. Cocceius Nigrinus a Treasurer to the
Emperor, when Laetus was second time Consul, with intricate connection of
letters, which I read thus.

DEAE NYMPHAE BRIGantum QUOD VOVERAT PRO SALUTE PLAUTILIAE COnjugis INVICTAE DO
Mini NOSTRI INVICTI IMP. M. AURE Lii SEVERI ANTONINI PII. FE Licis C AE Saris
AU Gusti TOTIUSQUEDO MUS DIVINAE EJUS M. COCCEIUS NIGRINUS In the year of
Christ 216.
Here by was the Priory of Lanercost, founded by R. de Vaulx, Lord of
Gillesland: and hard by the wall Burd Oswald. Beneath which, where that Picts
wall passed over the river Irthing by an arched bridge, was the station of the
first band Aelia Dacica, or of the Dacians (the place is now named Willoford)
which the book of Notice of and many altars bearing inscriptions to Jupiter
Optimus Maximus, reared by that Cohort here, do plentifully prove: Of which I
thought good to add these unto the rest, although time has almost worn them
out.

Iovi optimo Maximo.
I. O. M. COH. I. AEL. DAC. CUI PRAE IG

I. O. M. OH. I. AEL. DA C. -- C. -- A. GETA IRELSAVRNES --

I. O. M. CoH. I. AEL. DAC. C. P. STATU LoN

PRO SALUTE D. N MAXjMIANO Fortissimo Caesari.
FOR -- CAE VA -- OAED

LEG. VI

I. O. M. COHIAEL. DAC TETRICIANORO -- C. P. LUTIC -- V S. DESIG NATUS TRIB.

I.O.M. COH. I. AEL. DAC. GORD. ANA. C.P -- EST

I. O. M. -- H. I. AEL. DAC. -- C.PRAEE SI. --

Lords of Gillesland. Out of an old Missal. Also R. Cook Clarenceux calls him
Radulph.i. Raulph. So does Manuscript books of Fountains and Holme.
The first Lord of Gillesland, that hitherto I have read of, was William
Meschines, the brother of Ralph Lord of Cumberland (I mean not that William
brother de Ruelent, but the brother of Ralph) yet could he never wrest it
wholly out of the Scots hands: for Gill, the son of Bueth held the greatest
part of it by force and arms. After his death, King Henry the second gave it
to Hubert de Vaulx, or de Vallibus, whose shield of Arms was Chequy Or and
Gueles. His son Robert founded and endowed the Priory of Lanercost. But the
inheritance after a few years was by marriage translated to the Moltons, and
from them by a daughter to Ranulph Lord Dacre, whose line has flourished unto
our days in very great honor. Having now in some sort surveied the maritime
coasts, and more inward parts of Cumberland; the side that lies more Easterly,
being lean, hungry, and a wast, remains to be viewed: South-Tine in a
moorish place, and an ancient Roman highway eight else broad, paved with
great stone (commonly called Maiden Way) which leads out of Westmorland;
Maiden way.
and where the riveret Alon, and the aforesaid South Tine meet together in one
channel, by the side of an Whiteley Castle: and for to testify the antiquity
thereof, there remains this imperfect inscription, with letters inserted one
in another, after a short and compendious manner of writing, whereby we learn
that the third Cohort of the Nervians erected there a Temple unto the Emperor
Antonine, son of Severus.

IMP. CAES. Lucii Septimi Severi AraBICI, ADIABENICI, PARTHICI, MAX. FILL. DIVI
ANTONINI Pii Germanici SARMA. NEP. DIVIANTONINI PII PRON. DIVI HADRIANI ABN.
DIVI TRAIANI PARTH. ET DIVI NERVAE ADNEPOTI. M. AURELIO ANTONINO PIO FELL. AUG.
GERMANICO PONT. MAX. TR. POT -- X -- IMP. -- COS. IIII. P. p. -- Whereas
therefore the third Cohort of the Nervii served in this place, which Cohort the
book of Notices in a latter time places at ALIONE, Alone.
or as Antonine Alne: if I should think this were ALONE, it might seem rather
probable than true, considering the injury of devouring time, and the fury of
enemies have long ago outworne these matters out of all remembrance.

Albeit when the State of the Roman Empire decayed most in Britain, this
country had been most grievously harried and spoiled by the Scots and Picts,
yet it preserved and kept long the ancient and natural inhabitants the
Britans, and late it was ere it became subject to the English Saxons. But when
again the English Saxons state, sore Kings of Cumberland.
ran to ruin, it had peculiar Governors, called Kings of Cumberland, unto the
year of our Lord 946. at what time, as the Florilegus.
Floure-gatherer of Westminster says, King Edmund, by the help of Leoline
Prince of South Wales, wasted and spoiled all Cumberland, and having put out
the eyes of both the sons of Dunmail King of the same Province, he granted
that kingdom unto Malcolme King of Scots, to be holden of him, that he might
defend the North parts of England by land and sea from the inrodes and
invasions of the common enemies. Captains or Rulers of Cumberland.
Whereupon the eldest sons of the Kings of Scotland were for a while under the
English Saxons, and Danes both, called the Prefects, or Deputy Rulers of
Cumberland. But when England had yielded it self into the hands of the
Normans, this part also became subject de Meschines, whose eldest son
Ranulph, was Lord of Cumberland, and partly in his mothers right, and partly by
his Princes favor together, Earl also of Chester. But King Stephen, to
purchase favor with the Scots, restored it unto them again, that they should
hold it of him and the Kings of England. Howbeit K. Henry the second, who
succeeded after him, perceiving that this over great liberality of Stephen was
prejudicial both to himself and his realm, demanded again of the Scot
Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmorland: And the K. of Scots ( as
Newbrigensis writes) wisely considering that the King of England had in those
parts both the better right and also greater power, although he

Earls of Cumberland:
As for Earls of Cumberland, there were none before the time of King Henry the
eighth, who created Henry Lord Clifford (who derived his pedigree from the
Lords Vipont) the first Earl of Cumberland: who of Margaret, the daughter of
Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, begat Henry the second Earl: he by his
first wife, daughter to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, had issue Margaret
Countess of Derby; Dacre of Gillesland, two sons, George and Francis: George
the third Earl, renowned for sea-service, armed with an able body to endure
travail, and a valorous mind to undertake dangers, died in the year 1605.
leaving one only daughter, the Lady Anne, now Countess of Dorset. But his
brother, Sir Francis Clifford, succeeded in the Earldom; a man whose ardent
and honorable affection to virtue, is answerable in all points to his
honorable parentage.

As for the Wardens of the West-marches against Scotland in this County, which
were Noblemen of especial trust, I need to say nothing, when as by the union
of both kingdoms under one head, that office is now determined.

This shire reckons beside chapels, 58. Parish Churches.

VALLUM, SIVE MURUS PICTICUS: That is,
THrough the high part of Cumberland shoots that most famous Wall (in no case
to be passed over in silence) the limit of the Roman Province, Frontier senses
or Forts, writers termed Clusurae, because they excluded the enemies; and
Praetenturae, because they were set against or affront the enemies.
the Barbarian Rampire, the Forefence and Enclosure, for so the ancient writers
termed it, being called in Dion (...), that is, a cross Wall; in Herodian,
(...), that is, a Trench or Fosse cast up; by Antonine, Cassiodore, and others,
VALLUM, that is, the Rampire; by Bid, MURUS, Gual-Sever, Gal-Sever, Bal, Val,
and Mur-Sever; by the Scottish, Scottishwaith; by the English, and those that
dwell thereabout, See P. Pithoeus in adversariis lib. 1. cap. 14.
the Picts Wall, or the Pehits Wall, the Keep Wall, and simply by way of
excellency, The Wall.

When the ambitious and valiant Romans, The Limits or Bounds of the Empire.
finding by the guidance of God and assistance of virtue, their success in all
their affairs above their wishes, had enlarged their Empire every way, so as
that the very unwealdinesse thereof began now to be of it self fearfully
suspected; their Emperors thought it their best and safest policy to limit
and contain the same within certain bounds: for in wisdom they saw, That in
all greatness there ought to be a mean, like as the heaven in self reaches
Now those limits or bounds, according to the natures of the places, were either
natural, as the sea, greater rivers, mountains, wastes and desert grounds; or
artificial, as frontier-fenses, namely trenches or dikes, castles, keeps or
fortresses, wards, mounds, and baricadoes by trees cut down and plashed,
banks, rampires and walls: along which were planted garrisons of soldiers
against the barbarous nations confining. Whence it is that we read thus in the
Novellae of Theodosius the Emperor, Tit. 43.
Whatsoever lies included within the power and regiment of the Romans, is by
the appointment and dispose of our Ancestors defended from the incursions of
Barbarians with the rampire of a Limit. Vallo Limitis.
Along these limits or borders soldiers lay garrisoned in time of Hence come
Stationes Agartae in Vegetius.
some of them had their field-stations within the Barbarian ground, for defense
of the lands: others made out-rodes into the enemies marches, to discover how
the enemies stirred; yea, and if good occasion were offered, to encounter with
them before they came to the Limits.

In this Island the Romans, The first forefense.
when they perceived that the farther parts of Britain lying North were cold,
and a rough barren soil, and inhabited by the Caledonian Britans and barbarous
nations, in subduing whereof they were sure to take much pains, and reap very
small profit, built at sundry times diverse fore-fenses, as well to bound, as to
defend the Province. Bodo^^ia and Glotta.
The first of these seems to have been made by Julius Agricola, when he
fortified with holds and garrisons that narrow space of ground that lies
between Edenborrough Frith and Dunbretten Frith, which afterward was
eftsoons strengthened.

When TERMINUS the god of bounds, S. Austin. de Civ. Dei, l. 4. c. 19.
who would not give place to Jupiter himself, was so enforced to yield to
Hadrian the Emperor, that he withdrew the Limit of the Roman Empire in the
East to the river Euphrates, The second fore-fense.
whether for envy to Trajans glory, under whom the Empire extended furthest,
or for fear; he likewise withdrew Tine, and there made the second fore-fence.
He, says Spartianus, brought a wall on for fourscore miles in length (which
should divide the Barbarians and the Romans asunder) raised with great stakes
or piles pitched deep in the ground, and fastened together in manner of a murall
or military mound for defense, as may be gathered out of that which follows
in Spartianus. And this is that fore-fense wherewith we are now in hand: for it
goes out in length Lxxx. Italian miles. About which were PONS AELIUS, CLASSIS
AELIA, COHORS AELIA, ALA SABINIANA, which took their names from Aelius
Hadrianus and Sabina his wife. And that Scottish Historiographer who wrote The
wheel of Times, Rota temporum.
writes thus, Hadrian was the first of all that made a rampire or wall Tine
unto the river Eske, that is, from the German Sea unto the Irish Ocean; which
Hector Boethius accordingly witnesses in the same words.

The third Fense.
Lollius Urbicus, Lieutenant of Britain under the Emperor Antoninus Pius, by
his fortunate fights did enlarge the bounds again as far as to that first
frontier fense that was made by Julius Agricola, and even there raised up a
third fense with a wall. He, says Capitolinus, vanquished the Britans, and
having driven out the Barbarians, made another wall of turfes beyond that of
Hadrianus. The honor of which war happily dispatched and finished in Britain,
Fronto, as the Panegyricall Orator says, ascribed Antonine the Emperor, and
has testified that he, although sitting still at home in the very Palace of
Rome, had given charge and commission to another General for the war, yet like
unto the Pilot of a Galley sitting at the stern, and guiding the helm,
deserved the glory of the whole voyage and expedition. But that this Wall of
Antoninus Pius, and of his Lieutenant Lollius Urbicus, was in Scotland, shall be
proved hereafter.

The fourth Fense.
When the Caledonian Britans, whiles Commodus was Emperor, had broken through
this wall, Severus, neglecting that far and huge big Country, made a
fortification cross over the Island from Solway Frith to Tinmouth, in that very
place (if I have any judgment) where Hadrian made his wall of stakes and
piles: and of mine opinion is Hector Boethius: Severus, says he, commanded
Hadrians wall to be repaired with Bulwarks of stone and Turrets, placed in such
convenient distance, as that the sound of a trumpet, though against the wind,
might be heard from the one unto the other. And in another place, Our
Chronicles report, that the wall begun by Hadrian was finished by Severus. Also
Hierom Surita, a most learned Spaniard, who writes, That the Fense of Hadrian
was extended farther by Sept. Severus with great fortifications, by the name of
Vallum. Semblably, Guidus Paucirolus, who affirms, that Severus did but
re-edifie and repair the wall of Hadrian being fallen down. He, says
Spartianus, fensed Britain (which is one of the chief acts recorded in his
time) by erecting up a wall overthwart the Island, to the bound of the Ocean on
both sides the I Will: whereupon he got the title of BRITANNICUS. After he had
driven out the enemies, as says Aurelius Victor, he fensed Britain As also
Spartianus: Again Eutropius, To the end that he might for^ifie with all safety
and security the Provinces which he had recovered, he made a wall for 35. or
rather more truly, 80. miles in length, even from sea to sea: That part of the
Island which he had recovered, as Orosius writes, he thought good to sever from
other untamed Nations by a rampire or wall: and therefore he cast a great
ditch, and raised a most strong wall, fortified with many turrets for the space
of an hundred and twenty two miles, from sea to sea: with whom Bid agrees,
who will not willingly hear that Severus made a wall; for that he labors to
prove that a wall is made of stone, and a rampire, named Vallum, of stakes or
piles that be called Valli, Vallum and Murus, Murus. Vallum.
that is, a wall, be indifferently used on for another.) And yet Spartianus
called it Murus, that is a wall, and should seem to show that he made both a
wall and a trench, by these words, Post murum apud vallum in Britannia missum,
etc.

Howbeit, we gather out of Bid, that the said Vallum or Rampire was nothing
Severus was built of stone. Lib. 1. c 5.
But have here the very words of Bid himself: Severus having gotten the
victory in civil wars at home, which had fallen out to be very dangerous, was
drawn into Britain upon general revolt almost of all the allies there. Where,
after great and sore battles many times fought, when he had regained part of
the Island, he thought good to have the same divided from other wild and untamed
nations, not with a wall, as some think, but with a rampire: for a wall is
made of stones, but a rampire whereby Camps are fortified to repel the force
of enemies, is made of turfes cut out of the earth round about, but raised high
in manner of a wall above ground; so that there be a ditch or Neither is it
known by any other name in Antonine, or the Notice of Provinces, than by
Vallum, that is, a Rampire, and is in the British tongue termed Gual-Sever.
Hereto we may annexe the authority also of Ethelward our ancientest writer
next unto Bid; who, as touching Severus, has these words, He did cast a ditch
or trench cross over the Island, from sea to sea; within it also he built a
wall with turrets and bulwarks. Which afterward he calls Fossam Severiam,
that is, Severs fosse or ditch: like as we read in the most ancient Annals of
the English-Saxons, (...), that is, Severus And other later writers in this
wise, (...), that is, Severus in Britain made and finished a wall of turfes, or
a rampire from sea to sea. William of Malmesburie likewise names it a famous
and most notorious trench. In which very place, two hundred years after, or
much thereabout, a wall of stone was set up, whereof I am to speak anon.

Whereas Eutropius has set down the length of it to be 35. miles, Victor 32.
and other Authors 132. I suppose some faults have crept into the numbers. For
the Island is not so broad in that place, although a man should take the measure
of the wall as it stood winding in and out, rising also and falling here and
there. Nay, if one should Spartianus has truly reckoned them. Some few years
after, this Munition, as it seems, was forlet. Howbeit, Why lands were given
to the Captains of the Marches.
when Alexander Severus the Emperor, as we read in Lampridius, had once given
unto the Captains and soldiers of the marches, those grounds and lands which
were won from the enemies, so that they should be their propriety, if their
heirs served as soldiers, and that they should never return to any private
men; supposing they would go to the wars more willingly, and take the better
care, if they should defend their own peculiar possessions. Note these words
well I pray you: for hence may be deduced either a kind of Feudum, or the
beginning of Feuds. After this the Romans marching beyond the wall, and
building themselves stations within the out-land and barbarian Edenborough
Frith. Nevertheless, the savage and barbarous people, never ceasing to assail
them upon advantages, drove them back now and then as far as to Severus
Trench.

Dioclesian the Emperor had a provident eye to these limits, under whom when
as the whole command in Britain was committed unto Carausius, for that he was
reputed the fitter man to war against these warlike nations, he did set up
again the fore-fense between Dunbritton Frith and Edenborough Frith, as I
will show in place convenient. The first that ever had blame for neglecting
these limits was Constantine the Great: for thus writes Zosimus, Whereas the
Roman Empire by the providence left the marches open to the inrodes of
barbarous nations, without garrisons, and pestered

Marcellinus lib. 38. About the year 367.
The Country that lay between these enclosures or fore-fenses, Teodosius
father unto Theodosius the Emperor recovered: he re-edified and repaired the
Cities, strengthened the garrison castles and the limits with such watch, and
ward, and fortications, yea and when he had recovered the Province, restored it
to the ancient estate, Valentinian the Emperor called VALENTIA. Theodosius
also his son, having now by his own virtue attained unto the Imperial
Majesty, had a provident care of these limits, and gave commandment that the
M^gister Off^ciorum.
Master of the Offices should year by year give advice and advertisement unto
the Emperor how all things went with the soldiers, and in what sort the
charge of castles, holds, and fore-fenses was performed. But when the Roman
Empire began once to decay apparently, and the Picts, together with the Scots,
breaking through the wall of Turfes by Edenborrow-frith, cruelly wasted and
over-ranne these parts, the Roman legion sent to aid the Britans under the
leading of Gallio of Ravenna, after they had driven away and quite Gildas and
Bid) to make a wall overthwart the Island between the two seas, The wall
between Edenborrow Frith and Dunbrit^on Frith.
which might serve for a defense to keep off the enemies, and so returned home
with great triumph. But the Ilanders fall to building of a wall as they were
willed, not so much with stone as with turfes, considering they had no workman
to bring up so great a piece of work, and so they did set up one good for
nothing. Which, as Gildas says, being made by the rude and unskilful common
multitude, without any one to give direction, not so much of stone as of turfe,
served them in no stead. As touching the place where this wall was made, Bid
proceeds to write in this manner: They raised it between the two friths or
arms of the sea, for the space of many miles, that where the fense of water
failed, there by the help of a rampire they might defend the borders And such a
fore-fense, reaching a great length, secured Assyria from the inrodes of
foreign nations, as Ammianus Marcellinus writes. And the Seres at this day,
as we read in Osorius, fortify their vales and plain champion with walls,
that they might thereby shelter and defend themselves from the violent
incursions of the Scythians. Of which work there made (says Bid) that is to
say, of a most broad and high rampire, a man may see the express and certain
remains to this day: which begins almost two miles from a Monastery called
Abercurving, Eastward, at a place named in the Picts language Penvahel, in the
English tongue Penveltun, and reaching Westward, ends near the City
Alcluid. But the former enemies no sooner perceived that the Roman soldiers
were returned, but presently sailing thither by water, About the year of
Christ 420.
Hereupon a Legion was sent over, which being arrived unlooked for toward
Winter, made great slaughter of the enemies: as for the rest that were able to
shift away and escape, they drove beyond the seas, who before time made it a
practice every Now by this time the Romans were retired back unto the Wall or
Rampire of Severus, Alciatus calls it the Breviary of Theodosius.
and Perlineam Valli (as the book of Notices terms it, which was written
toward the later end of Theodosius the younger his reign) that is on both
sides as well within as without the wall, they kept a standing watch and ward
Soldiers placed in garrisons, and along the Wall.
namely five wings of Horsemen with their Captains, 15. Cohorts of footmen
with their Colonels, one band, and likewise one squadron; which I have
mentioned and will again in due place. As touching the time immediately
ensuing, Bid goes forward to relate in these words. Then the Romans denounced
unto the Britans, that they could endure no longer to be out-toyled and wearied
with such painful voiages and expeditions for defense of them, advising them
to take weapon in hand themselves, and endeavor to fight with the enemy, who
could not by any means be stronger than themselves, unless they would give
way to idleness, and become feeble therewith: Moreover, the Romans, because
they thought this also might Here will I also put down the words of Gildas,
from whom Bid borrowed all this. The Romans directly level a wall after their
usual manner of building, not like unto the other, at the common and private
charges, adjoining unto them the poor and miserable natural home born
inhabitants, from sea to sea betwixt the cities, which chanced to have been
placed there for fear of the enemies. And now hear what Bid says again:
Which wall, that has been hitherto famous and conspicuous, they with public
and private cost, having with them the Britans helping hand also, built eight
foot broad and twelve foot high, in a direct line from East forward to West, as
is evident even at this day to the beholders. Out Bid you may see that a great
learned man, whiles he thinks to hit the bird in the eye, has missed the
mark, straining and striving mightily to prove against Boethius and other
Scottish writers, that Severus his wall of turfe was in Scotland. Does not Bid
write in plain terms, after he had spoken of the Earth-wall at Abercuruing
in Scotland, that a wall was reared of strong stone where Severus had made his
of turfe? and where I pray is that wall of stone but in this place, between
Tine-mouth and Solwey frith? where was then that wall of Severus? As for the
wall, there are yet such express tokens of it in this place, that you may
tracke it as it were all the way it went: and in the In Vastis. The Wastes,
Wastes, as they term them, I

Verily I have ^eene the tract of it over the high pitches and steep descents
of hills, wonderfully rising and falling: and where the fields lie more plain
and open, a broad and deep ditch without, just before it, which now in many
places is grounded up: and within a bank or military highway, but in most
places interrupted. It had many towers or fortresses, about a mile distant from
another, which they call Castle-steeds; and more within little fensed towns,
termed in these days Chesters, Areani might have their Stations, whom the
foresaid Theodosius, after they were convicted of falsehood, displaced and
removed from their Stations. Areani, certain discoverers, lib. 28.
These Areani (as Marcellinus says) were a kind of men ordained in old time,
whose office it was to run a great way too and fro from place to place, to
intimate or give intelligence unto our Leaders what stir and noise there was
abroad among the neighbor nations. So that the first founders of this wall may
seem to have been directed by his counsel, who wrote unto Theodosius and his
sons as touching military affairs in this manner. Among the commodities of

The dwellers hereabout talk much of a brazen trunk (whereof they found
pieces Bizantium, Xiphiline relates out of Dion in the life of Severus. But
since the wall now lies along, and no pipe remains there, many tenants hold
farms and lands of our Kings here round about in Cornage, Cornage.
as our Lawyers speak: that is, that they should give knowledge unto their
neighbors of the enemies approaching, who also were bound to go by the Kings
precept in the army and service for Scotland (these be the words of the Record)
as they marched forth in the Vantward, as they returned home in the Rereward.

But that I may follow the tract of this wall more directly in particular, it
begins at the Irish sea, hard by BLATUM BULGIUM or Bulnesse, and goes on
along the side of Solway frith, and so by Burgh upon Sands unto LUGU-VALLUM or
Carlisle, where it passes over Eden. From thence it runs forth, and has the
river Irthing beneath it, crossing over Camberke, a little brook running
crooked with many turnings in and out, where are great tokens to be seen of a
fortification. After this having Irthing and Poltrosse, it enters into
Northumberland, and among the mountains hudled together, goes along by the
side of the river which they call South-Tine without any interruption (save
only that it is divided by North-Tine, where in ancient time there was a bridge
over it) as far as to the German Ocean: as I will show in due place when I am
come once into Northumberland.

Yet this admirable work could not avert and keep out the tempestuous storms
of foreign enemies: But when the Roman armies were retired out of Britain,
the Picts and Scots assaulting the wall upon the sudden with their engines and
hooked weapons, plucked and pulled down the garrison soldiers, brake through the
fence, and overranne Britain far and near, being then disarmed and shaken
with civil broiles, Gildas a Britan, who lived not long after, pensilleth out
lively in these words. As the Romans were returning homeward, there appear
striving who could come first out of their Caroches, The high-land Sco^s at
this day call their little barges Carroches.
in which they had passed over the vale The Paris edition has Scytica Vallem,
and means happily the Scottish sea.
Stitica, like unto duskish swarms of worms, coming forth of their little
caves, with most narrow holes at noone day in summer, and when the heat of he
sun is at the highest, a rabble of Scots and Picts, in manners partly
different, but in one and the same greedy design of bloodshed: And having
knowledge once that our friends and associates were retired home, and had
denied ever to return again, they with greater confidence and boldness than
before time attempt to possess themselves of all the North side, and the
utmost

But this is worth the observation, The policy and wisdom of the Roman in
setting of this wall.
that as by the wisdom of the Romans this wall was so built, that it had two
very great rivers near to it on the inner side (as it were) for another
defense, namely, Tine and Irthing, that are divided one from the other with a
very narrow parcel of ground: So on the other side the barbarous people Plants
medicinable and wholesome.
That the Roman soldiers of the marches did plant here every where in old time
for their use certain medicinable herbs, for to cure wounds: whence it is
that some Emperick practitioners of Surgery in Scotland, flock hither every

OTTADINI.
AFter the Brigantes, Ptolomee places those who (according to the diverse
readings in Copies) are called OTTALINI, OTTADENI, and OTTADINI: In steed of
all which names, I would, if I durst presume so far, with a very easy
alteration substitute OTTATINI, On the farther side of, or above the river
Tine. And so verily would the name of the Inhabitants be consonant with the
position and site of the country. For these are planted beyond Tine. And the
Welsh-Britans at this day call a country in Wales beyond the river Conwey, Uch
Conwey: beyond the hills, Uchmynith: beyond the wood, Uch-Coed: beyond the river
Gwyrway, Uch-Gwyrway. Neither can it be, I assure you, altogether absurd, if
after the same manner they termed this country beyond Tine, Uch Tin: whence
the Romans may seem to have framed this name OTTADINI, by a word somewhat
disjointed, Xiphilinus reports out of Dio, that all the Britans that dwelt
near unto the wall, which we spoke of even now, MAEATAE.
were called (...), or MAEATAE, good reason it is that we should think these
our Ottadini dwelling by the said wall, were among those Maeatae, who in that
memorable revolt and rebellion of the Britans, called in the Caledonians to
assist them, and take arms with them. At which time Severus the Emperor
commanded his soldiers peremptorily to kill all the Britans, using these
verses of Homer.

(...)
(...)
(...)
Let none escape cruel death,
Nor dint of sword: no not the child unborne
In mothers womb that lies: his death is sworn.
But the tempestuous storm of this rebellion was calmed by the death of
Severus, who in his very preparation for war died at York.

Valentia.
this Country seems to have been a part of VALENTIA. For so Theodosius
called it in honor of Valentinian the Emperor, after he had subdued the
barbarous people, and recovered this tract or Province, which before had been
lost.

But these ancient names were quite worn out of use in the English Saxon war,
and all the Countries lying North on the other side of the Arm of the sea
called Humber, began by a Saxon name to be called (...), that is, The Kingdom
of Northumberland: which name notwithstanding Bernicia, which had peculiar
petty Kings, and reached from the River TEES to Edenborough Frith.



NORTH-HUMBER-LAND.
NOrth-umber-land, which the English Saxons called (...), lies after a sort
enclosed in fashion of a Triangle, but not with equal sides. The South side is
shut in with Derwent running Tine, and with Tine it self, where it butteth
upon the Bishopric of Durham. The East side the German sea lies and beats
upon it. But the West side, which reaches out from South-west to North-east,
is first parted from Cumber-land, afterward with Cheviot and hills linked one
to another, and lastly with the river Twede it affronteth Scotland, and so was
the limit of both kingdoms: over which were set in this county two
Governors, the one called L. Warden of the middle Marches, Wardens of the
Marches.
the other of the East marches. The ground it self for the most part rough,
and hard to be manured, seems to have hardened the inhabitants, whom the
Scots their neighbors also made more fierce and hardy, while sometimes they
keep them exercised in wars, and other Rank-riders.
and excellent good light-horsemen. And whereas they addicted themselves as it
were wholly to Mars and Arms, there is not a man amongst them of the better
sort, Very many Baronies in Northumberland.
that has not his little tower or pile: and so it was divided into a number of
Baronies, the Lords whereof in times past, before King Edward the first his
days, went commonly under the name Barons, although some of them were of no
great living. But a wise and politic device this was of our Ancestors, to
cherish and maintain martial prowess among them in the marches of the
kingdom, if it were nothing else but with an honorable bare title. Howbeit
this title came to nothing among them, what time as under King Edward Barons,
whom the Kings summoned unto the high Court of Parliament by special summons.
Toward the sea and Tine, by diligence and good husbandry it becomes very
fruitful; but elsewhere it is more barraine, rough, and as it were
unmanurable: And in many places those stones Lithanthraces, Sea-coales.
which we call Sea-coales, are dug up in great plenty, to the great gain
of the inhabitants, and commodity of others.

The hithermore part bending toward the South-west, Hexam-shire.
and called Hexam-shire, acknowledged a long time the Archbishop of York for
the Lord thereof, and challenged unto it self, by what right I know not, the
privilege of a County Palatine. But after it became of late annexed unto the
crown land, upon an exchange made

South Tine (a river so called, The river South-Tine.
if we may believe our Britans, for that by reason of his narrow banks he is
straight pent in, for so signifies Tin, as they say, in the British tongue)
having his spring head in Cumberland, near unto Alsten-more, where there was
an ancient copper mine, holding on his course by Lambley, sometime a Nunnerie
built by the Lucies, and now with floods for the most part undermined and
fallen down: also by Fetherston-Haugh, the seat of the ancient and well
descended family of Fetherston, when he is come as far as Bellister Castle,
turning Eastward,

For the Wall having left Cumberland behind it, and crossed over the Irthing,
passed likewise with an arch over the swift riveret Poltrosse, where I saw
within the wall high mounts of earth cast up, as it were to over look and
discover the country. Near this stands Thirl-wale Castle, which is not great,
but strongly built; yet it gave both habitation and surname to the ancient and
noble family, which was first called Wade: where the Picts and Scottish made
their passage into the Province, between Irthing and Tine (and that verily upon
good forecast) in that place where they had free entrance by reason of no river
in their way, Joh. Fordon.
into the inmore parts of England. But you shall better understand this, and
the name of the place, out of John Fordon the Scottish Historian, whose words
it will not be amiss, as I think, to set down here, because the book is
not every where to be had. The Scots (says he) when by conquest they had
gotten the possession of those countries, Scoto-Chronicon.
which are on this side the wall, toward Scotland, began to inhabit them, and
having of a sudden raised a sort of the Country people, with their mattockes,
pickaxes, rakes, three tined forkes and spades, make Thirlwall, which it has
at this day in this place: for in the English tongue that very place is called
Thirlwall, which is as much as a wall pierced through. Then saw we Blenkensop,
which gave name unto a generous family, as also their habitation in a right
pleasant country Southward; which was part of the Baronie of Sir Nicholas of
Bolteby, a Baron of renown in the time of King Edward the first.

Ca^r Vorran.
When you are past Thirlwall, the said wall opens it self unto the raging
river Tippall, where in the descent of an hill, a little within the wall, is to
be seen the ground work of a Castle of the Romans, in form four square,
every side whereof Ranke-riders, or taking men of the borders do report, that
a great port-way, paved with flint and big stone, led from hence through
wastes unto Maiden castle in Stanemore. Certes, it passed directly to Kirkby
Thor, whereof I spoke. A poor old woman that dwelt in a little poor cottage
hard by, showed unto us an ancient little altar-stone, in testimony of some
vow, with this inscription unto VITIRINEUS, a tutelar God, as it seemed, of the
place.

DEO VITI RINE -- -- LIMEO ROV Posuit libens merito.
P. L. M. This place is now named Caer Vorran; what it was in old time it
passes my wit to find out, seeing that amongst all the stations mentioned
along the range of the Wall, there is not one comes near to it in name;
neither have we any light out of inscriptions to lead us thereunto. What ever
it was, sure the wall thereby was both strongest and highest by far: for
scarce a furlong or two from hence, upon a good high hill, there remains as
yet some of it to be seen fifteen foot high, and nine foot thick, built on
both sides with four square ashler stone, although Bid reports it

From hence the wall goes forward more aslope by Iuerton, Forsten, and Chester
in the Wall, near to Busie-Gap, a place infamous for theeving and robbing:
where stood some Castles, Chesters they call them, as I have heard (but I could
not with safety take the full survey of it, for the ranke-robbers thereabout.)
As for Chester, Dalmatians, which is called in the old book of Notice, MAGNA,
where this inscriptions was found upon an ancient altar.

PRO SALUTE DESIDIENI AE -- LIANI PRAE Anno Christ. 259.
Melkrig, where now women beat their buckes on it.

DEAE SURI These two inscriptions are yet to be seen in Sir Robert Cottons
house at Connington.
AE SUB CALP UR NIO AG -- ICOLA. LEG. AUG PR. PR. A. LICINIUS Which if I were
able to read, The goddess Suria.
thus would I willingly read it, and the draught of the letters makes well for
it. Deae Suriae, sub Calphurnio Agricola Legato Augusti, Propraetore Licinius
Clemens Praefectus; that is, Unto the goddess Suria, under Calphurnius
Capitolinus. Some will have her to be Juno, others Venus.
and Propraetor, Licinius Clemens the Captain. This Calphurnius Agricola was
sent by Antoninus Philosophus against the Britans, what time as there was
likely to be war in Britain, about the year of Christ 170. At which time
some Cohort under his command erected this Altar unto THE GODDESS SURIA, whom
with a turreted crown on her head, and a Tabber in her hand, was set in a coach
drawn with Lions, as Lucian shows at large in his Narration of the goddess
Suria. Suetonius in Nero. cap. 56.
Which goddess also Nero, albeit he contemned all religion, especially
worshipped for a time; and soon after so aviled and despised, that he defiled
her with his urine.

From hence we saw Willy^otes-wicke, the seat of a respected family of the
Ridleyes; Alon, Alon River.
tunning with a surging stream and rise of waters into Tine, namely, when both
the Alons are met together in one channel. By the Eastern of the two Alons,
there is to be seen a town, now called Old-towne, but what the old name was,
will not easily be found. Now to the wall again. The next station upon the
wall beyond Busie-gap, Seaven-shale.
is called Seaven-shale: the name whereof, if any man would think with me to
come from the wing Saviniana or Sabiniana, I might the more confidently say
that it was that HUNNUM where the Notice of Provinces reports the wing
Sabiniana kept watch and ward.

Then beyond Carraw and Walton, stands Walwick, which some conjecturally would
Antonine: Gallana.
in all which places there be evident remains of old fortifications.

North-Tine.
Here there runs through the wall North Tine, which being now come down
amain out of the mountains in the marches of England and Scotland, first as
he passes Eastward, Tin-dale.
waters Tindale, a place taking the name of him, and in the end receiving
into his bosom the river Rhead, which springing out of Readsquire, a steep
mountain, True plane.
where oftentimes was the True-place, that is, a place of parley and conference
for the East marches (for the LL. Wardens of the East marches to both Kingdoms
were wont here to decide matters and controversies between the borderers)
Rhedesdale.


Both these dales breed notable light horsemen: and both of them have their
hills hard by, so boggy and standing with water in the top, that no horsemen are
able to ride through them: whereupon (and that is wonderful) there be many
very great heaps of stone, Laws.
called Laws, which the neighbor inhabitants be verily persuaded were in old
time cast up and laid together, in remembrance of some there slain. In both of
them also there be many ruinous remains of old Castles. In Tindale are
Whitchester, Delaley, Tarset, sometimes belonging to the Comins. In Rheadsdale
are Rochester, Green-chester, Rutchester, and some others, whose ancient
Rochester which stands nearer into the head of Rhead, in the brow of a rocky
high mountain, that overlooketh the country underneath a great way (whence it
seems to have taken this new name) there has been found an antique altar
among the rubbish of an old castle, with this inscription, D. R. S. i. Duplares
Numeri exploratorum Bremenii Aram instituerunt Numini cjus Caepione Charitino
Tribuno votum solverunt libenter merito.
DVPL. N. EXPLOR. BREMEN. ARAM. INSITVERVNT N EIVS C CAEP Ptolomee has made
mention in this very si^e and position of the country, and from which Antonine
the Emperor begins the first journey of Britain, as from the utmost limit
of the Roman Province in Britain at that time? And the limits or bounds of a
Dominion were seas, great rivers, Mountains, Desert lands, and unpassable,
such as be in this tract. Trenches also with their rampires, walls, mounds of
trees cut down or plashed, and Castles especially built in places more
suspected and dangerous than others: to all which there are to be seen
remains here every where about. Certes, when the Barbarous Antoninus Pius in
Scotland, harried all over the country, and laid all wast before them, and the
wall of Hadrian lay neglected unto the time of Severus, we may well think
that even here was set down the limit of the Roman Empire: and that from
hence the old Itinerary which goes about under the name of Antoninus began
thus, A limite, that is, From the Bound. As for that which is set to it, id
est, A vallo, that is, From the wall or rampire, may seem a gloss put down
by the transcribers, considering that BREMENIUM is fourteen miles Northward
distant from the said wall: unless it may seem to have been one of those out
Field-stations, which, as I said even now, were placed within the Barbarians
ground, beyond the Wall.

Otterburne, where there was a field most valiantly fought between the
Scottish and English; in which the victory waved alternatively too and fro
three or four times, and fell in the end to the Scottish. For Sir Henry Percy,
for his overforward spirit and youthful heat by-named Hot-Spurre, who had the
leading of the English, lost 15. hundred of his men in fight, and was himself
led away prisoner: William Douglas also the leader of the Scots, with most of
his company was slain, so that the martial valor of both nations was never
more illustrious.

There is also another town beneath of ancient memory, which Rhead waters,
or rather has now well near washed away: they call it at this day Risingham,
The Giants Habitation, as Risingberg in Germany, the Giants Hill. Many shows
are there, and those right evident of antiquity. The inhabitants report that
God Magon defended and made good this place a great while against a certain
Sultan, that is, an Heathenish Prince. Neither is this altogether a vain tale.
For that such a God was here honored and worshipped, is plainly proved by
these two altar stones lately drawn out of the river there, with these
Inscriptions.

Deo Mogonti Cadenorum and numini Domini nostri Augusti M.G. Secundinus
Beneficiarius Consulis, Habitanci Primas tam pro se and suis posuit.
DEO MOGONTI CAD. ET. N. DN. AUG. M. G. SECUNDINUS BF. COS. HA^ITA NCI PRIMAS TA
-- PRO SE ET SUIS POSUIT

DEO MOUNO CAD. INVENTUS DO V. S.

Out of the former of these, Primas.
we may in some sort gather that the name of the Either promoted to that place
by him, or by a dispensation exempt from soldiers services.
Beneficiarius to a Consul, and Primate beside of the place. For certain it
is out of Codex Theodosii, that the chief Magistrates of Cities, Towns, and
Castles, were called Primates. Now whether this God were the tutelar and
appropriate Genius of the Gadeni, whom Ptolomee placed as next neighbors to
the Ottadini, I cannot aver, let others sift and search it out. Moreover,
these inscriptions also were here found: for which with others, we are to
thank the right worshipful Sir Robert Cotton of Connington

D. M. BLESCIVS DIOVICVS

-- CUIPRAEEST. M. PEREGRINIUS SUPER TRIB.

COH. I. VANG

DEAETER TIANAESA CRUM AEL. TIMOTHEA -- P. V. S. LL. M.

HERCU LIJUL.

VR. ANTONI NI. PII AVG. M

Cohors prima Vangionum.


Vetusta^e conlabsum.


And that which far surmounteth all the rest for curious workmanship, a long
table in this form artificially engraven, set up by the fourth Cohort of the
Gauls-Horsmen, and dedicated to the sacred Majesty of the Emperors.



But now leaving these particularities, Rhead a little lower carries both his
own Tine, and so far reaches Rhedesdale. Which as we find in a book of the
Kings Exchequer, Testa Nevilli.
the Umfran Vills held of ancient feofament by regal power and service, that
they should keep the vale from thieves and robbers.

Here every way round about, in the In Vastis. Nomades.
Wastes as they term them, as also in Gillesland, you may see as it were the
ancient Nomades, a martial kind of men, who from the month of April unto
August, lie out scattering and summering (as they term it) with their
cattle, Sheales and Shealings, Clipches.
in little cottages here and there, which they call Sheales and Shealings. Then
North-Tine aforesaid passing down by Chipches, a tower belonging Umfranvills,
afterward to the Herons, and not far from Swinborne a little Castle or Pile,
which gave name unto a worthy family, and was in old time parcel of the
Baronie of the Hairuns, now commonly called Heron, a warlike generation, now a
seat of the Wodering tons; and so comes to the Wall, running under it beneath
Collerford, where a bridge of arches was made over, and where now are seen the
ruins of a large castle. Cilurnum. Scilcester. Hoveden.
Which if it were not CILURNUM, wherein the second wing of the Astures lay in
garrison, it was hard by at Scilicester in the wall: where, after that Sigga a
nobleman had treacherously murdered Ethwald King of North-Humberland, there was
a Church built by the faithful Christians in honor of Saint Cuthbert and King
Ofwald; whose name so obscured the light of the other, that the old name being
quite gone, St. Oswald.
it is now called Saint Oswalds. This Oswald Cedwella, or Caswallo.
being at the point to give battle unto Cedwall the Britan (for so Bid
calls him, whom the Britans themselves named Caswallon) King, as it seems,
of Cumberland, erected a Cross, and humbly upon his knees prayed unto Christ,
that he would vouchsafe his heavenly aid unto his devoted servants: and
presently with a loud voice cried unto the army in his wise: Bedel. 2. c. 2.
About the year 634. Christian religion first began in Northumberland.
Let us all kneel down, and beseech the Almighty, living, and true God, of
his mercy to defend us from our proud and cruel enemy. No sign (says Bid)
do we find of Christian faith, no Church, no altar throughout the whole
nation to have bin erected, before that this new leader and conducter of an
army, directed thereto by faithful devotion, did set up this sign For when
Oswald perceived in this battle the present assistance of Christ, which he had
so earnestly implored, streightwaies he bacame a professed Christian, and sent
for Aidan the Scot, to catechize and instruct his people in the Christian
religion. The very place of victory was called (...), Heafonfield, now Haledon.
that is, Heaven-field; which at this day in the same sense, as some will have
it, is named Haledon. Concerning which have here these verses, such as they be,
out of the life of the said Oswald.

Tune primum scivit causam cur nomen haberet
Heafenfeld, hoc est, caelestis campus, and illi
Nomen ab antiquo dedit appellatio gentis
Praeteritae, tanquam belli praesaga futuri.
Nominis and caussam mox assignavit ibidem
Caelitus expugnans caelestis turba scelestam.
Neve senectutis ignavia possit honorem
Tam celebris delere loci, tantique triumphi,
Ecclesiae fratres Hangustaldensis adesse
Devoti, Christumque solent celebrare quotannis.
Quoque loci persistat honos in honor beati
Oswaldi Regis, ibi construxere capellam.
Then wist he first, and not before, why this place took the name
Of Heafenfield, that is, the field of Heaven; for the same
By those that lived in alder time unto it given had been,
As if by skill divine they had this future war foreseen.
And even the reason of this name he there streightwaies expressed,

Now that in time through negligence the same might not miscarry
Both of the place so memorable, and this so noble victory,
The Monks of Hangustald-Church in great devoutnesse here,
Are wont to be, and Christ to praise duly from year to year.
And that the honor of this place might still remain entire,
In honor of Saint Oswald King, they built a Chapel there.
And another in praise of him wrote in that unlearned age, not unlearnedly,
thus.


Magnus Alexander? Alcides se superasse
Fertur. Alexander mundum, sed Julius hostem:
Se simul Oswaldus, and mundum vicit, and hostem.
What was to Oswald Hercules? What Julius Caesar? what
Great Alexander? Hercules is named much for that
Himself he won: Xander the world: Julius made foes to fly,
Oswald at once conquered himself, the world, and enemy.
Oswalds both Tines meet in one, after that South-Tine (which keeps just pace
in parallel, as it were, with the wall, about two miles from it) has passed by
Langley Castle, where sometimes, under King John, Sir Adam de Tindale had his
Barony, which afterward came to Sir Nicolas Bolteby, and of late belonged to
the Percies: and at Aidon runs under the wooden weak bridge, and shaking
through the violence of the stream Tine, by this time being now broader and
broader, continues his course in one channel apace toward the Ocean, by
Hexham, Hexham.
which Bid calls Hangustald, but the old English-Saxon (...). That this was
named in the Romans time AXLELODUNUM (where the first Cohort of the Spaniards
had their station) both the name implies, Axelodunum.
and the high situation upon an hill answerable to the name, Dunum.
when as the ancient Britans called an hill Dunum. But as touching this, hear
what Richard Prior of this place says, who flourished 500. years ago. Not
far from the river Tine Southward there stands a town, now in these days
verily but of mean bigness, and slenderly inhabited, but in times past, as
the remains of antiquity do bear witness, very large and stately. This
place, of the little river Hextold running down by it, and swelling
otherwhiles like unto a flood, with a swift stream, is name Hextoldesham:
which town Etheldreda the wife of King Egfrid gave unto Saint Wilfrid in the
year 675. that he should exalt it with an Episcopal See; who Take with you
also that which William of Malmesbury wrote: This was Crown-land, when Wilfrid
the Bishop exchanged with Queen Etheldreda other lands. It was wonderful to
see what buildings were erected there with mighty high walls, and how they were
set out and contrived with diverse turning in and out by winding stairs, all
polished and garnished by the curious workmanship of Masons and Pargetters,
whom the hope of his liberality had allured from Rome; so that these buildings
carried a show of the Romans stately magnificence, and stood very long
struggling with time. The foresaid King Egfrid placed an Episcopal See in this
little City. But that dignity, after the eighth Bishop, vanished clean away,
whilst the Danish wars were at the hottest. Montacute, encountered the
leaders of the Lancastrian Faction with much courage, and with greater success
put them to flight: and therefore was created Earl of Northumberland by King
Edward the fourth. But now all the glory that it has is in that ancient Abbey,
a part whereof is converted into a fair dwelling house, belonging to Sir John
Foster Knight. As Umfranvils, Men buried with their legs a cross.
as appears by his Escutcheon of Arms, lying with his legs acrosse. After
which fashion in those days were they only enterred (that I may note so much
by the way) who took upon them the cross, and were marked with the badge of
the cross for sacred warfare, to recover the Holy land from the Mahometans and
Turks. Hard by the East end also of this Church, upon the brow of an hill, are
erected two most strong bulwarks of free stone, which belong, as I have

From hence we went Eastward, and came to Dilston, a mansion house of the
Ratcliffes: In old evidence it is found written Divelstone, of a little river
running into Tine, Bid lib. 3. cap. 1.
which Bid called Divelesburn, where, as he writes, Oswald having the faith
of Christ for his armor and defense, in a set battle slew Cedwalla the
Britan, that wicked and horrible Tyrant, who had already slain two Kings of
Northumberland, and depopulated the country all over. On the other bank of
Tine lies CURIA OTTADINORUM, whereof Ptolomee makes mention; it may seem by
the distance thereof to be CORSTOPITUM in Antonine, called at this day of the
bridge, Corbridge; in Hovedons Annals, Corobridge; and in Henry of Huntingdon,
Cure. Treasure in vain. Hoveden. Tacitus.
among which King John searched for ancient treasure, supposed to have been
buried there: But he was overtaken in his own vanity, and deceived of his
great expectation, no less than Nero, when he searched for the hidden wealth
of Dido at Carthage. For nothing found he but stones signed with brass, iron,
and lead. But whosoever shall see the heap of rubbish that lies thereby, and is
called Colecester, Colecester.
will soon say it was some hold of a Roman garrison. Forward still upon the
same bank, we saw Biwell a proper fair castle, which in the reign of King
John was the Barony of Sir Hugh Balliol; for which he did owe to the Ward of
Newcastle upon Tine, thirty Knights [service.]

Beneath this Castle there is a very goodly Wear for the catching of Salmons:
and two solid piles of most firm stone, which in times past supported the
bridge, stand up in the midst of the river. From hence Tine running underneath,
looks up to Prudhow Castle, in ancient books written Prodhow, situate very
pleasantly upon the ridge of an hill. This may I guess to have been
PROTOLITIA, which also is called PROCOLITIA, the station of the first band of
the Batavians, till time tell me more, and instruct me better. But it is
famous in this regard, that in King Henry the second his days it valiantly
gave the check unto William King of Scots laying siege unto it; when, as
William of Newborrough writes, he had taken great to his loss and hurt.
Afterward it belonged to the Umfranvils, men of great estimation, among whom
Sir Gilbert Umfranvill flourishing in the profession of arms, in right of his
wife attained the title of Earl of Anguish in Scotland, in the reign of K.
Edward the first, and left that honor to his posterity. But Eleanor, daughter
to the sister, and heir of the last Earl, was married at length into the
family of Talebois: and afterward this castle by the Princes bountiful gift
came to the Duke of Bedford.

But to retire to the Wall. Beyond Saint Oswalds there are seen in the wall
the foundations of two sorts, which they call Castle-steeds: then a place named
Portgate, where there stood a gate in the wall, as may appear by the word,
that in both languages imports as much. Beneath this, more within the
country, is Halton-Hall: Carnabies, in great name for their antiquity and
military prowess: near unto which is seated Aidon castle, sometimes part of
the Barony of that Hugh Balliol before named. But for as much as many places
Aidon, and the very same signifies a Militare Wing or a troop of horsemen, in
the British tongue, of which sort there were many wings placed along the Wall
(as plainly appears by the book of Notices) in their stations; I would have
the reader thoroughly to consider, whether this name was not thereupon imposed
upon these places, like as Leon, upon those towns where the Legions had their
standing camp. Well, hard by there was dug up the fragment of an antique
stone, wherein is the express portrait or image of a man lying in bed, leaning
upon his left hand, and with the right touching his right knee, with these
inscriptions.

-- NORICI. AN. XXX. -- ESSOIRUS MAGNUS FRATER EJUS DUPL. ALAE SABINIANAE.

M. MARI US VELLI ALONG US. A QUI SHANC POSUIT V. S. L. M.

Then the river Pont, having his spring head more outwardly, and running down
near to Fenwick-Hall, Fenwick.
the dwelling house of the worthy and martial family of the Fenwickes, for
certain miles together gardeth the wall, and upon his bank had for a defense
in garrison the first Cohort of the Cornavii, Pons Aelii-Pont-Eland.
at a place called PONS AELII, built as it seems by Aelius Hadrianus the
Emperor, now called Pont-eland: at which King Henry the third, in the year
1244. concluded a peace; and near unto this the first Cohort of the Tungri had
their abode at Borwick, Borrovicus. Borwic.
which in the Notice of Provinces is called BORCOVICUS. From Port-gate the wall
runs along to Waltowne, which, seeing the signification accords so well
with the name, Walton. Ad-Murum.
and that it stands twelve miles from the East sea, I believe verily it is
the same royal town which Bid called ADMURUM, wherein Segbert King of the
East Saxons was by the hands of Finanus baptized and received into the Church
of Christ. Near unto this was a fortification, Vindolana. Old Winchester.
called Old Winchester (I would gladly take it to be that VINDOLANA) which that
Book of Notice so often cited, records to have been the Frontier-station in
times past of the fourth Cohort of the Gauls. And then have ye Rouchester,
where we beheld very plainly the express footings, in form four square, of a
garrison Castle, that joined hard to the wall. Near unto it Headon shows it
self, which was part of the Barony of Sir Hugh de Bolebec, Barony de Bolebec.
who fetched his descent Mont-Fichet; and had issue none but daughters, matched
in wedlock with Ralph Lord Greistock, I. Lovel, Huntercomb, and Corbet.

Now where the wall and Tine almost meet together, New Castle upon Tine.
New Castle shows it self gloriously, the very eye of all the towns in
these parts, ennobled by a notable haven, which Tine makes, being of that
depth, that it bears very tall ships, and so defendenth them, that they can
neither easily be tossed with tempests, nor driven upon shallowes and shelves.
It is situate on the rising of an hill, very uneven,

From whence the ascent is not easy to the upper part, which is larger by
far. It is adorned with sour Churches, and fortified with most strong walls
that have eight gates in them, with many towers, what it was in old time it is
not known. I would soon deem it to have been GABROSENTUM, Gabrosentum.
considering that Gates-head the suburb, as it were, thereof, does in the own
proper signification express that British Gabrosentum derived from Goats, as
has been said before. The Notice also of Provinces places Gabrosentum and the
second Cohort of the Thracians in it, within the range of the wall. And most
certain it is that both the Rampire and the Wall went through this City, and
at Pandon gate there remains, as it is thought, one of the turrets of that
wall. Surely for workmanship and fashion it is different from the other.

Moreover, whereas it was named before the Conquest Monk-chester, because it
was as it seems in the possession of Monks; this addition Chester, which
signifies a place fortified, implies that it was anciently a place of
strength. But after the Conquest of the New castle, which Robert the son of
William the Conqueror built out New Castle, and by little and little increased
marveilously in wealth, partly by intercourse of traffic with the Germans,
and partly by carrying out sea-coales, wherewith this country abounds, both
into foreign Countries, and also into other parts of England. In the reign of
Edward the first a rich man chanced to be haled way prisoner by the Scottish,
out of the middle of the town: who after he had ransomed himself with a
great sum of money, began with all speed to fortify the same: and the rest
of the inhabitants moved by his example finished the work, and compassed it
with fair strong walls. Since which time it has with security avoided the
force and threats of the enemies and robbers, which swarmed all over the
country, and withal fell to trading and merchandise so freshly, that for quick
commerce and wealth it became in very flourishing incorporate by it self. It
is distant from the first Meridian or West line 21. degrees and 30. minutes,
and from the Aequinoctiall line toward the North pole 34. degrees and 57.
minutes. As touching the suburbs of Gateshead, which is conjoined to New Castle
with a fair bridge over the river, and appertains to the Bishops of Durham,
I have already written. Now in regard of the site of New Castle, and the
abundance of sea-cole vented thence, unto which a great part of England and the
Low Countries of Germany are beholden for their good fires, read these verses
of Master John Ionston, out of his Poem of the Cities of Britain.

NOVUM CASTRUM.
Rupe sedens celsa, rerum aut miracula spectat
Naturae, aut solers distrahit illa aliis.
Sedibus aethereis quid frustra quaeritis ignem?
Hunc alit, hunc terrae suscitatista sinu.
Non illum torvo terras qui turbine terret;
Sed qui animam terris, datque animos animis.
Eliquat hic ferrum, as, hic aurum ductile fundit,
Quos non auri illex conciet umbra animos?
Quin (aiunt) auro permutat bruta metalla.
Alchimus hunc igitur praedicat esse deum.
Si deus est, ceu tu dictas divine Magister,
Haec quot alit? quot alit Scotia nostra deos?
NEVV-CASTLE.
Seated upon high rock she sees dame Natures wonders strange,
Or else to others wittily does vent them for exchange.
In vain why seek ye fire to fetch from heaven to serve your turn?
The ground here either keeps it close, or quickly makes it burn.
Not that which folk with stony flash or whirlewind grim affrights,
But gives life to earthly things, and minds to living wights.

What minds th'allective shade of gold stirs not, nor sets aloft?
Nay more than so, men say it does dull metals change to gold,
To say therefore he is a God our Alchymists are bold.
If God he be, as thou giv'st out (Great Master) of thy word,
How many Gods then does this place, and our Scotland afford?
Scarce three miles hence (for I over pass Gosseford, Barons Sur-Teis.
which was the Barony in old time of Richard Sur-Teis, who came up under King
Henry the first, and lived in great honor) stands a village named Walls-end.
The very signification of the Thraciens, which in the book of Notices is
called VINDOBALA, Vindobala. Vindomora. Walls end.
in Antonine VINDOMORA: for it may seem that in the provincial language of
the Britans, as the latter of them betokened The Walls-end, so the former the
Rampiers-end, considering that long since they termed a Wall Mur, and a
Rampire Bal, Val, and Gual.

Neither is it credible that the Rampire or Wall reached any farther, seeing
that beyond this place there are no tokens thereof: and Tine being now very
near unto the Ocean, with his exceeding deep channel ferveth in stead of a
most strong sense. Yet some there be who think, Tinmouth.
that the rampire, and not the wall, went as far as to the very mouth of
Tine, which is called Tinmouth; and stiffly affirm that it was termed
Pen-bal-crag, that is, the head of the rampire in the rock, whom I will not
contradict. But I durst almost avouch, Tunnocellum.
that this was in the Romans time TUNNOC^LLUM, seeing that Tunnocellum
sounds as much as the Promontory of Tunn or Tine, where the first Cohort
Aelia Classica, enrolled (as it is probable by the very name) by Aelius
Hadrianus the Emperor, was in pay for sea service. For the Romans had certain
light Foists or Pinnaces, Naves Luforiae.
termed Lusoria, upon the rivers in the marches: as well to repress the
outrodes of them that dwelt there by, as to quit them with like inrodes, as we
may see in the books of Theodosius his Code, Code.
under the title, de Lusoriis Danubii, The pinnaces of the river Danow. Under
the Saxons Heptarchy it was called Tunna(...), not of Tunna the Abbot, as Bede
writes, but doubtless of the river; and a little Monastery it had, which was
oftentimes risted by the Danes: But now it is called Tinmouth Castle, and takes
great glory in a stately and strong castle, which, as an ancient writer says,
on the East and North side i^ unpossible to be entered, by reason of a mighty
high rock over the sea, and in other places such is the height of it, that it
needs but small defense: Whereupon Robert Mowbray, Earl of Northumberland,
made choice of it for his strongest hold, when he rebelled against King
William Rufus. But, as commonly it falls out with rebels, he had but ill
success: who being forthwith very straightly besieged, withdrew himself into
a

Now must I coast along the shore. On the back side of the Promontory, on which
Tinmouth is situate, Seton.
next unto Seton, which under King Henry the third was part of the Barony
Dela-vall; Segedunum. Seghill.
Seghill shows it self called in old time SEGEDUNUM, a station of the third
Cohort of the Lergi, by the wall or Rampire: and verily SEGEDUNUM in British,
is all one with Seghill in English.

Some few miles from hence, the shore makes room for the river Blithe to fall
into Belsey, belonging in times past to the Midletons, and Ogle, Barons Ogle.
a Castle of the Barons Ogle, is here, together with the river Pont, discharged
into the sea.

These Ogles, from the very beginning of Edward the fourth his reign,
flourished in the dignity of Barons, enriched by marrying the heirs of Sir
Berthram Bothall, of Alan Heton, and of Alexander Kirkby. The issue male of
these Barons went out lately, and expired in Cuthbert, the seventh Baron of
that house: who begat two daughters, Joan married to Edward Talbot, a younger
son of George Earl of Shrewsbury; and Katharine wife to Sir Charles
Cavendish Knight.

Wents-beck. Barony of Mitford.
A little higher the river Wents-beck is swallowed up of the Ocean; it runs
beside Mitford, which King John and his Rutars set on fire, when in most
grievous manner they over-ranne these Countries. That age called foreign and
willing soldiers, Rutarii or Ruptarii. Alias de Breant.
Rutars, whom Falques de Brent, and Walter Buc brought out of the
Low Countries, and from other parts, to aid King John. Brent a wild
madbraine, was at length banished out of the Realm: But Buc a more staid man,
after he had done the King stout service, had given unto him by the King
possessions in Yorkshire and Northamptonshire: and his race flourished there,
until that John Buc was attainted under King Henry the seventh: whose great
grandson is Sir George Buc knight, a man well learned, of great reading, and
Master of the Kings Revels; who Berthram, whose issue male soon had an end in
Roger his grand-sonne; and his three daughters inheritrices were bestowed in
marriage upon Sir Norman Darcy T. Penbury, and William of Elmeley.

Morpeth.
From thence Wents-beck passes through Morpeth, a famous little town. For on
the North bank of the river is the town situate, and on the South bank
stands the Church, and the Castle by it, upon a shady hill beset with trees;
which, together with the town, came from Sir Roger M^rley, whose Barony it was,
unto the Lords of Greistock, and so from them to the Barons Dacre of
Gillesland. Nothing I have of any Wents-beck passes by Bothall Castle, Histor.
Malrosse.
and the Barony sometimes of Richard Berthram, from whose posterity it was
devolved unto the Barons of Ogle: Upon the bank whereof, I have thought this
great while (whether truly, or upon a bare supposall I know not) that in old
time GLANOVENTA stood, Glanoventa.
which was fortified by the Romans with a garrison of the first Cohort of the
Morini, for defense of the marches. Which the very situation does as it were
persuade; and the rivers name, together with the signification of the same,
induces me to think. For it is seated within the raunge of the rampire or
wall, even where the book of Notices places it: the rivers Wants-beck, and
GLANOVENTA in the British tongue signifies the shore or bank of Venta. Whence
also Glanon, a city in France upon the seashore, whereof Pomponius Mela has
made mention, may seem to have drawn that appellation.

Not far hence, to let pass little piles and towers of less account, is to
be seen near unto the shore Withrington or Woderington, Withrington.
in the English Saxon tongue of old time called (...) an ancient Castle, which
gave the name unto the Withringtons, Gentlemen of good birth, and Knights,
whose valor in the war has been from time to time remarkable. Coqu^da the
river.
Then the river Coquet falls into the sea, which springing among the rough
and stony mountains of Cheviot, not far from his head, has Billesdun upon
it; from whence sprang the ancient family of the Selbies: and somewhat lower
Southward, Harbottle.
Harbottle, in the English Saxons tongue (...) The station of the Army, whence
the family of the Harbottles descended, that in the ages aforegoing flourished.

A Castle it had in times past, but in the year of our salvation 1314. the
Scots razed it. Haliston.
Close unto this stands Halyston, as one would say Holy stone, Paulinus in
the primitive Church of the English nation baptized many thousands. Warkworth.
And at the very mouth of Coquet, Warkworth a proper fair Castle of the
Percies stands and defends the shore, where there is a chapel wonderfully
built out of a rock hewn hollow, and wrought without beams, rafters, or any
pieces of timber. This Castle King Edward the third gave unto Henry Percie,
together with the Manor of Rochburie. Before time it had been the Baronie of
Roger Fitz-Richard, Rot. Parliament 5. Ed. 3. Clavering
by the gift of Henry the second King of England, who gave also unto his
son, Clavering in Essex, whereof at the commandment of King Edward the
first, they assumed unto them the surname of Clavering, Fitz Roger, Roger Fitz
John, etc. Part of this inheritance the Nevils entered upon by Fine and
Covenant, who afterward were Earls of Westmorland; and part of it a daughter
named Eve inherited, who was wedded to Sir Th. Ufford; from whose posterity it
came hereditarily unto the Fienes Barons of Dacres. But from the younger sons
branched the Barons of Evers, the Evers of Axholme, and the Claverings of
Kalaly in this County, and others. Hard unto this also lies Morwick, Morwick.
which may likewise boast of the Lords it had, whose issue male had an end
about the year of our Lord 1258. and so the inheritance passed over by the
daughters Lumleies, Seimors, Bulmers, and Roscells.

The shore after this opens it self to give passage unto the river ALAUNUS,
Aulne river.
which being not yet bereft of that name, whereby it was known unto Ptolomee,
is called short Alne: Upon the bank whereof, besides Twifford, that is, A
double fourd (where was holden a solemn Synod under King Egfrid) and
Eslington, the habitation of the Collingwoods (men renowned for their warlike
exploits) there shows also it self Alan-wic, Alnewick.
in the English Saxon tongue (...), now commonly called Anwick, 1174.
a town ennobled by the victory of Englishmen (wherein our ancestors showed
such valor and prowess, that they took William King of Scots, and presented
him prisoner unto King Henry the second) and fortified besides with a goodly
castle: 1097.
Vescies. Testa Nevilli.
For King Henry the second gave it unto Eustach Fitz-Iohn, father to William
Vesci, to be held by the service of twelve knights. Vescy, of this race,
returning out of the sacred war in the Holy Land, was the first that brought
with him into England the Friars Carmelites, Carmelites.
and built for them a Covent here in Holme, a desert place, not unlike to Mount
Carmel in Syria. William, the last of the Vescies, made Antonine Bec Bishop of
Durham his feofie upon trust, that he should deliver this Castle, with all the
lands lying thereto, unto his base son, History of Durham.
the only child that he left behind him; but the Bishop falsely conveied away
from him the inheritance, and for ready money sold it unto William Lord
Percie: since which time it has evermore belonged to the Percies.

From hence the shore making diverse angles and points, Dunstaburg, Bebban.
passes by Dunstaburge, a Castle belonging to the Duchy of Lancaster, which
some have untruely supposed Bebhan; for Bebhane stands higher, and in stead
of (...) is now called Bamborrow. Bamborrow.
Our Bid, where he reports that this Castle was besieged and burnt by Penda
King of the Mercians, writes that Queen Bebba gave it this name: but the
Floure-gatherer records, that Ida the first King of Northumberland built it,
which he sensed first with great stakes or piles of timber, and afterward with
a wall. But take here with you the description thereof out of Roger Hoveden:
Bebba (says he) is a most strong City, not very great, but containing the
space of two or three fields, having into it one hollow entrance, and the same
raised on high with stairs after a wonderful manner, and on the pitch of an
hill, a very

But in our age it is counted a castle rather than a city, yet so big and
large, as that it may seem to match with a city. Male vicina.
Neither went it for any other but a castle, when King William Rufus having
raised over against it a tower called Mal-voisin, gave assault continually to
Mowbray, while he rebelled and lurked there, who at length privily stole away,
and escaped by flight. The greatest part of the beauty thereof was lost long
time after, in the civil war, when Bressie the Norman, redoubted soldier,
who sided with the house of Lancaster, exercised his rage against it very
Viscounts.
Hereto adjoyneth Emildon, sometime the Barony of John Le Viscont, but Rametta
the heir of that house sold away the possessions to Simon de Montfort, Earl
of Leicester. Jo. Scotus the subtle Doctor flourished in the year 1300.
In this was borne John Duns, called Scotus, because he was descended of
Scottish blood, who being brought up in Merton College at Oxford, became
wonderful well learned in Logic, and in that crabbed and intricate Divinity
of those days: yet as one still doubtful and unresolved, he did overcast the
truth of religion with mists of obscurity. And with so profound and admirable
subtlety, in a dark and rude style he wrote many works, that he deserved
the title of the Subtle and after his own name erected a new sect of the
Scotists. But he died pitifully, being taken with an Apoplexy, and overhastily
buried for dead; whiles upon return of life, nature (though too late) was
about to discuss the violence of the disease, and he, making means in vain
by a lamentable noise to call for help, after he had a long time knocked his
head against the grave stone, dashed out his own brains, and at last yielded
up his vital breath. Whereupon a certain Italian wrote thus of him.

Paul. Jovius in Elogiis Doctorum.
Quaecunque humani fuerant, jurisque sacrati,
In dubium veniunt cuncta vocante Scoto.
Quid? quod and in dubium illius sit vita vocata,
Morte illum simili ludificante stropha.
Quum non ante virum vita jugularit adempta,
Quam vivus tumulo conditus ille foret.
All learning taught in humane books, and couched in holy writ,
Dan Scotus dark and doubtful made by subtlety of wit.
No marvel that to doubtful terms of life himself was brought,
Whiles with like wile and subtle trick death on his body wrought.
When as her stroke to kill outright she would not him vouchsafe,
Until the man (a piteous case) was buried quick in grave.
That he was borne here in England, I avouch it out of his own manuscript
works in the Library of Merton College in Oxford, and upon their faithful
testimony, which conclude in this manner: Explicit Lectura, etc. that is, Thus
ends the Lecture of the subtle Doctor in the University of Paris, John Duns,
borne in a certain little village or hamlet within the Parish of Emildon,
called Dunston, in the county of Northumberland, pertaining to the house of the
scholars of Merton Hall in Oxford.

On this shore forward there is nothing to be seen worth relation, but the
Holy Island (whereof I will write in due place) until a man come to the mouth
of Twede, which parts England and Scotland a great way asunder, The river
Twede.
and is called the East limit: Pict-land.

Anglos a Pictis sejungit limite certo
Flumen, quod Tuedam pristina lingua vocat.
Twede, a certain bound,
Divides * Pict-land from English ground.
This river breaking forth at a number of Springs out of the mountains of
Scotland, wandereth a great while with many a crooked winding in and out, among
the ranke-riders and borderers (to give them no worse term) whose manner is,
as one says, to try their right by the swords point. But when he is come hard
to a village called Carram, Carram.
waxing a great deal bigger by reason of many waters fallen unto him, he
begins to distinguish the Confines of the Kingdoms. And when he has watered
Work, Werk.
a Castle often assaulted by the Scottish, belonging in times past to Rosses,
and now to the Graies, who by feats of arms have won much honor, he is
increased more with the stream of Till, a river that has two names. For at
the head, River Bramish.
which is in the innermore part of this country, it is called Bramish, and upon
it stands Bramton, a little village, very obscure and almost of no reckoning:
from whence it goes Northward by Bengeley, Bramton.
which together with Brampton it self, with Broundum, Rodam (which has given
name to a stock in this tract of good note) Edelingham, etc. was in King Henry
the third his time the Barony of Patricke Earl of Dunbar: who also, as we read
in the book of Inquisitions, was Inborow and Outborow between England and
Scotland, Inborow and Outborow what they signify.
that is to say if I mistake it not, he was to allow and observe in this part,
the ingresse and egresse of those that travailed too Chevelingham, now called
Chillingham, hard by the river, which, like as Horton not far distant from
it, had their Castles belonging to the Greies, ever since that those two
families of the Greies were conjoined in one by marriage.

There lies near unto it Wollover, Wollover.
a Barony which King Henry the first gave to Robert De Musco Campo. Fin. 35. H.
3. Glendale. Lib. 2. cap. 14.
Muschampe, who bare Azure three Butterflies or Papilions Argent: of whose race
descended Robert, who in Henry the third his reign was reputed the mightiest
Baron in these North parts. But the inheritance was quickly dismembered and
parted among the females: one of whom was married unto the Earl of Stratherne
in Scotland, a second to Sir William de Huntercombe, and a third to Odonell
Ford. Then the river of Glen from out of the West augmenteth Till with his
waters, and names the vale that he runs through Glendale. Touching this
little river Bid writes thus: Paulinus coming with the King and Queen into a
Manor or house of the Kings, called Ad-Gebrin (at this day Yeverin) abode with
them 36. days there, employed wholly in the catechizing and baptising: during
all which time he did nothing from morning but instruct the people resorting to
him in the saving word of Christ, and being thus instructed, he baptized them
to the forgiveness of their sins in the river of Glen, which was hard by.
This house was in the time of the succeeding Kings neglected, and another made
for it in a place called Melmin, Melfeld.
but at this day Melfeld.

Brum-ridge, The battle of Brunford.
by Brumeford, K. Athelstan fought a pitched field with Aulase the Dane,
Constantine K. of Scots, and Eugenius or Owein Prince of Cumberland, with so
fortunate success, that this battle was most famous far and near, See
Henry Huntingdon. William Malmesbur. and Ingulph.
yea and triumphantly described by the Historians and Poets of that time in the
highest degree, with stately style and lofty verse in the language of that age,
in barbarous Latin.

Here Bramish, losing his own name, comes to be called Till, and first
saluteth Ford Castle, Fort. Etall.
belonging sometimes to the warlike and valiant house of the Herons, now to the
family of the Carrs: then Etall, where the family surnamed De Maneriis, or
Manours sometimes inhabited, reckoned in the rank of worshipful Knights, out
Castles 1115. in England.


Right over against this Ford westward, there mounteth aloft an high hill
called Floddon near Bramton, memorable in regard of James the fourth, King of
Scots, who was there slain, and his army overthrown: who, whiles King Henry
the eighth lay at the siege of Tournay in France, marched forward in great
courage, and greater hope with Banner displayed against England. But Thomas
Howard Earl of Surry, arraunged in good order of battle, valiantly in this
place received him: where the fight continued sharp and hot on both parts,
until the night came upon them, uncertain as then whether side had the
victory. But the day ensuing manifested both the Conqueror and conquered: and
the King of Scots himself with many a mortal wound, was found among the
heaps of dead bodies. And Howards, as I have formerly specified.

Twede having now entertained Till, runs down with a fuller stream by
Nor^ham or Northam, in old time called Ubbanford, a town belonging to the
Bishops of Durham. For Egfrid the Bishop built it, and Raulph his successor
erected a Castle upon the top of an high steep rock, and fortified it with a
trench: in the utmore wall whereof, which is of greater circuit, are placed
sundry turrets in a Canton toward the river: within there is another enclosure
or wall much stronger: in the midst of which there rises up the Keep of great
height: But the secure peace of our age, has now a long time neglected these
fortifications, albeit they stand in Ceolwulph King of Northumberland, unto
whom Venerable Bede dedicated his book of the Ecclesiastical history of
England; and who afterward renouncing the world, became a Monk in Lindiffarn
Church, and served as a Christian soldier for the Kingdom of heaven, and his
body was conveyed after that into the Church of Norham. Also when the Danes
harried and spoiled the Holy Island, where Saint Cuthbert, whom Bid so highly
extolleth, both sat as Bishop, and lay buried: and some went about by a devout
and religious kind of stealth, to transport his body over; William Malmesbury
lib. 1. de Gestis Pontificum In printed books corruptly ye read Bubbeford.
by occasion that the winds were against them, They laid the sacred body down
with due honor at Ubbanford, (whether it were an Episcopal See or no, it is
uncertain) hard by the river Twede, and there it lay for many years together,
until the coming Of this, and of other things, I had information (for I will
never conceal by whom I have found any good) by George Carleton borne here, as
who was the Castellanes son of this place; whom for that I have loved in
regard of his singular knowledge in Divinity (which he professes) and in
other more delightful literature, and am loved again of him, I were not
worthy I assure you of love, if I did not acknowledge thus much. Beneath
Norham, at Killey a little village hard by, were found, as I have heard old men
say, in our grandfathers remembrance, the ornaments or Harnish of a Knights
belt, and the hilt of a sword of massy gold, which were presented unto Thomas
Ruthall then Bishop of Durham.

A little lower appears the Mouth of Twede; upon the farther side whereof
stands Berwicke, the utmost town in England, and the strongest hold in all
Britain. Which name some derive from one Berengarius a Duke, Ingulph
expounds Berwicke a Manor.
whom they never heard of, unless it were in a dream. Leland fetches it from
Aber, which in the British tongue signifies the mouth of a river, so that
Aberwic should sound as much as The town by the rivers mouth. But he that
knows what Berwic in the Charters of our Kings signifies, wherein nothing is
more common than these words, I give C. and D. that is, such and such towns,
cum suis Berwicis, surely he must needs understand the true Etymology of this
Berwicke. For mine own part I cannot conjecture what it means, unless it be
a Village or Hamlet annexed, as it were a parcel of the Demesne, unto some
place of greater reckoning. For in the donations of Edward the Confessor,
Totthill is called the Berwicke of Westminster, and Wandlesworth the Berwicke
of Patricseie, and a hundred such. But to what end is all this? Surely we do
but lose this labor, if, as some will have it, the name thereof were in old
time (...), The town or village of the Bernicians. Now that these countries
were named Bernicia, it is better known than can be said, and I have already
notified as much. But whence soever it has the name, it is so situate that it
shoots far into the sea, in so much as it is well near compassed about
with the sea, and Twede together; and seated betwixt two most mighty Kingdoms,
as Pliny has reported of Palmyra in Syria. It was the first thing always that
both nations took care of whenever they were at any discord: so that since
the time that King Edward the first of that name, first wrested it perforce out
of the Scots hands, the Scots have oftentimes repossessed it, and the
Englishmen as often Berwicke I have read nothing of greater antiquity than
this, that William King of Scots being taken Prisoner in the field by the
English, delivered it up unto our King Henry the second for his enlargement out
of prison, on this condition, that unless by a certain day appointed he paid
a sum of money for his ransom, it should belong unto the Crown of England
for ever; and presently, as it is in the Polychronicon of Durham, the said King
Henry fortified it with a Castle. Howbeit King Richard the first, upon payment
of the money released it again unto the Scottish. Afterward King John, as we
read in the history of Melrosse, won both the town and Castle of Berwick,
what time as he with his Rutars burnt Work, Roxburgh, yea and laid all
Northumberland most, because the Barons of Northumberland had done homage at
Felton to Alexander King of Scots. Many years after, when John Balioll King of
Scots had broken his oath, King Edward the first, in the year of salvation
1297. brought Berwick under his subjection: yet within a little while after,
when the fortune of war began to smile upon the Scots, they surprised it
standing for-let and neglected, but straightwayes it was yielded up, and the
English became Masters of it. Afterward, in that loose reign of King Edward
the second, Peter Spalding betrayed it unto Robert Bru^ King of the Scots, who
hotly assaulted it: and the English laid siege unto it in vain, until that
our Hector, King Edward the third, in the year of Christ 1333. setting
valiantly upon it, won the night but six hours and 38. minutes: so that
that there was no untruth in Servi^^ Britain has day plenty.
when he wrote thus, Britanni lucis dives, etc. that is, Britain is so
plentiful of day light, that it affords scarce any time for the nights.
Neither is it any marvel that soldiers without other light do play here all
night long at Dice, considering the side light that the sun beams cast all
night long: and therefore this verse of Iuvenall is true: Minima contentos
nocte Britannos.
The Britains who with least night stand content.


Concerning Berwicke, have here now for an Overdeale, these verses of Master I.
Ionston.

Scotorum extremo sub limite, meta furoris
Saxonidum: gentis par utriusque labor.
Mill vices rerum, quae mill est passa ruinas,
Mirum, qui potuit tot superesse malis:
Quin superest, quin extremis exhausta ruinis,
Funere sic crevit firmior usque suo:
Oppida ut exaequet jam munitissima. Civis
Militis and censum, and munia Martis obit.
Postquam servitio durisque est functa periclis,
Effert laetitiae signa serena suae:
Et nunc antiquo felix sejactat honor,
Cum reddit Domino debita jura suo:
Cujus ab auspiciis unita Britannia tandem
Excelsum tollit libera in astra caput.
Afront the bound of Scottish ground, where staid the furious broile
Of English wars; and Nations both were put to equal toil.
Now won, then lost, a thousand turns it felt of fortunes will,
After so many miseries, wonder, it stands still.
And still it stands: although laid wast it were and desolate,
Yet always after every fall it rose to firmer state:
So that for strength best fenced towns it matcheth at this day.
The Citizens were soldiers all, and served in wars for pay.
But after service long performed, and hard adventures past,
Of joy and mirth the gladsome signs it puts forth at last.
And now her ancient honor she does vaunt in happy plight,
When to her Sovereign Lord she yields all service due by right.
Whose blessed Crown united has great Britain now at last,
Whereby her head she lifts on high, since quarrels all be past.
The Commentary of Pim Secundus, set forth in the name of John Gebellin.
That which Aeneas Sylvius, or Pope Pius the second, who when he was a private
person was Ambassador into Scotland about the year 1448. has reported in his
own life, by himself penned, and published under the name of another,
touching the borderers that dwelt there round about, I think good here to put
down, considering that as yet they have nothing degenerated.

There is a river (says he) which spreading broad from out of an high hill,
confineth both the lands: This river when Aeneas had ferried over, and turned
aside into a great village about sun setting, where he supped in a country-mans
house, with the Priest of the place

There have been in this country certain petty nations, Scovenburgenses.
Fisburgenses.
called Scovenburgenses and Fisburgingi; but to point out precisely the very
place of their abode, in so great Florentius of Worcester, 1013.
published by the right honorable Lord William Howard, writes, That when
there was an assembly or Parliament holden at Oxenford, Sigeferth and Morcar,
the worthier and mightier ministers of the Scovenburgenses, were secretly made
away by Edrike Streona. Clitonem. Prince of Fisburgings.
Also that Prince Edmund against his fathers will married Alfrith the wife of
Sigefrith, and having made a journey to the Fisburgings, invaded Sigeferth his
land, and brought his people in subjection to him. But let others inquire
farther into these matters. 1015.


Osca Hengists brother, Kings, Dukes, and Earls of Northumberland. Bernicii.
and by his son Jebusa, had first official governors under the fealty of the
Kings of Kent. After that, when the kingdom of the Bernicii, whom the Britans
call Guir a Brinaich, as it were, Mountainers, was erected; that which reached
from Tees to the Scottish Frith, was the best part thereof, and subject to the
Kings of North-humberland: who having finished their period, whatsoever lay
beyond Twede, became Scottish and was counted Scotland; Then Egbert King of the
West Saxons laid it to his own kingdom, when it was yielded up to him.
Afterward King Aelfred permitted the Danes to possess it, whom Athelstane
some few years after dispossessed and drove out: yet after this the people set
up Eilrick Osulfe, Oslake, Edulph, Walde of the elder, Uchtred, Adulph, Alred,
Siward, Tostie, Edwin, Morcar, Osculph, and that right valiant Siward, who as
he lived in arms, so would he dye also armed. Then his Earldome and these
parts were given unto Tostie the brother of Earl Harold: but the Earldomes of
Northampton and Huntingdon, with other lands of his, were assigned to the noble
Earl Walde of his son These words of Ingulphus have I put down, because
some deny that he was Earl of Huntingdon. And now will I add moreover to the
rest, that which I have read in an old manuscript memorial of this matter, in
the Library of John Stow, a right honest Citizen, and diligent Antiquarie of
the City of London. Copso being made Earl of Northumberland by the gift of
King William Conqueror, expelled Osculph, who notwithstanding within a few
days after slew him. Then Osculph being run through with a Javelin by a
thief, ended his life. After this, Gospatricke purchased the Earldome of the
Conqueror, who not long after deposed him from that honor; and then succeeded
after him Walde of Siwards son. His fortune was Walcher Bishop of Durham, who
(like as Robert Comin his successor) was slain in a tumultuous commotion of
the common people. Afterward Robert Mowbray attained to the same honor, which
he soon lost through his own perfidious treachery, when he devised to
deprive King William Rufus of his royal estate, and to advance Stephen Earl
of Albemarle, a son to the Conquerors sister, thereunto. Then K. Stephen made
Henry, the son of David King of Scotland (as we read in the Poly Chronicon
of Durham) Earl of Northumberland: whose son also William, that afterward
was King of Scots, writ himself, William de Warrenna Earl of Northumberland:
for his mother was descended out of the family of the Earls of Warren, as
appears out of the book of Brinkburne Abbey. After some few years, King
Richard the first passed away this Earldome for a sum of money, unto Hugh
Pudsey Bishop of Durham for term of his life, scoffing that he had made a
young Earl of an old Bishop. But when the said King was imprisoned by the
Emperor in his return out of the Holy Land, and Hugh for his deliverie had
contributed only 2000. pounds of silver, which the King took not well at his
hands, because he was deemed to have performed but a little, whom he
understood to have raised and gotten together a huge mass of money, under
pretense of his ransom and release, he divested and deprived him of his
Earldome. After which time the title of the Barledome of Northumberland lay
discontinued about an hundred and fourscore years.

Percies descended from Charlemaine.
But at this day the family of the Percies enjoys the same, which family being
descended from the Earls of Brabant, inherited together with the surname of
Percie the possessions also of Percie, ever since that Joscelin of Lovaine,
younger son of Godfrey Duke of Brabant, the true issue of the Emperor
Charles the Great by Gerberga, the daughter of Charles, a younger brother to
Lothar, the last King of France of the line of Charles, took to wife Agnes the
daughter and sole heir of William Percie: of which William the great
grandfather William Percie, coming into England with King William the
Conqueror, was rewarded by him for his service, with lands in Tatcaster,
Linton, Normanby, and other places. Between this Agnes and Joscelin it was
covenanted, that he should assume the name of Percies, Brabant, viz. A Lion
azure (which the Brabanters afterward changed) in a shield Or. The first Earl
of Northhumberland out of this family, was Henry Percie, begotten of Marie
daughter to Henry Earl of Lancaster, who being descended of ancient blood,
and renowned for his martial prowess, was rewarded also by King Edward the
third with fair possessions in Scotland, created Earl of North-humberland by
King Richard the second on the day of his Coronation, and much enriched by his
second wife Dame Maud Lucie (although by her he had no issue) upon a fine
levied unto her, that he should bear quarterly the Arms of the Lucies with
his own, and lived in great honor, confidence, and favor with King Richard
the second. Yet full badly he requited Isle of Man: against whom within a
while, he feeling the corrosive and secret prick of conscience, for that King
Edmund Mortimer Earl of March, the true and undoubted heir of the Kingdom,
and his near ally, was neglected in prison, he conceived inward enmity,
grievously complaining, John Harding Manuscript.
and charging him with perjury, that whereas he had solemnly sworn to him,
and others that he would not challenge the Crown, but only his own
inheritance; and that King Richard should be governed during his life by the
good advice of the Peers of the realm: he to the contrary had by imprisonment
and terror of death enforced him to resign his Crown, and usurped the same, by
the concurrence of his faction, horribly murdering the said K. and defrauding
Edmund Mortimer Earl of March of his lawful right to the Crown, whom he had
suffered to languish long in prison under Owen Glendour, reputing those
traitors who with their own money had procured his enlargement. After the
publication of these complaints, he, confident in the promises of his
confederates, who yet failed him, sent his brother Thomas Earl of Worcester,
and his courageous son Henry surnamed Hot-Spurre, with a power of men against
the King, who both lost their lives at the battle of Shrewesbury. Whereupon
he was proclaimed traitor, and attainted; but shortly after, by a kind of
connivency, received again into the Kings favor (unto whom he was a terror)
yea and restored to all his lands and goods, save only the Isle of Man, which
the King resumed into his own hands. Howbeit within Barrhammore in a
tumultuary skirmish in the year 1408. was discomfited and slain by Thomas
Rokesby the high Sheriff of Yorke-shire. Eleven years after, Henry, this man's
nephew by his son Henry Hot-Spur (whose mother was Elizabeth, daughter to
Edmund Mortimer the elder, Earl of March, by Philippa the daughter of Leonel
Duke of Clarence) was restored in blood and inheritance by authority of
Parliament, in the time of King Henry the fifth: which Henry Percie, whiles he
stoutly maintained King Henry the sixth his part against Albans, like as his
son Henry, the third Earl of Northumberland, who married Aelenor, the
daughter of Richard Lord Poinings, Brian, and Fitz-Pain, in the same quarrel
lost his life in the battle at Towton, in the year 1461. The house of
Lancaster being now kept under, and down the wind, and the Percies with it
trodden under foot, King Edward the fourth made John Nevill, Lord Montacute,
Earl of Northumberland: but he after a while surrendered this title into the
Kings hands, and was created by him Marquess Montacute. After this Henry
Percy, the son of Henry Percy aforesaid, recovering the Henry Percy, the
fifth Earl, whose son Henry by a daughter and Coheire of Sir Robert Spenser,
and Eleanor the daughter likewise and Coheire of Edmund Beaufort Duke of
Somerset, was the sixth Earl; who (having no children, and his brother Thomas
being executed for taking arms against King Henry the eighth, in the first
difference about Religion) as if now that family had been at a final end for
ever) prodigally gave away a great part of that most goodly inheritance unto
the King and others. Some few John Dudley Earl of Warwick, got to himself the
title of Duke of Northumberland, by the name of John Earl of Warwick, Marshal
of England, Vicount Lisle, Baron Somery, Basset, and Ties, Lord of Dudley,
Great Master and Steward of the Kings house; when as in the tender age of King
Edward the sixth, the Chieftaines and leaders of the factions shared titles of
honor among themselves, their fautors, and followers. This was that Duke of
Northumberland, who for the time, like unto a tempestuous whirlewind, began to
shake and tear the public peace of the state, whiles he with vast ambition
plotted and practiced to exclude Mary and Elizabeth Baron Percy, and anon Earl
of Northumberland, to himself 3. and 4. Philip and Mary.
and for default thereof, to his brother Henry, and his heirs males. But this
Thomas the seventh Earl, for his treason to Prince and country, under mask of
restoring the Romish religion again, lost both life and dignity in the year
1572. Yet through the singular favor and bounty of Queen Elizabeth, according
to that Patent of Queen Mary, his brother Henry succeeded after him, as the
eighth Earl; who in the year 1585. ended his days in prison, and had for his
successor Henry his son, by Katherin the eldest daughter, and one of the
heirs of John Nevill, Lord Latimer, the ninth Earl of Northumberland of this
family.

Parishes in Northumberland about 46.

SCOTLAND.
SCOTIA Regnum


SCOTLAND.
NOw am I come to SCOTLAND, and willingly I assure you will I enter into it,
but withal lightly pass over it. For I remember well that said saw, In places
not well known less while we must stay: as also admonition of that Art thou
a stranger? be no medler. And verily I should play an unadvised part, if I
would insist long in that, wherein I am but little conversant. But yet seeing
Scotland also joyeth in the name of BRITAIN, let it be lawful for me
(reserving the due honor to the Scottish) according to my purpose, having
boldly undertaken to illustrate BRITAIN, to proceed with their good favor,
DISCORD which has set these nations (otherwise invincible) so long at debate,
might be stifled and crushed for ever; and sweet CONCORD triumph joyously with
endless comfort, when (as one sometimes sung this tenor) Jam cunctigens una
that is, We all one Nation are this day, whereunto as a Chorus both nations
resound, Et simus in aevum, that is, God grant we may be so for aye.

But before my pen comes to Scotland, thus much I think it good to advertise
the Reader aforehand, that I leave the first original of the Scottish nation
to their own Historians: also the primitive derivation of their name

THE DIVISION OF SCOTLAND.
THe North part of the Island of Britain, was of old time inhabited throughout
by the Picts, who were divided into two Nations, the DICALIDONII, and
VECTURIONES: of whom I have spoken already out of Ammianus Marcellinus. But
when the Scots became Lords and Rulers over all this part, it was shared into
seven parts among seven Princes, as we find in a little ancient pamphlet
touching the division of Scotland, in these words and old name.

The first part contained Enegus and Maern. The second, Atheodl and Goverin.
The third, Stradeern and Meneted. The fourth was Forthever. Mar with Buchen.
The sixth, Muref and Ros. The seventh Cathanes, which Mound, a mountain in the
midst divides, running on forward from the West sea to the East.
Then afterward the same Author reports, according to the relation of Andrew
Bishop of Cathanes, that the whole Kingdom was divided likewise into seven
territories.

Worid, now Scotwade, to the river Tae. The second to Hilef, according as the
sea fetches a compass, to a mountain in the North-east part of Strivelin,
named Athran. The third from Hilef to Dee. The fourth from Dee to the river
Spe. The fifth from Spe to the mountain Brunalban. The sixth, Mures and Ros.
The seventh, the kingdom Argathel, as it were
Also according to the habitation of the people, Scotland is now divided into
Highland-men and Lawland-men: Highlandmen Lawlandmen.
These being more civil, use the English language and apparel: the other,
which are rude and unruly, speak Irish, and go apparelled Irishlike, as I have
already said. Borderers.
Out of this division I exclude the Borderers, because by reason of peace
shining now upon them on every side, by a blessed and happy Union, they are to
be ranged and reckoned in the very heart and midst of the British Empire, as
who begin to be weary of wars, and to acquaint themselves with the delightful

Moreover, according to the situation and position of the places, the whole
Kingdom is divided into two parts: the South, on this side the river Tay, and
the North beyond Tay; besides a number of Islands lying round about. In the
South part these countries are more remarkable than the rest.

Teifidale. Merch. Lauden. Liddesdale. Eskedale. Annandale. N^ddesdale.
Galloway. Carrick. Kyle. Cunningham. Arran. Cluydesdale. Lennox. Stirling.
Fife. Strathern. Menteith. Argile. Cantire. Lorn.
In the North part are reckoned these Countries.

Loquabrea. Braidalbin. Perth. Athol. Anguish. Mern. Mar. Buquhan. Murray.
Rosse. Sutherland. Cathanes. Strathnavern.
These are subdivided again according to their civil government, into
counties, which they call Sherifdomes, Seneschalfies, commonly Stewarties, and
Bailiwicks, or Bailerries.

Counties, or Sheriffedomes.
Edinburgh. Linlythquo. Selkirk. Roxburgh. Peblis. Berwick. Lanark. Renfrew.
Dunfreis. Wightou. Air. Bute. Argyle and Tarbet. Dunbarton. Perth.
Clackmannan. Kinros. Fife. Kincardin. Forfaire. Aberd^ne. Bamff. Elgin. Forres.
Narne. Innerness. Cromartie. Orknay and Shetland.
Seneschalsies or Stewarties.
Menteith. Strathern. Kircudbricht. Annandale.
Bailiwickes or Baileries.
Kile. Carick. Cunningham.
Hadingtona Constablery.

Bishoprics.
As touching the administration of that divine City and commonwealth, which we
term the Church, like as the Bishops in all the world besides, had no certain
dioeceses, before that Dionisius Bishop of Rome, about the year 268. did set
out dioeceses

Andrews, the other of Glasco; whereof the former is counted Primate of all
Scotland: under whom there be eight Bishoprics.

Dunkeld. Aberdon. Murray. Dunblan. Brechin. Rosse. Cathanes. Orkney.
Under the Archbishop of Glasco there be only three.

Whiterne.
Candida Casa, or Galloway. Lismore, or Argile. The Isles.
THE STATES OR DEGREES OF SCOTLAND.
THe Republicke, or Commonwealth of the Scots, like as that of Englishmen,
consists of a King, the Nobility or Gentry, and Commons.

The King, that I may use the words of their own Record, is Directus totius
Dominus, that is, The direct Lord of the whole Domain, or Dominion, and has
royal authority and jurisdiction over all the States and degrees, as well
Ecclesiastical as Lay or Temporal.

Next unto the King is his eldest son, who is called PRINCE OF SCOTLAND,
Rothsay, and Seneschall or Steward of Scotland. But all the rest of the Kings
children are named simply Princes.

Among the Nobles, Thanes.
the greatest and most honorable were in old time, The Thanes, that is, those
who (if my judgment be ought) were ennobled only by the office which they
administered. For the word in the ancient English Saxon tongue signifies, The
Kings Minister. Of these, they of the superior place were called Abthanes, the
inferior, Under Thanes. But these names by little and little grew out of use,
Malcolm the third conferred the titles of Earls and Barons, after the manner
received from the English, upon Noble men of good desert. Since when, in
process of time new titles of honors were much taken up, and Scotland as well
as England, has had Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts, and Barons. As for
the title of Duke, the first that brought it into Scotland was King Robert the
third, about the year of Salvation 1400. like as the honorable titles of
Marquess and Vicount were first brought in by our most gracious Sovereign,
King James the sixth. These are counted Nobles of the higher degree, and have
both place and voice in the Parliaments, Knights.
and by a special name are called Lords, like as also the Bishops.

Among the Nobles of a lower degree, in the first place are ranged Knights, who
Lairds.
by taking of an oath, and are proclaimed by the public voice of an Herald. Of
a second sort are they, who are termed Lairds and Barons: among whom none were
reckoned in old time, but such as held immediately from the King, lands in Chef,
and had jus furcarum, that is, power to hang, etc. In the third place are all
such as being descended from worshipful houses, Gentlemen.
and not honored with any especial dignity, be termed Gentlemen. All the
rest, as Citizens, Merchants, Artisans, etc. are reputed among the Commons.

THE JUDICATORIES,
Parliament.
THe supreme Court, as well for dignity as authority, is accounted the
Assembly of the States of the Kingdom, which is called by the very same name
as it is in England, A Parliament: and has the same very power as absolute.
It consists of three Spiritual, namely, Bishops, Abbots, and Priors: and of
Lords Temporal, to wit, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts, and Barons: and
Commissioners for Cities and Burghs. Unto whom were adjoined not long since for
every County also two Commissioners. It is appointed and solemnly called by
the King at his pleasure, at a certain set time, before it be holden. When
these States abovesaid are assembled, and the causes of their assembly
delivered by the King or the Chancellor, the Lords Spiritual choose out, apart
by themselves, eight of the Lords Temporal. Semblably, the Lords Temporal
make choice of as many out of the Lords Spiritual: then the same all jointly
together nominate 8. of the Commissioners for the counties, and as many these
Domini pro articulis.
Lords of the Articles (so they are termed) together with the Chancellor,
Treasurer, Keeper of the Privy Seal, Kings Secretary, etc. do admit or
reject every bill proposed unto the States, after they have bin first imparted
unto the King. Being allowed by the whole assembly of the States, they are
thoroughly weighed and examined, and such of them as pass by the greater number
of voices, are exhibited unto the King, who by touching them with his Scepter,
pronounces that he either ratifieth and approves them, or disableth and
makes the same void: But if any thing disliketh the King, it is razed out
before.

The Second Court, or next unto the Parliament, is the College of Justice, or
as they call it, The Session.
The Session, which King James the fifth 1532. instituted after the form
Paris, consisting of a President, 14. Senators, seven of the Clergy, and as
many of the Laity (unto whom was adjoined afterward the Chancellor, who has
the chief place, and five other Senators) three principal Scribes or Clerks,
and as many Advocates as the Senators shall think good. These sit and
minister justice, not according to the rigor of law, but with reason and
equity, every day (save only on the Lords day and Monday) from the first of
November to the fifteenth of March; and from Trinity Sunday unto the Calends
of August. All the space between, as being the times of sowing and harvest, is
vacation and intermission of all suites and law matters. They give judgment
according to the Parliament Statutes and Municipall Laws, and where they are
defective, they have recourse to

There are besides in every County inferior civil Judicatories or Courts
kept, wherein the Sheriff of the shire, or his deputy, decideth the
controversies of the inhabitants, about violent ejections, intrusions,
damages, debts, etc. From which Courts and Judges, in regard of hard and
unequal dealing, or else of alliance and partiality, they appeal sometime to
the Session. These Sheriffs are all for the most part hereditarie. For the
Kings of Scots, like as of England also, to oblige more surely unto them the
better sort of Gentlemen by their benefits and favors, made in old time these
Sheriffs hereditarie and perpetual. But the English Kings soon perceiving
the inconveniences thereby ensuing, of purpose changed this order, and

There are likewise Judicatories, which they call Commissariats, the highest
whereof

In criminal causes, Courts of criminal matters.
the Kings chief Justice holds his Court for the most part at Edinburgh
(which office the Earls of Argile have executed now for some years.) And he
does depute two or three Lawyers, who have the hearing and deciding of capital
actions concerning life and death, or of such as infer loss of limbs, or of
all goods. In this Court the Defendant is permitted, yea in case of high
treason,

Moreover, in criminal matters there are sometimes by virtue of the Kings
commission and authority, Justices appointed for the deciding of this or that
particular cause.

Also the Sheriffs in their territories, and Magistrates in some Burghs, may
sit in judgment of manslaughter (in case the manslayer be taken within 24.
hours after the deed committed) and being found guilty by a Jurie, put him to
death. But if that time be once overpast, the cause is referred and put over to
the Kings Justice, or his Deputies. The same privilege also some of the
Nobility and Gentry enjoy against thieves taken within their own
jurisdictions. There be likewise that have That they judge according to Law.

Thus much briefly have I put down, as one that has but slightly looked into
these matters, yet by the information of the judicious Knight, Sir Alexander
Hay, his Majesty's Secretary for that kingdom, who has therein given me good
light. But as touching SCOTLAND, what a noble country it is, and what men it
breeds (as sometimes the Geographer wrote of Britain) there will within a
while more certain and more evident matter be delivered, since that most high
and mighty Prince has set it Mean while I will come unto the description of
places, the project that I intended especially.

GADENI, or LADENI.
UPon the Ottadini, or Northumberland, bordered as next neighbors the (...),
that is GADENI, who also by the inversion or turning of one letter upside
down, are called in some Copies of Ptolomee, LADENI, seated in that country
which lies between the Twede and Edinburgh Forth: and is at this day divided
into many petty Countries: the chief whereof are Teifidale, Twedale Merch, and
Lothien, in Latin Lodeneium, under which one general name alone the Writers
of the middle time comprised all the rest.

TEIFIDALE.
TEifidale, that is to say, the Vale by the river Teifie, or Teviat, lying
Iedburgh, a Borough well inhabited and frequented, standing near unto the
confluence of Teifie and Ied, whereof it took the name: also Mailros, a very
ancient Monastery, Roxburg.
And more Eastward, where Twede and Teifie join in one stream, Rosburg
shows it self, called also Roxburg, and in old time MARCHIDUN, because it
was a town in the Marches; where stands a Castle, that for natural situation
and towred fortifications, was in times past exceeding strong. Which being
surprised and held by the English, whiles James the second King of Scots
encircled it with a siege, he was by a piece of a great Ordnance that brake,
slain untimely in the Sherifdome of Roxburg, has one hereditary Sheriff out
of the family of the Douglasses, who is usually called the Sheriff of Teviot
Dale. And now has Roxburg also a Baron, Robert Kerr, through the favor of
King James the sixth, out of the family of the Kerrs, a famous house, and spread
into a number of branches, as any one in that tract: out of which the
Fernhersts, and others inured in martial feats, have been of great name.

Twede aforesaid runs through the midst of a Dale, taking name of it,
replenished Drimlar Castle, by Peblis a mercate town, which has for the
Sheriff thereof Baron Zeister, like as Selkirk hard by has another out of the
family of Murray of Fallohill, entertaineth Lauder a riveret; at which
appears Lauder, together with Thirlestan: where stands a very fair house of
Sir John Mettellan, late Chancellor of Scotland, whom, for his singular
wisdom, King James the sixth created Baron of Thirlestan. Then Twede beneath
Roxburg, augmented with the river of Teviot resorting unto him, waters the
Sherifdome of Berwick throughout; a great part whereof is possessed by the
Humes (wherein the chief man of that family Berwick, the strongest town of
Britain (whereof I have spoken already) where he is exceeding full of Salmons,
and so falls into the sea.

MERCHIA, MERCH, or MERS.
MERCH, which is next, and so named because it is a march country, lies wholly
upon the German sea. In this, first Hume Castle shows it self, the ancient
possession of the Lords of Home, Hume, who being descended from the family of
the Earls of Merch, are grown to be a noble and fair spread family: out of
which Alexander Hume, who before was the first Baron of Scotland, and Sheriff
of Berwick, was of late advanced by James King of great Britain to the title
of Earl Hume. Earl Hume. Kelso.
Near unto which lies Kelso, famous sometime for the monastery, which with
thirteen others, King David the first of that name built out of the ground, for
the propagation of Gods glory, but to the great empairing of the Crown land.

Coldingham. Colania.
Then is to be seen Coldingham, which Bid calls the City Coldana, and the
City of Coludum, happily COLANIA mentioned by Ptolomee, a place consecrated many
Fast-castle, a castle of the Lords Humes, so called for their firmness Ebb,
who being the daughter of Edilfria King of Northumberland, when her Father was
taken prisoner, got hold of a boat in Humber, and passing along the raging
Ocean, landed here in safety, became renowned for her sanctimony, and left her
name unto the place. But this Merch is mentioned in the Historiographers, a
great deal more for the Earls thereof, than for any places therein, who for
martial prowess were highly renowned, and descended from Gospatricke Earl of
Northumberland, whom after he was fled from William Conqueror of England,
Malcom Canmor, that is, With the great head, King of Scotland, entertained,
enriched him with the castle of Dunbar, and honored Merch. Whose posterity,
besides other goodly and fair lands in Scotland, held (as appears plainly in
an old Inquisition) the Barony of Bengeley in Northumberland, that they should
be Inborow and Utborow, between England and Scotland. What the meaning should
be of these terms let others guess, what my conjecture is I have said
already. In the reign of King James the first, George de Dunbar Earl of Merch
by authority of Parliament, for his Fathers rebellion lost the Propriety and
possession of the Earldom of Merch, and the Seignorie of Dunbar. And when as
he proved by good evidences and writings brought forth, that his father had
been pardoned for that fault by the Regents of the Kingdom, he was answered
again, that it was not in the Regents power to pardon an offense March, among
other honorable titles, was given afterward to Alexander Duke of Albany, and
by him forfaited. And in our remembrance, this title of honor was revived
again in Robert, the third brother of Matthew Earl of Lennox, who being of a
Bishop of Cathanes made Earl of Lennox, resigned up that title soon after
unto his nephew, then created Duke of Lennox: and he himself in lieu thereof
received of the King the name and style of the Earl Merch.

LAUDEN, or LOTHIEN.
LOTHIEN, Lauden*
which is also called Lauden, named in times past of the Picts, Pictland,
shoots out along from Merch unto the Scottish sea, or the Forth, having many
hills in it, and little wood; but for fruitful cornfieldsd, for courtesy also
and civility of manners, commended above all other countries of Scotland. About
Lothien, as Matthew the Florilegus.
Flour-gatherer witnesses: and to win his heart the more unto him, He gave
unto him many mansions in the way, wherein both he and his successors, in
their coming unto the Kings of England, and in return homeward might be
lodged: which unto the time of K. Henry the second continued in the hands of
the Kings of Scotland. In this Lothien, the first place that offers it self
unto our sight upon the sea side is Dunbar, a passing strong castle in old
time, Earls of Dunbar.
and the seat of the Earls of Merch aforesaid, who thereupon Dunbar. A Piece
many a time won by English, and as often recovered by the Scottish. But in
the year 1567. by authority of the States in Parliament it was demolished,
because it should not be an hold and place of refuge for rebels. But James King
of great Britain conferred the title and honor of Earl of Dunbar upon Sir
George Hume, for his approved fidelity, whom he had created before Baron Hume
of Barwick, to him, his heirs, and assigns. Hard by, Tine a little river
after it has run a short course, falls into the sea; near unto the
springhead Zeister, which has his Baron out of the family of the Haies Earls
of Aroll, who also is by inheritance Sheriff of the little territory of
Twedall, or Peblis. By the same riveret, some few miles higher, is seated
Hadington or Hadina, in a wide and broad plain: which town the English
fortified with a deep and large ditch, with a mure or rampire also without,
four square, and with four bulwarks at the corners, and with as many other
at the inner wall: and Sir James Wilford, an Englishman valiantly defended it
against Dessie the Frenchman, 1548.
who with ten thousand French and Dutch together fiercely assaulted it, until
that by reason of the plague, which grew hot among the garrison soldiers,
Henry Earl of Rutland John Ramsey among the Nobles of Scotland, with title and
honor of Vicount Hadington, Vicount Hadington.
for his faithful valor, as whose RIGHT HAND was the DEFENDER OF PRINCE AND
COUNTRY, in that most wicked conspiracy of the Gowries against the Kings
person. Touching this Hadington thus has Master I. Ionston versified.

Planities praetensa jacet prope flumina Tinae,
Flumini^ arguti clauditur ista sinu.
Vulcani and Martis quae passa incendia, fati
Ingemit alterno vulnere fracta vices.
Nunc tandem sapit icta. Dei praecepta secuta
Praesidio gaudet jam potiore Poli.
Before it lies a spacious plain, the Tine his stream hard by,
In bosom of that river shrill, this town enclosed does lie.
Which having suffered grievous smart of fire and sword by turns,
Groans under these misfortunes much, and for her losses mournes.
But now at length selfe-harmes have made it wise, and by Gods lore
Directed, help it has from heaven, which steedeth it much more.
Athelstanford.
Within a little of Hadington stands Athelstanford, so called of Athelstane, a
chief leader of the English, slain there with his men about the year 815.
But that he should be that warlike Athelstane, which was King of the
West Saxons, both the account of the times, and his own death do manifestly
controlle it.

Above the mouth of this Tine, in the very bending of the shore, stands
Tantallon Castle; from whence Archibald Douglas Earl of Angus, wrought James
the fifth, King of Scots, much teene and trouble. Here by retiring back of the
shores on both sides, is room made for a most noble arm of the sea, and the
same well furnished with Islands, which by reason of many rivers encountering it
by the way, and the tides of the surging sea together, spreads exceeding
broad: Ptolomee calls Bodotria.
Tacitus BODOTRIA, of the depth, as I guess; the Scots The Forth, and Frith;
we Edinburgh Frith; others the Fresian sea, and the Scottish sea, and the
Eulogium, Tantallon.
Morwiridh. Upon this, after you be past Tantallon, are seated, first,
North-Berwick, a famous place sometime for an house there of religious Virgins:
and then Dyrlton, Dyrlton.
which belonged in times past to the notable family of the Haliburtous, and now
to S. Tho. Ereskin Captain of the guard, whom James K. of great Britain for his
happy valor, in preserving him against the traitorous attempts of Gowrye,
first created Baron of Dirlton, and afterward advanced him to the honorable
title of Vicount Felton, Vicount Felton.
making him the first Vicount that ever was in Scotland. Against these places
there lies in the sea, not far from the shore, the Island Bas, which rises up
as Scouts and Soland Soland Geese, which seem to be Plinies Picarinae.
a hundred garrison soldiers that here lay for defense of the place, fed upon
no other meat but the fresh fish that they brought in) what a quantity of
sticks and little twigges they get together for the building of their nests,
so that by their means the inhabitants are abundantly provided of fuel for
their fire; what a mighty gain grows by their feathers and oil, the report
thereof is so incredible, that no man scarcely would believe it, but he that
had seen it.

Then as the shore draws back Seton shows it self; Seton.
which seems to have Setons, branched out of an English family, and from the
daughter of King Robert Brus: out of which the Marquess Huntley, Robert Earl
of Wentoun, Earl of Wentoun.
Alexander Earl of Dunfirmling, advanced to honors by K. James the sixth, are
propagated.

After this the river Eske discharges it self into this Frith, Borthwick.
when it has run by Borthwic (which has Barons surnamed according to that
name, and those deriving their pedigree out of Hungary) by Newbottle, Newbottle.
that is, The new building, sometimes a fair monastery, now the Barony of Sir
Mark Ker: by Dalkeith, Dalkeith. Musselborrow.
a very pleasant habitation of the late Earls of Morton, and Musselborrow,
hard under which, in the year Seimor Duke of Somerset, with an army royal had
entered Scotland, to claim and challenge the keeping of a covenant made,
concerning a marriage between Marie Queen of Scotland, and Edward the sixth
King of England, there happened the heaviest day that ever fell, to the
adventurous youth of the most noble families in all Scotland, who there lost
their lives. Here I must not over-passe in silence this Inscription, which John
Napier, a learned man, has in his Commentaries upon the Apocalypse recorded to
have been here dug up, and which the right learned Knight Sir Peter Young,
teacher and trainer of King James the sixth in his youth, has in this wise
more truly copied forth.

APOLLINI GRANNO Q. LUSIUS SABINIA NUS Procurator.
PROC AUG Votum susceptum solvit lubens merito.
V.S.S.L.V.M Who this Apollo Granus might be, Apollo Grannus.
and whence he should have this name, not one, to my knowledge, of our grave
Senate of Antiquaries hitherto could ever tell: But if I might be allowed, from
out of the lowest bench, to speak what I think, Granus amongst the Romans, was
the same that (...), that is, Apollo with long hair amongst the Greeks. for
Isidor calls the long hair of the Goths, Grannos. But here I may seem to
wander out of my way, and therefore will return to it.

Lower yet, Edenborrow.
and near unto the Scottish Forth, is seated EDENBUROUGH, which the Irish Scots
call Dun Eaden, that is, the town Eaden, or Eden Hill, and which no doubt is
the very same that Ptolomee named (...), that is, The Winged Castle: for Adain
in the British tongue signifies a wing; and Edenborrow (a word compounded out
of the British and Saxon language) is nothing else but The Burgh with wings.
From Wings therefore we must fetch the reason of the name: and fetched it may
be, if you think good, either from the Companies of Horsemen, which are called
Wings, or else from those Wings in Architecture, which the great Master
builders term P^eroma^^, that is, as Vetruvius shows, two Wall^ so rising
up in height, as that they resemble a show of Wings: which, for that a certain
City of Cyprus wanted, it was called in old time (as we read in the
Geographers) Aptera, that is, Without Wings. But if any man believe that the
name was derived from Ebr^^k a Britain, or from Heth a Pic^, good leave have
he for me, I will not confront them with this my conjecture.

This City in regard of the high situation, of the wholesome are and plentiful
soil, and many Noble men's towred houses built round about it, watered also
with clear springing fountains, reaching from East to West a mile out in
length, and carrying half as much in breadth, is worthily counted the chief
City of the whole Kingdom; strongly walled, adorned with houses as well
public as private, well peopled and frequented, by reason of the opportunity
from the sea which the neighbor haven at Leth affords. And as it is the seat
of the Kings, so is it the oracle also, or closet of the Laws, and the very
Palace of Justice. For the high Courts of Parliament are here for the most part
holden, for the enacting or repealing of Laws: also the Session, and the Court
of the Kings Justice, and of the Commissariat, whereof

On the East side, hard unto the Monastery of Saint Cross, or Holy ruide, is
the Kings palace, which King David the first built: over which, within a Park
stored with game, rises an hill with two heads, called of Arthur the Britain,
Arthurs Chair. On the West side a most steep rock mounteth up aloft to a
stately height every way, save only where it looks toward the City: on which
is placed a Castle with many a tower in it, so strong that it is counted
impregnable, which the Britans called Castle Mined Agne^, the Scots, The
Maidens Castle, and the Virgins Castle, of certain young maidens of the Picts
royal blood, who were kept there in old time, and which may seem in truth to
have been that Castrum Alatum, or Castle with AVVING, abovesaid.

How Edenborrow in the alternative fortune of wars was subject one while to
the Scots, and another while to the English, who inhabited this East part of
Scotland, until it became wholly under the Scots dominion, about the year of
our salvation 960. what time the English Empire, sore shaken with the Danish
wars, lay as it were gasping and dying.

How also, as an old book Of the division of Scotland, in the Library of the
right honorable Lord Burghley late high Treasurer of England, Oppidum Eden.
shows: Whiles Indulph reigned, the town of Eden was voided and abandoned to
the Scots unto this present day, as what variable changes of reciprocal
fortune it has felt from time to time, the Historiographers do relate, and
out of them ye are to be informed. Mean while read Edenborrow.

Monte sub acclivi Zephyri procurrit in auras
Hinc arx celsa, illinc Regia clara nitet.
Inter utramque patet sublimibus ardua tectis
Urbs armis animis, clara frequensque viris.
Nobile Scotorum caput, and pars maxima regni,
Pene etiam gentis integra regna suae.
Rarae arts and opes, quod men's optaverit aut hic
Invenias, aut non Scotia tota dabit.
Compositum hic populum videas, sanctum que Senatum,
Sanctaque cum puro lumine jura Dei.
An quisquam Arctoi extremo in limite mundi

Dic hospes, postquam externas lustraveris urbes,
Haec cernens, oculis credis an ipse tuis?
Under the rising of an hill, Westward there shoots one way
A castle high; on the other side the Kings house gorgeous gay.
Between them both the city stands, tall buildings show it well,
For arms, for courage much renowned, much people therein dwell.
The Scots head city large and fair, the kingdoms greatest part,

Rare arts and riches: what ones mind can wish is therein found,
Or else it will not gotten be throughout all Scottish ground.
A civil people here a man may see, a Senate grave,
Gods holy laws with purest light of Preachers here ye have.
In parts remote of Northren clime would any person ween,
That ever these, or such like things might possibly be seen?
Say Travailer, now after that thou foreign town have known,
Beholding this, beleevest thou these eyes that are thine own?
Leth, Lyth.
a most commodious haven, hard upon the river Leth, which when Dessey the
Frenchman for the security of Edenborrow had fortified, by reason of many men
repairing thither, within a short time from a mean village it grew to be a
big town. Again, when Francis the second, King of France, had taken to wife
Marie the Queen of Scots, the Frenchmen, who in hope and conceit had already
devoured Scotland, and began now to gape for England, in the year 1560.
strengthened it with more fortifications. But Elizabeth Queen of England,
solicited by the Nobles of Scotland that embraced the reformed religion to side
with them, by her puissance and wisdom effected, that both they returned into
France, and these their fortifications were laid level with the ground, and
Scotland ever

Where this Forth grows more and more narrow, Caer Guidi.
it had in the midst of it the city Caer-Guidi, as Bede notes, which now
may seem to be the Island named Inch-Keith. Whether this were that VICTORIA
which Ptolomee mentions, I will not stand to prove: although a man may
believe, that the Romans turned this Guidh into Victoria, as well as the Isle
Guith or Wight into Victesis or Vecta: certes, seeing both these Islands be
dissevered from the shore, the same reason of the name will hold well in both
languages. For Ninius has taught us, that Guith in the British tongue
betokens a separation. More within, upon the same Forth is situate Abercorn,
in Bedes time a famous Monastery, which now by the gracious favor of Earl of
Abercorn. Black-nesse.
gives unto James Hamilton the title of the Earl of Abercorn: And fast beside
it stands Blackness Castle; and beneath it Southward, the ancient city
LINDUM, whereof Ptolomee makes mention: which the better learned as yet call
Linlithquo, Linlithquo.
commonly Lithquo, beautified and set out with a very fair house of the
Kings, a goodly Church, and a fishfull lake; of which lake it may seem to have
assumed that name: for Lin, as I have already showed, in the British tongue
sounds as much as a Lake. A Sheriff it had in times past by inheritance out
of the family of the Hamiltons of Peyle: Earl of Linlithquo.
and now in our days it has for the first Earl, Sir Alexander Levingston,
whom King James the sixth raised from the dignity of a Baron, wherein his
Ancestors had flourished a long time, to the honor of an Earl: like as Ker,
Earl of Lothien.
Baron of Newbottle aforesaid, to the title of Earl of Lothien.

SELGOVAE.
BEneath the GADENI, toward the South and West, where now are the small
territories of Lidesdale, Eusdale, Eskdale, Annandale, and Nidesdale, so called
of little rivers running through them, which all lose themselves in Solway
Frith, dwelt in ancient Solway.

Liddesdale.
In Lidesdale there rises aloft Armitage, so called, because it was in times
past dedicated to a solitary life; now it is a very strong Castle, which
belonged to the Hepburns, Hepburnes Earls of Bothwell.
who draw their original from a certain Englishman a prisoner, whom the Earl
of March, for delivering him out of a danger, greatly enriched. These were
Earls of Bothwell, and a long time by the right of inheritance Admirals of
Scotland. But by a filter of James Earl of Bothwel, the last of the Hepburns,
married unto John Prior of Coldingham, base son to King James the fifth (who
begat too too many Brakensey.
Hard by is Brakensey, the habitation of the warlike family of Baclugh,
Backlugh.
surnamed Scot; beside many little piles or sorts of military men every
where. Eusdale. Uzbllhum.
In Eusdale, I would deem by the affinite of the name, that old UZBLLUM,
mentioned by Ptolomee, stood by the river Euse.

In Eskdale some are of opinion that the HORESTI dwelt, into whose borders
Julius Agricola, when he had subdued the Britans inhabiting this tract, brought
the Roman army: especially if we read Horesci in stead of Horesti. For Ar-Esc
in the British tongue betokens a place by the river Eske. Eskedale. Horesci.
As for Aesica in Eskdale, I have spoken of it before in England, and there is
no cause wherefore I should iterate the same.

ANNANDALE.
Annandale.
UNto this on the West side adjoyneth ANNANDALE, that is, The vale by the river
Annan; into which the access by land is very difficult. The places of greater
note herein are these: Lough Maban.
a castle by Lough-Mahan, three parts whereof are environed with water, and
strongly walled; and the town Annandale, at the very mouth almost of the river
Annan: which lost all the glory and beauty it had, by the English war in
the reign of Edward the sixth.

In this territory, the Ionstons are men of greatest name; a kindred even bred
to war: between, whom and the Maxwels there has been professed an open
enmity over long, even to deadly feud and bloodshed: The Stewartie of
Annandale.
which Maxwels by right from their ancestors, have the rule of this
Seneschalsie, for so it is accounted. This vale Eadgar King of Scots, after he
was restored to his kingdom by auxiliarie forces out of England, gave in
consideration and reward of good service, unto Robert Bruise or Brus Lord of
Cliveland in Yorke-shire; who with the good favor of the King bestowed it upon
Robert his younger son, when himself would not serve the King of Scots in
his wars. The Bruses.
From him flowered the Bruses Lords of Annandale, of whom Robert Brus married
Isabel, the daughter of William King Avenall: his son likewise, Robert the
third of the name, wedded the daughter of David Earl of Huntington and of
Gariosh: whose son Robert, surname The Noble, when the issue of Alexander the
third King of Scots sailed, challenged in his mothers right the Kingdom of
Scotland, as the direct and superior Lord of the Kingdom of Scotland (so the
English give it out) or, an honorable Arbitratour (for to say the Scots) as
being nearer in proximitie, in degree and blood, to King Alexander the third
and Margaret, daughter to the King of Norway, although be were the son by a
second sister: who soon after resigning up his own right, granted and gave over
to his son Robert Brus Earl of Carrick, and to his heirs (I speak out of the
very original) all the right and claim, which he had or might have to the
Kingdom of Scotland. But the action and suit went with John Balliol, who sued
for his right, us descended of the eldest sister, although in a degree farther
off: and sentence was given in these words, For that the person more remote in
the second degree descending in the first line, is to be preferred before a
n^^erer in a second line, in the succession of an inheritance that cannot be
parted. How beit, the said Robert, son to the Earl of Carrick, by his own
virtue at length recovered the Kingdom unto himself, and established it to his
posterity. A Prince, who as he flourished notably in regard of the glorious
ornaments of his noble acts, so he triumphed as happily with invincible
fortitude and courage, over fortune that so often crossed him.

NIDISDALL.
Annandale on the West side lies NIDISDALE, suficiently with corne-fields and
pastures; so named of the river Nid, The river Nid
which in Ptolomee is wrongly written NOBIUS, for NODIUS or NIDIUS: of which
name there be other rivers in Britain, full of shallow foords and muddie
shelves, like as this NID is also. It springs out of the Lake Logh-Cure, by
which flourished CORDA, Corda.
a town of the Selgova. He takes his course first by Sauqhuera Castle of the
Creightons, Creightons Barons de Sauquer. Earls of Morton.
who a long time kept a great port, as enjoying the dignity of the Barons of
Sauqhuer, and the authority besides of hereditarie Nidisdale: then by Morton,
which gave title of Earl to some of the family of Douglas: out of which others
of that surname have their mansion and abiding at Drumlanrig, by the same
river: near unto the mouth whereof stands Danfreys between two hills,
Dunfreis.
the most flourishing town of this tract: which has to show also an old
Castle in it, famous for making of woollen clothes, and remarkable for the
murder of John Commin, the mightiest man for manred and retinew in all
Scotland; whom Roberts Brus, for fear he should foreclose his way to the
kingdom, ran quite through with his sword in the Church, and soon obtained
his pardon from Solway, a little village retains still somewhat of the old
name of Selgova. Upon the very mouth is situate Caer Laverock, Caer Laverock.
which Prolomee I supposed called CARBANTORIGUM, accounted an imprenable sort,
when King Edward the first, accompanied with the flower of English Nobility,
besieged and hardly won it: but now it is a weak dwelling house of the
Barons of Maxwell, who being men of an ancient and noble lineage, were a long
time Wardens of these West matches, and of late advanced by marriage with the
daughter one of the heirs of the Earl of Morton; whereby John Lord Maxwell
was declared Earl of Morson: as also by the daughter and heir of Hereis Lord
Toricles, whom I a younger son took to wife, and obtained Hereis. Barons
Hereis, Clencar.
Moreover, in this vale by the Lake side lies Glencarn, whence the
Cunninghams, of whom I am to write more in place convenient, bare a long time
the title of Earl.

This Nidisdale, together with Annandale, nourishes a warlike kind of men, who
have been infamous for robberies and depredations: for they dwell upon Solway
Frish, a fourdable arm of the sea at low waters, through which they made many
times outrodes into England for to fetch in booties, Salmons.
and in which the inhabitants thereabout on both sides with pleasant pastime
and delightful sight on horseback with spears hunt Salmons, whereof there
is abundance. What manner of cattailestealers Lesley, The behavior of Scottish
burderers.
himself a Scottish man, and Bishop of Rosse, will tell you in these words.
They go forth in the night by troops out of there own borders, through desert
by-waies, and many winding crankes. All the day time they refresh their burses,
and recreate their own strength in lurking places appointed before band, until
they be come thither as length, in the dark night, where they would be. When
they have laid hold of a booty, back again they return home likewise by
night, through blind ways only, and fetching many a compass about. The more
skillful any leader or guide is, to pass through those wild deserts, crooked
turnings, and steep downe-falls, in the thickest mists and deepest darkness,
he is held in

NOVANTES,
FRom Nidisdale as you go on Westward, the NOVANTES inhabited in the vales,
all that tract which runs out far and wide toward the West, between the sea
and Dunbritain Frith, or Clydsforth: yet so indented and hollowed with nookes
and creekes, that here and there it is drawn into a narrow room: and then
again in the very utmost skirt it opens and spreads it self broad at
more liberty: whereupon some have called it the The Biland of the NOVANTES.
But at this day their country contains Galloway, Carick, Kyle, and
Cunningham.

Galloway.
Galloway, in the Latin Writers of the middle time Gaelwallia and Gallovidia,
so called of the Irish, who in times past dwelt there, and term themselves
short in their own language Gael, is a country rising up every where with
bills, that are better for feeding of cattle than bearing of corn: the
inhabitants practice fishing, as well within the sea lying round about them, as
in little rivers, and the Loches or meeres in every place standing full of
water at the foot of the hills: out of which in September they take in Weeles
and Weere-ners, an incredible number of most sweet and favorite eeles,
Galloway nagges.
whereby the make no less gain than others do by their little nagges, The
river Dee.
mentioned in Prolomee, which keeping the name still full and whole,
Kircoubright.
they call Dee, is Kircoubright, the most commodious port of this coast, and
the second Stewartie of Scotland, which belongs also to the Maxwels: then
Cardines, a sort set upon a craggie and high rock by the river Fleet, and
fensed with strong walls. Near unto it the river Ken, corruptly read in
Ptolomee IENA, runs into the sea: after it is Wigton, an haven town with a
narrow entrance unto it, between the two rivers, Bluidnoo and Crea, which also
is counted a Sheriffdome, over which Agnew is Sheriff. Earls of Wigton.
In times past it had for Earl Archibald Douglasse, renowned in Wigton.

Leucopibia.
Near unto this Ptolomee placed the City LEUCOPIBIA, which I know not, to say
truth, where to seek. Yet the place requires that it should be that
Episcopal seat of Ninian, which Bid calls Candida Casa, and the English and
Scottish in the whit-berne: what say you then if Ptolomee after his manner
translated that name in Greek (...), Herna house or habitation.
that is, white-houses (in stead whereof the Or Copiers.
Transcribers have thrust upon us Leucopibia) which the Britans termed Candida
Casa. In this place Ninia or Ninian the Britan, an holy man, the first that
instructed the South-Picts in Christian says, in the reign of the Emperor
Theodofius the younger, had his seat, and built a Church consecrated to the
memory of Saint Martin, after a manner unusual among the Britans, as Bede
says, who wrote that the English in his time held this country, and when the
number of the faithful Christians multiplied, an Episcopal See was erected at
this Candida Casa. A little higher there is a Bi-land Mull of Galloway.

Beyond this Northward, there is a Bay taking a great compass, and full of
Islands, into which very many rivers on every side do out-lade themselves. But
first of all, from the very cape or top of the Promontarie is ABRAVANUS, which
being set little out of his own place, is so called of Ptolomee, for
Aber-Ruanus, that is, The mouth of Ruan. For at this day that river is named
Rian, and the lake out of which it flows, Logh-Rian, exceeding full of
Herrings and Stone-fishes.

This Galloway had in times past Princes and Lords over it: Lords of Galloway.
of whom the first recorded Fergus, in the reign of Henry the first, King of
England, who gave for his Arms, A Lion rampant Arg, crowned Or in a shield
Azur: who after many troubles that he had stirred, was driven to this exigent
by King Malcolm, that he gave his son Ucthred to the King for an hostage, and
himself weary of this world, took the habit of a Chanon at Holy Rood house
in Edinburgh. As for Ucthred, Gilbert his younger brother took him prisoner in
battle, and when he had cut out his tongue, and plucked his eyes forth of
his head, he cruelly bereaved him both of life and inheritance. But within some
few years, when Gilbert was dead, Ucthreds son recovered his fathers
inheritance, who of a sister of William Morvill Constable of Scotland,
Constables of Scotland.
begat Alan Lord of Galloway, and Constable of Scotland: Dervolgilda wife to
John Balliol, and the mother of John Balliol King of Scotland, who contended
with Robert Brus for the Kingdom of Scotland; and by a former wife, as it
seems, he had Helen, married to Roger Quincy Earl of Winchester, who
thereby was Constable of Scotland; like as William Ferrars of Groby, the Nephew
of the said Roger by a daughter and one of the heirs. But these Englishmen
soon lost their inheritance in Scotland, as also the dignity of Constable:
which the Comnins Earls of Bucquan, descended likewise from a daughter of
Roger Quincie, obtained, until it was translated unto the Earls of Arroll. But
the title of the Lords of Galloway fell afterward to the family of the
Douglasses.

CARRICTA. CARRICT.
NOw follows Carrict upon Dunbritain Frith, Berigonium, Bargenie.
fair to be seen with fresh pastures; supplied both by land and sea with
commodities abundantly. In this province Ptolomee placed RERIGONIUM a Creek,
and RERIGONIUM a Town. For which BERIGONIUM is read in a very ancient copy
of Ptolomee, printed Bargeney. A Lord it has out of the family of the
Kennedies, which came forth of Ireland in the reign of Robert Brus, and is in
this tract of high birth, spread into many branches, and of great power. The
chief of which lineage is Earl of Cassile: for this is the name of a Castle
wherein he dwells by the river Dun: upon the bank whereof he has also
another Castle, named Dunnur: and he is the hereditarie Bailiffe of this
Country. Carrict, together with Kyle and Cunningham, are counted the three
Baillerries of Scotland, because they that govern these with an ordinary
power and jurisdiction are called Ballives, by a term that came up in the
middle times, and among the Greeks, Sicilians, and Frenchmen signifies a
Conservatour or Protector. But in the age aforegoing Carrict had Earls: Earls
of Carrict. Book of Malrosse.
for, to say nothing of Gilberts of Galloway, son unto whom King William gave
all Carrict to be possessed for ever, we read that Adam of Kilconath was
about the year 1270. Earl of Carrict, and died serving in the Holy Land:
whose only daughter Mariha fell extremely in love with Robert Brus, a
beautiful young Gentleman, as she saw him hunting, and thereupon Robert Brus,
that most renowned King of Scots, from whom the royal line of the Kings is
descended. But the title of the Earl of Carrict being left for a time to the
younger sons of the family of Brus, afterward among other honors increased
the style of the Princes of Scotland.

KYLE.
Anno 750.
MOre inward from Clids-forth follows KYLE, plentiful in all Bedes Auctarium
it is called Campus Cyel, that is, The Field Cyel, and Coil: where it is
recorded, That Eadbert King of Northumberland annexed this with other
territories unto his own Kingdom. In Ptolomees time there was known a place
here named VIDOGARA, happily Air, which is a Sherifdome, has a townlet also of
merchandise, and a well known port by a little river of the same name. Touching
which I can think of no better thing to write, than these verses sent unto me
from Master John Ionstoun.

ERA, sive AERIA.
Parva urbs, ast ingens animus in fortibus haeret,
Inferior nulli nobilitate virum.
Aeris e campis haurit purissima coelum,
Incubat and miti mollior aura solo.
Aeria hinc, non Era prius credo illa vocata est,
Cum duris quid enim mollia juris habent?
Infera cum superis quod si componere fas est,
Aurea fors dici debuit illa prius.
A City small, but yet great minds in valiant bodies rest,
For nobleness of Gentlemen matching the very best.
Out of the fields what air it draws is right pure, fresh, and kind,
The soil is mild, and upon it there breathes a gentle wind.
Hence I suppose AERIA first, not Era called it was,
For what have elements to do with matters hard as brass?
But to compare low things with high if that I may be bold,
Then happily well it should have been named AUREA of old.
Besides the river Air there be other two riverets that water this little
territory, Longar, near unto which the Caufords, and Cesnocke, by which the
Cambels, families (in this tract) of good worship, dwell: upon the bank
whereof stands Uchiltre castle, the seat of the Stewarts that are of the
blood royal, as who issued from the Dukes of Albanie; Uchiltrey, out of which
house was that noble Robert Stewart, who kept continually with the Prince of
Condie, as an inseparable companion, and was with him slain in France in
battle. The government of Kyle belongs by an heritable right to the
Cambells of Louden, as Bailiffe thereof.

CUNNINGHAM.
Kyle on the East side and the North, butteth upon the same Forth so close,
that it restrains the breadth thereof, which hitherto lay out and spread at
large. The name, if one interpret it, is as much as the Kings Habitation: by
which a man may guess how commodious and pleasant it is. This territory is
watered with Irwin, that divides it from Kyle: at the springhead well near
whereof, Kilmarnock shows it self, the dwelling place of the Barons Boids:
of whom in the reign of James the first, Thomas, by a prosperous gale of Court
favor, was advanced to the authority of Regent or Viceroy, Robert his son
to the dignity of Earl of Arran, and marriage with the Kings sister. But
soon after, when the said gale came about, and Hamilton; their goods were
confiscate, fortune made a game of them, and when they had lost all they died
in exile. Howbeit their posterity recovered the ancient honor of Barons, and
honorably enjoy it at this day. At the mouth of the river Irwin, stands Irwin
a Borough, with an haven so barred up with shelves of sand, and so shallow
withal, that it can bear none other vessels but small barks and boats:
Ardrossan also, a pile belonging to the Montgomeries, more above stands
higher over the Creek: this is a very ancient and famous familiy as any
other, who have to show for witness of their warlike prowess, Poununy, a fort
built with the ransom money of Sir Henry Percie, surnamed Hot-Spur, whom
Montgomerie with his own hand took prisoner in the battle at Otterburne,
and led away captive. Not far from Ardrossan is Largis, embrued with the
blood of the Norwegians by King Alexander the third. From whence, as you follow
the shore bending and giving in, you meet with Eglington, a fair castle, which
was the possession of certain Gentlemen highly descended of the same surname:
from whom it came by marriage unto the Montgomeries, Montgomeri^ Earls of
Eglington.
who thereby received the title of Earls of Eglington. But whence the said
surname should come, a man can hardly tell: this I know, that out of Normandy
it came into England, and that diverse families there were of the same name: but
that in Essex, from which Sir Thomas Montgomerie, Knight of the order of the
Garter, descended, in the reign of Edward the fourth

This noble lineage is fair and far spread, and out of those of Gevan was
that Gabriel de Lorges, called Earl of Montgomerie, Captain of the guard of
Scots (which Charles the fifth King of France instituted for defense of his
own person, and his successors, in testimony of their fidelity, and his love
toward them) who in running at tilt slew Henry the second King of France, by
occasion that a broken splint of his spear, where the helmet chanced to be
open, entered at his eye, and pierced into his brain; and afterward in that
civil war, wherein all France was in a broile, whiles he took part with the
Protestants, Cunningham Earls of Glencarne.
he was apprehended and beheaded. But the Cunninghams in this tract are counted
to be the greater and more numerous family, the chief Glencarn, dwells at
Kilmauris, and fetches his descent out of England, and from an English
Gentleman, who, together with other, killed Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury.
How true this is I know not, but they ground it happily upon a probable
conjecture, taken from an Archbishops pall, which the Cunninghams give in their
coat of Arms.

ISLE GLOTTA, OR ARRAN.
WIthin the sight of Cunningham, among sundry other Islands, GLOTA, the Isle
mentioned by Antonine the Emperor, bears Forth and salt water of the river
Glota, or Cluyd, called at this day Arran, of a castle bearing the same name.
Inwardly it mounteth up altogether with high rising hills, at the bottom and
foot whereof, along the shore it is well inhabited. The first Earl hereof,
that I can read of, was Robert Boide, Earls of Arran.
whose wife and Earldome together, when Boide was banished the realm, James L.
Hamilton, as I said erewhile, obtained, and his posterity enjoyed the same
Earldome, saving that of late Sir James Steward, appointed guardian to James
Hamilton Earl of Arran, when he was so defective in understanding that he
could not manage his estate, took this title in the right of being guardian.

Near unto this stands Buthe, so called of a little religious Cell which
Brendanus Rothsay Castle, Rothsay Dukedom.
which gives the title of Dukedom unto the King of Scots eldest son, who is
borne Prince of Scotland, Duke of Rothsay, and Seneschall of Scotland, since
time that King Robert the third invested Robert his eldest son Duke of
Rothsay, the first in Scotland that ever was created Duke. With which title
also Queen Marie honored Henry Lord Darly before she took him to be her
husband. Then show themselves Hellan, sometimes called Hellan Leneow, that it,
as John Fordon interprets it, The Saints Islands, and Hellan Tinoc, that is,
The Swines Island, with a great number of other Islands of less note and
reckoning in the same Forth.

DAMNII, CLUYDSDALE, etc.
BEyond the NOVANTES, more inward, by the river Glotta or Cluyd, and farther
still even to the very East sea, dwelt in times past the DAMNII, in those
countries, if I have any judgment, (for in things so far remote from our
remembrance, and in so thick a mist of obscurity, who can speak of
certainty?) which Cluydsdale, the Baronie of Renfraw, Lennox, Strivelinshire,
Menteth, and Fife.

Near unto the head of Cluyd in Crawford Moore, among the wild wastes,
certain husbandmen of the country, after great store of violent rain,
happened to find certain small pieces like scrapings of gold, which have this
long time given great hope of much riches, but most of all in our days, since
that Sir Beamis Bulmer undertook with great endeavor to find out here a Mine
of gold. Certes there is Azur gotten forth every day, without any pains in
manner at all. Now the Castle of Crawford, Earls of Crawford.
together with the title of the Earl of Crawford, was by Robert the second,
King of Scots, given unto Sir James Lindesey, who by a Wells an Englishman,
won high commendation for his valor. These Lindeseyes have deserved passing
well of their country, and are of ancient nobility, ever since that Sir
William Lindesey married one of the heirs of William of Lancaster Lord of
Kandale in England, whose neice in the third degree of lineall descent, was
married into the most honorable family of Coucy in Cluyd, after he has from
his spring head with much struggling got out Northward by Baron Somervils
house, Baronie Somervils. Douglasse.
receives unto him from out of the West the river Duglasse or Douglasse, so
called of a blackish or greenish water that it has: which river communicates
his name both to have the vale through which he runs, called Douglasdale,
and also to Douglasse castle therein: which name that castle likewise has
imparted unto the family of the Douglasses. Which I assure you is very ancient,
but most famous ever since that Sir James Douglasse stuck very close at all
times as a most fast friend unto King Robert Brus, and was ready always with
singular courage, resolution, and wisdom, to assist him, claiming the kingdom
in most Douglasses have inserted in their Coat of Arms a man's heart. From
which time this family grew up to that power and greatness, and namely, after
that King David the second had created William Earl of Douglasse, that they
after a sort awed the Kings themselves. For at one time well near there were
six Earls of them, namely, of this Douglasse, of Angus, of Ormund, of Wigton,
of Murray, and of Morton: among whom, the Earl of Wigton, through his martial
prowess and desert, obtained at the hands of Charles the seventh king of
France, the title of Duke of Tourain, and left the same to two Earls Douglasse
his heirs after him.

Above the confluence of Douglasse and Cluyd is Lanric, Sheriffdome o Lanric.
the hereditarie Sheriffdom of the Hamiltons, who for their name are beholden
unto Hamilton castle, which stands somewhat higher upon Cluyds bank, in a
fruitful and passing pleasant place; but they refer their original, as they
have a tradition, to a certain Englishman surnamed Hampton, who having taken
part with Robert Brus, received from him fair lands in this tract. Much
increase of their wealth and estate came by the bounteous hand of King James
the third, who bestowed in marriage upon Sir James Hamilton his own eldest
sister, whom he had taken perforce from the Lord Boide her husband, together
with the Earldom of Arran; but of honors and dignities by the States
Hamilton grandsonne to the former James, Regent of Scotland, whom Henry also
the second, King of France, advanced to be Duke of Chasteau Herald in Poictou:
as also by King James the sixth, Marquess H^milton.
who honored his son John with the title of Marquess of Hamilton, which
honorable title was then first brought into Scotland.

The river Glotta or Cluyd runs from Hamilton by Bothwell, which glories in
the Earls thereof, Earls of Botwell.
namely, John Ramsey, whose greatness with King James the third was excessive,
but pernicious both to himself and the King: and the Hepburns, Glascow, in
ancient times past a Bishops seat: but discontinued a great while, until that
King William restored it up again: but now it is an Archbishops See, and an
Universitie, which Bishop Turnbull, after he had in a pious and religious
intent built a college in the year 1554. first founded. This Glascow is the
most famous town of merchandise in this tract: for pleasant site, and apple
trees, and other like fruit trees much commended, having also a very fair
bridge supported with eight arches. Of which town I. Ionstoun thus versified.

Non te Pontificum luxus, non Insula tantum

Glottiadae quantum decorant te, Glascua, Musae,
Quae celsum attollunt clara sub astra caput.
GLOTTA decus rerum, piscosis nobilis undis,
Finitimi recreat jugera laeta soli.
Ast Glottae decus, and vicinis gloria terris
Glascua foe cundat flumine cuncta suo.
The sumptuous port of Bishops great has not adorned thee so,
Nor mitre rich, that has been cause of thine accursed woe,
As Cluyds Muses grace thee now, O Glascow town: for why?
They make thee bear thy head aloft up to the starrie sky.
Cluyd the beauty of the world, for fishfull stream renowned,
Refreshes all the neighbor fields that lie about it round:
But Glascow beauty is to Cluyd, and grace to countries nigh,
And by the streams that flow from thence, all places fructify.
Reinfraw Baronie.
Along the hithermore bank of Cluid yeth the Baronie of Reinfraw, so called of
Ptolomee, by the river Cathcart, that has the Baron of Cathcart dwelling upon
it, carrying the same surname, and of ancient nobility: near unto which (for
this little province can show a goodly breed of nobility) there border
Cruikston, the seat in times past of the Lords of Darley, from whom by right of
marriage it came to the Earls of Lennox, whence Henry the Father of King
James the sixth was called Lord Darly; Halkead, the habitation of the Barons of
Ros, Barons de Ros.
descended originally from English blood, as who fetch their pedigree from that
Robert Ros of Warke, who long since left England, and came under the
allegiance of the King of Scots: Pasley.
Pasley, sometimes a famous Monastery founded by Alexander the second of that
name, high Steward of Scotland, which Claud Hamilton, a younger son of Duke
Chasteu Herald: and Sempill, the Lord whereof Baron Sempill, Baron Sempill.
by ancient right is Sheriff of this Baronie. But the title of Baron of
Reinfraw, by a peculiar privilege does appertain unto the Prince of Scotland.

LENNOX.
ALong the other bank of Cluyd above Glascow, runs forth Levinia or LENNOX
Northward, among a number of hills close couched one by another, having that
name of the river Levin, which Ptolomee calls LELANONIUS, and runs into
Cluyd out of Logh Lomund, which spreads it self here under the mountains
twenty miles long and eight miles broad, passing well stored with variety of
fish: but most especially with a peculiar fish that is to be found no where
else (they call it Pollac) as also with Islands, concerning which many fables
have been forged, and those ri^e among the common people.

As touching an Island here that floateth and waveth too and fro, I list not to
make question thereof. For what should let, but that a lighter body, and
spongeous withal in manner of a pumice stone, may swim above the water? and
Pliny writes, how in the Lake Vadimon there be Islands full of grass, and
covered over with rushes and reeds, that float up and down. But I leave it
unto them that dwell nearer unto this place, and better know the nature of this
Lake, whether this old Distichon of our Necham be true or no: Ditatur fluviis
Albania, saxea ligna
Dat Lomund multa frigiditate potens.
With rivers Scotland is enriched, and Lomund there a Lake
So cold of nature is, that sticks it quickly stones does make.


Round about the edge of this Lake there be fishers cottages, but nothing else
memorable, unless it be Kilmoronoc, a proper fine house of the Earls of
Cassiles on Levin emptieth it self out of the Lake into Cluyd, stands the
old City called Al-Cluyd. Al-Cluyd.
Bid notes that it signified (in whose language I know not) as much as The
rock Cluyd. True it is, that Ar-Cluyd signifies in the British tongue, upon
Cluyd, or upon the rock; and Cluyd in ancient English sounded the same that a
Rock. The succeeding posterity called this place Dunbritton, Dunbritton.
Britannodunum.
that is, The Britans town (and corruptly by a certain transposition of
letters, Dunbarton) because the Britans held it longest against the Scots,
Picts, and Saxons. For it is the strongest of all the castles in Scotland by
natural situation, Levin; on the South, Cluyd; and on the East a boggie flat,
which at every tide is wholly covered over with waters; and on the North side
the very upright steepness of the place is a most sufficient defense.
Certain remains of the Britans, presuming of the natural strength of this
place, and their own manhood, who, as gat themselves a place of refuge in high
mountains and hills, steep and naturally fensed, as it were, with rampires and
ditches, in most thick woods and forests, in rocks also of the sea, stood out
and defended themselves here, after the Romans departure, for three hundred
years, in the midst of their enemies. For in Bedes time, as himself writes,
it was the best fortified city of the Britans. But in the year 756. Eadbert
King of Northumberland, and Oeng King of the Picts, with their joint forces
enclosed it round about by siege, R. Hoveden.
and brought it to such a desperate extremity, that it was rendered unto them
by composition. Of this place the territory round about it is called the
Sherifdome of Dunbarton, and has had the Earls of Lennox this long time for
their Sheriffs, by birthright and inheritance.

Lennox themselves, Earls of Lennox.
to omit those of more ancient and obscure times, there was one Duncane Earl
of Lennox in the reign of Robert the second, who died and left none but
daughters behind him. Of whom one was married to Alan Steward, Steward.
descended from Robert, a younger son of Walter the second of that name, High
Steward of Scotland; and brother likewise to Alexander Steward the second, from
whom the noblest and royal race of Scotland has been propagated. This
surname Steward was given unto that most noble family, in regard of the
honorable office of the Stewardshippe of the kingdom, as who had the charge
of the Kings revenues. The said Alan had issue John Earl of Lennox, A troop
of Scots in France.
and Robert, Captain of that company of Scottishmen at Aubigny in Auvergne.
John had a son named Matthew Earl of Lennox, who wedded the daughter of
James Hamilton by Marion daughter to King James the second; on whom he begat
John Earl of Lennox: he taking arms to deliver King James the fifth out of
the hands of the Douglasses and the Hamiltons, was slain by the Earl of Arran
his Uncle on the mothers side. This John was father to Matthew Earl of Lennox,
who having sustained sundry troubles in France and Scotland, found fortune
more friendly to him in England, through the

Henry, James King of Britain.
by Marie Queen of Scots, had issue JAMES the sixth, King of Britain, by the
propitious grace of the eternal God, borne in a most auspicate and lucky
hour, to knit and unite in one body of an Empire the whole Island of
Britain, divided as well in it self, as it was heretofore from the rest of
the world, and (as we hope and pray) to lay a most sure foundation of an
everlasting security, for our heirs and the Arbella, who above her sex has
so embraced the studies of the best literature, that therein she has profited
and proceeded with singular commendation, and is comparable with the excellent
Ladies of old time. When Charles was dead, after that the Earldom of Lennox,
whereof he stood enfeoffed, was revoked by Parliamentarie authority in the
year of our Lord 1579. and his Uncle by the fathers side, Robert Bishop of
Cathanes, had some while enjoyed this title (in lieu whereof he received at the
Kings hands the honor of the Earl of March) King James the sixth conferred
the honorable title of Duke of Lennox upon Esme Steward, son to John Lord
D'Aubigny, Lennox, which Lodowic Esme his son at this day honorably enjoieth.
Lords of Aubigny or Obigny.
For since the time of Charles the sixth, there were of this line Lords of
Aubigny in France, the said Robert before named, and Bernard or Eberard under
Charles the eighth and Lewis the twelfth, who is commended with great praise
unto posterity by P. Iovius, for his noble acts most valerously exploited in
the war of Naples, a most firm and trusty companion of King Henry the
seventh when he entered into England. Who used for his Emprese or devise, a Lion
between buckles, with this Mot, DISTANTIA JUNGIT: for that by his means the
Kingdoms of France and of Scotland, severed and dis-joined so far in
distance, were by a straighter league of friendship conjoined: like as Robert
Steward Lord D'Aubigny of the same race, Paradine.
who was Marshall of France under King Lewis the eleventh, for the same cause
used the royal Arms of France, with buckles Or in a border Gueules: which the
Earls and Dukes of Lennox have ever since borne quarterly with the Arms of
Steward.

STIRLING Sheriffdome.
UPon Lennox North-eastward bordereth the territory of STERLING, so named of
the principal town therein: for fruitful soil, and numbers Dunbritton Frith
and Edenborrough Frith (that I may use the terms of this our age) piercing
far into the land out of the West and East Seas, are divided asunder, that
they meet not the one with the other.

Which thing Julius Agricola, who marched hitherto and beyond, first observed;
and fortified this space between with garrisons, so as all the part of
Britain in this side was then in possession of the Romans, and the enemies
removed and driven, as it were, into another Island, in so much as Tacitus
judged right truly, There was no other bound or limit of Britain to be
sought for. Neither verily in the time ensuing, Agricola, when himself was
called back, Britain, as faith Tacitus, became for-let, neither was the
possession kept still thus far: for the Caledonian Britans drove the Romans
back as far as to the river Tine: in so much as Hadrian, who came into
Britain in person about the fortieth year after, and reformed many things in
it, went no farther forward, but gave commandment that the GOD TERMINUS, God
Terminus.
which was wont to give ground unto none, should retire backward out of this
place, like as in the East on this side Euphrates. Hence it is that Augustine
wrote in this wise: Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 4. c. 29.
God TERMINUS, who gave not place to Jupiter, yielded unto the will of
Hadrianus, yielded to the rashness of Julian, yielded to the necessity of
Iovian. In so much as Hadrian had enough to do, for to make a wall of turfe
between the rivers Tine and Esk, well near an hundred miles Southward on this
side Edenborrough Frith.

Antoninus Pius, who being adopted by Hadrian bare his name, styled thereupon
TITUS AELIUS HADRIANUS ANTONINUS PIUS, under the conduct of Lollius Urbicus,
The wall of Antoninus Pius.
whom he had sent hither Lieutenant, repelled the Northern enemies back again
beyond BODOTRIA, or Edenborrough Forth, and that by raising another wall of
turfe, namely, besides that of Hadrianus, as Capitolinus writes. Which wall,
that it was reared in this very place whereof I now speak, and not by Severus
(as it is commonly thought) I will produce no other witnesses, than two ancient
Inscriptions dug up here: of which the one fastened in the wall of an house
at Cader, shows how the second Legion Augusta, set up the wall for the space
of three Dunotyr, which implies, that a band of the twentieth Legion Victrix
raised the said wall three miles long. But see here the very inscriptions
themselves, as Servatius Riheley, a Gentleman of Silesia, who curiously
travailed these countries, copied them out for me.

IMP. CAESARI T. AELIO HADRIANO ANTONINO.

IMP. CAES. TIT. -- IO AELIO HADRIANO ANTON. AUG. PIO. PP. LEG. II. AUG. PER.
M. P. III. D. CIXVIS.

At Cadir, where this latter inscription is extant, there is another stone also
erected by the second Legion Augusta, wherein within a Laurel garland,
supported by two

LEG. II And in a village called Miniabruch, out of a Ministers house there was
removed D. M. C. JULI. MARCELLINI PRAEF. Cohors prima Hamiorum.
COH. I. HAMIOR:

But when the Northern nations in the reign of Commodus, having passed once
over this wall, had made much wast and spoil in the country, the Emperor
Severus, as I have already said, repaired this wall of Hadrian. Howbeit
afterward the Romans brought eftsoons the country lying between, under
their subjection. For Ninius has recorded, that Carausius under Diocletian
strengthened this wall another time, and fortified it with seven castles.
Lastly, the Romans fensed this place (when Theodosius the younger was
Emperor) under the conduct of Gallio of Ravenna. Now, says Bid, they made a
turfe wall, rearing it not so much with stone as with

This wall began, as the Scots in these days give out, at the river Aven, that
goes into Edenborrough Forth, Ninius.
and having passed over the riveret Carron, reaches unto Dunbritton. But Bid,
as I said erewhile, affirms that it begins in a place called Pen vaell,
that is, in the Picts language, as much as The head of the wall; in the Britans
tongue Pen-Gual, in English Penwalton, in Scottish Cevall: all which names
Vallum in Latin: and he says, That place is almost two miles from Abereurvig
or Abercurving. Abercorn.
And it ends, as the common sort think, at Kirk-Patricke, the native soil
(as some writes) of Saint Patrick the Irish-mens Apostle, near unto Cluyd;
according to Bid, at Alcluid; after Ninius, at the City Pen Alcloyt, which
may seem all one.

Grahams dyke.
Now this wall is commonly called Grahams dyke; either of Graham a warlike Scot,
whose valor was especially seen when the breach was made through it, or else
of the hill Grampie, at the foot whereof it stood. The author of Rota Temporum
calls it the wall of Aber-corneth, that is, of the mouth of the river
Corneth: where, in Bedes time, there was a famous monastery standing, as he
has recorded, upon

Hard by this wall of turfe, what way as the river Carron crosses this
Sheriffdome of Sterling, toward the left hand are seen two mounts cast up by
man's hand, which they call Duni pacis, Duni pacis.
that is, Knolles of peace: and almost two miles lower there is an ancient
round building, four and twenty cubits high, and thirteen broad, open in the
top, framed of rough stone without lime, having the upper part of every stone
so tenanted into the nether, as that the whole work still rising narrow, by a
mutual interlacing and clasping, upholdeth it self. Some call this the Temple
of God TERMINUS, Arthurs oven.
others Arthurs-Oven, who father every stately and sumptuous thing Arthur.
Others again, Julius Hoff, and suppose it to have been built by Julius Caesar.
But I would think rather that Julius Agricola built it, who fortified this
frontier part, were it not that Ninius has already informed us, that it was
erected by Carausius for a triumphall Arch. For he, as Ninius writes, built
upon the bank of Caron, a round house of polished stone, erecting a Triumphall
Arch in In the midst space between Duni pacis and this building, on the
righthand-banke of Carron, there is yet to be discerned a confused face of a
little ancient City: where the vulgar people believes there was sometimes a
road for ships, who call it Camelot, by a name that is rife in King Arthurs
book; and they contend, but all in vain, to have it that Camalodunum which
Tacitus mentions. But it would seem rather, by the name of the river Carron
running underneath, to have been CORTA DAMNIORUM, Coria Damniorum.
which Ptolomee mentions in this tract. And now take with you that which
George Buchanan, that excellent Poet, wrote of the limit of the Carron.

Roma securigeris praetendit maenia Scotis,
Hic spe progressus posita, Carronis ad undam
Terminus Ausonii signat divertia regni.
Against warlike Scots with axes armed, a mighty frontier wall
The Romans raised: and limit there, which TERMINUS they call,
Near Carron stream, now past all hope more British ground to gain,
Marks out the Roman Empires end, whence they to turn were feign.
Sterling on the East side, Callendar. Barons Levingston.
there shows it self Castle Callendar, belonging to the Barons of
Levingston; and the family of the Barons Fleming dwells hard by at
Cumbernald, which they received at the hands of King Robert Brus, for their
service valiantly and faithfully performed in defense of their country: whereby
also they attained unto the hereditarie honor to be Chamberlaines of Scotland.
And even very lately the favor of King James the Sixth has honored this
house with the title of Earl, Fleming Earl of Wigton.
what time as he created I. Baron Fleming Earl of Wigton. In a place near
adjoining stands Elpheingston, which likewise has his Barons, advanced to
that dignity by King James the fourth: And where Forth full of his windings
and crooked crankes runs down with a rolling pace, and has a bridge over
him, Sterlin, commonly called Strivelin, and Sterlin Borough; where on the
very brow of a steep rock there is mounted on high a passing strong Castle of
the Kings, which King James the sixth has beautified with new buildings, and
whereof this long time the Lords of Ereskin have been Captains, unto whom the
charge and tuition of the Princes of Scotland during their minority has been
otherwhiles committed. Whereas some there be, that would have the good and
lawful money of England, Sterling money*
which is called Sterling money, to take the name from hence, they are much
deceived: for that denomination came from the Germans, of their Easterly
dwelling termed by Englishmen Esterlings; whom King John of England first sent
for to reduce the silver to the due finenesse and purity: and such moneys in
ancient writing are Esterling. But concerning Sterlin town the verses that I.
Jonston has made shall supply all the rest.

Regia sublimis celsa despectat ab arce
Pendula sub biferis maenia structa jugis.
Regum augusta parens, Regum nutricula natis,
Hinc sibi Regifico nomine tota placet.
Hospita sed cuivis quovis sub nomine, amicus
Sive es, seu non es, hospes an hostis item.
Pro lucro cedit damnum. Discordia tristis

Hoc uno infelix, at felix coetera, nusquam
Laetior aut caelifrons, geniusve soli.
A regal palace stately set, beholds from mount aloft,
Town wall, built hanging on the side of hill with double cost.
The sacred mother unto Kings, of Kings babes eke the nource,
Hence is it that she prides her self in Kings names and no worse.
But entertaineth every one, by name it skils not what,
A friend or foe, friend guest or no, she reckneth naught of that.
In steed of gain this turns to loss. Besides, how often alas,
Has discord foul with Nobles blood stained hence both ground and grass?
In this alone unhappie she, else not; nor shall ye find,
Else where the air more mild and clear, or soil of better kind.
Banocbourn.
About two miles hence the Banoc-bourn runs between exceeding high banks on
Forth: a bourn most famous for as glorious a victory as ever the Scots had,
what time as Edward the second King of England was put to flight, who was fain
to make hard shift, and in great have and fear to take a boat and save his
life: yea and the most puissant army which England had before sent out, was
discomfited through the valiant prowess of King Robert Brus; insomuch as for
two years after the English came not into the field against the Scots. Alauna.
About Sterlin Ptolomee seems to place ALAUNA, which is either near the
little river Alon, that here enters into the Forth; or else by Always, an house
of the Ereskins, who by inheritance are the Sheriffs of all this territory
without the Burgh. But I have not yet read of any one dignified by the title of
Earl of Sterlin.

CALEDONIA.
WHat soever part of Britain lies Northward beyond Grahames Dyke, or the wall
of Antoninus Pius before named, and bears out on both seas, is called by
Tacitus CALEDONIA, like as the people thereof, Britans inhabiting CALEDONIA.
Ptolomee divides them into many nations, as CALEDONII, EPIDII, VACOMAGI, etc.
who were all of them afterward, for continuing their Ammianus Marcellinus into
two nations, the DICALEDONES and VECTURIONES, touching whom I have spoken
already before. Howbeit in the approved and best writers they go all under the
name of Caledonians: whom I would think to have been so called of Kaled, a
British word that signifies Hard, and in the plural number makes Kaledion:
whence the word Caledonii may be derived, that is to say, hard, rough,
uncivil, and a wilder kind of people, such as the Northren nations for the
most part are: who by reason of the rigorous cold of the air, are more rough
and fierce, and for their abundance of blood more bold and adventurous.
Moreover, beside the position of the Varro alleges out of Pacuvius, that
Caledonia breeds and nourishes men of exceeding big bodies, I would
understand the place rather of Caledonia the region of Epirus, than this of
ours; although ours also may justly challenge unto it self this commendation.
Among this was the Wood CALEDONIA, Caledon forest.
termed by Lucius Florus, Salius Caledonius, that is, the forest of
Caledonia, spreading out a mighty way, and impassable by reason of tall trees
standing so thick, divided also by Grampe hill, now called Grantzbaine, that
is, Ulysses his Altar.
the crooked bending mountain. That Ulysses arrived in Caledonia (says
Solinus) appears plainly by a votive altar with an inscription in Greek
letters; but I would judge it to have been rather erected to the honor of
Ulysses, than reared by Ulysses himself. Caledonian Bears.
Martial the Poet likewise in this verse makes mention of Caledonian bears.

Nuda Caledonio sic pectora praebuit urso.

To bear of Caledon forest.
Plutarch also has written, that Bears were brought out of Britain to Rome,
and had there in great admiration; whereas notwithstanding Britain for these
many ages past has bred none. What Caledonian monster that should be, whereof
Claudian wrote thus, -- Caledonio velata Britannia monstro,
With monster Caledonian Britain all attired,
to tell you truth, Caledonian bulls.
I know not. Certes, it nourished in times past a number of white L. Florus
writes, that Caesar followed the Britans unto the Caledonian woods, and yet he
never saw them in his life: Hence also Valerius Flaccus writes thus to
Vespasian the Emperor, -- Caledonius postquam tua carbasa vexit
Oceanus: that is, the British Ocean.


Hence likewise it is that Statius versified thus unto Crispinus, son of
Vectius Volanus Propretour of Britain about the time of Vitellius.

Quanta Caledonios attollet gloria campos,
Cum tibi long aevus referet trucis incola terrae?
Hic suetus dare jura parens, hoc cespite turmas
Affari, ille dedit, cinxitque baec moenia fossa:

Cernis adhuc titulos: hunc ipse vacantibus armis
Induit, hunc regi rapuit thoraca Britanno.
How much renowned shall the fields of Caledonia be,
When as some old inhabitant of that fierce land to thee
Shall in these terms report and say? Behold, thy father often
Was wont in judgment here to sit: upon this bank aloft
To th'armed troops to speak; also 'twas he that walled this fort,
That built thus strong, and it with ditch entrenched in this sort.
By him to gods of war these gifts and arms were consecrate,

In time of battle did put on, this cuirace, finally,
In fight he plucked by force of arms from King of Britannie.
But in these, as in other things, I may say, Crescit in immensum facunda
licentia vatum.
Poetical license is boundless.


Caesar, nor Volanus so much as ever knew the Caledonians. In Plinies time, as
himself witnesses, thirty years almost after Claudius, the Romans with all
their warlike expeditions, had discovered no farther in Britain than to the
vicinitie of the Caledonian wood. For Julius Agricola under Domitian, was the
first that entered Caledonia: Galgacus the Britan.
whereof at that present Galgac was Prince (who is named Galauc ap Liennauc in
the book of Triadum.
Triplicites, among the three worthies of Britain) a man of a mighty spirit
and stout stomach: who having put to flight the ninth Legion, in These Northern
Britans, beyond whom there was no land, and beside whom none were free, were
the utmost nation verily of this Island, like as Catullus called the Britans the
utmost of all the world, in that verse unto Furius.

Caesaris visens monumenta magni,
Gallicum Rhenum, horribiles and ultimosque Britannos.
Great Caesar's monuments to see in his memorial,
The Rhene in Gaul, and Britans grim, the farthest men of all.
Argetecoxus.
In the days of Severus, as we read in Xiphilinus, Argetecox a petty Prince
reigned over this tract; whose wife being rated and reviled as an adulteress
by Iulia the Empress, frankly and boldly made this answer: We Britain Dames
have to do with the bravest and best men, and you Roman Ladies with every
lewd base companion secretly.

FIFE.
Clarkmans.
IN this large country of the Caledonians, beyond the Territory of Sterlin,
whereof I wrote last, and two countries or Sheriffedomes of less note,
Clackmans, over which a Knight named de Carsse; and Kinros, over which the
Earl of Morton are Sheriffs, FIFE, a most goodly Biland, wedged, as it were,
between the two Arms of the Sea, Forth and Tau, shoots out far into the
East. This land yields plenty of corn and forage, yea and of pit coals:
the sea, besides other fishes, affords Oisters and Forth, first appears
Westward Cul-ros, which gives the title of a Baronie to Sir I. Colvill: then
stands Dunfermling, Dunfermling.
a famous monastery in old time, both the building and burial place of King
Malcolm the third. But now it gives both name and honor of an Earl unto Sir
Alexander Seton a most prudent Counselor, whom lately James King of great
Britain worthily raised from Baron of Fivie to be Earl of Dunfermling, Earl
of Dunfermling. Earl of Kinghorn.
and Lord Chancellor of the realm of Scotland. Then Kinghorne stands hard
upon the Forth, from which place Sir Patrick Lion, Baron Glamys, lately
received at the bountiful hand of King James the sixth the title and honor of
an Earl. Disert.
there is upon the shore Disert, situate on the rising of an hill, from whence
there lies an open Heath of the same name, where there is a good large place
which they call the Cole-plot, that has great plenty of an earthie Bitumen,
and partly burns, to some damage of the inhabitants. Unto it adjoineth
Ravins-Heuch, as one would say, The steep hill of Ravens, the habitation of
the Barons Seincler. Above it the river Levin hides himself in the Forth:
River Levin.
which river running out of the Lake Levin, wherein stands a Castle of the
Douglasses now Earls of Morton, has at the very mouth of it Wemmis Castle,
Wemmis.
the seat of a noble family, bearing the same surname: which King James the
sixth has of late honored with the dignity of a Baron. Fif-nesse, Saint
Andrews. Saint Regulus.
that is, The Promontorie or Nose of Fife. Above it Saint Andrews an
Archiepiscopall City has a fair prospect into the open maine sea. The more
ancient name of the place, as old memorials witness, was Regimund, that is,
Saint Regulus mount: in which we read thus, Oeng or Ung King of the Picts,
granted unto God and Afterward there was placed here an Episcopal See, the
Bishops whereof, like as all the rest within the Kingdom of Scotland, were
consecrated by the Archbishop of York, until at the intercession of King
James the third, by reason of so many wars between the Scottish and
Englishmen, Pope Sixtus the fourth ordained the Bishop of Saint Andrews to be
Primate and Metropolitan of all Scotland; and Pope Innocentius the eighth
bound him and his successors to the imitation and precedent of the
Metropolitan of Canterbury, Ex Camera Apostolica lib. 24. fol. 24.
in these words: That in matters concerning the Archiepiscopall state, they
should observe and firmly hold the offices, droits, and Howbeit before that,
Laurence Lundoris and Richard Corvel, Doctors of the Civil law, publicly
professed here good literature, laid the foundation of an Universitie: which
now, for happy increase of learned men, for three Colleges and the Kings
Professors in them, is become highly renowned. In commendation whereof Master
Ionston, the Kings Professor there in Divinity, has made these verses.


Imminet Oceano paribus descripta viarum
Limitibus, pingui quam been septa solo!
Magnificis opibus, staret dum gloria prisca
Pontificum, hic fulsit Pontificalis apex.
Musarum ostentat surrecta palatia coelo,

Hic nemus umbriferum Phoebi, Nymphaeque sorores,
Candida quas inter praesitet Uranie.
Quae me longinquis redeuntem Teutonis oris
Suscipit, excelso collocat inque gradu.
Urbs nimium felix, Musarum si bona nosset
Munera, and aetherei regna beata Dei.
Pelle malas pestes urbe, and quae noxia Musis
Alme Deus, coeant Pax pietasque simul.

Seated it is hard by the sea, at even and equal bounds
Of streets, how well enclosed besides with fat and fertile grounds!
Whilom, when Prelates state was great and glorious withal,
There flourished here in sumptuous port a See Pontifical.
Now Schools it shows and Colleges, both Gods and man's delight,

Here Phoebus has his shadie grove, here dwell the Sisters nine,
And chief of them the Lady bright, Uranie divine.
Who when I was returned from far coasts of Germany,
With welcome kind here did me place in chair of high degree.
Most happy town, wist it what were the gifts of learning true,
The blessed Kingdom, if withal of God in heaven it knew.
All plagues, good God, all nocive things to Muses hence repel,
That in this City Godliness and Peace may jointly dwell.
Hard by there loses it self in the sea Eden or Ethan, a little river, which
springing up near unto Falkland (belonging in times past to the Earls of
Fife, Falkland.
but now a retyring place of the Kings, very well seated for hunting pleasures
and disports) runs under a continued ridge of hills, which divide this
country in the midst, by Struthers (a place so called of a Reedplot) a Castle
of the Barons Lindsey; Studer.
and by Cupre, Cuper.
a notable Borough, where the Sheriff sits to minister justice. Concerning
which the same I. Ionston has thus versified.

CUPRUM FIFAE.
ARVA inter nemorisque umbras and pascua laeta,
Lene fluens vitreis labitur Eden aquis.
Huc veniat si quis Gallorum a finibus hospes,
Gallica se hic iterum forte videre putet.
Anne etiam ingenium hinc and fervida pectora traxit?
An potius patriis hauserit illa focis?
By rich corn fields, by shadie woods and pastures fresh among,
The river Eden glideth soft with crystal stream along.
Hither to come from coasts of France if any stranger chance,
Here happily may he think he has a sight again of France.
What? drew this place from thence their wit and spirit hot trow ye?
Or rather had the same at first by native property?
Now where the shore turns inward a front Northward, hard by the salt water
of Tau, there flourished in old time two goodly Abbyes, Balmerinoch, built by
Ermengard, wife to King William, daughter of Vicount Beaumont in France. But
lately King James of great Britain advanced Sir James Elphinston to the honor
of Baron Balmerinoch: Balmerinoch. Lundoris.
and Lundoris, founded among the woods by David Earl of Huntington, and at
this day the Baronie of Sir Patrick Lesley: between which stands Banbrich,
the habitation of the Earl of Rothes, strongly built castle wise. But as
touching the towns of Fife planted along the sea side, have here now, if it
please you, these verses of Master Ionston.

Oppida sic toto sunt sparsa in littore ut unum
Dixeris, inque uno plurima juncta eadem:
Littore quot curvo Forthae volvuntur arenae,
Quotque undis refluo tunditur orasalo.
Pene tot hic cernas instratum puppibus aequor,
Urbibus and crebris pene tot ora hominum.
Cuncta operis intenta domus, foeda otia nescit,
Sedula cura domi, sedula curaforis.
Quae maria, and quas non terras animosa juventus
Ah! fragili fidens audet adire trabe?
Auxit opes virtus, virtuti dura pericla
Iuncta etiam lucro damna fuere suo.
Quae fecere viris animos, cultumque dedere,
Magnanimis prosunt damna, pericla, labor.
Who sees how thick towns stand upon this coast, will say anon,
They are but one, and yet the same all joined in that one.
How many sands on crooked shore of Forth are cast by tides,

So many ships well near you may here see to sail or ride,
And in those towns so thick, almost as many folk abide.
In every house they ply their work, no idle drones they are:
Busy at home with diligence, busy abroad with care.
What seas or lands are there to which a voyage for to make,
In brittle barks will not their youth courageous undertake.
By valor be they grown to wealth, yet valor meet with pains,
And perils too; some losses too have they had with their gains.

Loss, peril, painful toil avail all such as be magnanimous.
The Governor of this province, like as of all the rest in this Kingdom, was
in times past a Thane, that is, in the old English tongue, The Kings Minister:
as it is also at this day in the Danish language: but Malcolm Canmore made
Macduffe, who before was Thane of Fife, Earls of Fife.
the first hereditarie Earl of Fife; and in consideration of his good desert
and singular service done unto him, granted that his posterity should have the
honor to place the King, when he is to be crowned, in his chair; to lead the
Vant-guard in the Kings army; and if any of them should happen by casualty to
Lundoris there is to be seen a Cross of stone, which standing for a limit
between Fife and Strathern, had an inscription of barbarous verses, and a
certain privilege of Sanctuary, that any Man-slaier allied to Macduffe Earl
of Fife within the ninth degree, if he came unto this Cross, and gave nine
kine with an Coplindas^*
hei^er, should be quit of manslaughter. When his posterity lost this title I
could never yet find: but it appears out of the Records of the kingdom, that
K. David the second gave unto William Ramsey this Earldome, with all and every
the immunities and law which is called Clan-Mac-Duffe: and received it is for
certain, that the lineage of the Wemesies and Douglasse, yea and that great
kindred Clan-Hatan, the chief Mac-Intoskech, descended from them. And the most
learned I. Skerne Clerk of the Kings Register of Scotland, has taught me in
his significations of words, that Isabel daughter and heir to Duncane Earl of
Fife, granted upon certain conditions unto Robert the third King of the Scots,
for the use and behoof of Robert Stewart Earl of Menteith, the Earldome of
Fife: who being afterward Duke of Albanie, and affecting the Kingdom, with
cruel ambition caused David the Kings eldest son to be most pitifully famished
to death, which is highest extremity of all misery. 1424.
But his son Murdac suffered due punishment for the wickedness both of his
father, and his own sons, being put to death by King James the first for
their violent oppressions, and a decree passed, that the Earldome of Fife
should be united Fife belongs in right of inheritance to the Earl of Rothes.
Earls of Rothes.


STRATHERN.
AS far as to the river Tau, which boundeth Fife on the Northside, Julius
Agricola, the best Propretour of Britain under Domitian the worst Emperor,
marched with victorious arms in Tau, the notable river Ern intermingleth his
waters with Tau: The river Ern.
which river beginning out of a Lake or Loch of the same name, bestows his
own name upon the country through which he runs: For it is called Straith
Ern, which in the ancient tongue of the Britans, signifies the Vale along Ern.
The bank of this Ern is beautified with Drimein Castle, belonging to the
family of the Dromund, Barons of Dromund.
advanced to highest honors ever since that King Robert Stewart the third took
to him a wife out of that lineage. For the women of this race have for their
singular beauty and well favored sweet countenance won the prize from all
others, insomuch as they have been the Kings most amiable paramours. Upon the
same bank Tulibardin Castle shows it self aloft, Earls of Tulibardin.
but with greater jollitie, since that by the propitious favor of King James
the sixth, Sir John Murray Baron of Tulibardin, was raised to the honor and
estate of Earl of Tulibardin. Upon the other bank, Duplin. Baron Oliphant.
more beneath, Duplin Castle, the habitation of the Barons Oliphant, reports
yet what an overthrow (the like to which was never before) the Englishmen that
came Balliol, gave there unto the Scots; insomuch as the English writers in
that time do write, that they won this victory not by man's hand, but by the
power of God: and the Scottish writers relate, how that out of the family of
the Lindeseies there were slain in the field fourscore persons, and that the
name of the Haies had bin quite extinguished, but that the chief of that house
left his wife behind him great with child. Not far from it stands
Innermeth, well known by reason of the Lords thereof, the Stewarts out of the
family of Lorn. Inch-Chafra, that is in the old Scottish tongue, the Isle of
Masses, hereby may be remembered when as it was a most famous Abbey of the
order of Saint Augustine, founded by the Earl of Strathern about the year
1200.

When Ern has joined his water with Tau in one stream, so that Tau is now
become more spacious, he looks up to Aberneth seated upon his bank, the
royal seat in old time of the Picts, and a well peopled City: which, as we
read in an ancient fragment, Nectane King of the Picts gave unto God and S.
Brigide until the day of Doom, together with the bounds thereof, which lie
from a stone in Abertrent, unto a stone nigh to Carfull, that is, Loghfoll, and
from thence as far as to Ethan. But long after it became the possession of
the Douglasses Earls of Anguse, who are called Lords of Aberneth; and there
some of them lie enterred.

Earls of Strathern. Fines 35 H. 3. n. 1.
The first Earl of Strathern, that I read of, was Malisse, who in the time of
King Henry the third of England married one of the heirs of Robert Muschamp,
a potent Robert Stewart, in the year 1380. Then, David a younger son of King
Robert the second, whose only daughter given in marriage to Patricke Graham
begat Mailise or Melisse Graham, from whom King James the first took away the
Earldom as escheated, after that he understood out of the Records of the
Kingdom, that it was given unto his mothers grandfather, and the heirs males
of his body. This territory, as also that of Menteith adjoining, the Barons
Dromund govern hereditarily by Seneschals authority, as their Stewarties.

Menteith Stewartie.
Menteith has the name of Teith, a river which also they call Taich, and
thereof this little province they term in Latin Taichia; upon the bank of
which lies the Bishopric of Dunblan, Dunblan.
which King David the first of that name erected. At Kirkbird, Brigids Church,
the Earls of Menteith have their principal house, or Honor: as also the
Earls of Montrosse coming from the same stock, at Kin-Kardin not far off.
This Menteith reaches, as I have heard, unto the mountains that enclose the
East side of the Logh or Lake Lomund. Earls of Menteith.
The ancient Earls of Menteith were of the family of Cumen, which in times
past being the most spread and mightiest house of all Scotland, was ruinated
with the over-weight and sway thereof: but the latter Earls were of the
Grahams line, ever since that Sir Mailise Graham attained to the honor of an
Earl.

ARGATHELIA, OR ARGILE.
Lomund and the West part of Lennox, there spreads it self near unto
Dunbriton Forth the large country called Argathelia, and Argadia in Latin, but
commonly ARGILE, more truly Argathel, and Ar-Gwithil, that is, Near unto the
Irish; or, as old writings have it, The edge or border of Ireland: For it lies
toward Ireland, the inhabitants whereof, the Britans term Gwithil and
Gaothel. The country runs out in length and breadth, all mangled with
fishfull pooles, and in some places with rising mountains, very commodious for
feeding of cattle; in which also there range up and down wild kine and red
Dear: but along the shore it is more unpleasant in sight, what with rocks,
and what with blackish barraine mountains. In this part, as Bede writes,
Britain received after the Britans and Picts, a third nation of Scots, in
Dalreudin^ Dal.
which they still hold. Of which their leader they are to this very day called
Dalreudini: for in their language Dal signifies (a part). And a little after,
Ireland (says he) is the proper Country of the Scots, for, being departed
out of it, they added unto the Britans and Picts a third nation in Britain.
And there is a very great Bay or arm of the sea, that in old time severed the
nation of the Britans from the Picts, which from the West breaks a great way
into the land, where stands the strongest City of all the Britans even to
this day, called Alchith. In the North part of which Bay, the Scots aforesaid
when they came, got themselves a place to inhabit. Of that name Dalreudin,
Dalrieta*
unless it be the same that Dalrieta. For, in an old Pamphlet, touching the
division of Albanie, Dalrea.
we read of one Kinnadie (who for certain was a King of Scots, and subdued
the Picts) these very words; Kinnadie two years before he came into Pictavia
(for so it calls the country of the Picts) entered upon the Kingdom of
Dalrieta. Also in an history of later time there is mention made of Dalrea in
some place of this tract, where King Robert Brus fought a field unfortunately.

That Justice should be ministered unto this Province by Justices Itinerant at
Perth, whenever it pleased the King, King James the fourth by authority of
the States of Argile, by an infinite descent of Ancestors, and from their
castle Cambell took their surname: but the honor and title of Earl was given
unto them by King James the second, who, as it is recorded, invested Colin Lord
Cambell, Earl of Argile, in regard of his own virtue, and the worth of his
family. Whose heirs and successors standing in the gracious favor of the
Kings, have bin Lords of Lorn, and a good while General Justices of the
Kingdom of Scotland, Earls of Agile.
or, as they use to speak, Justices ordained in General, and Great Masters of
the Kings royal household.

CANTIRE.
Logh Fin.
LOgh Fin, a lake breeding such store of herrings at a certain due season, as
it is wonderful, severeth Argile from a Promontorie, which for thirty miles
together growing still toward a sharp point, thrusts it self forth with so
great a desire toward Ireland (betwixt which and it there is a narrow sea,
scarce thirteen miles over) as if it would conjoine it self. Ptolomee Epidium.
the Promontorie EPIDIORUM, between which name, and the Islands EBUDAE lying
over against it, there is, in my conceit, some affinity. At this day it is
called in the Irish tongue (which they speak in all this tract) CAN-TYRE, that
is, The lands Head; inhabited by the Mac-Conells, a family that here swayeth
much, howbeit at the pleasure and dispose of the Earl of Argile: yea and
otherwhiles they make out their light pinnaces and galleys for Ireland, to
raise booties and pillage, who also hold in possession those little provinces
of Ireland, which they call Glines and Rowts. This Promontorie lies annexed to
Knapdale by so thin a neck (as being scarce a mile broad, and the same all
sandy) that the mariners find it the nearer way to convey their small vessels
over it Plinius.
Which I hope a man may sooner believe, than that the Argonauts laid their
great ship Argos upon their shoulders, and so carried it along with them five
hundred miles, from Aemonia unto the shores of Thessalia.

LORN.
SOmewhat higher toward the North lies LORN, bearing the best kind of barley
in great plenty, and divided with Leave a vast and huge lake: Berogomum.
by which stands Berogomum a castle, in which sometime was kept the Court of
Justice, or Session: Dunstafag, that is, Stephens Mount, the Kings house in
times past: above which Logh Aber, a Lake insinuating it self from out of the
Western sea, windeth it self so far within land, that it had conflowed
together with Nesse, another Lake running into the East sea, but that certain
mountains between kept them with a very little partition asunder. The
chiefest place of name in this tract is Tarbar in Logh Kinkeran, where King
James the fourth ordained a Justice and Sheriff, to administer justice unto
the Inhabitants of the out Islands. These countries and those beyond them,
1503. Lib. 3. cap. 4.
in the year of our Lords Incarnation 655. the Picts held: whom Bid calls
the Northern Picts, where he reports, that in the said year Columbane a and
that they, in lieu of a reward, allowed unto him the Island Hii, over against
them, now called I-Comb-Kill, of which more in place convenient. The Lords of
Lorna in the age aforegoing were the Stewarts: but now, by reason of a female
their heir, the Earls of Argile; who use this title in their honorable style.

BRAID ALBIN, or ALBANY.
MOre inwardly, where the uninhabitable, lofty, and rugged ridges of the
Mountain Grampius begin a little to slope and settle downward, Albanie.
is seated BRAID-ALBIN, that is, The highest part of Scotland: for they that
are the true and right Scots indeed, Albin; like as that part where it mounteth
up highest, Drum Albin, that is, the Ridge of Scotland. But in an old book it
is read Brun Albin, where we find this written: Fergus filius Eric, etc. that
is, Fergus the son of Eric was the first of the seed or line of Chonare, that
entered upon the Kingdom of Albanie, from Brun-Albain unto the Irish sea and
Inch-Gall. And after him the Kings descended from the seed or race of Fergus
reigned in Brun-Albain or Brunhere unto Alpin the son of Eochall.

But this Albanie is better known for the Dukes thereof, Dukes of Albanie.
than for any good gifts that the soil yields. The first Duke of Albanie
that I read of, was Robert Earl of Fife, whom his brother King Robert the
third of that name advanced to that honor: Albanie, suffered most grievously,
being condemned for treason and beheaded, when he had seen his two sons the
day before executed in the same manner. The third Duke of Albanie was
Alexander, second son to King James the second, who being Regent of the
Kingdom, Earl of March, Mar, and Garioth, Lord of Annandale and of Man, was
by his own brother, King James the third outlawed, and after he had been
turmoiled with many troubles, in the end, as he stood by to behold a Justs and
Tourneament in Paris, chanced to be wounded Auverne and Lauragveze, died there
without issue: Whom in a respective reverence to the blood royal of the Scots,
Francis the first King of France gave thus much honor unto, as that he
allowed him place between the Archbishop of Langres, Tillet.
and the Duke of Alenson, Peers of France. After his death there was no Duke
of Albanie until that Queen Marie in our memory conferred this title upon
Henry Lord Darly, whom within some few days after she made her husband, like
as King James the sixth granted

There inhabit these regions a kind of people, rude, warlike, ready to
fight, querulous, and mischievous: High-landmen.
they be commonly termed High-landmen, who being in deed the right progeny
of the ancient Scots, speak Irish, and call themselves Albinich; their bodies
be firmly made and well compact, able withal and strong, nimble of foot, high
minded, inbread and nuzzeled in warlike exercises, or robberies rather, and
upon a deadly feud and hatred most forward and desperate to take revenge. They
go attired Irish-like, in stripped or streaked mantles of diverse colors,
wearing thick and long glibbes of hair, living by hunting, fishing, fowling,
and stealing. In Clannes, they commit such cruel outrages, what with robbing,
spoiling, and killing, that their savage cruelty has forced a law to be
enacted, whereby it is lawful, That if any person out of any one Clanne or
kindred of theirs has trespassed ought and done harm, Parliament. 1581.
whosoever of that Clanne or lineage chance to be taken,

PERTHIA, OR PERTH Sheriffdome.
The river Tau.
OUt of the very bosom of Mountains of Albany, Tau the greatest river of all
Scotland issues: and first runs amain through the fields, until that
spreading broad into a lake full of Islands, he restrains and keeps in his
course. Then gathering himself narrow within his banks into a channel, and
watering Perth, a large, plentiful and rich country, he takes in unto him
Amund, a small river coming out of Athol.

Athol.
This Athol, that I may digress a little out of my way, is infamous for witches
and Caledon wood.
namely, where that WOOD CALEDONIA, dreadful to see to for the sundry
turnings and windings in and out therein, for the hideous horror of dark
shades, for the burrowes and dens of wild bulls with thick manes (whereof I
made mention heretofore) extended it self in old time far and wide every
way in these parts. As for the places herein, they are of no great account, but
the Earls thereof are very memorable.

Thomas, a younger son of Rolland of Galloway, was in his wives right Earl
of Athol, Earls of Athol.
whose son Patricke was by the Bissets his concurrents murdered in feud, at
Hadington in his bedchamber, and forthwith the whole house wherein he lodged

Chroniron Vailrosse.
In the Earldome there succeeded David Hastings, who had married the aunt by the
mothers side of Patricke; whose son that David surnamed of Strathbogie may
seem to be, who a little after, in the reign of Henry the third King of
England, being Earl of Athol, married one of the daughters and heirs of
Richard, base son to John King of England, and had with her a very goodly
inheritance in England. She bare unto him two sons, John Earl of Athol, who
being of a variable disposition and untrustie, was hanged up aloft on a
gallows fifty foot high; and David Earl of Athol, unto whom by marriage with
one of the daughters and heirs of John Comin of Badzenoth, by one of the
heirs of Aumar de Valence Earl of Penbroch, there Balliol made Lord
Lieutenant General of Scotland, was vanquished by the valerous prowess of
Andrew de Murray, and slain in battle within the Forest of Kelblen in the
year of our Lord 1335. And his son David left two young daughters only,
Elizabeth wedded unto Sir Thomas Percie, from whom the Barons of Borough are
descended: and Philip, married to Sir Thomas Halsham an English Knight. Then
fell the title of Athol unto that Walter Stewart, son to King Robert the
second, who cruelly murdered James the first, King of Scotland, and for this
execrable cruelty suffered most condign punishment accordingly: in so much as
Aeneas Sylvius, Ambassador at that time in Scotland from That he could not
tell whether he should give them greater commendations that revenged the Kings
death, or brand them with sharper censure of condemnation, that distained
themselves with so heinous a parricide.

After some few years passed between, this honor was granted unto John
Stewart Lorne, the son of James, surnamed The Black Knight, by Joan the widow
of King James the first, daughter to John Earl of Somerset, and Niece to John
of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, whose posterity at this day enjoy the same.

Tau bearing now a bigger stream, by receiving Almund unto him, holds on his
course to Dunkelden, Dunkelden.
adorned by King David with an Episcopal See. Most writers grounding upon the
signification of that word, suppose it to be a town of the Caledonians, and
interpret it, The Mount or hill of Hazeles, as who would have that name given
unto it of the Hazel trees in the wood Caledonia. From hence the Tau goes
forward by the carcass of Berth, Berth.
a little desolate City, remembering well Perth.
King William builded Perth, which straightwaies became so wealthy, that
Necham, who lived in that age, versified of it in this manner: Transis ample
Tai per rura, per oppida, per Perth,
Regnum sustentant istius urbis opes.
Perth, thou runn'st great Tay amain,
The riches of this City Perth does all the realm sustain.


But the posterity ensuing called it of a Church founded in honor of Saint
John, Saint John's town: Saint John Town.
and the English, whiles the wars were hot between the Bruses and the
Balliols, fortified it with great bulwarks, which the Scots afterward, for the
most part overthrew, and dismantled it themselves. Howbeit it is a proper
pretty City, pleasantly seated between two Greenes: and for all that some of
the Churches be destroyed, yet a goodly show it makes; ranged and set out in
such an uniforme manner, that in every several street almost there dwell
several artificers by Tau brings up with the tide sea commodities by
lighters: whereupon J. Jonston, so often now by me cited, writes thus.

PERTHUM.
Propter aquas Tai liquidas, and amoena vineta,
Obtinet in medio regna superba solo.
Nobilium quondam regum clarissima seeds,
Pulchra situ, and pinguis germine dives agri.
Finitimis dat jura locis, moremque modumque,

Sola inter patrias incincta est moenibus urbes,
Hostibus assiduis ne vaga praeda foret.
Quanta virum virtus, dextrae quae praemia, norunt
Cimber, Saxo ferox, and genus Hectoridum.
Felix laud nova, felix quoque laud vetusta,
Perge recens priscum perpetuare decus.
PERTH.
Tay, and pleasant plains all green,
In middle ground between them stands Perth proudly like a Queen.
Of noble Kings the stately seat and palace once it was,
Fair for the site, and rich with all for spring of corn and grass.
To neighbor places all it does laws, customs, fashions give,
Her praise to give; theirs to deserve the same for to receive.
Of all the Cities in these parts walled alone is she,
Lest she to foes continual a scambling prey might be.
What Knights she bred, and what rewards they won to knighthood due,
Danes, Saxons fierce, bold Britans eke the Trojans offspring knew.
Happy for praises old, happy for praises new of late,
New as thou art, thine honor old strive to perpetuate.
Earl of Perth.
And now of late King James the sixth has erected it to the title of an
Earldome, having created James Baron Dromund Earl of Perth.

Baron Methwen.
Unto Perth these places are near neighbors, Methven, which Margaret an
English Henry Steward descended of the royal blood, and for his heirs; and
withal obtained of her son King James the fifth for him the dignity of a
Baron. More beneath is Rethuen, Rethuen, or Reuven.
a castle of the Rethuens, whose name is of damned memory, considering that
the three states of the kingdom has ordained, that whosoever were of that
name, should forgo the same, and take unto them a new; after that the
Rethuens, brethren in a most cursed and horrible conspiracy, had complotted to
murder their sovereign King James the sixth, who had created William their
father Earl of Gourie, and afterward beheaded him being lawfully convicted,
when he would insolently prescribe laws to his sovereign. But of men
condemned to perpetual

Gourie.
As for the country Gourie aforesaid, famous for the cornfieldsd, and singular
fertility of the soil, it lies more plain and flat along the other bank of
Tay. In this tract over against Perth, Scone.
on the farther side of Tay, stands Scone, a renowned monastery in old time,
and of reverend respect for the coronation therein of the Kings of Scotland:
since that time K. Keneth having hard by put the Picts for the most part to the
sword, placed a stone here enclosed within a chair of wood for inauguration of
the Kings of Scotland, that had been transported out of Ireland into Argile:
which

Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum
Inveniunt lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem.
Except old sawes be vain,
And wits of wisards blind,
The Scots in place must reign,
Where they this stone shall find.
Baron of Scone.
But now Scone gives title of Baron of Scone to Sir David Murray, whom K. James
for his good service advanced lately to that honor.

Arrol. Earls of Arrol.
Where Tay now grown bigger enlarges himself, there appears over it Arrol,
the habitation of the noble Earls of Arrol, who ever since the Bruses days
have been by inheritance the Constables of Scotland: and verily they deduce an
ancient pedigree from one Hay, a man of exceeding strength and excellent
courage; who together with his sons, in a dangerous battle of Scots against
the Danes at Longcartie, caught up an Ox yoke, and so valiantly and
fortunately withal, what with fighting, and what with exhorting, re-enforced
the Scots at the point to shrink and recule, that they had the day of the
Danes, and the King, with the States of the kingdom, ascribed the victory and
their own safety unto his valor and prowess. Whereupon in this place, the
most battle and fruitful grounds were assigned unto him Huntly castle.
Three Escotcheons Geules in Argent. Touching Huntley castle, that joyneth unto
it, I have nothing to write, but that it has given title to a very potent,
great, and honorable family, whereof I am to speak hereafter.

ANGUSIA, or ANGUS.
BY the outlet or mouth of Tay, and more within, beside the river North-Eske,
Anguis called by the natural and true Scots Aeneia, lies extended with goodly
fields bearing wheat and corn of all kinds plentifully, with large hills also
and pooles, forests, pastures, and meadows, and also garnished with many
Goury, stands Glamis, Barons Glamys.
a castle, and the Baronie of a family surnamed Lions, which arose to honor
and reputation, ever since that Sir I. Lion standing in the high favor of King
Robert the Second, received this and the dignity of a Baron with the Kings
daughter, for her marriage portion, and therewith, as I find written, the
surname of Lion: with a Lion in his Arms, within a Treassure Floury, as the
Kings themselves do bear, but in different colors: like as Sir Patrick Lion,
Lord Glamis, who now lives, was advanced very lately by King James the Sixth
of that name to the honor of the Earl of Kinghorn.

Not far hence stands Forfare, Forfar Sherdome.
where for the administration of justice, the Greies are hereditary Sheriffs,
who being descended from the Greies of Chillingham in the county of
Northumberland, came into Scotland with King James the first, at his return
out of England: upon the first of whom named Andrew, the King of his bounteous
liberality bestowed the Seigniorie of Foulis, together with Helen Mortimer in
marriage for his advancement.

Hard by the mouth of Tay is situate Dundee, Jo. Skene de Verbor. signi
sometimes called Alectum: others term it in Latin Taodunum; a town verily
of great resort and trade, and the Constable whereof by a special privilege
is Standard Bearer to the King of Scots. Hector Boethius, who was here born,
expounds this name Dundee by way of allusion, to Donum Dei, Hector Boetus.
that is, Gods gift. This Hector, in the reflourishing time of learning, Paulus
Iovius wondered in his writings, there should be records extant for above a
thousand years, of these remote parts of the world, Scotland, the Hebrides,
and the Orcades: considering that Italy, the nource of fine wits, for so many
ages after the Goths were cast out, was defective of writers and records. But
of this place Master Ionston, borne not far from it, writes thus.

TAODUNUM, OR DEIDONUM.
Qua Notus argutis adspirat molliter auris,
Hac placide coeunt Taus and Oceanus.
Hic facili excipiens venientes littore puppes
Indigenis vasti distrahit orbis opes.
Saepe dolis tentata, and belli exercita damnis,
Invictis animis integra praestat adhuc.
Fama vetus crevit cum Relligione renata,
Lucis and hinc fulsit para nitela aliis.
Alectum dixere prius; si maxima spectes
Commoda, fors Donum dixeris esse Dei.
Tu decus aeternum genrisque urbisque Boeti,
Caetera dic patriae dona beata tuae.
DONDEE, or DUNDEE.
Where South wind with his whistling blasts aloft does mildly blow,
There Tay with stream, and sea with tide do friendly meet below.
And here Dundee, ships under sail harbring in gentle road,
The wide worlds wealth to Inlanders both sells and sends abroad.
By wiles betrayed, by force assailed often times like to have been,
With heart undaunted to this day it stands sound to be seen.
With new spring of religion her old fame more did grow:
Hence shone pure light, hence to the rest clear beams full bright did show.
At first Alectum clep'd it was: but if you mark withal
Her gifts so great, perhaps you will it Gift of God.
Donum Dei call.
Thou Boeth now, this peoples praise, and Cities joy for aye,
The blessings all besides of thine own native place shall say.
Brochtie Crag. 1547.
From hence stands within sight Brochty-cragge, a good fortress, which the
English garrison soldiers manfully defended and made good for many months
together, what time as in their affectionate love to a perpetual peace, they
desired and wished for a marriage between Marie, heir apparent of Scotland,
and Edward the sixth King of England; and upon promise thereof, demanded it by
force of arms: Aberbroth, Arbroth.
short Arbroth, a place endowed with ample revenues, and by King William
dedicated in old time to Religion, in honor of Thomas of Canterbury; beside
which the Red-head, a Promontorie.
Red-head shoots into the deep sea, and is to be seen a far off: Hard by
South Eske voideth it self into the Ocean; which river flowing amain out of a
lake, passes by Finnevim Castle, well known by reason of the Lindeseies
Earls of Crawford keeping residence there; of whom I have already written.
Brechin.
Then upon the said river stands Brechin, which King David the first adorned
with a Bishops See; Mont-Rose.
and at the very mouth thereof Mont-rose, as one would say the Mount of Roses;
a town in times past called Celurca, risen by the fall of Eskes, and imparteth
the title of Earl to the family of the Grahams. Concerning which town Ionston
has these verses.

CELURCA, five MONS ROSARUM.
Aureolis urbs picta rosis, mons molliter urbi
Imminet, hinc urbi nomina facta canunt.
At veteres perhibent quondam dixisse Celurcam,
Nomine sic prisco and nobilitata novo est.
Et prisca atque nova insignis virtute, virumque
Ingeniis, patriae qui perperere decus.
MONT-ROSE.
With Roses gay the town is decked, an easy Mount withal
Stands near the same, and hence they say MONT-ROSE folk did it call.
In former times by ancient name Celurca men it knew,
Ennobled thus you see it is by name both old and new:
Both old and new renown it has for prowess and for wit,
Of men that have their country graced and honor won to it.
Boschain.
Not far from hence is Boschain, belonging to the Barons of Ogiluy, of very
ancient nobility, lineally descended from Alexander Sheriff of Angus, who was
slain in the bloody battle at Harley against the Mac Donald of the out
Isles.

Angus; Earls of gus.
Gilchrist of Angus, renowned for his brave exploits under King Malcolm the
fourth, was the first Earl of Angus that I read of. About the year 1242. John
Comin was Earl of Angus, who died in France; and his widow (happily inheritrice
to the Earldome) was married to Sir Gilbert Umfranvill an Englishman. For, both
he and his heirs successively after him, were summoned to the Parliaments in
England (until the third year of King Richard the second) by the title of
Earls of Angus. Howbeit the Lawyers of England refused in their Brieves and
instruments to acknowledge him Earl, for that Angus was not within the
kingdom of England, until he had brought forth openly in the face of Angus.
In the reign of David Brus, Thomas Stewart was Earl of Angus, who by a
sudden surprise won Barwicke, and streightwaies lost it; yea, and within a
while after died miserably in prison at Dunbritton. But the Douglasses, men of
haughty minds and invincible hearts, from the time of King Robert the third
have been Earls of Angus (after that George Douglasse had taken to wife the
Kings daughter) reputed the chief and principal Earls of Scotland, and to
whom this office belongs, to carry the regal Crown before the Kings at all
the solemn assemblies of the kingdom. The sixth Earl of Angus out of this
stock, was Archebald, who espoused Margaret daughter to Henry the seventh K.
of England, and Matthew Stewart Earl of Lennox; who after her brothers
decease, that died childlesse, willingly resigned up her right and interest in
this Earldome, unto Sir David Douglasse of Peteindreich, her unkles son by
the fathers side, and that with the consent of her husband and sons; to the
end that she might bind the surer unto her self, by the link also of a
beneficial demerite, that family, which otherwise in blood was most near;
what time as Henry her son went about to wed Marie the Queen: by which
marriage King JAMES our Sovereign, the mighty Monarch of great Britain, was
happily borne to the good of all Britain.


THese regions were in Ptolomees time inhabited by the VERNICONES, the same
perhaps that the VECTURIONES mentioned by Marcellinus. But this their name is
now quite gone, unless we would imagine some little piece thereof to remain
in Mernis. For many times in common speech of the British tongue, V. turns
into M.

This small province Mernis abutting upon the German Ocean, Dunnotyr, Dunotyr.
a Castle advanced upon an high and unaccessible rock, whence it looks down
to the underflowing sea; well fensed with strong walls and turrets, which has
been a long time the habitation of the Keiths, of an ancient and very noble
stock; Keith. Earls Mar. shall.
who by the guidance of their virtue became hereditarie Earls Mareschals of
the kingdom of Scotland, and Sheriffs of this province. In a porch or
gallerie here, is to be seen that ancient inscription which I mentioned even
now, of a company belonging to the twentieth legion, the letters whereof the
right noble and honorable Earl now living, a great lover of antiquity,
caused to be gilded. Fordon. Sherifdome Kinkerdin, Mernis.
Somewhat farther from the sea stands Fordon, graced de Fordon; who being
borne here, diligently and with great pains compiled Scoti Chronicon, that is,
The Scottish Chronicle: unto whose laborious studies the Scottish
Historiographers are very much indebted: but more glorious and renowned in old
time, for the relics of St. Palladius, St. Palladius
bestowed and shrined sometime, as is verily thought, in this place; who in the
year 431. was by Pope Caelestinas appointed the Apostle of the Scottish nation.

MARRIA, or MAR.
FRom the sea in the mediterranean or inland parts above Mernis, MAR enlarges
it self, and runs forward threescore miles, or thereabout: where it lies
broadest Westwards, it swells up with mountains, unless it be where the
rivers Dee, which Ptolomee calls DIVA, and Done make way for themselves, and
enfertile the fields. Kildrummy.
Upon the bank of Done, Kildrummy stands Mar: and not far distant from it
the habitation of the Barons Forbois, Barons Forbois.
who being issued from a noble and ancient stock, assumed this surname;
whereas before time they were called Bois, after that the heir of that family
had manfully killed a savage and cruel Bear. But at the very mouth of this
river, there be two towns that give greater ornament, which of the said mouth,
that in the British tongue they call Aber, borrowing one name, are divided
asunder by one little field lying between: the hithermore of them, which
stands nearer to Dee mouth, is much ennobled by an Episcopal dignity (which
King David the first translated hither from Murthlake a little village) by
fair houses of the Canons, an William Elphinston, Bishop of the place in the
year 1480. consecrated to the training up of youth, and is called New Aberdon:
The other beyond it, named Old Aberdon, is most famous for the taking of
Salmons. Salmons.
But J. Ionston, a native hereof, in these his verses depainteth Aberdon thus.

ABERDONIA.
Ad Boream porrecta jugis obsessa superbis,
Inter connatas eminet una Deas.
Mitior algentes Phoebus sic temperat auras,
Non aestum ut rabidum, frigora nec metuas.
Faecundo ditat Neptunus gurgite, and amnes
Piscosi: gemmis alter adauget opes.
Candida men's, frons laeta, hilaris, gratissima tellus
Hospitibus: morum cultus ubique decens.
Nobilitas antiqua, opibus subnixa vetustis,
Martiaque invicto pectore corda gerens.
Iustitiae domus, and studiorum matter honoris
Ingenio ars, certant artibus ingenia.
Omnia ei cedunt, meritos genetricis honores
Pingere non ulla Ars, ingeniumve valet.
Beset with lofty tops of hills, and Northward lying spread,
Among her sister-townes alone she bears up her head.
The warm sunbeams such temper give to sharpness of the air,
That neither scorching heat you need, nor pinching cold to fear.
The sea, the fishfull rivers eke, with plenteous gulfes and streams,
Make this place rich, and one of them enriches it with gemmes.
Plain-hearted men, of lightsome looks, and cheerful, passing kind
To strangers: decent every thing and neat you shall there find.
Their noble gentry ancient, their livings ancient were
And their demesnes: undaunted hearts and martial minds they bear.
The Justice Hall, as mother kind, she honors due does daigne
Professions all; art strives with wit, and wit with arts again.
All short of her. But praises all of this my genitresse
That she deserves, no wit nor art is able to express.
Bid, and oui writers called them in Lati^ Isicii.
Salmons as well these rivers, as others also in Scotland on both sides of the
realm, do breed. This fish was altogether unknown unto Pliny, unless it
were that Esox of the Rhene: but in this North part of Europe passing well
known, shining and glittering (as he says) with his red bowels. In Autumn
they engender within little rivers, and in shallow places for the most part,
what time they cast their spawne, and cover it over with sand: and then are
they so poor and lean, that they seem to have nothing else in a manner but
their small bones. Of that spawn in the spring next following there comes a
fry of render little fishes, which making toward the sea, in a small time grow
to their full bigness: and Andrew in winter. And it should seem they were
reputed among the greatest commodities of Scotland, when likewise it was
ordained that they should not be sold unto Englishmen, but for English gold,
and no other contentation. But these matters I leave for others.

Mar. Earls of Mar.
In the reign of Alexander the third, William Earl of Mar is named among
those that were sore offended and displeased with the King. Whiles David Brus
reigned, Donald Earl of Mar, Protector of the Kingdom, was before the
battle at Dyplin murdered in his bed, by Edward Balliol, and the Englishmen
that came to aid him: whose daughter Isabel King Robert Brus took to be his
former wife, on whom he begat Marjorie mother to Robert Stewart King of Scots.
Under the same David there is mention also made of Thomas Earl of Mar, who
was banished in the year 1361. Likewise in the reign of Robert the third,
Alexander Stewart is named Earl of Mar, who in the battle at Harley against
the Ilanders lost his life, in the year 1411. In the days of King James
Scoto-Chronicon thus: Scotochronicon lib. 12. cap. 33.
Alexander Earl of Mar died in the year 1435. the base son of Alexander
Stewart Earl of Bucquan, son to Robert the second King of Scots; after whom,
as being a bastard, the King succeeded in the inheritance. John the second
son of King James the second afterward bare this title; who being convict
for attempting by art magic to take away the King his brothers life, was let
blood to death. And after him Robert Cockeran was promoted from a Mason to this
dignity by King James the third, and soon after hanged by the Nobility. Since
which time this honorable title was discontinued, until that Queen Marie
adorned therewith James her bastard brother: and not long after, when it was
found that by ancient right the title of Earl of Mar appertained to John
Lord Ereskin, in lieu of Mar she conferred upon him the honor of Earl
Murray, and created John Ereskin, a man of ancient and noble birth Earl of
Mar; whose son bearing the same Christian name, now enjoieth also the same
dignity, and is in both realms one of the Kings Privy Council.

BUCHANIA OR BUQUHAN.
Ptolomee, in ancient times inhabited where now Buquhan, in Latin Boghania and
Buchania, above the river Done bears forth toward the German sea. Some derive
this latter name a Bobus, that is, From Oxen and Kine; whereas notwithstanding
the ground serves better to feed sheep, whose woole is highly commended.
Albeit the rivers in this coast every where breed great store of Salmons,
River Ratra.
yet do they never enter into the river Ratra, as Buchanan because many things
in them contained are to be dashed out. An admirable water.
Who also has written, That on the bank of Ratra there is a cave near unto
Stangs Castle, the nature whereof seems not to be passed over. The water
distilling by drops out of a natural vault, presently turns into Pyramidall
stones, and were not the said cave or hole otherwhiles rid and cleansed by man's
labor, the whole space as far as up to the vault would in short time be filled
therewith. Now the stone thus engendered is of a middle nature between ye and
hard stone: for it is brittle and easy to crumble, neither grows it ever to
the soliditie and Claik-geese.
Concerning those Claik-geese, which some with much admiration have believed to
grow out of trees, both upon this shore and elsewhere, and when they be ripe to
fall down into the sea, it is scarce worth the labor to mention them. That
there be little birds engendered of old and rotten keeles of ships, they can
bear witness, who saw that ship wherein Francis Drake sailed about the world,
standing in a docke near the Tamis; to the outside of the keele whereof a
number of such little birds without life and feathers stuck close. Yet would I
gladly think that the generation of these birds, was not out of the logges of
wood, but from the very Ocean, which the Poets termed the Father of all things.

Amber.
A mighty mass likewise of Amber, as big as the body of an horse, was not
many Succinum, Glessum, and Chryso-Electrum: and Sotacus supposed that it was a
certain juice or liquor which distilleth out of trees in Britain, and runs
down into the sea, and is therein hardened. Tacitus also was of the same
opinion, when he wrote thus: I can verily believe, that like as there be trees
in the secret and inward parts of the East, Concerning the manners of the
Germans.
which sweat out frankincense and balm, so in the Islands and other countries
of the West, there be woods and groves of a more fattie and firm substance,
which melting by the hot beams of the Sun approaching so near, runs into
the sea hard by, and by force of tempest floateth up to the shores against it.
But Serapio, and the Philosophers of later times write that it arises out of a
certain clammie and bituminous earth under the sea, and by the sea side; and

Earls of Buquhan.
In the reign of King Alexander the second, Alexander Comin rose up to the
honor of Earl of Buquhan, who married the daughter and one of the heirs of
Roger de Quincie Earl of Winchester in England, and his Niece by a son
brought the same title unto Henry de Beaumont her husband: for he, in King
Edward the third his days had his place in the Parliament of England, by the
name of Earl of Buquhan. Afterward, Alexander Stewart, son to King Robert
the second, was Earl of this place; unto whom succeeded John, a younger son
of Robert Duke of Albanie, Clarence brother to Henry the fifth King of England
at Baugie, and discomfited the English, The valor of Scots in the wars of
France.
he was made Constable of France. But in the third year following, when the
fortune of war turned, he, with other most valiant Knights, to wit,
Archibald Douglasse Earl of Wigton, and Duke of Touraine, etc. was vanquished
at Vernoil by the English, and there slain. Whom notwithstanding, as that Poet
said, -- aeternum memorabit Gallia cives
Grata suos, titulos quae dedit and tumulos.
France thankfully will ay recount, as citizens of her own,
On whom both titles glorious, and tombs she has bestowne.


Certes, whereas under the K.K. Charles the sixth and seventh France was
preserved, and Aquitain recovered, by thrusting out the English, the Frenchmen
cannot Buquhan unto George of Dunbar, moved thereto upon pity and
commiseration, because he had deprived him before of the Earldom of March by
authority of Parliament, for his fathers crime: and not long after, James the
son of James Stewart of Lorn, surnamed the Black Knight, whom he had by Q.
Joan sister to the Duke of Somerset, and widow to King James the first,
obtained this honor, and left it to his posterity: but for default not long
since of heirs male, it came by a daughter married to Robert Douglas, a
younger brother of Douglas of Lochlevin, to the family of the Douglasses.

Buquhan, as the shore bends backward and turns full into the North, lies
Boena, Boen. Barons of Salton. Strathbolgy.
and Bamff a small Sherifdome, also Ajuza a little territory of no especial
account, and Rothamay castle, the dwelling place of the Barons of Salton,
surnamed Abernethy. Beneath these lies Strath-bolgy, that is, the vale by
Bolgy, the habitation in times past of the Earls of Athol, who of it assumed
their surname; but now the principal seat of Marquess Huntly. Marquess
Huntly.
For this title K. James the sixth conferred upon George Gordon, Earl Huntly,
Lord Gordon and Badzeneth, a man of great honor and reputation for his ancient
nobleness of birth, and the multitude of his dependants and followers: whose
ancesters descended from the Setons, by Parliamentarie authority took the name
of Gordon (when as Sir Alexander Seton had taken to wife the daughter John
Gordon Knight, by whom he had a large and rich inheritance) and received the
honor of the Earl of Huntly at the hands of King James the second, in the
year 1449.

MORAVIA, or MURRAY.
THe VACOMAGI, Vacomagy. Murray bay. Sinus Vararis.
remembered by Ptolomee, anciently inhabited on the further side of
Crantz-baine-mountain, which, as it were in a continued range, by hills hanging
one by another, drives out his ridge with many a winding Murray frith, where
now lies Murray, in Latin Moravia, celebrated for the fertility, pleasant
site, and commodity of fruitful trees. By this Province, The river Spey.
History of John Lesley Bishop of Rosse.
Spey a famous river makes his issue into the sea, wherein he lodges, when
he has watered Rothes Castle, whence the family of the Lesleys took the
title of Earl, ever since that K. James the second conferred the honor of
Earl of Rothes upon Sir George Lesley. Concerning this Spey our Poet Necham
has thus written.

Spey loca mutantis praeceps agitator arenae,
Inconstans certas nescit habere vias.
Officium lintris corbis subit, hunc regit audax
Cursus labentis nauta fluenta sequens.
Spey raising heaps of sand amain, that shift often times their place,
Inconstant he does change eftsoons, and keeps no certain race.
A panier serves here for a boat, some ventrous swain it guides,
Who follows still the rivers course, while down the stream it glides.
The river LOXA mentioned by Ptolomee, The river Loxa.
which now is called Loss, hides himself in the sea hard by, near unto
which Elgina appears, in which and in Forres adjoining I. of Dunbar of
Cumnock, descended from the stock of the Earls of March, has his jurisdiction
as Sheriff by inheritance. But where it is now ready to enter into the sea, he
finds a more plain and soft soil, and spreads abroad into a Mere full of
swans, wherein the herb Olorina plentifully grows, he has Spiny Castle
Baron of Spiny.
whereof now the first Baron is Alexander, of the lineage of the Lindseys; like
as Kinlosse also a neighbor by, sometime a famous Monastery (some call it
Kill-flos, of certain flowers miraculously there springing up on a sudden,
when the carkase of King Duff, murdered and hidden in the same place, was found)
has also for the Lord thereof Edward Brus, M. of the Rolls in England, and of
the Kings Majesty's Privy Counsel, Baron Kinlos.
whom King James the sixth created Baron Brus of Kinlosse.

Thus much for the shore. More inward, where now stands Bean Castle (thought
Ptolomee mentions) Banatia.
there was found in the year 1460. a vessel of marble artificially engraven,
and full of Roman coin. Hard by is Nardin, or Narne, Narne Sherifdome.
an hereditable Sherifdome of the Cambels of Lorne; where there stood within a
Biland, a fortress of a mighty height, built with wonderful bulwarks, and
in times past defended by the Danish forces against the Scottish. A little off
is Logh-Nesse, a very great Lake, Logh-Nesse.
as reaching out 23. miles in length; the Water whereof is so warm, that even
in this cold and frozen climate it never freezeth: from which, by a very small
Isthim or partition of hills, the Logh Lutea or Louthea, which by Aber lets
it self forth into the West sea, is divided. Near unto these Loghs, there
stood Innernesse.
the one named Innernesse, the other Innerlothea, according to the names of the
said Loghs. Innernes has for Sheriff thereof by right of inheritance the
Marquess Huntly, who is of great command hereabout. But have here what M.
Jonston has written jointly of these two.

INNERNESSUS, and INNERLOTHEA.
Imperii veteris duo propugnacula quondam,
Prim^que regali moenia structa manu.
Turribus oppositis adverso in limine spectat
Haec Zephyrum, Solis illa orientis equos.
Amnibus hinc atque hinc cincta, utraque piscibus amnes
Faecundi, haec portu perpete tuta patet.
Haec fuit, at jacet heu, jam nunc sine nomine tellus,
Hospita quae Regum, est hospita facta feris.
Altera spirat adhuc tenuis sufflamina vitae,
Quae dabit and fati turbine victa manus.
Dic ubi nunc Carthago potens? ubi Martia Roma?
Trojaque, and immensae ditis opes Asiae?
Quid mireris enim mortalia cedere fatis
Corpora? cum videas oppida posse mori.
INNERNESSE, AND INNERLOTHEA.
Two mighty forts and holds these were in ancient kingdoms days,
The first walled fences, as they say, that hand of Kings did raise.
Affront with towers opposed they stand, for one of them regards
The Western wind, but the other looks the Sunrising toward.
On both sides they their rivers have, and rivers full of fish:
One has an haven frequented aye, and safe as heart can wish.
Such was it once; but now alas to wast and desert fields
Is turned, and that which lodged Kings to wild beasts harbor yields.
The other yet draw's breath, though deep, and shows that it does live,
But over matched, to destiny at length does bucklers give.
What Is now become of Carthage great? where is that martial Rome?
Where Troy? of wealthy Asia the riches all and some?
No marvel now that mortal wights to death be subject, why?
Because you plainly see that Towns and Cities great may dye.
Earls of Murray.
Under the reign of Robert Brus, Thomas Randolph his sisters son, who in his
Countries behalf undertook exceeding great pains, and most grievous
quarrels, was highly renowned by the title of Earl of Murray. Under King
Robert the Second, John of Dunbarre took to wife the Kings daughter, to make
amends Murray with her in marriage. Under King James the second William
Creichton Chancelour of the Realm, and Archebald Douglas grew to great
variance and eagre contention about this Earldom, when as against the laws
and ancient customs, Douglas who had married the younger daughter of James of
Dunbar Earl of Murray, was preferred to the Earldom before Creighton who had
wedded the elder, and that through the powerful authority that William Earl
Douglasse had with the King; which was so great that he advanced not only him
to the Earldom of Murray, but also another brother to the Earldome of Ormund;
and made two cousins of his Earls, the one of Angus, Morton. But this
greatness of his, not to be trusted upon because it was excessive, turned
soon after to his own confusion. Under King James the fifth, his own brother,
whom he appointed his Vicegerent in the government of the Kingdom, enjoied
this honor: and within our remembrance, James the base son of King James the
fifth received this honor of Queen Mary his sister: but he requited her
basely, when conspiring with some few of the Nobility, he deposed her from her
Royal estate and kingdom; a foul president, and prejudicial to all Kings
and Princes. Which notwithstanding was revenged, for shortly after he was shot
through with a bullet. His only daughter brought this title unto her husband
Sir James Stewart of Down, who was also of the blood royal from the Dukes of
Albany:

LOQHUABRE.
WHatsoever beyond the Nesse bends to the West coast, and adjoineth to the
Lake Aber, is thereupon called Loghuabre, that is in the ancient tongue of the
Britans, The mouth of the Lakes, as what lies toward the North is commonly
called Rosse.

Loqhuabre is full of fresh pastures and woods, neither is without iron mines,
but not so free in yield of corn; but for most fishfull pooles, and rivers
scarce inferior to any country thereabout. At Logh-Lothey, Innerlothe.
Innerlothey, fensed with a fort, and well frequented with Merchants, was of
great name and importance in times past, but being razed by the piracies and
wars of Danes and Norwegians, it has lien for these many ages so forlet,
that there remains scarce any show of it; which those verses that I alleged
even now do imply. Loqhuabre has had, so far as I have read, no Earls: but
about the year of our salvation 1050. there was a Thane over it of great fame,
Thane of Loqhuabre. Banqhuo.
and much spoken of, named Banqhuo, whom Macbeth the bastard, when with murder
and bloodshed Macbeth was expired and extinct, should one day obtain the
Kingdom, and by a long successive descent reign in Scotland. Which verily
has fallen out accordingly. For Fleanch the son of Banqhuo, who unknown in
the dark escaped the trains laid for him, ^led into Wales, where for a time
he kept himself close: and having taken to wife Nesta the daughter of
Griffith ap Lewellin Prince of North Wales, begat Walter; who returning into
Scotland, with so great fame of his fortitude repressed the rebellion of the
Ilanders, and with as great wisdom managed the Kings revenewes in this tract,
that the King made him Seneschall, Stewart of the whole Kingdom of Scotland.
Whereupon this name of Office imposed the surname Stewart unto his posterity:
The beginning of the Stewarts family.
who spreading throughout all parts of Scotland into a number of noble
branches, after many honors heaped upon them, have flourished a long time, and
from out of them, three hundred years ago and thirty, Robert Stewart by
Marjorie his mother, daughter to King Robert Brus, obtained the Kingdom of
Scotland: and now lately James Stewart of that name the sixth King of Scots, by
Margaret his

ROSSIA.
THe Province ROSSE, so called by an old Scottish word, which Promontorie,
others a Biland, was inhabited by the people named CANTAE (which term in
effect implies as much) in the time of Ptolomee. The people Cantae.
This extends it self so wide and large, that it reaches from the one sea
to the other. What way it bears upon the Vergivian or Western Ocean, by
reason of huge swelling mountains advancing their heads aloft, and many woods
among them, it is full of stagges, roe buckes, fallow Dear, and wild foul:
but where it butteth upon the German sea, it is more lovely bedect with corn
fields and pastures, and withal much more civil. In the very first entrance
into it Ardmanoch, Baron of Ardmanoch.
no small territory, whereof the second sons of the Kings of The height of
hills, and depth of sea.

Plutarch. in Pub. Aemilius, concerning Olympus.


As touching their height, some have reported unto me strange wonders: and yet
the ancient Geometers have written, that neither the depth of sea, nor height
of hills exceed by the plumbe line ten stadia, that is, one mile and a quarter.
Which notwithstanding, they that have beheld Tenariffe, amongst the Canarie
Islands, which is fifteen leagues high, and sailed withal the Ocean near unto
them, will in no wise admit for truth. In this part stands Lovet Castle, and
the Baronie of the worthy family of the Frasers, whom for their singular good
service for the Scottish kingdom, King James the second accepted into the
rank of Barons: and whom the Clan-Ranalds, a most bloody generation, in a
quarrel and braule between Nesse mouth there flourished sometimes Chanonrie,
so called of a rich College of Chanons, whiles the Ecclesiastical state stood
in prosperity, in which there is erected a See for the Bishop of Rosse. Hard
by is placed Cromartie, where Urqhuart, a Gentleman of noble birth, by
hereditarie right from his ancestors, ministers justice as Sheriff to this
Sheriffdome: and this is so commodious and safe an harbor for any fleet, be it
never so great, that both Sailers and Geographers name it PORTUS-SALUTIS,
Portus Salutis. Littus Altum.
that is, The Haven of safety.

Above it is LITTUS ALTUM, whereof Ptolomee makes mention, called now, as it
seems, Tarbarth: for there indeed the shore rises to a great height,
enclosed on the one side with Cromer a most secure and safe haven; and on the
other with CELNIUS, The river Celnio.

Cerones.


now Killian the river: and thus much of the places toward the East Ocean. Into
the west sea the river LONGUS, mentioned in Ptolomee, at this day named Lough
Longus, runs: then the CERONES anciently dwelt where now is Assinshire, a
country much mangled with many inlets and arms of the sea in bosoming it
self with manifold commodities.

Earls of Rosse.
As for the Earls of Rosse, it is full of difficulty to set them down in order
successively out of writers. About four hundred years past, we read that
Ferqhuard flourished and Lesley, who for his noble feats of arms courageously
achieved under Lewis the Emperor, was worthily named The Noble Knight: he
begat Alexander Earl of Rosse, and a daughter married unto Donald Lord of the
Islands Hebrides. This Alexander had issue one only daughter, who made over by
her deed all her own title Albany: whereat the said Donald of the Islands
being highly enchafed and repining, styled himself in the reign of James the
third, King of the Islands, and Earl of Rosse, having with fire and sword
laid waste his native country far and near. At length, the said K. James the
third by authority of Parliament, in the year 1476. annexed the Earldome of
Rosse to the crown, so as it might not be lawful for his successors to
alienate by any means from the crown, either the Earldome it self, or any
parcel thereof; or by any device to grant the same unto any person, save only
to the Kings second sons lawfully borne: whence it is that Charles the Kings
second son, Duke of York, at this day holds an enjoieth Rosse.

SUTHERLAND.
BEyond Rosse, Sutherland looks toward the East Ocean; a land more meet to
breed cattle than to bear corn: wherein there be hills of white marble (a
wonderful thing in this so cold a climate) but of no use almost, Mountains of
white marble.
considering excess in building, and that vain ostentation of riches, is not
yet reached to these remote Dunrobin, Dun-robin.
a castle of very great name, the principal seat of the ancient Earls of
Sutherland, descended, if I be not deceived, Earls of Sutherland.
out of the family of Murray. Among whom, one William under King Robert Brus is
most famous, who married the sister of the whole blood to K. David, and had by
her a son, whom the said David declared heir apparent of the crown, and
compelled his Nobles to swear unto him allegiance: but he within a little
after departed without issue, and the Earldome in the end came by a daughter
and heir hereditarily unto A. Gordon, one of the line of the Earls of Huntly.

CATHANES.
HIgher lies CATHANES, butting full upon the said East sea bending inward with
a number of creakes and compasses, which the waves as it were indent: In which
dwelt in Ptolomees time the CATINI, Catini a people.
but written falsely in some copies CARINI, among whom the self same Ptolomee
places the river Ila, which may seem to be the Wifle at this day. The
inhabitants of this province raised their greatest gain and revenues by
grazing and raising of cattle, and by fishing. The chief castle therein is
called Girnego, in which the Earls Catnesse for the most part make their abode.
The Bishops sea is in Dornock, a little mean town otherwise; where also King
James the fourth appointed the Sheriff of Catnesse to reside, or else at Wik,
as occasions should require, for the administration of justice.

The Earls of Catnesse in ancient times were also Earls of the Orcades,
Earls of Cathnesse.
but at last they became distinct, and by the eldest daughter of one Malise
given in marriage to William Seincler the Kings Pantler, his heirs
successively came to be Earls of Catnesse, and do still enjoy the same honor.

STRATH-NANERN.
THe utmost and farthest coast of all Britain, which with the front of the
shore looks full against the North point, and has the midst of the greater
Bears tail, which, as Cardan was of opinion, causes translations of Empires,
Cornabii. The river Nabe.
just over head, was inhabited, as we may see in Ptolomee, by the CORNABII,
among whom he places the river NABEUS, which names are of so near affinity;
that the nation may seem to have drawn their denomination from Strath-Navera,
which signifies the Valley by Navern, jarre altogether in sound from them. The
country it self is for the soil nothing fertile, and by reason of the sharp
and cold air, less inhabited; and thereupon sore haunted and annoied with
most cruel wolves. Wolves.
Which in such violent rage not only set upon cattle, to the exceeding great
damage of the inhabitants, but also assail men with great danger; and not in
this tract only, but in many other parts likewise of Scotland, in so much as
by virtue of an act of Parliament, the Sheriffs and inhabitants in every
country, are commanded to go forth thrice a year a hunting, for to destroy
the wolves and their whelps. But (if in this The longest days.
and the longest day. For, by reason of the position of heaven here distant
from the Aequinoctiall line 59. degrees and forty minutes, the longest day
contains 18. hours and 25. scruples: and the shortest night not above five
hours and 45. scruples. So that the Panegyrist is not true in this, who made
report in times past, That the sun in manner sets not at all, but passes
by, and lightly glanceth upon the Horizon: happily relying upon this authority
of Tacitus, for that the extreme points, and plain levels of the earth, with
their shade so low raised up no darkness at all. But more truly Pliny
(according to true reason) where he treats of the longest days, according
to the inclination of the suns circle to the Horison. The longest (says he)
in Italy are 15. hours, in Britain 17. where the light nights do prove that
undoubtedly by experience, which reason forces credibly, that in Midsummer
days, when the sun approaches near to the Pole of the world, the places of
the earth under the Pole have day 6. months, though the light having but a
narrow compass, the night contrariwise when he is far remote in middle
winter.

In this utmost tract, which Ptolomee extends out far East, whereas indeed
it bears full North (for which Roger Bacon in his Geography taxed him long
since) where Tacitus said, That an huge and enorme space of ground running
still forward to the farthest point, grows narrow like a wedge. There run out
three Promontories, mentioned by the old writers, Berubium.
namely BERUBIUM, now called Urdehead, near to Bernswale a village: Virvedrum.
Orcas.
VIRVEDRUM, now Dunsby, otherwise named Duncansby, which is thought to be the
most remote promontorie of Britain: ORCAS, now named Howburn, which Ptolomee
sets over against the Islands Orcades, as the utmost of them all: Tarvisium,
or Tarvodunum in Marcianus. Tarvus what it is.

Shetland.


this also in Ptolomee is called TARVEDRUM, and TARVISIUM, and so named, if my
conjecture fail me not, because it is the farthest end of Britain: for Tarvus
in the British tongue has a certain signification of ending. With which I
accordingly will end this book, purposing to speak of the out-Isles, Orcades,
Hebudes or Hebrides, and of Shetland, in their due place.

THus have I briefly run over Scotland, and verily more briefly than the worth
of so great a kingdom requires: neither doubt I but that some one or other
will set it forth more at large, and depaint it (as I said) with a more
flourishing pensill, in greater certainty, and upon better knowledge; when as
our most mighty Monarch now opens those remote places, hitherto fore-closed
from us. Mean while, if I have at any time dropped asleep (for the most
watchful may sometimes be taken napping) or if some error in this unknown
tract has misled me from the truth (as nothing is more rife and easy than
error) I hope the courteous Reader will pardon it upon my acknowledgment; and
of his kindness recalling me from error, direct me in the right way to the
truth. HIBERNIAE IRELAND Anglis. YVERDON BRITANNIS ERIN in^elis. IERNA Orphaeo
and Arist. IRIS Diodoro Siculo IVVERNA Iuuelalj IOYERNIA Ptol.


IRELAND, AND THE SMALLER ISLANDS IN THE BRITISH OCEAN.


NOw have I rather passed over than thoroughly surveied all BRITAIN, namely,
those two most flourishing Kingdoms, ENGLAND and SCOTLAND: And whereas I am
now to cross the seas for IRELAND, and the rest of the Isles, if I premise
some few lines touching the British sea, The British sea*
I hope it shall not seem a crooked course, or an extravaga^t digression.
BRITAIN is encompassed round about with the vast open and main Ocean, which
ebbeth and flows so violently with main tides, that, as Pytheas of Marsiles
has reported, Lib. Hexameron. cap. 3.
it swells 80. cubits about Britain: and St. Basile has termed it Mare
Magnum, etc. The great sea and dreadful to yea and S. Ambrose wrote thus of
it; The great sea not adventured on by sailers, British sea in times past
unknown.
nor attempted by Mariners, is that which with a roaring and surging current
environeth Britain, and reaches into far remote parts, and so hidden out of
sight, as that the fables have not yet come hither. Certes this sea sometimes
overfloweth the fields adjoining, otherwhiles again it retireth and leaves all
bare: and that I may use the words of Pliny, by reason of this open
largeness, it feels more effectually the force and influence of the Moon,
exercising her power thereupon without impeachment: and it flows always up
within the land with such violence, that it Belluosus qui remotis
Obstrepit Oceanus Britannis.
The Ocean of sea monsters freight with store,
Upon the Britans far remote does roar.


And Juvenal in the like tune.

Quanto Delphino Balaena Britannica major.
As much as Whales full huge, that use to breed
In British Sea, the Dolphins do exceed.
And so great an adventure and exploit it was thought, but to cross only this
Libanius the Grecian sophister, in a Panegy^icall oration unto Constantinus
Chlorus, cried out in these words: (...): that is, This voyage into Britain
seemed comparable to the greatest triumph. Iul. Firmicus.
And Julius Firmicus, not that famous Astrologer, but another that was a
Christian, in a little treatise of the error of profane religions, written
unto the Emperors Constans and Constantius, brake out into this exclamation.
In winter time (a thing that never was done before, nor ever will be done
again) ye trampled under your oars the swelling

The famous learned man Julius Scaliger in his Poeticalls, affirms that
Caurus the North-west wind arises and blows out of this British sea, The
wind Caurus.
and that against the opinion of Lucan, who wrote thus: Primus ab Oceano caput
exeris Atlantaeo,
Caure, movens aestus.
From Ocean called Atlantic, Caur thou first
Thy head do show, making seas fell and cursed.


Certes in Ireland he keeps foul work, and plays the tyrant; and Caesar
writes

But whereas some write that in this our sea ships were first devised and used,
I am not disposed to believe them. But Pliny witnesses that the Britans used
small wicker vessels, The old twiggen or wicker ships of the Britans.
covered over with hides (which at this day they term Corraghs) and with
Pliny accords Lucan, who versifieth in this wise.

Primum cana salix madefacto vimine parvam
Texitur in puppim, caesoque induta juvenco,
Vectoris patiens tumidum super emicat amnem:
Sic Venetus stagnante Pado, fusoque Britannus
Navigat Oceano.
At first wet twigges of willow gray, that long in soake had lain,
And covered over close with hide of Ox or Bullock slain,
(But wrought before unto the form of little bark or boat)
Used to carry passengers, the swelling streams afloat.
Thus over Po, that river large, sails the Venetian,
And thus the Britan makes way upon the spacious Ocean.
Semblably Solinus Polyhistor. In the sea between Britain and Ireland they
sail in wicker bottomes, which they cover round about with

As for the commodities which this sea affords, the warmth whereby it
comfort and cherishes the earth, the vapors wherewith it nourishes the
air, and bedeweth the fields: touching also the great variety of fishes that
it breeds, as Salmons ( which Bid calls Isicios, as Pliny Esox) Plaice,
Pungers, Cods, Hadocks, Whitings, Herrings, Basse, Maccarell, Mullets, Turbits,
Seals or Sea-calves, Rochets, Soles, Pilchards, Raifish or Scale, Thornback,
Pearls.
they are so well known. Yet the pearls are not to be overpassed in silence,
which King Jubas reports to be shaped round, and to swim in the British sea
by flocks or swarms, in manner of bees, following their Captain and Leader.

And Marcellinus, when he had spoken of the Persian and Indian pearls; which
kind of gemme ( says he) we are not ignorant to be engendered Which although
they be accounted by Pliny small ones, and ill colored, yet Suetonius
writes, that Caesar made his voyage into Britain in hope of them; and that
they were of such bigness, as he took the peise of some of them by hand, and
dedicated a breast plate made of them unto Venus Genitrix, which he also
witnessed by a subscription. Origin likewise as touching these pearls writes
thus: Sea-pearles, such as be most notable, are found among the Indians, but
the best are bred in the Red sea: In the next place are those pearls which are
taken in the British Ocean: Bosphorus near Scythia. And after a few lines: But
that kind which they say is gotten in Britain, for the superficial color
verily somewhat resembles a golden hew, but cloudie it is and troubled, and for
the luster with the dimmest Furthermore, our Venerable Bede writing of the
Shell-fishes of this our sea: Among them ( says he) there be Musculae.
Muscles, wherein they find enclosed oftentimes the best pearl of all colors,
of purple, Vetu^tior Venustior.
older it is, the fairer it shows. And Tertullian reproving the lavish
expense and superfluity in his time: If ambitious pride ( says he) may be
maintained from the British or Indian seas, there is a kind of shellfish more
pleasant in taste, I say not than the purple fish or oister, but than the very
scallop it self.

This sea, which generally is called MARE BRITANNICUM, and OCEANUS CALEDONIUS,
according to the diverse situation of places has sundry and distinct names.

Eastward, where it has Germany opposite unto it, they call it the GERMAN
sea: Northward, it is termed the Hyberborean sea, which ancient writers
reported untruely, to be dead, dull, and heavy for the oar, and in that
respect not raised with winds: and Tacitus believed it was so, belike, because,
as he writes, the Lands and Mountains be rare, which minister cause and
matter of tempests, and for that a deep mass of continuat sea is more slowly
stirred to work and rage. On the West side it is named OCEANUS DEUCALEDONIUS,
and VERGIVIUS, both South and West from Ireland: but all the way that it
runs between Britain and Ireland, the HIBERNICUS, that is, Julius Solinus.
Irish sea, and by Seamen at this day S. Georges Chanel, And ancient writers
have recorded that it rages all the year long, with surging billows and
counter seas, and never is at rest nor navigable, unless it be in some few
summer days. But Southward, where it interfloweth France and Britain, it is
properly called the BRITISH sea, and by the common mariners, the Chanel, by
English sailers the SLEEVE; and in the same sense Le Manche in French, because
it grows narrow in manner of a sleeve. And this name of the BRITISH sea
extended as far as to Spain, as Pomponius Mela, Lib. 2. c. 4.
being himself also a Spaniard, where he reports that the Pyrene Mountain
runs forth into the BRITISH OCEAN.

Moreover, there be certain Islands, which, as it were for a show, Nature has
be sprinkled along these seas, fewer toward the East and South parts, but
Westward and Northward more in number. For there, by their thick standing
together, they do after a sort garnish the sea, yea and depaint it as it were
with their colors, in most pleasant sort. But for as much as Ireland far
excels all the rest, in regard of the greatness thereof and frequencie of
resort thereto,

HIBERNIA, IRELAND.
IN the Vergivian sea, The Ocean Vergivian.
which name is derived, not a vergendo, that is, of bending toward, as some
are of opinion, but of Mor-weridh; Farigi, by which name the Irish men call it,
the most famous Island HIBERNIA, that is to say, IRELAND, encloseth the West
side of Britain; an Island which in times past challenged the third place
amongst all the Isles of the then known world. For thus as touching Islands
writes the ancient Geographer. (...): Libro magnae constructionis.
that is, Of all Islands for greatness the Indian TAPROBANE is prime and
principal; next after it BRITAIN; and in a third degree another British
Island, named HIBERNIA, that is, Ireland; and thereupon Ptolomee called it
LITTLE BRITAIN.

This Isle by Orpheus, Aristotle, and Claudian is named IERNA; by Iuvenal and
Mela JUVERNA; by Diodorus Siculus IRIS; by Martian of Heraclea JOYEPNIA; by
Eustathius OYERNIA and BERNIA; by the native inhabitants Erin; by the Britans
Yuerdon, and of English men Ireland. Whence these names have had their
original, sundry and diverse opinions have been conceived from time to time,
as in a doubtful matter. Some derive Hibernia from Hiberno tempore, that is,
from the Winter season; others from Hiberus a Spaniard; and some again from
the river Iberus: the author of the book entitled Eulogium, from Duke
Irnalph: Postellus, a fancifull man, when he read Pomponius Mela publicly in
Paris, because he would seem to have a reach beyond other men, fetches the
original thereof from the Hebrews: so that Irin should be as much as Iurin,
that is, the Jews land: The forsooth says he, being most wise Sages, and
learned Philosophers, knowing by their learning that the Empire of the world
should be settled in the strongest Angle, which lies West, seized upon those
parts, and Ireland with the first: The Syrians also and Tyrians, to lay the
foundation of their future Empire, endeavored all they could to inhabit those
Regions. Pardon me I pray you if I dare not subscribe hereto, no nor give my
consent to that opinion most received, as touching the Winter season aforesaid:
although I have read, that in this Island the air upon every wind is cold and
winterlike. As for Hibernia, Iuverna, and Ouernia, they came doubtless from
IERNA, spoken of by Orpheus and Aristotle: and the same Ierna, as also Iris,
Yuerdhon, and Ireland, from Erin, the term that the inhabitants use. From
this Erin therefore, hold off and suspend my judgment: neither know I what to
divine and ground my conjecture upon, unless peradventure that name may come
from Hiere, an Irish word, which with them signifies the West, or a Western
coast; whence Erin may seem to be derived, as one would say, a Western
country. Of this opinion have I been a good while since, induced thereto with
my own conceit and flattering conjecture, both because it lies furthest
Westward of any region in all Europe (as being no more than twelve degrees
distant from the utmost West point) as also for that the river running in the
most remote Ptolomee called IERNUS, like as the Promontorie or Cape bearing out
farthest West in Spain (from whence our Irish-men came) is named by Strabo
IERNE, and as the next river unto it, which also is most West of all the rivers
in Spain, is called by Mela IERNA. Moreover, by reason of the Western
situation Spain is named Hesperia, and that West Cape in Africa, Hesperium
cornu, yea and even in Germany these countries, Westrich, Westphalen, etc.
have Erin of the Western situation. Besides, these names of Ireland which I
have spoken of, the Irish Bards or Poets have usually taken up in their ballads
these terms, Tirvolas, Totidanan, and Banno, as the most ancient names of
this Island, but upon what reason I wot not, Bannomanna.
unless Banno were that Bannomanna which Pliny mentions out of Timaeus,
whiles his pen coasteth along the outmost sides and skirts of Europe, and the
shore of the Northren Ocean on the left hand from Scythia, even as far as
Cadis in Spain. For what country that same Bannomanna should be, the
Geographers have not yet found out But Biaun in Irish signifies Sacred or
Holy, Festus Av^enus calls Ireland SACRAM INSULAM, The holy Island.

Orae Maritimae.


that is, The holy Island, in that little book entitled ORAE MARITIMAE, that
is, The Sea coasts, which he compiled out of most ancient Geographers: namely,
Hecataeus of Miletum, Hellanicus of Lesbos, Philaeus of Athens, Caryandaeus,
Pausymachus of Samos, Damastus, Euctemon, and others. But I will write down
his verses: for when he had spoken of the Islands Ostrymides, thus he
versifieth: Ast hinc duobus in SACRAM, sic insulam
Dixere prisci, solibus cursus rati est.
Haec inter undas multum cespitem jacit,
Eamque late gens Hibernorum colit.
Propinqua rursus insula Albionum patet.
But to the SACRED Isle (for so
They used to call it long ago)
From hence a course who so desires,
Just two days sailing it requires.
Much turfe it casts the waves among,
And Irish dwell therein along.
Now very near to it again,
The Albions Isle is kenned plain.


Ogygia. In his book De macula in Luna, that is, Of the spot in the Moon.
If that OGYGIA, which Plutarch placed on the West side of our Britain were not
(...), but (...), not a vain dream, but a matter in truth, he may seem by
that name plainly to point at Ireland, although the reports that he so sadly
tells of it, be mere poetical fictions and Milesian toies. Neither can any
man readily tell, why they called it Ogygia; unless happily of the antiquity:
For the Grecians termed nothing by the name of Ogygia but that which was very
ancient. And Robert Constantine seems to have shot wide all the world over,
Isle Cerne.
when he affirms that CERNE, mentioned in Lycophron, was our Ireland: for
Lycophron himself, and Tzetzes that commenteth Cerne toward the sun rising:
and all the best learned men think it to be Madagascar, situated as it were in
another world, right under the Tropique of Capricorn, right over against
Aethiopia. Thus much touching the names of Ireland, yet so, as we remember
withal to take this by the way, that in these later times it was called also
SCOTIA, Hibernia called Scotia.
that is, Scotland by Isidor and Bid, of the Scots who inhabited it: and that
thence the name of Scotland, together with the Scots themselves, came into
Britain. But of this we have spoken already once before, and therefore have
no cause to repeat here.

This Island is stretched out from South to North not broader than it is long,
as Strabo has recorded, but shaped in form of a lentile, or an egg; nor of
twenty Philemon in Ptolomee has set it down: but according to the later
writers, The state of Ireland.
it takes up three hundred miles and no more in length, and is scarcely one
hundred and twenty miles broad. On the East side it has England severed from
it with a troublous and tempestuous sea, which is called the Irish sea: on the
West the

The country, Giral. Cambrensis in Topographia Hibernia.
if you would hear Giraldus Cambrensis to speak, is uneven, full of hills,
soft, waterish, and boggie, wild and overgrowne with woods, lying open to the
winds, and so full of meeres or loghs, that a man may see ponds and standing
waters even upon the mountains. The air (as Mela says) is nothing good and
favorable for ripening of corn: but the ground is so rank of grass, and the
same not only fresh and long, but sweet also withal, that the cattle may
fill their bellies in a small piece of the day, and unless they be kept from
grazing, Cattle.
and not suffered to feed long together, their bellies will burst. Hence Irish
mantles and rugges. Horses called Hobbies. Hawks.
and make of their course wool, rugges or shagge mantles, caddowes also or
coverlets, which are vented into foreign countries. They have likewise
excellent good horses (we term them Hobbies) which have not the same pace
that other horses in their course, but a soft and round amble, setting one
leg before another very finely. Their hawks also are right commendable, but
these, as all other living creatures (besides men, women, and greyhounds) are
smaller here than in England. Now as well the air as the ground is excessive
moist; whence it is that very many there be sore troubled with looseness, and
rheumes, Diseases.
but strangers especially: Uskebah.
Aqua vitae of the best, which inflameth a great deal less, and dries much
more than ours. Whereas Giraldus writes, that those which are borne here sick
en never of any of the three kinds of fevers, it is daily found by experience
to be false. As for the land it self (that I may use the testimony here of
the said Giraldus) it is of all countries most temperate; neither does any
frying heat of Cancer drive folk to seek shade, nor chilling cold of
Capricorn call them in to the fire: but all times in manner, by reason of the
pleasantness and temperate disposition of the air, have a gentle kind of
warmth.

Of Bees there are such numbers, that they be found not only in hives, but
also within the bodies of trees, and holes of the earth. Likewise it has
vines, but more Why grapes are not ripe in Britain.
than for any fruit they yield. For no sooner is the sun passed out of Leo,
but cold blasts here in this our climat are wont presently to follow, and in
Autumn the afternoon heats are less effectual and shorter, both here and
in our Britain, than to give the full and kind ripening unto Grapes. Besides
this, there is no snake in this country, nor any venomous thing whatsoever:
howbeit much noisance they have every where by wolves. And that I may speak
all at a word, whether a man respect the fertility of the soil, or the
commodiousnesse of sea and havens, or the inhabitants themselves, who are
stout, hardy, warlike, witty, proper men of body, and goodly feature, of a
wondrous soft skin, by reason also of the tenderness of muscles passing
nimble; the Island abounds in so many blessings, that Giraldus said That
nature had cast into this Western kingdom of Zephirus, a more gracious eye
than ordinary. Now that otherwhiles there goes of it an ill name, it is for
that the inhabitants are in some places wild and very uncivil, who in a
mavelous contrariety of nature, both love idleness, and withal hate
quietness: who also are immoderately given to fleshly lust, and that over
soon. For among the wilder sort they bestow their maidens in marriage, as ripe
and ready for husbands, when they be once ten or twelve years of age. Neither
will they by any means stay for a competent maturitie of years, a thing
observed in all other countries. But as touching the manners and qualities of
the Irish nation, I will discourse more at large in the end of this book. And
now, if it please you, give Ireland the hearing, whiles she Hadrianus Iunius.

Illa ego sum Graiis olim glacialis Ierne
Dicta, and Iasoniae puppis been cognita nautis:
Quae Tarthessiaco propior se tingere soles
Flumine conspicio, Cauro subjecta procaci:
Cui Deus, and melior rerum nascentium origo
Ius commune dedit cum Creta altrice tonantis,
Noxia ne nostris diffundant sibila in oris
Terrificae creti tabo Phorcynidos angues:
Et forte illati compressis faucibus atris
Viroso pariter vitam cum sanguine ponant.
En ego cum regni sceptro, Mavortia bello
Pectora, and horriferas hominum, nil fingo, figuras,
Qui cursu alipedes norint praevertere cervos,
Dedico, piscososque lacus, volucrumque paludes
Omnigenum lustris foetas, stannique fodinas,
Et puri argenti venas, quas terra refossis
Visceribus manes imos visura recludit.
I am that frozen Isle, which Greeks once did Ierne call,
Well known to Argo Jasons ship, and to her sailers all.
Which subject unto Caurus cursed have sun more near in sight,
When in Tartessus flood he sets and seems to drench his light.
Whom God and better Nature has secured from this fear
(A gift imparted eke to Crete which Jupiter did rear)
That snakes of grim Medusa's blood so filthy that were bred,
Should dare in these my coasts to hiss, and hurtful venom spread.
And say, that some by chance there were brought thither of that brood,
Throtled anon they lose at once their life with poisoned blood.
Lo here with regal scepter I present most martial minds,
And dreadful shapes (I fable not) of men who hearts and hindes
So swift of foot in running can outstrip and leave behind.
With fishfull lakes besides and fennes, where fowls of every kind
Their eiries have and harbors safe: moreover Delfes of tin,
Rich Mines likewise of silver pure, which wondrous far within
The earth has kept, whose bowels now dug up for men to pry,
As if she meant even hell to see, she shows them to the eye.
Ireland why called Ogygia.
If that be true which the Irish Historiographers record, this Island was not
without cause by Plutarch termed Ogygia, that is, very ancient. For they fetch
the beginning of their histories from the most profound and remote records of
antiquity, so that in comparison of them, the antientness of all other nations
is but novelty, and, as it were, a matter of yesterday. They write that one
Caesaria Noah his Niece, inhabited it before Noah's flood: Then that Bartholanus
a Scythian came hither about three hundred years after the said Noah's flood,
and fought right doughtie battles with giants: That many years after Nemethus
a Scythian arrived here, and forthwith Dela with certain Grecians seized upon
this Island; and soon after, that Gaothel with Scota his wife, daughter to
Pharaoh King of Egypt landed here, and nominated after his wives name the
Island Scotia, and according to his own name the language Gaothela; and that,
about the time of the Israelites departure out of Egypt. And the British
history reports how some few ages after, Hiberus and Hermion ( Ever and
Erimon the Irish writers term them) the sons of Milesius King of Spain, by
the sufferance of Gurguntius King of the Britans, planted colonies in this
country, after it had been dispeopled by a pestilence. My purpose is not
either to aver these reports for true, nor yet to refute them: In such things
as these let Antiquity be pardonable, and enjoy a prerogative.

Surely, as I doubt not but that this Island became inhabited even of old time,
when as mankind was spread over all quarters of the world: so it is evident,
that the first inhabitants thereof passed thither out of our Britain: For (to
say nothing of an infinite number of British words in the Irish tongue,
together with the Britans the first inhabitants of Ireland. Little Britain.
the natures of the people, and their fashions, as Tacitus says, differ not
much from Britain: of all ancient writers it is called A British Island:
Diodorus Siculus termed Irin a part of Britain: and Ptolomee named the same
BRITANNIA PARVA, that is, little Britain, as you may see, if you list to
compare his Geographickes with his book of Great Construction. And the Epitome
of Strabo calls the inhabitants in plain words, BRITANS: the old Geographers
also named it The Britans Island: yea and Festus Aveienus shows this out of
Dionysius Afer, when he treats of British Islands, in these verses.


Exuperant undas, and vasta cacumina tollunt,
Hae numero geminae, pingues sola, cespitis ampli,
Conditur occidui qua Rheni gurgitis unda,
Dira Britannorum sustentant agmina terris.
Here other Islands near unto the chilling North winds blast,
The waves of sea surmount aloof, and show their mountains vast,
In number twain, their soil is fat, their ground both large and wide
What way the Western Rhene his gulf and waters deep does hide:
These Lands fierce Britan troops maintain, and thereon they abide.
Neither is there any other country, out of which by reason of the vicinitie
they might pass over more commodiously into Ireland than out of Britain: from
whence there is the like passage thither, in respect of the space of sea
between, as is out of France into Britain. But afterward, when the Romans
had enlarged their Empire every way, many there were no doubt who out of
Spain, Gaul, and Britain withdrew themselves hither, that they might shake
off that intolerable yoke of the Romans slaverie: Neither do some otherwise
understand these words of Tacitus: Ireland being situate in the midst
between Spain and Britanie, lying also very fitly for the French sea, would
aptly have united, to the great use and advantage of the And albeit Julius
Agricola also kept with him a petty King or Prince of Ireland, who was driven
thence by occasion of civil dissension, that he might have the more
advantageous opportunity thereby to invade the Island, which he thought would
be subdued and held with a legion, and a small power of aid forces; and was
persuaded withal, that the same would avail much for the affairs of
Britain, in case the Roman forces were planted every where, and hope of
liberty banished, as it were, far out of sight: yet we read not that the
Romans gave any attempt that way. Notwithstanding some are verily persuaded
that they assaied the conquest of it, and do Iuvenal.

-- Arma quid ultra
Littora Iuvernae promovimus, and modo captas
Orcadas, and minima contentos nocte Britannos?
Why warred we past Irish coasts, and the Orkneis lately won,
Beyond the Britans eke that have least night and longest Sun?
Yet the Panegyricall oration pronounced before Constantius the Emperor,
implies that Ireland was under his government: Britain (says he) is so
recovered, that even Also we find written in the Chronicles of later
historians, that Ireland, together with Britain and Thule, at the division of
the Empire fell unto Constantine, Caesarea.
the son of Constantine the Great. And that very fond fable of Caesarea Noah's
Niece, carries before it the name of Caesar's, so as that therein may seem
covertly couched the coming of some Caesar into Ireland. Howbeit I can hardly
persuade my self to believe, that this country at any time became subject to
the Roman Conquests.
But a blessed and happy turn had it been for Ireland, if it had at any time
been under their subjection: surely, it had then been reduced from barbarism
to civilitie. For wheresoever the Romans were victors, they brought them whom
they conquered to civilitie: neither verily in any place else throughout Europe
was there any civilitie, learning, and elegance, but where they ruled. And very
inconsiderately also they may seem to have neglected this Island. For from
hence (to the plague and spoil of Britain) brake out most dangerous enemies:
which August^^ seems to have foreseen, when he took so small care of
Britain, for the danger which he presaged to hover and approach from the
nations round about adjoining. But when in times past, as Strabo writes, all
people Westward were termed Celto-Scythae) grew mighty in Ireland, and began
to be renowned. Furthermore, under the Emperors Honorius and Arcadius it was
inhabited by the Scottish nations, as Orosius has written. Whereupon Claudian
living in the same age wrote thus: Scotorum cumulos flevit glacialis Ierne.
Yce-frozen Ireland wept amain,
To see the Scots on heaps lie slain.
And in another place, -- Totam cum Scotus Hibernem
Movit --
What time as Scots did make,
All Ireland arms to take.


For from hence it was that the Scots made their forcible invasions into
Britain, and hither they were otherwhiles with great losses and overthrowes
repulsed. But whence they came into Ireland, Ninnius a disciple of Elvodugus,
an author of good antiquity, shall inform you by his own words; who lived, as
himself witnesses, in the year 830. under Anaraugh King of Anglesey and
Guineth, or North Wales. For after he had related, that in the third age of the
world the Britans came into Britain, Last of all came the Scots, Irishmen out
of Spain. In other copies Tholanus.
from the parts of Spain into Ireland. But the first that arrived there, was
Partholanus, with a thousand men and women together, and they grew after to be
four thousand: and there fell a mortality among them, so that in one week they
all died, and there remained of them not so much as one alive. The second that
landed in Ireland was one Nemeth, the son of Aguomenes, who, by report, sailed
upon the sea one year and an half: and afterward, when he had suffered
shipwreck, fell with an haven in Ireland, and he returned into Spain. And after
that came three sons of a Spanish knight, with thirty Ciules with them, and
in every Ciule thirty wives; and they continued there for the space of one
year. Last of all came Elam-Hoctor, and dwelt there with all his progeny With
this Ninnius accords Henry of Huntingdon. The Britans (says he) in the third
age of the world came into Britain, and the Scots in the fourth into Ireland.

And how ever these reports be not most certain, yet sure it is that they came
out of Spain into Ireland: and part of them departing thence, came and added a
third nation unto the Britans and Picts in Britain. The received opinion of
the Irish is agreeable hereunto, for they most willingly acknowledge themselves
to be an off spring of the Spaniards. Neither verily can it be a marvel,
that a number of them withdrew themselves into Ireland out of the North part of
Spain, which, as S^rabo writes, is most barren, and wherein men live most
miserably. Out of those words of Ninnius Bartholanus and Nemethus, which
fabulously they fetch so far off, out of most profound and remote antiquity,
are to be drawn back unto later times. Neither is it needful for me to note
again, that this Island was of the Scottish inhabitants called SCOTIA.

Rufinus, concerning the conversion of the Hiberians in Asia, and Celestin Pope
of Rome sent unto these Scots Palladius the Bishop. Anno Christi 431.
Palladius. Vincent. l. 9. c. 7
Whereupon Prosper Aquitanus writes in this manner against Collator. Celestin
delivered the Britans from the Pelagians heresy, when he secluded certain
enemies of grace, who held their own native country, even from that unknown
part of the Ocean: and having ordained a Bishop among the Scots, whiles he
labo^red to keep an Island of the Romans in the Catholic faith, he brought also
a barbarous nation to be Christian. Yet Ninnius writes, that Palladius being
taken away by untimely Patrick. For he being a Britan borne, and that as some
will in Cluidsdale, allied also to Sir Martin of Tourain, and a disciple of
Saint German, was appointed successor by Pope Celestin to Palladius deceased;
who with so good success taught and sowed the seed of Christian religion over
all Ireland, that he converted the greatest part by far thereof unto Christ,
and deserved the name of the Apostle of the Irish nation. Touching whom an
ancient writer, Hierieus Ant^siodorensis in his book of Saint Germans
miracles; For as much as (says he) the glory of a Father appears bright in
the governance of his own sons, among many sons whom we believe 18. years
unto his most holy discipline, out of the vein of so worthy a fountain drew
no mean knowledge and learning in the heavenly scriptures. Whom also that most
divine and godly Bishop, considering to be in religion magnanimous, in virtues
excellent, and in learning powerful: and deeming it mere folly, that so
strong and able an husbandman should live idle in the tillage and ordering of
the Lords corn^field, directed him unto holy Celestine Pope of Rome, by
Segetius a Priest of his, who should give testimony unto the Apostolical See,
of Ecclesiastical honesty in the behalf of that Monks of Ireland holy men
and learned.
The Irish scholars of Patricke profited so notably in Christianity, that in
the age next following, Ireland was termed Sanctoram-patria, that is, The
native country of Saints; and the Scottish Monks in Ireland and Britain
highly excelled for their holiness and learning, yea and sent out whole
flocks of most devout men into all parts of Europe, who were the first
founders of Luxeul Abbey in Burgundy, of Bobie Abbey in Italy, of Wirtzburge
Abbey in Francland, of St. Gallus Sweitzerland, of Malmesburie, Lindisfarn, and
of many other Monasteries in Britain. For out of Ireland came Caelius Sedulius
a Priest, Columba, Columbane, Colman, Aidan, Gallus, Kithan, Maidulph, Brendan,
and many other celebrated for their holy life and learning. Of these Monks is
that Hieric above named of Auxerre to be understood, when he writes thus to
the Emperor Charles the Bald: What should I speak of Ireland, which setting
light by the dangers of sea, flitteth all of it well near with whole flocks
of Philosophers unto our shores? of whom so many as are more skillful and
learned than the rest, do voluntarily banish themselves, to attend dutifully
upon the most wise Solomon, and be at his command.

This Monastical profession, although but then newly come up, was far
different was that of Columbane (a Monk of Ireland) who, as the Abbat
Walafride writes, when Sigebert King of the Franckners dealt very earnestly
with him, and that by way of many large and fair promises, that he should not
depart out of his kingdom, answered him after the same sort, as Eusebius has
reported of Thaddeus, namely, That it became not them to embrace other men's
riches, Contempt of riches.
who for Christ's sake had forsaken their own. And the Bishops of Britain seemed
no less to have despised riches, seeing they were so poor, that they had
nothing of their own. For, as we read in Sulpitius Severus, three Bishops of
Britain, in the Council holden at Rimine, for want of their own lived of the
public charges. The English Saxons also in that age conflowed and resorted
from all parts into Ireland, as it were to the mart of good learning: and hence
it is Such a one was sent over into Ireland, for to be trained up in learning:
and in the life of Sulgen, who flourished 600. years ago.

Exemplo patrum commotus, amore legendi,
Ivit ad Hibernos, sophia, mirabile, claros.
The fathers old he following, for love to read good works,
Went unto Irish men, who were (O wonder) famous Clerks.
English Saxons seem to have had their letters and writing from the Irish.
And from thence it may seem our forefathers the ancient English learned the

And no cause have we to marvel that Ireland, which now for the most part is
rude, half barbarous, and altogether void of any polite and exquisite
literature, was full of so devout, godly, and good wits in that age, wherein
good letters throughout all Christendom lay neglected and half buried, seeing
that the divine providence of that most gracious and almighty ruler of the
world, sows the seeds and brings forth the plants of sanctity and good
arts, Arts and piety sowed among nations in sundry ages.
one whiles in one nation and other whiles in another, as it were in garden
beds and borders, and that in sundry ages: which being removed and translated
hither and thither, may by a new growth

But the outrage of wars by little and little quenched these hot affections
and studies of holiness and good literature. For in the year 644. after
Christ's nativitie, Egfrid King of Northumberland with fire and sword made
spoil and havocke of Ireland, a nation most friendly unto England; for which
cause Bid charge him after a sort, in most grave and important terms.
Afterward the Norwegians, under the leading of Turgese their Captain, spoiled
and wasted the country in most lamentable manner for the space of 30. years:
But when he was once slain by a train and ambush laid for him, the inhabitants
fell upon the Norwegians, and made such a Norwegians were no doubt those
Normans, who, as Rhegino says, in the time of Charles the great, setting upon
Ireland, an Isle of the Scots, were by the Scots put to flight. Oustmanni, who
happily are those that Tacitus names Aestiones, and Egivardus Aisti.
After this the Oustmans, as one would say Esterlings, or Eastmen, came out of
the seacoasts of Germany into Ireland; who having entered into certain Cities
under the pretense of great traffic, in a short space raised a most dangerous
war. About the very same time in manner, Eadgar that most puissant King of
England, conquered also a great part of Ireland: For thus we read in a certain
Charter of his: Unto whom God of his gracious favor has granted, together
with the Empire of England, dominion over all the kingdoms of the Isles lying
in the Ocean, with their most

After these tempestuous foreign wars were allaied, there followed a most
grievous storm of civil dissension at home, which made way for the English to
conquer Ireland. For Henry the second King of England, taking occasion and
opportunity, William of Anjou: But through the counsel of his mother Maude
the Empress, this project was rejected unto another time. Howbeit not many
years between, Dermicius, Dermot Mac Morrog.
the son of Murchard (Dermot Mac Morrog they call him) who reigned over the
East part of Ireland, which in Latin is called Lagenia, and commonly Leinster,
being for his tyranny and lustful lewdness thrust out of his kingdom (for
he had ravished the wife of O Rorke, a petty King of Meth) obtained aid and
forces of Henry Pembroch, Richard Strongbow.
surnamed Strongbow, of the house of Clare, that he for his part should aid
him in the recovering of his Kingdom, and that himself would assure unto the
Earl, together with his daughter Eva, the said Kingdom in succession after
him. Hereupon the said Earl having forthwith mustered up and raised an army
of Welsh and English together, and joined unto him to accompany him in the
wars, the Fitz-Giralds, Fitz-Stephans, and other Gentlemen out of England and
Wales, restored his father in law Dermot into his former Kingdom again: and
within few years gat by conquest so great a part of Ireland into his own
hands, that his power became now suspected to the King of England; Weisford,
Henry the second enters Ireland.
Ossorie, Caterlogh, and Kildare, with certain Castles. Then King Henry the
second, having gathered a power together in the year of Christ 1172. sailed
over into Ireland, and obtained the Princely title of sovereign rule of the
Island.

For the States of Ireland passed over unto him all their rule and power,
Girald. Camb and a Manuscript in the hands of Baron Houth.
namely, Rothericke O Conor Dun, that is, The Brown, Monarch of Ireland,
Dermot Mac Carti King of Cork, Donald O Bren King of Limi^icke, O Carell King
Uriel, Macshaglin King of Ophaly, O Rorke King of Meth, O Neale King of Ulster,
with the rest of the Nobles and their people, and the same under their Charters
subscribed, signed, delivered, and transmitted to Rome. Which was ratified and
confirmed moreover by a Patent of Pope Hadrian, by a ring delivered unto him in
token of his investiture, and also by the authority of certain Provincial
Synods. This King Henry afterward delivered up the Seigniorie of Ireland, into
the hands of his son John; which conveiance Pope Urban confirmed by his Bull,
and in testimony of his confirmation sent him a Coronet of Peacocks feathers
broided and embroidered with gold. Whom, after he was once established in his
Kingdom, diverse authors affirm to have granted by his Charter or Patent,
Ireland and England both unto Feudatarie: also to have bound his successors to
pay three hundred Marks unto the Bishop of Rome: But that most worthy and
famous Sir Thomas Moore, who took the Popes part even unto death, affirms
this to be false: For he writes that the Romanists can show no such grant;
that they never demanded the foresaid money, and that the Kings of England
never acknowledged it. But by his leave, as great a man as he was, the case
stood otherwise, as evidently appears by the Parliament Records, the credit
whereof cannot be impugned. For in an assembly of all the States of the
Realm, in the reign of Edward the third, the Lord Chancellor of England
proposed and related, that the Pope Homage as the tribute, which was to be
yielded for England and Ireland, to the performance whereof King John in times
past had obliged himself and his successors: and of this point which he put
to question, required their opinion. The Bishops desired to have a day by them
selves for to consult about this matter: the Nobles likewise and the people or
Communaltie. The day after, they all met, and with one general accord ordained
and That for as much as neither King John, nor any other King whatsoever, could
impose such servitude upon the Kingdom, but with the common consent and assent
of a Parliament; which was not done: and whatsoever he had passed was against
his oath at his coronation by him in express words religiously taken before
God: Therefore in case the Pope should urge this matter, they were most ready,
to the uttermost of their power, to resist him resolutely with their bodies and
goods. They also who are skillful in scanning and sifting every prick and
tittle of the laws, cry out with one voice, That the said Grant or Charter of
King John was void in Law, by that clause and reservation in the end thereof;
Saving unto us and our heirs, all our Rights, Liberties, and Regalities. But

Ever since King John's time, the Kings of England were styled Lords of Ireland,
until that King Henry the eighth in the memory of our fathers was in a
Parliament of Ireland, by the States thereof declared King of Ireland, because
the name of Lord seemed in the judgment of certain seditious persons, nothing
so sacred and full of majesty as the name of King.

This name and title of the Kingdom of Ireland were by the Popes authority
(what time as Queen Marie in the year 1555. had by her Ambassadors in the
name of the Kingdom of England tendered obedience unto the Pope Paul the fourth)
confirmed in these words. To the laud and glory of almighty God, and his most
glorious

And seeing that I have happened upon those Noblemens names, who first of all
English gave the attempt upon Ireland, and most valiantly subdued it under the
imperial crown of England, lest I might seem upon envy to deprive both them
and their

The names of them that came with Dermot Mac Morrog into Ireland.
Richard Strongbow Earl of Pembroch, who by Eve the daughter of Morrog the
Irish petty King aforesaid, had one only daughter, and she brought unto
William Mareschall the title of the Earldome of Pembroch, with fair lands in
Ireland, and a goodly issue, five sons, who succeeded one another in a row,
all childlesse: and as many daughters, which enriched their husbands, Hugh
Bigod Earl of Norfolk, Earl of Gloucester, William Ferrars Earl of Derby,
and William Breose, with children, honors, and possessions. Robert
Fitz-Stephen. Harvey de Mont-Marish. Maurice Prendergest. Robert Bar. Meiler
Meilerine. Maurice Fitz-Girald. Redmund nephew of Fitz-Stephen. William
Ferrand. Miles de Cogan. Richard de Cogan. Gualter de Ridensford. Gualter and
sons of Maurice Fitz-Girald. Alexander sons of Maurice Fitz-Girald. William
Notte. Robert Fitz-Bernard. Hugh Lacie. William Fitz-Aldelm. William Maccarell.
Humfrey Bohun. Hugh de Gundevill. Philip de Hasting. Hugh Tirell. David Walsh.
Robert Poer. Osbert de Herloter. William de Bendenges. Adam de Gernez. Philip
de Breos. Griffin, nephew of Fitz-Stephen. Raulfe Fitz-Stephen. Walter de
Barry. Philip Walsh. Adam de Hereford.
To whom may be added out of Giraldus Cambrensis, John Curcy. Hugh Contilon.
Redmund Cantimore. Redmund Fitzhugh. Miles of S. David's, and others.

Ireland.
EVer since that Ireland became subject unto England, the Kings of England have
sent over thither, to manage the state of the Realm, their Regents or
Vicegerents, The Vice-roies of Ireland.
whom they termed in those writings or letters Patents of theirs (whereby
authority and jurisdiction is committed unto them) first, Custodes, or Wardens.
Keepers of Ireland: then afterward, according as it pleased them, Justices of
Ireland, Lievtenants, and Deputies. Which authority and letters Patents, when
any one enters upon this honorable place of government, are publicly read,
and after a solemn oath taken in a set form of words before the Chancellor,
the sword is delivered into his hands, which is to be borne before him; he is
placed in a chair of estate, having standing by him the Chancellor of the
Realm, those of the Privy Council, the Peers and Nobles of the kingdom,
with a King of Arms, a Sergeant of Arms, and other Officers of State. And
verily there is not (look throughout all Christendom again) any other
Viceroy The states of Ireland.
namely, Earls, Barons, Knights, Esquires, etc.

The Courts of Justice, or Tribunals of Ireland.
THe supreme Court of the Kingdom of Ireland is the Parliament, which at the
pleasure of the Kings of England is usually called by the Deputy, and by him
dissolved: although in the reign of King Edward the second, a Law was enacted,
Parliamentum claus. anno 12. The Tribunals of Ireland.
That every year there should be Parliaments holden in Ireland, which seems
yet not to have been effected. There be likewise four Terms kept, as in
England, yearly: and there are five Courts of Justice; The Star Chamber, the
Chancerie, the Kings Bench, the common Pleas, and the Exchequer. There are also
Justices of Assizes, Nisi prius, and of Oyer and Determiner, according as in
England: yea and Justices of Peace in every county, for the keeping of peace.
Moreover, the King has his Sergeant at law, his Attorney General, his
Sollicitour, etc.

Over and besides, in the more remote Provinces there be Governors to minister
Justice; as a principal Commissioner in Connaught, and a President in
Mounster: who have to assist them in Commission certain Gentlemen and Lawyers,
and yet every of them are directed by the Kings Lieutenant Deputy. As for the
common laws, Ireland is governed by the same that England has. For we read in
the Records of the Kingdom thus: King Henry the third, in the 12. year of his
reign, gave commandment to his Justice of Ireland, that calling together the
Archbishops, Bishops, Nevertheless the mere Irish did not admit them, but
retained their own Brehon laws and lewd customs. And the Kings of England
used a connivence therein upon some deep consideration, not vouchsafing to
communicate the benefit of the English laws, but upon especial grace to
especial families or sects; namely, the O Neales, O Conors, O Brien, O
Maloghlins, and Mac Murough, which were reputed of the blood royal among them.
The Parliamentary or Statute laws also of England being transmitted, were
usually in force in Ireland unto the time of K. Henry the seventh. For in the
tenth year of his reign, those were ratified and confirmed Edw. Poinings
government, but ever since they have had their Statutes enacted in their own
Parliaments. Besides these civil Magistrates, they have also one military
officer, named the Mareshal, who stands here in great stead, to restrain as
well the insolency of soldiers, as of rebels, who otherwhiles commit many and
great insolences. This office the Barons de Morley of England bare in times
past by inheritance, as appears by Records for King John gave it to be held
by right of inheritance, Mareshall of Ireland.
in these very express words, We have given and granted unto John Marshall
for his homage and service, Anno 9. R. Iohannis.
our Mareshalship of Ireland, with all appurtenances. We have given also unto
him for his homage and service, the Cantred in which stands the town of
Kilbunny, to have and to hold unto From whom it descended in the right line to
the Barons of Morley. This Mareshall has under him his Provost Marshall, and
sometime more than one, according to the occasions and troubles of the time,
who exercise their authority by limitation under the great seal of Ireland,
with instructions. But these, and such like matters, I will leave to the
curious diligence of others. Touching the order of justice and government among
those more uncivil and wild Irish, I will write somewhat in place convenient,
when I shall treat of their manners.

THE DIVISION OF IRELAND.
Division of Ireland.
IRELAND, according to the manners of the inhabitants, is divided into the
Irishry, and commonly the Wild Irish: but such as being more civil do
reverence the authority of laws, and are willing to appear in Court, and
judicially to be tried, are named English-Irish, The English Pale, because the
first Englishmen that came thither did empale for themselves certain limits in
the East part of the Island, and that which was most fruitful: Within which
there be even at this day, those also that live uncivilly enough, and are not
very obedient unto the laws: like as others without the pale are as courteous
and civil as a man would desire. But if we look into higher times, according
to the situation of the country, or the number rather of governors in old time,
it contains five portions (for it was sometimes a Pentarchie) namely,
Mounster Southward: Leinster Eastward: Connacht in the West: Ulster in the
North: and Meth, well near in the very midst.

In Mounster are these Counties, Kerry. Desmond. Cork. Waterford. Limiricke.
Tipperary, with the county of holy Cross in Tipperarie.


In Leinster be these Counties, Kilkenny. Caterlough. Queens County. Kings
County. Kildare. Weishford. Dublin.


In Meth are these Counties, East Mead. West Mead. Longford.


In Connaght are these Counties, Clare Galloway. Majo. Slego. Letrim. Roscoman.


In Ulster be these Counties, Louth. Cauon. Fermanagh. Monaghan. Armagh. Down.
Antrim. Londonderry. Tir-Oen. Tir-Conell, or Donegall.


The Ecclesiastical State of Ireland was ordered anciently by Bishops,
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
whom either the Archbishop of Canterbury consecrated, or they themselves one
another. But in the year 1152. as we read in Philip Flatesburie, Christianus
Bishop of Lismore Legate of all Ireland, held a most frequent and honorable
Council at Mell, whereat were present the Bishops, Abbats, Kings, Captains,
and Elders of Ireland. In which, by authority Apostolical, and by the
counsel of Cardinals, with the consent of Bishops, Abbats, and others, there
in Consistory he ordained four Archbishopricks Armach, Dublin, Cassile, and
Tuem or Toam.

The Bishoprics which were Diocessans under these, seeing that now some of
them are by the covetous iniquity of the times abolished, others confounded,
and conjoined, others again translated another way, I am disposed here to put
down (according as they were in old time) out of an ancient Roman PROVINCIAL,
faithfully exemplified out of the original.

Under the Archbishop of Armagh, Primate of all Ireland, are the Bishops of
Mead, or -- Elnamirand. Dune, alias -- Dundalethglas. Chlocor, otherwise --
Lugundun. Conner. Ardachad. Rathbot. Rathluc. Daln-Liquir. Dearrih or Derri^.
Clo^macnois. Dromor. Brefem.


To the Archbishop of Dublin are subject the Bishops of Glendelach. Fern.
Ossery, alias -- De Canic. Lechlin. Kil-dare or Dare.


Under the Archbishop of Cassile are the Bishops of Laonie, or -- De Kendalnan.
Limric. The Isle Gathay. Cellumabrath. Melite or of Emileth. Rossi, alias
Roscree. Waterford, alias -- De Baltifordian. Lismore. Clon, alias -- De
Cluanan. Corcage, that is, Cork. De Rosalither. Ardefert, or Kerry.


Unto the Archbishop of Tuam or Toam are subject the Bishops of Duac, alias --
Kilmacduoc. Mage. Enachdun. De Celaiar. De Rosconmon. Clonfers. Achad, or
Achonry Lade or Killaleth. De Conany. De Kilmunduach. Elphin.


MOMONIA, or MOUNSTER!
MOMONIA, in Irish Mown, and in ordinary construction of speech Wown, in
English Mounster, lies Southward open to the Vergivian sea; separated in some
place from Connaght by the river Siney or Shanon, and elsewhere from Lemster by
the river Neor. In times past it was divided into many parts, as Towoun, that
is, North Mounster, Deswoun, that is, South Mounster; Hier woun, that is, West
Mounster; Mean woun, Middle Mounster; and Urwoun, that is, The Front of
Mounster: but at this day into two parts, that is, into West Mounster, and
South Mounster. In the West Mounster there dwelt in old time the LUCENI, the
VELABRI, and UTERINI: in the South, the OUDIAE or VODIAE, and the CORIONDI: but
at this day it is distinguished into seven Counties, Kerry, Desmund, Cork,
Limiric, Tipperary, Holy Cross, and Waterford.

Where Ireland lies out most Westward, and treanding toward the Cantabrian
Ocean, looks afar off Southwest, with a large interspace, to Gallitia in
Spain, there inhabited in old time the VELABRI and LUCENI, as Orosius writes.
The LUCENI of Ireland (who may seem to have had their name and beginning from
Gallitia, Luceni.
in the opposite coast of Spain, and of whose name some relics still remain
in the Barony of Lyxnaw) were seated as I suppose in the County of Kerry, and
in Conoglogh hard by upon the bank of the river Shanon.

THE COUNTY OF KERRY.
THe County of Kerry near unto the mouth of Shanon, runs forth like a
little tongue into the sea, beaten on with barking billows on both sides: a
country mounting aloft with woody, wild, and solitary mountains: between
which there lie many valleys, in some places garnished with cornfieldsd, in
others beset also thick with woods. This is reputed a County Palatine, and
the Earls of Desmond had in it the dignity and privileges of a
Count-Palatine, and that by the bountiful gift of K. Edward the third, who
granted unto them all Regal liberties, except four pleas, namely, of Burning,
Rape, Forstall, and Treasure trouue, with the profit growing de Croccis,
reserved for the Kings of England. But through the licentious iniquity of the
men, who neither would nor knew how to use this liberty, it became of late a
very sink of mischiefs, and a common receptacle for rebels. In the entrance
into this country there is a territory called Clan-Moris, Clan-Morys.
of one Moris descended from the stock of Raimund le Gross, whose heirs
successively were called the Barons of Lixnaw. A little river now namelesse
(which the situation in some sort implies to be DUR in Ptolomee) cutteth
through the midst of this, The river Dur.
running Trayley a small town, laid now in manner desolate, (where the Earls
of Desmund had an house. Bishopric of Ardart.
) Hard by stands Ardart, where the Bishop called of Ardefert, a poor one God
wot, has his poor See. In the farthest point well near of this, where it
makes a promontorie, Dingle.
there shows it self on the one side Dingle, a commodious port, Smerwic.
on the other side Smerwic Sound a road for ships, for so they term it short
in steed of S. Mary-wic: at which of late, when Girald Earl of Desmund, a man
notorious for deep treachery to his Prince and country, wickedly wasted
Mounster with continual harrying and raising booties out of the fields, there
arrived certain companies of Italians and Spaniards, sent underhand to aid
him from Pope Gregory the thirteenth, and the King of Spain; who here
fortifying a place which they Fort del Ore, made their bragging bravadoes, and
thundered out many a terrible threat. Arthur Baron. Gray.
But the most noble and martial Baron, Arthur Lord Gray, Lord Deputy, with
his very coming and first onset that he made upon them, decided the matter,
and ended the quarrel. For immediately they yielded themselves, and the most
part of them were put to the sword, which was in policy thought the wisest and
safest course, considering in what ticklish terms the state of this Realm
then stood, and how the rebels in every place were up in arms. And the Earl
of Desmund himself at length in his fearful flight being forced to take the
woods hard by for his refuge, was soon after in a poor cottage by a soldier
or two rushing in upon him, 1583.
first wounded, and afterward being known, cut shorter by the head, and so
paid worthily

Here some man happily would think it not correspondent to the gravity of this
work, A ridiculous conceit.
if I should but relate what a ridiculous opinion hathfully possessed the minds
of a number of the Irishry, yea and persuaded them verily to believe that he
who in that barbarous Pharoh and out cry of the Soldiers, which with great
straining of their voice they use to set up when they join battle, does not
cry and hout as the rest do, is suddenly caught up from the ground, and
carried as it were flying in the air, into these desert valleys, out of any
country of Ireland whatsoever: where he eats grass, lappeth water, knows
not in what state he is, good or bad, has some use of reason but not of
speech, but shall be caught at length with the help

DESMONIA, or DESMOND.
BEneath those ancient LUCENI lies DESMOND, stretched out far and wide
toward the South, called in Irish Deswown, in Latin Desmonia, inhabited in
ancient times by the VELLABRI and IBERNI, which in some copies are written
UTERINI. Velabri.
As for these VELABRI, they may seem so named of ABER, that is, salt water
washes, for that they dwelt upon such Friths, divided one from another by many
and those notable arms of the sea running between: whence also the Artabri
and Cantabri in Spain Kerry aforesaid, with crooked and winding shoares run
out into the Southwest, and those the inhabitants termed in old time Hierwoun,
that is, West-Mounster. The first of them between Dingle bay and the river
Mair, is named Clan-Car, and has a castle built at Dunkeran by the Carews of
England. In this dwelt Donald Mac Carty More, a Lord of the Irish blood, who in
the year 1566. resigned up unto Queen Elizabeth's hands his possessions and
lands, 1565.
and took them again of her, to hold the same after the English manner by
fee, Barons of Valentia. Barle Clan-Ca^r.
doing homage and fealty. And at the same time he was (...) created Baron of
Valentia (an Island adjoining) and Earl of Clan-car. A man in this tract of
great name and power, a most deadly foe in times past of the Fitz-Giralds, who
disseized his ancestors, Kings (as he stiffly avoucheth) of Desmond, of their
ancient seat and habitation. But long enjoied not he this honor: and having
but one only daughter legitimate, he matched her in marriage with Florence Mac
Carty, and departed out of this life an aged man.

The second promontorie enclosed within two baies, Maire and Bantre, is named
Bear, Bear.
standing for the most part upon hungry gravel, and a lean stony soil: In
which live O Swillivant Bear, O Swilivant.
and O Swillivant Bantre, descended both of one and the same stock, men of
great nobility in their country.

The third is called Eraugh, lying between Bantre and Balatimore or Baltimore,
a Bay or Creek passing well known by reason of the abundance of Herrings
taken O Mahon.
to fish for Cods. In this the O Mahons by the beneficial gift of M. Carew
received fair lands and Lordships. This is that Ptolomee calls NOTIUM,
Notium Promontorium. The river I^rnus.
that is, the South-Promontorie, at this day named Missen-head, under which (as
we may read in him) the river IERNUS is disgorged into the Ocean. But what name
the said river now has, in so great obscurity I hardly dare divine, unless it
be that which they call Maire, and runs hard under Dunk-eran aforesaid.
Neither wot I how to guess at those people, whom the same Ptolomee places
upon these promontories, seeing that according to the variety of copies they
have sundry names, as IBERNI, OUTERNI, IBERI, and IVERNI, unless peradventure,
Iberi of Spain. Well, this name of Desmond in the foregoing ages stretched
far and wide in this tract, even from the sea unto the river Shanon, and was
called also South-Mounster. Earls of Desmond.
The Fitz-Giralds descended out of the house of Kildare, having subdued the
Irish, became Lords here of very large and goodly possessions: and of them
Maurice Fitz-Thomas (unto whom T. Carew heir unto the Seigniory of Desmond,
had before passed away his right of Desmond) was in the third year of King
Edward the third created the first Earl of Desmond. Among whose posterity many
there were, great men for their valor and wealth, whose credit also and
reputation reached far. But a bad name there went, and still does, of James;
who Coin, Livery, Cocherings, Bonaghty, etc. for the maintenance of
Galloglasses and Soldiers to spoil and harry the country. Which when his
son Thomas exacted and gathered of the poor people, he was by the
commandment of John Tiptoft Deputy Lieutenant Girald that rebel, whom
erewhile I named, who wilfully overthrew a most noble and potent family. And
when he was attainted by Parliamentary authority, Desmond was adjudged and
annexed to the Crown land, reduced into the rank of counties, and a Sheriff
was ordained to govern it from year to year. Nevertheless in the last
rebellion the rebels erected a titularie Earl; and against him Queen
Elizabeth granted the title of Earl of Desmond unto James Fitz-Girald, son
to the foresaid Giraldines, or Fitz-Giralds, although they have for sundry
respects assumed unto themselves diverse sirnames.

VODIAE, and CORIONDI.
AFter the Iberi, Vodiae a people.
there dwelt far in the country the (...), who are termed also VODIAE, and
UDIAE: the footing of which name does more expressly show it self in Idou and
Idouth, two small territories: like Coriandi a people.
in the county of Cork bordering upon them. These nations inhabited the
counties of Cork, Tipperary, Limericke, and Waterford.

COMITATUS CORCAGIENSIS, commonly called THE COUNTY OF CORK.
Cork, which in old time was reputed a Kingdom, comprised the whole tract
along the sea from Lismore unto Saint Brend, where it affronteth Desmond
Westward, has in the midland parts thereof Mu^keray, Muskeray.
a wild and woody country; wherein Cormac Mac-Teg is of great name: and toward
the sea coast Carbray, Carbray.
in which the Mac-Carties bear the most sway. By the sea side, the first place
that we meet with is Rosse, a road and port in times past well frequented, but
now less resorted unto by reason of a bar of sand. From thence with a narrow
neck runs out a biland, called the Old head of Kinsale, near unto which the
family of the Curcies flourished in ancient times, famous for their wealth;
descended from a brother of John Curcy the Englishman that subdued Ulster; and
out of which there remains here still Curcy Ringrom; but at this day (this is
the world) of weak and mean estate. After it, at the mouth of the river Bany,
in a fertile soil and well woodded, stands Kinsale, a very commodious port,
and a town fortified with old walls: under which in the year 1601. the
kingdom of Ireland lay a bleeding, and put it was upon the hazard, as it
were, of one cast of a die, whether it should be subject to England or Spain:
what time as the Island was endangered both with foreign and domestical war,
Spaniard landed in Ireland, and from thence driven.
and eight thousand old trained soldiers under the conduct of Don John D'
Aquila, had of a sudden surprised and fortified it, confident upon the censures
and excommunications of Pius the fifth, Gregory the thirteenth, and Clement
the eighth, Popes of Rome, discharged like thunderbolts upon Queen Elizabeth,
and presuming Charles Blunt Baron Mountjoy, L. Deputy, presently belaied it
round about both by sea and land, albeit his soldiers were tired, toiled out,
and the season of the year most incommodious, as being midwinter: and withal,
made head also against a rabble of rebels, whom the Earl of Tir-Oen, O-Donel,
Mac-Gwyre, and Mac-Mahound Kinsale lies Kerry-Wherry, Kerry-wherry.
a little territory of late belonging to the Earls of Desmond. Just before
which runs the river that Ptolomee calls DAURONA, Giraldus Cambrensis, by
changing only one letter, Sauranus and Saveranus, which issuing out of
Mu^kerey mountains, passes along by that principal City of the county,
Clon) which Giraldus names Corragia, Englishmen Cork, and the natural
inhabitants of the country Coreach: enclosed within a circuit of walls in form
of an egg, with the river flowing round about it and running between, not
passable through but by bridges, lying out in length, as it were, in one direct
broad street, and the same having a bridge over it: Howbeit a pretty town of
merchandise it is, well peopled, and much resorted unto; but so beset on every
side with rebels neighboring upon it, that they are feign to keep always a
set watch and ward, as if they had continual siege laid unto their City, and
dare not marry their daughters forth into the country, but make marriages one
with another among themselves; whereby all the Brioc that most devout and holy
man (who in that fruitful age of Saints flourished among the Gauls, and from
whom the Diocese of Sanbrioch in Britain Armorica, commonly called S. Brieu
took the name) was borne and bred here.

Beneath Cork the river parting in twain, environeth a large and very
pleasant Island, over against the principal dwelling house of that most ancient
and noble family of the Barries, which thereupon is called Barry Court. For
that family is derived from Robert de Barry an Englishman, a personage of great
worth, and renowned: who notwithstanding chose rather among the first to be
chief indeed, than to seem His posterity by their long approved loyalty and
martial prowess, deserved to receive of the Kings of England, first the title
of Baron Barry, Vicount Butiphant.
afterward of Vicount Butiphant, and for their great lands and wealth, gat
among the people the surname Barry more, that is, Barry the great. Below
Barry-court, the river Saveren, hard by Imokelly a fair possession long since
of the Earl of Desmond, loses it self in the Ocean, affording at the very
mouth commodious harbors and havens.

As Saveren waters the nether part of this country, so Broodwater, called
in times past Aven-more, that is, The great River, moisteneth the upper: upon
which Roch, Baron Roch Vicount Fermoy.
which being transplanted out of England has grown up and prospered here very
well, and now enjoieth the title of Vicount Fermoy. Certain it is, that in the
reign of Edward the second, they were entitled with the honor of
Parliament-Barons, considering that George Roch was fined in two hundred
Marks, because upon summons given, he came not to the Parliament at Dublin:
where Broodwater (which for a good while runs as a bound between this county
and the county of Waterford) entering into the sea makes an haven, stands
Yoghall; Yoghall.
no great town, but walled round about, built in fashion somewhat long, and
divided into two parts: the upper, which is the greater part, stretching out
Northward, has a Church in it, and without the wall a little Abbey which North
Abbey: the nether part reaching Southward, called the Base-towne, had also an
Abbey called South Abbey; and the commodiousnesse of the haven, which has a
well fensed Kay belonging unto it, The Kay.
and the fruitfulness withal of the country adjoining, draws Merchants unto
it, so as it is well frequented and inhabited, yea and has a Mayor for the
head Magistrate.

Cork, The kingdom of Cork.
which in times past, as I said even now, was counted a kingdom, and went
farther, as which contained within it Desmond also. This kingdom King Henry
the second gave and granted unto Sir Robert Fitz-Stephen, and to Sir Miles de
Cogan in these words: Know ye that I have granted the whole kingdom of Cork,
excepting the City and Cantred of the Oustmans, to hold for them and their
heirs, of me and John my son, by the service of 60. knights. And the Carews
of England were heirs to that Fitz-Stephen, from whom Sir George Carew, now
Baron Carew of Clopton, lineally and directly deriveth his descent, who not
long since was the Lord President of Mounster, and in some of these obscure

THE COUNTY OF WATERFORD.
ON the East coast of Ireland the county of WATERFORD extends it self
between the rivers Broodwater West, Shour East, the Ocean from the South, and
the county of Tipperary Northward: a goodly country, as well for pleasant site
as fertile soil. Upon Broodwater, so soon as it has left Cork county
behind it, Lismor. Christian a Bishop.
Lismore shows it self, Clarevall in the same cloister with St. Bernard and
Pope Eugenius.

But now, since that the possessions in manner all have been alienated, it is
united unto the Bishopric of Waterford. But near unto the mouth of the said
river, stands Ardmor a little town, so called because it stands near the
sea, of which, and of this river Necham long since versified thus.

Urbem Lisimor pertransit flumen Avenmor,
Ardmor cernit ubi concitus aequor adit. Ard-mor.

Aven-Mor through Lismor town does run,
Ardnor him sees, and there apace to sea he speeds anon.
The little territory adjoining unto it is called Dessee, Dessee.
the Lord whereof, one of the family of Desmond, received in our remembrance
the honorable title of Vicount Dessee: but for that he had no issue male, it
vanished with him in a short time. Not far from hence stands Dungarvan upon
the sea, Dungarvan.
a town well fortified with a castle, and as commodious by reason of the road
for ships: which together with the Baronie of Dungarvan King Henry the sixth
bountifully granted unto John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury: but afterward, seeing
it stood handsomely to that part of Mounster which was to be brought under and
reduced to order, it was by authority Poers of ancient nobility (from the very
first time that Ireland was conquered by the English) and afterward advanced to
the honorable title of the Barons of Curraghmore. Poers Barons of Curraghmore.
Waterford.
But upon the bank of the river Suyr, Waterford the chief and principal city
of this county makes a goodly show. Concerning which old Necham writes in
this wise.

Suirius insignem gaudet ditare Waterford,
Aequoreis undis associatur ibi.
The river Suyr has great desire,
Fair Waterford rich to make:

His course with sea to take.
This city which the Irish and Britans call Porthlargy, the English Waterford,
was built by certain Pirates of Norway; and although it stands in an air
somewhat gross, and upon a soil not very fruitful, and the streets therein
be with the narrowest, thrust close and pent together; yet such is the
convenience and commodiousnesse of the haven, that for wealth, fresh trading,
and frequent resort it is the second City Pembrok wanne it, it has continued
so faithful and quietly disposed, that it performed at all times safe and
secure peace unto the English on their backs, whiles they went on in the
conquering of Ireland. Whence it is that the Kings of England have granted unto
it very many, and those right large Franchises, which King Henry the seventh
augmented, and confirmed, because the Citizens had demeaned themselves most
valiantly and wisely against that Mock-Prince Perkin Warbeck, who being a young
man of base condition, by hoising up the full sails of impudence went about
York, the second son of King Edward the fourth.

Earl of Waterford.
This county of Waterford together with the city, King Henry the sixth gave
unto John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury aforesaid, by these words, which because
they testify the valerous virtue of that most martial Knight, to the end that
virtue might have the due honor thereto belonging, I think it worth my
labor, and happily any man else would deem no less, to put down out of the
Record; which may be Englished thus. We therefore, says the King, (after other
eloquent terms penned by the Secretaries of that age, when there was but
simple Latin) weighing with due consideration John Earl of Shrewsbury and of
Weisford, Lord Talbot, Furnivall, and Le Strange, sufficiently tried and
approved even unto his old age in the wars aforesaid, upon his body no less
bedewed with sweat many a time than embrued with blood; and considering in what
sort our County and City of Waterford in our land of Ireland, the Castle,
Seigniory, Honor, Land, and Baronie of Dungarvan, and all the Lordships,
Lands, Honors, and Baronies with the pertinences within the same County, which
by forfeiture of rebels, by reversion or decease of any person or persons, by
escheat, or any other title of law ought to come into our hands or our
progenitors, or in the same to be by reason of the hostile invasions of our
enemies and rebels in those parts, are become so desolate, and lie so much
exposed to the Waterford, together with the style, title, name, and honor
thereto belonging. And because as the highness of his state and degree
grows, all things consequently of necessity grow withal, upon our special
grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, and for the estate of the Earl
himself our Cousin to be maintained in more decent manner, we have given,
granted, and by these our letters confirmed unto the same Earl the County
aforesaid, together with the foresaid style, title, name, and honor of (to
have I say and to hold) of us and our heirs, by homage, fealty, Steward of
Ireland.
and the service of being and to be our Seneschall or Steward, and that his
heirs be

But when as (whiles the Kings of England and the Nobles, who had large and An.
28. H. 8.
that the Earl of Shrewsbury, for his absence and carelessness in maintaining
of his own, should surrender into the hands of the King and his successors the
Earldom and town of Waterford: the Duke of Norfolk likewise, the Baron
Barkley, the heirs general of Ormond, and all the Abbats, Priors, etc. of
England, who had any lands, should surrender up all their possessions unto the
King and his successors for the same absence and neglect.

THE COUNTY OF LIMERICK.
HItherto have we gone over the Maritime counties of Mounster: two there
remain yet behind that be in-lands, Limericke and Tipperary, which we are
now to go unto. The county of LIMERICK lies behind that of Cork Northward,
between Kerry, the river Shanon, Tipperary. A fertile country, and well
peopled, but able to show very few places of any good account and importance.
The more Western part of it is called Conilagh; Conilagh. Knoc-Patric.
wherein among the hills, Knock-Patric, that is Patricks hill, mounteth up of a
mighty height, and yielding a pleasant prospect into the sea, beholds afar
off the river Shanon, falling with a wide and wast mouth into the Vergivian or
Ocean. Under which hill a sept of Fitz-Giralds, or Giraldines, lived honorably
a long time, Knight of the Valley. Anno 11. Reg. Eliz.
until that Thomas, called the Knight of the Valley, or of the Glin, when his
graceless son that wicked firebrand suffered death (for to set villages and
houses a fire is by the laws of Ireland high treason) because himself advised
his son, and set him on to enter into these lewd actions, by authority
Limerick, which Shanon, a most famous river, by parting his channel compasses
round about.

The Irish call it Loumeag, Limirick.
and the English Limirick. A Bishops See this is, and a very famous mart town
of Mounster; first forcibly won by Reimundo the Gross, an Englishman, the
son of William Girald, afterward burnt by Duvenald an Irish petty King of
Thuetmond: and then in process of time Philip Breos an Englishman was
enfeoffed in it, and King John fortified it with a castle. At this day it is
counted two towns. The upper (for so they call it) wherein stand the
Cathedral Church and the castle, has two gates opening into it, and each of
them a fair bridge unto it of stone, Clan-William, Clan-William.
so named of the sept or kindred of William, who came out of the family de Burgo
(the Irish call it Burke) which dwells therein: and out of which house Queen
Elizabeth conferred upon William, who slew James Fitz-Moris that tempestuous
troubler of his country, Baron of Castle Conell.
the title and honor of Baron of Castle-Conel, (where Richard the Red Earl of
Ulster, had strengthened a castle) together with a yearly pension, as a reward
of his valor, and to his comfort and meed for the loss of his sons, slain
in that encounter.

Kil-Mallo, the second town next to Limirick both for wealth and for number of
inhabitants, enclosed also with a wall about it: likewise Adar, a little town
in old time fortified, standing upon the same river; which streightwaies
emptieth it self into Shanon: Clan-Gibbon.
hard unto which lies Clan-Gibbon, the Lord whereof John Fitz-Girald, called
John Oge Fitz-Iohn Fitz Gibbon, and for the gray hairs of his head, The white
Knight, was attainted by Parliament for his wicked acts: but his son through
the clemency of Queen Elizabeth was Bourks, 13. Elizab. Fitz-Geralds.
Giraldines, and Fitz-Giralds, are the Laceys, Browns, Hurleys, Chaceys,
Sapells, and Pourcels, all of the English race: also the Mac-Shees, Mac-Brien
O-Brian, etc. of Irish breed.

THE COUNTY OF TIPPERARY.
THe county Tipperary Westward is bounded with Limirick-shire aforesaid and the
river Shanon, Eastward with the county of Kilkenny, toward Cork and Waterford,
and North with the territory of the O-Carolls. The South part is an exceeding
fertile country, and yields corn abundantly, furnished also sufficiently
with good and frequent buildings. The West part of it the river Glason passes
through, and waters with a long course: Emely.
not far from the bank whereof stands Emely, or Own, a Bishops See, which
has been in times past, by report, a City very populous and of great resort.
Through the midst of it runs the noble river Shower, or Swire, The lower
Ossery.
which streaming out of Bladin hill, speeding through the lower Ossery (which
by the bountiful favor of King Henry the eighth entitled the Butlers Earls
of Ossery) and through Thurles, which honors them with the dignity of
Vicounts, Holy Cross, a right famous Abbey in times past (whence the country
also adjoining is commonly termed the County of the Holy Cross of Tipperary)
and enjoieth certain peculiar freedoms, The county of Holy Cross of
Tipperary. Wood of the Cross.
granted in honor of a piece of Christ's cross there sometimes preserved. The
whole world (says Saint Cyrill) is full of pieces of this wood, and yet by a
continual miracle (as Paulinus says) it has never been impaired.

Thus were Christians persuaded in ancient times. And incredible it is what a
confluence there is even yet of people continually upon devotion hither, as
unto an holy place. So firmly does this nation persevere in the old Religion
of their forefathers, which the careless negligence of their Prelates, and
ignorance together, has beyond Shour passes beside Cassile, Cassile.
beautified with an Archiepiscopall dignity by Engenius the third Bishop of
Rome, which had under it in times past many Bishops as Suffragans. From thence
runs the river down, sprinkling Islands here and there in the way, and
fetches a compass about Cahir Castle: which out of the family of the Butlers
has a Baron advanced to that dignity by Queen Elizabeth: Baron de Cahir.
but his son stained himself with perfidious disloialty, and suffered for
it, when as the Castle was by the Earl of Essex taken in the year 1599. and
himself cast into prison. Clomell.
Then holding on his course by Clomell, a mercate town well frequented and
fensed, as also by Carick Mac-Griffin, situate upon a rock, whereof also
Ormond, which together with the honor of Earl of Carrick King Edward the
second granted unto Edmund Boteler or Butler) it leaves Tipperary behind it,
Earl of Caricke. Anno 9. Ed. 2.
and serves in steed of a limit to confine the Counties of Waterford and
Kilkenny.

Thus much of the places in the South side of this county. As for that which
lies Northward, lean it is and very barren, peaking up with high tops of
mountains, and twelve above the rest, as it were, hudled up together, which
they term Phelemge Modona. Ormond.
This part in Latin is called Ormondia, in Irish Orwowon, that is, the Front of
Mounster, in English Ormond, and most men name it very corruptly Wormwood. All
the name and glory whereof arises from the Earls, Butlers Earls of Ormond.
Anno 2. Ed. 3.
of whom there has been a James Butler, upon whom and his heirs King Edward
the third conferred this title of honor for term of life, with the Roialty
also and other liberties with Knights fees in the county of Tipperary, the
which his posterity through the favor of the Kings of England still enjoy:
whence this County is reputed Palatine, and he of some was styled Earl of
Tipperary. Earl of Tipperary.


Butlers (an honorable office) of Ireland; and from thence came this surname
Le Boteler or Butler imposed upon them: and certain it is that they were
linked in most near alliance unto St. Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury
(as who derive their descent from his sister): and that after he was murdered,
they were by King Henry the second removed into Ireland, who supposed that he
should disburden himself of the worlds hatred for that fact, in case he
advanced the kinsfolks and allies of the said Thomas to rich revenues and high
honors.

The first Earl of Ormond in this family, was James son to Edmund Earl of
Carricke, who wedded the daughter of Humfrey Bohun Earl of Hereford, whom he
had by a daughter of King Edward the first: and here was his first step unto
this honor. Hereupon James his son by this marriage came to be commonly
named among the people, The noble Earl. The fifth Earl of these named James
(that I may not stand particularly upon every one) received at the hands of
King Henry the sixth the title and honor of Earl of Wiltshire, to him and to
the heirs of his body: who being Lord Deputy of Ireland, as diverse others of
this race, and Lord Treasurer of England, standing attainted by King Edward the
fourth, was straight ways apprehended and beheaded: but his brethren John and
Thomas, likewise proclaimed traitors, kept themselves close out of the way:
John died at Jerusalem without issue. James de sancto Leodegano, called
commonly Sellenger; and Margaret unto Sir William Bollein, who bare unto him
Sir Tho. Bollein: whom King Henry the eighth created first Viscount Rochfort,
afterward Earl of Wiltshire and of Ormond, and afterward took Anne Bollein
his daughter to wife; who brought forth for England Queen Elizabeth, a Prince
of most happy memory, and with all thankfulness to be always remembered by the
English and Irish. When Thomas Bollein was dead leaving no issue male, Sir
Pierce Butler, a man of great power in Ireland, descended of the Earls race,
whom Henry the eighth had before time Osserie, attained also to the title of
Ormond, and left the same unto his son James, who had issue by the daughter
and heir of James Earl of Desmond a son named Thomas Earl of Ormond now
living; whose faith and loyalty has been passing well tried and approved in
many troubles and dangerous affairs: who also has joined in marriage his only
daughter unto Theobald Butler his brothers son, whom King James has advanced
lately to the title of Vicount Tullo.

Whereas some of the Irish, Wolf-men.
and such as would be thought worthy of credit, do affirm, that certain men
in this tract are yearly turned into Wolves: surely I suppose it be a mere
fable: unless happily through that malicious humor of predominant unkind
Melancholy, they be possessed with the malady that the Physicians call The
disease Lycanthropia.
which raises and engendereth such like fantasies, as that they imagine
themselves to be transformed into Wolves. Neither dare I otherwise affirm of
those metamorphosed Lycaones in Liveland, concerning whom many Writers deliver
many and mavelous reports.

Thus far as touching the Province of Mounster, for the government whereof
Queen Elizabeth, when she bethought herself most wisely, politickly, and
princely, which way she might procure the good and wealth of Ireland, ordained
a Lord President to be the reformer and punisher of inconsiderate rashness,
the director also and moderator of duty, together with one Assistant, two
learned Lawyers, and a Secretary: and the first President that she made was
Sir Warham S. Ledger

LAGENIA, or LEINSTER.
THe second part of Ireland, which the inhabitants call Leighnigh, the Britans
Lein, the English Leinster, and Latin writers Lagenia, and in the ancient
lives of the Saints, Lagen, lies all of it on the Seaside Eastward, bounded
toward Mounster with the river Neor (which notwithstanding in many places it
passes beyond) on Connaght side for a good space with Shanon, and toward Mead
with the peculiar known limits. The Country is fertile and fruitful, the
air most mild and temperate, and the people there inhabiting come nearest of
all other BRIGANTES, MENAPII, CAUCI, and BLANI: and peradventure from these
Blani are derived and contracted these later and modern names, Lein, Leinigh,
and Leinster. But now it is divided into the Counties of Kilkenny, Caterlogh,
Queens County, Kings County, Kildare, Weisford, and Dublin: to say nothing of
Wicklo and Fernes, which either be already, or else are to be laid thereto.

BRIGANTES, or BIRGANTES.
THe BRIGANTES seem to have planted themselves between the mouth of the river
and the confluence of Neor and Barrow, which in Ptolomee is called BRIGUS. Now
because there was an ancient City of the Brigantes in Spain, named BRIGANTIA,
Florianus del Campo labors tooth and nail to fetch these BRIGANTES out of
his own country Spain. But if such a conjecture may take place, others might
with as great probality derive them from the Brigantes of Britain, a nation
both near and also exceeding populous. But if that be true which I find in
certain copies, that this people were called BIRGANTES, both he and the other
have missed the mark: For, that these took their denomination of the river
BIRGUS, about which they do inhabit, the very name is almost sufficient to
persuade BRIGANTES, or BIRGANTES, whether you will, dwelt in the Counties of
Kilkenny, Ossery, and Caterlogh, watered all with the river BIRGUS.

THE COUNTY OF KILKENNY.
County of Kilkenny.
THe County of Kilkenny is bounded West with the county of Tipperary, East
with the counties of Weisford and Caterlogh, South with the county Waterford,
North with Queens County, and Northwest with upper Osserie. A country that
with towns and castles on every side makes a very goodly show, and for plenty
of all things surpasses the rest. Near unto Osserie the mighty and huge
mountains Sleiew Bloemy, which Giraldus calls Bladinae Montes, with their
rising tops mount up to a wonderful height: out of the bowels whereof, as
from their mothers womb, issue the rivers Shour aforenamed, Neor, and Barrow:
which running down in several channels, before they enter into the Ocean join
hand in hand all together, whereupon they in old time termed them The three
sisters.

The Neor, commonly called also Neure, runs in manner through the midst of
Kilkenny county: Upper Ossery. Baron of upper Ossery.
and when it is passed with a forward course by the upper Osserie, the first
Baron whereof was Barnabas Fitz-Patrick, promoted to that honor by King Edward
the sixth, and has watered many fortresses on both sides, flows beside
Kilkenny, which is as much to say, as the Cell or Church of Canic; which for
the sanctimony of his solitary life in this country, was highly renowned: a
proper, fair, and Canicks Church, which both gave name unto it, and now also
affords a See unto the Bishop of Osserie. But the English town is nothing so
ancient, built, as I have read, by Ranulph the third Earl of Chester, and
fortified with a wall on the West side by Robert Talbot a Nobleman, and with a
castle by the Butlers. And sure it is that in the division of lands between the
daughters of William Marshall Earl of Penbroch, it fell unto the third
daughter, whom Gilbert Clare Earl of Gloucester married.

Neore, stands a little walled town, named in English Thomas Town: Thomas
Town.
in Irish, Bala-Mac-Andan, that is, The town of Antonies son: For it took
both names of the founder Thomas Fitz-Anthonie, an Englishman, who flourished
under King Henry the third, whose heirs are yet acknowledged the Lords
thereof. Callan.
Beneath this town the river Callan voideth his stream into Neore: upon which
stands the third Borough or incorporate town of this county, bearing the
same name Callan. Inis Teog.
Like as Inise-Teog, which is the fourth.

The family of Butlers has spread and branched far and wide throughout this
County, men that with much honor bare a great port, and for their worth and
virtues were adorned with the titles of Earls of Carick, Ormond, Wiltshire in
England Ossorie, as is before said: and at this day there remain of their
line, beside the Earl of Ormond, Vicount Thurles, and Knight of the Order of
Saint George, Vicount Montgarret, Vicount Tullo, the Barons of Dunboyn and of
Cahir, a goodly race also and progeny of Noble Gentlemen. The rest of the
Gentry in this Tract that are of better birth and parentage be likewise of
English descent, as the Graces, Walshes, Lovells, Foresters, Shortels,
Blanch-felds, or Blanchevelstons, Drilanas, Comerfords, etc.

THE COUNTY OF CATERLOGH.
THe County of CATERLOGH, by contraction Carlogh, toward the Sun Kilkenny,
wholly, in manner, situate between the rivers Barrow and Slane; of a fertile
soil and shaded well with woods; has two towns in it of better note and
importance than the rest, both standing upon the West bank of Barrow: namely,
Caterlogh, which Leonel Duke of Clarence began to wall; and Bellingham a most
renowned Lord Deputy fortified with a castle; Also Leighlin, called in Latin
Lechlinia, where there was an Episcopal Chair, now united to the Sea of
Fernes. These towns have both of them their wards or garrisons, and Constables
over them. And whereas the greatest part of this County belonged in right of
inheritance unto the Howards Dukes of Norfolk (who by the Earls of Warren
drew their descent from the eldest Mareschall Earl of Penbroch) King Henry the
eighth by a general consent of the States of the Realm took unto himself,
The Statute of Absenties.
both from them and also from other Noblemen, yea and from Monasteries in
England, all their lands and possessions in Ireland; for that the Lords thereof
by neglecting in their absence their own private estates carelessly, brought
therewith the public state into danger, as is already showed.

From hence Barrow passes through the Baronie Ydron, Barony Ydron.
which by right belonged to the Carews: for Sir John Carew an English Knight,
died seized thereof in the time of King Edward the third: and which Peter Carew
within our memory recovered, as it were by a writ of remitter, after it had
been unlawfully usurped, and a long time

Upon the river Slane appears Tullo, memorable in this regard, that King
James has lately honored Theobald Butler, the Earl of Ormonds brothers
son, with the title of Vicount Tullo. Cavanaghs.
The Cavanaghs dwell a great many of them every way hereabouts, who being
descended from Dovenald a younger son, as they say, the Bastard of Dermot the
last King of Leinster, are spread and branched out into a very great sept or
lineage, a warlike generation renowned for their good horse-manship, O-Mores, O
More. Out of a pamphlet of Patrick Finglas.
and taking into their society the Toles and Brenes, by little and little
disseized the English of all the territory between Caterlogh and the Irish
sea.

Among these is the confluence of Neore and Barrow, which after they have
travailed in a joint stream some few miles from hence in one channel, present
both their name and their waters unto their eldest sister the Shour, which
straightwaies is swallowed up at a mouth full of rocks within the gulf of the
Ocean: where on the left hand there shoots out a little promontorie with a
narrow neck, that shows a pretty high tower unto the sailers, Hook-Tower.
erected by the merchants of Rosse, what time they were in their prosperity,
for their direction and safer arrival at the rivers mouth.

QUEENS COUNTY.
ABove Caterlogh, toward the North-west there spreads out a little country
full of woods and bogs, Lease.
named in Irish Lease, and QUEENS County in English: which Queen Mary
ordained to be a County, by Commission given unto Thomas Ratcliffe Earl of
Sussex, then Lord Deputy, who reduced it into the terms of civil order and
government: whence it is that the chief town thereof is called Mary-Burgh:
Mary Burgh.
where certain garrison soldiers with their Seneschall keep ward, and have
much ado to defend themselves against the O-Mores (who bear themselves as the
ancient Lords thereof) against Mac-Gilpatric, the O-Dempsies, and others, a
mischievous and tumultuous kind of people, who daily practice and plot all they
can to annoy the English, and to shake off Meilere was sent: For whom Hugh
Lacie governor of Ireland erected one Castle at Tahmelio, like as a second at
Obowy, a third likewise upon the river Barrow, and a fourth at Norrach. But
among the rest, he fortified Donemaws, Donemaws.
an ancient Castle standing in the most plentiful part of the territory,
which came hereditarily unto the Breoses Lords of Brecknocke, by Eua the
younger daughter of William Mareschall Earl of Pembroch, and what way as
Barrow, which rising out of Slew Blomey hills Westward, runs solitary alone
amongst the woods, Rheba.
he visits that ancient RHEBA, mentioned by Ptolomee, which keeping the name
still entire is called at this day Rheban: but instead of a city it is
altogether, A city citilesse, or, The remains of that which was a city; even
a few little cottages with a fortress. Notwithstanding it gives the title of
a Baronet unto that Nobleman Nicholas of Saint Michael, the Lord thereof, who
is commonly called the Baronet of Rheban. Baronet of Rheban.


KINGS COUNTY.
LIke as the Queens County aforesaid was so named in honor of Queen Marie,
so the territory bordering next unto it Northward, divided with Barrow running
between, Offaly.
and called in times past Offalie, Kings County, Philips town.
and the principal town in it Philips Town; where is placed a Seneschall
with a ward: and diverse Gentlemen of English blood are here planted, namely,
the Warrens, Her-berts, Colbies, Mores, and Leicesters: amongst the Irish septs
of O-Conor, unto whom a great part hereof in old time belonged; Mac-Coghlan,
and others stand stoutly in defense of the lands won by their ancestors, and
left unto them. Now these natural Irish inhabitants grumble and complain that
their livings and patrimonies have been taken from them, and no other lands
assigned and set out for them to live in: Hence it is that taking hold of every
occasion to make uprores, they put the English dwelling among them to much
trouble ever and anon: yea and oftentimes in revengefull minds festered and
poisoned with hostile hatred, they break out furiously into open and actual
rebellions.


OVer against these all along Eastward, affronteth the county of Kildar a most
rich and plentiful country: concerning the pastures whereof Giraldus
Cambrensis uses these verses of Virgill.

Et quantum longis carpunt armenta diebus,
Exigua tant^m gelidus ros nocte reponit.
And look how much when days are long the beasts by grasing eat,
So much cold dewes make good again by night when it is not great.
The chief and head town of the shire is Kildar, Kildar. S. Brigid.
much honored and graced in the first infancy of the Irish Church, by reason
of Saint Brigid a Virgin right venerable and highly esteemed of for her
devotion and virginity (I mean not that Brigid which about 240. years ago
erected that order of the sisters or Nuns of Saint Brigid: namely, that
within one Monastery both Monks and Maidens should live, divided asunder by
walls, and suffered only one to see another) but another Brigid of greater
antiquity by far, as who was a Disciple of Saint Patricke, of great fame and
renown throughout Ireland, England, and Scotland. Whose miracles and fire
never going out, but kept by Nuns, as it were, in that secret Sanctuary of
Vesta, and of the ashes that never increase, are mentioned by writers. This
Kildar is adorned with an Episcopal See, named in the Popes letters in old
time, Episcopatus Darensis. After the entrance of the English into Ireland, it
was the habitation of Richard Earl of Pembroch, then of William Mareschall his
son in law, that married his daughter, Earl of Penbroch likewise: by whose
fourth daughter Sibyll it came to William Ferrars Earl of Derby, and by his
daughter likewise begotten of her, unto William Lord Vescy: whose son William
Vescy, Lord chief Justice of Ireland, standing in terms of disfavour and
disgrace with King Edward the First, for certain quarrels arising between him
and John the son of Thomas Fitz-Girald, and being bereft of his only son
lawfully begotten, granted and surrendered Kildare De Kildare, in his other
lands in England. And a little while after, the said John son of Thomas
Fitz-Girald, whose ancesters (descended from Girald Windesor, Castellan of
Pembroch) had with passing great valor performed most painful service in the
conquest of this Island, Chapter 9. Ed. 2. N. 12.
was by Edward the second King of England endowed with the castle and town of
Kildar, together with the title and name of Earl of Kildar.

These Fitz-Giralds, or as they now term them, the Giraldines, are a right
noble family, and for their exploits highly renowned: by whose valor, as one
said, The Englishmen both kept the sea coasts of Wales, and also forced and won
the walls of Ireland. Kildare flourished a long time without taint of honor
and name (as which never bare arms against their Prince) until that Thomas
Fitz-Girald, the son of Girald Fitz-Girald Earl of Kildare, and Lord Deputy
of Ireland under King Henry the eighth, hearing that his father sent for into
England, and accused for misgoverning Ireland, was put to death; upon this
light and false rumor, unadvisedly and rashly carried away with the heat of
youth, put himself into arms against Prince and country, solicited the
Emperor Charles the fifth to Girald brother unto the aforesaid Thomas to be
Earl of Kildare, and Baron of Offaly. He ended this life about the year 1558.
His eldest son Girald died before his father, leaving one only daughter
married to Sir Robert Digby: Henry his second son succeeded, who when he had
by his wife L. Francis daughter to Charles Earl of Nottingham only two
daughters, William the third son Kildare came to Girald Fitz-Girald son to
Edward their Uncle, who was restored to his blood in lineage to make title by
descent lineall or collateral from his father and brother, and all his
ancestors, any attaindour or corruption of blood to the contrary
notwithstanding. There be also in this County these places of better note than
the rest; Naas a mercate town, Athie upon the river Barrow, Mainoth a castle
belonging to the Earls of Kildare, and a town unto which King Edward the
first, in favor of Girald Fitz-Moris granted a mercate and Fair: Castle
Martin, the chief seat of the family of Fitz-Eustace; which descending from
the Poers in the County of Waterford, for Barons Fitz-Eustace. Pat. 2. Ed. 4.
bestowed upon Rowland Fitz-Eustace by King Edward the fourth, together with
the Manor of Port-lester, and the title of Vicount Baltinglas, at the hands of
King Henry the eighth: which dignities with a fair patrimony Rowland
Fitz-Eustace, seduced by the religious pretext unto rebellion, and flying his
country lost by attaindour under Queen Elizabeth. The families here
remaining, besides the Giraldines, that be of higher birth above others, fetch
their descent also out of England, namely, the Ougans, De-la- Hides, Ailmers,
Washes, Boisels, Whites, Suttons, etc. As for the Giants dance, which they
talk of that Merlin by art magic translated out of this territory unto
Salisbury plain, as also of that most bloody battle which shall be one day
between the Molleaghmast, I willingly leave unto the credulous lovers of
fabulous antiquity, and the vain believers of prophesies. For my purpose is
not to give fond tales the telling. These be the midland counties of Leinster:
now are we to go unto those by the sea side.

THE COUNTY OF WEISFORD.
BEneath that mouth, at which Barrow, Neore, and Shoure, the sister-like
rivers, having embraced one another and joined hands, are laid up in the Ocean,
there shows it self Eastward in a Promontorie Weisford or Wexford. In Irish,
County Reogh, where Ptolomee in times past placed the MENAPII. That these
Menapians came hither from the Menapii, a nation in low Germany that dwelt by
the sea coasts, the name does after a sort imply. But whether that Carausius
were of this or that nation, Carausius.
who taking upon him the imperial purple robe seized upon Britain against the
Emperor Dioclesian, I leave to others. For Aurelius Victor calls him a
Citizen of Menapia; and the City Menapia is place by the Geographers not in
those Low Countries of Germany, but in Ireland. In this county, upon the river
Barrow, there flourished sometimes Rosse, a great City, well traded by
merchants and peopled with inhabitants, fensed with Richard Strongbow: and that
is the only monument which now it shows. For by reason of discord and home
broiles between the Citizens and the religious orders, it is a good while
since brought in manner to nothing.

More East, Duncannon, a castle with a garrison, stands over the river, so as
that Waterford, or to Rosse: and therefore it was thought good policy, to
fortify this place when the Spaniards hovered and gaped for Ireland, in the
year 1588. From thence at the very mouth of the river, there runs out a
narrow neck of land, which presents unto the sailers an high Turret, erected
by the Citizens of Rosse when they were in flourishing estate, that they might
more safely enter into the rivers mouth. A little from hence stands Tintern,
Tintern Monastery.
upon the shore with many winding creekes, where William Marshall Earl of
Penbroch founded a notable Abbay, and called it de Voto, for that he had vowed
to God to erect an Abbay, when he was tossed in a sore and

This very Promontory Ptolomee calls HIERON, Hieron a Promontory.
that is, Holy: and in the same signification, I would make no doubt but the
inhabitants also called it. For the utmost town thereof, at which the
Englishmen landed, and set first foot in this Island, they named in their native
language Banna, which sounds all one with Holy.

From this Holy point, the shore turning full upon the East, runs forth
along Northward; over against which there lie flats and shallowes in the sea,
that endanger many a ship, which the Mariners call The Grounds. In this place
Ptolomee sets the river MODONA, and at the mouth thereof the city MENAPIA,
which are so stripped Slane: seeing also at the very mouth thereof, where it
makes a Poole, there is a town by a German name called Weisford, the head
place of the whole county, I may the more boldly conjecture that Slane was that
MODONA, and Weisford MENAPIA; and so much the rather, because this name is of a
later date, to wit, a mere German, and given unto it by those Germans, whom
the Irish term Oustmans. This town is for the bigness inferior to many,
but as memorable as any; because it was the first in all Ireland that when
Fitz-Stephen, a most valiant Captain, assaulted it, yielded Dermot, who first
drew the Englishmen over into Ireland, granted this and the territory lying to
it unto Fitz-Stephen for ever, who began a Burgh hard by at Carricke: and
albeit the place were strong by natural situation, yet he helped it by art.
But when as the said Fitz-Stephen had surrendered up his right into the hands of
King Henry the second, he made it over to Richard Earl of Penbroch, that he
should hold it in Fee from him and the Kings of England as superior Lords.
From whom by the Earls Mareschals, the Valences of the Lusignian line in
France, and the Hastings, it descended to the Greies Lords of Ruthin, who
commonly in ancient Charters are named Lords of Weisford; although in the
reign of King Henry the sixth, John Talbot is once called in the Records Earl
of Shrewsbury and of Weisford. Touching this river, take with you this verse,
such an one as it is, of Nechams making.

Ditat Eniscortum flumen quod Slana vocatur,
Hunc cernit Weisford se sociare sibi.
The river which is called Slane enricheth Eniscort,
And this said river Weisford sees gladly with him to sort.
For Eniscourt, a Borough or incorporate Town, is seated upon it. More inward
Fernes, known only for the dignity of an Episcopal See in it; which in old
time the Giraldines fortified with a Castle. Hard by, but beyond the river
Slane dwell the Cavenaghs, Donels, Montaghs, and O-Mores, Irishmen of a
stirring and tumultuous spirit: and among them the Sinottes, Roches, and
Peppards, Englishmen. On this side Slane the men of greatest name be the
Vicounts Mont-Garret: of whom the first was Richard Butler, a younger son of
Pierce Earl of Ormond, adorned with that title by Edward the sixth, and many
more of the same Devereuxes, Staffords, Chevers, Whites, Forlongs, Fitz-Harris,
Browns, Hores, Haies, Cods, Maylers, all of the English race and blood, like as
be most of the common people.

CAUCI.
Cauci.
THe CAUCI, who were likewise a people inhabiting the sea coast of Germany,
seated themselves next unto the Menapii, but not so far distant a sunder as
those in Germany. Their country lying upon the O Tools and O Birns, families of
Irishry dwell in, O Tools. O Birns.
men fed and maintained by wickedness and bloodshed, impatient of rest and
quietness; and who presuming upon the strength of their holds and fastnesses,
carry an obstinate mind against all laws, and implacable hatred to English.
For the repressing of whose audacious outrage, and to strengthen the authority
of laws, there has been serious consultation had by most prudent and
politic persons in the year 1578. that these small territories should be
reduced into the form of a county: and set out they were into six Baronies
within certain appointed limits, which should make the county of Wicklo or
Arcklo. Arklo.
For a place this is of greatest name, and the Earl of Ormonds castle, who
write themselves among other honorable Lords of Arcklo: under which castle
that river which Ptolomee calls OVOCA falls into the sea, making a creek,
and as Giraldus Cambrensis writes, The nature of this river is such, that as
well when the sea flows, as when it ebbeth, in this creek it retains still
the taste of the natural freshness, saving his own water entire and void of
all brackishnesse, even as far as to the maine sea.

COMITATUS DUBLINIENSIS, The County of Divelin.
BEyond the CAUCI inhabited the EELANI, where now lies the Kildare, on the
South joining to the little territories of the OTooles and O-Birns, Glynnes.
and those which they term the Glynnes, and limited Northward with the county
of Meth and Nanny a little river: the soil thereof brings forth corn
abundantly, and yields grass and fodder right plenteously, besides it is
well stored with all sorts of living creatures that are gotten by hunting and
hawking for the table: but so destitute, for the greatest part, of woods, that
in most places they use a clammy kind of fat turfe, or Sea-coale out of England
for their fuel. In the South part thereof, which is less inhabited and more
uncivil, Glynnes; every place is sore annoied with the two pernicious and
mischievous septs or kinreds of the O-Tooles and the O-Birnes. Among these
Glynnes appears the Bishopric of Glandilaw, but utterly desolate, ever
since it was annexed to the Archbishopricke of Divelin. All this county besides
is passing well replenished with inhabitants and towns, and for wealthy port,
and a certain peculiar finenesse and neatness that they use, surpasses all
other parts of Ireland, and is divided into five distinct Baronies, namely,
Rath down, New castle, Castle-Knoc, Cowloc, and Bal-rodry, which not
withstanding I am not able to go through as I would, for that their bounds are
unknown

First therefore I will run along the sea coast only, and from thence, as the
courses of the rivers lead me, survey the more inland places; for there is no
part of this county twenty miles from the shore. Wicklo lately made a county,
1606.
To begin then at the South side, the first place that shows it self upon
this coast is Wicklo: where there stands over the Giraldus says, who
terms it Winchiligillo. There is an haven at Winchiligillo, on that side of
Ireland where it lies nearer unto Wales, that ordinarily and usually at every
ebb of the sea receives waters flowing into it; and again at every return of
tide, discharges and voideth the said water which it entertained:

Then from the top of an hill New Castle looks into the sea, and sees the
shelves of sand, which they call The Grounds, lying opposite a great way in
length: The Grounds.
Howbeit between them and the shore it is reported to be seven fathom deep
of water. A little higher, where the riveret Bray comes into the sea,
appears Old-Court, the possessions of the Walshes of Caryckmain, who as they
are of ancient stock and gentry, Old-Court.
so their family has shot forth many branches in this tract. Next unto it is
Powers or Poers-Court, Poers Court.
belonging in times past, as appears by the name, Poers; a large and great
castle, until that Tirlough O Tool, after he had revolted and rebelled,
undermined and overthrew it. From Bray mouth the shore for to let in a creek
bends and windeth it self inward, and at the very bent of the elbow lies a
little Island called Saint Benets, belonging to the Archbishop of Divelin.

This creek or Bay is called Dublin Haven, into which Liffy the noblest river
of this county out-powreth his stream: Liffy river, which Girald calls
Aven-Liff.
who albeit his spring head where he rises be but fifteen miles from his
mouth, yet with so many winding crankes he fetches such a compass, that first
he turns into the South by Saint Patrickes land; then Westward, afterward
North, watering the county of Kildare, and at length into Castle-Knoc, the
Barony in times past of the Tirils, whose inheritance by the females was
devolved upon other about the year 1370. and so by Kilmainam, an house in old
time of Saint John's Knights of Jerusalem, now converted to a retiring place of
the Lords Deputies. This Liffy doubtless is mentioned by Ptolomee, but through
carelessness of the transcribers banished out of his own due place. For the
river LIBNIUS is set down in the copies of Ptolomee at the very same latitude
or elevation of the Pole, in the other part of the Island, where there is no
such river at all: but let him, if it please you, by a writ of recovery return
out of exile now to his own city EBLANA, from whence uniustly he has been for
a time alienated: and take withal, if you think good, these verses of Necham
as touching this river.

Castle-Knoc non dedignatur That is, the river L^ff.

Istum Dublini suscipit unda maris.
To see and visit Castle-Knock Liffy does not disdain,
At Dublin ready is the sea this stream to entertain.
For seated it is seven miles from his mouth, Eblana. Dublin.
which alone fame may celebrate for all the cities of Ireland. This is that
very city which Ptolomee called EBLANA, we DIVELIN, the Latin writers
Dublinium and Dublinia, the Welsh Britans Dinas Dulin, the English Saxons in
times past Duplin, and the Irish Bala-cleigh, that is, The town upon Hurdles:
for men say when it was built the foundation was laid upon Hurdles, the place
was so fennish and moorish: like as Hispalis or Sivill in Spain, Isidore
reports to have been so named, because it stood in a marish ground, upon
piles and stakes deeply pitched into the earth. For the antiquity of Dublin I
find no certainty; but that very ancient it is the authority of Ptolomee
persuades me to think. Saxo Grammaticus writes, how it was pitifully rent
and dismembered in the Danish wars: afterward it came under the subjection of
Edgar King of England, which his Charter before mentioned confirms, wherein
he calls it the most Noble City of Ireland. Then the Norwegians possessed
themselves of it: Gryffith Ap Cynan Prince of Wales, we read that Harald of
Norway when he had subdued the greatest part of Ireland, built Develin. This
may seem to be that Harald Harfager, that is, with the fair locks or
tresses, who was the first King of Norway, whole line in descent goes thus in
the life of Gryffith: Harald begat a son named Auloed: Who also is named
Abloicus. Aulafus and Olavus.
Auloed begat another Auloed; he had a son named Sitric King of Develin:
Sitric he begat Auloed, whose daughter Racwella was mother to Gryffith Ap Cynan
borne at Dublin, whiles Tirlough reigned in Ireland. But this is extravagant.
Develin at length when the English first arrived in Ireland, yielded unto their
valor, and by them was manfully defended, when Ausculph Prince Gottred King of
the Isles fiercely on every side assaulted it: within a while after a Colony of
Bristow-men was deduced hither, unto whom King Henry the second granted this
City (happily at that time dispeopled) for to inhabit, with all the Franchises
and free Customs, which the men of Bristow have, and that by those very words
which I have alleged. Since which time it has flourished every day more and
more, and in many tumultuous times and hard streights given notable proof of
most faithful loyalty to the Crown of England.

This is the royal City and seat of Ireland, a famous town for Merchandise,
the chief Court of Justice, in munition strong, in buildings gorgeous, in
Citizens populous. Ioscelin of Furnes in the life of S. Patricke. Lib. 2. verum
Anglicar. c. 26.
An old writer calls it, a City in regard of the people noble, of the site
most And William of Newborrow of it writes thus: Divelin a maritime city is
the mother city of all Ireland, having to it a haven passing well frequented,
for traffic and intercourse of Merchants matchable with our London. Seated it
is in a right delectable and wholesome place: for to the South ye have hills
mounting up aloft, Westward an open champion ground, and on the East the sea at
hand and in sight; the river Liffy running down at North-East affords a safe
rode and harbor for ships. By the river side are certain wharfes or Kaies,
Kaies.
as we term them, whereby the violent force of the water might be restrained.
Caiare) in old writers signified to Keep in, to restrain and repress: which
that most learned Upon Ausonius l. 2. c. 22.
Scaliger has well noted. A very strong wall of rough building stone reaches
hence along by the sides of it (and the same toward the South fortified also
with rampires) which opens at six gates, from whence there run forth
suburbs of a great length.

Dammensis.
Toward the East is Dammes gate, and hard by stands the Kings castle on high,
most strongly fensed with ditches, towers, and an Armory or Storehouse built
by Henry Loundres the Archbishop, about the year 1220. In the East suburbs
near unto Saint Andrew the Apostles Church, Henry the second King of England,
as Hoveden reports, caused a royal palace (or rather a banqueting house) to
be erected for

From hence is to be seen just over against it a beautiful College (in
which place there stood in old time the Monastery of All-Hallowes) consecrated
unto the name of the holy and indivisible Trinity, All-Hallowes. An University
begun 1591. 13. May was the foundation laid, 1593. Scholars were first admitted.
which for the exercise and polishing of good wits with good literature, Queen
Elizabeth of most happy memory endowed with the privileges of an University;
and being furnished of late with a notable Library, gives no small hope that
both religion, and all the exquisite and liberal sciences will return
eftsoons after their long exile to Ireland, as to their ancient home Alexander
Bicknor Archbishop of Divelin began to recall the profession of learning
hither, 1320. A Manuscript of Baron Hoult.
having obtained from the Pope the privileges of an University, and erected
also public Lectures: but the troublesome times that presently ensued,
interrupted the laudable Oustmantowne to the City. For here the Oustmans, who
came over, as Giraldus writes, out of Norway and the parts of the Northren
Islands, planted themselves, as the Annals bear record, about the year of
salvation 1050.

In this suburb stood in times past the goodly Church of Saint Mary's of
Oustmanby (for so in a Charter of King John it is called) an house also founded
for preaching Friars, called of them Black Friars, unto which of late days
have been translated the Judicial Courts of the kingdom. In the South
quarter of the City stand Ormonds gate and Newgate (which is their common house
of correction.) These lead unto the longest suburb of all, called Saint Thomas
street, and a magnificent Abbey of the same name, called Thomas Court* Thomas
Court.
founded and endowed in times past with very ample revenues by King Henry the
second for the expiation of the murder of Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury. Into
the South opens Paul's gate, and that which takes the name of Saint Nicolas,
making way into Saint Patrickes suburb, wherein stands the Archbishops
Palace, known by the name of Saint Sepulchers, and a most stately Church
dedicated unto Saint Patricke, right goodly to be seen, with fair embowed
works, stone pavements, an arched roof over head of stone work, and a very
high tower steeple. What time this Church John Common Archbishop of Dublin in
the year 1191. and Pope Celestine the third confirmed the same. Then after
him, Henry Loundres his successor in the Archbishopricke augmented it with
dignities of Personages (for I may be bold to use here the founders words) and
framed it conformable to the immunities, orders, and approved customs of the
Church of Salisbury. But in our days it maintains a Deane, a Chanter, a
Chancellor, a Treasurer, two Archdeacons, and two and twenty Prebendaries;
Statut. Parli. 18. H. 8. c. 15.
The only light and lamp (that I may not conceal the most of all godly and
Ecclesiastical discipline and order in Ireland.

There is another Cathedral Church also standing in the very heart of the
City, which being consecrate unto the Holy Trinity, is commonly called Christ's
Church; touching the building thereof thus we read in the ancient records of
the same Church: Sitric King of Dublin, the son of Ableb Earl of Dublin,
gave unto the blessed Trinity, and to Donatus the first Bishop of Dublin, a
place to found a Church in unto the holy Trinity; and not only so, but gold
and silver also he bestowed sufficiently for the building of the Church and
the whole close. This was done in the year 1012. in which, as Lancarvanensis
avoucheth, Sitric the son of Abloie (for so he calls him) lived Donatus,
Laurence Archbishop of Dublin, Richard Strongbow Earl of Penbroch, commonly
called Earl of Strigulia (whose tomb is here to be seen, repaired by Sir Henry
Sidney Lord Deputy) Robert Fitz-Stephen, and Reimund Fitz-Girald finished. Hard
at the South side of this Church there stands a stately Towne-hall, built of
four square stone, and called the Tolestale, Tole-stale.
where causes are tried before the Mayor of the City, and where the Citizens
use to hold their Sessions and public assemblies, for it enjoys many
immunities. In times past this City had for the chief Magistrate a Provost;
but in the year of our redemption 1409. King Henry the fourth granted them
license to choose every year a Mayor and two Bailifs: also that the Mayor
should have Liffy, does so dam up and bar the haven, that it is not able to
bring up any great vessels but at high water. Thus much of Dublin, for the most
part of which I acknowledge my self beholden unto the diligence and learning
of James Usher Chancellor of S. Patricks Church, whose

As touching Robert Vere Earl of Oxford, whom King Richard the second, a
Prince too too lavish in giving honorable titles, Marquess of Dublin.
made Marquess of Dublin, and afterward Duke of Ireland, I have spoken
already, and reason I have none to repeat the same here. Yet will I note thus
much, which I have since happened upon in the Records. When as King Richard
aforesaid had advanced that Robert Vere Earl of Oxford to be Marquess of
Dublin, and had given to him the Seigniory of Ireland during his life: Pr. p.
Pat. anno 9. Rich. 2. m. 1.
he, desirous to augment his honor by more ennoblishing him with honorable
Arms, granted also that as long as he should live, and hold Azure 3. Crowns
Or in a Bordur, in his Standards, Pennons, Coat-armours, and other things
wherein Arms are to be showed in all Marshall matters, and elsewhere at his
pleasure. But this grant was soon after recalled, and those Arms abolished.

Where the river Liffy lodges himself in the Ocean, Houth stands, compassed
in manner round about with the sea: of which the Noblemen surnamed Saint
Laurence, and dwelling there, Saint Laurence Barons of Houth.
become named Barons of Houth; men of rare felicity, for that in so long a
descent of their line (for they are able to derive their pedigree from the time
of King Henry the second) there has of them, by report, none been attainted
of high treason, none left ward in his minority. And within a little of this
place is Malchide, Malchid.
or Molachid, ennobled by the Lords thereof the Talbots, English

More within the country, Northward there adjoineth hard to the county of
Dublin, Fingall, Fingall.
that is, if you interpret it out of the Irish language, a nation of
forreiners, (for they use to nominate the English Gall, as one would say,
strangers, and Saissones, as it were, Saxons) a little country, but very good
and passing well husbanded; even the garner and barn of this kingdom, so great
store of corn it yields every year. And here the soil striveth after a
sort with the painful labor of the husbandman, which in other places
throughout this Island lying neglected, without tillage and manuring, seems to
make a very grievous complaint of the inhabitants sloth and Plonkets, Barnwels,
Russels, Talbots, Dillons, Nettervils, Holywoods, Lutterels, Burnels, Fitz*
Williams, Gouldings, Usshers, Cadleys, Finglases, Sarfelds, Blackneys, Cruceys,
Baths, etc.

Thus far forth summarily of Leinster, which in old time reached no farther.
Now I wot not whether it be worth the laughing at or the relating, that Thomas
Stukely, Th. Stukely.
when he had in England and Ireland both made shipwreck of his good name,
credit, and fortunes, having wound himself out of the danger of the laws,
curried such favor with Pope Gregory the thirteenth, what with making many
Marquess of Leinster.
Marquess of Leinster, Earl of Weisford and Caterlogh, Vicount Murrough, and
Baron of Rosse and Ydron. With which titles he being puffed up in pride,
whiles he thought to conquer Ireland, went aside into Africa, and there with
the three Kings that were slain in one battle, made up the interlude of his
life with an honest close and catastrophe.

MIDIA, OR MEDIAMETH.
THe rest of the Country of the Eblani was in ancient time a kingdom, Miih,
the English Meth, Giraldus names it in Latin Midia and Media, perhaps, because
it is in the very middle of the Island. For they say that Killair a castle in
these parts, which seems to be in Ptolomee LABERUS, Laberus.
is as it were the Navill of Ireland. Lair in the Irish tongue signifies The
Middle. This Meth lies stretched out from the Irish sea as far as to the
river Shanon: For the soil thereof, as says Bartholomaeus Anglicus, Fertile
it is in corn, pasture ground, and cattle, plentiful in fish, flesh, and
other victuals of white meat, as butter cheese, and milk, watered also with
rivers. The situation is delectable to the eye, and an wholesome air. In regard
of woods and marshes in the skirts and borders, it has a very hard access
and entry unto it: And therefore, considering the multitude of people, the
strength of castles and towns, is i^ commonly called for the peace thereof,
the CHAMBER of IRELAND. Within the memory of our fathers, because the country
was East Meth, and the county of West-Meth.

THE COUNTY OF EAST-METH.
THe County of EAST-METH is environed round about with the county of Kildar
South, with the county of Dublin and the sea East, with the territory of Louth
North, and with the county of West on the West. The whole is divided into 18.
Baronies: Dueleke, Scrine, Slane, Margallen, Navan, Kenles, half the Barony of
Four near to Kenles, Killalou, Demore, Cloue, Moylagh, Loghern, Oldcastle,
Luyn, Moyfeuraragh, Deese, Rath-touth, and Dunboyn.

Boyn, which Ptolomee calls BUVINDA, Giraldus BOANDUS, a noble river
springing out of the North side of the Kings county, runs through this
county. In the hither part on this side Boyn, these are the places memorable:
Galtrim, where the Huseys have dwelt a long time: Killin Castle, which Hugh
Lacy Custos of Ireland under King Henry the second built; and Dunsany, which
have their Parliament Barons, Noblemen of ancient descent out of the family of
the Plonkets, which Denmark: but they bear the very same Arms in sundry
colors, which Alan Plonket of Kilpecke in England did: who also under King
Edward the first lived in the dignity and port of a Baron. Now this house of
the Plonkets in Ireland came up and grew to be of high estimation, ever since
that Sir Christopher Plonket, a valiant and wise man (Deputy, as they term
him, unto Richard Duke of York, Lord Lieutenant in King Henry the sixth his
time) was advanced to the dignity of Baron of Killin, which fell unto him by
his wife, heir to the family of the Cusakes: and his second son by his own
worth and valor obtained the title of Baron Dunsany. On the farther side of
Boyn, Barnwell. Baron Trimlet stoun.
are Trimletstoun, which has his Baron out of the family of the Barnwells (for
King Edward the fourth promoted Sir Robert Barnwell to Gormanston, which now
has had honorable Vicounts, men of good desert in the Commonwealth,
descended from the line of the Prestons (as it is verily thought) in
Lancashire; Baron Slane.
and Slane, which is able likewise to show Barons thereof, out of the family of
the Flemings: and amongst them stands Aboy, a mercate town well inhabited and
of good resort, upon the river Boyn: which when it has passed beside
Glan-Iores, that is, The land of the sons of George (this George was of the
Birminghams progeny, whose heir by marriage brought a fair inheritance with
the castle of Carbray unto the Prestons) runs under Trim a pretty town of
trade, and one of the better ^ort, where William Pepard erected a castle. This
was an ancient Baronie of the Lacies, which accrewed unto the titles Lords of
Trim. Then flows it beside Navan, Navan. Baronet of Navan.
which has a Baron or Baronet, but not of the Parliament house, and affords
for the most part a dwelling house unto the Bishop of the Dioecesse, who has
now no Cathedral Church, but does all with the assent of the Clergy of Meth.

His See seems to have been at Cluanarard, Bishop of Meth.
which is called also Clunart, where Hugh Lacy in times past built a castle:
For in the letters Apostolical we read him thus, Episcopus Midensis, five
Cluanarardensis, that is, The Bishop of Meth or Cluanarard, Provincial
Elnamirand. Boyn now by this time carrying a fuller stream, after it has with
an hasty course swiftly passed on certain miles, near unto Drodagh emptieth
himself into the sea. Of this swift running what if I should think this Boyn
took his name: for Boan both in Irish and British also signifies swift, and
our Poet Necham of this river has thus versified.

Ecce Boan qui Trim celer influit, istius undas
Subdere se salsis Drogheda cernit aquis.
Lo Boin that swiftly unto Trim does run, and mark withal,
How at Tredagh his stream into the salt sea gulf does fall.
The men of greatest reputation and name in this county, besides those whom I
rehearsed before, to wit, the Plonkets, Flemings, Barnwels, and Husseys, are the
Darceys, Cusakes, Dillons, Birminghams, De la hides, Nettervils, Garvies,
Cadels, and others: whom if I do not name at all, or if I reckon either these
or others elsewhere not in their own rank, according to their worth and
degree, I desire no imputation may be laid upon me therefore.

THE COUNTY OF WEST-MEATH.
THe county of WEST-METH, so called in respect of the other abovesaid, Shanon,
and lies between the Kings County South, and Longford County North; unto
which it is not willing to give place either in fertility of soil, multitude
of inhabitants, or any thing else whatsoever, unless happily it be inferior in
civility of manners. Molingar.
Molingar by authority of Parliament was ordained to be the head and principal
shire town, because it lies, as it were, in the very midst: and the whole
country is laid forth into twelve Hundreds or Baronies, viz. Fertulogh, where
the Tirels, Barons Delvin.
Ferbille, where the Darcies dwell; Delvin which adorneth the old Nogents (who
came first out of England) with the title of a Parliament Baron. These are
descended from that Sir Gilbert Nogent, whom Hugh Lacy the Conqueror of Meth,
for his courageous and valiant service in the wars of Ireland, rewarded both
with these lands and those also of Furry, as that most learned Gentleman
Richard Stanihurst has recorded: Fourry aforesaid, as also Corkery, where the
Nogents dwell; Nogents.
Moyassell, where the Tuts and Nogents; Maghertiernan, where very many of the
Petits and the Tuts; Moigoysy, where the Tuts and Nangles; Rathcomire, where
the Daltons; Magirquirk, where the Dillons, all propagated from English blood
do inhabit; Clonlolan, where the O-Malaghlins, of the old royal line of Meth;
Moycassell, where the Magohigans, mere Irish bear sway: and others whose very
Martial the Poet when he had reckoned up certain barbarous Spanish names of
places, being himself a Spaniard, said, That he liked them better than British
names, so the Irish love these rather than the English: in so much as one of
their Potentates gave it out, that he would in no wise learn the English
tongue, for fear he should in speaking English get a wry mouth. Thus the crow
thinks her own birds fairest; and we all are given to like our own too well,
even with the disdain and contempt of others.

Lords of Meth.
This Meth had in times past Kings, or pety Princes rather to rule it. And, as
we read, that Monarch or sole King of Ireland, Slany, caused the revenues of
Meth to be assigned Hugh Lacy subdued a great part thereof, and King Henry the
second enfeoffed him in it, and made him Lord of Meth, who while he was
building of a castle at Derwarth* and holding his head down to prescribe a
Carpenter somewhat that he would have done, had by him his head stricken off
with his axe. Ulster, of whom I will speak hereafter: and Walter Lord of Trim,
who begat Gilbert that died before his father. By the daughters of this
Gilbert, Genevile.
Margaret and Maud, the one part by the Genevils, who were (as they write) of
the house of Lorrain; and by the Mortimers, came to the Dukes of York, and so
to the Kings domain or Crown: for Peter de Genevile, son to that Maud, begat
Joan espoused to Roger Mortimer Earl of March: and the other part by Margaret
wife to John Lord Verdon, Constables of Ireland.
and by his heirs who were Constables of Ireland, was devolved at length upon
diverse families in England, as Furnivall, Burghersh, Crophul, etc.

THE COUNTY OF LONGFORD.
UNto West Mead on the North side joyneth the County of LONGFORD (reduced into
this rank of Countries a few years since by the provident policy of Sir Henry
Sidney Lord Deputy) called before time Anale, Anale.
inhabited by a numerous Sept of the O-Pharols: of which house there be two
great men and Potentates; one rules in the South part, O-Pharoll.
named O-Pharoll Boy, that is, The yellow: the other in the North, called
O-Pharoll Ban, that is, The white. And very few Englishmen are there among
them, and

Along the side of this County passes Shannon, the noblest river of all
Ireland, which as I have said runs between Meth and Conaught. River Senus or
Sineus. Shannin and Shannon.
Ptolomee names it SENUS, Orosius SENA, and some copies SACANA, Giraldus
Flumen Senense: but the people dwelling there by call it Shanon, that is, as
some expound it, The ancient river. He springs out of Thern hills in the
county Le Trim, and forthwith cutting through the lands Southward, one while
overfloweth the banks, and enlarges himself into open Pooles: and other
whiles draws back again into narrow straights, and after he has run abroad
into one or two Lakes, gathering himself within his banks, valeth bonnet to
MACOLICUM, Macolicum. Malc.
now called MALC (as the most learned Geographer Gerard Mercator has observed)
whereof Ptolomee has made mention; and then by and by is entertained by
another broad Mere (they call it Lough Regith) the name and situation whereof
does after a sort imply, Rigia.
that the City RIGIA, which Ptolomee places there, stood not far from hence.
But when he has once gotten beyond this Poole, and draws himself to a
narrower channel within the banks, there stands hard upon him the town
Athlon, of which I will write in place convenient.

From thence Shannon having gotten over the Water-fall at Killolo (whereof I
must speak anon) being now able to bear the biggest ships that are, in a
divided channel, as it were with two arms claspeth about the city Limirick,
whereof I have Shannon passing on directly for threescore miles or thereabout
in length, bearing a great breadth, and making many an Island by the way,
speedeth himself Westward; and in what place soever he becomes shallow and
affords fords at an ebb or low water, there were planted little forts with
wards (such was the careful providence of our forefathers) to restrain the
inrodes of preytaking robbers. And so at length he runs and voideth out at
an huge mouth into the West Ocean beyond Knoc Patric, Which others call Mare
Bredunicum.
that is, Patricks hill: for so Necham terms that place in these his verses
of Shannon.

Fluminibus magnis laetatur Hibernia, Sineus
Inter Connatiam, Momomiamque fluit.
Limirici, Knoc Patric illum
Oceani clausum sub ditione videt.
Ireland takes joy in rivers great, and Shannon them among,
Betwixt Connaught and Munster both holds on his course along,
He runs hard by Limrick ways: Knoc Patric then at last
Within the gulf of the Ocean does see him lodged fast.
CONNACHTIA, OR CONAGHT.
THe fourth part of Ireland, which bears Westward, closed in with the river
Shannon, the outlet of the Lake or Lough Erne, which some call Trovis, others
Bana, and with the maine Western sea, is named by Giraldus Cambrensis Conachtia
and Conacia, in English Conaght, and in Irish Conaughty. In ancient times, as
we may see in Ptolomee, it was inhabited by the GANGANI, Nagnatae. Gangani.
Concani. Auteri.
who are also named CONCANI, AUTERI and NAGNATAE. Those CONCANI or GANGANI,
like as the LUCENI their next neighbors Lucensii in Spain, may seem by the
affinity of name and also by the vicinity of place to have been derived from
the CONCANI in Spain, who in Strabo are according to the diversity of reading
named CONIACI and CONISCI: whom Silius testifies in these verses following to
have been at the first Scythians, and to have usually drunk horses blood (a
thing even of later days nothing strange among the wild Irish.)

Et qui Massagetem monstrans feritate parentem,
Cornipedis fusa satiaris Concane vena.
And Concane though in savagenesse that now resembling still
Thy parents old the Massagets, of horse-blood drinkst thy ^^ll.
And beside him Horace, Et letum equino sanguine Concanum.
And Concaine, who thinks it so good
To make his drink of horses blood.
Unless a man would suppose this Irish name Conaughty to be compounded of
CONCANI and NAGNATAE. Well, this Province as it is in some place fresh and
fruitful, so by reason of certain moist places, yet covered over with grass,
which of their softness they usually term Boghes, like as all the Island
besides every where Conaught is at this day divided into these counties,
Twomond or Clare, Galway, Maio, Slego, Letrim, and Roscoman.

The ancient CONCANI abovesaid, held in old time the more Southerly part of
this Conaught, where now lie Twomond or Clare, the county Galway, Clan-Richards
country, and the Barony of Atterith.

TWOMOND, OR THE COUNTY CLARE.
TWomon or Twomond, which Giraldus calls Thuetmonia, the Irish Twowoun, that
is, The North-Mounster (which although it lie beyond the river Shannon yet was
counted in times past part of Mounster, until Sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy
laid it unto Conaught) shoots out into the sea with a very great Promontory
growing by little and little thin and narrow. On the East and South sides it is
so enclosed with the winding course of the Shannon, which waxes bigger and
bigger, like as on the West part with the open maine sea, and on the North side
confineth so close upon the county Galway, that there is no coming unto it by
land, but through the Clan-Ricards territory. This is a country wherein a man
would wish for nothing more, either from sea or soil, were but the industry of
the inhabitants correspondent to the rest; which Robert Muscegros an English
Nobleman, Richard Clare and Thomas Clare, younger brethren of the stock of the
Earls of Gloucester (unto whom King Edward the first had granted this country)
stirred up long since by building towns and castles, and by alluring them to
the fellowship of a civil conversation; of whose name the chief town Clare,
now the dwelling place of the Earl of Twomond, took denomination, as also the
whole tract, of it called the county of Clare. The places of greater note and
name than the rest, Killaloe.
are Kilfennerag and Killaloe or Laon, the Bishops seat. This in the Roman
Provincial is termed Episcopatus Ladensis, where there stands a rock in the
mid channel of the river Shannon, Catarracta.
from which the water rusheth

Not far from the bank of Shannon, Bunraty.
is seated Bunraty, for which Sir Robert Muscegros obtained from King Henry the
third the liber^ie of a Mercate and Fair, and when he had fortified it with a
castle, gave it at length unto King Edward the first, who granted both this
town and the whole territory unto Richard Clare aforesaid. And seven miles
from thence, Clare.
appears Clare the principal town, at a Creek (flowing up out of Shannon)
full of Islands: and these twain are the only mercate Mac-Nemors, Mac-Mahon,
O-loughton, and the mightiest by far of all other, the O-Briens, descended from
the ancient Potentates or Kings of Conaght, or as themselves give it forth,
Earls of Twomond.
from the Monarchs of Ireland. Of these, Morogh O-Brien was the first Earl of
Twomond, created by King Henry the eighth for term of life; and after him to
Donough his brothers son, and his heirs; who at the same time being made
Baron of Ibarcan, succeeded in the Earldome, and was slain by his brother Sir
Donel: O-Brien Connagher, O-Brien Donaghs son, was the third Earl, and father
to Donaugh

THE COUNTY OF GALLWAY.
THe county of GALLWAY meereth South upon Clare, West upon the Ocean, North
upon the county Maio, and East upon the river Shannon. A land very thankful
unto the industrious husbandman, and no less profitable unto the Shepherd.
The West shore endented in with small Arran, Islands of Arran.
make a Barony, and many a foolish fable goes of them, as if they were the
Islands of the living, wherein none do dye: also Inis Ceath, well known in
times past by reason of the Monastery of Colman a devout Saint, Bed. l. 4. c.
4. Ecclesiast. hist.
founded for Scots and Englishmen: and Inis-Bouind, which Bid interprets out
of the Scottish tongue to signify, The Isle of white Heifers; whereas it is a
mere British word. But the Englishmen soon forsook the Monastery, when the
Scots and they could not well agree together. Logh-Corbes.
Further within lies a Lake, called Logh-Corbes (where Ptolomee places the
river AUSOBA) spreading out twenty miles or thereabout in length, and Gallwey.
runs under Gallway, in the Irish tongue Galliue; named so (or else I cannot
tell) of the Gallaeci in Spain, the very principal city of this Province, and
which would think hardly to be reckoned the third in Ireland. Surely a very
proper and fair City it is, built almost round, and in manner tower-like, of
entry, and some stone, and has beside to set it out a Bishops See: and
withal, through

The battle of Knoctoe. 1516.
Not full four miles from hence stands Knoc-toe, that is, the hill of Axes;
under which that noble Girald Fitz-Girald, Earl of Kildare, and by times, for
the space of three and thirty years Lord Deputy of Ireland, discomfited and
put to flight, after a bloody overthrow, the greatest rabble of rebels that
ever was seen before in Ireland, raised and gathered together by William Burk,
O-Bren, Mac-Nomare, and O-Carrall. Not far from hence Eastward stands
Aterith (in which remain some footings Athenry, Aterith.
enclosed round about with a wall of great circuit, but slenderly inhabited. It
glories much of that warlike Baron thereof, Birminghams.
John de Birmingham an Englishman; out of which family the Earl of Louth
descended: but these Birminghams of Aterith, being now as it were degenerate
into barbarous Irishry, scarce acknowledge themselves to have been English
originally. The septs or kinreds of the Irish here, that be of the better sort,
are O Kelleis, O Maiden O Flairts, Mac Dervis, etc.

Clan-Ricard. Earls of Clan-Ricard.
Clan-Ricard, that is, The sons, kindred, or Tube of Richard, or the land of
Richards sons, confineth upon these, and lies to this county. The name it
took, after the Irish manner, from one Richard of an English family, called de
Burgh, that became afterward Ulick Burgh Earl of Clan-Ricard, whose eldest
son carries the title of Baron Dun-Kellin. His son Richard was the second
Earl, whose children, begotten of sundry wives, stirred up many troubles, to
the grief of their father, the overthrow of their own country, and
themselves. After Richard, who died an old man, succeeded his son Ulick the
third Earl, and father to Richard the fourth Earl now living, whose fast
fidelity and singular fortitude has, to his great praise, evidently appeared,
when the English, and their whole estates in Ireland, were in greatest danger.
Archbishopric of Toam, or Tuen.
In this territory is the Archbishops See of Toam, unto which in old time many
Bishops were subject; but at this day the Bishoprics of Anagchony, Duae, and
Maio are annexed unto it. The Bishopric likewise of Kilmacough, which in the
old Provincial, unless the name be corrupt, is not mentioned, as also of
Clonfert, are seated in this part, and, as I have heard, united to the Sea of
Toam.

THE COUNTY OF MAIO.
THe county Maio, on which the Western Ocean beats, lies bounded South with
the county of Galway; East with the county Roscoman, and North with the county
of Slego. A fertile country and a pleasant, abundantly rich in cattle, Dear,
Hawks, and plenty of honey: taking the Maio, Maio.
a little city with a Bishops See in it, which in the Roman Provincial is
called Mageo. But that Episcopal seat is now annexed to the Metropolitan of
Toam, and the neighbor inhabitants repair for Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to
the Bishop of Killaley, Killaley. Bishopric of Killaley.
in the Barony of Tir-Auley.

In this Maio, if I deceive not my self, Colman a Bishop of Ireland built, as Bede writes, a Monastery for thirty men or thereabout of the English Nation,
trained in the profession of the Monastical life, whom he brought out of
England into Ireland. But hear what Bid says. Lib 4. cop. 4.
Colman found a place in the Isle of Ireland, meet for building of a Monastery,
named in the old Scottish tongue Magio. And he bought a part of it, which was
not much, of the Earl, unto whose possession it belonged, to found a Monastery
In Mago. And having now this good while turned all to better orders, it
contains a notable covent of Monks, who being assembled there together out
of the Province of England, according to the example of the reverend fathers,
under Regularity and a Canonical Abbat, live in great continency and sincerity
with the labor of their own hands.

About the year of our Lord 1115. this monastery was re-edified, and
flourished in King John's time, who by his Patent confirmed many farms and
fair lands unto it. Neither verily is there any other place, that I can find
memorable, unless it be Logh-Mesk a good large and fishfull Lake, Logh-Mesk.
in two small Islands whereof stand Burke. This county is not so famous for the
towns therein as the Inhabitants, who are either of the Irish race, as
O-Mayles, Ioies and Mac-vadus; or of the Scottish out of the Islands Hebrides,
and out of the sept of Donell, Galloglasses.
whereupon they be called Clan-Donells, and Galloglasses, and as it were,
doughty mercinary soldiers, who fight with two edged axes, and be armed with
habergeons or coats of maile, procured in times past to come hither by the
rebels, and endowed here with lands: or else of English blood, as the said
Burkes, Iordans, descended from one Jordan of Excester, Nangles of Castlough,
Prendergest of Clan-Moris. But the most puissant be those Burkes, who after a
sort are beholden both for their first beginning, and also for their glory unto
William a younger brother Burgo or Burk of Ulster. This William, highly
renowned for his military prowess, being led away prisoner into Scotland, and
leaving his wife behind him for an hostage, when he was restored to his own
home, by his manhood recovered Conaught (out of which in his absence all the
English had been expelled by Phelim O Conor) having slain in the field the
said Phelim O Conor, Mac Dermond, Tego and Kelly, and was himself at last, in
revenge, killed by Cormac Mac-Dermond. His grandson Thomas, by his son Edmund
surnamed Albanach (because he was borne in Scotland) when he saw the goodly and
rich inheritance of his own family, translated by a female unto Leonell Duke
of Clarence, took it to the heart, and therefore raising a power of lewd
lawless and desperate persons (who will be never wanting Ulster in this County
into his own hands, and after the name of that Grandfather of his, whose
glorious fame and gracious authority was then fresh in remembrance, called
himself Mac-William, Mac-William who also is called Mac-William Eughter.
Cuttings, Coin, Liverey, etc. Cause of Rebellions in Ireland. Richard Bingham.
that is, the son of William. And his posterity under that name and title
usurped a tyranny in these parts, raging upon themselves other whiles, with
mutual injuries, and oppressing the poor people a long time with extorting,
pilling and spoiling: insomuch as they left scarce one village or house in the
Country unrazed and unrifled. This powerful violence of theirs Sir Richard
Bingham principal Commissioner, or Governor of Conaght, a man resolute,
severe and valiant, fit for such a fierce and fell Province, thought not to be
Mac-William and of others getting head, employed with all diligence his whole
care and cogitations to the uttermost: and albeit he had from time to time many
imputations, suggestions, and complaints eagerly urged upon him, both before
Queen Elizabeth and also the Lord Deputy, yet Burke, their followers and
dependants, that refused to obey the laws, took arms and drew to band and
side with them, the Septs of the Clan-Donells, Ioies and others, who distrusted
themselves and their own power; whom Bingham the Governor soon scattered:
and having forced their forts, drove them into woods and lurking hooles, until
the Lord Deputy taking pity of them, upon their humble supplication,
commanded by his Missives that they should be received upon That they would
set up their Mac-William, or else send for one out of Spain: That they would
not admit a Sheriff, nor yield obedience to laws. And herewith they closely
procured the Scottish Ilanders from out of the Hebrides, to come over for to
aid them, promising them fair lands and possessions: whereupon the Lord
Deputy commanded the Governor to repress and bridle this their excessive and
malapert insolence. He then Maio: but the Governor with continual journies
affronted them by night and day so near, and followed upon them so hard, that
in the end he intercepted them at Ardnary, and valiantly giving the charge, put
them to flight, after he had killed and drowned in the river Moin about three
thousand of them. A happy victory this was, and of great consequence both for
the present and future times: Mac-William, was extinguished. Donell Gormy, and
Alexander Carrough, the sons of James Mac-Conel, and those Ilanders who most of
all had plagued Ireland were slain. These occurrents have I briefly set down
out of my Annals (impertinent though they be to my intended purpose) which for
their worthiness ought more at large to be penned by some Historiographer.

THE COUNTY OF SLEGO.
SOmewhat higher lies the county of Slego, a plenteous and battle country for
feeding and raising of cattle, wholly also coasting upon the sea. Ulster
Northward runs the river TROBIS, which Ptolomee calls RAVIUS, as an
outlet of the Lake Erne: it is severed from the neighbor counties, Le Trim
and Roscoman, by the comberous Curlew hills; and the river Suc divides it in
twain. In some place hereabout Ptolomee sets the city NAGNATA; Nagnata.
but what city it was it passes my wit to find out. He has placed also the
river LIBNIUS in this tract, which through the retchlesnesse of the
transcribers, I reduced even now from out of exile to Dublin his own city. But
that place which Ptolomee here points out, is now called THE BAY OF SLEGO, a
rode full of harbors under Slego the principal place of this county: where
stands a castle, the seat at this day of the Sept of O-Conor, who of it take
their addition Slego, and fetch their pedigree, as they say themselves, from
that Rotherick O-Conor Dun, who being a great man and of much puissance, bare
himself as Monarch of Ireland, what time as the English entered first into
Ireland, and hardly yielded himself unto King Henry the second, although in
words he professed submission, and oftentimes raising tumults (as an author
without name of that age writes) used ever and anon to cry out and say, That
these words following of Adrian the Pope, in his Patent or Charter made unto
the King of England, were prejudicial unto him: Enter you into that Island,
Diploma l. 2. c. 6 Girald. Cambren. de* expugnatio. Hibern p. 787.
and execute whatsoever shall concern the glory of God, and the salvation of
that land: and let the people of the said land receive you and honor you as
their Lord: until such time as Pope Alexander the third by a new Bull or
Charter O Conors, the greatest men of name in this territory are O Don, O
Haris, O Ghar, and Mac-Donagh.

THE COUNTY OF LE-TRIM.
THe County of Slego Eastward is enclosed with Breany, the possession of the
ancient family of O-Rorck, which drew their descent from Rotherick Monarch of
Ireland, whom they by contraction (which they take pleasure in) term Rorck,
until that Brien O Rorck, Lord of Breany and Minterolise, fed with vain hopes
by Pope Sixtus Quintus and the King of Spain, had persidiously cast off his
allegiance to Queen Elizabeth, and Breany, by John Perot Lord Deputy was made
a county, and of the chief town called Le-Trim, which rises up throughout
with hills, full of rank grass; yet not so, as that it should be altogether
true which Solinus reports of Ireland: namely, that it is so full of forage,
that unless cattle were kept other whiles from grasing, their fullness would
endanger them. And so much cattle it feeds, that within the little circuit
which it has, it may reckon at one time above a hundred and twenty thousand
head of beasts. In this stands Achonry Bishopric, united now to the Sea of
Elphin. And Shannon, the Sovereign O Rorck, O Murreies, Mac Lochleims, Mac
Glanchies, and Mac Granelles, all mere and stark Irish. Whereas John Burgh,
son to Richard the Earl of Clan-Ricards, was created by Queen Elizabeth
Baron Le-Trim, who was afterward slain by his envious concurrents, I cannot
say whether he had that title of this Le-Trim, or of some other place in this
kingdom.

THE COUNTY OF ROSCOMAN.
UNder the county of Letrim Southward lies ROSCOMAN, ordained to be a county
by Henry Sidney Lord Deputy; lying out a good length, but narrow; closed up
between the two rivers Suc Westward, and Shanon Eastward, and on the North side
bounded with Curlew mountains. A territory it is for the most part plain,
fruitful, feeding many herds of cattle, and with mean husbandry and tillage
yields plenty of corn. Where it bears Northward, Curlew hills.
the steep mountains of Curlew perke up aloft, and those impassable until by
the careful industry of George Bingham there was a way cut out: which Curlews
not long since became more notorious, for the disastrous death of Sir Coniers
and (by his default) for the slaughter with him of most valiant and experienced
soldiers. In this county are reckoned four Baronies. Under Curlew hills, by
the river Shanon, Barony of Boil.
the Baronie of Boil first comes in view: where was founded in times past a
famous Abbey, in the year 1152. together with the Abbey of Beatitude, and Mac
Dermot rules all there as Lord; then by the river Suc lies the Baronie Balin
Tober, Balin Tober.
where O Conor Dun is of the greatest command: and upon it joineth Elphen an
Episcopal See. Somewhat lower is Roscoman, the Baronie of O Conor Roo, that
is, Conor the red, wherein is seated the chief town of the whole county,
sensed in times past with a castle by Robert Ufford Lord Justice of Ireland;
but all the houses are mean and thatched; and more Southward, Athlone the
Baronie of the O Kellies, so named of the head town, which has a castle and
ward in it; also a most beautiful bridge of hewn stone, which to the great
terror of seditious rebels, Queen Elizabeth in our memory appointing Henry
Sidney Lord Deputy of Ireland overseer thereof, caused to be built, with a
purpose to constitute in that place (as most fit of all others in Ireland to
repress seditions) the seat of residence for the Lords Deputies: and thus much
for the Counties of Conaght.

LORDS OF CONAGHT.
AS for the Lords of Conaght, we find it recorded in the Irish histories,
that Turlogh O Mor O Conor ruled absolutely in old time this country, and
divided it wholly between his two sons, Cahel and Brien. But at the
Englishmens first arrival into Ireland, Rothericke bare rule, who styled
himself Monarch of Ireland, yet being put in fear with the great preparation
for the English war hanging so near over his head, he betook himself into
the protection of King Henry the second, Rog. Hoveden. Anno 1175. page 312.
without trying Miles Cogan was the first Englishman that gave the attempt upon
Conaght, yet sped he not in his enterprise. Howbeit that King of Conaght
abovesaid, was driven to this exigent, as to acknowledge himself the King of
Englands Liegeman, to serve him faithfully as his man, and to pay unto him
yearly of every tenth beast, one hide mercateable, etc. And King John granted
that the third part of Conaght should remain unto him still, to be held
hereditarily for an hundred Marks. But William Fitz-Adelme, whose posterity
are called in Latin de Burgo, and Burke or Bourke in Irish, Robert Muscegros,
Gilbert Clare Earl of Gloucester, and William de Birmingham were the first
English that fully subdued this country, and labored to bring it to civil
government. William Bourk and his lineall posterity, being called Lords of all
Conaght, governed that province, together with Ulster, for a long time in great
peace and tranquillity, yea and raised thereout rich revenues, until the only
daughter of William Burke, sole heir in gross of Conaght and Ulster both, was
matched in marriage with Leonell Duke of Clarence, King Edward the thirds
son. But when as he abode for the most part in England, and the Mortimers his
heirs and successors looked but negligently to their patrimony and
inheritance in Ireland, the Bourkes there allies, whom they had appointed as
overseers of their lands, taking the advantage of their Lords absence, and
presuming upon the troubles in England, despising the authority of laws,
entering into alliance with the Irish, and contracting marriage with them,
Conaght to their own behoof, and degenerating by little and little, have laid
down English civility, and taken up Irish behavior. Whereof some, who fetched
their pedigree from Richard Burke, were called Clan-Ricard; others, Mac William
Oughter, that is, The upper; others, Mac William Eughter, that is, The lower;
even as they who in the county of Maio were of greatest power and authority,
affected to be termed simply Mac-William, as being a name full of honor,
glory, and authority, because they descended from William de Burgo, or Burke,
whom I mentioned erewhile: under countenance of which name, they for a long
time tyrannized over the poor inhabitants with most grievous exactions.

ULTONIA, OR ULSTER.
ALL the land beyond the mouth of the river Boyn, Mead, the County Longford,
and the mouth of the river Ravie that stretches Northward, is counted the
fifth part of Ireland, called in Latin Ultonia, and Ulidia, in English Ulster,
in Irish Cui Guilly, that is, The Province Guilly, and of our Welsh Britans
Ultw. Which Province was Ptolomees time by the VOLUNTII, DARNI, ROBOGDII, and
ERDINI: A large country, bespred with many, and those very large loghes and
lakes, shaded with many and thick woods, in some places fruitful, in others
barren, howbeit fresh and green to see to in every place, and replenished with
cattle. But as the country for want of manuring is grown to be Louth, Down,
and Antrim: and now the rest is laid out into seven new counties, that is to
say, Cavon, Fermanagh, Monaghan, Armagh, Colran, Tir-Oen, and Donegall or
Tir-Conell, by the provident care of Sir John Perot L. Deputy: John Perot Lord
Deputy. 1585.
who being notable and worthy man, well acquainted with the humors and haughty
spirits of the Province, foreseeing that no policy would serve better to
appease the tumults of Ireland, than

THE COUNTY OF LOUTH.
THe county of LOUTH, Uriel, in Latin Urgalia.
in ancient books written Luva and Luda, called in the Irish tongue Iriel or
Uriel (if that be not rather a part of this territory) situate beyond Meth and
the mouth of the river Boyn, turning full upon the Irish sea, runs out with
a shore much winding into the North; the soil whereof is so full of forage and
so

Near unto Boynes mouth is seated Drogheda, Tredagh.
or Droghda, in English Tredagh, a fine town, well peopled and frequented, so
called of the bridge, and divided by the river Boyne running through it. Unto
which King Edward the second, for Theobald Verdons sake, granted license for a
mercate and Fair; the Kings confirmed many and great liberties, Mellifont
Abbey.
and among other a Mint. Near unto this stands Mellifont Abbey founded by
Donald a King of Uriel, and much praised by Saint Bernard: which Queen
Elizabeth (when as the religious Monks were before thrust out) gave unto Sir
Edward More of Kent, for his good deserts both at home, and abroad

Ardeth seven miles from hence is a dry inland town well known: Dundalk.
and above it Dundalk, with a commodious haven, and in times past strongly
walled; which Edward Brus, brother to the King of Scots, who had proclaimed
himself King of Ireland, burnt: but he within a while after was with eight
thousand two hundred of his men slain near thereabout. And in our remembrance
Shan O Neale laid siege unto it, but straightwaies he was forced with shame
enough to dislodge. Eight miles from hence stands Carlingford, Carlingford.
a port also of good request and resort: neither be there, to my knowledge, any
other places in this county worth the naming.

Louth had for Earl Sir John Birmingham an Englishman, Birmingham, who also is
called Brimicham.
whom in reward of his martial valor, when he had discomfited and in a
pitched field slain that Edward Brus, who assuming the title of King of Ireland
for a time, had made soul work with fire and sword in Ireland, King Edward the
second advanced to the honor of Earl of Louth, Earl of Louth.
to have unto him and his heirs males, and withal, the dignity of Baron of
Athenry, to him and his heirs. But this honorable title, as it began, so it
ended in him; for he that in war vanquished his enemies, was soon after in a
tumult of Oliver Plonket with the title of Baron of Louth. Baron Louth.
There remain in this county, the Verdons, Tates, Clintons, Bellews, Dowdals,
Gernons, Hadsors, Wottons, Brandons, Mores, Warrens, Chamberlanes, and very
many besides of English blood; and of the Irish the Mac-Mathons, etc.

THE COUNTY OF CAVON.
THe county of CAVON lies next unto Louth to the West, called in times past
East Breanny, East Breany.
the habitation of the O-Reilyes, who vaunt themselves to have had their
beginning of the Ridleys in England, whereas in their whole course and manner of
life they be mere Irish. O Reily.
These O-Reileys not long since were of great power in horsemen: but to the end
they might be that way less powerful, Sir Henry Sidney in his policy divided
their county into seven Baronies; whereof the Lords out of that family should
immediately hold the same by service, in fee from the Crown of England. They
dwell scattering in piles and forts, not in towns. A Bishop they have of their
own, and him a poor one, God he knows, whose See is at Kilmore: Kilmore
Bishopric.
and yet is not he so poor as those Irish Bishops were, Poor Bishops.
according as Adam Bremensis from their own relation, when they returned by
Germany out of Italy, learned and put down in writing.

THE COUNTY OF FERMANAGH.
BEyond Cavan West and North FERMANAGH presents it self, where sometimes the
ERDINI dwelt, a country full of woods, and very boggish. In the midst whereof
is that most famous and the greatest Mere of all Ireland, Lough-Ern.
Logh Erne, stretching out 40. miles, bordred about Bal-tarbet.
first at Bal-Tarbet, which is a little town farthest North of any in this
county of Cavon; it stretches from South to North fourteen miles in length,
and four in breadth. Anon it draws in narrow, to the bigness of a good
river, for six miles; in the channel whereof stands Inis Killin, the
principal castle in Dowdall a most valiant Captain won. Then turning
Westward, it enlarges it self most of all, Belek.
twenty miles long, and ten broad, as far as to Belek: near unto which is a
great downfall of water, and as they term it, that most renowned Salmons
Leap. A common speech is current among the inhabitants there by, that this
Lake was once firm ground, passing well husbanded with tillage, and
replenished with inhabitants; but suddenly, for their abominable buggery
committed with beasts, overflowne with waters, and turned into a Lake. The
Almighty God (says Giraldus) Creator of Nature, judged this land privy to so
filthy acts against Nature, unworthy to hold not only the first inhabitants,
but any others for the time to come. Howbeit this wickedness Annals lay upon
certain Ilanders out of the Hebrides, who being fled out of their own
Country lurked there. Among the Lords in this tract, Mac-Gwir was most noble
and powerful, until he overthrew himself and his state in the late
rebellion. And they that be of that Sept dwell on both sides, yet so as that
those beyond the Lake are reckoned of Ulster, and they on this side of Conaght.

THE COUNTY MONAGHAN.
ALong the Lough-Erne, on the East side, stretches out the County Monaghan,
mounting aloft with hills well attired with woods, but known by no town at
all (unless it be Monaghan, which imparted the name unto the whole country.)
It is divided into five Baronies, and contains Iriel, Dartre, Ferey, Loughty
(which by authority of Parliament were for rebellion, given away from the
Mac-Mahons) with the little territory Donemain, Walter D'Evereux Earl of Essex.

Those Mac-Mahons, Mac-Mahon.
that is, if we interpret it out of the Irish language, The Sons of Ursus, or
the Bear, ruled here as tyrannical Lords a long time, and derive their
Genealogy from Walter Fitz-Urse, Fitz-Urse.
who imbrued his hands with the bloody murdering of Thomas Archbishop of
Canterbury. The most puissant of these, after the manner of that nation, took
upon him to Lord it over the rest, and by way of excellency was termed
Mac-Mahon. About which pre-eminence, when as of late days they of that Sept or
Family were at most bitter debate, by way of hard words, open arms, foul
practices, yea and close corruptions, Sir William Fitz-William the Lord Deputy
came hither among them, 1590.
and judicially convented Hugh-Roe, Mac-Mahon, Mac-Mahon, he divided the
territory between the kindred of the said Hugh, and certain Englishmen, to
have and to hold after the English tenure, to them and theirs.

THE COUNTY ARMAGH.
ON the East side again lies out in length the county of Armagh, so as that it
is compassed as it were about with the river Neury by East, with the county
Louth by South, and with the Black-water by North. A County, as I have sundry
times heard the Earl of Denshire Lord Lieutenant General say, Charles Blunt
L. Mont-joy.
that for a most rich and battle soil passes all other parts of Ireland,
insomuch as if any compost be laid upon it to make it more fruitful, it
scorneth and disdaineth, as one would say, the same, and becomes barren. The
first place in it that we meet with, Fewes.
is Fewes, a little territory belonging to Turlogh Mac-Henry, one of the family
of O-Neale, thick set with woods, and by reason of loughs and bogs unpassable.
Orry.
Then have you Orry, as scarce of woods, where dwells O-Hanlan, and the fort
Mont-Norris, Mont-Norris.
built by Charles Baron Mont-joy when he was Lord Deputy, and so named in
honor of Sir John Norris, under whom he had served first, and was Armach.
Eight miles from hence, near unto the river Kalin, Armach makes a poor
show, albeit it is the Archiepiscopall See, and Metropolitan of the whole
Island. The Irish talk much, that it was so called of Queen Armacha: but in
mine opinion it is the very same that Bid names Dearmach, and out of the
Scottish or Irish language interprets it, The field of Oaks. But it was named
Drumsailich, before that Saint Patricke had built there a proper fair City, S.
Patricke. Vita Patricii. Marianus Scotus.
for site, form, quantity, and compass, modelled out, as he says, by the
appointment and direction of Angels. That Patricke I say, who being a Britan
borne, and Saint Martins sisters son, named at his Baptism Sucat, was sold
into Ireland, where he became Heardman to King Miluc, afterward was named by
Saint German, whose disciple he Magonius, as a Nurse-Father, out of a British
word: and by Pope Caelestine, Patricius, as a Father of the Citizens, and by
him sent over to catechize Ireland in the Christian faith: which
notwithstanding some had received there before, as we may gather out of an old
Synodall, wherein is urged the testimony of Patricke himself, The Irish
shaving.
against that tonsure or shaving of Priests which had been used before his
time in Ireland; whereby they were shaven only on the fore part of the head,
and not on the Crown. Which manner of shaving he seems by way of contempt
Lagerius the son of Nell: and the writers of that age cried out, See Bed. l.
5. c. 22.
that it was Simon Magus his shaving, and not S. Peter's. In this place about
the year of our salvation 610. Columbane built a most famous Monastery, out of
which very many Monasteries afterward were propagated by his disciples, both
in Britain and in Ireland. S. Bernard in the life of Malachy.
Of this Armach S. Bernard thus writes. In honor of S. Patrick the Apostle of
Ireland, who here by his life time ruled, and after death rested; it is the
Archiepiscopall seat and Metropolitan City of all Ireland, and of so venerable
estimation in old time, that not only Bishops and Priests, but Kings also and
Princes in general, were subject to the Metropolitan thereof in all
obedience, and he alone governed them

When in process of time the Ecclesiastical discipline in this Island was
grown loose, so as in towns and cities, there were translations and plurality
of Bishops, according to the will and pleasure of the Metropolitan; for
reformation of this abuse, John Papyrio a Cardinal was sent hither from Pope
Eugenius the fourth, as a namelesse writer then living wrote in these words. In
the year of our Lord 1142. John Papyrio, a Cardinal sent from Eugenius the
fourth Bishop of Rome, together with Christian Bishop of Lismore Legate of all
Ireland, came into Ireland. The same Christian held a solemn Counsel in Mell,
at which were present all the Bishops, Abbats, Kings, Dukes, and Elders of
Ireland: By whose consent there were established four Archbishopricks, namely,
of Armach, of Dublin, of Cassile, and Toam. Wherein sat and ruled at the same
time, Gelasius, Gregorius, Donatus, and Edanus: and so the Cardinal, bestowing
his blessing upon the Clergy, returned to Rome. For before that time, the
Bishops of Ireland were wont to be consecrated by the Archbishops of
Canterbury, in regard of the Primacy which they had in Ireland. This did the
Citizens of Dublin acknowledge, when they sent Gregory elect Bishop of Dublin,
unto Ralph Archbishop Canterbury for to be consecrated, by these words,
Antecessorum vestrorum Magisterio, etc. that is, Unto the Magistracy of your
Predecessors we willingly submitted our (Prelates) from which we remember that
our Prelates have received their dignity Ecclesiastical, etc. which appears
for certain out of letters also bearing date of greater antiquity, namely, of
Murchertach King of Ireland, written unto Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury, for
the ordaining and enstalling of the Bishops of Dublin and of Waterford:
likewise of King Gothrich unto Lanfrank his predecessor, in the behalf of one
Patrick a Bishop: of Lanfrank also unto Therdeluac a King of Ireland, unto whom
he complains, That the Irishmen forsake and leave at their pleasure their
wedded wives, without any canonical cause, and match with any others, even
such as be near of kin, With which vices if this nation had not bin
corrupted even unto these days of ours, both the right of lineall succession
among them had been more certain, and as well the gentry as the communalty had
not embrued themselves so wickedly with the effusion of so much blood of their
own kindred, about their inheritances and legitimation, neither had they become
so infamous in these respects among foreign nations. But these matters are
exorbitant of themselves, and from my purpose.

Long had not that Archiepiscopall dignity and Primacy been established, when
Vivian the Popes Legate confirmed the same again; so that their opinion may
seem to be worthy of discredit and refutation, who affirm that the Archbishop
of Armach had in regard of antiquity the priority and superior place of the
Archbishop of Canterbury in the General or Oecumenicall Counsels; whereas by
the first institution he is by many ages the latter. Neither according to the
antiquity But all Prelates, of what degree soever they be, Lib. 1. Ceremoniar
sacrar. Sect. 14.
sit among their Colleagues, according to their own ordination, enstalling,
and promotion.

What time as that Vivian was Legate in Ireland, Sir John Curcy subdued Armach,
and made it subject to the English: and yet did he no harm then, but is
reported to have been very good and bountiful unto the Churchmen that served
God there, and he re-edified their Church, which in our memory was fired and
foulely defaced by the rebel Shan O Neale, and the city withal, so that they
lost all the ancient beauty and glory, and nothing remains at this day but
very few small watled cottages, Malachy, the first that prohibited Priests
marriage in Ireland, a man in his time learned and devout, and who took no
less of the native barbarousnesse of that country, than sea fishes saltness
of the seas, as says S. Bernard, who wrote his life at large: also Richard
Fitz-Ralfe, commonly called Armachanus, is of famous memory, who turned the
edge of his style about the year 1355. against the mendicant Friars, as
detesting in Christians such voluntary begging. Near to Armach, upon a rising
hill, remain the relics of an old castle ( Owen-Maugh they call it) which
was, as they say, the ancient habitation of the Kings of Ulster. More East
glideth the Black-water (in the Irish More, that is, Great) which is the limit
between this shire and Tir-Oen, whereof I am to speak in due place. In this
country and about it Mac-Genis, O Hanlan, O Hagan, and many of the sept of
O-Neal, assuming unto them sundry additions and by-names, carry all the sway
after a sort, and overruled the rest.

THE COUNTY OF DOWN.
EAstward now follows the county of DOWN, and that very large and fertile in
soil, stretched out even as far as to the Irish sea, reaching on the North
side to the Lake Eaugh, by a new name called Logh and on the South to the
county of Louth, from which the river Newry severeth it. Upon this river, in
the very first entrance into this shire, within our remembrance Sir Nicolas
Bagnall Mareschall of Ireland, who by his conduct achieved here diverse
exploits, and reduced the country to more civility, built and fortified a town
of the same name. Hard by it, the river called Banthelesse, issuing out of the
desert mountains of Mourn, passes through the country of Eaugh, which
belongs to the family of Mac Gynnis: Between whom and the O Neals, who
tyrannized in Ulster, there fell in times past a controversy, whether they
were vassals to O Neal, and whether they should find their followers and
soldiers victuals, etc. (this kind of service they call Bonoghty.) This has
unto it an Episcopal Dromore, above which at the edge of Logh Eaugh, are the
tracts of Kilwlto and Kilwarny, much encombred with woods and bogges. These lie
inwardly: but by the maritime coast the sea does so wind it self in, and with
sundry Creeks and Bays encroach within the land, yea and the Logh and Lake
dilateth it self beside Dyffrin, a valley full of woods, the inheritance in
old time of the Mandevils, afterward of the Whites, in such sort that it
makes two bilands; Lecall Southward, and Ardes Northward. Lecall, a rich and
battle ground, bears out farthest into the East of any part of Ireland, and
is the utmost Promontory or cape thereof, which the Mariners now term Saint
John's Foreland, Ptolomee calls it ISANIUM, Isanium the Promontory.
perhaps of the British word Isa, which signifies Lowest. In the very straight
whereof flourished Dunum. Down.
whereof Ptolomee also made mention (though not in the right place) now named
Down, a town of very great antiquity, and a Bishops See, renowned by the tomb
of Saint Patricke, Saint Brigid, and Saint Columb, upon which was written this
rude riming distichon: Hi tres in Duno tumulo tumulantur in uno,
Brigida, Patricius, atque Columba pius.
At Down these three lie buried in one tomb,
Brigid, Patricke, and that devout Columb.
Which monument of theirs, as the bruit runs, was demolished by the Lord
Leonard Gray, Deputy under King Henry the eighth: and sure it is, that when he
was arraigned for misgoverning, and condemned therefore to death, among other
imputations he was charged, that he had profaned this Cathedral Church of
Saint Patricke. Saint Patricks Sepulcher.
But as touching the Sepulcher of Saint Patricke, the religious Priests were at
variance, like as the Cities of Greece in times past strove about the native
country of the Poet Homer: These of Down challenge it to themselves, and that
upon the Armagh put in their claim out of the words of Saint Bernard, which
erewhile I alleged: The Monks of Glastenbury in England averred it to be with
them, and that out of the old Records and Evidences of their Abbey: and some
Scots have likewise avouched, that as he was borne near unto Glasco, so
likewise he was enterred there at Kirk-Patrick. Into this Down, Sir John Curcy,
that Martial Englishman, and (for a Warrior) extraordinarily devout to
Godward, after he had brought this country in subjection unto him, was the
first that brought in the Benedictine Monks: and he translated the Monastery
of Cariche, which Mac Neal, Mac Eulef King of Ulster had founded in Erinaich
near unto S. Finins Fountain, into the Isle called after his name Ynis-Curcy,
and endowed the same with lands assigned for it. For before time the Monks of
Ireland, as those of Congell, that is by interpretation, A fair pledge,
brought over into Ireland, being wholly given to prayer, earned for themselves
and the poor their living, with the labor of their own hands. Howbeit, these
Monastical orders and customs (as all humane things) continued not long, when
their manners and carriage grew to be worse, and riches had by little and little
polluted piety, which as a mother, had formerly bred them. Robert Abbat of
Molisime in Burgundy studied and endeavored earnestly in times past to reduce
and set on foot again the said ancient Discipline: Robert de Monts, de
Immutatione Ordinis Monacho^um.
and persuaded his own Disciples to live with their handy labor, to leave
Tithes and Oblations unto the Priests But I have digressed too far, now will
I return again. By the seaside stand Arglas, where Saint Patrick, by report,
founded a Church: and Strangford, called in old time Strandford, a safe
harbor, where the river Coin with a great and violent stream breaks into
the Sea. Near unto which, in the Biland Lecale, Queen Mary in her great
bounty unto Noblemen liberally gave lands unto the Earl of Kildare. And here,
of the English race the Russells, Audleys, Whites, and Bagnells who came
thither last, stoutly defend, among the wild and fierce Irish, not without
danger, what they and their ancestors won in these parts.

Ardes, the other Biland called The Andes, lies over against to the North,
severed with a small channel out of the Logh-Coin, which on the West side
encloseth it, like as the sea on the East side, and the Bay of Knoc-Fergus on
the North. You may resemble it to the bent of the arm, which by a very narrow
Isthim or neck of land grows to the rest of the Island, like as an arm to
the shoulder. The soil is every where passing good and bountiful, but only in
the mids, where lies out for twelve miles or thereabout in length, a moist,
flat, and boggy plain. The shore is sufficiently bespred with small villages,
and in times past had a most renowned Monastery Knoc-Fergus, of the same
institution, order, and name, as was that right ancient and famous Abbey in
England near unto Chester, Banchor Abbay.
I mean, Banchor. Out of whether of these twain that Arch-hereticke Pelagius
came, it is uncertain, whiles some will needs have him to spring from hence,
others from that in Britain: but neither of them grounding upon any certain
warrant of authority. Howbeit, certain Prosper Aquitanus, Pelagius the
Arch-heretick.
inveying against his impiety.

I procul insana impieta^, artesque malignas
Aufer, and authorem comitare exclusa Britannum.
Avaunt far hence impiety, and lewd Arts take with thee,
Once gone, with British sire of thine keep always company.
But touching this place, hear what S. Bernard says: In the life of Malachias.
A rich and mighty man gave 900. in one day were slain by Pirates. Verily the
possessions belonging to that place were great: But Malachias contenting
himself only with the site of the holy place, surrendered the possessions and
lands wholly to another: for from the time that the Monastery was destroyed,
there wanted not one to hold it with the livings thereto belonging:

More inward, Bishopric of Coner.
hard by the Lake is the Bishops See of Conereth or Coner, where sat the said
Malachy as Bishop. But what manner of flock this so holy a Pastor fed, listen
unto S. Bernard. Malachy in the thirtieth year almost of his age, was brought
in and presented a consecrated Bishop of Conereth, for this was the cities
name. Now when as he began to execute his function according to his office,
then perceived this man of God, that it was his lot to come not unto men, but
unto beasts. No where had he to that time experience words? where the very
paucity and fewness among the lay Persons, was in manner idle and Thus wrote
Saint Bernard; and little better can he that is Bishop there at this day say,
as I hear, of his wild flock hereabout.

Savage.
This Ardes, the Savages, an English family in times past held in possession:
amongst whom there goes a great name of him, who said no less stoutly than
pleasantly, when he was moved to build a castle for his defense, That he would
not trust to a castle of stones, but rather to a castle of bones, meaning
thereby his own body. Afterward the O-Neals wrested it out of their hands:
who being attainted of high treason, by permission of Queen Elizabeth, Sir
Thomas Smith Knight, and the Queens Secretary planted a Colonie there not long
since: a worthy adventure, but it sped unhappily. For after great expenses
defraied, the Irish by a train caught his base son, whom he had made
Captain and ruler thereof, and cruelly cast him to hungry dogs: for which
barbarous cruelty, those most wicked wretches Ardes Westward the more Southern
Clan-boy, Upper Clane-Boy.
that is, the Yellow Nation or Sept, or the kindred of Hugh the Yellow, a
country very full of woods, reaches as far as to the bay of Knock-fergus,
inhabited by the Sept of the O-Neales, and is counted the farthest territory
of this county of Down.

THE COUNTY OF ANTRIM.
THE next County in order unto Louth Northward, is that of ANTRIM, Antrim a
base townelet of small reckoning at all, had it not imparted the name unto the
whole country, which lies between the Bay of Knoc-Fergus, Logh Eaugh, and
the river Ban. This Bay of Knoc-Fergus which Ptolomee terms VINDERIUS,
Knoc-Fergus.
took name of a town situate upon it, which the English call Knoc-Fergus, the
Irish Carig-Fergus, that is, the Rock of Fergus, of that most renowned Fergus,
who first brought the Scottish out of Ireland into Britain, there drowned.
This is well inhabited and more frequented than the rest in this coast, by
reason of the commodious haven, although the blockhouses thereto be unfinished,
having a fortress pitched upon an high rock, a ward of garrison soldiers to
keep the country in awe and good order, with an ancient Nether Clane-Boy.
Hard by it lies the Nether Clane-Boy, which also was the habitation of
O-Neales, notable for the death of that most lend rebel, Shan or John O-Neal,
who after many robberies and sacriledges committed, being in one or two
skirmishes under the leading of Sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy, vanquished and
weakened, was brought to that exigent, that he was resolved to go unto the
Deputy with an halter about his neck and submissely to crave pardon: but being
persuaded by his Scribe to seek first for aid of certain Scots of the
Islands, who under the conduct of Alexander Oge had encamped themselves here,
and preyed in the country, he came unto them, who gave him friendly
entertainment, and presently massacred him and all his company in revenge of
their kinsfolk whom he Claneboy unto Walter D' Eureux Earl of Essex, who
crossed over the seas hither, and, I wot not, whether under a goodly color of
honor (for chosen he was Governor of Ulster and Marshall of Ireland) he was
by the politic practice of some O-Neales and Brian Carragh, of the
Mac-Conells race, who since that time have gone together by the ears, and
committed many murders one upon another, about the sovereignty of this
Seigniory.

Near unto Knoc-Fergus there is a By-land, Isle of Magie.
with a narrow neck (as it were) annexed Isle of Magie, taking up four miles
in length and one in breadth: wherein, as some suppose, flourished that
Monastery of Magio so highly praised by Bid: whereof I have made mention
before in the County of Majo.

Then the Glinnes, Glinnes.
that is, the Valleys, begin at Older-Fleet, a bad road for ships, and run out
a great length upon the sea. Bissets.
This country belonged in ancient times to the Bissets Noblemen of Scotland,
who when upon private grudges and quarrels they had made away Patricke Earl of
Athol, were banished hither, and through the beneficial favor of Henry the
Third King of England, received Lands here. For John Bisset, who died in the
beginning of Edward the First his reign, had Bisset for rebellion lost some of
them. But in our fathers days, the Highland Irish Scots, out of Cantire and
the Hebrides, under the leading of James Mac-Conell Lord of Cantire in
Scotland, made an entry upon the same, and he laying claim thereto challenged
it as descended from the Bissets. Howbeit Shan O-Neale having slain their
Captain easily chased them away. Yet returned they, and in this tract
committed continually robberies and outrages in cruel manner, yea and
maintained seditious commotions, until that even of late Sir John Perot Lord
Deputy of Ireland brought first Donell Goran (who together with his brother
Alexander was slain by Sr. Richard Bingham in Conaght) and afterward Agnus
Mac-Conel, James Mac-Conell.
the sons of James Mac-Conel, to that pass, that they betook themselves to
the Queen of Englands protection, and upon their humble suite received at her
hands this county to be held of her by service under certain conditions,
namely, to bear arms within Ireland under none other but the Kings of
England, and to pay yearly a certain number of cowes and hawks, etc.

Above this, The Rowt. Mac-Guilly. Surley Boy. Chairly Boy.
as far as to the river Bann, all the tract is called Rowte, the seat of the
Mac-Guillies, a family of good reputation in their county: which,
notwithstanding the violence of the Islander Scots, and their continual
depredations, has driven them into a narrow corner. For, Surley Boy, that is,
Charles the Yellow, brother unto James Mac-Conel, who possessed himself of the
Glines, became also in some sort Donluse,
until that Sir John Perot Lord Deputy, having won Donluse Castle, a very
strong pile, seated upon a rock that hangs over the sea, and severed from
the Land with a deep ditch, dispossessed him and all his. Which for all that,
he recovered the next year following by treason, after he had slain Carry
the Captain thereof, who manfully defended himself. But the Lord Deputy
sending against him Captain Meriman an approved warrior, who slew the two
sons of James Mac-Conell, and Alexander this Surley Boys son, so coursed him
from place to place, and drove away his cattle the only riches he had (for
he was able to number of his own stock 50000. cowes) so that Surley Boy
rendered Donluse, came to Dublin, and in the Cathedral Church openly made his
submission, exhibited a supplication craving him by the bounteous liberality of
Queen Elizabeth, four territories ( Toughes Boys unto the Bay, Don severig,
Loghill, and Balla-monyn, with the Constableship of Donluse Castle, to him and
the heirs males of his body, to hold of the Kings of England, with these
conditions, That neither he nor his, nor yet his posterity serve in the wars
under any foreign Prince without License; That they keep their people from
all depredations; That they furnish and find twelve horsemen, and forty
footmen, at their own charges for forty days in time of war; and present
unto the Kings of England a certain number of cowes and hawks yearly, etc.

THE COUNTY OF
BEyond the Glynnes West, stands Krine, which now they call the county
COLRAN, of the principal town therein. It lies between the river Ban and
Lough-foile, and confineth South upon the county of Tir-Oen. River Ban.
This Ban, a passing fair river, as Giraldus says (which the name also
witnesses) rising out of the mountains of Mourn in the county of Down,
carries himself and his name into Lough Eaugh, Lough-Sidney, a large Lake:
which name for all that, after thirty miles or thereabout (for of so great
length that Lake is esteemed to be) at his going forth in the end he resumeth
again at Tome castle, and being beset and shadowed along the sides with woods,
Glan-Colkein.
by Glancolkein, where by reason of thick woods, and unpassable bogges there is
the safest place of refuge for the Scottish Ilanders and the rebels (and which
the English felt, who pursued Surley Boy whiles he lurked here) carrying a
proud stream, Salmons.
enters into the sea, breeding Salmons in abundance above any other river in
all Europe: because, as some think, it passes all the rest for cleerenesse, in
the which kind of water Salmons take special delight. O-Cahan.
In this part the O Cahans were of greatest authority; the principal person
of which family O Cahan is thought to be one Uraights. The election of O-Neal.
or Uraights as they term them, that ought service unto O Neal the Tyrant of
Ulster: as who in that barbarous election of O Neal, which with as barbarous
ceremonies is solemnized in the open air upon an high hill, performs this
honorable service forsooth, as to fling a shoe over the head of the elected O
Neal. Howbeit he is not of power sufficient to restrain the Scottish Ilanders,
who to save charges at home, Scottish Ilanders.
every year in Summer time flock hither out of those hungry and barren Islands
(where is nothing but beggary) to get their living; ready upon every occasion
and opportunity to maintain rebellions; insomuch as provided it has been by
law, under pain of high treason, that no person call them into Ireland, nor
give them lodging or entertainment.

But this county with other confining is escheated to the King, who graciously
purposing a civil plantation of those unreformed and waste parts, is pleased
to distribute the said lands to his civil subjects, and the city of London
has undertaken to plant Colonies here.

THE COUNTY OF TIR-OEN.
BEneath Colran lies Southward the county of TIR-OEN, in old books Tir-Eogain,
that is, if a man interpret it, The land of Eugenius, which name the Irish have
contracted into Eogain and Oen. This is altogether upland from the sea, divided
toward the suns setting by the river Liffer from Tir-Conell, toward the
rising with the Logh Eaugh from the county of Antrim, and Southward with the
Blackwater, which in Irish they call Aven More, The great water, from the
county of Armagh. A country though rough and rugged, yet fruitful and very
large, as which lies out threescore miles in length, and thirty in breadth:
divided by the mountains called Sliew Gallen, into the Upper Tir-Oen
Northward, Upper Tit-Oen.
and the Nether Southward.

In it are first Cloghar, Bishopric of Cloghter. Dunganon. Baron of Dunganon.
a Bishopric, and that a slender one; then Dunganon, the chief habitation of
the Earls; which through the favor of King Henry the eighth gave the title of
Baron unto Matthew son to the first Earl of Tir-Oen. And verily this is an
house fairer built than commonly they be in this county, but has been
oftentimes by the Lords themselves defaced with fire, because it should not be
burnt Ublogahell, where O-Neal that most proudly rules and oppresses Ulster
was wont to be inaugurated after that barbarous manner and tradition of the
country: Fort of Black-water.
and the fort at Black-water on the river More, which has sustained the
variable changes and chances of war, whiles there was no other way into this
country, being the place of refuge for the rebels: but now it is neglect, ever
since there was found another Ford more below, at which on both sides of the
river Charles Lord Mount-joy Deputy erected new Sconces, when with hot war
he pursued the rebels in these parts. Who likewise at the same time raised
another garrison fort, called by his own name Mont-joy, at the Lake Eaugh (
Logh Sidney in honor of Henry Sidney soldiers now term it) which encloseth
the West side of this Bann, as I have said. Surely this is a goodly and
beautiful Lake, passing fishfull, and very large, as stretching out thirty
miles or thereabout, as the Poet says.

-- Dulci mentitur N^rea fluctu.
Fresh water though it be,
A sea folk think they see.
And considering the variety of show upon the banks, the shady groves, the
meadows always green, the fertile corn fields, if they be well manured; the
bending Tir-Oen stands Straban, a Castle well known, wherein dwelt in our
days Turlogh Leinigh of the sept of O-Neals, who after the death of Shan
O-Neal, as I shall show anon, by election of the people attained to the dignity
of O-Neal: also some other Piles and fortresses of smaller reckoning, the which
(like as else where in this Island) be no more but towers with narrow
loope-holes rather than windows, unto which adjoine Hauls made of turfes, and
roofed over head with thatch, having unto them belonging large Courts or yards
fensed round about with Tir-Oen, namely, Con O-Neale, and Hugh his nephew by
his son Matthew. But of these I will speak more at large by and by, when I am
to treat of the Earls and Lords of Ulster.

THE COUNTY OF DONEGALL OR TIR-CONELL.
ALL that remains now behind in Ulster toward the North and South, was
possessed in ancient times by the ROBOGDII and VENNICNII: but at this day it is
called the County of DONEGALL or TIR-CONELL, that is, as some interpret it, The
land of Cornelius, or as others, The Land of Conall, and in truth, Marianus
plainly names it, Conallea. The county is all in a manner champian and full of
havens, as bounded with Tir-Oen with the river Liffer, and from Conaght with
the Lake Erne. Liffer near unto his spring head, enlarges his stream, and
spreads abroad into a Lake, wherein appears above the water an Island, and
in it hard by a little Monastery, a very narrow vault within the ground, much
spoken of by reason of I wot not what fearful walking spirits, and dreadful
apparitions, or rather some religious horror: which cave, as some dream
ridiculously, was dug by Ulysses when he went down to parley with those in
hell.

The inhabitants term it in these days Ellan u' Frugadory, that is, The Isle
of Purgatory, Patricks Purgatory.
and Saint Patricks Purgatory. For some persons devoutly credulous, affirm
that Patrick the Irishmens Apostle, or else some Abbat of the same name,
obtained by most earnest prayer at the hands of God, that the punishments and
torments which the godless are to suffer after this life, might here be
presented to the eye: that so he might more easily root out the sins which
stuck so fast to his Countrymen the Irish; and withal their heathenish
errors. But seeing that this place is named in Saint Patricks life, Regia.
Reglis.
Reglis, I would deem it to be the other REGIA, that Ptolomee mentions: and
the very situation of it in the Geographer implies no less. Besides this
Patrickes Purgatory, there was another Purgatory also of Sir Brendan in this
Island; but since I could not find out the place, take here with you that only
which I found, namely, Nechams Tetrastichon of it.

Asserit esse locum solennis fama dicatum
Brendano, quo lux lucida saepe micat.
Purgandas animas datur hic transire per ignes,
Ut dignae facie Iudicis esse queant.
If common fame say true, a place of Brendan taking name
There is, and often times clear lights do shine within the same.
The souls have license here to pass through Purgatory fire,
That worthily before that Judge, they may at length appear.
Where this river Liffer augmented by other waters coming unto it, approaches
nearer to the sea, it spreads out again into a Lake, which Ptolomee called
LOGIA, and now they usually term it Logh Foil and Logh Der, whereupon Necham
has these verses.

Logh Der aquis dives Lacus est, Ultonia novit,
Commodus indigenis utilitate placet.
Logh Der a Lake in waters rich, this Ulster knows well,
Commodious, and pleasing much those that about it dwell.
Derry.
Hard by this, there flourished sometime Derry a Monastery and Episcopal See;
where in the year 1566. Edward Randolph, renowned for his long service in the
wars, spent his life in the behalf of his country to his everlasting fame,
and gave Shan O-Neal (who had then assembled and armed all the power he could
possibly against the English) such an overthrow, as that he could never after
recover the loss he then sustained. But now of late Sir Henry Docwra knight,
who in the wars of Ireland quit him so well, that with great praise he has
approved his singular valor and martial skill, brought hither first a
garrison, and afterward planted here a Colony, to bridle the Earl of Tir-Oens
insolent pride: and established and settled the same with so good orders, that
it both stands in good steed for help against the Robogdii.
and also traineth the barbarous people to their duties. The ROBOGDII placed
above LOGIA held all that Northren sea coast of Ireland, where O Dogherty an
obscure Potentate had great sway. Amongst these, Robogh a little Episcopal
town retains the express footings of the old name Robogdii. Robogdium
Promontory.
Which should be that promontory ROBOGDIUM, unless it be Fair Foreland, I know
not From Swilly Lake, which Ptolomee seems to call ARGITA.

Beyond these more Westward were the VENNICNII seated, Vennicnii.
where Mac Rwyn Faid, Mac Swyn Netoeth, and Mac Swyn Bannigh have great lands
and large possessions. Among these Ptolomee places the river VIDUA, River
Vidua. Boreum Promontory.
which now is called Crodagh, and the Promontory VENNICNIUM, which they now
call Rams-head, and the Foreland BORAEUM, now S. Helens head.

Upon the shore as it twineth back from hence Southerly, Calebeg affords an
Haven and commodious harbor for sailers: then appear the ruins and rubbish of
Sligah Castle, Sligah. ^
which Maurice Fitz-Girald Lord Justice of Ireland built about the year 1242.
when he had made himself Lord of this country. But John Fitz-Girald the first
Earl of Kildare was dispossessed of this castle and a goodly inheritance in
this tract, fined also in a great sum of money, for that he had raised a
civil and dangerous war against the Earl of Ulster.

Lower yet, Donegall.
and not far from the mouth of Logh Earne, Donegal, that is, the town of the
Gallicians of Spain, with an Abbey shows it self, whence this county when it
was made a county took the name.

There have been rulers over this territory for these many ages they of the
house of O-Donel, and those extracted from the same stock that the family of
O-Neals, neither O-Donel, O-donell.
and Lords of Tir-Conell. For the getting of which title, and that they might
be by a certain election of the people inaugurated with their due complements
at a stone beside Kilmacrenan, they were at deadly discord, and committed
outrages one upon another, until that King James not long since by his
honorable Letters Patents conferred the honor, title, and style of Earl
Tir-Conell upon Rory O-Donell, the brother of that Hugh the rebel, who being
fled out of his country died in Spain; and this Rory his successor
practicing new treason against King James his advancer, upon the terror of a
guilty conscience fled the realm in the year 1607. and died at Rome.

The ancient inhabitants of this Ulster, like as the rest of all Ireland
throughout, Scoti.
and from hence carried they over with them the name of Scots into the North
parts of Britain. For as Giraldus writes, about the year of salvation four
hundred, six sons of Mured King of Ulster seized upon the North parts of
Britain, whereupon it was by a special and peculiar name called SCOTIA. And
yet it appears by the Scottish Annals that this happened long before. Also
Ferguse the second, who re-established the kingdom of Scots in Britain, came
from hence, In the life of S. Patrick.
unto whom Patrick had prophesied by way of divination or Soothsaying, in these
words: Although thou seem at this day base and contemptible in the eyes of
thy brethren, thou shall shortly be the Prince and Lord of them all. And to
avow the credit and authority of this prediction, the said writer adds
moreover and says: No long space of time after this, Fergus, according to the
Holy man's prophecy, obtained the sovereignty in all that land, and his seed
reigned for many generations together. From his stem proceeded that most
valerous King Edan, the son of Gabran, who subdued Scotland that is called
Albanach, whose posterity in lineall descent and succession reigns there
still.

The first Englishman that in the reign of King Henry the second attempted
this country was Sir John Curcy, Earls of Ulster.
who having by force won Down and Armach, either by dint of sword conquered,
or by surrender gat the whole into his own hands, and was the first that was
styled Earl of Ulster: but when his great exploits and fortunate archievements
had wrought him such envy, that through his own virtues and other Hugh Lacy,
the second son of Hugh Lacy Lord of Meth, who had commandment to pursue him
by force and arms, was by King John appointed his successor, being created
Earl of Ulster, by the sword, An. 7. Ioannis.
of which honor notwithstanding the same King afterward deprived him for his
tumultuous insolency: and he was in the end received into favor again. But
for the sounder testimony hereof, it were good to exemplify the same word for
word out of the records of Ireland. Hugh de Lacy sometime Earl of Ulster, held
all This Walter de Burgo, who was Lord of Conaght, and Earl of Ulster, begat
of the only daughter of Hugh de Lacy, Richard Earl of Ulster, who after he
had endured many troubles and calamities died in the year 1326. Richard had
issue John de Burgo, who departed this life before his father, having begotten
upon Elizabeth, sister and one of the heirs of Gilbert Clare Earl of
Gloucester, William, who succeeded after his grandfather. This William being
slain by his own men when he was young, left behind him a little daughter See
page 624. and 725.
who being married unto Leonell Duke of Clarence bare one daughter likewise,
the wife of Edmund Mortimer Earl of March, by whom the Earldom of Ulster and
Seigniory of Conaght came unto the Mortimers, and from them together with the
kingdom of England unto the house of York: and afterward Edward the fourth
King of England adjoined it unto the Kings Domaine or Crown land.

And when as at the same time England was divided into sides and factions,
whiles the civil war grew hot, and the English that abode here returned out
of Ulster into England to follow the factions, O-Neal and others of Irish blood
seized these countries into their own hands, and brought them to such wildness
and savage barbarism, as it exceeded: In so much as this province which in
times past paid a mighty mass

Ireland neglected.
And verily in no one thing whatsoever (pardon this my over-boldnesse) have the
Kings of England been more defective in piety and policy, than that they have
for these so many ages seen so slightly to this Province, yea and to all
Ireland, in the propagation of religion, establishing the weal public, and
reducing the life of the inhabitants to civility: whether it was for careless
neglect, sparing, or a forecast of damage, or some reason of state, I am not
able to say. But that the same may be no longer thus neglected, it seems of
it self by good right to importune most earnestly, being an Island so great, so
near a neigbour, so fruitful in soil, so rich in pastures

I Intimated even now, that I would speak touching the O-Neals, who carried
themselves as Lords of Ulster; and I promised not long since a friend of mine,
that I would write of their rebellions raised in our age. And verily I will
perform my promise to his Manes, whom whiles he lived I observed with all
respect, and being now in heaven I will not forget. Thus much only I will
promise by way of Preface, that I have compendiously collected these matters
out of my Annals, and here conjoined them, which there are severed and divided

THE O-NEALES, AND THEIR REBELLIONS IN OUR TIME.
TO say nothing of that GREAT NEALE, who ruled by force and arms in Ulster,
and a great part of Ireland, before the coming of Saint Patricke; nor of those
in the middle times, who were but of mean note and memorial to speak of;
this family, after the arrival of the English in Ireland, lay close and
obscure in remote lurking corners, unless it were when Edward Brus brother to
Robert King of Scotland, named himself King of Ireland. For then in a
troublesome time Dovenald O-Neale started and rowsed himself out of his
lurking holes, and in Scoto-Chronicon lib. 12. cap. 26.
Dovenald O-Neale King of Ulster, and in right of inheritance the undoubted
heir of all Ireland. But after these stirs and troubles were laid, this new
King soon vanished away; and Dovenalds posterity plucked in their horns and
hid their heads, until that, whiles England was all in a combustion, kindled
by the furious firebrands of civil wars between the houses of York and
Lancaster for the Imperial Crown, those English that served and lived here,
abandoning Ulster, and committing it to the keeping of the O-Neals, returned
home to follow the factions. For then Henry O-Neal, the son of Oen or
Eugenius O-Neal, espoused the daughter of Thomas Earl of Kildare: and his son
Con-More, that is, Con the great, married the daughter of Girald Earl of
Kildare his

These supported by the powerful authority of the Earls of Kildare (who
verily for many years were Deputies of Ireland) carried their heads aloft,
tyrannizing cruelly upon the people, and transported with the insolent spirit
of pride, disdained all the titles of Prince, Duke, Marquess, and Earls, in
comparison of the name of O-Neal. Con the son of Con, surnamed Bacco, because
he halted, succeeded his father in the dignity of O-Neale, who cursed all his
posterity, in case they either learned to

When as the greatness of this Con O-Neale became very much suspected of King
Henry the Eight, and the Kings power having now trodden under foot the family
of Kildare, in whose rebellion O-Neale had engaged himself deep, grew
dreadful to O-Neale also: into England he comes, and there renouncing the name
O-Neale, put his whole estate into the Kings hands: which within a while after
was granted again by letters Patent under the great seal of England, to hold
as in fee, together with the title of the Earl of Tir-Oen, to him and to
Matthew his false reputed son, and to the heirs of their bodies lawfully
begotten. And Matthew at the same time was created Baron of Dunganon. This
Matthew being taken until he was fifteen years old for the son of a
blacksmith in Dundalk, was by the said Smiths wife, Shan or John O Neale.
whom Con had sometime kept as his concubine, tendered unto Con as his own
son, and he accepting him for his own son in deed, rejected John ( Shan
they call him) with the rest, whom he had begotten on his own lawful wife.
Hereupon Shan, seeing a bastard preferred before him, so much made of, and Shan
being chosen, proclaimed and inaugured O-Neal, by an old shoe cast over his
head, seized upon his fathers inheritance, and with all diligence sought after
the sons of Matthew, that he might be secured from them; but they were fled
and gone. Howbeit Brian the eldest son not long after was slain by Mac-Donel
Totan one of the O-Neals race, suborned as Shan to do that feat. Hugh and
Cormack by the means and help of the English escaped, and yet remain alive.
Shan having thus gotten all into his own hands (as he was a man cruel and
barbarous) began to exercise excessive cruelty over the great men of Ulster,
and made his vaunt, that Mac-Gennys, Mac-Guyr, Mac-Mahon, O Reali, O-Hanlon, O
Cahan, Mac-Brien, O Hagan, O Quin, Mac-Canna, Mac-Carton, and all the
Mac-Donels, the Galloglasses, were his subjects and vassels.

And when as Sir Henry Sidney Justice for the time being, in the absence of the
Earl of Sussex Lord Deputy, expostulated with him about these points, he
answered, that he, the undoubted and lawful son and heir of Con O-Neale,
as being Dundalke, and by the said Smith begotten, and borne after his marriage
with Alison his Wife, yet craftily obtruded upon Con as his son, thereby to
intervert another way, and to alienate the inheritance and honor of O-Neale:
which howsoever he would endure, yet none besides of the Sept of O-Neals would
ever bear and digest. As for the letters Patent of King Henry the eighth, they
were of no validity, considering that Con had no right in that he surrendered
into the Kings hands, longer than his own life: neither could he surrender up
the same without the consent of the Nobles and people of Ulster by whom he had
been elected O-Neale: Neither were such Patents of any force, unless there
were an O-Neale according to the ancient law of Tanistry, whereby a man at his
full years is to be preferred before a boy, and an uncle before that nephew,
whose grandfather survived the father: neither had he arrogated unto himself
any authority over the Peers or Nobles of Ulster, other than his ancesters (as
he was able to prove by plain proofs produced) had exercised in times past
out of mind most rightfully.

Howbeit, soon after he outraged and overthrew O-Raily in the field, took
Callagh O-Donell Lord of Tir-Conell prisoner, and cast him with his children
into prison, carried away his wife, on whom he begat children in adultery,
seized upon his fortresses, Ulster.

But so soon as Thomas Earl of Sussex the Lord Deputy came with a power into
the field for to abate this insolency of his, Thomas Earl of Sussex Lord
Deputy.
he was strangely terrified, and by the persuasion of Girald Earl of Kildare,
whom Queen Mary had restored to his former estate, came into England unto
Queen Elizabeth, cast himself prostrate at her feet in all submissive and
humble manner, and being received with all courtesy, after he had promised his
allegiance, returned home, and for a while in his feeding and apparel
conformed himself to all kind of civility: he assailed the Scottish and drove
them quite out of Ulster, slew James Mac-Conell their leader, kept himself and
all his people in good order, and the poorer sort he carefully protected from
wrongs: Howbeit he Mac-Guir Lord of Fermanagh (who underhand had accused him)
out of house and home, set fire upon the Metropolitan Church of Armach, and
burnt it, yea and laid siege unto Dundalik on every side: but his enterprise
was made frustrate through the valor of the soldiers there in garrison, and
William Sarfield Mayor of Dublin, who went forth against him with the very
flower of choice Citizens. Howbeit the neighbor Countries round about he
harried and spoiled in all manner of hostility.

Then Sir Henry Sidney the Deputy, Sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy.
to restrain and bridle the boldness of the Edward Randolph, 1565.
an old approved and renowned Coronell, with seven ensigns of footmen, and a
cornet of horsemen, by sea into the North side of Ireland; who encamped at
Derry by Logh-foil, that he might charge upon the back of the Rebels. Which
he fearing, came thither speedily with all the power and forces that he had,
to remove him: But Randolph in a pitched field gave him battle, and there
manfully fighting, with honor lost his life in his Countries service, but gave
him withal such an overthrow, that never after he was able to make head
again: and being elsewhere in light skirmishes foiled, and by little and
little forsaken of his own followers, he was minded with an Alexander Oge,
that is, the younger, held their standing Summer Camp in Claneboy, having sent
before hand Surley Boy Alexanders brother, whom he had kept prisoner a long
time, to prepare the way, he came unto them with the wife of O-Donell whom he
kept, was kindly welcomed, and admitted with some few into a tent: where
after they had been in their cups, they brake out into a brawle about James
Mac-Conell Alexanders brother, whom Shan had slain, and also about the honesty
of James his sister, whom Shan had married and cast off: 1567.
by which time Alexander Oge, and his brother Mac-Gillaspic Shan, and with many
a wound hacked and hewed him to death: whereby the Province recovered, after
grievous oppressions and war, the benefits of wished peace.

Within a while after a Parliament was holden at Dublin, where by the authority
of all the States of the Realm there assembled, Shan was attainted, and all
the Seigniories, lands, and goods which he and his followers had, were
invested in O-Neale. And yet shortly after Turlogh Leinigh, a brothers son of
Con-Mor O-Neale aforesaid, took it upon him by a popular election, being a man
far stepped in years, and therefore more calm and quiet, and so much the
rather, because he stood in fear of Shan O-Neals sons, and Hugh Baron of
Dunganon, the son of Matthew, although he had given unto the said Hugh his
daughter in marriage; whom he notwithstanding quickly after did cast off and
repudiate, taking another wife. This Turlogh being most obsequious and dutiful
unto the Queen of England, put O-Donell his neighbor and the Scots of the
Islands, and in an encounter slew Alexander Oge, who had killed Shan O-Neale.

Hugh O-Neal Earl of Tir-Oen.
Hugh the son of Matthew, commonly called Baron of Dunganon, who had lived a
long time one while concealed in his own country, other whiles in England in
the retinue of Noble men, began now to put himself forth, and to raise himself
out of that obscure condition, when Elizabeth had given him command of a
company of horsemen in the war against the Earl of Desmond, then in
rebellion, and assigned to him a pension of a thousand Marks by the year. In
that war he acquitted himself valiantly in all places against the rebels;
and at length exhibited a supplication Tir-Oen, and settled in his ancestors
inheritance. The title and place of Earl of Tir-Oen was presently granted: but
as touching the inheritance, considering that upon the forfaiture and
attainture of Shan O-Neale the Kings of England were invested therein, the
matter was referred unto Queen Elizabeth: who most bountifully granted the
same to him, for his faithful service performed, and to be performed. Yet so,
as that the country should be first surveied, and laid out into several
divisions, one or two places fit for garrisons reserved, and namely, the fort at
Blackwater, that good order might be taken for the maintenance of the sons of
Shan and Turlogh, Tir-Oen. These conditions he most willingly accepted, and
rendered very great thanks, accordingly promising to perform whatsoever he was
able, with diligence, authority, study, and endeavor, in regard of so great
benefits received: and verily he failed not in his promise, nor omitted any
duty that might be expected from a most loiall subject. A body he had able to
endure travel, watching and fasting: his industry was singular, his courage in
war great, and answerable to the most important affairs: good skill he had
in martial feats, and a profound wit and deep reach to dissemble and carry his
business closely: in so much as even then some there were who gave this
prediction of him, That he Turlogh Leinigh at the Queens intercession resigned
up unto him his government upon certain conditions. After whose decease he
usurped unto himself the title of O-Neal, which by law was a capital crime;
but excused himself colourably, because others should not enter upon the
far: and promised solemnly to renounce it quite, yet labored he most
earnestly, that he might not be urged thereunto by any oath.

1588.
Not long after, when that most puissant Armada of Spain, which had in vain
given the attempt upon England, was put to flight, many ships in their return
homeward were cast away and lost in the Vergivian sea, and many of the
Spaniards Tir-Oen is reported to have entertained and lodged, yea and to have
consulted and complotted with them about entering into a secret confederacy with
the King of Spain. For which practice Hugh Ne Gaveloc, that is to say, Hugh in
the fetters (surnamed so because he had been kept so long in fetters) a base
son of Shan O-Neal informed against him, and that upon O-Neals blood, would
lay hands upon him. For which barbarous and inhumane murdering of his cousin
german, he was charged in England; but the Queen of her royal clemency, and
for the hope that she had conceived of the Earl, craving with repentance
forgiveness of this fault, and submitting himself to diverse good orders, for
his obedience, pardoned him, to the great grief of some good men. But this
soon after more grieved him, yea pricked (as it were) and sore galled him,
that the Deputy had suppressed the name of Mac Mahon in the Ulster. At which
very time, there began some secret grudges, and heart burnings to arise between
the Earl and Sir Henry Bagnall the Marshall, whose sister the Earl had
carried away and married. The Earl complained, that whatsoever he had with the
loss of his blood and painful travel reduced to the obedience of the Prince,
the Marshall, and not he, reaped the fruit and gain thereof: that the Marshall
by suborning most base and vile persons as witnesses, had falsely brought him
into question for high treason, had incited Sir William Fitz-Williams, then
Lord Deputy, his deadly Ulster, by secret parlees combined in an association,
that they would defend the Romish religion (for Religion now a days is made
the mantle for all rebellion) that they would in no wise admit Sheriffs or
Garrison soldiers in their Territories, and mutually maintain one another
right, yea and withstand all wrongs offered by the English. The first Champion
thrust forward to sound the alarm, was Mac-Gwyr, a man of a turbulent Conaght,
accompanied with Gauran a Priest, who being ordained by the Pope Primate of
Ireland, commanded him in the name, and with the help of God to try his
fortune, and to fight the Lords battle, assuring him of most happy success:
yet fell it out otherwise; for Mac-Gwyr, through the valor of Sir Richard
Bingham, was discomfited and put to flight, and the Primate with others slain.
Soon after, Mac-Gwyr brake out into open rebellion; whom the Earl himself
(together with the Marshall) in a show of dutiful attendance pursued; and in
this service, with great commendation of his forwardness, was wounded in the
thigh. Howbeit wholly intentive to provide for his own security, he
intercepteth the sons of Shan O-Neale, and makes them sure for doing Fitz
Williams, the Lord Deputy was revoked home out of Ireland, Sir William Russell
succeeded in that office. Unto him repaired the Earl of his own accord,
exhibited an humble submission, upon his knees to the Lord Deputy, wherein he
dolefully expressed his great grief that the Queen

He acknowledged that the Queen advanced him to high title, and great livings,
that she ever upheld him, and enabled him, that she, who by grace had advanced
him, was able by her force to subvert him, and therefore if he were void of
gratitude, Bagnall the Marshall was present in the place, who exhibited
articles against the Earl, and accused him, that he had underhand suborned
and sent Mac-Guir, with the Primate above named into Conaght, that he had
complotted secretly Mac-Guir, O-Donel and other conspirators, and had aided
them by Cormac-Mac-Baron the Earls brother, and Con the Earls base son, and
some of his servants, in the wasting of Monaghan, and besieging of Inis-Kellin,
and by means drawn away the Captains of Kilulio and Kilwarny, from their
loialty and obedience to the Queen. Hereupon it was seriously debated among the
Counselors of the kingdom, whether the Earl should be stayed to make his
answer or no? The Deputy thought good that he should be detained. But when it
was put to question generally, the more part, either upon a vain fear, or
forward inclination to favor the Earl, were instant to have him dismissed,
and the matter to be put off unto a further day of hearing, pretending certain
weighty considerations, and that the Articles exhibited were

The Earl being now returned home, when he heard that a new supply of
soldiers was coming out of England, and thirteen hundred besides of old
servitors out of the Low Countries, who had served in little Britain under Sir
John Norris, and that the English intended now to possess themselves of
Balashanon and Belik, Castles upon Logh-Earn, he being privy to himself of his
own evil purposes, and carrying a guilty conscience, on a sudden assaileth the
fort at Blackwater, by which the entry lay into Tir-Oen his own country, and
had it surrendered up unto him. And at the very same instant in manner, he
(wavering in his mind) with one breath (as it were) by his letters offers
unto the Earl of Kildare, his help against the wrongs done by the Deputy, and
withal, promises the Earl of Ormond, and Sir Henry Wallop Treasurer of the
kingdom, 1595. Die 12. Iunii.
to continue firm in his allegiance, yea and beseeches in his letters Sir
John Norris appointed Lord General, that he might be more mildly dealt with,
nor against his will be driven headlong upon the dangerous rocks of
disloialty. But these letters unto Norris Bagnall the Marshall intercepted, and
(as the Perot Lord Deputy had appointed to every Lord and Chieftain of Ulster,
a certain number to be exercised in their weapons, for to resist the Irish
Scots of the Islands: or else had been employed in the wars of the
Low Countries, whom

And verily the English forces were equivalent in numbers, which were commanded
by Sir John Norris: for the Queen had selected him as a man of especial trust
and reputation, to be used martially in such journeyes as the Deputy himself
in person could not undertake, in consideration that he had performed diverse
Mounster, and had formerly commanded the Britain companies, which were to serve
principally in this action. Yet achieved he no memorable exploit, by reason of
private misconstruction, suspicious surmises, and dislikes conceived between
him and the Deputy. Only the time was spent in preying, truce-making, and
frivolous parlies. And without doubt the martial men on both sides were well
content to have the war drawn out in length, and the Earl fed himself every
day with hope of succor out of Spain.

But among all these parlies, that was most memorable, which the two
Commissioners, Sir Henry Wallop Treasurer of that Realm, and Sir Robert
Gardener chief Tir-Oen and O-Donell: at which they and others of the rebels
both laid open their grievances, and exhibited also their petitions.

The Earl complained, that Sir Henry Bagnall the Mareschall had cunningly
withdrawn unto himself the fruit of his labors; that with lies and indirect
means and subtle fetches, he had thrust him out of the Queens favor, and
after a sort brought him into disgrace: that to his great hinderance and
prejudice, he had intercepted his letters written unto the Lord Deputy, unto
Norris, and others; and still detained and withheld from him his wives portion:
and herewith he protested, that he never negotiated with foreign Princes,
before he was proclaimed Traitor.



O-Donell for his part, when he had rehearsed his fathers and ancestors
fidelity to Boin was sent from Perot the Lord Deputy, with a band of soldiers
into his Province, under a color of teaching his people civility, who being
kindly entertained by his father, and having certain towns assigned unto him,
offered all manner of injurious indignity and rigor unto his father, and
advanced a certain bastard to the dignity of O-Donell: Also that the said
Deputy by sending a Bark secretly intercepted him, thrust him (innocent man)
into prison, and there unjustly kept him in duresse, until that by the
Almighties goodness he was delivered: Item that the Deputy Fitz Williams laid
up fast in close prison for seven years together Sir Owen O-Toole, the second
man next to O-Donell in this tract, notwithstanding he was guiltless, and sent
for upon promise Fermanaugh with intolerable wrongs: neither could himself
devise any other means for his own safety and security, than to releeve his
next neighbors thus vexed and molested. He likewise made the same request
that the Earl did, and moreover demanded certain fortresses and lands in the
county of Slego, which he challenged to be his inheritance. Shan Mat Brian Mac
Phelim O-Neal laid down his complaints, That Walter Earl of Essex had
wrongfully taken from him the Isle of Magy, and Sir Henry Bagnall the Barony of
Maughery-Mourn, both of them his ancient inheritance: That he was himself
imprisoned, until that by enforcement he had resigned his right unto Bagnall;
beside other infinite injuries done unto him by the Garrison Knoc-Fergus. Hugh
Mac-Guir made a great matter of the insolent outrages committed by the Garrison
soldiers next unto him, in driving away his cattle as booties, and withal
that the Sheriff who was sent into his Territories, had cut off the head of
his next kinsman, and spurned it under foot.

Brian Mac-Hugh-Oge, Mac Mahon and Ever Mac-Couley came in with these their
complaints, That over and above other wrongs Sir William Fitz Williams the
Deputy for great gifts and presents, had settled Hugh Roe in the dignity of
Mac-Mahon: and Mac-Mahon. In a word, they were petitioners every one severally
for the same things that I have above rehearsed. When some of these their
demands were thought reasonable, and others again to be referred unto the
Queens consideration; the Commissioners also on the other side proposed
certain Articles unto the Rebels, that they should lay down their arms,
disperse their forces, acknowledge submissively their disloyalties, admit
Sheriffs in their governments, re-edifie the Forts they had defaced, suffer

But these seemed so unreasonable to them in their conceit, being now grown
insolent, that after agreement of a cessation from arms for a short time, they
departed on all hands; whereas the Queen both then and afterward, as well to
spare the effusion of blood, as to save expense of money, was willing enough to
condescend unto any conditions of peace, that might have stood with the honor
of her Majesty.

Lord General of the Army.
The time of cessation once expired, Norris (unto whom alone by the Queens
Armach: so that the Earl leaving the fort at Blackwater, set fire upon the
villages all round about, and the town of Dungannon; yea and plucked down a
great part of his own house there, who bewailing now his own estate, as quite
undone and past all recovery, he thought of nothing but how to hide his head:
when as they had marched so far, they stayed there for default of victuals;
and having proclaimed the Earl traitor within his own territory, and placed
a garrison in the Church of Armach, returned back. In their return, the Earl
diligently attends and accosteth them a Monaghan) and when they were come
near unto Dundalke, the Deputy, according to the purport of her Majesty's
Commission, rendered the prosecution of the war unto Norris, and after many
words passed too and fro between them, with all the complements of kindness
and courtesy that might be, he retireth to Dublin, and providently looks to
the state of Leinster, Conaght, and Mounster.

Norris stayed in Ulster, but achieved no exploit answerable to the
expectation raised of so worthy a Warrior: whether it were upon emulation to
the Deputy, or that Fortune altered and went backward (as who in the end is
wont to cross great Commanders) or in favor of the Earl, unto whom he was as
forward in kind affection, as Norris seemed to blame the Deputy in some
measure, for that entertaining an hard opinion of the Earl, his resolution was
to make no peace with him: for he in no wise would be otherwise persuaded, but
that he trifled out the time, and made delays for the nonce, expecting aid
and succor still out of Spain: whereas Norris in the mean while more
favorable to him, and credulous withal, had conceived very good hope to bring
the Earl to conditions of peace: which hope he working under hand so fed and
fomented still in Norris, as that he also presented unto him a fained
submission, subscribed with his own hand and signed, yea and humbly upon his
knees craved pardon. Yet for all this in the mean time he dealt by his spying
Agents and Curreours earnestly and secretly O Rorke, Mac-William, and others
set to their hands, but not the Earl himself, being providently cautelous,
and yet no man doubts but his consent was thereto. And the letters which the
King of Spain wrote back full of great promises, he in outward show of
dutiful service, sent unto the Deputy, and withal relying himself upon
assured hope of help from Spain, started back from that written submission
aforesaid, and faithful promise made to Norris: for which, Norris through his
own credulty thus deluded and engaged, takes him up in hot and bitter terms,
as if he had gulled him. But he knowing well Norris and Fenton the Secretary:
and so by giving hostages, a peace such as it was (or rather covenants of
agreement) was concluded: which soon after with the like levitie as before, he
brake; alleging for his reason and excuse, that he could not otherwise think,
but he was deceitfully dealt with, because the Deputy and Norris agreed so
badly; because also the Deputy was discontented with them that in his behalf
traveled with him about peace, as though the Deputy desired nothing but
war, considering that the troops of horsemen were supplied out of England,
the King of Spaines letter abovesaid detained, and the Mareschall his most
heavy enemy, even then was returned with new commission out of England.



In the year 1597. when as by this time all Ulster throughout beyond Dundalke,
except seven Castles with wards, Baron Burough, Lord Deputy, 1597.
(namely, Newry, Knoc-Fergus, Carlingford, Green Castle, Armach, Dondrom, and
Olderfleet) yea and in manner all Conaght, was revolted; Thomas Lord Borough,
a man full of courage and politic withal, was sent John Norris distasting
himself and the new Deputy, ended his life.

At which time the Earl beseeched by his letters a Cessation of arms; and
verily it seemed good policy to grant it for a month. After the month
expired, the Deputy brought his forces together, and which was thought to
stand with his profit and honor both, at his first entry into government,
aranged them in order of battle against the Earl: and albeit he was welcomed
by the Earl with a doubtful and dangerous piece of service within the space
of the Moiry, yet made he way through by his valor, and most valiantly won the
Fort at Blackewater, repaired and re-enforced by the Rebels, by which the way
lies into the County of Tir-Oen, Kildare presently marched, with a cornet of
horse and certain of the better sort of Gentlemen voluntaries, and setting
Vagham brother to the Lord Deputies wife, R. Turner Sergeant Major a doughty
and approved servitour, two of the Earl of Kildares foster brethren: whose
death he took so heavily, that himself within few days after for grief of
heart ended his life. For there is no love in the world comparable by many
degrees to that of fosterbrethren in Ireland.

But many more were wounded, and among the rest Sir Thomas Waler, highly
commended for his Martial forwardness. After that this Fort was with new
munitions re-enforced, no sooner had the L. Deputy withdrawn his army from
thence,

The Rebels understanding of the Deputies death, became exceeding stout and
bold, and so eft-soones with mighty outcries and furious violence assaulted
the Fort, but repulsed always they were with the greater loss: they that gave
the Scallado were thrown down headlong, and most of them, by the Garrison
soldiers sallying resolutely upon them borne down and trodden under foot, in
so much as distrusting now to maine force, they changed their copy and
determined to protract the siege, being persuaded that they within had victuals
but for few days; and besides, they conceived good hope that the Garrison
soldiers for very want would be wavering in their allegiance and turn
traitors. But through the singular valor of Thomas Williams the Captain, and
of the band within, the place was manfully defended:

Now by this time the government was by authority from the Queen committed
unto the Earl of Ormond, under the title of Lieutenant General of the Army,
unto the Chancellor, and Sir Robert Gardener. Then Tir-Oen recapitulateth in a
long letter unto the said Lieutenant all his greivances before specified: and
not leaving out the least insolency either of soldiers, or of Sheriffs,
coldly excuses his breach of Covenants with Sir John Norris. But principally
he complains, that Feogh Mac-Hugh, a ^eere associate and kinsman of his, had
been persecuted and executed: and in Feogh Mach-Hugh, that they might kindle
new coals in Leinster. So that now, every man might see that this war was
begun to no other end (whatsoever was pretended) but to extirpate the English
quite out of Ireland.

1598.
All this while the Earl continued his siege about the Fort at Black-water; for
the Bagnall, the Mareschall, and the bitterest adversary the Earl had: upon
whom as he marched with divided troops, the Earl, edged with fretfull malice,
assailed most furiously near unto Armagh, and forthwith (the Mareschall
against

And verily, since the time that they set first footing in Ireland, they never
had a greater overthrow; wherein thirteen valiant Captains lost their lives,
and fifteen hundred of the common soldiers; who being routed and put to
shameful flight, as they were disparkled all over the fields were cut in
pieces: and such as remained alive, laid the fault reproachfully, not upon
their own cowardice, but their chief leaders unskilfulnesse (a thing now a
days ordinary.) Immediately upon this, followed the Black-water: when as the
garrison soldiers having held out with loyalty in heart, and weapon in hand,
unto extreme famine, being now driven to exceeding great distress, saw all
hopeless of succor and relief. A notable victory this was, and of great
consequence to the Rebels, who furnished themselves hereby with armor and
victuals: and now the Earl renowned all Ireland over, and magnified in every
place as the founder of their freedom, above all measure swelled with haughty
arrogance: and sent into Mounster, Ouny-Mac-Rory-Og-O-More, and Tirell (who
although by his first original he were of English blood, yet none so
maliciously bent against the English name as he) with 4000. preying rogues:
against whom Sir Thomas Norris, President of that Province, advanced forward
with a strong Kilmalock: but before he saw the enemy he dispersed his forces,
and retired back to Corcke.

Which when the Rebels understood, having a great rabble of most lewd rascals
flocking from all parts unto them, they fell to waste the country, to drive
booties before them, to ransack and burn where ever they went, the castles,
houses, and farm places of the English, and most cruelly in all places to kill
them: James Fitz-Thomas, one of the family of the Earls of Desmond, they set
up as Earl of Desmond; yet so, as he should hold as tenant in fee of the
O-Neal, or Earl of Tir-Oen. And thus after a month, when they had kindled this
fire, and set all in a flame in Mounster, they returned back laden with rich
booties. The Earl by this time in his letters to the King Ormond, (but all
colourably) about a submission, and his demands withal were most unreasonable.

In this desperate estate stood Ireland when Queen Elizabeth chose Robert
Earl of Essex (then glorious for the winning of Cadis in Spain) in regard of
his approved Robert Earl of Essex Lord Lieutenant.
fortitude, and fidelity, Lieutenant and Governor general of Ireland, to
repair the detriments and losses there sustained, 1599.
with most large and ample authority added in his Commission, To make an end of
the war; and that which by importunity, as it were, he wrested from her, To
remit and pardon all crimes, even of high treason: which always in the Patents
of every Lord Deputy were thus in these very words before time restrained ( All
treasons and treacheries touching our own person, our heirs and successors
excepted.) And verily with good and provident forecast he obtained the
authority to pardon crimes of this kind, considering that Lawyers do resolve
and set down, That all Rebellions whatsoever touch the Princes person. There
was committed to his charge as great an army as he required, roially furnished
Tir-Oen, as the head of all the rest, and with all speed to press hard upon
him with garrisons planted at Lough-Foile, and Bala-Shanon: a thing that
himself had always thought most important, and in accusatory

Thus he, honorably accompanied with the flower of Noble gallants, and well
wishing acclamations of the common people, yet with a strange thunderclap in a
clear sunshine day, he sets forward from London, toward the end of March:
and being sore tossed and rejected with an adverse tempest, at length arrived
in Ireland. Where having, after the manner, received the sword, presently
contrary to his charge and commission, by the advice of some of the Council of
State there (who too much regarded their own particular) he, neglecting the
Arch-rebell, advanced forward with all his power against petty Rebels in
Mounster; and having taken Cahir, Thomas Butlers Baron of Cahir (into which,
being environed about with the river Shower, certain seditious persons had
betaken themselves) and driven away a number of cattle, he made himself
terrible to all the country far and wide, and dispersed the Rebels every way
into woods and forests. Yet in this while he received no small foil and
overthrow by the cowardice of some who served under Sir Henry Harrington, whom
he punished very severely by martial discipline. Neither returned he before
the latter end of July, with his soldiers wearied, sickly, and their number
more than a man would believe, diminished.

When upon his return he understood that the Queen was displeased at this
expedition of his, so costly, and yet damageable, and that she urged still a
journey into Ulster against the Earl, and no other; in his missives unto her
Majesty he transferred all the fault from himself upon the Council of
Ireland, unto whom for their manifold experience in the affairs of Ireland, he
could not choose but condescend: promising and protesting most faithfully, to
set forward with all speed into Ulster. Scarce were these letters delivered,
when he dispatcheth others after them, wherein he signifies, that upon
necessity he must turn his journey aside into Ophaly, near to Dublin, against
the O-Conors, and the O-Moils, who were there risen and in arms; whom he
quickly and fortunately vanquished with light skirmishes.

Now returning, and having taken a review of his army, he found it so weakened
and impaired, that by his letters subscribed with the hands of the Councellers
of Ireland, he craved a new supply of a thousand soldiers for his expedition
into Ulster,

Being now fully resolved to turn the whole war upon Ulster, he commanded
Sir Coniers Clifford Governor of Conaght, to go with certain bands lightly
appointed toward Bellike, to the end that the Earls forces might be
distracted one way, whiles he himself set upon him another way. Clifford
forthwith putting himself on his journey with a power of 1500. commanded his
soldiers out-toiled with traveling so far, and having but small store of
gunpowder, to pass over the mountains of Curlew. And when they had gotten
over the most part of them, the Rebels under the leading of O-Rorke assailed
them on the sudden. The English easily at the first Clifford himself, together
with Sir Alexander Ratcliffe of Ordsall. Mean while, that supply which the Lord
Lieutenant required was levied in England, and transported: some few days
after, he gave the Queen to understand by other letters, that he could for
this year perform no more, than with a thousand and three hundred footmen,
and three hundred horse go to the frontiers of Ulster. Thither came he about
the thirteenth day of September; before whom the Earl with his forces two
days together Hagan before, he requested the Lieutenant that they might parlie
together: which he refused to do, answering, that if the Earl would talk
with him, he should find him the next morrow in the head of his troops. On
which day, after a light skirmish made, a horseman from out of the Earls
troops with a loud voice delivered as a message, that the Earl was not
willing to fight, but to parley with the L. Lieutenant: yet in no wise at that
instant. The day following as the Lord Leivtenant was marching forward, Hagan
meets him, who declares that the Earl humbly desired to have the Queens
mercy and peace, and besought withal, that he might have but audience for a
while: which if he would grant, then would he with all reverence and observance
expect him at the Foord of the river hard by ( Balla-Clinch they call it.)

This Foord is not far from Louth, the head town of the County, and near unto
the Castle of Gerard Fleming. Thither sent the L. Lieutenant before some of
purpose to discover the place; who found the Earl at the said Foord, and he
told them, that Con a base son of the Earls following hard after the L.
Leivtenant, besought him in his fathers name that certain principal persons
of his train might be admitted to a conference. The L. Lieutenant assented
thereto, so they were not above six. Then forthwith the Earl taking with him
his brother Cormoc, and O-Quin, shows himself at the Foord. Unto them the L.
Lieutenant came down, accompanied with the Earl of Southampton, Sir George
Bourchier, Sir Warrham St. Ledger, Sir Henry Danvers, Sir Edward Wingfeld, 8
September 1599.
and Sir William Constable Knights. The Earl saluteth them every one with
great courtesy, and after some few words between them passed, thought good
that certain Commissioners should the next day following treat of peace:
between whom it was agreed, that there should be a tr^ce from that very day for
six weeks, and so forward from six weeks to six weeks unto the first of May:
yet so, as it might be free for both sides, after fourteen days warning given
aforehand, to begin war afresh. And if that any Confederate of the Earls
would not yield his

Whiles these things were a doing, those letters of the Lord Lieutenant which I
spoke of erewhile, were delivered to the Queen by Henry Cuffe (a man very
learned, but as unfortunate.) Which when she had perused through, and
understood thereby, that her Lieutenant, with so great an army, in so long
time, and with the expense of so much money, had effected just nothing, nor
would do ought that year; she being highly offended thereat, writes back
again to himself, and to the Councellers of Ireland in these terms: That his
proceeding answered neither her direction, nor the worlds expectation; that
she could not but marvel much, why the Lieutenant by prolonging thus from
time to time, and by finding means still of further Mounster and Ophaly,
whereof he had not certified her, nor given so much as any notice before they
were undertaken? which otherwise she would expressly have countermanded. If
his army were now broken, weak, and much empaired, why undertook he not the
action upon the enemy whiles it was entire, strong, and complete? If the
spring had not been a fit season for to make war in Ulster, wherefore was the
summer, wherefore was the autumn neglected? what, was there no time of the
year meet for that war? Well, she now foresaw that her Kingdom of England
must be impoverished beyond all measure by such expenses, her honor blemished
among foreign Princes, and the Rebels encouraged by this unfortunate success:
yea they that shall pen the Story of this time, will deliver unto posterity,
that she for her part was at great charge to hazard her Kingdom of Ireland,
and that he had taken great pains, and had left nothing undone, to prepare for

28. September. 1599.
The Lord Lieutenant startled, or rather galled with these letters, speedeth in
all have, and sooner than any man would have thought, into England, accompanied
with

What befell him afterward in England, and how it appeared by pregnant
presumptions, and some evidence, that he aimed at other matters than war
against Rebels, whiles he could not find in his heart to remit private
distastes for the public good, and relied too much upon popularitie (which is
always momentany, and never fortunate) it is impertinent to this place,
neither take I pleasure so much as to remember the same.

The said cessation was scarcely once or twice expired, when the Earl of
Tir-Oen drew his forces together, and addresseth himself again to war. Unto
whom there Warren, to know of him wherefore he brake the Cessation that was
made? Unto whom in the swelling pride of his heart he haughtily answered, That
he had not broken the Cessation, considering he had given fourteen days
warning before, that he meant to renew the war; and that he had just cause to
war a fresh: for why? he understood that the Lord Lieutenant, in whom he had
reposed all his hope and whole estate, was committed in England: Neither would
he have any thing to do from thence forth with the Councillors of the
Kingdom, that had dealt before time so craftily and deceitfully with him. And
as for the Cessation, would he never so feign, he could not revoke it, because
he had already entered another course, and appointed O-Donel to go into
Conaught, and other of his confederates

In this mean space, there ran among the Rebels rumors very rife (and the
Earl of Tir-Oen questionless was the author) that there should be within a
while the greatest and strangest alteration that ever was in England; and lewd
persons began daily to increase both in number and in courage. For they that
were of the Irishry, aspired now to their ancient freedom and Nobility;
contrariwise good and honest men of the English blood were much dejected and
discouraged, seeing so great expenses of the Prince came to nothing: who also
complained one unto another, that they had been of late excluded as mere
strangers from bearing offices in the Commonweal. But the Earl, all in a
glorious jollity gives it out every where, and Urban the third had sent in
times past a little Coronet, platted with peacocks feathers, unto John, King
Henry's the second his son, when he was invested Lord of Ireland.

And now triumphantly glorying of his victories, to the end that he might make
a goodly show of his greatness in every place, and by his personal presence
set that fire to burn out light, which in his absence he had kindled in
Mounster; under a fair and religious pretense of visiting a little piece of
wood of Christ's Cross (which is Tipperary) in mid-winter thither he goes on
Pilgrimage, and sent out into the grounds of true and faithful subjects a
number of preying robbers, under the conduct of Mac-Guir: he by chance happened
upon Sir Warrham Saint Ledger, who run him through with his lance, and was
withal at the same instant himself run through by him. Whose funerals when
the Earl had performed, he hasteneth home sooner than all men looked for, as
having heard, that the Earl of Ormond, appointed General of the Army, was
raising of a power from all parts, Charles Blunt Lord Deputy. 1600.
and that Sir Charles Blunt Baron Mon^joy, appointed the Lord Deputy, was
coming; unto whom the Queen before time had purposed in her mind this
government; but Robert Earl of Essex (who for to pleasure Montjoy, had seen
no service, nor been experienced in the wars, more than in the Netherlands,
had no followers and dependants, nor much aforehand with the world, and
overmuch bookish. He arriveth in Ireland in the month of February, without any
great noise and stir, accompanied with a small train, and so entered upon the
Government. Now he found the state of Ireland very distressed, or rather
desperately sick, and past all hope of recovery, yea at the point, as it were,
to give up the ghost: for every good and honest meaning mind was dismayed to
see such a confluence of calamities, without all Ulster, into Mounster. The
Rebels moreover, to terrify the Deputy now at his first coming, struck up
an Al'arme in the very suburbs of Dublin. But he, full of good courage, desired
nothing more than to set upon the Earl himself, who, as he had intelligence
given him, was to return out of Mounster. Mustering up therefore in all haste
such a power as he could (for the companies of choice soldiers were in
Mounster already with the Earl of Ormond) he hastened to stop the Earls
passage in Fereal, and there

The Deputy being returned to Dublin, was wholly busied in mustering of the old
soldiers, that should be sent by shipping to Logh-Foile and Bala-shanon near
unto the mouth of Logh-Earn, that by placing garrisons there, they might make
sallies upon the Earl both on back and sides; as also about sending aid unto
the garrison soldiers in Lease and Ophaly, a matter by reason of so many
enemies round about, of great danger and difficulty.

Ulster, with this purpose, to divert the Earl another way, whiles Sir Henry
Docwra at Logh-foile, and Sir Matthew Morgan at Bala-shanon planted the
garrisons: which they with small ado effected; for Sir Henry Docwra took
Logh-foile, and Sir John B^lle who accompanied him, took Don-a-long and
Lhiffer castles, suppressing the rebels with diverse overthrowes.

Whiles the Earl was every day kept occupied by the Deputy with light
skirmishes, Armagh, thereby to bring the Rebels within a straighter compass.

Mean while he took a journey into Lease, which was the place of refuge and
receipt of all the Rebels in Leinster: where he slew Ony-Mac-Rory-Og, the
chief of the O-Mores family, a bloody bold, and most desperate young man; who
of late had Mounster; him I say he slew, with other most wicked and mischievous
Rebels: and after he had laid their fields waste, he chased them into woods
and forests, so as that in those parts they were scarcely ever after seen.
When as now new succors were come out of England, although he wanted both come
and money, the Equinoxe was past, and winter weather began already in that
climate, yet marched he forward to the very entrance of Moyery, three miles
beyond Dondalk. This passage is naturally the most combersome of all others
well near in Ireland, which the Rebels had fortified and blocked up with
pallisadoes and fences, with stakes pitched into the ground, with hurdles
joined together, and stones in the midst, and turfes of earth, betwixt the
hills, woods, and bogges quite overthwart on both sides, with great skill and
greater industry, yea and manned the

But when the waters were fallen, the English courageously brake through those
pallisadoes or senses aforesaid, and having beaten back their enemies, and
overcome all difficulties, the Lord Deputy placed a garrison eight miles from
Armagh (for at Armagh the Rebels had eaten up and consumed all) which in
memory of Sir John Norris, under whom he had his first rudiments in the
profession of Arms, Mount-Norris; over which he made Captain E. Blany, a
stout and valiant Gentleman, who afterward in this part, like as Sir Henry
Docwra in the other, troubled the Rebels sore, and withal kept them forcibly
in awe. In his return (that I may pass over with silence the skuffling
skirmishes which happened every day) the Rebels in the pass near unto
Carlingford, where they had stopped up the way, in a memorable overthrow were
discomfited, and put to fearful flight.

Some few days after, the Lord Deputy, because he would lose no time, entered
in the very midst of winter the Glynnes, that is, the valleys in Leinster, a
secure receptacle of Rebels; where having wasted the country, he brought
Donell Spanioh, and that tumultuous and pernicious Sept of the O Tools unto
submission, and took hostages of them. Afterward he went as far as Fereall;
and drove Tirell, the most approved warrior of all the Rebels, out of his own
holds, or as they call it, Fastnesses (a place full of bogges, and beset thick
with bushes) into Ulster. Now by this time by fetching many a compass was he
come victorious in every place, as far as to the frontier of Ulster: which he
entered, and first having slain the two sons of Ever Mac Cowley, he laid the
territory of Fernes wast, and sent out Sir Richard Morison to spoil the Fues.
In Breany he placed a garrison, by the conduct of Sir Oliver Lambard: and
turning down to Tredagh, he received into his protection and mercy such of
the principal Rebels as submitted themselves; Turlogh Mac-Henry, a great man
and Potentate in Fues, Ever Mac Cowly, O-Hanlan, who glories in this, that by
inheritance he is Standard Bearer to the Kings of Ulster, and many of the
Mac-Mahons, and O-Realies, who delivered up for hostages their dearest friends
and kinsfolk. The spring now approaching, before all the forces were assembled
and come together, the Lord Deputy marches Moyery, where by cutting down the
woods, he made the way passable, and there erected a fort: out of Lecall he
expelled the Mac-Genisses, who usurped lands there, and reduced all the Rebels
fortresses and holds about Armagh to his obedience: Armagh also he fortified
with a garrison. And so far went he forward, that he removed the Earl from
Black-water (who had very artificially encamped himself there) and purposed
somewhat lower to set up a sort.

About which time many signified unto him by letters for certainty, that which
he had heard before bruited by a common rumor still more and more increased,
namely, that the Sparniards were arrived in Mounster. So that now he was of
necessity Mounster, journeying continually with one or two companies of horse,
commanding the Captains of the footmen to follow hard after.

For whiles he was earnestly busied about the war in Ulster, the Earl, and
his assiociates the Rebels of Mounsters by their Agents, a certain Spaniard
elect Archbishop of Dublin by the Pope, the Bishop of Clonfort, the Bishop of
Killaloe, and Archer a Jesuit, had obtained at length, with praying,
entreating, and earnest beseeching at the King of Spaines hand, that succor
should be sent into Mounster to the D' Aquila, upon assured hope conceived,
that all Mounster would shortly revolt, and the titular Earl of Desmond, and
Florens Mac-Carty join great aides unto them. But Sir George Carew the Lord
President of Mounster, had providently before intercepted them, and sent them
over into England.

Thus D' Aquila arrived at Kinsale in Mounster with two thousand Spaniards, old
soldiers, and certain Irish fugitives, the last day of October: and
straightwaies having published a writing, wherein he gloriously styles
himself with this title, [MASTER General and Captain of the Catholic King
in the war of God, for holding and keeping the Faith in Ireland] endeavors
to make the world believe, That

The Lord Deputy, having gathered together all the Companies of soldiers that
he could, prepares himself to the siege: and Sir Richard Levison the
Vice Admiral, sent out of England with one or two of the Queens ships to
impeach all access, fore-closeth the haven. The English, when they had now
encamped themselves, began from land and sea to thunder with their ordnance
upon the Levison with the sea soldiers was sent before against two thousand
Spaniards newly landed, at Bere-haven, Baltimor, and Castle Haven, of whose
ships he sunk five: on the other side the President of Mounster, at the same
time was dispatched with certain troops to get the start of O-Donell, who was
now approaching, that he should not join with that new supply of the
Spaniards. But he, when as now all the Country was over frozen, had by speedy
journeyes in the night, through blind by-waies, gotten to those Spaniards newly
arrived, and was not so much as once seen.

Tir-Oen also himself came with O-Rork, Raimund Burk, Mac-Mahon, Randall
Mac-Surley, Tirell, the Baron of Lixnaw, and the most select and choice of all
the Rebels, unto whom when Alphonso O Campo, the leader of the new-come
Spaniards, had joined his forces, they mustered themselves six thousand
footmen, and five hundred horse strong, in a confident hope of victory, because
they were more in number, fresh and better furnished with all kind of means:
whereas contrariwise the English were out-wearied with the inconveniences

In these difficulties and distresses, the Deputy consulteth with the
Captains what was to be done: Some thought the best way was to break up the
siege, to retire into Cork, and not to hazard the whole Realm upon the
fortune of one battle. Contrariwise, the Deputy advises and persuades to
persist, and not to degenerate from the approved virtue of their ancestors:
adding, that valiant men could not have a more wished opportunity presented
unto them, than that which was now fallen into their laps; namely, either to
spend their lives with glory, or to vanquish their enemies

Upon the one and twentieth day of December, the Earl of Tir-Oen shows
himself with his horse upon an hill about a mile from the camp: and there
encamping himself, makes a bravado likewise the next day in the same place:
the night following, both the Spaniards sallied forth of the town, and the
Irish also assayed to steal into the town, but both were forced to retire. On
the three and twentieth day, the English men discharge their greater pieces
upon the town, as if they had not cared for the Earl now so near at hand,
and the very same day were the letters D' Aquila unto the Earl intercepted:
wherein he importuned Tir-Oen, that the Spaniards newly arrived might be put
into the town, and that they might assail the camp on both sides. When the
Moon was ready to rise over the horizon, the Deputy commanded Sir Henry Poer
to lead forth into the field eight ensigns of old soldiers, and to make a
stand on the West side of the camp. Sir Henry Greame, who that night had the
charge of the horsemen that watched, very early in the morning advertised the
Deputy, that the enemies for certain would advance forward, for that a great
number of their matches were lighted. Hereupon the al'arme was given throughout
the camp, and companies placed wheresoever there was any way to the town.

The Lord Deputy himself, with the President of Mounster, and Sir Richard
Wingfeld Marshall, marched toward the watch, and withal by the advice of Sir
Olivar Lambart, chooses out a plot, wherein he might give battle to the
enemies: Thither were brought the Ensigns and Regiments of Sir Henry Folliot,
and Sir Olivar Saint John, with six hundred sea soldiers under the conduct of
Sir Richard Levison. But the Earl of Tir-Oen, who resolved (as afterward it
was known) to have brought into Kinsale by dark night the new supply of
Spaniards, and eight hundred Irishmen, when he saw now the day to break, and
beheld withal the Marshall and Sir Henry Danvers with the power of horsemen,
and Poer with the Companies of old soldiers at the foot of the hill, being
disappointed of

Within a while after, the weather clearing up again, he observed that they
retired hastily for fear in three great battalions, and with the horsemen
placed behind at their backs: he fully determined therefore to charge upon
them, having sent back the President of Mounster with three companies of
horsemen into Clan-Ricard discomfited, and put to rout the other, and
courageously gave the onset upon the maine troops of the enemies horsemen;
which charge when Sir William Godolphin, who had the leading of the Deputies
horse, Sir Henry Da^vers, Minshaw, Taff, Fleming, and Sir John Barkly Sergeant
Major of the Camp, who joined with them, redoubled with so great alacrity, that
the Rebels presently brake, and fell in disorder. But it was not thought good
to follow the chase, but gathering their forces and power together, they
charged upon the maine battle now in fear and wavering; which they also
brake. Tirell with his company and the Spaniards all this while kept their
standing, and made their ground good: against whom the Oliver S. John's, whereof
Captain Roe had the conduct, charge violently upon them, and so brake their
arraies, that in great disorder and confusion they reculed back and betook
themselves to the Irish, by whom they were presently left unto the edge of the
sword, and routed by the troop of the Duputies horsemen, whereof Sir William
Godolphin had the leading. Then Ter-Oen, O-Denel and the rest on all sides put
to flight, flung away their weapons, and made what shift they could to save
themselves. Alphonso O Campo was taken prisoner with three other Captains of
the Spaniards, and six ensign bearers; slain there were one thousand and two
hundred, Danvers, Sir William Godolphin, and Cr^ft: so little cost this so
great a victory. The Lord Deputy after he had founded the retreat, and rendered
thanks unto almighty God for this victory among the dead bodies of the enemies
lying thick in heaps, gave the order of Knighthood to the Earl of
Clan-Ricard for his right valiant service in this battle: and thus with lucky
acclamations returned victor into his Camp, which he found safe and found from
all dangers. For the Spaniards within the town, seeing all places every way
made sure with guardes, and having experience before time, that all sallies
were to their loss, kept themselves at home in careful expectation of

A noble victory this was, and in many regards important, whereby Ireland most
miserably distressed and ready to revolt, was retained, the Spaniards ejected,
the Arch-rebell Tir-Oen repulsed into his starting holes in Ulster, O Donell
driven into Spain, the rest of the rebellious rabble scattered into sundry
parts, the Princes regal authority by daunting the l^wlesse insolency
recovered, and within a while after a secure peace throughout the Island firmly
established.

The morrow after, the Lord Deputy commanded Captain Bodley the Trench-master,
who both in the fortifications and also in the battle had manfully borne
himself, to finish the Mount begun, and to raise banks and rampires nearer
unto the D' Aquila in his letters sent by his Drum Major to the Deputy, craved
that some Gentlem^n of credit might be sent into the town, with whom he might
parley.

For this purpose was Sir William Godolphin chosen: Unto whom D' Aquila
signifies, that he had found the Lord Deputy, although he were his most eager
enemy, yet an honorable person, the Irish of no valor, rude and uncivil, yea
and (that which he sore feared) perfidious and false: That he was sent from the
King of Spain his Master, to aid two Earls, and now he doubted whether there
were any such in Rerum Natura, considering that one tempestuous pusse of war
had blown the one of them into Spain, the other into the North, so as they
were no more to be seen. Kinsale, the Forts, and Castle at Baltimore,
Be^^haven, and Castle Haven, unto the Lord Deputy, and so depart with life,
with goods, and

These things thus concluded, the Spaniards after certain days fitted with a
good gale of wind set fail from the coast of Ireland with dishonor, as
having their companies much impaired, and weak. Mean while the Earl of
Tir-Oen in fearful Ulster, after he had lost most of his men, whom the rivers
risen and running violently by reason of Winter floods had swallowed up. And
afterward he could not take his rest without care, no not so much as breath
without fear; whiles carrying an evil and burdened conscience he dreaded the
due reward of his deserts, and distrusted every one; insomuch as he sought
from day to day new blind corners, and the same straightwaies he abandoned, The
Deputy to refresh his wearied soldiers, bestows them abroad in garrisons,
and after he had settled the State in Mounster, returns to Dublin. And when
the winter season was past, he by a gentle and easy march (thereby to spread
a greater Ulster with an army well appointed, that he might with Forts and
garrisons planted round about, belay the Rebels on every side, as it were,
within net and toil. When he was come as far as to Black-water, he
transported his army upon floats; and having found a Foord unknown before,
beneath the old Fort, he erected a Fort upon the very bank, which after his
own Christian name he called Charle-mont. At which time the Earl of Tir-Oen
being affrighted, set fire on his own house at Dunganon. Then marches the
Deputy forward from thence to Dunganon: and after he had encamped himself, so
soon as Sir Henry Docwra was come unto him from Logh-foile with his company,
he sent out his soldiers every way. Then might you have seen the cornfieldsd
spoiled, the villages on Logh-Crew, Logh-Reogh, and Mogher Lecowe (where Sir
John Barkley, a most valiant martial man was shot through with a bullet) were
yielded up, he planted a garrison at Logh-Eaugh, or Logh-Sidney, which after
the title of his own honor he named Mont-joy, and gave unto Sir Arthur
Chichester (who by the demerit of his virtue is now Lord Deputy of Ireland) the
charge and command thereof; another likewise at Monaghan, which he committed
unto Sir Christopher St. Laurence: who being leaders of great experience, and
greater courage, what with often sallies, and what with traverse journies made
too and fro, so coursed and crossed the rebels, that they seeing themselves
environed with Tir-Oen, that he had engaged the ruin of the whole nation for
his own private discontentments; that this war was only necessary to him, but
most pernicious to them: neither was the Earl ignorant that both the force and
fidelity also of his people and followers was now sore shaken: he determined
therefore to prevent the worst, as being weary of misery and calamity, and yet
in some hope also of life, Arth Mac Baron his brother, and others: and being
often rejected, at length in the month of February, after he had promised
absolutely, and without any condition, to submit his life and all that he had
unto the Queen, the Deputy, who had some intelligence out of the Court in
England from his inward friends, that the Queen, now far stepped in years,
was dangerously sick, condescended that the Earl might repair unto
Mellifont: and thither forthwith came he out of his lurking holes in all speed,
accompanied with one or two, and no more. Being admitted into the chamber of He
acknowledges his sin to God, and fault unto his most gracious Prince and
sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, in whose royal clemency and mercy lay the
only hope that he had now remaining, to whose pleasure he submits wholly
and absolutely his life and whole estate. He most demisely beseeches, that
whose bountiful As he was enforcing this point further, the Deputy interrupted
him, and cut off his speech; and after a few words, delivered with great
authority (which in a martial man does stand in stead of eloquence) to this
effect, that there was no excuse to be made for so grievous and heinous a
crime, with Dublin, purposing to bring him from thence into England before
Queen Elisabeth, that she might determine at her pleasure what to do with
him. But in this mean time, that most excellent Princess, a little after that
she had intelligence (that nothing might be wanting to the accomplishment of
her glory) how this rebellion was extinguished, which had not a little
disquieted her, departed godly and peaceably out of this transitory life into
the eternal.

Thus the war of Ireland, or the rebellion rather of the Earl of Tir-Oen,
begun upon private grudges and quarrels intermedled with ambition, cherished at
first by contempt, and sparing of charges out of England, spread over all
Ireland (under Charles Blunt Baron of Mont-joy (whom afterward in regard James
created Earl of Devonshire) was most happily dispatched, and firm peace, as
we hope, for ever established.

THE MANNERS OF THE IRISHRY, BOTH OF OLD AND OF LATER TIMES.
The manners of the Irishry, or wild Irish.
THe place requires now, that I should add somewhat of the manners of this
people: and that verily will I do, as touching their ancient behavior, out of
ancient Historiographers: and concerning the latter, out of a modern writer
both learned and diligent,

As concerning the Irish of ancient times, when as they were, as all other
nations beside in this tract, barbarous and savage, thus much have old authors
recorded.

Strabo in his fourth book of Ireland, says, I can deliver nothing for
certain, but that the inhabitants thereof are more rude than the Britans, as
who both feed upon man's flesh, (...), but in the Epitome (...), that is,
feeding upon herbs and weeds.
and also devour exceeding muth meat; yea and they think it a point of
honesty to eat the bodies of their dead parents, and wantonly to have company
not only with other men's wives, but even with their own mothers and sisters.
Which things verily we relate so, as having no witnesses hereof that be of
sufficient credit. Certes the report goes, that

Pomponius Mela in his third book writes thus: The inhabitants are uncivil,
ignorant of all virtues, and utterly void of religion.

Solinus in the 24. chapter, When they have achieved any victory, the blood of
those that are slain they first drink, and then besmeare their faces with it.
Right and wrong is all one with them. A woman lying in childbed, if she have at
any time brought forth a man child, lays the first meat she gives it upon
her husbands sword, and with the very point thereof puts it softly into the
infants mouth, in hansell as it were of the nourishment

But these fashions savor of greater antiquity. Their conditions of the middle
time Giraldus Cambrensis has here and there treated of, and out of him others.
But now for their later demeanor, take them here with you out of that foresaid
Modern writer, a studious and painful man, and that in his own words: who,
as I collect, was named I. Good, brought up in Oxford, by profession and
calling a Priest, and who Limiricke. But first I will briefly premise,
according to my promise made even now, somewhat as touching the manner of the
jurisdiction that is used among the mere Irish, out of others.

O prefixed to the names of the Noblest men in Ireland, by way of excellency.
Their great men and Potentates, whose names have the fourth vowell ( O) put
before them, as a mark of pre-eminence and excellency, as O-Neal, O-Rork,
O-Donel, etc. and many of the rest, to whose name ( Mac) is prefixed, have
peculiar rights and privileges of their own, whereby they domineere and Lord
it most proudly, and what with tributes, exactions, paiments, and impositions
upon their subjects, for their soldiers, Galloglasses, Kernes, and horsemen,
whom they are to find and maintain, they so prey upon their goods and
estates, and oppress them at their own pleasure,

These Nobles or Potentates aforesaid have their Lawyers belonging unto them,
whom they term Brehons, Brehons.
like as the Goths named theirs Bellagines: who being Bards; yea and their
Harpers, who have every one of them their several livelods and Profession^
hereditary.
and of these, there be in each territory, several professors and those
liable to some certain and several families: that is to say, the Brehons be
of one stock and name, the Historians of another, and so of the rest, who
instruct their own children or kinsmen every one in their own art, and have
some of them always to be their successors. Now, among these great Lords and
Nobles, there is no hereditarie right of succession observed, but whosoever of
any principal house is of greater puissance in regard of strength, retinewes
of followers, and boldness, he by a certain faction or election of the people
in that province, usurpeth the Lordship and soveraigntie over the rest, quite
excluding the sons, nephews, and next in blood of the party deceased: and so
with certain complements of barbarous ceremonies Tanistry, Tanistry.
there is sometime nominated and declared a successor, who is termed Tanist, I
wot not whether by a word borrowed from the Danes, among whom, as among the
Northren inhabitants of Britain, Thane was a long time used for a noble man,
and the Kings especial officer.

But whereas I have incidently happened of better observations concerning this
Brehon law and Tanistry, diligently collected by Sir John Davis, his Majesty's
Attorney general in Ireland, I hope I may, with his good leave, impart some of
them to public knowledge in his own words.

Tanist, which was his successor apparent: both these were elected of the
country, who commonly made choice of such as were most active, and had most
swordmen and followers depending upon him. The chief Lord had certain lands
in Demesne, which were called his Loghtii, or mensall lands in Demesne, where
he placed his principal officers, namely, his Brehon, his Marshall, his
Cupbearer, his Physician, his Surgeon, his Chronicler, his Rimer, and others:
which offices and professions were hereditarie and peculiar to certain septs
and families.

He had also small rents of money, and Cowes, and customarie duties of
Oatemeale, Butter, and the like, out of the lands in the Country, except the
lands of the Church, and such of his kinsmen and followers to whom he granted a
special discharge or freedom. Besides he had a general tallage or cutting
high or low, at his pleasure upon all the inheritance, which he took commonly
when he made war either with his neighbors, or against the Crown of
England, or made a journey to the State, or gave any entertainment; so as the
whole profits of the country were at his disposition when he listed: and so
made the inhabitants like the villains of England, upon whom their Lords had
power Tallier Haut and Bas, as the

The Tanist had also a special portion of land, and certain Chiefrie proper
to the Tanist, and within the limits of his portion he had also his cuttings
and his Coshiries: the rest of the land being distributed among several septs,
every sept had a Chief or Canfinie, as they called him, with a Tanist of that
sept, both which were chosen by the chief Lord or Captain of the country,
and had likewise their several portions and Chiefries. These Captainships or
Chiefries were not partable, but were entirely enjoyed by such as were elected
thereunto.

All the rest of the lands, except the portions of the Cheifes and Tanists,
descended in course of Gavelkind, and were partable among the Males only; in
which division the Bastards had their portions as well as the Legitimate.

For offenses and matters criminal, none was so heinous or of so high a nature
as that it was capital, for treason against the chief Lord, and murder were
fineable, the fine they called an Ericke, which was assessed by the Lord and
his Brehons.

In case of treason the Lord had all the fine, in case of murder the Lord had
one moitie, and the kindred of the party slain the other moitie: so as they
never forfeited their possessions or their lands for any offense. Howbeit their
lands were seized by the Lord for their fines, until the same were levied
thereupon, and then restored. Rape was finable in like sort, but theft deserved
praise and reward, if the stealth were brought into the country; because the
Lord had a share, and the country thereby became the richer.

But the theft committed in the country and carried out, if the thief were
apprehended before his friend made offer of his fine, he was commonly punished
with death. But the Lord in that case might take an Erick if he would.

Upon the stealth of any cattle, if the owner followed the tract (wherein the
Irish are incredible cunning, insomuch as they will find the same by the
bruising of a grass in the summer time) if the party unto whose land the tract
is brought cannot make it off to some other land, he is to answer the stealth
to the owner. And this being an Irish law or custom, is at this day observed
both by the English and Irish, the same being ratified by an act of Counsel in
the Earl of Sussex his government, as fit and necessary for that Kingdom.

The Brehons, assisted by certain Scholars, who had learned many rules of the
civil and Canon law, rather by tradition then by reading, gave judgment in
all causes, and had the eleventh part of the thing adjudged for their fee, and
the chief Lords Marshall did execution.

These are the principal rules and grounds of the Brehon law, which the makers
of the Statutes of Kilkenny did not without cause call a lewd custom; for it
was the cause of much lewdness and barbarism. It gave countenance and
encouragement to theft, rape, and murder, it made all possessions uncertain,
whereby it came to pass that there was no building of houses, and towns, nor
education of children in learning or civility, no exercise of trades, or
handicrafts, no improvement or manuring

"Now forward, take with you the observations of the said Good: and thus much
will I speak before hand for the man, that in nothing he shoots at reproach,
but aims all at truth, and speaks only of those uncivil and mere Irish,
that lie shrouded in the utmost coasts, and have not as yet suited themselves
with civil qualities and conditions.

And to speak in general of them all, this Nation is strong of body, and
passing nimble, stout and haughty in heart, for wit quick, martial,
prodigal, and careless Girald. Cambren.
If they be bad, you shall no where meet with worse: if they be good, you can
hardly find better.



They that be of the more noble parentage shall have a number of nources
repair unto them straight ways from far, which make suit for the nourcing of
the infant; and of these foster children they make more account than of their
own which they bear. And although

Be they reproved at any time by their own parents, they fly to these their
foster-fathers, and being heartened by them, break out oftentimes even unto
open war against their said parents; taking instructions from them to all lewd
and villainous prankes, they become most ungracious and desperate. Semblably,
the nources train up those maidens which they rear, to all obscenity and
filthiness. If any of these foster children chance to fall sick, a man would
not believe how quickly their nources hear of it, yea though they dwell many a
mile off, how pensively they attend and watch by the sick body night and day.
To conclude, the greatest corruptions of Ireland, are thought to spring from
these foster-fathers and

That these Irish people are both of an hotter and moisture nature than other
nations, we may well conjecture. And this we gather by their wonderful soft
skin: which doubtless comes as well by the nature of the soil, as by
certain artificial bathings and exercise that they use. By reason also of the
same tenderness of their muscles, they so excel in nimblenesse and
flexibility of all parts of the body, as it is incredible. Given they are to
idleness above all things: they reckon it the greatest riches to take no pain,
and count it the most

They account it no shame or infamy to commit robberies, which they practice
every where with exceeding cruelty. When they go to rob, they pour out their
prayers to God, That they may meet with a booty: and they suppose, that a cheat
or booty is sent unto them from God as his gift: neither are they persuaded,
that either violence, or rapine, or manslaughter displeases God: for in no
wise would he presens unto them this opportunity, if it were a sin; nay a
sin it were if they did not lay hold upon the said opportunity. You shall
hear these Cutthroats and Incendiaries come out with these words, God is
merciful, and will not suffer the price of his blood to be of no effect in me.
Moreover, they say, that they walk in their fathers steps; that this manner of
life was left unto

Of late days, they spare neither Churches nor hallowed places, but thence
also they fill their hands with spoil: yea and sometimes they set them on
fire, and kill the men that there lie hidden: And the cause hereof, is the most
filthy life of their Priests, who of

Among those wild Irish, there is neither divine service, nor any form of
Chapel but outwardly no Altars at all, or else they be filthily polluted: the
image of the Rood or Cross defaced, if there be any at all. The sacred
vestiments are so foul and nasty that they would make one to cast up his
stomach: The alter portable, without any crosses emprinted upon it, and by
some abuse or other polluted: The Missal or Mass book all torn, and bereft
of the Canon: yet the same is tendered to all oaths and perjuries; the Chalice
of lead, without

The Parsons play the Vicars, and that of many Parishes together: they make it
great show of the Canon Law, but have never a jot of learning.

They have their children to succeed them in their Churches, for whose
illegitimation they that is, upon some small gift or oblation at the baptism,
inunction, and burial, wherewith God wot, they live most bare and miserable.

These Priests sons that follow not their studies, prove for the most part
notorious thieves. For they that carry the name of Mac-Decan, Mac-Pherson,
Mac-O^pac, that is, the Deanes or Deacons son, the Parsons son, and the Bishops
son, are the strongest thieves that be, and the more able by their Parents
liberality to raise a power of unruly rebels; and the rather, because following
their fathers steps, they maintain hospitality.

At every third word it is ordinary with them to lash out an oath, namely, by the
Trinity, by God, by S. Patrick, by S. Brigid, by their Baptism, by Faith, by
the Church, by my Godfathers hand, and by thy hand. And albeit by these they
swear, with the sacred Bible or Missal laid most religiously upon their bare
heads, yea and be forsworn, yet if one say they stand in danger of damnation
for perjury, you shall hear them straightwaies cry aloud, The Lord is
merciful, and will not suffer the price of his blood shed for me, to be of no
effect in me. Never shall I go to hell, repent I or repent I not. But for the
First, if one swear at the altar, touching the book lying open, and the same
laid on the crown of his head. Secondly, if he take to record some Saint, whose
crooked staff or bell he touches and kisseth. Thirdly, if he swear by the
hand of an Earl, or of his own Lord, or some mighty person: for then, if he
be convict of perjury by the two former, he incurreth infamy; but in case he
be forsworn by the third, the said mighty man will wring from him perforce a
great sum of money, and a number of Cowes; as if by that perjury the greatest
abuse and injury that might be were offered unto his name. For cowes are their
only wealth, and of greatest esteem. Touching which cattle, this seems not
unworthy the observation.

(as he writes) that cowes in Ireland give no milk, unless their own calfe
be set by their side alive, or else the skin of the dead calfe staffed with
straw, so as it may carry the resemblance of a live one, for in that skin they
acknowledge the sent, as it were, of their own womb. If a cow go dry or hold
up their milk, they send for a witch, who by herbs may cause her to cast her
love upon another cowes calfe, that so she may give down her milk.

Town-dwellers seldom make any contract of marriage with them of the country,
and these pass their promise not for present, but for the future time: or else
give assent without any deliberation. Whence it is, that for every light
falling out they part asunder, the husband to another woman, the wife to
another husband; neither is it ever known for certainty

To these may be added a number of superstitions. I cannot tell whether the
wilder sort of the Irishry yield divine honor unto the Moon; for when they
see her first after the change, commonly they bow the knee, and say over the
Lords prayer, and so soon as they Godsibs, whom they term Chari Christ,
praying for them and wishing them well, and so they are not afraid to be hurt
by them. The shoulder blade bone of a sheep, when the flesh is clean taken
from it, they use to look through, and thereby foretell of some c^rse shortly
to be carried out of that house, if they spy any dark or duskish spot in it.
They take her for a wicked woman and a witch, what ever she be, that comes to
fetch fire from them on May day (neither will they give any fire then, but unto
a sick body, and that with a curse): for because they think the same woman
will the next Summer steal away all

In their towns, when any Magistrate enters first upon his office, the Wives
along the streets, and the Maidens out of windows, bestrew them and their
followers with wheat and salt. And before they sow their seed in the corn
field, the Goodwife or Mistress of the

If they never give fire out of the house unto their neighbors, they are
persuaded their horses shall live the longer, and continue sound.

If the owners of horses eat eggs, they must look unto it that they be even
in number, otherwise their horses will be in danger. Horse-breakers and
horse-keepers are forbidden

In no case must you praise an horse or any other beast, until you say, God
save him, or unless you spit upon him. If any harm befall the horse within
three days after, they seek him out that praised him, that he may mumble the
Lords Prayer in his right ear. They think there be some that bewitch their
horses with looking upon them: and then they use the help of some old hagges,
who saying a few Prayers with a loud voice, make them well again. There is a
certain small worm breeding in their horses feet, which creeping on still by
little and little, breeds a great many of the same kind, and corrupts

Against all maladies and mischiefs whatsoever, the women have effectual
enchantments or charms, as they suppose, divided and parted amongst them, each
one her several enchantment, and the same of diverse forces; unto whom every
man, according as his mischance requires, speedeth himself for help. They
say always both before and after their charms, a Pater Noster and an Ave
Maria.

When any man has caught a fall upon the ground, forthwith he starteth up
again on his feet, and turns himself round three times toward his right
hand, with his sword, skeine, or knife he diggeth into the earth, and fetches
up a turfe, for that, they say, the earth does yield a spirit: and if within
some two or three Esane, which they are of opinion is sent by the Fairies: and
whistereth a certain odd prayer with a Pater Noster into his ear, puts
some coals into a pot full of fair water, and so gives more certain judgment
of the disease, than many of our Physicians can.

Their warre-fare consists of horsemen, of soldiers set in the rere-guard,
whom they Galloglasses, Galloglasses. Kernes.
who fight with most keen hatchets, and of light armed footmen called Kernes,
whose service is with darts and skeanes. To give an acclamation and shout unto
every footman or horseman as he goes out of the gate, is counted lucky and
fortunate: he who has no such applause is thought to have some mischeife
portended unto him. In war they use the bagpipe in stead of a trumpet; they
carry about them Amulets, they recite certain prayers, and in joining battle
they cry as loud as possible they can, Pharroh (I suppose this to be that
military Barritus which Ammianus speaks of) with this persuasion, Barritus.
that he who cries not as loud as the rest, shall have this accident befall
unto him, suddenly to be taken up from the ground, and carried, as it were
flying in the air (avoiding ever after the sight of men) into a certain vale
in Kerry, as I have said before.

Such as visit and sit by one that lies sick in bed, never speak word of
God, nor of the

They suppose that the souls of such as are deceased go into the company of
certain men, famous in those places, touching whom they retain still fables
and songs, as of Giants, Fin-Mac-Huyle, Osker Mac-Oshin, and they say that by
illusion they often times do see such.

As for their meats, Watercresses. Shamroots.
they feed willingly upon herbs, and watercresses especially, upon Strabo not
without good cause said they were (...), i. Eaters of herbs, for which in some
copies is falsely read (...) i. Great Eaters. They delight also in butter
tempered with oate-meale, in milk, whey, beefe-broth, and flesh oftentimes
without any bread at all. As for the corn that they have, they lay it up for
their horses provender, for whom verily they are especially

They go for the most part bare headed, unless it be when they put on an
headpiece. The hair of their head they wear long, and nothing set they
greater store by than the glibbes or tresses of their hairs; and to have the
same plucked or twitched, they take it for a contumelious indignity. They use
linen shirts, and those verily Isidore seems to call Heteromallae, with a
deep fringed pur^le, and the same daintily set out with sundry colors;
within which they lap themselves in the night, and sweetly sleep on the very
ground. Such also do the women cast over the side garment that they wear
down to the foot, and with elnes (as I said) of Sendall rolled up in wreathes,
they rather load than adorn their heads; like as they do their necks with
chains and carkaneth, their arms also with bracelets. These are the manners
of the

A PRAEFACE TO THE ANNALS OF IRELAND.
THus far forward was the Printers press a going when the Honorable Lord
William Howard Naworth, for the love that he bears unto the studies of
Antiquity, willingly imparted unto me the Manuscript Annals of Ireland, from
the year of our Salvation MCLII. unto the year MCCCLXX. Which I thought good
to publish; considering that after Giraldus Cambrensis, there is nothing, to my
knowledge, extant better in this kind; and because so noble and worthy a
person,

THE ANNALS OF IRELAND.
ANno Domini MCLXII. Gregory the first Archbishop of Dublin, a man praise
worthy every way, slept in the Lord: after whom succeeded holy Laurence
O-Thothil, who was Abbat of St. Kemnus de Glindelagh. Thomas is made Archbishop
of

MCLXVI. Rothericke O-Conghir, Prince of Connaght was made King and Monarch of
Ireland.

MCLXVII. Died Maud the Empress. The same year Almaricke King of Jerusalem
took Babylon. And in the same year Dermoc Mac-Murrogh Prince of Leinster,
whiles O-Rorke King of Meth was in a certain expedition, carried away his
wife, who was willing enough to be ravished. For her self made means to be
taken as a prey, as we find in Cambrensis.

MCLXVIII. Donate King of Uriel, founder of Mellifont Monastery, departed in
Christ. In the same year Robert Fitz-Stephen, neither unmindfull of his
promise,

MCLXIX. Earl Richard of Stroghul sent before him into Ireland a certain
young Gentleman of his own family, named Remund, with ten Knights about the
Calends of May. The same year the said Earl Richard, accompanied with two
hundred Knights or thereabout, and others to the number as one would say of a
thousand, arrived on the even of S. Bartholmew the Apostle. Which Richard
verily, was the son of Gilbert Earl of Stroghul, that is, Chippestow,
sometime Strogull. This Richard also was the son of Isabell, Aunt by the
mothers side of K. Malcome, and William King of Scotland, and of David the
Earl, a Gentleman of good hope: and the morrow after the same Apostles day
they took the said City; and there Eva, Dermots daughter, was lawfully joined
in marriage unto Earl Richard, and her father gave her.

MCLXXI. S. Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury was slain. In the same
year the City of Dublin was by the Earl and his company taken. And the same
year was founded the Abbey de Castro Dei, that is, of Gods Castle.

MCLXXI. Dermot Mac-Morrogh full of days was taken out of this world at
Fernys, about the Calends of May.

MCLXXII. The courageous King Henry with 500. Knights arrived at Waterford,
and among other things gave Meth unto Sir Hugh Lacie. The same year was
founded the Abbey de Font vivo.

MCLXXIV. Gelasius Archbishop of Armagh, the first Primate of Ireland, an holy
man, aged and full of days, rested in Christ. This Gelasius is said to be the
first Archbishop that wore the first pale; but others before him were in name
only called Archbishops and Primates, for the reverend regard and honor of
St. Patricke, as being the Apostle of that nation: whose See was from the
beginning had of all men in so great reverence, that not only Bishops and
Priests and those of the Clergy, but Kings and Princes universally were
subject to the Bishop thereof in all obedience. After whom succeeded in the
Archbishopricke Gilbert a Prelate of good memory.

MCLXXV. William King of Scotland was taken prisoner at Alnewicke.

MCLXXVI. Bertram Verdon founded the Abbey of Crokisdenne.

MCLXXVII. Earl Richard about the Calends of May died at Dublin, and was
buried in the Church of the holy Trinity at Dublin. The same year Vivian a
Priest, Cardinal entitled of S. Stephan in Mount Caelius, came as Legate of
the Apostolical See into Ireland, sent from Pope Alexander.

de Samaria was founded. The same year was founded Rose Vale, that is,
Rosseglasse.

MCLXXIX. Miles Cogan, and Ralph the son of Fitz-Stephen, his daughters
husband, were slain between Waterford and Lismore, etc. as we read in
Cambrensis. The same year Hervie Mont-Marish entered the Monastery of Saint
Trinity in Canterbury, who founded the Monastery of Saint Marie de Portu,
that is, Of Donbroth.

MCLXXX. The Abbey of the Quire of Benet was founded. The same year was
founded the Abbey of Geripount. The same year Laurence Archbishop of Dublin,

MCLXXXIII. The order of the Templars and Hospitallers is confirmed. The same
year is founded the Abbey de Lege Dei, that is, Gods Law.

MCLXXXV. John the Kings son, Lord of Ireland by his fathers gift, came into
Ireland in the 12. year of his age, in the thirteenth year after his fathers
coming,

MCLXXXVI. The order of the Cartusians and of the Grandians is confirmed. In
the same year Hugh Lacie was killed at Dervath treacherously by an Irishman;
because the foresaid Hugh would build a castle there: and as he was teaching of
an Irishman how to labor with an iron tool, to wit, a Pykax; when Hugh bowed
himself forward, he stroke him to the ground with both hands, and as he held
down his head, the said Irishman with an axe chopped off Hugh Lacie his head, and
there was an end of the conquest. In the same year Christian Bishop of
Lismore, sometime Legate of Ireland, an earnest follower of the virtues which
he had seen and heard of his Kyrieleyson, happily departed to Christ. Jerusalem
was taken with the Lords Cross, by the Sultan and the Saracens, after many
Christians slain.

MCLXXXVII. Upon the Calends, or first day of July, was the Abbey of Ynes in
Ulster founded.

MCLXXXIX. Henry Fitz-Empresse departed this life, after whom succeeded his
son Richard, and is buried in Font-Ebrard. In the same year was founded the
Abbey de Colle victoriae, that is, of Cnokmoy.



MCXCI. In the Monastery of Clarevall, the translation of Malachie Bishop of
Armagh was honorably celebrated.

MCXCII. The City of Dublin was burnt.

MCXCIII. Richard King of England in his return from the holy land, was taken
prisoner by the Duke of Austrich, and he made an end by composition with the
Emperor, to pay for his ransom one hundred thousand marks, and with the
Empress, to pay thirty thousand: also with the foresaid Duke 20. thousand
marks, in regard of an obligation which he had made unto them for Henry Duke
of Saxony. Now he remained in the Emperors prison a year, six months, and
three days: For Iugo Dei, that is, of Gods yoke.

MCXCIIII. The relics of S. Malachie Bishop of Clareval, were brought into
Ireland, and with all honor that might be, received in the Monastery of
Mellifont, and the rest of the Monasteries of the Cistertian order.

MCXCV. Matthew Archbishop of Cassile Legate of Ireland, and John Archbishop of
Dublin carried away the corpse of Hugh Lacie, the conqueror of Meth, from the
Irish, Becty. But the head of the said Hugh was bestowed in the Monastery of
Saint Thomas in Dublin.

MCXCVIII. The order of Friars Preachers began in the parts about Tolouse, by
Dominicke the second.

MCXCIX. Richard King of England died: after whom succeeded John his brother,
who was Lord of Ireland and Earl of Mortaigne: which John slew Arthur the
lawful heir, son of Geffrey his whole brother.

And in this manner died Richard. When K. Kichard besieged the Castle of Chaluz

Isti^ in morte perimit formica leonem,
Proh dolor! in tanto funere mundus obit.
In this man's death, as is well seen, the Ant a Lion slaies,
And in so great a death (alas) the world does end her days.
The Corpse of which King Richard is divided into three parts. Whence was this
verse made.

Viscera Carceolum, Corpus Fons servat Ebrardi,
Et Cor Rhothomagum magne Richard tuum.
Thy bowels only Carceol keeps, thy Corpse Font-Everard,
And Roan has keeping of thy heart O puissant Richard.
When King Richard was departed this life, his brother John was girt with the
sword of the Duchy of Normandy by the Archbishop of Rhoan, the seventh day
before the Calends of May next ensuing after the death of the aforesaid King:
which Archbishop did set upon the head of the said Duke a Circle flower with
golden roses in the top round about. Also upon the sixth day before the Calends
of June he was anointed and crowned King of England, all the Lords and Nobles
of England being present, within the Church of Saint Peter in Westminster upon
the day of the Lords Ascension: and afterward was John King of England called
to a Parliament

MCC. Cathol Cronerg King of Conaght founder of the Monastery de Colle
Victoriae, that is, of the Hill of Victory, is expelled out of Conaght. The
same year de Voto, that is, Tynterne, by William Marshall, Earl Marshall and
of Pembroch, who was Lord of Leinster, to wit, of Weisford, Ossory, Caterlagh,
and Kildare, in regard and right of his wife: who espoused the daughter of
Richard Earl of Stroghul, and of Eve the daughter of Dermot-Mac-Murogh. But
because the foresaid William Earl Marshall was in exceeding great jeopardie
both day and night in the sea, he vowed a vow unto our Lord Jesus Christ, that
if he might be delivered from the tempest, and come to land, he would make a
Monastery unto Christ and Marie his mother: and so it came to pass when he
was come safe to Weisford, he made I say the Monastery of Tyntern, according
to his vow, and called De voto, that is, Of the vow. In the same year was
founded the Monastery de Flumine Dei, that is, Of Gods river.

MCCII. Gathol Cronerg or Crorobdyr, King of Conaght, was set again in his
kingdom. The same year is founded the house of Canons or Regular Priests of
St. Marie, by Sir Meiler Fitz-Henrie.

MCCIII. The Abbey of S. Savior, that is, Dowi^ky, being founded, was in this
year and the next following built.

MCCIV. There was a field fought between John Curcie Earl of Ulster, and Hugh
Lacie at Down: in which battle many on both sides lost their lives. But John
Curcie had the upper hand in fight. Afterward, upon the sixth day of the
week,

Howbeit, in regard of other good deeds that thou have done, thou shall with
honor be delivered forth of prison: which also came to pass. And now by this
time there arose a contention between John King of England, and the King of
France, about a Seigniory and certain Castles: and this suit or controversy
still depending, in single fight: and so refreshed himself with meat, drink,
and bathing, and

MCCV. The Abbey of Wetheney in the county of Lymericke was founded by
Theobald the son of Walter Butler, Lord of Karryke.

MCCVI. The order of Friars Minors was begun near the city Assisa, by Saint
Francis.

MCCVIII. William Breos is expelled out of England, and comes into Ireland.
England is interdicted for the tyranny of King John of England. Likewise a
great overthrow and slaughter happened at Thurles in Mounster, committed upon the
Lord Justice of Irelands men, by Sir Geffery Mareys.

MCCX. John King of England came into Ireland, with a great fleet and a
puissant army: and for that the sons of Hugh Lacie, to wit, the Lord Walter
Lord of Meth, Alured, that is, Fitz-Acory, son to the foresaid Abbats whole
brother, and he made him Knight, and gave unto him the Seigniorie of Dengle,
and many other Lordships. Item, he brought Monks with him out of the same
Monastery, and gave unto them many fermes, and the Cell called Fourie, in
regard of charity, thankfulness, and counsel: and Hugh Lacie Earl of Ulster
made a Cell for Monks, and endowed them in Ulster in a place called..... But
John King of England having taken many pledges and hostages as well of English
as of Irish, and hanged a number of malefactors upon Jebbits, and settled the
State of the land, returned into England the same year that he

MCCXI. Sir Richard Tuit by the fall of a tower at Alone was crushed and
whindred to death. This Richard was founder of the Monastery de Grenard.

MCCXII. The Abbey of Grenard was founded. In the same year died John Common
Archbishop of Dublin, and was buried within the quire of the Church of the

MCCXIII. William Petit and Petre Messet departed this life. This Petre Messet
was Baron of Luyn hard by Trym; but because he died without heir male, the
inheritance

MCCXIX. The City of Damieta, in the Nones of September was about the still
time of midnight miraculously won, so that in the forcing and taking thereof
there was not one Christian lost his life. In the same year died William
Mareshal the elder, Earl Mareshall and of Pembroch, who begat on the daughter
of Richard Strongbow Earl of Stroghul five sons; the name of the first son
was William, the named of the second Walter, the name of the third Gilbert, the
name of the fourth Anselme, the name of the fifth Richard, who was slain in
the war of This place is corrupted in the copy.
father of John Bigod, who was the son of the Lady Bertha Furnival: also
Isabell Lacie, wife to Lord John Fitz-Gefferey: and when Hugh Bigod Earl of
Norfolk was dead, she bare John de G^aren Earl of Surrey, and his sister
Isabell Albeney Countess of Arundell. Gilbert Clare Earl

The Lord Guarin Mont Chensey espoused Johan Mareschall the fourth sister, of
whom came Johan Valens. Sibyll the Countess of Ferrers, to wit the fourth, had
issue five daughters: the first Agnes Vescie, mother to the Lord John, and the
Lord

MCCXX. The translation of St. Thomas of Canterbury. In the same year died
the Lord Meiler Fitz Henry, founder of the house of Connall, who is buried in
the Chapter house of the same house.

MCCXXIV. The Castle of Bedford was besieged, and the Castle of Trim in

MCCXXV. Roger Pippard died. And Anno MCCXXVIII. died William Pippard sometime
Lord of the Salmons-leap. There departed likewise Henry Londres, alias Scorch
villeyn Archbishop of Dublin, and is interred in the Church of the Holy
Trinity at Dublin.

MCCXXX. Henry King of England gave unto Hubert Burk the Justiceship of
Ireland, and a third penny of rent, and made him Earl of Kent. And afterward
the same

MCCXXXI. William Mareschall the younger, Earl Mareshall and of Pembroke died,
who is buried within the Quire of the Friars Preachers in Kilkenny.

MCCXXXIV. Richard Earl Mareshall and of Pembroke or Stroghull, on the first
day before the Ides of April was wounded in battle, upon the plain of
Kildare; and some few days after died in Kilkenny, and there, hard by his
natural whole brother, to wit, William, lies buried within the Quire of
Friars Preachers, of whom it is thus written: Cujus sub fossa Kilkenia continet
ossa.
Whose bones bestowed in grave so deep,
Kilkenny town does safely keep.


MCCXI. Walter Lacie Lord of Meth departed this life in England, leaving behind
him two daughters his heirs: whereof Sir Theobald Verdon married the first,
and Geffery Genevile espoused the second.

The whole year out of an old fragment.
MCCXLII. The Castle of Slegah was built by Morice Fitzgerald Justice of
Ireland. King Edward the first marched into Wales with a great army, and sent
to the said Justice that he would come to him with some forces out of Ireland,
who accordingly Fin Northward, and among them in the rescuing of a prey there
were slain Atarmanudaboge, Sir W. Brit Sherif of Conacth Kineoil Conail to
Rory O-Coner for that time.

There was another expedition also by the said Justice into Tirconnell, and
great spoils made, and O-Canamayu was expelled out of Kenoilgain, and he left
the territory of Kenail Conail with Gorry Mac-Donald O-Donnel.

There was another expedition also by the said Justice into Tireogaine against
O-Neale, but he gave pledges for the preservation of his country.

There was another expedition by the said Justice in Leinster against the
Irishry, whom he pitifully outraged, and spoiled their land.

In another expedition also the said Justice destroyed Kenoilgain, and all
Ulster in despite O-Neale, tarrying three nights at Tullaghoge.

MCCXLIII. Hugh Lacy Earl of Ulster died, and is buried at Crag-fergous in the
covent of the Friars Minours, leaving a daughter his heir, whom Walter Burk,
who was Earl of Ulster, espoused. In the same year died Lord Girald
Fitz-Moris, and Richard Burk.



MCCXLVIII. Sir John Fitz-Gefferey knight came Lord Justice into Ireland.

MCCL. Lewis King of France and William Long Espee, with many other, are taken
prisoners by the Saracens. In Ireland Maccanewey, a son of Beliol, was slain
in Leys, as he well deserved.

MCCLI. The Lord Henry Lacie was borne. Likewise upon Christmas day, Alexander
King of Scotland, a child eleven years old, espoused at York Margaret the
King of Englands daughter.

MCCLV. Alan de la Zouch is made Lord Justice, and comes into Ireland.

Moris, or Maurice Fitzgerald deceaseth.

MCCLIX. Stephen Long Espee comes Lord Justice of Ireland. The Green castle
in Ulster is thrown down. Likewise William Dene is made Lord Justice of
Ireland.

MCCLXI. The Lord John Fitz-Thomas, and the Lord Maurice his son are slain in
Desmund by Mac-Karthy: likewise William Dene Lord Justice of Ireland dejected,
after whom succeeded in the same year Sir Richard Capell.

MCCLXII. Richard Clare Earl of Gloucester died: Item, Martin Maundevile left
this life the morrow after Saint Bennets day.

MCCLXIV. Maurice Fitz Gerald, and Maurice Fitz Maurice took prisoners Rich.
the Lord Theobald Botiller, and the Lord John Cogan at Tristel-Dermot.

MCCLXVII. David Barrie is made Lord Justice of Ireland.

MCCLXVIII. Comin Maurice Fitz Maurice is drowned. Item, Lord Robert Ufford is
made Lord Justice of Ireland.

MCCLXIX. The castle of Roscomon is founded. Richard of Excester is made Lord
Justice.

MCCLXX. The Lord James Audeley came Lord Justice into Ireland.

MCCLXXI. Henry the Kings son of Almain is slain in the Court of Rome. The
same year reigned the plague, famine, and the sword, and most in Meth. Item,
Nicholas de Verdon and his brother John are slain. Walter Burk or de Burgo
Earl

MCCLXXII. The Lord James Audeley Justice of Ireland was killed with a fall
from his horse in Twomond: after whom succeeded Lord Maurice Fitz-Maurice in
the office of chief Justice.

MCCLXXIII. The Lord Geffrey Genevile returned out of the holy land, and is
made Justice of Ireland.

MCCLXXIV. Edward the son of King Henry, by the hands of Robert Kelwarby a
Friar of the order of Preaching Friars, and Archbishop of Canterbury, upon S.
Magnus the Martyrs day, in the Church of Westminster was anointed K. of
England, and crowned in the presence of the Lords and Nobles of all England;
whose protestation Edward son and heir to King Henry, profess, protest, and
promise before God and his Angels, from this time forward to keep without
respect the law, justice, and peace unto the holy Church of God, and the people
subject unto me, so far forth as we can devise, by the counsel of our liege
and loiall ministers: also to exhibit condign and canonical honor unto the
Bishops of Gods Church, to preserve inviolably whatsoever has bin bestowed by
Emperors and Kings upon the Church committed unto them, and to yield due honor
unto Abbats and the Lords vessels, according to the advice of our lieges, etc.
So help me God, and the holy Gospels of the Lord. In the same year died the
Lord John Verdon; likewise the Lord Thomas Clare came into Ireland. Item,
William Fitz-Roger, Prior of the Hospitalers, with

MCCLXXV. The castle of Roscoman is erected again. In the same year Moydagh
was taken prisoner at Norragh by Sir Walter Faunte.

MCCLXXVI. Robert Ufford is made Lord Justice of Ireland the second time:
Geffrey Genevile gave place, and departed.

MCCLXXVII. O-Brene is slain.

MCCLXXVIII. The Lord David Barry died. Likewise the Lord John Cogan.

MCCLXXIX. The Lord Robert Ufford entered into England, and appointed in his
room Friar Robert Fulborne Bishop of Waterford, in whose time the money was
changed, likewise the Round table was holden at Kenilworth by the Lord Roger
Mortimer.

MCCLXXX. Robert Ufford returned out of England, Lord Justice as before. Also
the wife of Robert Ufford deceased.

MCCLXXXI. Adam Cusack the younger slew William Barret, and many others in
Connaght. Item, Friar Stephen Fulborne is made Justice of Ireland. Item, the
Lord Robert Ufford returned into England.

MCCLXXXII. Moritagh and Art Mac-Murgh his brother are slain at Arclowe, on
the Even of Saint Marie Maudlen. Likewise the Lord Roger Mortimer died.

MCCLXXXIII. The city of Dublin was in part burnt, and the Belfray of Saint
Trinity Church in Dublin, the third day before the Nones of Januarie.

MCCLXXXIIII. The castle of Ley was taken and burnt by the Potentates or Lords
of Offaly, the morrow after Saint Barnabe the Apostle his day. Alphonsus the
Kings son twelve years old, changed his life.

MCCLXXXV. The Lord Theobald Botiller died the sixth day before the Kalends of
October in the castle of Arclowe, and was buried there in the covent of the
Friars preachers. Item, Girald Fitz-Maurice was taken prisoner by his own Irish
in Offalie, Richard Petit and Saint- Doget, with many other: and a great
overthrow was given at Rathode with much slaughter.

MCCLXXXVI. Norragh and Arstoll, with other towns, were one after another
continually burnt by Philip Stanton, the 16. day before the Calends of
December. In these days Alianor Queen of England, mother of King Edward, took
the mantle and the ring at Ambresburie, upon the day of Saint Thomas his
translation, having her dower in the kingdom of England confirmed by the Pope
to be possessed for ever. Likewise Calwagh is taken prisoner at Kildare. The
Lord Thomas Clare departed this life.

MCCLXXXVII. Stephen Fulborn, Archbishop of Tuam died: after whom there
succeeded Dublin. In the same year the King of Hungary forsaking the Christian
faith, became an Apostata: and when he had called fraudulently, as it were to
a Parliament, the mightier potentates of his land, Miramomelius a puissant
Saracene came upon them with 20000. soldiers, carrying away with him the King,
with all the Christians there assembled on the even of Saint John Baptists day:
as the Christians therefore journied, the weather that was clear and fair
turned to be cloudie, and suddenly a tempest of hail killed many thousands of
the Infidels together: The Christians returned to their own homes, and the
Apostata King alone went with the Saracenes. The Hungarians therefore crowning
his son King, continued in the Catholic

MCCLXXXIX. Tripolis a famous city was laid even with the ground, not without
much effusion of Christian blood, and that by the Sultan of Babylon: who
commanded the images of the Saints to be drawn and dragged at horses tails,
in contempt of the name of Christ, through the city newly destroyed.

MCCXC.

Inclyta Stirps Regis Sponsis datur ordine legis.
In lawful guise (by hand and ring)
Espoused is the Kings offspring.
The Lord Gilbert Clare took to wife the Lady Joan, a daughter of the Lord
King Edward, in the Abbey or Covent Church of Westminster; and the marriage was
Martins day. Item, O Molaghelin King of Meth is slain.

Item, the Lady Eleanor, sometime Queen of England and mother of King Edward,
died in the feast of St. John Baptist, who, in the religious habit which she
desired, led a laudable life for the space of four years, eleven months, and
six days, within the Abbey of Ambresby, where she was a professed Nun. Item,
there resounded certain rumors in the ears of the Lord Pope Martin, on the
even of St. Mary Maudlen, as touching the City Acon Cypres and Otes Grandison,
with their companies, pitifully escaped by a ship. Item, granted there was unto
the Lord Edward King of England by the Lord Pope Martin, the tenth part of all
the profits of Ecclesiastical benefices for seven years in Ireland, toward
the relief Item, the eldest son of the Earl of Clare was borne.

MCCXCII. Edward King of England eftsoons entered Scotland, and was elected
King of Scotland. Lord John Balliol of Galwey obtained the whole kingdom of
Scotland in right of inheritance, and did homage unto the Lord Edward King of
England at New Castle upon Tine on S. Stephens day. Florentius Earl of
Holland, Robert Brus Earl of Carrick, John Hastings, John Common, Patrick
Dunbar, John Vescie, Nicolas Souls, and William Roos, who all of them in that
kingdom submitted themselves to the judgment of the Lord King Edward.

Item, a fifteen of all secular men's goods in Ireland was granted unto the
sovereign Lord King of England, the same to be collected at the feast of S.
Michael. Item, Sir Peter Genevile Knight died. Item, Rice ap Meredyke was
brought to York, and there at horses tails drawn, etc.

MCCXCIII. A general and open war there was at sea against the Normans. Item,
no small number of the Normans by fight at sea was slain by the Barons of the
Ports of England, and other their co-adjutors, between Easter and Whitsuntide.
For which cause there arose war between England and France: whereupon Philip
King of France directed his letters of credence unto the King of England, that
he should make personal appearance at his Parliament, to answer unto Questions
which the same King would propose unto him: whose mandate in this behalf being
not fulfilled, straightwaies the King of France declaring by the counsel of
the French the King of England Item, Gilbert Clare Earl of Gloucester entered
with his wife into Ireland about the feast of S. Luke.

MCCXCIV. William Montefort in the Kings counsel holden at Westminster before
the King, died suddenly: which William was the Dean of S. Paul's in London, in
whose mouth the Prelates, Bishops, and Clergy putting their words which he was
to utter, and doubting how much the King affected and desired to have of every
one of them, and willing by him to be certified, in whom also the King reposed
most trust, being returned to the King, and making have before the King to
deliver expressly a speech that he had conceived, became speechless on a
sudden, and fell down to the ground, and was carried forth by the Kings
servants in their arms in piteous manner. In regard Tenths of Ecclesiastical
benefices should be paid to the King, and another author and procurer of a
scrutinie made into the fold and flock of Christ, as also of a contribution
granted afterward to the King crying against William. Item, the City of
Bordeaux with the land of Gascoigne adjoining, was occupied or held by the
ministers of the King of France conditionally: but unjustly and perfidiously
detained by the King Dublin and certain other Lords of the Nobility were sent
into Almaine to the King thereof: and after they had their dispatch and answer
in Tordran, the Lord Archbishop being returned into England, ended his life
upon S. Leodegaries day. The bones of which John Sampford were enterred in the
Church of Saint Patrick in Dublin, the tenth day before the Calends of March.

The same year there arose debate between Lord William Vescy, Lord Justice of
Ireland for the time being, and the Lord John Fitz-Thomas: and the said Lord
Williliam Vescy crossed the seas into England, and left Sir William Hay in his
stead Justice Vescy fled into France, and would not fight. Then the King of
England gave all the Seigniories and Lordships which were the Lord William
Vescies unto Sir John Fitz-Thomas, to wit, Kildare, Rathemgan, and many others.

The same year Gilbert Clare Earl of Gloucester returned out of Ireland into
England: likewise Richard Earl of Ulster soon after the feast of S. Nicholas
was ta^en prisoner by Sir John Fitz-Thomas, and kept in ward within the Castle
of Ley, unto the feast of Saint Gregory the Pope: whose enlargement was then
made by the counsel of the Lord the King in a Parliament at Kilkenny: for the
taking of whom, John Fitz-Thomas gave all his lands, to wit, Slygah with the
pertenances, which he had in Connaght.

Item, the Castle of Kildare was won. Kildare and the country round about it is
spoiled by the English and Irish. Caluagh burnt all the Rolls and Tallies of
the said Earl. Great dearth and pestilence there was throughout Ireland this
year, and the two next ensuing. Item, Lord William Odyngzele is made Justice
of Ireland.

MCCXCV. Edward King of England built the Castle de Bello-Marisco, that is,
Beaumaris in Venedocia, which is called mother of Cambria, and of the common
sort Anglesey: entering unto the said Anglesey straight after Easter, and
subduing the Venodotes, that is, the able men of Anglesey under his dominion:
and soon after this Margaret, Madock at that time the elect Prince of Wales,
submitting himself to the Kings grace and favor, was brought by John
Haverings to London, and there shut up prisoner in the tower, expecting the
Kings grace and benevolence. This year died Lord William Odingzele Justice of
Ireland, the morrow after S. Mary of Egypt: whom succeeded Sir Thomas
Fitz-Maurice in the Justiceship.

Item, about the same time the Irish of Leinster wasted Leinster, burning
New Castle with other towns. Item, Thomas Torbevile a traitor of the King and
the realm being convicted, was drawn through the midst of London lying along
prostrate, guarded with four tormentors disguised under vizzards, taunting and
reviling him,

Item, about the same time the Scots having broken the bond of peace, which
they had covenanted with the Lord Edward King of England, made a new league
with the King of France: and conspiring together, rose up in arms against
their own sovereign Lord and King John Balliol, and enclosed him within the
John Wogan was made Justice of Thomas Fitz-Maurice gave place unto him. Item,
the said John Wogan Justice of Ireland made peace and truce to last for two
years between the Earl of Ulster, and John Fitz-Thomas, and the Geraldines.
Item, in these days about the feast of Christ his Nativitie, Gilbert Clare
Earl of Gloucester finished this life. Item, the King of England sends his
brother Edmund with an army into Gascoigne.

MCCXCVI. The Lord Edward King of England the third day before the Calends of
April, to wit, upon Friday, that fell out then to be in Easter week, won
Berwicke, wherein were slain about 7000. Scots, and of the English one only
Knight, to wit, Sir Richard Cornwall, with seven footmen and no more. Item,
Dunbar, and took prisoners of the enemies about forty men alive, who all
submitted themselves to the Kings grace and mercy, having before defeated the
whole army of the Scots, that is to say, slain seven hundred men of arms:
neither were there slain of the English men in that service, as well of
horsemen as of footmen, but... footmen only.

Item, upon the day of Saint John before Port-Latin, no small number of
Welshmen, even about fifteen thousand, by commandment of the King went into
Scotland to invade and conquer it. And the same time the great Lords of
Ireland, to wit, John Wogan Justice of Ireland, Richard Bourk Earl of Ulster,
Theobald Butler, John Fitz-Thomas, with others, came to aid, and sailed over
sea into Scotland. The King of England also entertaining them upon the third
day before the Ides of May, to wit, on Whitsunday, made a great and solemn
feast in the Castle of Rokesburgh to them and other Knights of England. Item,
upon the next Wednesday before the feast of Saint Barnabe the Apostle he
entered the town of Ede^burgh, and won the Castle before the feast of Saint
John Baptist: and shortly after, even in the same summer, were all the Castles
within the compass of Scotland rendered up into his hands. Item, the same Lord
John Balliol King of Scotland came, though unwilling, upon the Sunday next
after the feast of the translation of Saint Thomas the Archbishop, to the King
of England, with Earls, Bishops, and a great number

Item, Edmund the King of Englands brother died in Gascoigne.

MCCXCVII. Lord Edward King of England sailed over into Flanders with a power
of armed men, against the King of France for the war that was raised between
them: where after great expenses and much altercation, a certain form of
peace was concluded between them, with this condition, that they should submit
themselves unto the ordinance of the Lord the Pope.

as Barons against the King of England. And there fell discord between the
King of Lewis a Friar minor son of the King of Sicily, and Archbishop of
Colein died. Also the son and heir of the King de Maliagro, that is, of the
Majoricke Islands, instituted the order of the Friars minors, at the information
of Saint Lewis, who said, Go and do so. Item, in Ireland, Leghlin, with other
towns, was burnt by the Irish of Slemergi.

Item, Calwagh O-Hanlan, and Yneg Mac-Mahon are slain in Urgale.

MCCXCVIII. Pope Boniface the fourth, the morrow after the Feast of the
Apostles Peter and Paul, after all tumults were appeased, ordained and
confirmed a Edward King of England set forth with an army again into
Scotland, for to subdue the Scots under his dominion. Item, there were slain
in the same expedition, about the feast of Saint Marie Maudlen, many thousands
of the Scots at Fawkirk. The sun the same day appeared as red as blood over
all Ireland, so long as the battle continued at Fawkirke aforesaid. Item,
about the same time the Lord King of England feoffed his Knights in the
Earldomes and Baronies of the Scots that were slain. More, in Ireland peace
and concord was concluded between the Earl of Ulster, and Lord John
Fitz-Thomas, about the feast of the Apostles Simon and Jude. Also on the morrow
after the feast of the 7. Saints sleepers, Thomas Fitz-Maurice Knight, and Sir
Robert Bigod, sometime Lord chief Justice of the Bench. Item, in the City
Artha, as also in Reathe in the parts of Italy, whiles Pope Boniface abode
there at the same time there happened so great an Earthquake, that towers and
palaces fell down to the ground. The Pope also with his Cardinals fled from
the City much affrighted.

Item, upon the feast of the Epiphany, that is, Twelfe day, there was an
earthquake, though not so violent, in England from Canterbury as far as to
Hampton.

MCCXCIX. Lord Theobald Botiller the younger departed this life in the Manor
de the second day before the Ides of May: whose corpse was conveied toward
Weydeney, that is, Weney in the county of Limeric the sixth day before the
Calends of June.

Item, Edward King of England took to wife the Lady Margaret, sister to the
noble King of France, in the Church of the holy Trinity in Canterbury, about
the feast of the holy Trinity. Item, the Sultan of Babylon was defeated with a
great army of Saracens, by Cassian King of the Tartars.

MCCXCIX. The day after the feast of the Purification of the blessed Virgin
Marie, there was an infinite number of the Saracens horsemen slain, besides
the footmen, who were likewise innumerable. Item, in the same year there was a
battle or fight

MCCC. The Pollard money is forbidden in England and Ireland. Also in the
Autumn Edward King of England entered Scotland with a power of armed men: but
at the commandment of Pope Boniface he was stayed, and he sent solemn
messengers unto the Court (of Rome) excusing himself of doing any injury.
Item, Thomas the Kings son of England was the last day of May born at
Brotherton, of Margaret sister to the King of France. Item, Edward Earl of
Cornwall died without leaving

MCCCI. Edward King of England entered into Scotland with an army: unto whom
failed over sea Sir John Wogan Justice of Ireland, and Sir John Fitz-Thomas,
Peter Bermingham, and many others, to aid the King of England. Also a great
part of the City Dublin was burnt, together with the Church of Saint Warburga,
on Columbs day at night. More, Sir Geffrey Genevil espoused the daughter of Sir
John Montefort: and Sir John Mortimer espoused the daughter and heir of Sir
Peter Genevil. And the Lord Theobald Verdon espoused the daughter of the Lord
Roger Mortimer. At the same time the men of Leinster made war in winter,
burning the town of Wykynlo and Rathdon, with others: but they escaped not
unpunished: because the more part of their sustenance was burnt up, and their
cattle lost by depredation: and the same Irish had been utterly almost
consumed, but that the seditious dissension of certain Englishmen was an
hinderance thereto. Item, a defeature and slaughter was made by the Toolans,
upon a small company assembled of the Brenies, in which were slain almost
three hundred robbers. Item, Walter Power wasted a great part of Mounster,
burning many ferme houses.

MCCCII. There died the lady Margaret, wife to Sir John Wogan Justice of
Ireland, the third day before the Ides of April: and in the week following Maud
Lacy, wife to Sir Geffery Genevil died: also Edward Botiller recovered the
manor de Happily Holl^wood.
S. Bosco, with the pertenances, from Sir Richard Ferenges Archbishop of
Dublin, by a concord made between them in the Kings bench, after the feast of
S. Hilarie.

Item, the Flemings gave an overthrow at Courteray in Flanders unto the army of
the French, the Wednesday after the feast of the Translation of S. Thomas,
wherein were slain the Earl of Arthois, the Earl of Aumarle, the Earl of
Hue, Ralph Constable of France, Guy Nevil Marshall of France, the son of the
Earl of Hennaund, Godfrey Brabant with his son, William Fenys and his son,
James S. Paul lost his hand, and forty Baronets lost their lives that day,
with Knights, Esquires, and others sans number.

Item, the tenths of all Ecclesiastical benefices in England and Ireland were
exacted by Boniface the Pope for 3. years, as a Subsidy to the Church of Rome
against the King of Aragon. Also upon the day of the Circumcision Sir Hugh
Lacie raised booties from Hugh Vernail. In the same year Robert Brus, then
Earl of Carrick, espoused the daughter of Sir Richard Bourk Earl of Ulster.
Item, Edward Botiller espoused the daughter of Sir John Fitz-Thomas: also the
City of Bordeaux, with other Cities Edward King of England, were restored unto
him again upon St. Andrews even, by the industry of the L. Hastings.

MCCCIII. The Earl of Ulster, to wit, Richard Bourk, and Sir Eustace Pover,
entered Scotland with a puissant army: but after that the Earl himself had
first made thirty three Knights in the Castle of Dublin, he passed over into
Scotland to aid the King of England.

Item, Gerald the son and heir of Sir John Fitz-Thomas departed out of this
world. In the same year Pope Boniface excommunicated the King and Queen of
France and their children. He renewed also all the privileges granted at any
time Ulster deceased. Also Wulfrane Wellesly and Sir Robert Percivell were
slain the 11. day before the Calends of November.

MCCCIIII. A great part of Dublin was burnt, to wit, the Bridge street, with a
good part of the Key, and the Church of the Friars Preachers, and the Church of
the Monks, with no small part of the Monastery, about the Ides of June, to
wit, on the Feast day of S. Medard. Also the first stone of the Friars
Preachers Quire in Dublin was laid by Eustace Lord Pover on the Feast of S.
Agatha Virgin.

Likewise after the Feast of the Purification of the blessed Virgin Marie, the
King Flanders again in proper person, with a puissant army. Then bare he
himself bravely in the war, and fought manfully so long, until two or three
horses of service were slain under him: but at last he lost his cap that under
his helmet was put upon his head; which the Flemings taking up carried by way
of scornful derision upon a lance as a banner, and in all the famous Faires of
Flanders, put it out at the high window of some place or stately house, like
the sign of an Inn or

MCCCV. Jordan Common with his accomplices slew Moritagh O-Conghir King of
Offalie, and Calwagh his whole brother, and certain others in the Court of Sir
Piers Brymgeham at Carrick in Carbrey: likewise Sir Gilbert Sutton Seneschal of
Weisford was slain by the Irish near unto a village ( or House) of Haymund
Grace, which Haymund verily in the said skirmish manfully carried himself, but
stoutly escaped.

Item, in Scotland the Lord Robert Brus Earl of Carricke, forgetting his oath
made to the King of England, slew Sir John Read Common within the cloisture of
the Friars Minors of Dunfrese, and soon after caused himself to be crowned
King of Andrews and of Glasco, in the town of Scone, to the confusion of
himself and of many others.

MCCCVI. A great discomfiture was made in Offaly, near unto the Castle of
Gesbill, on the Ides of April, upon O-Conghor by O-Dympcies, in which was
slain O-Dympcey Leader of the Regans, with a great train accompanying him.
Also O-Brene King of Towmond died. Item, Donald Oge Mac Carthy slew Donald
Ruff, that is, the Red King of Desmund. Item, a lamentable defeature fell upon
the part of Piers Brymegham the fourth day before the Calends of May, in the
Marches of Meth. Item, Balymore in Leinster was burnt by the Irish, where at
the same time Henry Calfe was slain: and there arose war between the English
and the Irish in Leinster: for Leinster: in which expedition Sir Tho. Mandevil
Knight, and a brave warrior, had a great conflict with the Irish, near to
Clenfell; in which conflict he behaved himself valiantly, until his horse of
service was slain, and won much praise and honor by saving many a man, and
himself also. Item, M. Thomas Cantock Chancellor of Ireland was consecrated
Bishop of Ymelasen, in the Church of the holy Trinity at Dublin with great
honor: at whose consecration were present the Elders of all Ireland, where
there was so sumptuous and so great a feast made, first unto the rich, and
afterward to the poor, as the like had never been heard of before in Ireland.
Item, Richard Feringes Archbishop of Dublindied in the Vigile Haverings, who
occupied the Archbishopric almost five years by Apostolical dispensation.
Who also resigned up his Archbishopric: after whom succeeded John Leth.

The occasion and cause of his giving over (as the Archdeacon of Dublin of
good memory, his Nephew has reported) was this, for that one night he
dreamed, that a certain Monster heavier than the whole world stood eminently
aloft upon his breast: from the weight whereof he chose rather to be delivered,
than alone to have all the goods of the world: but when he wakened he thought
with himself, this was nothing else but the Church of Dublin, the fruits
whereof he received, and took no pains for the same. As soon as he could
therefore

Item, Edward King of England in the feast of Pentecost, that is, Whitsontide,
made Edward his son Knight in London; at which feast were dubbed about 400.
Knights, and the said Edward of Caernarvan newly knighted, made threescore
Knights of those abovesaid, and kept his feast in London at the New Temple, and
his father gave unto him the Duchy of Aquitaine.

Item, the same year in the feast of Saint Potentiana, the Bishop of
Winchester, John Read Common. In the same year, upon S. Boniface his day,
Aumarde Valence Earl of Pembroch, and Lord Guy Earl............ slew many
Scots, and the Robert Brus was defeated without the town of S. John's. And the
same year about the feast of the Nativitie of St. John Baptist, King Edward
went toward Scotland by water from Newarke to Lincoln.

Item, the same year the Earl of Asceles, and the Lord Simon Freysell, and
the Countess of Carricke, the pretended Queen of Scotland, daughter of the
Earl of Ulster, were taken prisoners. The Earl of Asceles and the Lord Simon
Freysell were first torn and mangled. As for the Countess, she remained with
the King in great honor, but the rest died miserably in Scotland.

Item, about the feast of the Purification of the blessed Virgin Marie, two
brethren

Item, upon St. Patricks day there was taken prisoner in Ireland Mac-Nochi with
his two sons, near unto New castle, by Thomas Sueterby: and there Lorran
Oboni a most strong thief was beheaded.

MCCCVII. The third day preceding the Calends of April, was Marcord Ballagh
beheaded near unto Marton by Sir David Caunton a doughtie Knight: and soon
after was Adam Dan slain.

Also a defeature and bloody slaughter fell upon the English in Connaght by
Oscheles, Philip and Jacob the Apostles day.

Item, the preading Brigants of Offaly pulled down the Castle of Cashill, and
upon the Vigill of the translation of Saint Thomas they burnt the town of Ly,
and besieged the Castle: but soon after they were removed by John Fitz-Thomas,
and Edward Botiller.

Item, Edward King of England departed this life: after whom succeeded in the
kingdom his son Edward, who most solemnly buried his father at Westminster,
with great reverence and honor.

Item, the Lord Edward the younger took to wife the Lady Isabel, daughter of
the French King, in St. Mary's Church at Bologne: and shortly after they were
both

Item, the Templars in the parts beyond sea, being condemned (as it was said)
of a certain heresy, were apprehended and imprisoned by the Popes Mandat. In
England likewise they were all taken the morrow after the feast of the
Epiphany. Also in Ireland they were arrested the morrow after the feast of the
Purification and laid up in prison.

MCCCVIII. The second day before the Ides of April died Sir Peter or Piers
Bermingham, a noble vanquisher of the Irish.

Item, on the fourth day before the Ides of May was burnt the Castle of Kenir,
and certain warders in it slain, by William Mac-Balthor, and Cnygnismi
Othothiles,

More, on the sixth day preceding the Ides of June, Lord John Wogan Justice of
Ireland was defeated with his army near Glyndelory; where were slain John
called Hogelyn, John Northon, John Breton, with many other. Also, the sixteenth
day going before the Calends of July, were burnt Dolovan, Tobyr, and other
towns and villages bordering upon them, by the foresaid malefactors.

Item, in England shortly after was holden a great Parliament at London;
wherein arose a dissension, and in manner a mortal conflict between the King
and the Barons, occasioned by Piers Gaveston, who was banished out of the
kingdom of England the morrow after the feast of Saint John Baptist his
Nativitie: and he passed over

Moreover, William Mac-Baltor, a strong thief and an Incendiarie, was
condemned, and had judgment in the Court of the Lord the King in Dublin before
the chief Justice Lord John Wogan, upon the twelfth day preceding the Calends
of September: and was drawn at horses tails unto the gallows, and there
hanged according

Item, in the same year there was erected a certain cisterne of marble, to
receive water from the conduict head, in the City of Dublin, such an one as
never was there before, by the dispose and providence of Master John Decer then
Mayor of the City of Dublin, who of his own money defraied the charges for
the building thereof: and the same John a little before the time caused a
certain bridge to be made beyond the river Aven-Liffy, near unto the Priorie
of St. Wolstan: also the Chapel of Saint Ma^ie to the Friars Minours, and
there lies he buried: the Chapel likewise of Saint Marie, to the Hospital
of Saint John's in Dublin, etc.

Item, the same John Decer was very beneficial to the Covent of the Friars
Preachers in Dublin: to wit, in making one Column of stone in the Church, and
giving one great broad altar-stone, with the ornaments thereto belonging.

More, upon the sixth day of the week he entertained the Friars, and tabled
them at his own charges (thus say Elders to the younger) in regard of charity.

More, in the Autumn, Lord John Wogan sailed over the sea unto the Parliament
of England: in whose place the Lord William Burke was made Custos of Ireland.

Item, the same year, in the Vigill of Simon and Jude the Apostles day, the
Lord Roger Mortimer arrived in Ireland with his wedded wife, the right heir of
Meth, the daughter of the Lord Peter, son of Sir Gefferie Genevil: they
entered I say into Ireland, Meth, Sir Gefferie Genevil yielding unto them, and
entering into the order of the Friars Preachers at Trym, the morrow after the
day of St. Edward the Archbishop.

Also, Dermot Odympoy was slain at Tully by the servants of Sir Peter or Piers
Gaveston.

More, Richard Burgo or Burk Earl of Ulster kept a great feast at Whitsontide
in Trym, and dubbed Walter Lacie and Hugh Lacie Knights. And on the even of the
Assumption, the Earl of Ulster came against Piers Gaveston Earl of Cornwall,
at Tradag. And at the same time he went back again, and took his passage
into Scotland.

Item, in the same year Maud the Earl of Ulsters daughter sailed over into
England, to contract marriage with the Earl of Gloucester: and soon after
within one month the Earl and she espoused one the other.

Also, Maurice Caunton slew Richard Talon: and the Roches killed the foresaid
Maurice.

Item, Sir David Caunton is hanged at Dublin.

Item, Odo the son of Catholl O-Conghir slew Odo O-Conghir King of Connaght.

Item, Athi is burnt by the Irish.

MCCCIX. Piers Gaveston subdued the O-Brynnes, Irishmen, and re-edified the

The same year Lord Piers Gaveston passed the seas over into England on the
Vigil of S. John Baptists Nativitie.

Item, the wife of the Earl of Ulsters son, daughter unto the Earl of
Gloucester, upon the 15. day of October arrived in Ireland.

Also on Christmas even the Earl of Ulster returned out of England, and landed
at the Port of Tradagh.

More, on the feast of the purification of the blessed Virgin Mary, Sir John
Bonevile Arstoll was slain by Sir Arnold Pover and his accomplices, and buried at
Athy in the Church of the Friars Preachers.

Item, a Parliament was held at Kilkenny, in the Outas of the purification of
the blessed Virgin Mary, by the Earl of Ulster, and John Wogan Lord Justice of
Ireland, and other Lords: wherein was appeased great discord risen between
certain Lords of Ireland: and many Provisoes in manner of Statutes were
ordained, commodious and profitable to the land of Ireland if they had been
observed.

Item, shortly after that time returned Sir Edmund Botiller out of England, who
there at London was before Knighted.

Item, there crossed the seas into England out of Ireland, the Earl of Ulster,
Roger Mortimer, and Sir John Fitz-Thomas.

Item, Sir Theohald Verdon died."

MCCCX. King Edward and Sir Piers Gaveston took their journey toward Scotland,
to fight against Robert Bru^.



Also the Bakers of Dublin for their false weight of bread, suffered a new
kind of torment, which was never seen there before: for that on S. Sampson the
Bishops day they were drawn upon hurdles through the streets of the City at
horse-tailes.

More, in the Abbey of S. Thomas Martyr at Dublin died Sir Neile Bruin Knight,
Escheator to the Lord the King in Ireland: whose body was committed to the
earth at the Friars minors, with so great a pomp of tapers and wax lights, as
the like was never seen before in Ireland.

The same year a Parliament was holden at Kildare, where Sir Arnold Pover was
Bonevile, because he had done this deed in his own defense.

Likewise, on S. Patricks day, by assent of the Chapter, M. Alexander Bickenore
was elected Archbishop of Dublin.

Item, the Lord Roger Mortimer returned into Ireland within the Octaves of the
Nativitie of the blessed Virgin Marie.

Also the same year the Lord Henry Lacie Earl of Lincoln died."

MCCCXI. In Thomond at Bonnorathie there was a wonderful and miraculous
discomfiture given by the Lord Richard Clare unto the side of the Earl of
Ulster: Which Lord Richard aforesaid took prisoner in the field the Lord
William Burke, Lacie, and many others. In which battle verily there were
slain a great number as well of the English as the Irish, the 13. day before
the Galends of June.

Item, Taslagard and Rathcante were invaded by the robbers, to wit, the
O-Brines and O-Tothiles the morrow after the Nativitie of S. John Baptist.
Whereupon soon after in Autumn, there was a great army assembled in Leinster,
to make head and fight against the said robbers, lurking in Glindelory and in
other places full of woods.

Also, a Parliament was holden at London in August, between the King and the
Barons, to treat about the State of the kingdom, and of the Kings household,
according

Item, on the second day before the Ides of November, the Lord Richard Clare
slew six hundred of Galegalaghes.

More, on All Saints day next going before, Piers Gaveston was banished the
Realm of England by the Earls and Barons: and many good Statutes necessary
for the commonwealth were by the same Lords made. Which Piers abjured the
Realm of England about the Feast of All Saints; and entered into Flanders:
four months after the said Piers returned presently upon the Epiphanie, and
by stealth entered into England, keeping close unto the Kings side, so that the
Barons could not

Item, Sir John Cogan, Sir Walter Faunt, and Sir John Fitz-Rerie Knights died,

Item, John Mac-Goghedan is slain by O-molmoy.

Item, William Roch died at Dublin with the shot of an arrow by an Irish
mountainer.

"Item, Sir Eustace Power Knight died.

Item, in the Vigill of Saint Peter's Chair began a riot in Urgaly by Robert
Verdon.

"Item, Donat O-Brene is traitorously slain by his own men in Tothomon.

MCCCXII. Sir Peter or Piers Gaveston entered the castle of Scardeburgh,
resisting Aumare Valence, who had besieged him, yet upon certain conditions
named before hand: who brought him toward London. But by the way he was taken
prisoner at Dedington by the Earl of Warwick, and brought to Warwick:
whereupon, after counsel taken by the Earls and Barons, he lost his head the
thirteenth day before the Calends of July: whose body lies buried in the
coventuall Church of the Friars Preachers at Langley.

Item, John Wogan Lord Justice of Ireland led forth an army, to bridle the
malice of Robert Verdon and his abettors: which was miserably defeated the
sixth day before the Ides of July: in which fight were slain Nicolas Avenel,
Patrick Roch, and

Also, on Thursday, the morrow after Saint Lucie Virgin, in the sixth year of
King Edward, the Moon was wonderfully seen of diverse colors: on which day
determined it was, that the order of Templars should be abolished for ever.

More, in Ireland Lord Edmund Botiller was made the Lieutenant of Lord John
Wogan Justice of Ireland: which Edmund in the Lent following besieged the
O-Brynnes in Glindelorie, and compelled them to yield, yea and brought them
almost to confusion, unless they had returned the sooner unto the peace of the
Lord the

Item, the same year, on the morrow after Saint Dominickes day, Lord Maurice
Fitz-Thomas espoused Katherin daughter of the Earl of Ulster, at Green-castle.
And Thomas Fitz-Iohn espoused another daughter of the same Earl, the morrow
after the Assumption, in the same place.

Also, the Sunday after the feast of the exaltation of the holy Cross, the
daughter of the Earl of Gloucester, wife to the Lord John Burke, was delivered
of a son.

MCCCXIII. Friar Roland Joce Primate of Ardmach arrived at the Island of Houth
the morrow after the annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Marie: and rising in
the night by stealth, took up his Crosier, and advanced it as far as to the
Priorie of

Item, a Parliament was holden at London, wherein little or nothing was done as
touching Peace: from which Parliament the King departed, and took his journey
into France, at the mandate of the King of France: and the King of England with
many of his Nobles took the badge of the Cross.

Also the Lord John Fitz-Thomas knighted Nicolas Fitz-Maurice, and Robert
Clonhull at Adare in Mounster.

More, on the last day of May Robert Brus sent certain Galleys to the parts of
Ulster

Item, in the same summer Master John Decer, a Citizen of Dublin, caused a
necessary bridge to be made from without the town of Batiboght, unto the
Causey Mil-poole of Clontarf, whereas before time the passengers that way were
much endangered. But after he had defraied great charges thereabout, by reason
of a mighty inundation and flood the bridge with the arches fell down.

Also, Master John Leeks Achbishop of Dublin in the feast of St. Laurence ended
this mortal life. Then in a schism and division of sides were elected for to
be Archbishop of Dublin, Master Walter Thornbury the Kings Chancellor in
Ireland, and Master Alexander Bicknore Treasurer of Ireland: but Walter
Thornbury was drowned, and many others, to wit, about one hundred fifty and
six took the sea, and the night following were all drowned. At the time of the
foresaid Walters death, Dublin. Item, the Lord Miles Verdon espoused the
daughter of the Lord Richard Excester. Item, the same year the Lord Robert
Brus overthrew the Castle of Man, and vanquished the Lord Donegan, O-Dowill on
S. Barnabes day. And the Lord John Burck, heir unto Richard Earl of Ulster,
died at Galwey on the feast of St. Marcellus and Marcellianus.

Also, the Lord Edmund Botiller dubbed thirty Knights in Dublin Castle on
Sunday and St. Michaels day.

MCCCXIV. The Knights Hospitallers had the lands given unto them of the
Templars in Ireland.

Item, Sir John Parice is slain at Pount. Also, Lord Theobald Verdon came Lord
Justice of Ireland on Saint Sylvesters day.

Item, Sir Gefferey Genevile a Friar died the twelfth day before the Calends of
November, and was buried in his own order of the Friars Preachers of Trym: who
was Lord also of the liberty of Meth.

More, in the same year, and upon S. Matthew the Apostles day, Loghseudy was
burnt: and on the friday following the Lord Edmund Botiller received his
Commission to be Lord Justice of Ireland.

MCCCXV. On St. John Baptists day the Earl of Gloucester had his deaths wound
given him, and died, when many others, as it were, without number, were slain
in

Item, shortly after this came the Scots and besieged the town of Carlisle,
where James Douglas was squized to death by misfortune of a certain wall
falling upon him.

The same year the Scots not contented with their own land, arrived in the
North part of Ireland at Clondonne, with six thousand fighting men and expert
warriors: to wit, Edward Brus whole brother to Robert King of Scots, and with
him the Earl of Morreff, John Meneteth, John Steward, the Lord John Cambel,
Thomas John Bosco, and John Bisset, who seized Ulster into their hands, and
drove the Lord Thomas Mandevile and other liege men out of their own
possessions.

The Scots entered Ireland first on St. Augustines day, that was the Englishmens
Apostle, in the month of May, near unto Crag-fergus in Ulster: between whom
and the English the first conflict was near unto Banne, in which the Earl of
Ulster was put to flight: there were taken prisoners William Burk, John
Stanton, and many others, and the Scots having slain a number of the English,
prevailed and had the day.

The second conflict was at Kintys in Meth, wherein Roger Mortimer with his
followers

The third conflict was at Sketheris hard by Arstoll, the morrow after the
conversion of S. Paul, wherein the Englishmen were chaced, and the Scots had
the better hand. And the foresaid Edward Brus soon after the feast of Philip
and Jacob caused himself to be crowned King of Ireland: and they took Green
Castle, and left their men there, whom the Dublinians quickly after expelled,
and recovered the said Castle to the Kings behoof, and finding Sir Robert
Coulragh the Keeper of the

Item, upon Peter and Paul the Apostles day came the Scots before Dundalk, and
won the town, spoiled and burnt it, killing as many as made resistance: and a
great part of Urgale was burnt by the Scots. The Church of the blessed Virgin
Mary in Atterith, being full of men, women, and little children, was burnt by
the Scots and Irish.

In the same year the Lord Edmund Botiller, Justice of Ireland, about the
feast of S. Mary Maudlen, assembled together a mighty power out of Mounster,
Leinster, and Ulster on the contrary side, as it were, coming from the parts
of Connaght with an infinite army, met all together about Dundalk, and
consulted among themselves to kill the Scots; but how it is not known: the
Scots fled, otherwise, as hope was, they had been taken prisoners.

Which done, the Earl of Ulster, with the foresaid Justice and other great
Lords, took in hand, after they had slain the Scots, to bring the Lord Edward
le Brus quick or dead to Dublin: which Earl followed them in chase as far as
to the water of Branne, and afterward the said Earl retired back toward
Coyners: which the said Brus perceiving, warily passed over the said water, and
followed him: whom with some other of the Earls side he put to flight, having
wounded George Roch, de sancto Bosco, that is, Holy-wood: likewise on the part
of Brus many were slain, and the Lord Wiliam Burk was taken prisoner the tenth
day of the month of September: and the Earl was defeated near unto Coyners:
and then the Irish of Connaght and Meth, rose up in arms against the King, and
against the Earl of Ulster, and burnt the Castle of Atholon and of Raudon, and
many other Castles in the said war of Coyners. The Baron of Donell bare
himself there right valiantly: but he lost much goods there, and the said
Scots manfully chased them as far as to Cragfergus: and there on the Earls side
they fled, and some entered the Castle and valiantly kept it: and afterward
came mariners from the havens and Port towns of England, and on a night
surprised the Brus with him, seeking for more warlike and armed men, with four
Pirates ships full of the goods of Ireland: whereof one was sunk; all which
time the said Brus laid siege to the Castle of Cragfergus. At the same time,
Cathill Roge razed three Castles of the Earls of Ulster in Connaught, and many
towns in the same Connaught he burnt and sacked. And at the same time the said
mariners went to the said Castle, and the Lords there skirmished, and in the
mean time slew many Scots; at which time Richard Lan de O-ferivill was by a
certain Irishman slain.

Item, afterward upon St. Nicolas day the said Brus departed out of
Cragfergus, unto whom the Earl of Moreff presented himself with 500. men unto
the parts about Dundalk they came together: and to them many fled, and some
gave unto them their right hands: and from thence they pass on to Nobee, where
they left many of their men about the feast of S. Andrew the Apostle: and Brus
himself burnt Kenlys, in Meth, and Grenard Abbey: and the said Monastery he
rifled and spoiled of all the goods in it: Also Finnagh and New Castle he
burnt, and all that country: and they kept their Christmas at Loghfudy, and
then burnt it. And after this they marched forward by Totmoy unto Rathymegan
and Kildare, and the parts about Tristeldermot, and Athy and Reban, not without
loss of their men. And then came Brus to Skethy, Arscoll in Leinster: where
there encountered him in fight the Lord Edmund Botiller Justice of Ireland, and
Sir John Fitz-Thomas, and Thomas Arnald Power, and other Noblemen of Leinster
and of Mounster: insomuch as one of those Lords, with his army, was sufficient
to vanquish the said Edw. and his forces. But there arose a discord among them,
and so being disordered and in confusion, they leave the field unto Every
kingdom divided in it self shall be made desolate. There also was slain a
noble esquire, and faithful to the King and the Realm, Haymund Grace, and
with him Sir William Prendregest, Knight. On the Scots part were slain Sir
Fergus Andressan, Sir Walter Morrey, and many others, whose bodies were buried
at Athy, in the Covent of the Friars Preachers.

Afterward, the said Brus in his return toward Meth burnt the castle de Loy:
and then the said Scots depart away from Kenlis in Meth, against whom the Lord
Roger Mortimer came with a great army, well near 15000. but, as it is
thought, not true Roger, who about three of the clock began to fly, and turned
their backs: and principally the Lacies, leaving the Lord Roger alone with a
few: whom it behoved then to fly toward Dublin, and to Sir Walter Cusake at
the Castle of Trim, leaving with the Scots that country, and the town of
Kenlis.

Also, at the same time the Irish of the South, to wit, the O-Tothiles and the
O-brynnes, burnt all the South-country, namely, Arclo, Newcastle, Bree, and all
the villages adjoining. And the O-Morghes fired and wasted part of the Leys in
Leinster, whom for the most part the Lord Edmund Botiller Justice of Ireland
slew, whose heads to the number of fourscore were brought to the castle of
Dublin.

Item, in the same year about the feast of the purification of the blessed
Virgin Marie, certain Lords of Ireland, and the Lord Fitz-Thomas, the Lord
Richard Clare, Lord John Pover, and the Lord Arnald Pover, for to establish
peace and greater security with the King of England, came to Sir John Hothom,
assigned there by the said King of England, which said Lords and Nobles swear
to hold with the King of England come life come death, and to their power to
quiet the country and make peace, and to kill the Scots. For the performance
whereof by the leave and help of God, they gave hostages and so returned:
which form if other Nobles of the land of Ireland would not keep, they were
generally held for the Kings enemies.

Item, there died Sir John Bisset. And the Church of the new town of Leys with
the steeple and belfray was by the Scots burnt. The Scots won the Castle of
Northburgh in Ulster.

Also Fidelmic O-Conghir King of Connaght slew Rorke the son of Cathol
O-Conghir.

More, Sir William Maundevile died: and the Bishop of Conere fled to the Castle
of Crag-fergus, and his Bishopric was liable to an interdiction: and Sir Hugh
Antonie is killed in Connaght.

Item, in the same year, on Saint Valentines day, the Scots abode near Geshil
and Offaly: and the army of the English about the parts of Kildare: and the
Scots endured Fowier in Meth. The Sunday following so feeble they were, what
with hunger, and what with travail, that most of them died.

And afterward the Nobles came unto the Parliament, and did nothing there; but
as they returned, spoiled all the country: and the Lord Walter Lacie came to
Dublin, for to clear himself of an imputation (touching his credit) laid
upon him, and to tender hostages unto the Lord the King, as other Nobles had
done: and the same time Edward Brus peaceably abode in Ulster.

Item, the O-Tothiles and O-Brynnes, the Archibaulds and Harolds conspired and

And in the first week of Lent the Earl of Moreff sailed over into Scotland,
and Brus held plees in Ulster, and caused many to be hanged.

Also in the midst of Lent Brus held Plees, and slew the Logans, and took Sir
Alan Fitz-Warin, and carried him into Scotland.

Also in the same year Fennyngher O-Conghir slew Cale-Rothe, and with him of

MCCCXVI. Lord Thomas Mandevile, with many others, came from Tredagh to
Crag-fergus upon Maunday Thursday, and joined battle with the Scots, put them
to flight, and slew thirty of the Scots: and afterward on Easter even the said
Lord Thomas with his men charged upon the Scots, and slew many of them about
the Calends: and there was slain the said Lord Thomas Maundevile in his own
country, in defense of his right.

Item, in the parts of Connaght many Irish were slain by Lord Richard Clare,
and Richard Bermingham.

Item, on Saturday after the Lords Ascension, Donnyger O-Brynne a strong
thief, with twelve of his confederates, was slain by Sir William Common and his
followers, keepers of the peace, whose heads were carried to Dublin.

Item, the Dundalkers made a rode against O-Hanlan, and slew of the Irish about
two hundred: and Robert Verdon a warlike esquire there lost his life.

Item, at Whitsontide the same year Richard Bermingham slew of the Irish in
Mounster about three hundred or more: and afterward at the feast of the
Nativitie of S. John Baptist came Brus to the Castle of Crag-fergus, and
commanded the keepers to render up the Castle unto him, according to the
covenant between them made, At the same time the Irish of O-mayl went toward
the parts of Tullogh, and fought a battle: whereupon of the Irish were slain
about four hundred, whose heads were sent to Dublin: and wonders were
afterward seen there. The dead, as it were, arose and fought one with
another, and cried out Fennokabo, which was their signal. And afterward, about
the feast of the translation of S. Thomas, there were rigged and made ready
eight ships, and set out from Tredagh to Crag-fergus with victuals. Which
Dublin the Earl of Ulster and the Lord John Fitz-Thomas, and many of the
Nobles sworn and confederate to live and die for the maintenance of the peace
of Ireland.

The same year news came out of Connaght, that O-Conghir slew many of the
English, to wit, Lord Stephen of Excester, Miles Cogan, and many of the Barries
and of the Lawlies, about fourscore.

Item, the week after Saint Laurence feast, there arose in Connaght four
Irish Princes to make war against the English: against whom came the Lord
William Burk, Richard Bermingham, the Lord of Anry with his retinue of the
country, and of the same Irish about eleven thousand fell upon the edge of the
sword near unto Anry; which town was walled afterward with the money raised of
armor and spoil gotten from the Irish: because every one of the English that
had double armours of the Irish, gave the one half deal toward the walls of
the town Anry. Slain were there Fidelmic O-Conghir, a petty King or Prince of
Connaght, and O-Kelley, and many other Princes or Potentates. John Husee a
butcher of Anry fought there, who the same night at the request of his Lord of
Anry stood among the dead to seek out and discover O-Kelley: which O-Kelley
with his Costrell or esquire rose out of their lurking holes, and cried unto
the foresaid man, to wit Husee, come with me and I will Hussee fair lands,
and dubbed him Knight, as he well deserved.

The same year about the feast of S. Laurence came O-Hanlan to Dundalk, for to
destreine, and the Dundalkers with their men killed a number.

Item, on Monday next before the feast of the nativitie of Saint Mary, came
David O-Tothill with four more, and hid himself secretly all night long in
Coleyn wood: which the Dublinians and Sir William Common perceiving, went forth
and manfully

Also, there ran rumors to Dublin that the Lord Robert Brus King of Scotland
entered Ireland to aid Edward Brus his brother, and the Castle of Crag-fergus in
Ulster was besieged by the foresaid Scots. The Monasteries of St. Patrick of
Dune, and of Seball, and many other houses as well of Monks as of regular
preaching Friars and Minors, were spoiled in Ulster by the Scots.

Item, the Lord William Burk, leaving his son for an hostage in Scotland, is
set free. The Church of Brught in Ulster being in manner full of folk of both
sexes, is burnt by the Scots and Irish of Ulster.

Crag-fergus, that those which kept the Castle, for default of victuals, did
eat hides and leather, yea and eight Scots who before were taken prisoners:
great pity and grief that no man relieved such.

And the Friday following news were brought that Thomas the son of the Earl
of Ulster was dead.

Also the Sunday following the feast of the nativitie of the blessed Virgin,
died Lord John Fitz-Thomas at Laraghbrine near unto Mayneth, and he was buried
at Kildare among the Friars Minors. Of which Lord John Fitz-Thomas, it is said,
that a little before his death he was created Earl of Kildare: after whom
succeeded his son and heir the Lord Thomas Fitz-Iohn, a prudent and wise
personage.

Crag-fergus was rendered to the Scots, and granted there was to the keepers of
it life and limb.

Also upon the day of the exaltation of the holy Cross, Conghar and Mac-keley
were slain, with five hundred of the Irish, by the Lord William Burke and
Richard Bermingham in Connaght.

Item, on Monday before Holloughmas happened a great slaughter of the Scots in
Ulster, by John Loggan, and Hugh Bisset; to wit, one hundred with double
armor, and two hundred with single armor.

The number of those men of arms that were slain in all, was three hundred
beside footmen.

Edmund King there fell a great tempest of wind and rain, which overthrew
many houses, and the Steeple of Saint Trinity Church in Dublin, and did much
harm on land and sea. Also in the Vigill of S. Nicholas, Sir Alan Stewart,
taken prisoner in Ulster by John Loggan and Sir John Sandale, was brought unto
the Castle of Dublin.

In the same year news arrived out of England, that the Lord King of England
and the Earl of Lancaster were at variance, and that they were desirous one to
surprise the other: for which cause the whole land was in great trouble.

Item, in the same year, about the feast of St. Andrew the Apostle, sent there
were to the Court of Rome the Lord Hugh Despencer, and the Lord Bartholmew
Baldesmere,

Also, after the said feast the Lacies came to Dublin, and procured an
inquisition to prove that the Scots by their means came not into Ireland:
which inquisition acquitted them. Whereupon they had a charter of the Lord the
King, of peace and upon the Sacrament given unto them, they took an oath to
keep the peace of And afterward, even in the same year after the feast of
Shrovetide, the Scots came secretly as far as to Slane, with twenty thousand
armed men; and the army of Ulster joined with them, who spoiled the whole
country before them.

And after this, on monday next before the feast of S. Matthias the Apostle,
the Earl of Ulster was taken in the Abbey of St. Mary, by the Mayor of the
City of Dublin, to wit, Robert Notingham, and brought to the castle of Dublin,
where he was kept in hold a long time, and the chamber wherein he lay was
burned, and seven of the said Earls men were there killed.

In the same week, and upon the Vigill of St. Matthias, came Brus with his
army toward Dublin: and because he had quickly intelligence of the said Earls
apprehension, he took his journey toward the castle of Knock, and entered the
said castle, and took the Lord Baron of the same, namely, the Lord Hugh Tirell
and his wife, who for a piece of money were delivered.

And the same night, by common consent, the men of Dublin for fear of the
Scots burnt St. Thomas street; and with the said fire the Church of St. John,
with the chapel of S. Marie Maudlen was by casualtie burnt: yea and all the
suburbs of Dublin were set on fire, together with the Monastery of S. Mary,
and the Church of St. Patricke in Dublin was by the said villains spoiled.

Item, the said Mayor with the Communaltie destroyed the Church of St. Savior,
which is the place of the Friars Preachers: and carried away the stones of the
same place toward the building of the City wall, which he then enlarged on
the North side above the Key: because the wall at first went along by the
Church of St. Owen, where a tower is to be seen beyond the gate; and in the
Vintners street appears another gate. But afterward the King of England
commanded the Mayor and Communalty to make a covent Church of Friars as before.
And after the feast of Saint Matthias, Brus understanding that the City was
strongly walled and fortified, took his journey toward the Salmon leap, and
there they pitched their tents, namely, Robert Brus King of the Scots, Edward
Brus, the Earl of Morrey, John de Menteth, John Steward, the Lord Philip
Mountbray, and abode there four days, and burnt part of the town, brake
down the Church and spoiled it, and afterward marched on toward the Naas, and
the Lacies against their oath conducted them and gave them counsel: and Sir
Hugh Canon appointed Wadin White his wives brother to be their guide through
the country, and they came to the Naas, and sacked the town, brake into the
Churches, opened the tombs in the Churchyard to seek for treasure, and did
much mischief while they remained there for two days together. And afterward
they went on toward Tristeldermot, in the second week of Lent, and destroyed
the Friars minors, the books, vestiments, and other ornaments they had away,
and then departed from thence to Baligaveran: and from Gregory the Pope.

At the same time there came letters from the Lord Edmund Botiller Justice of
Ireland, the Lord Thomas Fitz-John then Earl of Kildare, the Lord Richard
Clare, the Lord Arnald Pover, and the Lord Maurice Fitz-Thomas, for the
delivery of the Earl of Ulster by mainprise, and by a writ of the Kings: about
which nothing was then done.

And afterward the Ulster men came with an army, about two thousand, and
craved the Kings aid for to destroy the Scots, as they said: for which cause
the Kings standard was delivered unto them: and when they had it, they did more
harm than the

Item, a great overthrow was given unto the Irish, near unto the desert of
Dermot, that is, Trostil-Dermot, by Edmund Botiller.

Also the same Edmund Botiller Lord Justice of Ireland for the time being, gave
a

And about Palme-sunday there came news to Dublin, that the Scots were at
Ke^^ys in (...), and the Nobles of Ireland at Kilkenny, and there levied a
power to set forward against Brus: and the monday following the King gave
commandment to the men of Ulster to speed them against the Scots, whose leader
and head the Earl of Kildare, to wit Thomas Fitz-John was appointed to be:
and so they put

MCCCXVII. Upon Mandie thursday the Lord Edm. Botiller the Lord Justice of
Ireland, and Sir Thomas Fitz-Iohn Earl of Kyldare, because the King gave unto
them the jurisdiction and liberty of the county of Kildare, also Richard Clare
with the army of Ulster, Sir Arnold Po^^r Baron of Donnoyll, Maurice Roch-fort,
Thomas Fitz-Moris, and the Ca^ntons with their retime assembled themselves
together about the Scots: and for one whole week abode about them, and did
nothing: whose forces were reckoned to be about 30000. strong. And afterward
upon thursday in Easter Yoghall with the Kings power, because he was Lord
Justice, and the monday following speedily took his journey toward the army, and
sent his letters unto Edmund Botiller late (as it has been said) Justice,
that he should attempt nothing against the Scots before his coming. But
before that Mortimer came, Brus was forewarned by some to depart from thence:
who the night following took his journey toward Kildare, and afterward in the
week following every one of the English returned hence into their country:
and the army of Ulster came to the Naas.

And at the same time two messengers were dispatched from the city of Dublin,
who passed the seas toward the King of England to ask advice, and to advertise
as Ireland, and about the deliverance of the Earl of Ulster.

Also at the same time the Lord Roger Mortimer Justice of Ireland, and the
Nobles of Ireland were at Kilkenny to dispose of Brus, but nothing effected
they there at that time.

And about a month after Easter Brus advanced with his army about 4. leagues
near unto Trim in a certain wood, and there stayed a week and more to refresh
his men, who with (...) and travail were almost perished, and for that many of
them died there.

And afterward on Philip and Jacob the Apostles day the said Brus entered on
his journey toward Ulster: and after the said feast came the Lord Roger Mortimer
Justice Ireland to Dublin, accompanied with the Lord John Wogan, and Sir Fulk
Warin, with thirty Knights and their trains: and they held a Parliament with
all the Lords and Potentates of the land at Kylmainan; but did nothing there
save only treat about the deliverance of the Earl of Ulster.

And on the sunday before the feast of our Lords ascension, there repaired
again unto the Parliament at Dublin the said Nobles of the land, and there they
delivered the Earl of Ulster by mainpri^e and hostages, and upon an oath. And
the said Earl having an oath tendered unto him, swore upon the Sacrament that
he would never work or procure by himself or by any of his friends and
followers, harm or grievance upon the occasion of his apprehension unto the
Citizens of Dublin, but that

Also in the same year Corn and other victuals were exceeding dear. A Cranok
of wheat was sold for three and twenty shillings, and wine for eight denires:
and the whole land in manner was wasted by the Scots and Ulster-men: yea many
house-holders, and such as had sustained and relieved a number of folk were
driven to beg:

At the same time came messengers to Dublin out of England, with grants of
pardon which they had at their will and pleasure: but before their coming, the
foresaid Earl was delivered. And at the feast of Pentecost, Mortimer the Lord
chief Justice took his journey toward Tredagh, and from thence to Trim, and
sent his letters for the Lacies to repair unto him, who contemptuously refused
to come.

And afterward Sir Hugh Crofts Knight was sent unto the Lacies to treat about
a peace, who by them was slain, the more the pity. And after that Mortimer L.
Justice Lacies, who seized upon their goods, cattle, and treasure, and brought
them to final destruction, slew many of their men, and chased them into the
parts of Connaght.

And it was said, that Sir Walter Lacie went forth as far as to Ulster to
seek Brus.

Item, in the town of St. Cinere in Flanders, about the feast of Pentecost,
the Lord Aumar Valence and his son were taken prisoners, and conveied into
Almaini And the same year, on Monday after the feast of the nativitie of S.
John Baptist, the Potentates of Ireland assembled themselves to the Parliament
at Dublin: and there was the Earl of Ulster enlarged, who took his oath, and
found mainprisers or

Item, upon the day of the Saints Pnocesse and Martinian, Sir John Atly
encountered at sea Thomas Dover a right strong thief, and took him, and about
forty of his men well armed he slew, and his head he brought with him to Dublin.

Also upon the day of the translation of S. Thomas, Sir Nicholas Bolscot came
out of England with news, that two Cardinals were come from the Court of Rome
into England, to treat concerning a peace, and they brought a Bull to
excommunicate all the troublers of the peace of the Lord the King of England.

Likewise, the Thursday next before the feast of St. Margaret, Hugh and Walter

More, on the sunday following, the Lord Roger Mortimer Justice of Ireland,
took his journey to Tredagh with all his soldiers.

At the same time the Ulster-men raised a booty near unto Tredagh: and the
men of Tredagh went out and fetched the booty back again: where was slain
Miles Cogan with his brother, and six other great Lords of Ulster were taken
prisoners, and brought to the castle of Dublin.

And afterward Mortimer the Lord Justice assembled his army against O-Fervill,
and commanded the Mal-passe to be cut down, and destroyed all his houses: and
afterward O-Fervil rendered himself to the peace, and put in hostages.

Also the Lord Roger Mortimer Justice took his journey toward Clony, and made
an inquisition or inquest, as touching Sir John Blound (to wit, White) of
Rathregan: which inquest accused the said John; whereupon he was of necessity
to fine for two hundred marks: and afterward on sunday after the feast of the
nativity of blessed Marie, the said Mortimer with a great power marched against
the Irish of O-Mayl, and came to Glinsely, where many were slain both of Irish
and English, but the Irish went away with the worst: and soon after came
O-brynn, and rendered himself to the peace of the King. And Roger Mortimer with
his company came to the castle of Dublin.

And upon the day of Simon and Jude the Apostles* the Archbales had peace by
mainprise of the Earl of Kildare.

And at the feast of Saint Hilary following there was a Parliament holden at
Lincoln, about a treaty of peace between the Lord King of England, and the
Earl of Lancaster, and between the Scots: and the Scots continued in peace,
and by reason Hugh Canon the Kings Justice in his bench, was slain by Andrew
Bermingham, between Naas and Castle-Martin.

Item, at the feast of the purification of the blessed Virgin Mary, there came
the Popes Bulls, so that Alexander de Bicknor was confirmed and consecrated
Archbishop of Dublin: and those Bulls were read and published in the Church of
the holy Trinity. And at the same time was read another Bull, that the Lord
Pope ordained peace between the Lord King of England, and the Lord Robert Brus
King of Scotland for Brus refused to condescend and agree. These things passed
about the feast of St. Valentine.

Item, the sunday following came the Lord Roger Mortimer to Dublin, and dubbed
John Mortimer Knight, with four of his fellows: and the same day Mortimer
kept a great feast in the castle of Dublin.

Item, at the same time a great slaughter was made of Irishmen in Conaght,
through a quarrel between two Lords of Princes there: and slain there were
of both sides about four thousand men: and afterward there was taken great
revenge upon the men of Ulster, who in the time that the Scots spoiled and
preaded in Ireland, had done much harm, and eat flesh in Lent not of
necessity: therefore much tribulation

Item, it was reported of a truth, that some of the foresaid evil doers were
so hunger-starved, that in Churchyards they took the bodies out of their
graves, and in their skuls boiled the flesh and fed thereupon, yea and women
did eat their own children for stark hunger.

MCCCXVIII. In the Quindene of Easter news out of England arrived in Ireland,
that the town of Berwicke was betrayed and taken by the Scots: and afterward
in the same year Master Walter Islep, the Kings Treasurer in Ireland, landed,
and

And afterward, at the three weeks end after Easter, there came news to
Dublin that the Lord Richard Clare was slain, and with him four Knights,
namely, Sir Henry Capell, Sir Thomas Naas, Sir James Cannon, and Sir John
Caunton: also Adam Apilgard, with 80. other men, by O-Brene and Mac-Carthy, on
the feast of Saint Gordian and Epimachus. And it was reported that the said
Lord Richard his body was in despightfull malice cut into small pieces; but his
relics were enterred in Limerick among the Friars Minors.

Item, on sunday in Mense Paschae, that is, a month after Easter, John Lacy
was led forth of the castle of Dublin, and brought to Trim, for to be arraigned
and to hear and receive his judgment there: who was adjudged to be strait
dieted, and so he died in prison.

Item, the sunday before the Lords Ascension, Lord Roger Mortimer sailed over
into England: but paid nothing for his victuals that he had taken up in Dublin
and elsewhere, which amounted to the value of one thousand pounds.

Also, the same year about the feast of S. John Baptist the great grace and
mercy of God was showed, in that wheat which before was sold for 15. shillings,
was now not James day there was new bread to be had of new corn, a thing that
never or seldom had been seen before in Ireland: and this was a sign of Gods
tender mercy, and all through the prayer of the poor, and other faithful
folk.

Item, the Sunday after the feast of Saint Michael, news came to Dublin, that
Lord Alexander Bykenore then the Kings Justice in Ireland and Archbishop of
Dublin

Item, on Saturday falling out to be the feast of Pope Calixtus, a field was
fought between the Scots and English of Ireland, two leagues from the town of
Dundalk: to which battle came of the Scots part, the Lord Edward Brus (who
named himself King of Ireland) the Lord Philip Mowbray, the Lord Walter
Souls, the Lord Alan Stewart, with his three brethren: also Sir Walter Lacy,
Sir Robert and Sir Aumar Lacy, John Kermerdyne, and Walter White, and about
3000. others. Against Richard Tuit, Sir Miles Verdon, Sir Hugh Tripton, Sir
Herbert Sutton, Sir John Cusack, Sir Edward and Sir William Bermingham, and the
Primate of Armagh, who assoiled them all: Sir Walter Larpulk: and certain came
from Tredagh, to the number of twenty, well appointed and choice soldiers,
whom John Maupas accompanied: and so they joined the said battle. The English
were the first that entered with great vigor upon the front and vaward, where
the said John Maupas manfully and with much honor in this conflict slew the
Lord Edward Brus: which John also was found slain upon the body of the said
Edward: and all the Scots in manner were killed up, even to the number of two
thousand or thereabout: whereby few of the Scots escaped, Hugh Lacy, Sir Walter
Lacy, with some few others that were with them, made shift hardly to save
themselves. This fortuned between Dundalk and Faghird. Now the head of the
foresaid Edward, the said Lord John Bermingham brought unto the said Lord King
of England: upon whom the King bestowed at the same time, the Earldom of
Louth to him and to his heirs males, and the Barony of Aterith. And one
quarter, with the hands and heart of the foresaid Edward, were carried to
Dublin, and the other quarters divided and sent to other places.

MCCCXIX. The Lord Roger Mortimer returned out of England, and is eftsoons
made Lord Justice of Ireland. The same year at the feast of All Saints came a
Bull Moris Fitz-Thomas. In this year the foresaid John Bermingham was created
Earl of Louth. Also the Stone bridge of Kil-Coleyn was built by Master Moris
Jack, Canon of the Cathedral Church of Kildare.

MCCCXX. In the time of Pope John the 22. and of the Lord Edward son to King
Edward, which Edward after the coming of Saint Austin into England was the 25.
King; also under Alexander Bicknore then Archbishop of Dublin began the
Universitie of the said City of Dublin. The first that proceeded Master in the
same Dublin, who solemnly commenced Doctor in the Canon law. And this William
was made the first Chancellor of the said University. The fourth Master in
sacred Theology or Divinity, that went out, was Friar Edmund Kermerdin. Item,
Roger Mortimer Lord Justice of Ireland returned into England, leaving in his
place the Lord Thomas Fitz-John then Earl of Kildare.

Item, the Lord Edmund Botiller entered into England, and so came to Saint James.

Also the bridge of the town of Leghelyn was built by Master Moris Jack Canon
of the Cathedral Church of Kildare.

MCCCXXI. A very great overthrow, with much slaughter of the O-Conghors, was

Item, the Lord Edmund Botiller died in London, and lies buried at Balygaveran
in Ireland. Also John Bermingham Earl of Louth, is made Lord Justice in
Ireland. Likewise John Wogan departed this life.

MCCCXXII. Andrew Bermingham, and Nicolas de La-Lond Knight, and many others
are slain by O-Nalan on St. Michaels day.

MCCCXXIII. A truce is taken between the King of England, and Robert Brus King
of Scotland for 14. years. Also John Darcie came chief Justice of Ireland.
Item, John the first begotten son of the Lord Thomas Fitz-Iohn Earl of
Kildare,

MCCCXXIV. Nicolas Genevile, son and heir to the Lord Simon Genevile,
departed out of this world, and was buried in the Church of the Friars
Preachers of Trym. Item, there happened a great wind on twelfe day at night.

Item, a general murrain there was of oxen and kine in Ireland.

MCCCXXV. Richard Lederede Bishop of Ossorie cited Dame Alice Ketyll upon her
perverse heretical opinion, and caused her to make personal appearance before
him: and being examined as touching sorceries, he found by an enquest that she
had practiced sorceries: among which this was one foul fact of hers, that a
certain spirit named Robyn Artysson lay with her: and that she offered unto
him nine red cocks at a

Item, that she swept the streets of Kilkenny with beesomes, between Complin
and Courefew, and in sweeping the filth toward the house of William Utlaw her
son, by way of conjuring mumbled these words: Unto the house of William my
son,
Hie all the wealth of Kilkenny town.


Now the accomplices of the said Alice, and those that agreed unto this divelish
and wretched practice of hers, were one Pernill of Meth; and Basilia the
daughter of the same Pernil. When the above named Alice was by inquisition
attainted of these foresaid imputations, the Bishop punished her by the purse,
and caused her utterly to abjure Kilkenny: but at the hour of death she
avouched that the foresaid William deserved death as well as her self,
affirming that he for a year and a day wore the devils girdle upon his bare
body. Whereupon the Bishop caused the said William to be apprehended and laid
in prison for eight or nine weeks within the Castle of Kilkenny: and by the
Bishops decree and appointment he had two men to give attendance and to
minister unto him, with express commandment, not to speak unto him but once
a day, nor to eat or drink with him. At length the said William, by the help
of the Lord Arnald Poer Seneschall Kilkenny, was delivered forth of prison: and
the foresaid William gave a great sum of money unto the abovenamed Arnold, to
imprison the Bishop aforesaid. The Lord Arnold before named caused the Bishop
aforesaid to lie in prison about three months.

Now among the goods and implements of the said Alice, there was a certain
holy Wafer-cake found, having the name of the Devil imprinted upon it: there
was found also a box, and within it an ointment, wherewith she used to besmear
or grease a certain piece of wood called a Coultree: which being thus
anointed, the said Alice with her accomplices could ride and gallop upon the
said Coultree whethersoever they would, all the world over through thick and
thin, without either hurt or hindrance. Alice was cited again to appear at
Dublin, before M. Deane of the Church of St. Patricke, there to find greater
favor. Who there made her appearance, and craved a day of answer, under a
sufficient mainprise and suretiship, as it was thought. But she was no more to
be seen: for by the counsel of her son, and others that were not known,
was she kept hidden in a farm house or village, until the wind served for
England, and so she passed over: and never was it known whither she went. Now
because it was found Utlaw was consenting to his mother in her sorcerie and
with-craft: the Bishop caused him to be arrested and taken by the Kings writ,
and to be kept in prison: who in the end through the supplication of great
Lords was set free: yet with this condition, that he should cause the Church of
S. Mary's in Kilkenny to be covered all over with lead, and to do other
almsdeeds by a certain time; which almsdeeds if he performed not within
the said term, then he should be in the same state wherein he stood when he
was taken by virtue of the Kings Process.

MCCCXXVI. A Parliament was holden at Whitsontide in Kilkenny: unto which
Athisell, where he ended his life. And a little before the feast of S. John
Baptist he was there enterred. The Lord William Burk became his heir.

MCCCXXVII. There arose a quarrel and a fray between the Lord Moris
Fitz-Thomas and the Lord Arnald Pover: and the Lord Moris had in his train and
company, the Lord Botiller, and the Lord William Bermingham: and the Lord
Arnald had in his retinew the Bourkeins: of whom the said Lord Morris
Fitz-Thomas slew

In the same year after Michaelmas the Lord Arnald came to aid the Bourkeins:
and by occasion of certain rude and uncivil terms which the Lord Arnald had
given out, in calling him Rymour, the said Morice raised an army again, and
together with Botiller and the said William Bermingham with a puissant host
burnt the lands and possessions of the said Lord Arn^ld in Ofath. Also the said
William Bermingham fired the lands and man our houses of the Lord Arnald Pover
in Mounster; and Kenlys in Osserie he burnt: so that the Lord Arnald was forced
to fly with the Baron of Donnyl to Waterford, and there they remained a month,
until that the Earl of Kildare, then Lord Justice of Ireland, and others of
the Kings Counsel took Arnald kept not, but came to Dublin, and passed the seas
into England about the feast of the Purification: and after that Arnald had
sailed over, the said Moris Botiller and the Lord William Bermingham with a
great army came, spoiled, harried, and burnt the lands of the said Arnald: and
by reason of those puissant forces that they had led, and the many mischiefs
which they had done, the Kings ministers of his Counsel feared lest he would
besiege Cities: and therefore the Cities made provision with more warding and
watching the while between. And when the said Lord Moris Botiler, and William
heard that the Cities made such provision and preparation before hand, they
gave intelligence unto the Kings Counsel that they would come to Kilkenny, and
there clear himselves, Kilmaynon, to wit, Roger Outlaw Chancellor of Ireland,
Nicholas Fastoll Justice in the Bench, and others of the Kings Counsel: and
the foresaid ( Moris and William) demanded the Kings Charter of peace, but they
of the Kings Counsel warily making answer, took day unto the month after
Easter, that they might with their fellows of the Counsel, treat upon this
point.

In the same year before Lent the Irish of Leinster gathered themselves
together, and set up a certain King, namely Donald the son of Art Mac-Murgh.
Who being Henry Traharn; who brought him to the Salmons leaps, and had of him
200. pound for his lives ransom, and then led him to Dublin, to wait there
until the Kings Counsel could provide and take order what

The same year Adam Duff the son of Walter Duff of Leinster, and of the
kindred of the O-Tothiles, was convicted; for that against the Catholic faith,
he denied the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, and held that there could not be
three persons and one God: and he affirmed that the most blessed Virgin Mary,
mother of our Lord, was an harlot: he denied also the resurrection of the
dead, and avouched that the sacred Scriptures were fables, and nothing else:
and he imputed falsitie upon the sacred Adam Duff was pronounced an heretic
and blasphemer: whereupon the same Adam by a decree of the Church was on the
Monday after the Outas of Easter the year 1328. burnt at Hoggis (Green) by
Dublin.

MCCCXXVIII. On Tuesday in Easter week Thomas Fitz-John Earl of Kildare and
Justice of Ireland died: after whom succeeded in the office of Justice, Friar
Roger Outlaw Prior of Kilmaynok. The same year David O-Tothil, a strong thief
and enemy to the King, a burner of Churches and destroier of people, was
brought forth of the Castle of Dublin to the Tolstale of the City, before
Nicolas Fastoll and Elias Ashbourne Justices in the (Kings) bench: which
Justices gave him his judgment, Item, in the same year the Lord Moris
Fitz-Thomas raised a great army to destroy the Bourkeins and the Poers. The
same year also the Lord William Bourk was knighted at London on Whitsunday,
and the King gave unto him his Seignory. Also in the same year James Botiller
in England espoused the daughter of the Earl of Hereford, and was created
Earl of Ormund, who before was called Earl of Tiperary.

The same year a Parliament was holden at Northampton, where many of the Lords
and Nobles of England assembled: and a peace was renewed between Scotland,
England and Ireland by marriages between them: and it was ordained that the

The same year after the said espousals and contract made at Barwicke, the
Lord Robert Brus King of Scotland, and the Lord William Burk Earl of Ulster,
the Earl of Meneteth, and many of the Scottish nobility arrived at Cragfergus
peaceably, and sent unto the Justices of Ireland and to the Counsel, that they
would come to Green Castle, to treat about a peace of Scotland and Ireland. Now
because the said Justices of Counsel failed to come as the said King desired,
he took his leave of the Earl of Ulster, and returned into his own country
after the feast of the assumption of the blessed Virgin Mary. And the Earl of
Ulster came to Dublin unto the Parliament,

The same year, about the feast of Saint Katherin Virgin, the Bishop of
Osserie certified the Kings Counsel there, that Sir Arnald Pover was convicted
before him upon diverse articles of perverse heresy. Whereupon, at the suit of
the said Bishop, the said Sir Arnald by virtue of the Kings writ was arrested
and laid up in the Castle of Dublin: and a day was given unto the Bishop for
to come unto Dublin, to follow the foresaid suit and action against the
foresaid Lord Arnald: who made his excuse, that he could not then come,
because his enemies lay in wait for his life in the way: whereupon the Kings
Counsel knew not how to make an end of this business; Arnald was kept in
duresse within the Castle of Dublin until the Parliament following, which was
in Mid-lent, where all the Nobles of Ireland were present.

In the same year Friar Roger Utlaw, Prior of the Hospital of St. John of
Jerusalem in Ireland, Lord Justice and Chancellor of Ireland, was disfamed by
the said Bishop, and slandered to be a favourer of heresy, a Counselor also
and a better of the said Lord Arnold in his heretical naughtiness. And
because his person was thus Rodyard, Deane of the Cathedral Church of St.
Patrick in Dublin, the Abbat of Saint Thomas, the Abbat of St. Mary's, the
Prior of holy Trinity Church in Dublin, M. Elias Lawles, and M. Peter
Willebey: These Inquisitours convented those that were cited, and they examined
every one severally by himself: which examinats all upon their oaths deposed,
that he was honest and faithful, a zealous embracer of the faith, and ready
to die for the faith: and in regard of this great solemnity of his purgation,
the said Friar Roger made a royal feast to all that would come.

Also the same year in Lent died the said L. Arnald Pover in the Castle of
Dublin, and lay a long time unburied in the house of the preaching Friars.

MCCCXXIX. After the feast of the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Mary, the
Nobles of Ireland came unto the Parliament at Dublin, to wit, the Earl of
Ulster, the Lord Thomas Fitz-Moris, the Earl of Louth, William Bermingham, and
the rest of the Lords: and a peace was renewed there between the Earl of
Ulster, and the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas: and the said Lords with the Kings
Counsel ordained there that the Kings peace should be fully kept: so that every
Nobleman and Chieftaine should keep in his own sept, retinew, and servants,
and the said Earl of Ulster made a great feast in the Castle of Dublin: and
the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas the morrow Patrick in Dublin: and Friar Roger Outlaw
Justice of Ireland feasted likewise upon the third day at Kylmaynon, and so
they departed.

The same year on the Virgill of St. Barnabee the Apostle, Sir John Bermingham
Earl of Louth was slain at Balybragan in Urgal, by those of Urgal: and with
him Peter Bermingham the said Earls legitimate and whole brother, also Robert
Bermingham the same Earls putative brother, Sir John Bermingham the son of his
brother Richard Lord of Anry, William Finne Bermingham, the Unkles son by the
mothers side of the foresaid Lord of Anry, Simon Bermingham the same Williams
son, Thomas Bermingham the son of Robert of Conaght, Peter Bermingham the
James of Conaght, Henry Bermingham of Conaght, and Richard Talbot of Malaghide
a valiant man at arms, and two hundred with them whose names are not known.

Item, after the foresaid slaughter the Lord Simon Genevile his men invaded the
country of Carbry, for to spoil and harry them, in regard of their robberies
and manslaughters committed many times in Meth: but before the said invasion,
they of Carbry arose, and slew of the said Simons men threescore and sixteen.

Also the same year on the morrow after holy Trinity Sunday there came to
Dublin, John Gernon and Roger Gernon his brother in the behalf of those of
Urgal, and made humble request, that they might stand to be tried at the Common
Law. And Bermingham was coming, departed out of Dublin. The same year on the
Vigill of St. Laurence, the Lord Thomas Botiller went with a great power into
the parts of Ardnorwith, and there encountered the said Lord Thomas Williams
Mac-Goghgan with his forces: and there was the said L. Thomas Dublin, and
bestowed in the house of the preaching Friars, but as yet not buried: and the
sunday next ensuing the feast of the beheading of St. John Baptist, the said
Lord Thomas his corpse was very honorably carried through the city, and
enterred in the Church of the

In the same year John Lord Dracy came Justice of Ireland the second time: and
the said Lord John espoused the Lady Joan de Burk Countess of Kildare, the
third day of July, at Maynoth.

Item, Philip Stanton is slain. Also Henry Lord Traham is treacherously taken
in his own house at Kilbego by Richard the son of Philip Onolan.

More, the Lord James Botiller Earl of Ormond burnt Foghird against Onolan,
for the foresaid Henry's sake brother of Botiller.

The same year, on wednesday next after the feast of the Ascension of the
blessed Virgin Mary, John Lord Darcy Justice of Ireland went toward the parts
of Newcastle, Mac-Kingham and Wikelow, against the O-Brynns: and the monday
following certain of Lawles were slain, and many wounded, and namely, Robert
Locam was hurt, and of the Irish the better sort were slain, many likewise
wounded, and the rest fled. But Murkad O-Brynne yielded himself an hostage
together with his son, uncle, and unkles son, and they were brought to the
castle of Dublin. But afterward delivered for other hostages the better sort
of their sept and kin.

The same year the Lord Justice, namely, the Lord John Darcy and those of the
Kings Counsel in Ireland, about the feast of the Circumcision of our Lord,
charged the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas of Desmund, that himself should come into
the field with his forces for to vanquish the Kings enemies: giving him to
understand, that Moris came with his power, and Briene O-Brene was in his
company: and their army consisted of ten thousand men: and the said Lord Moris
advanced with his army first against the O-Nolanes, vanquished them, gat a
great booty, and wasted their lands with fire: and the O-Nolanes fled, and
afterward delivered hostages, who were sent unto the castle of Dublin. And
afterward the said Lord Moris made a journey against the O-Morches, who did put
in their hostages for to keep the Kings peace. The same time the castle of Ley
which O-dympcy had won and kept, was rendered up to the said Moris. The same
year after the Epiphany of our Lord, Donald Arts Mac-Murgh made an escape out
of the castle of Dublin by Adam Nangle had bought for him: which Adam
afterward was drawn and hanged.

MCCCXXX. Mighty winds were up in diverse places, about the feast days of St.
Katherine, S. Nicolas, and of the Nativitie of our Lord: by which wind part of
the wall of a certain house fell down, and killed the wife of Sir Miles Verdon
with his daughter, on S. Nicolas even, such winds as the like were never seen
in Ireland.

Item, there was such an inundation of the water of Boyn, as never had been
known before: by which flood all the bridges, as well of stone as of timber,
standing over the said water, were utterly cast down, unless it were Babe
bridge. The water also carried away diverse mills, and did much hurt to the
Friars Minors of Trym, and Tredagh, Item, a cranoc of wheat was sold for 20.
shillings: also a cranoc of oats for eight shillings, and one cranoc of peason,
beans, and of barley for 8. shillings. And this dearth happened by occasion of
abundance of rain, so that much of the standing corn could not be reaped
before the feast of St. Michael.

The same year, the English of Meth made a slaughter of the Irish (to wit, of
Mac-Goghigans Mac-Goghigan in anger burnt in those parts 25. small villages,
and sacked them: which the English seeing, gathered themselves together against
him, and of his men slew one hundred, and among whom were slain three Lords
sons of the Irish.

Item, the Lord William Burgh Earl of Ulster led forth an army out of Ulster
into Mounster against Briene O-Brene.

Also the Lady Joan Countess of Kildare, was at Maynoth delivered of William
her first son, that the Lord John Darcy had by her, whiles the Lord John
abode in England.

" Item, Reymund Lawles is slain treacherously at Wickelow.

More, a Parliament was holden at Kilkenny, by Friar Roger Utlaw the Prior of
Kylmainon, then Lieutenant under the Lord Justice, at which were present
Alexander Archbishop of Dublin, the Lord William Earl of Ulster, the Lord
James Earl of Ormond, the Lord William Bermingham, and Walter Burk of Conaght:
and every of them with a great power set forward to expel Brien O-Brene out of
Urkiff near Cashill.

Also, Walter Burk, with his army of Connaght, harried the lands of the Lord
Moris Fitz-Thomas, bringing back with him the booty to Urkiff.

Item, the Lord Earl of Ulster, and the Earl of Desmund, namely, the Lord
Moris (for this is the first time that I call him Earl) are appointed to the
safe keeping of the Marshall at Lymeric, by Friar Roger Utlaw Justice of
Ireland. But the Earl of Desmond by a wile escaped out of the custody of the
said Marshall, and went his way.

MCCCXXXI. The Lord Hugh Lacy with the Kings pardon and peace entered Ireland.
Also the Earl of Ulster entered England.

Also there was given an overthrow to the Irish in Okenseley by the English the
one and twenty day of April.

Item, the same day on the Vigill of Saint Mark the Evangelist, the O-Tothely
came to Tanelagh, and robbed Alexander Archbishop of Dublin, took away three
Dublin of that depredation and slaughter: and Sir Philip Bryt knight, and Friar
Moris Fitzgerald Knight of the order of Knights Hospitalers, Hamnud Archdekyn,
John Chamberlane, Robert Tyrell, and the two sons of Reginald Bernewall, and
many others, but especially of the retinew of the Lord Archbishop of Dublin,
were by a train or ambush slain by David O-Tothill in Culiagh.

Also the Lord William Bermingham led forth a great army against the foresaid
Irish, and did much harm unto them, but more would have done, had he not been
empeached by the false promises of the Irish.

Item, those of the English pale at Thurles gave a great overthrow unto Briene
O-Brene,

Item, at Finnagh in Meth the English of the said pale defeated the Irish upon
the eleventh day of June.

Also, when famine increased much in Ireland, the mercy of God so disposed,
that upon the seven and twenty day of June there came to land a mighty
multitude of great sea fishes, to wit, Thurlhedis, such as in many ages past
had never been seen, which by the estimation of many men amounted to the
number of five hundred: and this happened near unto Connyng, and the water
called Dodyz in the haven of Dublin, about evening: and Anthony Lord Lucy then
Justice of Ireland, with his own people and certain citizens of Dublin,
amongst whom was Philip Cradock, killed of the foresaid

Item, Antony Lord Lucy Justice of Ireland ordained a common Parliament at
Dublin, in the Utas of Saint John Baptist: unto which certain of the Ancients
of the land came not. Then the said Justice removed to Kilkenny, proroging the
Peter ad Vincula. Unto which place there repaired the Lord Thomas Fitz-Thomas,
and many other Nobles of the land, who came not in before, submitting
themselves to the Kings grace and mercy. And the King for his part as much as
concerned himself under a certain form of pardon graciously forgave all the
mischiefs committed by the foresaid persons in the land.

Also the castle of Fernis is taken by the Irish perfidiously, and burned in
the month of August.

Item, the said Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas of Desmund is taken by order from the
Dublin, the seventh day of October.

Item, Henry Mandevile is apprehended in the month of September, and led to the
castle of Dublin, by virtue of a warrant from Simon Fitz-Richard Justice in the
Kings Bench.

Item, Walter Burck, who with his two brethren of whole blood are taken in
Connaght, by the Earl of Ulster in November, and conveied by the same Earl
unto the castle of North-burg, in the month of February.

Also, the Lord William Bermingham, with his son Walter Bermingham, are
attached Clomell, by the said Justice in the month of February,
notwithstanding the Kings charter or pardon given unto them before by the
Justice above named, and are brought unto the Castle of Dublin the nineteenth
day of April.

Item, the Irish of Leinster made spoil of the English, and burnt Churches:
and in the Church of Freineston they burnt about fourscore men and women, and
a certain Chaplain of the said Church, arraied in his sacred vestiments and
with the body of our Lord, they repelled back with their javelins when he
would have gone forth, and burnt him with the rest in the Church. These news
came unto the ears of the Lord Pope, who sent his Bull or brief unto the
Archbishop of Dublin, commanding him to excommunicate the said Irish, and all
their adherents, together with their retinue Carcarne, and spoiled the whole
country. Whom the English made head against, to wit, Richard White and Richard
Fitz Henry, with the Burgesses of Weisford and other English, slew of the Irish
about 400. and many others of them as they fled were drowned in the river which
is called Slane.

MCCCXXXII. William Bermingham is put to death and hanged at Dublin by the said
Lord Justice, the eleventh day of July, and Walter his son is set free. The
foresaid William was a noble Knight, and among many thousand knights most
renowned and excellent for feats of arms: Alas the day! great pity it was of
him; for who relating his death can forbear tears? But at length enterred he
was in Dublin among the preaching Friars. Also the castle of Bonraty was forced
and rased to the very ground by the Irish of Totomon in July. Also the castle
of Arclo by the said Justice, with the citizens of Dublin and the help of the
English within the pale, was won from the Irish, and in the Kings hand, on the
eighth day of August, and in part is newly erected. Also the Lord Antony Lucy
Justice of Ireland is put out of his office, and returns into England with
his wife and children in the month of November. In whose place also is set John
Lord Darcy Justice of Ireland: and he entered Ireland the Item, the English of
the pale gave a great overthrow to Briene O-Brene and Mac-Karthy, and slew many
Irish in the parts of Munster. Item, there deceased John Decer a citizen of
Dublin, and lies buried in the Church of the Friars Minors: a man that did
many good deeds. Also, a certain malady named Mauses reigned all over Ireland,
as well in old men and women, as in young and little ones.

Item, the hostages abiding in the castle of Lymericke slew the Constable of
the Nenagh, and when part of it was burnt, recovered it was again, and the
hostages were reserved.

Also one P...of wheat about Christmas was commonly sold for 22. shillings: and
straight after Easter, and so forward, for twelve pence.

"Item, the town of New Castle of Lions was burnt and sacked by the O-Tothiles.

MCCCXXXIII. The L. John Darcy arrived Lord Justice of Ireland at Dublin. Item,
O* Conghirs lost a great booty, two thousand cowes and above, by the
Berminghams Carbery.

Item, the Lord John Darcy Justice of Ireland caused the Pas at Ethergovil in
Offaly to be cut down, against O-Conghir.

Item, the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas Earl of Desmond is taken forth of the prison
of Dublin, after he had been imprisoned one year and a half, having gotten
many mainprisers first, even the greatest and noblest personages of the land to
be bound for him, in the forfeiture of life, loss of all their goods, if then
the said Lord Moris attempted ought against the King, and if those Nobles
abovesaid presented not his person unto the King for his demerits.

Also William Burk Earl of Ulster, between the New-towne and Cragfergus in
Ulster, was traitorously (the more pity) slain by his own company, in the
twentieth year of his age, and the sixth day of the month June: Robert the
son of Mauriton Maundevil was he that gave him his first wound. Upon the
hearing of which rumors, the Earls wife being then in the parts of Ulster
with her daughter and heir, presently embarked and went over into England.
After whose murdering, John L. Darcy Lord chief Justice of Ireland, to revenge
the Earls death, by advice of all the States of the land assembled in the said
Parliament, forthwith with his army took his journey, and by ship arrived at
Cragfergus upon the first day of July. Now the people of the country rejoicing
at the Lord Justice his coming, and thereby taking heart unto them against the
murderers of the said Earl of Ulster, with one assent rose up to Burgh
Treasurer at that time of Ireland.

Item, many Nobles of the land and the Earl of Ormond with their retinue and
followers assembled together at the house of the Carmelite Friars in Dublin,
the 11. day of June: and during this said Parliament, whereas they were going
out of the Court yard of the said Friars, suddenly within the press of the
people Murchard or Moris the son of Nicolas O-Tothil was there murdered. At
whose sudden killing all the Elders of the land fearing and supposing there
was some treason, were stricken Murchard stoutly escaped all their hands: but
neither the party himself nor his name they ever knew.

"Also John Lord Darcy returned Justice of Ireland.

Item, Sir Walter Bermingham, son to the Lord William Bermingham is delivered
out of the castle of Dublin, in the month of February.

More, the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas Earl of Desmond by a fall off his Palfrey
brake his leg.

Item, it fell out to be a fair and dry summer, in so much as at the feast of
St. Peter advincula bread made of new wheat was eaten, and a peck of wheat was
sold for sixpence Dublin.

Also Sir Reimund Archdekon Knight, and many others of the same kindred, were
slain in Leinster.

MCCCXXXVII. In the Vigill of S. Kalixt Pope, seven partridges (and unknown it
is what spirit moved them) leaving the plain field, made way directly unto the
City Dublin, and flying most swiftly over the mercate places, settled on the top
of the Brew House, belonging to the Canons of holy Trinity in Dublin. To which
sight some Citizens came running, and wondered much at so strange a prodigy.
But the boys of the city caught two of them alive, a third they killed: and
the rest scared therewith mounting up higher took their swift flight and
escaped into the fields over against them. Now what this accident (not heard of
in the ages before) did portend, I leave to the judgment of those that are
cunning and skillful.

Also Sir John Charleton Knight and a Baron, with his wife, sons, and
daughters, and his whole family, came at the feast of S. Calixtus Pope, as
chief Justice of Ireland:

Also Lord Thomas Charleton, Bishop of Hereford, and brother in the whole blood
unto the said Justice, came the same day with his brother as Chancellor of
Ireland, together with Master John Rees Treasurer of Ireland, and Doctor in the
Decretals, bringing with them many Welshmen, to the number of two hundred, and
arrived in the haven of Dublin.

Also whiles John Charleton was Lord Justice and held a Parliament at Dublin,
Doctor David O-Hirraghey Archbishop of Ardmagh being called to the Parliament
made his provision for housekeeping in the Monastery of S. Mary near unto
Dublin: but because he would have had his Crosier before him, he was
impeached by the

Item, the same year died the same David Archbishop of Ardmagh: after whom
succeeded Doctor Richard Fitz-Ralfe Deane of Lichfield, a notable Clerk, who
was borne in the town of Dundalke.

Item, James Botiller the first Earl of Ormond departed this life the sixth
day of January, and lies buried at Balygaveran.

MCCCXXXVIII. Lord John Charleton at the instigation of his whole brother, to
wit, Thomas Bishop of Hereford, is by the King discharged of his office, and
returns with his whole household into England, and Thomas Bishop of Hereford
is by the King ordained Custos and Justice of Ireland.



Also, in the parts of Ireland the frost was so vehement, that Aven-Liffie, the
river of Dublin, was so frozen that very many danced and leaped upon the Ice of
the said river, they played at football, and ran courses there: yea and they
made fires of wood and of turfe upon the same Ice, and broyled herrings
thereupon. This Ice lasted very many days. And as for the snow also in the
parts of Ireland that accompanied the same frost, a man need not speak any
more, seeing it was known to lie on such a wonderful depth. This hard time of
weather continued from the second

MCCCXXXIX. All Ireland was generally up in arms. Item, an exceeding great
slaughter there was of the Irish, and a number of them drowned, even 1200. at
the least, by the means of the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas Earl of Desmond, and
the rest of the Geraldines in the parts of Kernige.

Item, the Lord Moris Fitz-Nicolas, Lord of Kernige, was apprehended and
imprisoned by the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas Earl of Desmond, and died in prison,
being put to strait diet, for that he openly went out and rebelled with the
said Irish against the Lord King of England, and against the Lord Earl.

O. Dymcies and other Irish were killed and drowned in the water of Barrow by
the English, and the hot pursuit of the Earl of Kildare.

Also a great booty of cattle of sundry sorts, and such a booty as had not
been seen in the parts of Leinster, by the said Lord Thomas Bishop of Hereford
and Justice of Ireland, and with the help of the English of that country, was
taken from the Irish in the parts of Odrone in the end of February.

MCCCXL. The said Bishop of Hereford and Justice of Ireland, being sent for by

Item, the King of England granted by his letters patents unto John Darcy the
office of Lord Justice of Ireland for term of life.

MCCCXLI. Sir John Moris Knight came Lord Justice of Ireland in the month of
May, as Lieutenant unto John Darcy in the foresaid land.

Item, this wondrous prodigy following, and such as in our age had not been
heard Leinster: where a certain waifaring man as he traveled in the Kings high
way, found a pair of gloves, fit, as he thought, for his own turn: which as
he drew upon his hands, forthwith instead of a man's voice and speech, he kept a
strange and mavelous barking like unto a dog: and from that present, the
elder folk and full grown, yea and women too throughout the same county,
barked like big dogs; but the children and little ones waughed as small
whelps. This plague continued with some 18. days, with others a whole month,
and with some for two years. Yea this foresaid contagious malady entered also
into the neighbor shires, and forced the people in like manner to bark.

Also, the King of England revoked all those gifts and grants that by him or
his father Ireland, were they liberties, lands, or other goods: for which
revocation great displeasure and discontent arose in the land: and so the land
of Ireland was at the point to have been lost for ever out of the King of
Englands hand.

Item, by the Kings Council there was ordained a general Parliament of
Ireland in the month of October. To the same Parliament Moris Fitz-Thomas
Earl of Desmond came not. Before which time there was never known so notable
and manifest a division in Ireland, between those that were English by birth,
and English in blood. The Majors besides of the Kings cities in the same land,
together with all the better sort of the Nobility and Gentry of the said land,
with one consent upon

Now the Lord Justice, and the rest of the Kings Ministers, in no wise presumed
to come unto the same Parliament at Kilkenny. The Elders therefore of the land
aforesaid, together with the Ancients and Majors of the cities, agreed and
ordained as touching solemn Ambassadors to be sent with all speed unto the
King of England, about relieving the State of the land, and to complain of his
Ministers in Ireland, as touching their unequal and unjust regiment of the
same, and that from thenceforth Ireland to be ruled by his Ministers, as it had
wont to be. And particularly they make complaint of the foresaid Ministers, by
way of these Questions.

Imprimis, How a land full of wars could be governed by him that was
unskilful in war?

Secondly, how a Minister or Officer of the Kings should in a short time grow
to so great wealth?

"Thirdly, how it came to pass that the King was never the richer for Ireland?

MCCCXLII. The eleventh day of October, when the moon was eleven days old,
there were seen by many men at Dublin 2. moons in the firmament well and early

MCCCXLIII. St. Thomas street in Dublin was casually burnt with fire upon the
feast of S. Valentine Martyr.

Ralph Ufford, with his wife the Countess of Ulster, came Lord chief Justice
of Ireland: Upon whose entering, the fair weather changed suddenly into a
distemperature of the air, and from that time there ensued great store of
rain, with such abundance of tempestuous storms, until his dying day. None
of his predecessors in the times past, was (with grief be it spoken)
comparable unto him. For this Justicer bearing the office of Justice-ship,
became an oppressor of the people of Ireland, a robber of the goods both of
Clergy and Laity, of rich and poor alike: a defrauder of many under the color
of doing good: not observing the rights of the Church, nor keeping the laws of
the kingdom, offering

Item, the said Justice entering into Ulster in the month of March through a
Pas, called Emerdullan, was fiercely set upon by Mac-Carton, the which
Mac-Carton verily having encountered with the said Justice, spoiled him of his
clothes, money, utensils, silver, plate, and horses, yea and slew some of his
men. But in the end, the foresaid Justice with the help of the men of Ergale
got the victory, and entered into the parts of Ulster.

June a common Parliament was holden at Dublin, unto which the Lord Moris Fitz
Thomas came not.

Item, the Lord Ralph Ufford Justice of Ireland, after the feast of S. John
Baptist, with the Kings standard raised (yet without the assent of the Elders
of the land) against the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas Earl of Desmond, marches
forthwith into Mounster, and there seized into the Kings hands the Earls
lands: and these lands so seized lets out to farm unto others for a certain
yearly rent, to be carried unto the King.

Item, the said Justice being in the parts of Mounster, delivered unto Sir
William Burton Knight, two writs: the one whereof the said William should
deliver unto the Moris Fitz-Thomas Earl of Kildare: the contents of which was
this; That upon pain of forfeiting all his lands, he should with all speed
repair unto him, to aid the King and him with a strong power. Now in the other
writ contained it was, that the said Sir William should apprehend the said
Earl of Kildare, and so apprehended commit him to prison. But Sir William
seeing that this could not possibly be brought about and effected accordingly
by himself, with colorable words framed for the nonce, persuaded the said
Earl, whiles he was preparing himself with his army, and levying a power unto
the foresaid Justice, that before his departure out of the country, he should
repair unto the Kings Counsel at Dublin, and that by the unanimity and joint
counsel of the same so deal, as to provide for the safe keeping of Dublin.
When he was come, altogether ignorant of any treachery toward, whiles himself
sat in consultation with others of the King Council in the Exchequer-court,
suddenly he was by the said Sir William betrayed, attached or arrested and
apprehended, and brought to the castle of the said city, and there clapped up in
prison.

Item, the said Justice entered with his army the parts of O. Comill in
Mounster, and by a treacherous device takes two castles of the Earl of
Desmonds, to wit, the castle Yniskisty, and the castle of the Island: in which
castle of the Island thus taken, the Knights being within the said castle,
namely, Sir Eustacele B^re, Sir William Grant, and Sir John Cotterell, were
first drawn, and afterward in October openly hanged until they were dead.

Also the said Earl of Desmond, with some other of his Knights, were by the
said Justice banished. The foresaid Justice having attchieved these exploits in
Mounster, returned in the month of November with his company unto his wife
then great Kilmaynon, which is near to Dublin: over and beside those things
which had been done against the Laity, by inditing and emprisoning some of
them, and turning them out of their goods, he also caused the Ecclesiastical
persons, as well Priests as Clerks, to be endited; and standing endited,
attached and imprisoned them, and fetched no small sums of money out of their
purses.

Item, as touching the grants and demises of their lands, to wit, whom before
he had deprived of their lands, he bestowed the same upon diverse tenants (as
has been said) as also the very writings concerning those grants, so sealed
as they were by him and with the Kings seal, he revoked, took the same from
them, cancelled, defaced,

Item, all the mainpernours of the said Earl of Desmond, in number twenty
six, as well Earls as Barons, Knights and others of the country, whose names
be these, to wit, Lord William Burke Earl of Ulster, Lord James Botiller Earl
of Ormond, Sir Richard Tuit Knight, Sir Eustace Le Poer Knight, Sir Gerald De
Rochfort Knight, Sir John Fitz-Robert Poer Knight, Sir Robert Barry Knight, Sir
Moris Fitzgerald Knight, Sir John Wellesley Knight, Sir Walter Lenfaunt
Knight, Sir Roger de la Rokell Knight, Sir Henry Traharn Knight, Sir Roger
Pover Knight, Sir John Lenfaunt Knight, Sir Roger Pover Knight, Sir Matthew
Fitz-Henry Knight, Sir Richard Wallis Knight, Sir Edward Burk Knight, the son
of the Earl of Ulster, David Barry, William Fitzgerald, and Thomas de Lees de
Burgh, their own travels and proper expenses, which some of them with the said
Justice in his war had been at, and in pursuing the said Earl of Desmond
notwithstanding, he by definitive sentence deprived of their lands, and
dis-inherited, and awarded their bodies to the Kings pleasure, excepting four
persons only of all the foresaid sureties, whose names be these, William Burk
Earl of Ulster, James Botiller Earl of Ormond, etc.

MCCCXLVI. Upon Palme-Sunday, which fell out to be the ninth day of April, the
above named Lord Ralph Ufford Justice of Ireland went the way of all flesh: for
whose death his own dependants, together with his wife, sorrowed not a little:
for

And again, in the month of May, and on the second day of the same month,
behold a prodigious wonder, sent, no doubt, miraculously from God above. For
lo, she that Dublin so gloriously, with the Kings arms and ensigns, attended
upon with a number of soldiers in her guard and train along the streets of
the said city, and so from that time forward (a small while though it were)
living royally with her friends about her, like a Queen in the Island of
Ireland, now at her going forth of the same city privily by a posternegate of
the castle, to avoid the clamor of the common people calling upon her for
debts, in her retire homeward to her own country departed in disgrace, sad
and mournful with the doleful badges of death, sorrow and heaviness.

Item, after the death of the said Justice of Ireland, the Lord Roger Darcy,
with the assent of the Kings Ministers and others of the same land, is placed
in the office of Justice

Also the castles of Ley and Kylmehede are taken by the Irish and burnt, in the
month of April.

Item, Lord John Moris comes chief Justice of Ireland the fifteenth day of
May.

John Moris, Justice of Ireland, is discharged by the King of England from that
office of Justiceship, and the Lord Walter Bermingham set in the same office by
the foresaid King: and a little after the foresaid slaughter committed, enters
with Commission into Ireland in the month of June.

Item, unto the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas Earl of Desmond the maintenance of
peace for a certain time is granted by the King of England. Which being granted
upon the Vigill of the exaltation of the holy Cross, he together with his
wife and

Item, unto the said Earl, by commandment and order from the Lord King of
England, there are granted from his entrance into England twenty shillings a
day, and so day by day still is allowed for his expenses.

Also, the Lord Walter Bermingham Justice of Ireland, and the Lord Moris
Fitz-Thomas, Earl of Kildare, rose up in arms against O-Merda and his
accomplices, who burnt the Castle of Ley and Kilmehed: and they with their forces
valiantly set upon and invade him and his accomplices, spoiling, killing and
burning, in so much as the said O-Morda and his accomplices (although at the
first they had manfully and resolutely made resistance there with many
thousands of the Irish) after many wounds and a great slaughter committed, were
constrained in the end to yield; and so they submitted to the Kings grace and
mercy, and betake themselves full and whole unto the said Earls devotion.

MCCCXLVII. The Earl of Kildare with his Barons and Knights goes unto the
King of England in the month of May, to aid him lying then at the siege of
Caleys.

Also the town of Caleys was by the inhabitants upon the fourth day of June
rendered up into the King of Englands hands.



Also, Mac-Murgh, to wit, Donald Mac-Murgh the son of Donald Art Mac-Murgh
King of Leinster, upon the fifth day of June is treacherously slain by his own
people.

More, Moris Fitz-Thomas Earl of Kildare is by the King of England made Knight.

Also the town called Monaghan, with all the territory adjoining, is by the
Irish burnt on the feast day of S. Stephen Martyr.



MCCCXLVIII. And in the 22. year of King Edward the third, reigned the first
pestilence, and most of all in Ireland, which had begun before in other
Countries.

Item, in this year Walter Lord Bermingham, Lord Justice of Ireland came into
England, and left John Archer Prior of Kylmainon his Lieutenant in his room.
And he returns again in the same year Justice as before: and the King
conferred upon the same Walter, the Barony of Kenlys which is in Osserie,
because he led a great army Eustace Pover, who was attainted and hanged at the
castle of the Isle.

MCCCXLIX. Lord Walter Bermingham, the best Justice of Ireland that ever was,
gave up his office of Justiceship; after whom succeeded the Lord Carew Knight
and Baron both.

MCCCL. And in the 25. year of the foresaid King Edward, Sir Thomas Rokesby

Item, Sir Walter Bermingham Knight Lord Bermingham, that right good Justice
sometime of Ireland, died in the Even of S. Margaret Virgin in England.

MCCCLI. Kenwrick Sherman sometime Mayor of the City of Dublin died, and was
buried under the Belfray of the preaching Friars of the same City: which
Belfray and Steeple himself erected, and glazed a window at the head of the
Quire, and caused the roof of the Church to be made, with many more good
deeds. In the same Covent he departed I say the sixth day of March: and at his
end he made his Will or Testament, amounting to the value of three thousand
Marks: and bequeathed many

MCCCLII. Sir Robert Savage Knight began in Ulster to build new castles in
diverse places, and upon his own Manours: who while he was a building said unto
his son and heir Sir Henry Savage, let us make strong walls about us, lest
happily the Irish come and take away our place, destroy our kindred and people,
and so we shall be reproached of all Nations. Then answered his son, where
ever there shall be valiant men, there is a Castle and Fortress too, according
to that saying, The sons encamped, that is to say, valiant men are ordained
for war, and therefore will I be among such hardy men, and so shall I be in a
castle: and therewith said in his vulgar speech, Bones is better than a castle
of Stones. Then his father in a fume and chafe gave over his work, and swore
an oath that he would never build with stone and mortar; but keep a good
house, and a very great family and retinew of servants about him: but he
prophesied withal, that hereafter his sons and posterity should grieve and
wail for it: which indeed came to pass; for the Irish destroyed all that
country for default of castles.

MCCCLV. And in the thirty year of the same King, Sir Thomas Rokesby Knight
went out of his office of Justice the six and twenty day of July: after whom
succeeded Moris Fitz-Thomas Earl of Desmund, and continued in the office
until his death.

Item, on the day of Saint Paul's conversion, the same Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas
died Justice of Ireland in the castle of Dublin, not without great sorrow of
his friends and kinsfolk, and no less fear and trembling of all other Irish
that loved peace. First, he was buried in the quire of the preaching Friars of
Dublin: and at last enterred in the Covent Church of the Friars Preachers of
Traly. This man was a righteous Justicer, in that he stuck not to hang up
those of his own blood for theft and rapine, and misdemeanors, even as soon
as strangers: and chastised the Irish very well.

MCCCLVI. And in the one and thirty year of the foresaid King, Sir Thomas
Rokesby was made the second time Justice of Ireland, who tamed the Irish very
well,

The same year died that Sir Thomas Justice of Ireland, within the Castle of
Kilka.

MCCCLVII. Also in the two and thirty year of the same Kings reign, Sir
Almarick de Saint Aimund was made chief Justice of Ireland, and entered into it.

At this very time began a great controversy between Master Richard Fitz-Ralfe
Archbishop of Armagh, and the four Orders of the begging Friars: but in the
end the Friars got the mastery, and by the Popes means caused the Archbishop
of Armagh

MCCCLVIII. In the 33. year of the same King Sir Almarick Sir Amund chief
Justice of Ireland passed over into England.

MCCCLIX. In the 34. year of the same King, James Botiller Earl of Ormond was
made chief Justice of Ireland.

Joan Burke Countess of Kildare departed this life on St. Georges day: and was
buried in the Church of the Friars Minors of Kildare, near unto her husband
the Lord Thomas Fitz-Iohn Earl of Kildare.

MCCCLX. And in the 35. of the foresaid King, died Master Richard Fitz-Ralfe
Archbishop of Armagh in Hanault, the sixteenth day of December: whose bones
were conveied into Ireland by the reverend father Stephen Bishop of Meth, to be
bestowed in S. Nicolas Church at Dundalk, where he was born: But doubted it is
whether they were his bones or some other man's.

Item, Sir Robert Savage, a doughty knight dwelling in Ulster, departed this
life: Irish three thousand near unto Antrim: but before that he went forth to
that battle, he took order that there should be given unto every Englishman
one good draught or pot of wine or ale, whereof he had a number of hogsheads
and barrels full: and the rest he saved against the coming of his friends: he
caused also to be killed sheep, oxen, tame foul crammed fat, wild foul, and
for venison red Dear: that they might be dressed and made ready for such as
returned winners out of the field, whosoever they were. And he was wont to say,
a shame it were if guests should come and not find what to eat and drink.
But when it pleased God to give the English victory, he invited them all to
supper, and they rejoiced with thanksgiving: and himself said, I give God
thanks: For better it

Also, the Earl of Ormond, Lord Justice of Ireland entered England: in whose
place Moris Fitz-Thomas Earl of Kildare was made Lord Justice of Ireland, by
this Charter and Commission as appears: Omnibus ad quos, etc. that is, To all
whom these letters shall come unto Greeting: Know ye that we have committed to
our sweet and faithful subject, Moris Earl of Kildare, the office of our L.
Justice of our land of Ireland: and our land of Ireland, with the Castle and
all pertenances thereto, to keep and govern so long as it shall please us: and
to receive at our Exchequer in Dublin Burgey, Prior of the Hospital of S. John
of Jerusalem in Ireland, our Chancellor of Ireland, at Dublin the thirtieth
day of March, and of our reign the thirty five year. Also James Botiller
Earl of Ormond came again out of England Lord Justice of Ireland, as before,
unto whom the Earl of Kildare resigned up the office of Justiceship.

MCCCLXI. Leonell Earl of Ulster in right of his wives inheritance, and being
the

In the same year was the second pestilence. There died in England Henry Duke
of Lancaster, the Earl of March, the Earl of Northampton.

Also on the sixth day of January, Mons Doncref a Citizen of Dublin was buried
in the Churchyard of the Friars Preachers of the same City: unto which covent
or brotherhood he gave forty pounds, toward the glazing of their Church.

Item, there departed out of this life the Lady Joan Fleming, wife to the Lord
Geffery and the Lady Margaret Bermingham, wife to the Lord Robert Preston, on
the Vigill of St. Margaret, and were buried in the Covent Church of the
preaching Friars of Tredagh.

Also, the Lord Walter Bermingham the younger, died on S. Laurence day, who
divided his inheritance between his sisters, the one part thereof the foresaid
Preston had for his share.

Item, the foresaid Lord Leonell, after he was entered into Ireland and had
rested O-Brynne, and proclaimed throughout his army, that no man borne in
Ireland should come near unto his camp: and an hundred of his own Pensioners
were slain. Leonell seeing this, forthwith reduced the whole people as well of
England as of Ireland into one, and so he prospered, and struck many
battles round about in all places with the Irish, by the help of God, and
the people of Ireland. He made also many Knights of English and Irish: and
among them Robert Preston, Robert Holiwood, Thomas Talbot, Walter Cusacke,
James de La Hide, John Ash, or de Fraxius, Patricke and Robert Ash, or de
Fraxius, and many besides.

Also, he removed the Exchequer from Dublin to Carlagh, and gave five hundred
pounds to the walling of that town.

Item, on the feast of Saint Maur Abbat, there rose a mighty wind, that shook
and overthrew pinnacles, battlements, chimneys, and other things higher than
the rest, trees without number, diverse Steeples, and namely, the Steeple of the
Preaching Friars.

MCCCLXII. Also in the 36. year of the same King, the Church of St. Patricke
in Dublin through negligence was set on fire and burnt, the eighth of April.

MCCCLXIV. And in the 38. year of the foresaid King, the Lord Leonel Earl of
Ulster entered England the 22. of April, and left his Deputy-Justice of
Ireland, the

MCCCLXV. Also in the 39. year of the said King, the same Leonell Duke of
Clarence passed over into England, leaving behind him Sir Thomas Dale Knight
his Deputy-Custos, and Justice of Ireland.

MCCCLXVII. Great war began between the Berminghams of Carbry and the men of
Meth, because many robberies by the foresaid were committed in Meth. Then Sir
Robert Preston Knight, and Lord chief Baron of the Exchequer, set a strong
guard in the castle of Carbry, and laid forth a great deal of money against
the Kings enemies, to defend his own right, in regard of his wife.

Item, Gerald Fitz-Moris Earl of Desmond was made Lord Justice of Ireland.
MCCCLXVIII. And in the 42. year of the same King, in Carbry, after a certain
Parliament ended between the Irish and English, there were taken prisoners
Friar Thomas Burley Prior of Kylmaynon, the Kings Chancellor in Ireland, John
Fitz-Reicher Sheriff of Meth, Sir Robert Tirell Baron of Castle-knoke, with
many besides, by the Berminghams and others of Carbry. Then James Bermingham,
who had been kept in the castle of Trim in iron manacles and fetters as a
traitor, was delivered out of prison, in exchange for the foresaid
Chancellor, the other were put to their ransomes.

Item, the Church of Saint Mary's in Trim was burnt with the fire of the same
Monastery.

Also in the Vigill of St. Luke the Evangelist, the Lord Leonell Duke of
Clarence died at Albe in Pyemont. First he was buried in the City of Papie,
hard by St. Augustine the Doctor; and afterward enterred at Clare in the covent
Church of Austin Friars in England.

MCCCLXIX. And in the 43. year of the foresaid King, Sir William Windesore
Knight, a doughty man in arms and courageous, came as the Kings Lieutenant
into Ireland the twelfth day of July: unto whom gave place in the office of
Justice-ship Gerald Fitz-Moris Earl of Desmond.

MCCCLXX. And in the 44. year of the same King, began the third pestilence,
and

The same year Gerald Fitz-Moris Earl of Desmond, the Lord John Nicolas and
the Lord Thomas Fitz-Iohn and many other noble persons were taken prisoners
upon on the sixth of July, near unto the Monastery of Maio, in the county of
Limerick by

In this year died Lord Robert Terel Baron of castle Knock, the Lady
Scolastica his wife, and their son and heir: by reason whereof Joan Terel
and Maud Terel, sisters of the said Robert, parted the inheritance between
themselves.

Item, there departed this life Lord Simon Fleming Baron of Slane, Lord John
Cusake Baron of Colmolyn; and John Tailour sometime Mayor of Dublin, a rich and
mighty monied man.

That which follows was copied out of the Manuscript Chronicles of Henry
Marleburgh.
MCCCLXXII. Sir Robert Asheton came Lord Justice of Ireland.

MCCCLXXIII. Great warring there was between the English of Meth, and O-Ferdle,
in which war many of both sides were slain.

Item, in May Lord John Husse Baron of Galtrim, John Fitz Richard Sheriff of
Meth, and William Dalton, in Kynaleagh were killed by the Irish.

MCCCLXXV. Thomas Archbishop of Dublin died: and in the same year was Robert
Dublin.

MCCCLXXXI. There departed this life Edmund Mortimer the Kings Lieutenant in
Ireland, Earl of March and Ulster, at Cork.

MCCCLXXXIII. There was a great pestilence in Ireland.

MCCCLXXXV. The bridge of the city of Dublin fell down.

MCCCXC. Robert Wickford Archbishop of Dublin died.

The same year Robert Waldebey Archbishop of Dublin, of the order of Austen
Friars, was translated.

MCCCXCVII. There happened the translation and death of Friar Richard Northalis
Archbishop of Dublin, one of the Carmelites order.

Thomas Crauley was consecrated Archbishop of Dublin.

The same year the Lord Thomas Burgh, and the Lord Walter Bermingham slew six
hundred of the Irish, and their captain Mac-Con.

Item, Roger Earl of March, Lieutenant of Ireland wasted the country of
O-Bryn, with the help of the Earl of Ormund, and dubbed there seven Knights,
to wit, Christopher Preson, John Bedeleu, Edmund Loundris, John Loundris,
William Nugent, Walter de la Hyde, and Robert Cadell, at the forcing and
winning of a most strong Manor house of the said O-Bryn.

MCCCXCVIII. Upon the Ascension day of our Lord, the Tothils slew forty
English, among whom John Fitz-William, Thomas Talbot, and Thomas Common were
killed,

In the same year on St. Margarets day, Roger Earl of March the Kings
Lieutenant was with many others slain at Kenlys in Leinster, O Bryn and other
Irish of Leinster, in whose place and office Roger Gray is chosen Justice.

In the same year upon the feast of S. Mark Pope and Confessor, came to
Dublin the noble Duke of Sutherey, as the Kings Lieutenant in Ireland: with
whom at the same time arrived Master Thomas Crauley, Archbishop of Dublin.

MCCCXCIX. And in the 23. year of King Richard, upon Sunday which fell out to
be the morrow after S. Fetronill or Pernill the Virgins day, the same glorious
King Richard arrived at Waterford with two hundred sail.

Item, the sixth day of the same week, at Ford in Kenlys within the country of
Kil^are, were slain of the Irish 200. by Ie^icho and other English: and the
morrow after the Dublinians made a rode in the country of O-Bryn, and slew of
the Irish 33. and fourscore men and women with their little children they took
prisoners.

The same year, the said King came to Dublin the fourth day before the Calends
of July: where he heard rumors of Henry the Duke of Lancaster his coming
into England, whereupon himself passed over with speed into England.

MCCCC. In the first year of King Henry the fourth, at Whitsontide the
Constable of Dublin castle and many others encountered the Scots at sea before
Stranford in Ulster: whereupon fell out a lamentable accident, for that many of
the English were slain and drowned there.

MCCCCI. In the second year of King Henry the fourth, Sir John Stanley the K.
Lieutenant passed over into England in the month of May, leaving in his room
Sir William Stanley.

In the same year, upon the Vigill of Saint Bartholomew, there entered into
Ireland Stephen Scroop, as deputy to the Lord Thomas of Lancaster, the Kings
Lieutenant

The same year, on the day of S. Brice Bishop and Confessor, the Lord Thomas
of Lancaster the Kings son, arrived at Dublin, Lieutenant of Ireland.

MCCCCII. On the fifth of July was the Church of the Friars Preachers at Dublin
dedicated by the Archbishop of Dublin: and the same day John Drake the Mayor of
Dublin, with the citizens and men of the country, slew in battle of the Irish
near unto Bree 493. and were victorious over the Irish.

The same year in the month of September, a Parliament was holden at Dublin:
at which time in Uriel Sir Bartholomew Verdon, James White, Stephen Gernon, and
their accomplices, slew John Dowdal Sheriff of Louth.

MCCCCIII. In the fourth year of King Henry the fourth, and in the month of

In the same year about the feast of S. Martin, there passed over into England
Thomas the Kings son, leaving Stephen Scroop his Deputy, who also himself
upon the first day of Lent returned into England: and then the Lords of the
land chose the Earl of Ormond Lord Justice of Ireland.

MCCCCIV. In the fifth year of King Henry died John Cowlton Archbishop of
Armagh the fifth of May, whom Nicholas Fleming succeeded. The same year on S.
Vitalis day began a Parliament at Dublin, before the Earl of Ormond then Lord
Dublin: also the charter of Ireland.

In the same year Patrick Savage in Ulster was treacherously slain by
Mac-Kilmori; and Richard his brother given for an hostage, who likewise was
murdered in prison, after he had paid two hundred Marks.

MCCCCV. In the sixth year of King Henry, and in the month of May, were taken
three Scottish Galions or Barks, two at Green-castle, and one at Dalkey, with
the captain Thomas Mac-Golagh.

The same year the merchants of Tredaght entered Scotland, took pledges and
preies.

The same year Stephen Scroope crossed the seas into England, leaving the
Earl of Ormond Lord Justice of Ireland.

And the same year, in the month of June the Dublinians entered Scotland at
Saint Ninians, and there behaved themselves manfully: then landed they in
Wales, and did much hurt to the Welshmen there; yea and carried away the Shrine
of S. Cubie unto the Church of the holy Trinity in Dublin.

Also, the same year on the Vigill of the blessed Virgin, died James Botiller
Earl of Ormond, whiles he was Lord Justice (to the grief of many) at
Baligauran; unto whom there succeeded in the office of Lord Justice, Gerald
Earl of Kildare.

MCCCCVI. And in the seventh year of King Henry, on Corpus Christi day the
Dublinians Dublin.

The same year, the Prior of Conall fought valiantly in the plain of Kildare,
and vanquished two hundred Irish well armed, killing some, and putting others

In the same year, after the feast of S. Michael, Sir Stephen Scroop Deputy
Justice under the Lord Thomas the Kings son Lieutenant of Ireland, entered
into Ireland.

The same year died Pope Innocentius the seventh, after whom succeeded Pope
Gregory.

The same year began a Parliament at Dublin on Saint Hilaries day, which
ended at Trym in Lent: and Meiler Bermingham slew Cathol O-Conghir in the end
of February, and Sir Gefferey Vaulx a noble Knight in the county of Carlagh

MCCCCVII. A certain Irishman, a most false villain, named Mac-Adam
Mac-Gilmori (who caused forty Churches to be destroyed) one that was never
christened, and therefore termed Corbi, took Patricke Savage prisoner, and
received of him for his ransom two thousand Marks, and yet killed him
afterward with his brother Richard.

The same year, in the feast of the exaltation of the Holy Cross, Stephen
Scroop, Deputy under Thomas the Kings son Lieutenant of Ireland, accompanied
with the Earls of Ormond and Desmond, and the Prior of Kylmaynon, with many
out of Meth, set forth from Dublin: and in hostile manner invaded the land of
Mac-Murgh: O-Nolam with his son and others were taken prisoners. But hearing
then and there, that the Burkeins and O-Keroll in the county of Kilkenny had
for two days together done much mischief, suddenly the said Captains rode in
all haste with bridle on horse neck unto the town of Callan, and there
meeting with the said enemies, manfully put them to flight. O-Keroll, and to
the number of eight hundred they killed in the place.

The same year Stephen Scroop sailed over into England, and James Butler Earl
of Ormond was by the country chosen Lord Justice of Ireland.

Dublin, in which Parliament were confirmed the Statutes of Kilkenny and of
Dublin: and a Charter granted under the great seal of England against
Purveyouris.

The same year, the morrow after S. Peter's day ad Vincula, the Lord Thomas of
Lancaster the Kings son arrived as Lieutenant of Ireland at Cartingford, and
in the week following came to Dublin: and arrested the Earl of Kildare as he
came unto him, with three of his house: and all his goods he lost by the
servants of the said Lieutenant: and in the castle of Dublin he imprisoned him,
until he made payment of 300. Marks for a fine.

The same year on Saint Marcellus day died the Lord Stephen Scroop at
Tristel-Dermot

The same year the said Thomas of Lancaster was wounded at Kylmainon, and
hardly escaped death: and afterward caused Proclamation to be made, that
whosoever by his tenures owed service to the King should appear at Rosse. And
after Saint Hilaries feast he held a Parliament at Kilkenny, for to have a
tallage granted. And afterward upon the third day before the Ides of March, he
passed over into England, leaving the Prior of Kylmainon his Deputy in Ireland.

In this year Hugh Mac-Gilmory was slain at Cragfergus, within the Oratory or
Church of the Friars Minors: which Church he before had destroyed, and broken
the glass windows thereof, for to have the iron bars therein: at which his
enemies,

MCCCCIX. In the tenth year of King Henry, and in the month of June, Ianico of
Artoys with the English slew fourscore of the Irish in Ulster.

MCCCCX. On the thirteenth day of June began a Parliament at Dublin, and
continued three weeks, the Prior of Kylmainon sitting as Lord Justice.

The same year, on the tenth day of July, the same Justice began the castle
of Mibracly in O-Feroll, and built De la Mare: and a great dearth there was of
corn.

In the same year the Justice entered the land of O-brin with a thousand and
five hundred kernes, of whom eight hundred departed unto the Irish: and had not
the Dublinians been there, there would have been wailing and many a woe; and
yet John Derpatrick lost his life there.

MCCCCXII. About the feast of Tiburce and Valerian, O-Conghir did much harm to
the Irish in Meth, and took prisoner 160. men.

The same year O-Doles a knight, and Thomas Fitz-Moris Sheriff of Limerik,
killed one another.

In the same year, the ninth of June, died Robert Monteyn Bishop of Meth,
after Edward Dandisey sometime Archdeacon of Cornwall.

MCCCCXIII. The seventh of October there landed in Ireland at Cloncarfe, John
Stanley the Kings Lieutenant in Ireland, who died the sixth of January in
Atterith.

The same year, after the death of John Stanley Lord Lieutenant, Thomas
Crauley Archbishop of Dublin was chosen on the eleventh day of February Lord
Justice of Ireland. A Parliament eftsoons began at Dublin the morrow after
Saint Matthias the Apostles day, and lasted fifteen days: during which time
the Irish fell to burning in diverse places, as they had done often in
Parliament times; wherefore a tallage was demanded, but not granted.

MCCCCXIIII. The English slew of the Irish the O-Mordries and O-Dempsies Kilka,
even whiles the Justice of Ireland Thomas Crauley Archbishop of Dublin went in
Procession at Tristeldermot, praying with his Clerks: and his servants with
their countrymen overthrew of the Irish an hundred.

Upon the feast day of Saint Gordian and Saint Epimachus a foil or
discomfiture was given to the English of Meth, and there was slain Thomas
Maurevord Baron of Scrin: and taken prisoners there were Christopher Fleming,
John Dardis, and many others slain by O-Conghir and the Irish.

In the vigill of Saint Martin arrived the Lord John Talbot Lord Furnivall, as
Lieutenant of Ireland, at Dalkay.

MCCCCXV. In the month of November died Robert Talbot a Nobleman, who

Item, after the feast of All Saints died Friar Patricke Baret Bishop of Fern,
and a Canon of Kenlis, where he was buried.

MCCCCXVI. On the feast day of Gervasse and Prothasius the Lord Furnivall had a
son borne at Finglas. About this time the reverend Lord Stephen Fleming
Archbishop of Armagh departed this life: unto whom succeeded John Suanig. And
at the same time the Lord Bishop of Ardachard, Friar Adam Lyns of the order of
preaching Friars.

Item, on Saint Laurence day died Thomas Talbot Lord of Furnivall, lately borne
at Finglas, and is interred in the quire of the preaching Friars Church of
Dublin, within Dublin, in the time whereof the Irish fell upon the English and
slew many of them, among whom Thomas Balimore of Baliquelan was slain.

This Parliament lasted in that place six weeks, and then was removed to Trym
the eleventh day of May, and there it continued eleven days: and granted there
was unto the Lieutenant a subsidy of four hundred Marks.

MCCCCXVII. On the Eve of Philip and Jacob Apostles, Thomas Crauley Archbishop
of Dublin passed over into England, and died at Farindon: he was buried in the
New College at Oxford: a liberal man he had been, and an almes-giver, a
great Clerk, a Doctor in Divinity, and excellent Preacher, a builder of the
places Dublin peaceably.



Item, at Slane on the day of S. John and S. Paul, were arrested the Earl of
Kildare, Sir Christopher Preston, and Sir John Bedleu, and committed to ward
within the castle of Trym, because they were desirous to common with the Prior
of Kylmainon. The fourth of August died Sir Matthew Husee Baron of Galtrim, who
lies buried at the Preaching Friars in Trim.

MCCCCXIX. The eleventh of May, Edmund Brel sometime Mayor of Dublin departed

At the same time died Sir John Loundres. On the fifth day of the week, falling
out to be Maunday Thursday, O-Thoill took 400. kine that belonged to Balimore,
so breaking the peace against his oath.

The fourth of May Mac-Morghe chief Captain of his own Sept, and of all the
Irish in Leinster, was taken prisoner. And the same day Hugh Cokesey was made
knight.

The last day of May, the Lieutenant, the Archbishop of Dublin, and the Mayor
together

The morrow after the feast of Processus and Martinian, the Lord William Burgh,
and other of the English slew 500. of the Irish, and took O-Kelly prisoner.

On the feast of Mary Magdalen, the Lieutenant John Talbot passed over into
England, leaving for his Deputy the Archbishop of Dublin: carrying with him the
curses of diverse, for that he paid a little or nothing for his victuals, and
was indebted unto many.

About the feast of Saint Laurence, diverse there were that died in Normandy,
and by name, Friar Thomas Botiller Prior of Kilmainon, with many others.



Item, upon the Ides of February died Friar John Fitz-Henry Prior of Kylmainon:
whom succeeded Friar William Fitz-Thomas, elected and confirmed the morrow
after S. Valentines day.

Also the morrow after the feast of Saint Peter in Cathedra, the Lord John
Talbot Lord of Furnivall yielded the place into the hands of the Lord Richard
Talbot Archbishop of Dublin, who afterward was chosen Lord Justice of Ireland.

MCCCCXX. Upon the fourth day of April, the Lord James Butler Earl of Ormond
Ireland, and quickly caused a combat to be fought between two of his cousins:
of whom the one died in the field, and the other was carried forth of the place
sore hurt and lamed unto Kilkenny. On St. Georges feast day, the same
Lieutenant held a Counsel at Dublin, and summoned a Parliament there. And in
the mean while he raised great booties from O-Raly, Mac-Mahon, and Mac-Guyr:
And the eighth day of June began a Parliament at Dublin, and there were granted
unto the Lieutenant 700. Marks: and that Parliament continued for 16. days:
and the same was prorogued unto the monday after St. Andrews day: also in the
foresaid Parliament were cast up the debts of the Lord John Talbot late
Lieutenant, which arose to a great sum.

Michaels day died Michaell Bodley."

On the Vigill of Saint Francis, there departed this life Friar Nicholas
Talbot, Abbot of St. Thomas the Martyr in Dublin. After whom succeeded Friar
John Whiting.

The morrow after the Apostles Simon and Iudes day, was the castle of Colnolin
taken by Thomas Fitz-Geffery.

Also in the Vigill of S. Katherine Virgin, Botiller the son and heir of the
Earl

Item, on monday after the feast of S. Andrew the Apostle, the said Parliament
began at Dublin, and continued 13. days: and granted there was to the
Lieutenant there 300. marks: and the Parliament was adjourned eftsoons unto
the monday after St. Ambrose day.

Then rumors resounded, that the Lord Thomas Fitz-Iohn Earl of Desmund died
at Paris on St. Laurence feast day, and was buried there at the Friars
Preachers covent, the King of England being present at his funerals. After whom
succeeded in that Seigniorie James Fitzgerald his Uncle by the fathers side,
who had three James at Kernisham. 1421. The Parliament began upon prorogation
the third time at Dublin the monday after the feast of S. Ambrose: and there
certain persons were ordained to be sent in message to the King, as touching
the redress of the land, namely, the Archbishop of Armagh, and Sir Christopher
Preston Knight.

At the same time Richard O-Hedian Bishop of Cassell was accused by John Gese
Bishop of Lismore and Waterford, upon thirty Articles laid to his charge.
After all that, he charged him that he made very much of the Irish, and loved
none of the

Item, that he counterfeited the King of Englands seal, and the Kings letters
patents, that he went about to make himself King of Mounster: also that he
took a ring away from the image of S. Patrick, which the Earl of Desmund had
offered, and bestowed it upon an harlot of his: beside many other enormities,
which he exhibited in writing. And the Lords and Commons were much troubled
between these twain.

Now in the same Parliament, there was debate between Adam Pay Bishop of Clon
Adam went about to unite the others Church unto his, but the other would not:
and so they were sent and referred unto the Court of Rome, and this Parliament
lasted 18. days.

In the Nones of May there was a slaughter committed by O-Mordris upon the
family or retinue of the Earl of Ormund, Lieutenant, near unto the Monastery
of Leys, where were slain of the English 27. The principal parties were
Purcell and Grant. Then Gentlemen of good birth were taken prisoners, and 200.
fled unto the foresaid Monastery, and so were saved.

In the Ides of May died Sir John Bodley Knight, and Geffery Galon sometime
Mayor of Dublin, and was buried in the house of the preaching Friars of the
same

About this time Mac-Mahon an Irishman played the devil in Urgal, wasting and
burning where ever he went.

The seventh of June the Lieutenant entered into the country, to wit, of Leys
against O-Mordis, and led thither a most puissant army, having the killing of
his enemies for four days together, and until the Irish promised all peace
and quietness.

Upon the feast of Michael the Archangel, Thomas Stanley, accompanied with all
the Knights and Squires of Meth and Iriel, took Moyle O-Downyll prisoner, and
slew others, in the 14. year of King Henry the sixth his reign.

Thus far forth were continued the Annals of Ireland which came to my hands,
and upon which I have bestowed these few Augustus his days, I know they can
yield no pleasing relish to them, in regard of the harsh words, and the
saplesse dry style, familiar unto that age wherein they were penned.
Nevertheless, I would have those to remember, That HISTORY Also, That they
are to look as well for real and substantial knowledge from some, as for the
verbal and literal learning from others.

THE SMALLER ISLANDS IN THE BRITISH OCEAN.
NOw will I at length weigh anchor and set sail out of Ireland, and lanching
forth take survey of the Islands scattered here and there along the coasts of
Britain. If I durst repose any trust in

And that in this voyage I may at first set out orderly, and take a straight
and direct course, I will, to begin, sail out of Ireland into the Severn sea,
and by the Irish sea (after I have doubled the utmost point of Scotland) follow
my course down into the Antiphilus, (...), that is, Adventure is a good sea
Captain: and he that saileth the same voyage a second time, may happily speed
much better, and finish his desired course.

First and foremost, because it seems not impertinent to my matter, I will set
down what Plutarch, out of a fabulous narration of Demetrius (who seems to
have lived in Hadrians time) reports generally as touching the Islands lying
near to Britain. Demetrius Daemones, and Heroes: also that himself by
commission from the Emperor, sailed toward one that was nearest of those
desert Isles, for to know and discover somewhat: the which he found to have in a
few inhabitants, and those he understood were reputed by the Britans sacred and
inviolable. Within a while after he was landed there, the air and weather (as
he said) became foully troubled, many portenteous signs were given by terrible
tempests, with extra-ordinary And a little after: Now he said moreover, that
there was a certain Island there, wherein Saturn was by Briareus closed up and
kept in prison sound asleep (for sleep was the means to hold him captive) about
whose person there were many Daemones at his feet, that stood attending as
servitours. Thus they took pleasure in old time, as now also at this day,
boldly to devise strange wonders and tales of places far remote, in a certain
secure vein of lying, as it were by authority.

In the narrow sea of Severn there peep up first of all two small Islands,
whereof the Flatholme, in the same sense that Planarie is named Italy: the
other Step-holme, because it rises steep, in the British tongue Reoric: both
of them, when the Britans bare rule, were termed Echni, like as in our age
Holmes, for so the Anglo-Saxons called green plains enclosed within water:
neither were they in ancient times famous for any thing else, but for that the
Danes lay there at road: and for the tomb of one Gualchus, a Britan of singular
devoutnesse, whose Disciple Barruch left his name to the Island Barry in Wales
(as an ancient monument of the Church of Landaff witnesses) which Island in
like manner has given name to a noble house of the Barraies in Ireland.

This has lying hard to it the little Island Silly, upon the coast of the
ancient Silures, Glancorgan-shire: yet dare I not avouch it to be Silura, or
Insula Silurum, the Island that Solinus mentions, seeing there be other Islands
bearing the same name; yet, far distant from the Silures.

From thence we come to Caldey, in the British Imis-Pix, lying near unto the
shore; and to Londey farther within the sea, over against Caldey, and belonging
unto Devonshire; from the promontory or cape whereof, named Hert-nesse, it
lies 14. miles. Larger this is counted of the twain, howbeit reported to be
not much more than two miles long, and one mile broad, so encircled with rocks
and cliffes round about, that there is no avenue unto it but in one or two
places. A fort or sconce it had: the ruins Thomas Delamere Knight (in
reporting how that silly king Edward the second, when his froward and
unreasonable wife, together with the unruly Barons thundered out threats, and
denounced terrible menaces, was minded to withdraw himself hither, as to a
place of refuge) has in old time described it in this wise. Londay (says he)
is an Island lying in the mouth of Severn

From thence in the very bent and turning of Pembroch-shire, we meet with
Gresholme, Stockholme, Gresholme. Stockholme, and Scalmey. Silimnus.
and Scalmey, in which is plenty of grass, and wild thyme grows very fresh
and pleasant. The day was when I thought Scalmey to have been that SILIMNUS,
which Pliny in old time wrote of: but the truth has now made me change my
opinion. For that SILIMNUS of Pliny (as the affinity of the word Ptolomee his
LIMNI. That this here is the Britans Lymen, the word it self (if I should say
nothing) shows evidently, which the Englishmen by a new name have now a days
termed Ramsey. This lies full against the Episcopal Sea of Saint David's,
whereunto it belongs, and was in the foregoing ages very famous for the death
of one Justinian a most holy man; who after he had withdrawn himself hither
out of little Britain in France, in that age that brought forth so many
Saints, and led a long time an Eremits life, wholly devoted to the service of
God, being in the end slain by a page, was registered in the roll of Martyrs.
In whose life we find it oftentimes written, Lemen^ia Insula. Which
denomination Limen, by which name it is known unto the Britains themselves,
checketh and taxes his drowsinesse who makes this Island lying next above it
to be Ptolomees Limnon: which the Britains now name Enhly, and English Berdsey,
as one would say the Isle of Birds. But that this should be it that Ptolomee
calls EDRI, and Pliny ANDROS or ADROS (as it is in some place read) I durst
more boldly guess by the signification of the word: for Ader in the British
tongue signifies a Bird, and in the very same sense the Englishmen afterward
called it Berdsey. As for Enhly, it is a name of a later stamp, and came by
occasion of a certain holy and devout man, who here lived as an Eremite.

For this Island, which toward the East mounteth aloft with an high promontory,
Dubrith and Merlin the Caledonian, ancient histories record there were twenty
thousand Saints buried here. Next unto this lies MONA, that is, Anglesey,
which the Britans also name Mon, Tir-Mon, and Ynis Dowyll, that is, A dark or
shady Island, the Saxons (...), whereof I have treated already in the page 671.

To Moan or Anglesey there adjoine three smaller Islands, Moyl-Rhoniad, that is,
The Isle of Seals, upon the North-west; which after it had been withheld by
certain that unjustly seized upon it, from the Bishops of Bangor, unto whom it
belonged, Henry Deney Bishop of Bangor (as we read in the history of
Canterbury) with a Ynis Ligod, that is, The Isle of mice: and more beneath,
Prest-home, that is, The Isle of Priests: and nothing saw we in it but the
tower steeple of Saint Cyriacs chapel, which shows it self to the
beholders afar off. Incredible it is what the neighbors report of the
infinite multitude of sea foul that here do breed: as also what they tell of
a causey or bank which went from hence through the sea to the foot of that
huge mountain Pen-Maen-Maur, for their use who of devotion went on pilgrimage
to visit this place, held in times past so holy and religious. I pass over
Lambey a little Island opposite unto this toward the coast of Ireland, although
our Metall-men have to their great charges sought there of late for Alum.

Mona whereof Caesar makes mention, in the mids of the cur, as he says,
between Britain and Ireland.

Ptolomee terms it MONOEDA, as one would say Mon-eitha, that is, if I may be
allowed to conjecture, The more remote Mona, to put a difference between it
and the other Mona, that is, Anglesey: Pliny MONABIA, Orosius MENAVIA, and
Bid Menavia secunda, that is, the second Menavia, where he terms Mona or
Anglesey, Menavia prior, that is, the former Menavia, and calls them both,
Islands of the Britans: in which writers notwithstanding it is read amiss
Mevania: Ninius who also goes abroad under the name of Gildas, names it
Eubonia and Manaw, the Britans Menow, the inhabitants Maning, and we
Englishmen, The Isle of Man: stretched Girald Cambrensis) between the Northren
coasts of Ireland and Britain; about which Isle, and namely to whether of the
two countries it ought of right to appertain, there arose no small doubt among
those in ancient times. At length the controversy was taken up in this manner.
For as much as this land fostered venomous worms brought over hither for
trial, adjudged it was by a common censure and doom to lie unto Britain.
Howbeit the inhabitants

It lies out in length from North to South much about thirty Italian miles:
but reaches in breadth where it is widest, scarce above fifteen miles, and
where it is narrowest eight. In Bedes days it contained in it three hundred
families, like as Anglesey 96. but now it numbreth seventeene Parish Churches.
Flax and hemp it bears abundantly: it has fresh pastures, and fields by
good manuring plenteous of Barley, and Wheat, but of Oats especially: whence
it is that the people there eat most of all Oaten bread. Store of cattle
every where, and mighty flocks of

In the midst it rises up with hills standing thick, the highest whereof is
Sceafull, from whence a man may see on a clear and fair day, Scotland,
England and Ireland. Their chief town they count Russin, situate on the
South Side, which of a castle wherein lies a Garrison, is commonly called
Castle-Towne: where, within a little Island Pope Gregory the fourteenth
instituted an Episcopal See: the Bishop whereof Sodorensis (of this very Island
as it is thought) had jurisdiction in times past over all the Islands, West
Irish Isles or Hebrides, but exercises it now only upon that Island, and is
himself under the Archbishop of York. Howbeit, he has no place nor voice in
the assembly of the States of England in Court of Parliament. Duglasse is the
best peopled town, and of greatest resort; because the haven is commodious,
and has a most easy entrance: unto which the Frenchmen and other forrainers
use to repair with their bay salt, having traffic with the Ilanders, and
buying of them again, leather, course wool, and poudred beef.

But on the South side of the I Will stand Bala-Curi (where the Bishop for the
most part is resiant) and the Pyle, a Block-house standing in a little Island;
where also there Calfe of Man, wherein are exceeding great store of sea-foule
called Puffins, and of those duckes and drakes which (breeding of rotten-wood,
as they say) the Englishmen call Bernacles, Bernacles.
the Scots Clakes and Soland geese.

That which here follows I will set down out of a letter, which that learned
and reverend father in God John Meryk Bishop of this I Will wrote unto me. This
Island, for cattle, for fish, yea and for corn, rather through men's industry
than by any goodness of the ground, has not only sufficient for it self, but
also good store to send into other countries. Yet happier it was for the
government thereof, as being defended from neighbor enemies by soldiers pressed
and ready, at the expenses of the Earl of Darby, upon which It has certain
Coroners, and those they call Annos, who stand in stead of Sheriffs, and
execute their office. The Ecclesiastical Judge does cite persons and determine
causes, within eight days they stand to his award, or they are clapped up in
prison.

They had, as I have heard say, as a peculiar language of their own, so also
their peculiar

Honorius and Arcadius (as we read in Orosius) it was inhabited as well as
Ireland by the Scottish Nations: and Ninnius has written that one Biule a Scot
was Lord of it. But (as the same writer records) the Scots were driven out of
all the British countries and Islands by Cuneda, Grandfather Maglocunus, whom
Gildas (for the foul work that he made in these Islands) termed the Dragon of
the Isles. After this, Edwin King of Northumberland brought this Island, like as
the foresaid Anglesey, under the subjection of the English, if we understand
them both by the name of Menaviae, as writers persuade us: at which time it was
reckoned an Island of the Britans. But when the North had sent abroad his brood
the second time, I mean the Normans, Danes, and Norwegians: these Norwegians,
who with their manifold robberies and roveries did most hurt from the Northren
sea, took up their haunt into this Island and the Hebrides, and therein erected
Lords and Petty Kings, whose brief history I will here put down word for word
out of an old Manuscript, lest it should be utterly lost, which is entitled,
The seeming to have been written by the Monks of the Abbey of Russin, which was
the principal place of religion in this Isle.

A CHRONICLE OF THE KINGS OF MAN.
ANno Domini MLXV. Edward of blessed memory King of England departed this life:
after whom succeeded in the kingdom Harald the son of Godwin; against whom
Harald Harfager King of Norway came into the field, and fought a battle at
Stainford-bridge; and the English obtaining the victory, put them all to
flight: out of which chase Godred surnamed Crovan, the son of Harald the black
of Iseland, came unto Godred the son of Syrric, who then reigned in Man, and
by him was honorably received.

The same year, William the BASTARD conquered England and Godred the Syrric
died, after whom succeeded his son Fingal.

MLXVI. Godred Crovan assembled a great fleet and came to Man, fought with the
people of the land, but was overcome and put to rout. A second time he rallied
his forces and his fleet, sailed into Man, joined battle with the Manksmen,
was vanquished and driven out of the field. A third time he gathered a great
multitude together, and by night arrived in the haven called Ramsa, and hid
three hundred men within a wood, which stood upon the hanging hollow brow of an
hill called Scacafel. Godred. And when the fight was hot, those three hundred
men starting out of the ambush behind their backs, began to foil the Manksmen
and put them to the worst, yea and forced them to fly. Now when they saw
themselves discomfited, and no place for them of refuge to escape, (for the sea
water coming in with the tide had filled the channel of Ramsa river, and the
enemies on the other side followed the chase hard) they that then remained
alive took up a pitiful cry, and besought Godred to save their lives. And he
moved with compassion, pitying their woeful calamity (as who for a certain
time had been

Goared the morrow after proposed this choice unto his own army, whether they
would rather divide Man among themselves, and therein dwell, or only take the
substance and pillage of the country, and so return unto their own homes?
But they chose rather to wast and spoil the whole Island, and with the goods
thereof to enrich themselves, and so return home. But Godred himself, with
those few Ilanders that remained with him, inhabited the South part of the
Island, and granted to the remains of the Manksmen the North part, with this
covenant and condition, That none of them should at any time venture and
presume to challenge any part of the Godred then reduced Dublin, and a great
part of Leymistir under his subjection. As for the Western Scottish, he so
overawed them, as that no man who built ship or cog-boat durst drive into it
above three nails. Now he reigned 16. years, and died in the Island that is
called Isle. He left behind him verily three sons, Lagman, Harald, and Olave.

Lagman the eldest taking upon him the kingdom, reigned seven years. And
Harald his brother a great while rebelled against him; but at length being
taken prisoner by Lagman, he had his members of generation cut off, and his
eyes plucked out Lagman repenting himself that he had pulled out his brothers
eyes, gave over the kingdom of his own accord, and wearing the badge of the
Lords Cross, took a journey to Jerusalem, in which he died.

MLXXV. All the Nobles and Lords of the Islands, hearing of the death of
Lagman, dispatched their Ambassadors to Murecard O-Brien King of Ireland,
requesting that he would send some industrious and worthy man of the blood
royal to be their King, until Olave, Godreds son, came to full age. The
King very willingly yielded to their requests, and sent unto them one Dopnald
the son of Tade, warning and charging him to govern the kingdom (which by
right belonged unto another) with all gentleness and modesty. But he after he
was come to the Crown, not weighing

MLXXVII. One Ingemund was sent from the King of Norway, to take upon him the
dominion of the Islands: and when he was come to the Isle Leodus, he sent
messengers to all the Nobles of the Islands, with a commandment that they
should meet together and ordain him their King: Mean while, himself with his
companions did nothing else but rob, spoil, make good cheer and banquet,
dishonor and abuse married

Cistertium or Cisteaux was founded. Antioch was won by the Christians: and a
Comet or blazing star appeared. The same year there was a field fought between
those of the Isle of Man, at S^antwas: and the Northren men got the victory.
In which battle were slain Earl Oiher and Mac-Moras, Generals of both the
sides. In the same year Magnus King of Norway, the son of Olave, son of Harald
Harfager, desirous to try whether the corpse of S. Olave King and Martyr
remained incorrupt, commanded that his tomb should be opened and
notwithstanding the Bishop and Clergy withstood it, the King himself came
boldly thither, and by force that he brought with him caused the coffin to be
Olave King and Martyr appeared unto him in a dream, saying thus: Choose thou
one of these two things, either to lose thy life and kingdom both within
thirty days, or to depart from Norway and never see it again. When the King
awakened, he called unto him his Princes and Elders, and declared unto them his
dream and vision: and they being sore afraid gave him this counsel, to
depart with all speed out of Norway. He without delay caused a fleet to be
rigged and put in readiness, of an hundred and threescore sail, and cutteth
over to the Isles of Orkney, which he forthwith subdued; and making way by dint
of sword thorowout Man, and when he was arrived and landed he came unto St.
Patrickes Isle, to see the place wherein the field had been fought a little
before between the Manksmen, because as yet many of their bodies that were
slain lay there unburied. Now when he saw this most goodly and beautiful
Island, it pleased his eye, and he chose it to seat himself therein, built
fortresses in it, which unto this day carry his name. And those of Galway he
held in so great awe, that he compelled them to cut down wood for timber, and
to bring it unto the shore, that therewith he might build his Forts and
Bulwarks. To Anglesey, then called Mona (an Island in Wales) he sailed, and
found in it two Earls by the name of Hughes: the one he slew, the other he put
to flight, Man. Unto Murcard King of Ireland he sent his shoes, and commanded
him to carry them on his shoulders through the midst of his house on
Christmas day, that he might thereby understand he was subject unto King
Magnus. Which the Irishmen as soon as they heard of it took grievously, and
disdained exceeding much. But the King following a wiser course, I had rather,
says he, not only carry his shoes, but also eat them, than King Magnus
should destroy one Province in Ireland. He fulfilled therefore his
commandment, and honorably entreated his messengers. Many presents also he
sent over by them unto King Magnus, and entered into league with him. These
messengers being returned unto Magnus heard this, straightwaies he thought of
nothing else but to conquer Ireland, and bring it wholly under his dominion. He
commanded therefore his men to prepare a navy; and himself in person setting
forward with sixteen ships, desirous to take a view of the country, as he
unwarily departed aside from his shipping, was suddenly compassed about by the
Irish, and so lost his life, together with all those in manner that were with
him. And he was buried hard by S. Patricks Church in Down. He reigned six
years: after whose death the Princes of the Islands sent for Olave the son of
Godred surnamed Crovan, who lived in the Court of Henry King of England, son

MCII. Olave, the son of Godred Crovan aforesaid, began his reign and
reigned forty years: a peaceable Prince, having all the Kings of Ireland and
Scotland to be his confederates. He took to wife Africa the daughter of
Ferguse of Gallway: of whom he begat Gadred. By his concubines he had Regnald,
Lagman and Harald, beside many daughters, whereof one was wedded to Summerled
Prince of Herergaidel, who was the cause of the ruin of the whole Kings of the
Islands. On Dulgall, Raignald, Engus, and Olave.

MCXXXIII. There happened so great an Eclipse of the Sun, upon the fourth Nones
of August, that the day was turned into night.

MCXXXIV. Olave gave unto Yuo Abbat of Furnes a plot of his land in Man, to
build an Abbay, in a place called Russin: and both enriched with revenues, and
endowed with privileges the estate of the Church in the Islands.

MCXLII. Godred, Olaves son, saileth over sea to the King of Norway, whose name
was Hinge, and did his homage unto him, and stayed there being honorably
entertained of him. The same year three sons of Harald, Olaves brother (who
had been Dublin) raising a great number of men together, and all those who were
fled from the King, came to Man, demanding of the same King to have the one
moity of the whole kingdom of the Islands to be given unto them. But the King,
when he had heard their demand, being willing to pacify them, answered, That
he would take counsel of the matter. Now when they had appointed the time and
place where the counsel should be held, in the mean while those most lewd
and wicked villains complotted among themselves the Kings death. At the day
appointed both parts met at the haven which is called Ramsa, and sat in order
by rows, the King with his counsel on the one side, and they together with
their company on the other, and Reginald (who was to dispatch him) was in the
midst between, and stood

MCXLIII. Godred, Olaves son, returning out of Norway was created King of Man,
and to avenge his fathers death, he caused two of Haralds sons to have their
eyes pulled out, and slew the third.

MCXLIV. Godred begun his reign, and reigned thirty years. In the third year
of his reign, the people of Dublin sent for him and created him King of
Dublin, against whom Mure-card King of Ireland raised war, and encamping
himself before the City which is called Coridelis, sent his half brother (by
the mothers side) Osibeley, with three thousand men of arms to Dublin, who was
by Godred and the Dublinians slain, and all the rest put to flight. These
exploits achieved, Godred returned to Man, began to use tyranny, and turned
Noblemen out of their inheritances, whereof Thorsin, Oters Son, mightier than
the rest, came to Sumerled and made Dubgall, Sumerleds son, King of the Islands,
subduing unto him many Islands. When Godred had intelligence of these things by
one Paul, he prepared a navy, and sets forward to meet with Sumerled, who
was coming with a fleet of 80. sail. And in the year 1156. there was a
battle fought at sea on Twelfe day at night, and after many a man slain on
both sides, the next day after they grew to a pacification, and divided among
themselves the kingdom of the Islands: and so it became two several kingdoms
from that very day unto this present time. And this was the cause of the
overthrow of the kingdom of the Isles, since time that Sumerleds son seized
upon it.

MCLVIII. Sumerled came to Man with a fleet of 53. sail, put Godred to flight,
and wasted the Island. Godred then crossed over to Norway, to seek for aid
against Sumerled.

MCLXIV. Sumerled gathered together a fleet of 1060. ships, and arrived at
Rhinfrin, coveting to subdue all Scotland. But by the just judgment of God he
was vanquished by a few, together with his son and an infinite number of
people there slain.

Ramsae between Reginald brother of Godred, and them of Man: and by the
deceitful practice of a certain Earl, those of Man were put to flight.

Then Reginald began to reign, and on the fourth day after came Godred upon
him out of Norway with a great multitude of armed men, and took his brother
Reginald, whom he bereft both of his eyes, and of his genitall members. The
same year died Malcolm King of Scotland, and his brother William succeeded him
in the kingdom.

MCLXVI. Two Comets or blazing stars appeared before Sunrising in the Month

MCLXXI. Richard Earl of Penbrock sailed over into Ireland, and subdued
Develin with a great part of Ireland.

MCLXXVI. John Curey conquered Ulster, and Vivian Legate of the Apostolic Sea
came into Man, and caused King Godred to be lawfully espoused unto his wife
Phingola, daughter of Mac-Lotlen, son to Murkartac King of Ireland, to wit, the
mother of Olave then three years old. Sylvan the Abbat married them: unto whom
the very same day Godred gave a piece of land at Miriscoge, where he built a
Monastery: but at length the ground was together with the Monks granted to the
Abbey of Russin.

Reginald son to Eac-Marcat, one of the royal blood, coming into Man with a
great band of men in the Kings absence, at the first conflict put to flight
certain warders that kept the shore, and killed about 30. men. Afterward the
Manksmen gathering their forces together, the same day slew him and almost all
his company.

MCLXXXIII. O-Fogolt was Sheriff of Man.

MCLXXXV. There fell out to be an Eclipse of the Sun on Saint Philip and Jacobs
day.

MCLXXXVII. On the fourth Ides of November died Godred King of the Islands: and
the next Summer was his body translated to the Isle of Hy. He left behind him
three sons, Reginald, Olave, and Tvar. In his life he ordained his son
Olave to be Olave was now scarce ten years old, sent for Reginald out of the
Isles, and set him up for their King.

MCLXXXVIII. Reginald Godreds son began to reign over the Islands: and
Murchard, a man of great power throughout all the kingdom of the Isles, was
slain.

MCXCII. A battle was fought between Reginald and Engus the sons of
Sumerled, but Engus won the victory. The same year was the Abbey of Russin
translated to Dufglas: but after four years the Monks returned to Russin.

MCCIII. Michael Bishop of the Isles died at Fontans, after whom succeeded
Nicolas.

Lacy came with an army into Ulster, and gave John Curcy battle, took him
prisoner, and conquered Ulster. Afterward he set John at liberty, who came to
King Reginald: and he honorably entertained him, because he was his brother in
law: for John Curcy had taken to wife Africa Godreds daughter, who founded the
Abbey of S. Mary de Iugo Domini, and was there buried.

MCCV. John Curcy and Reginald King of the Isles having entered into Ulster with
one hundred ships, in the haven which is called Stranford, slackly besieged the
fortress of Rath: but Walter Lacy coming upon them with an army, put them to
flight: after this Curcy never recovered his land.

MCCX. Engus, Sumerleds son, was with three of his sons slain.

Fulk unto Man, in one fortnight and a day wholly in a manner wasted it: and
taking hostages, returned thence into their country. King Reginald and his
Nobles were not in Man.

MCCXVII. Nicolas Bishop of the Islands departed this life and was buried in
Ulster within the house of Benchor, after whom succeeded Reginald.

Here I think good to write somewhat again of Olave and Reginald, Brethren.
REginald gave unto his brother Olave the I Will called Lodhus, which is said to
be larger than the rest of the Islands, but slenderly inhabited, because it
stands much upon mountains, is stony besides, and almost all unfit for
tillage. The inhabitants thereof live for the most part by hunting and fishing.
Olave therefore went to possess himself of this Island, and dwelt in it,
leading a poor life. And when he saw it would Reginald, who then made his
abode in the Islands, and spoke unto him in this manner. Brother, says he, my
Sovereign Lord the King, thou know that the kingdom of the Islands belonged
unto me by inheritance; but since the Lord has elected thee to sway the
Scepter thereof, I envy thee not, nor take it grievously that thou art exalted
to that royal dignity. Now thus much I heartily beseech thee, that thou
would provide me some portion of land in the Isles, wherein I may live
honestly according to mine estate: for the Island Lodhus which thou gave unto
me is not sufficient to sustain me. Reginald his brother after he had given
him the hearing, said he would take counsel upon the point: and the morrow
after, when Olave was sent for, and came in place to parley of the matter,
Reginald commands that he should be apprehended Olave lay prisoner in irons
and chains almost seven years. In the seventh year died William King of
Scotland, after whom succeeded his son Alexander. Now before his death he
gave commandment that all prisoners should be set free. Olave therefore being
enlarged and at liberty came to Man: and soon after, accompanied with no small
train of Noblemen, he went to S. James: and after he was thus returned
Reginald his brother caused him to marry a Noble man's daughter of Kentyre, even
his own wives whole sister, named Lavon, and gave him Lodhus in possession to
enjoy. Some few days after Reginald Bishop of the Islands having Olave the
son of Godred, and Lavon his wife, as being the cousin german of his former
wife. After this Olave wedded Scristine daughter of Ferkar Earl of Rosse.

For this cause Reginalds wife Queen of the Islands was wroth, and directed her
letters in the name of Reginald the King, into the I Will Sky, unto Godred her
son that he should kill Olave. As Godred was devising means to work this
feat, and now entering into Lodhus, Olave fled in a little cog-boat unto his
father in law, the Earl of Rosse aforesaid. Then Godred wastes and spoileth
Lodhus. At the same time Pol the son of Book Sheriff of Sky, a man of great
authority in all the Islands, because he would not give his consent unto Godred,
fled, and together with Olave lived in the Rosses house: and entering into a
league with Olave they came both in one ship to Sky. At length having sent
forth their spies and discoverers, they learned that Godred lay in a certain
Island called St. Columbs I Will, having very few men with him, misdoubting
nothing. Gathering therefore about them all their friends and acquaintance,
with such voluntaries as were ready to join with them, at midnight with five
ships which they drew from the next seashore, distant from the Island
aforesaid some two furlongs, they beset the Isle round about. Godred then, and
they that were with him, rising by the dawning of the day, and seeing
themselves environed on every side with enemies, were astonished: but putting
themselves in warlike arms, assaied right manfully to make resistance, but all
in vain. For about nine a clock of Olave and Pol the foresaid Sheriff set
foot in the Island, with their whole army, and having slain all those whom they
found without the enclosure of the Church, they took Godred, put out his eyes,
and gelded him. Howbeit to this deed Olave did not yield his consent, neither
could he withstand it, for Books son, the Sheriff aforesaid. For this was
done in the year 1223.

Rognolfwaht. At this very time Reginald and Olave divided the kingdom of the
Islands between themselves, and Man was given to Reginald over and beside his
own portion, together with the title of King.

Olave the second time, having furnished himself with victuals from the people
of Man, returned with his company to his portion of the Island. The year
following, Reginald taking with him Alane Lord of Galway, went with his
soldiers of Man to the Island parts, that he might disseize his brother Olave
of that portion of land Alan Lord of Galway. At the same time he affianced his
daughter unto the son of Alan in marriage. Which the Manksmen hearing, took
such snuff and indignation thereat, that they sent for Olave, and made him
their King.

MCCXXVI. Olave recovered his inheritance, to wit, the kingdom of Man and of

MCCXXVIII. Olave accompanied with all the Nobles of Man, and a band of the
strongest men of the country, sailed over into the Islands. A little after Alan
Lord of Galway, and Thomas Earl of Athol, and King Reginald, came unto Man
with a puissant army: all the South part of Man they wasted, spoiled the
Churches, and slew all the men they could lay hold of, so that the South part
of Man was laid in manner all desolate. After this returned Alan with his army
into his own country, and left his bailiffes in Man, to gather up for him the
tributes of the country. But King Olave came upon them at unwares, put them to
flight and recovered his own kingdom.

In the same year came King Reginald out of Galway unlooked for, at the dead
time of night in winter, with five ships, and burnt all the shipping of his
brother Olave, and of the Lords of Man at Saint Patrickes Island: and suing to
his brother for peace, stayed forty days at the haven of Ragnoll-wath. Mean
while he won and drew unto him all the Ilanders in the South part of Man, who
swear they would venture their lives in his quarrel, until he were invested
in the one half of the kingdom. On the contrary part, Olave had the Northren
men of the Isle to side with him: and upon the 14. day of February, at a place
called Tingualla, there was a battle struck Russin translated the body of
King Reginald unto the Abbey of S. Mary de Fournes, and there enterred it was
in a place which himself had chosen for that purpose. After this went Olave to
the King of Norway; but before that he was come thither, Haco King of Norway
ordained a certain Noble man named Hu^bac, the son of Owmund for to be King
of the Sodorian Islands, and called his name Haco. Now the same Haco, together
with Olave, and Godred Don Reginalds son, and many Norwegians came unto the
Islands: and at the winning of a fort in the Island Both, Haco chanced

MCCXXX. Olave came with Godred Don and the Norwegians to Man: and they divided
the kingdom among themselves: Olave held Man, and Godred being gone unto the
Islands, was slain in the Isle Lodhus. So obtained Olave the kindgome of the
Isles.

MCCXXXVII. On the twelfth Calends of June died Olave the son of Godred King
of Man, in S. Patricks Island, and was buried in the Abbey of Russin. He reigned

Harold his son succeeded him being 14. years of age, and reigned 12.
years. In the first year of his reign he made a journey to the Islands, and
appointed Loglen his cousin, Custos of Man. In the Autumn following Harald
sent three sons of Nell, namely, Dufgald, Thorquill Mormore, and his friend
Joseph to Man, for to consult about affairs. On the 25. day therefore they
meet at Tingull: and by occasion of a certain envious quarrel that arose
between the sons of Nell and Loglen, there was a sore fight on both sides,
wherein were slain Dufgald, Mormore, and the foresaid Joseph. In the spring
ensuing King Harald came to the Isle of Man, and Loglen, MCCXXXVIII.
Gospatricke and Gillescrist the son of Mac-Kerthac came from the King of
Norway into Man, who by force kept Harald out of Man, and took tributes to the
Kings behoof of Norway, because he refused to come unto the King of Norwaies
Court.

MCCXL. Gospatric died, and is buried in the Abbey of Russin.

MCCXXXIX. Harald went unto the King of Norway, who after two years confirmed
unto him, his heirs and successors under his seal, all the Islands which his
predecessors had possessed.

MCCXLII. Harald returned out of Norway to Man, and being by the inhabitants
honorably received, had peace with the Kings of England and of Scotland.
Harald, like as his father before him, was by the King of England dubbed
Knight, and after he had been rewarded with many gifts returned home. The same
year he was sent for by the King of Norway, and married his daughter.

And in the year 1249. as he returned homeward with his wife, and Laurence
King elect of Man, and many other Nobles and Gentlemen, he was drowned in a
tempest near unto the coasts of Radland.

MCCXLIX. Reginald the son of Olave and brother to Harald, began his reign
the day before the Nones of May, and on the thirtieth day thereof was slain by
one Russin.

At that time Alexander King of Scots rigged and brought together many ships,
meaning to subdue the Island: and in the I Will Kerwaray he died of an ague.

Harald the son of Godred Don usurped the name of King in the Islands: all the
Nobles of Harald King Olaves son he banished, and placed in their stead all
the Princes and Peers that were fled from the said Harald.

MCCL. Harald the son of Godred Don, being by missives sent for, went unto
the King of Norway, who kept him in prison, because he had unjustly intruded
himself into the kingdom.

The same year there arrived at Roghalwaght Magnus the son of Olave, and John
the son of Dugald, who named himself King: but the people of Man taking it
to the heart that Magnus was not nominated, would not suffer them to land
there: many of them therefore were cast away and perished by shipwreck.

MCCLII. Magnus the son of Olave came to Man, and was made King: The next
year he went to the King of Norway, and stayed there a year.

MCCLIV. Haco King of Norway ordained Magnus, Olaves son, King of the Isles,
and confirmed the same unto him and his heirs, and by name unto his brother
Harald.

MCCLVI. Magnus King of Man went into England, and was knighted by the King

"MCCLVII. The church of S. Mary's of Russin was dedicated by Richard of Sodore.

MCCLX. Haco King of Norway came unto the parts of Scotland, and without any
exploit done turned to the Orkneys: where at Kirwas he ended his days, and
lies enterred at Bergh.

Russin, and was buried in the Church of S. Mary de Russin.

MCCLXVI. The kingdom of the Islands was translated, by reason of Alexander
King of Scots.

That which follows was written in another hand,

and of a later character.

MCCLXX. The seventh day of October, a navy set out by Alexander King of Scots,
arrived Roghalwath: and the next morrow before sun rising a battle was fought
between the people of Man and the Scots, in which were slain of the Manksmen
537. whereupon a certain versifier played thus upon the number.

L. decies, X. ter, and penta duo cecidere,
Mannica gens de te, damna futura cave.
L. Ten times told, X. thrice, with five beside and twain,
Ware future harms, I reed, of thy folk Man were slain.
MCCCXIII. Robert King of Scots besieged the Castle of Russin, which Dingawy
held against him: but in the end the King won the castle:

MCCCXVI. On the Ascension day, Richard le Mandevile and his brethren with
other Potentates of Ireland, arrived at Ramaldwath, requesting to be furnished
with victuals and silver, for that they had been robbed by the enemies warring
upon them continually. Now when the commonality of the country had made answer,
that they would not give them any: they advanced forward against those of Man
with two troops or squadrons, until they were come as far as to the side of
Warthfell hill, in a field wherein John Mandevile remained, and there in a
fought battle the Irish vanquished the Manksmen, spoiled the Island, and rifled
the Abbey of Russin: and after they had continued in the Island one whole
month, they returned home with their ships fraught with pillage.

Thus ends the Chronicle of the K.K. of Man.
The Process or course of the History following, I will now continue
summarily out of other Writers.
Sequatur coram Iustitiariis de Banco Regis, etc. that is, Let him sue before
the Justices of the K. Bench, let him be heard, and let justice be done. But
that which he could not obtain by right, Sir William Montacute, his kinsman
(for come he was of the race of Antonie Bec Bishop of Durham, and Patriarch of
Jerusalem, and made over the profits and revenues thereof unto him: yea and
soon after the King granted it unto the said Antonie for term of life.
Afterward, King Edward the second passed a grant thereof unto his minion Piers
Gaveston, what time as he created him Earl of Cornwall: and when the said
Piers was rid out of the way, he gave it unto Henry Beaumont, with all the
domaine and regal jurisdiction thereto belonging. Robert Brus recovered it;
and Robert Randulph that right warlike Scot, like as a long time after
Alexander Duke of Albany, used to style themselves Lords of Man, and bare the
same coat of Arms, as did the later Kings of Man; namely, three armed legs
of a man linked together, and bending in the hammes: such for all the world as
the Isle Sicilia gave, the three legs naked, in like form in her coins of
money in old time, to signify three Promontories. Notwithstanding, before time
the Kings of Man used for their arms, as we have seen in their Seals, a ship
with the sail hoised up, with this title in the circumference, Rex Manniae and
insularum, that is, King of Man and of the Islands. Afterward, about the year
1340. William Montacute the younger, Earl of Salisbury wrested it by strong
hand Thomas Walsingham says, sold for a great sum of money, Man, with the
crown thereof, unto William Scrope. Who being for high treason beheaded, and
his goods confiscate, it came unto the hands of Henry the fourth King of
England: who granted this Island unto Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland (as a
conqueror triumphing over William Scrope, whom he as yet a private person had
intercepted and beheaded, when he aspired to the crown) with this condition:
that himself and his heirs should when the Kings of England were enstalled
and crowned, carry before them that sword, which the said Henry wore by his
side, what time he came back again out of exile into England, commonly called
Lancaster sword. But I think it good to set this down De nostra gratia speciali
dedimus, that is: Of our special grace we have given and granted unto Henry
Earl of Northumberland, the Isle, Castle, Pile, and Seigniory of Man, and all
the Islands and Lordships to the said Isle belonging, which were Sir William le
Scropes, Knight, now deceased, (whom in his life time we conquered, and have
decreed him so to be conquered) and which by reason of our conquest of him we
took into our hand as conquered: which conquest verily and decree in our
present Parliament, with the assent of the Lords Temporal in the same
Parliament being, as touching the person of the foresaid William, and all the
lands, tenements, goods, and chattels of his, as well within our kingdom as
without, at the petition of the Communalty of our kingdom, stand confirmed,
etc. To have and to hold unto Lancaster sword, etc.

But in the fifth year following the said Henry Percie entered into open
rebellion, and the King sent Sir John Stanley and William Stanley to seize the
Isle and castle of Man, the inheritance whereof he granted afterward to Sir
John Stanley and his heirs by letters Patents, with the patronage of the
Bishopric, etc. And so his heirs and successors, who were honored with the
title of Earls of Derby, were commonly called Kings of Man.

Annals of Th. Otterborn. Anno 7. H. 4.
From Man, until we come to the Mull of Gallaway, we meet with none but very
small Islands. But after we be once past it, in the salt water of GLOTTA, or
Dunbritton Frith appears the Island GLOTTA, whereof Antoninus makes mention,
which the Scots now call Arran, whereof the Earls of Arran in Scotland were
styled: and neighboring unto it is that which was in times past named
Rothesia, now Buthe Hellan, in times past called Hellan Leneaw, that is, as
John Fordon interprets it, The Isle of Saints, and to Hellan Tinoc, that is,
The Isle of Swine: and these Islands are seen in the same Frith or Forth. But of
these I have spoken before.

Without this Bay or Frith lie a number of Islands very thick together, which
the Scots themselves that inhabit them call Inch-Gall, that is happily, The
Isles of the Gallicians: the English and the rest of the Scots, The Western
Isles: the writers of the former age HEBRIDES; but the ancient Ethnickes
Bettoricae, and Giraldus other where Inchades and Leucades: Pliny, Solinus, and
Ptolomee name them EBUDAS, Epidium the promontory of Britain opposite unto
them, and an Isle among these so named. The reason of the name I cannot pick
out, unless I should think they were so called, because there grows here no
corn or grain.

For Solinus writes, Scottish or western Isles.
that the inhabitants of these Islands are not acquainted with corn, and live
only upon fish and milk: and Eb eid in British sounds as much as without
corn. The inhabitants, as says the same Solinus, have no skill or knowledge
of corn, they live of fish and milk only. They all have but one King: For
how many soever they be, they are severed one from another by a narrow
enterflow of the Sea between.



No woman is he allowed to have in propriety, but by turns he takes for to
use whomsoever he fancieth, whereby he neither can have his wish, nor hope of
children.

Of these Islands, the common people affirms there be 44. whereas in truth
there are many more. Pliny wrote that there were 30. of them. But Ptolomee
Pliny calls it RICNEA, Antoninus RIDUNA, now termed Racline: and I think it
should be read in Antonine Riclina: for (cl) easily makes a (d) by joining a
(c) at the back unto it. A small Island this is, butting full upon Ireland,
known unto the ancient writers, for that it lies in the very narrow sea
between Ireland and Scotland: famous at this day for no cause else, but for
the overthrow and slaughter of the Scottish Irish, who otherwhiles possessed
themselves of it, and were thrust out by the English, under the conduct of Sir
William Norris in the year 1575. The next is EPIDIUM, which by the name I
would guess, with that excellent Geographer Gerard Mercator, lay near unto
the promontorie of the Epidii, and to the shore. And seeing there stands
apparently in Ila, of good largeness, and of a fruitful, plain, and champion
soil, I dare avouch that this was Epidium, or the Isle of the Epidii; for in
some places it is read (...). This carries in length 24. miles, and is 16.
miles broad, so plentiful of cattle, wheat, and herds of red dear, that it
was the second seat next unto Man, for the King of the Islands, as it is at this
day of the Mac-Connels, who herein have their Castle at Dunyweg. Betwixt Ila
and Scotland lies Iona, which Bid terms Hy and Hu, given by the Picts unto
the Scottish Monks, for propagating and preaching of the Gospel among them:
where stood a Monastery, famous by reason of the Scottish Kings tombs and the
frequent conversing of holy men therein: among whom Columba, the Apostle of the
Picts, was the principal: of Columb-Kill, like as the man also himself, by a
compound name was termed Columbkill, as Bede witnesses. And here at length, as
some will have it, a Bishops seat was ordained in Sodore, a little town,
whence all the Isles were also called Sodorensis, for that it is reckoned to be
in his Diocese. Then have you MALEOS, that Ptolomee writes of, now called
Mula, whereof Pliny seems to make mention, when he says, Mella is reported
to be 25. miles larger than the rest. For so we read in the most ancient
edition of Pliny, printed at Venice, Reliquarum Mella, is read Reliquarum
nulla, that is, None of the rest, etc. The Eastern HEBUDA, now called Sky,
from hence lies out in a great length over against the shore or coast of
Scotland: the Western HEBUDA bending more Westward, is now called Lewis (the
Lord whereof is Mac-Cloyd) and in the ancient history of Man is named Lodhus,
full of steep and craggie little hills, stony and very slenderly inhabited:
howbeit the largest of them all; from which Eust is dis-joined with a very
narrow wash. All the rest, save only Hyrtha, are of small account, being
either very stony, or else inaccessible by reason of craggy cliffes, and scarce
clad with any green-sord. Yet the Scots purchased all these with their
Mac-Conel, Mac-Alen, whom others term Mac-len, Mac-Cloyd of Lewis, and
Mac-Cloyd of Harich. But the mightiest house of them all is that of the
Mac-Conels, Donald, who in the reign of James the third styled himself King
of the Islands, and with all kind of cruelty in most savage and barbarous
manner plagued Scotland: which notwithstanding, his son being outlawed paid
dearly, as forced to submit his whole estate absolutely unto the Kings will
and pleasure, and had of his gift some possessions assigned to him in Cantire.
In the foregoing age, of this stock there flourished Donel Gormy, Mac-Conell,
that is, The blew, happily so surnamed of his apparel. He had issue two sons,
Agnus Mac-Conell, and Alexander, he who leaving this barren and hungry Cantir,
invaded the Glinnes in Ireland. Agnus Mac-Conell aforesaid, was father of James
Mac-Conell slain by Shan O-Neale, and of Surley Boy, upon whom Queen
Elizabeth of her Rout within Ireland. James Mac-Conell had issue Agnus
Mac-Conell, of whom I have spoken before, between whom and Mac-Clen there was
such a deep and inveterate hatred, that the force of consanguinity was never
able to quench the feud, but that they polluted themselves most wickedly with
one another blood. From the Haebudes, if you hold sails along by the shore
toward the North-east, you may at length discover the ORCADES, now called
ORKNEY, being thirty Islands or thereabout, sundred by the Ocean which has his
walk and current between them. A certain ancient fragment so calls them, as
one would say, Argat, that is, as the same interprets it, Above the Getes:
but I would rather expound it, Above Cath: for it lies over against Cath, a
country of Scotland, which of the Cathnesse: the inhabitants whereof seem to
be named amiss by Ptolomee, CARINI for CATINI. In Solinus his time no man
dwelled in them, but overgrowne they were Vinceis, or Iunceis herbis, that is,
With binding or rushy weeds: but now inhabited indeed they are, yet destitute
of woods, bearing barley good store, and altogether without wheat. Among these
Pomonia, famous for an Episcopal See, is the principal, called by Solinus
POMONA Diutina, for the length of the days there: now the inhabitants term
it Mainland, as if it were the continent or maine, adorned with the Bishops
seat in Kirkwale a little town, and with two castles: it yields plenty of
tin and of lead. OCETIS also is reckoned by Ptolomee in number of these,
which now we guess to be named Hethy.

But whether Hey, which is counted one of these, be Plinies DUMNA or no, I
could never yet resolve. Surely if it be not, I would think that Fair Isle,
the only town whereof (for it has but one) they call Dumo, is that Dumna
rather than with Becanus judge Wardhuys in Lapland to be it. Julius Agricola,
who first of all sailed round about Britain with his fleet, discovered out of
these Isles of Orkney, which till that Tacitus: but questionless they were
known in the time of Claudius the Emperor; for Pomponius Mela who then lived
mentions them. Yet doubtless Orosius is untrue, in that he writes that
Claudius conquered them: and so far is it off that Claudius should conquer
them (which is avouched in S. Hieroms Chronicles) that Iuvenal in Hadrians
time, not long after Agricola, wrote thus of them.

-- Arma quid ultra
Littora Iuvernae promovimus, and modo captas

Why warred we past Irish coasts, and Orkneys lately won,
Beyond the Britans, where there is least night and longest Sun?
Afterward when the Romans Empire in Britain was utterly decayed, now the
Saxons, as it seems, were seated in them: for Claudian the Poet played upon
them in these terms.

-- Maduerunt Saxone fuso

With Saxons blood that there were slain
The Orkneys was imbrued again.
Ninnius also writes, that Octha and Ehissus Saxons, who served for pay under
the Britans, sailed round about the Picts with 40. Ciules, that is, Flyboats or
Roving Pinnaces, and wasted the Isles of Orkney. After this, they came into the
hands of the Norwegians (whence it is that the inhabitants speak the Goths
language) by the grant of Donald Ban, who after the death of his brother Malcom
Can-Mor, King of Magnus, the fourth of that name, King of Norway, being by the
Scots that warred upon him brought to distress, surrendered them up again unto
Alexander, the third King of the Scots, by covenant and composition, which
Haquin King of the Norwegians confirmed unto King Robert Brus, in the year
1312. And at length in the year 1498. Christian the first, King of Norway and
of Denmark, renounced all his right for himself and his successors, when he
affianced his daughter unto James, the third King of Scots, and made over all
his interest to his said son in law and his successors: and for the stronger

To say nothing of the Earls of Orkney that were of more ancient times, Earls
of Orkney.
who also in right of inheritance obtained the Earldomes of Cathnesse and of
Strathern, at the last the title of Orkney came by an heir female unto Sir
William Sent-cler: and William the fourth of this line, called The Prodigal
Earl for wasting his patrimony, was the last Earl of this race. Howbeit, his
posterity enjoyed the honor to be Baron Sent-cler, unto these days. And the
title of Cathnes remains still in the posterity of his brother. But within
our remembrance this honorable title of the Earl of Orkney and Lord of
Shetland was conferred upon Robert, a base son of King James the fifth; and
Patrick Steward his son enjoys the same at this present.

Orkney, and above Britain, the author of that ancient Commentary upon Horace,
places the Fortunate Islands, wherein, as they write, none dwell but devout and
just men; and the Grecians in their verses celebrate the pleasantness and
fertility of the place, calling them the Elysian fields. But as touching these
Fortunate Isles, take with you, if you please, another relation of that old
fabulous Grecian, Isacius Tzetzes out of his notes upon Lycophron: In the Ocean
(says he) there is a British Island, between West Britain and Thule that look
toward the East. Thither men

Of the same stamp also may that Poetical Geographer seem to be, of whom
Muretus makes mention in his variety of readings: who has written that C.
Julius Caesar went thither once in a great galley, with an hundred men aboard:
and when he was willing to have seated himself there (as being wondrously
delighted with

Thule.
Five days and nights sailing from the Isles of Orkney, Solinus places THULE:
An Island, if any other, often celebrated by the Poets, whenever they would
signify any thing very remote and far off, as if it were the furthest part
of the whole world. Hereupon says Virgil, Tibi serviat ultima Thule, that is,
Let Thule most remote thee serve: Seneca, Terrarum ultima Thule, that is, Thule
the farthest land that is: Juvenal, De conducendo loquitur jam Rhetore Thule,
that is, Now Thule speaks, how Orators to hire: Claudian, Thulen procul axe
remotam, that is, Thule far remote under the Pole, and in another place,
Ratibusque impervia Thule, And Thule where no ships Statius, Ignotam vincere
Thulen, that is, To conquer Thule all unknown: And Ammianus Marcellinus, by
way of an Adage or Proverbiall speech, uses it in these words, Etiamsi apud
Thulen moraretur, that is, Although he made his abode even in Thule. To pass
over other testimonies, give me leave yet to note thus much moreover, that the
said Statius used Thule for Britain, Thule for Britain.
in these his verses.

Caerulus haud aliter cum dimicat incola Thules,
Agmina falcifero circumvenit acta covino.
Even so the blew inhabitants of Thule when they fight,
Environ battles, marching on with sithed chariots might.
As also in this place of his Poem entitled Sylvae, as it seems: -- restuo
circumsona gurgite Thule.
Thule that does resound amain,
With sea that ebbes and flows again.


Suidas writes, that it took the name of Thules a King of Egypt: Isidore, of
the Sun: Reynerus Reneccius, of the Saxon word Tell, that is, A limit, as if
it were the bound of the North and West.

But yet for all this, Synesius doubts whether there were any Thule or no;
and our Giraldus Cambrensis writes, that it is no where extant to be seen:
and the better sort of learned men are of sundry judgments concerning it. Most
of them have affirmed Island, Island.
that is subject to extreme sharp cold and continual winter, to have been
called in times past Thule.

Saxo Grammaticus, Crantzius, Milius, Iovius, and Peucerus are of a contrary
opinion. Neither am I ignorant, that the vast and huge country of Scandia is
described by Procopius under the name of Thule. Lib. 2. belli Gothici.
But if that be true which the most learned Peucer has recorded in his book
entitled De dimensione terrae, that is, Of the measuring of the earth, that
sailers call Shetland Thilensel (neither dare I empeach his credit) then surely
we have found Thule, and the matter is now at an end and questionless. For
this Shetland is an Isle under the Scottish dominion, Shetland, which some call
Hethland.
environed with other Islets, and the same is nipped with frost and chilly
cold, lying open on every side unto bitter storms; the inhabitants whereof,
like as those of Island, use in steed of bread-corne Pithaeas of Marsils has
fained of Thule (for which he is justly taxed by Strabo:) and this happens not
to Island it self, where there is in manner a continual Winter, and an
intolerable settled cold. Yet that a man should think this Shetland to have
been Thule, first the situation thereof in Ptolomee may induce him, being set
63. degrees from the Aequinoctiall, as Thule is in Ptolomee: again, for that it
lies between Norway and Scotland, where Saxo Grammaticus places Thule: then,
because it is two days sailing distant from the point of Caledonia or Cathnes,
according to which distance Solinus places Thule: also, Tacitus says that the
Romans kenned Thule afar off, as they sailed round about Britain by the
Orcades: lastly, because it faceth the shore of Bergae in Norway, against which
place Thule lies according to Pomponius Mela: in which Author the reading is
corruptly, Belgarum littori in stead of Bergarum. For Bergae a city in Norway
lies over against Shetland: and Pliny names in this tract BERGOS, Bergos.
which I doubt not but it is that little country wherein BERGAE flourishes,
Nerigon.
like as no man will deny that Norway is NERIGON specified by Pliny. But enough
of this Thule, which snow and winter weather, as one says, has hidden from
the ancient writers, and from us too I assure you: neither is any of them able
to say, which of the Northren Islands they meant, when they spoke so much of
Thule. As touching the length of days in that unknown Island, Festus Avienus,
when he Dionysius these verses.

Long a dehinc celeri si quis rate marmora currat,
Inveniet vasto surgentem gurgite Thulen;
Hic cum plaustra Poli tangit Phaebeius ignis,
Nocte sub inlustri rota solis fomite flagrat
Continuo, clarumque diem nox aemula ducit.
From hence if one with pinnace swift along the sea does sail,
Thule above the Ocean vast to find he shall not fail:
Here when about the Northren pole the Suns fire does sejourne,
The night is lightsome, and his wheels continually do burn,
The night, I say, resembling day fair light makes soon return.
Which Pomponius Mela likewise has noted in these words. Opposite unto the
coast of Bergae lies Thule, an Island much renowned both in Greek Poems, and in
ours also. In it, for that the Sun rises and is to set far off, the nights
verily are short; but in winter time, as elsewhere, dark; in summer light:
because all that time he mounteth very

Above these Islands the sea is termed, The frozen sea, or Cronium
The slow, frozen, and Icie sea; for that it is so rough by occasion of heaps
of Ice, and scarce navigable.

It is also named of ancient writers CRONIUM, or Cronian sea, of Saturn;
because Plutarch records, there goes a tale, how Saturn is kept sleeping in
a deep cave, or bottom of a golden pumish stone: that he is by Jupiter cast
into a most deep and dead sleep, which serves in stead of bonds: that birds
bring him Ambrosia the divine meat, with the odoriferous smell whereof all the
place is perfumed. Also that he has many spirits or daemones attending upon
him as servitours, who reverence him, serve him, and attend upon him. By which
pretty fable, (unless I be deceived) is covertly couched by a Mythiology, that
there lie hidden in these Islands, veins or mines of Metals, over which Saturn
is president: which notwithstanding are forlet and out of request, for want of
wood to maintain the fornaces.

Now beneath Thule Southward, the German sea spreads it self wide, wherein,
as Pliny affirms, there lie dispersed the seven ACMODAE, Mela terms them
HAEMODES: But seeing it is known for certain, that these be Islands belonging
to Denmark in the Codan Gulf, namely, Zeland, Fuynen, Lagland, Muen, Falstor,
Layland, and Femerem, there is no cause wherefore I should say any more;
neither of the Isle GLESSARIA or ELECTRIDA, so called of Amber cast up there
out of the Sea: which Sotacus supposed to drop forth of trees in Britain. But
seeing that the ancient Germans called Amber Glesse, willing enough I am to
think with that most learned man, Erasmus Michael Laetus, that the Island
Less, hard by Scagen, or Promontory May, Basse, Keth, and Inche Colme, that
is, Columbs Isle. On the coast of Northumberland, over against the river Lied,
Lindis-farne.
one shows it self, namely Lindis-farn: the Britans call it Inis Medicante,
which, that I may use Bedes words, as the sea ebbeth and flows at his tides,
is twice a day inundated and compassed about with water in manner of an Island,
and twice likewise made continent to the land, as the shore is laid bare again:
whereupon he aptly termed it a Demi Island. The West part of it being the
narrower, and left unto conies, joineth to the East side by a very small spange
of land: and this part which bends toward Aidan the Scot (called thither to
preach the Christian faith unto the people of Northumberland) instituted, as
being much delighted with the solitary situation, as a most fit place of
retire. In this small Island there sat eleven Bishops. But afterward when the
Danes rifled and robbed all the Seacoasts, the Episcopal See was translated
to Durham. Under the town there is a good commodious haven, defended with a
Block-house situate upon an hill toward the South-East.

Holy Island.
This, for the habitation therein of holy Monks, is called in English Holy
Island. Concerning which Alcuin, in an Epistle unto Egelred King of
Northumberland, writes A place more venerable than all the places in Britain,
is left to the spoil of Pagans and Miscreants: and where after the departure
of S. Paulinus from York, Christian religion in our nation first began, there
it has felt the first beginning of misery and calamity.

Farn Isle.
Seven miles from hence South-Eastward, Farn Isle shows it self, distant
almost two miles from Banborrow castle, enclosed within the most deep Ocean,
and encircled about with craggy cliffs, and this has also in the middle well
near, a Fort belonging unto it; even in that place, as the report goes, where
Cuthbert Bishop of Lindisfarn, that tutelar St. and Patron of the Northren
Englishmen, to the end he might wholly give himself to the service of God,
Bid in the life of Cuthbert.
built, as Bede says in his life, a city fitting Upon this there adjoine other
smaller Islands toward the North, as Widopens, Staple Island, which lies two
miles off, Bronsman, and two lesser than these, which they call the Wambes.

After these the Island commonly called Coquet lies right before the mouth of
the river Coquet, wherein is a plentiful vein of Sea-coale. Neither are there
any more Islands to be seen in this coast: but over against it be the Saxonum
Insulae, that is, The Saxons Islands, now called Heilich lant, that is, The
Holy-Ilands, Saxon Islands.
and they lie, as it were, in a continued range along East and West Frislands:
Among which that was best known unto the Roman Captains which Strabo called
BIRCHANIS, Lib. 7. Birchanis.
Pliny BIRCHANA, and the Romans FABARIA, of the resemblance of a certain Grain
or Pulse coming up there of the own accord: which that I may restore it
again to the due place (although it be nothing pertinent to my purpose) the
very name it self witnesses to be that Borkun which lies over against the
mouth of Ems. Borkun.
Somewhat lower upon the shore of Holland, The British Armory or Storehouse.
where in ancient time was the mouth of Rhene, the foundations of a most
ancient Storehouse, Magazin or Armory, are covered over with the waves, which
being very seldom discovered and laid bare at a low ebb of the Ocean,
shows both an admirable spectacle of reverend antiquity, and also a most
noble model and form of building; which, Abraham Ortelius, Holland coast
Britten huis.
I have mentioned this the more willingly, because the Hollanders call it in
their language Huis te Britten, that is, the British house, so that it
belongs at least wise in name to Britain, and therefore not impertinent to my
purpose. For as it is evident and confessed of all, that the Emperor C.
Caligula, when he intended the conquest of Britain, in that ridiculous voyage
of his, built it for a watchtower: so an ancient Inscription there dug up
does testify, that the Emperor Septimius Severus, after it was fallen to decay
rebuilt it. But whence it was named Britten, let him tell that best can guess.
Probable it is that it took this name from the Britans: for that Bretta the
natall place of Philip Melanchthon took name of the Britans, he himself was
fully persuaded: and that Mounts in Heinault were of the Britans termed Breten,
we have read elsewhere. But yet (that I may speak as Pliny does) seeing he
marvelleth why the Herb that is peculiar unto Holland, as growing no where
else, is called Britannica, unless perhaps those that bordered upon the Ocean
dedicated it unto Britain so near unto it: so for my part I wonder as much,
why this tower should be termed Britannica, or Breten, unless the Hollanders
consecrated it to our Britain, lying opposite unto it. Pliny calls a place
in Picardy, Portus Morinorum Britannicus.
Portum Morinorum Britannicum, that is, The British haven or port of the
Morines, either for that they took ship there to pass over into Britain, or
because it kenned Britain over against it on the other side of the sea. Why
then should not this tower by the same reason be called Britannica or Breten?
for that the Zosimus has given the just measure of the sea betwixt Britain
and this mouth of Rheine, The Chamavi dwelt thereby, as appears out of the
Embassages of Eunapius.
to be 900. Stadia over, as though it had been an usual passage: and written
beside, that corn was wont to be brought by ships out of Britain to this
place, and from thence with barges and boats haled up the Rhene against the
stream to serve the Roman garrisons: seeing that Julian the Emperor built
garrisons, as Marcellinus says, wherein might be

At which time this said Armory may seem to have been converted into a Garner
or Storehouse for corn, and of the said British corn termed Britannicum:
and so much the rather, because in the old Records of Holland, we find it
written Brittanburg: for that age termed castles standing commodiously, and
such as were stored with plenty of corn, Burgus what it is.
Burghs, as we read in the history of the Burgundians. Moreover, what if the
Britans (that in this doubtful matter I may run out of one conjecture to
another) sometimes held it in their own hands, and so adopted it into their
own name? considering they invested Magnus Maximus, whom some Clemens Maximus,
in the purple robe, and proclaimed him Emperor against Gratian. For he arrived
at this mouth of Rhene. If again, it had not as yet taken this name
Britannicum, what if the Saxons termed it Huis te Britten, for that they took
ship from hence into Britain, when they annoied our shores with their Cyules?
for so they termed their pinnaces or Brigantines. Zosimus l. 4. Saxons in
Holland. Janus Douza in his Nomenclator.
Verily Zosimus shows that the Saxons, after they had driven out the Frankers
called Salii, planted themselves in Batavia, that is, Holland: and that from
thence they put over by multitudes into Britain, it is most clear and evident.
Which also as I said before, Ianus Douza, a noble Gentleman indeed, and passing
well learned, in his Ode of Leyden seems to imply: yet here again, lest I
might seem too forward and lavish in setting forth the glory of Hadrian
Iunius, borne and bred in Holland, has fetched the original of the herb
Britannica from Britten a word of his own country, Britten an herb.
because it grows plentifully upon those turfes which they call Britten, and
whereof they raise great banks and dikes against the violence of the
encroching Ocean; it will be no absurdity if one should reduce this Huis te
Britten, unto the same original: and suppose it to have been so called,
because it was fensed with banks of turfe, or of Britten, set opposite against
the forcible surges of the waves; which when the surges of the sea had once
pierced and overthrown, it may seem to have borne down this house also. But
let them see to these matters who have a deeper insight into the nature of the
word, and the situation of the place, and pardon me withal,

Zeland. See page 333. and 441. Toliapis. Caunus. Canvey. See in Essex, Shepey.
In that coast there be also Isles of Zeland compassed about with the rivers
Scaldt, Maese, and the Ocean: Touching which I will only add thus much, that
the name of Valachria (for of these this is the chief) as Lemnius Levinus
conjectureth, came from our Welshmen. Over against Zeland, Tamis the goodliest
and noblest river of Britain discharges himself into the sea: in which place
Ptolomee sets TOLIAPIS and CAUNA, or CONVENNON. Of Toliapis, which I suppose
to be Shepey, see in Kent. Of Convennos I have spoken in Essex in the page 441.

More Eastward without Tamis mouth, there lies along before the Island Tenet, a
place full of shelves and sands, and very dangerous for sailors, which they
call Goodwins Goodwin Sands.
where our Annals do record that in the year 1097. an Island which was the
patrimony of Goodwin Earl of Kent, was quite swallowed up and sunk in the sea:
concerning which John Twin writes thus. This land was very fruitful, and full
of plenteous pastures, lying somewhat lower and more flat than Tenet; out of
which there was a passage by boat or barge three or four miles long. Some call
it Lomea.
This Island in an unusual tempest of winds, and boisterous fury of stormy
raines, and uncooth rage of the sea, was drowned, and lies overwhelmed with
sand cast up after an incredible manner, and without all recovery is turned
into a middle or doubtful nature of land and sea. For I wot well what I say,
because one while it wholly floateth, and another while at a low water after an
ebb, it bears walkers upon it. Happily this is Toliapis, unless you had
rather read Thanatos, for Toliapis, and in some copies we read it Toliatis, of
which we have treated in Kent. See the 345. page.

In this very place, the huge vastness of the sea gathers into such a
straight, that the gullet of the Ocean between the firm land of France and
Britain, is not above thirty miles over, The British narrow sea.
which Streights some call the Narrow sea of Britain, others of France (and
the bound it is of the British sea) which by little and little removes the
British sea: wherein first you meet with the Island, or byland rather, Selsy; in
the English Saxon tongue, (...), that is, according to Bid, The Island of
Sea-calves, which in our tongue we call otherwise Seals. But hereof I have
spoken already in the page 308.

Somewhat higher lies the Isle Vecta, in the British tongue Guith, in the
Saxon, (...), and (...), for the Saxons termed an Island (...), we The Isle of
Wight, and Whight. Whereof also I have written before in the 273. page.

Portland likewise, which now is no Island, but annexed to the continent, I have
treated heretofore in Dorsetshire in the page 210.

Hence will I cut over to the shore of France just against it; where from
Beer-fleet in Normandy unto the midst of the Channel, the sea, by the Mariners
saying, is paved, as it were, and overspred with rocks and cragges: among
which, William son to King Henry the first, and heir both of England and of
Normandy, whiles he crossed the seas out of Normandy into England, in the year
of salvation 1120. was by woeful shipwreck, together with his sister, his
base brother, and others of the flower of the nobility, drowned. Whereupon a
Poet of that age thus versified.


Proh dolor! occubuit Sol Anglicus, Anglia plora:
Quaeque prius fueras gemino radiata nitore,
Extincto nato vivas contenta parente.
Him, from the land his mother kind, the Sea a stepdame caught;
Now Englands Sun, alas, is set: weep England, weep for thought:
And thou that did enjoy the beams of twofold light before,
Since Son is gone, content thy self with father and no more.
Funus plangendum, private lapis aequoris unus,

O doleful day, one rock in Ocean maine,
One bark of Prince bereaveth kingdoms twain.
And another Poet at the same time hammered out these verses touching that
shipwreck.

Dum Normannigenae Gallis claris superatis,
Anglica regna petunt, obstitit ipse Deus:
Aspera nam fragili dum sulcant aequora cymba,
Intulit excito nubila densa mari.

Ruperunt imas abdita saxa rates.
Sic mare dum superans tabulata per ultima serpit,
Mersit rege satos, occidit orbis honos.
Whiles Normans after victories of Noble Frenchmen won,
Make sail for England, God himself withstood them all anon.
For as the rough and surging waves they cut with brittle bark,
He brought upon the troubled sea thick fogges and weather dark*
Whiles sailers then in coasts unknown were driven and haled astray,
Upon blind rocks their ships were split and quickly cast away.

Drowned was that royal progeny, worlds honor came to naught.
More Westward, certain Islands affront France, yet under the Crown of
England: and first of all upon the coast of Normandy, or the Lexobii (whom our
Britans or Welshmen term Lettaw, as one would say Littorales, that is,
Coast-men) lies Alderney, Alderney.
which in the Records is named Aurney, Aureney, and Aurigney: so that it
Antonine, according to the King of Spaines copy, is reckoned among the Isles
of the British sea. Others hold it to be that EBODIA, or EVODIA, whereof Paulus
Diaconus only has made mention, who had small skill of this coast; which he
places thirty miles from the shore of Seine, and tells of a rumbling and
roaring noise of waters, falling into a gulf or Charybdis, that is heard a far
off. This Alderney lies in the chief trade of all shipping passing from the
Eastern parts to the West: three leagues distant from the coast of Normandy,
thirty from the nearest part of England, extended from South East to the North
West, and contains about eight miles in circuit, the South shore consisting
of high cliffes. The Crabbic some mile off. On the East side there is an
ancient fort, and a dwelling house built at the charge of the Chamberlans: for
the fee farm of the Isle was granted by Queen Elizabeth to G. Chamberlane,
son to Sir Leonard Chamberlane of Shirburne in Oxfordshire, when he recovered
it from the French. And under this fort, the sand with violent drifts from the
Northwest overlaied the land, so that now it serves thereabout most for conies.

I know not whether I were best to relate of a Giants tooth, one of the
grinders,

Hence Westward there runs out a craggy ridge of rocks, which have their
several eddies, Casquettes.
and therefore feared of the Mariners, who term them Casquettes. Out of one
of the which properly named Casquet, there gusheth a most sweet spring of fresh
water, to the great comfort of the Iland-fishermen beating up and down
hereabout. At these, to remember incidently (that the memory of a
well-deserving Patriot may not perish) the fleet which John Philipot Antonine
has written, scarce twelve miles distant from Alderney, which name the
Frenchmen now have clipped so short, as the Spaniards have CAESAR AUGUSTA in
Spain: Gerzey.
for they call it Gearzey, like as Cherburgh for Caesarisburgus, and Saragose
for Caesar augusta. Gregorius Turonensis calls it, the Island of the sea that
lies to the City Constantia, where he reports how Pratextatus Bishop of
Roan was confined hither: like as Papirius Massonius terms it, the Isle of
the coast of Constantia, because it butteth just upon the ancient city
Constantia, which may seem in Ammianus to be named CASTRA CONSTANTIA, Castra
Constantia. Moritavum.
and in the foregoing ages Moritonium. For Robert Montensis writes thus: Comes
Moritonii, id est, Constantiarum, if that be not a gloss of the transcriber.
For Moritonium, which now is Mortaigne, is farther distant from the sea.

This Isle is thirty miles or thereabout in compass, fenced with rocks and
shelves, which are shallow places, dangerous for such as sail that way. The
ground is fertile Settembers, so that there is no being for Physicians here.
And for that it is scarce of fuel, in steed of Uraic, Uraic. Fucus marinus.
deemed to be that Fucus marinus, which Pliny mentions, and grows every
where about in craggy Islands, and on rocks most plenteously. This being dried
at the fire, serves for to burn; with the ashes whereof (as it were with
Marle and the fat of the earth) they dung commonly their fields and fallows,
and thereby make them very battle and fruitful. Neither are they permitted to
gather it but in the spring and summer season; and then upon certain days
appointed by the Magistrate. At which time, with a certain festival mirth,
they repair in numbers from all parts to the shore with their carres, as also
to the rocks near unto them they speed themselves a vie with their Hilaries
and Saint Albans: which harbor has also a little Island belonging to it,
fortified with a garrison, having no way of access unto it: wherein, by report,
Saint Hilarie Bishop of Poictiers, after he had been banished hither, was
enterred. For the town dedicated Constantia, there is seated upon a steep
rock a most strong castle, with an haughty name called Mont Orgueil, which is
much beholden unto King Henry the fifth, who repaired it. The Governor of the
Isle is Captain thereof, who in times past was called the Custos of the Isle,
and in Henry the third his reign had a yearly pension of 200. pound. On the
South side, but with longer distance between, Saint Malo is to be seen,
having taken that new name of Maclou a very devout man, where before time it
was called the city Diablintum, and in the ancient Notice, ALETUM: for in a
Manuscript of Isidor we read thus in express terms, Civitas Diablintum etc.
that is, the city Diablintum, which by another name is called Aletum. As for
the inhabitants, they freshly practice the feat of fishing, but give their
minds especially to husbandry: and the women make a very gainful trade by
knitting of hose, which they call Iarsey Stocks or Stockings.

As touching the politic state thereof, a Governor sent from the King of
England is the chief Magistrate: he appoints a Bailiffe, who together with
twelve Jurats or sworn Assistants, and those chosen out of the twelve several
parishes, by the voices of the Parishioners, sits to minister justice in
Civil causes: in criminal matters he sits but with seven of the said
sworn assistants, and in causes of conscience

Twenty miles hence North-west, lies another Island, which Antonine the
Emperor in ancient time named SARNIA, we at this day Garnsey, Sarnia.

Garnsey.

Happily Granon^ by, a transposition of letters which the N^^titia places i^ the
Tract of Armorica. Smyris.


lying out East and West in fashion of an harp, neither in greatness nor in
fruitfulness comparable to Iersey; for it has in it only ten parishes, yet is
this to be preferred before it, because it fostereth no venomous thing therein,
like as the other does. It is also better fortified by natural fenses, as
being enclosed round with a set of steep rocks, among which is found that
most hard and sharp stone Smyris (which we term Emerill) wherewith Goldsmiths
and Lapidaries cleanse, burnish, and cut their precious stones, and glaziers
also divide and cleave their glass. Likewise it is of greater name for the
commodiousnesse is always a continual truce, as it were: and lawful it is
for Frenchmen and others, Cornet) upon an high rock, and the same at every
high water compassed about with the sea. Which in Queen Mary's days, Sir
Leonard Chamberlane Governor of the Island, as also under Queen Elizabeth, Sir
Thomas Leighton his successor, caused to be fortified with new works. For
here lies for the most part the Governor of the Island, and the Garrison
soldiers: who will in no hand suffer Frenchmen and La-vall, a biland adjoining
unto it, which had belonging thereto a covent of religious persons, or a
Priory. On the West part near unto the sea, there is a lake, that takes up a
mile and half in compass, replenished with fish, but Carpes especially, which
for bigness and pleasant taste are right commendable. The inhabitants are
nothing so industrious in tilling of the ground as those of Iarsey, but in
navigation and traffic of merchandise, for a more uncertain gain they be
very painful. Every man by himself loves to husband his own land, so that
the whole Island lies in several, and is divided by enclosures into sundry
parcels: which they find not only profitable to themselves, but also a matter
of strength against the enemy. Both Islands smile right pleasantly upon Sisera,
and we Sydre. The inhabitants in both places are by their first original
either Normans or Britans, and speak French: yet disdain they to be either
reputed or named French, and can very well be content to be called English. In
both Islands likewise they burn Uraic for their fuel, or else sea-coals
brought out of England: and in both places they have wonderful store of fish,
and the same manner of civil government.

These Islands, with others lying about them, belonged in old time to the
Dukedom of Normandy, Normandy lost.
but when as Henry the first King of England had vanquished his brother Robert,
in the year of our Lord 1108. he annexed that Dukedom, and these Evan, a Welsh
Gentleman, descended from the Princes of Wales, and serving the French King,
Tillet.
surprised Garnesey in the time of King Edward the third: but soon lost it.
And also in the reign of King Edward the fourth, as appears by the records
of the Realm, they seized upon the same: but through the valor of Richard
Harleston, valect of the Crown (for so they termed him in those days) they
were shortly disseized; and the King, in recompense of his valorous service,
gave unto him the Captainship both of the Island and of the castle. And in the
year 1549. when Edward the sixth a child, was distressed with domestical
troubles, Leo Strozzi Captain of the French Galleys gave the attempt to invade
it, but with the loss of many of his men had the foil, and desisted from his
enterprise.

As touching the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, they were under the Bishop of
Constance in Normandy, until that he in our remembrance refused to abjure the
Popes Constance, and united for ever to the Diocese of Winchester, so as the
Bishop of Winchester and his successors execute every thing appertaining to
the Episcopal jurisdiction: yet their Ecclesiastical discipline is
conformable to the Church of Geneva, which the French Ministers have brought
in. As for the civil customs of these Islands, I could now note some of them
out of the Kings records: namely, How King John instituted twelve Coroners
sworn to keep the pleas and rights belonging to the Crown, and granted for
the security of the Ilanders, that the Bailiffe henceforth by advice of the
Coroners, might plead without writ But these points I think good to leave unto
others, who may search more curiously into particulars. Generally, the customs
of Normandy take place here in most cases.

Touching Serke, Serke.
a little Island that lies between these above named, walled about, as it
were, with mighty steep rocks, in which I. de S. Owen of Iarsey (whose
antiquity of descent some avouch (I know not upon what credit and authority)
from Owens time) by commission from Queen Elizabeth, and for his own
commodity, as the report goes, made a plantation, whereas before time it lay
desolate. As touching Iethow, which for the use of the Governor of Garnsey
serves in steed of a park, to feed cattle, to keep Dear, conies, and
phesants: as also touching Arm, which being larger than the other, was first a
solitary place for Regular Chanons, and after for the Franciscan Friars; seeing
they are not mentioned by the old writers, I have no reason to speak much of
them.

After these, upon the same coast, LIGA, whereof Antonine makes mention,
shoots up his head, which retains the name still, and is now called Ligon.
Then lie there spread and scattered seven Islands, termed by Antonine SIADAE, of
the number: Says in the British tongue betokens seven; which the Frenchmen
at this day term Le set Isles. Set-Iles.
And I suppose these Siades to be corruptly called Hiadatae by Strabo: for from
these, as he says, it is not a days sailing into the Island of Britain. From
these SIADAE to BARSA, Barsa.
whereof Antonine also has made mention, there is the distance of seven
furlongs. The Frenchmen call it the Isle de Bas, and the English Basepole:
Basepole.
For the Britans term that Bas which is shallow, and the Mariners by sounding
find the sea in this place to be more ebb and shallow: as which lies not
above seven or eight fathomes deep: whereas along all the shore beside, the
sea carries 12.18. and twenty fathoms of water, as we may see in their
Hydrographicall cards. Where the British sea is deepest.
Howbeit between these Islands and Foy in Cornwall this our Ideston, Moushole,
and Longships (which be rather infamous and dangerous rocks than Islands) at the
very utmost point of Cornwall, lies Antonines LISIA, now called of them that
dwell thereby Lethowsow, but of others The Gulf, seen only at a low water
when the tide is returned. Lisia by transposition of leters Silia.
I take this to be that Lisia which ancient writers do mention; because Lis
(as I have heard among our Britans in Wales) signifies the same. For Lis^
sounds as much as to make a noise with a great rumbling or roaring, such as
commonly we hear in Whirlepits: and in that place the current or tide Antonine
calls SIGDELES, Sulpitius Severus SILLINAE, Solinus SILURES, Englishmen
Silly, the low country Seamen Sorlings, and the ancient Greek writers term
HESPERIDES and CASSITERIDES. For Dionisius Alexandrinu^ named them Hesperides
of their Western situation, in these verses.

-- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Which Priscian translated thus: Sed Sacrum Promontorium.
summam contra Sacram cognomine dicunt,
Quam caput Europae, sunt stanni pondere plenae
Hesperides, populus tenuit quas fortis Iberi.


Which may be englished thus.

Now just beneath that Isle which Sacred, High,
And head of Europe men are wont to call,
The Islands named Hesperides do lie,
And those well stored with Tin, a rich metal.
But would ye know the people? then note well,
The glorious wealthy Spaniards therein dwell.
These also Festus Avienus, in his poem entitled Orae Maritimae, that is, The
sea coasts, called Ostrymnides: touching which he inserted these verses, as
they are found in the Paris edition, and the notes upon the same.

In quo insulae sese exerunt Oestrymnides
Non usque navibus, we read in the notes of Paris.
Laxe jacentes, and metallo divites
Stanni at que plumbi: multa vis his gentis est,
Superbus animus, efficax solertia,
Negotiandi cura jugis omnibus
Nolusque cumbis turbidum late fretum
Et belluosi gurgitem Oceani secant;
Non hi carinas quippe pinu texere
Facere morem non abiete, ut usus est,
Curvant phasello: sed rei ad miraculum
Navigia junctis semper aptant pellibus,
Corioque vastum saepe per currunt salum.
Wherein the Isles Oestrymnides do spread,
And show themselves broad lying all about,
In metals rich as well of tin as lead:
The people strong, their stomachs high and stout,
Active and quick, fresh merchants all throughout:
No troublous waves in Frith or Ocean maine,
Of monsters full, with ships cut they in twain.
For why? no skill at all have they to frame,
Of Pine tree keels for bark or gallion:
Nor know they how to make oars to the same,
Of fyrre or maple wood, where sails are none,
As others use: But which is wonder one,
Of stitched hides they all their vessels make,
And often through sea in leather, voyage take.
Like vessels unto which were used in this our sea, in the year of salvation
914. For we read of certain devout men, that in a Carab (or carogh) made of
two tanned hides only and an half, sailed out of Ireland into Cornwall.
Afterward also of the said Islands the same Avienus wrote thus: Tartesiisque in
terminos Oestrymnidum
Negotiandi mos erat, Carthagini^
Etiam colonis.
Those of Tartessus eke, as well
As they in Carthage town that dwell,
Were wont to trade for merchandise,
To skirts of Isles Oestrymnides.


Cassiterides, of Tin: like as Strabo names a certain place among the
Drangi in Asia, CASSITERON, of Tinn: and Stephanus in his book of Cities,
reports out of Dionysius, that a certain Island in the Indian sea was called
CASSITERIA, of Tin. As for that MICTIS, which Pliny cites out of Timaeus, to
be six days sailing inward from Britain, and to yield Mines of white lead;
that it should be one of these, I dare scarcely affirm. Yet am I not igrant,
that the most learned Hermolaus Barbarus read it in manuscript books, Mitteris
for Mictis, and does read for Mitteris, Cartiteris. But that I should avouch
these to be those CASSITERIDES so often sought for, the authority of the
ancient writers, their Artabri, says Strabo (over against which the West parts
of Britain do lie) appear those Islands Northward which they call
Cassiterides, placed after a sort in the same clime with Britain. And in
another place: The sea between Spain and the Cassiterides is broader than that
which lies between the Cassiterides and Britain. The Cassiterides look toward
the coast of Celtiberia, says Solinus: And Diodorus Siculus, in the Islands
next unto the Spanish sea, which of Tin are called Cassiterides. Also
Eustathius, There be ten Islands called Cassiterides lying close together
Northward. Now, seeing these Isles of Silly are opposite unto the Artabri, that
is, Gallitia in Spain, seeing they bend directly North from them, seeing they
are placed in the same clime with Britain, seeing Celtiberia, seeing they are
dis-joined by a far broader sea from Spain than from Britain, seeing they
are next unto the Spanish sea, seeing they lie hard one by another toward the
North, and ten only of them be of any good account, namely, Saint Mary's,
Annoth, Agnes, Sampson, Silly, Brefer, Rusco or Trescaw, Saint Helens, Saint
Martins, and Arthur, and that which is most material, seeing they have veins
of Tin, as no other Island has beside them in this tract, and considering
that two of the less sort, to wit, Minan Witham, and Minuisisand, may seem to
have taken their names of Mines, I would rather think these to be CASSITERIDES,
than either the Azores, which bear too far West, or Cisarga with Olivarius,
that lies in manner close unto Spain, or even Britain it self with Ortelius;
Cassiterides; and Dionysius Alexandrinus after he had treated of the
Cassiterides, writes of Britain apart by it self.

If any man by reason of the number deny these to be CASSITERIDES, for that
they be more than ten, let him also number the Haebudes and the Orcades, and if
after the account taken, he find neither more nor fewer with Ptolomee than
five Haebudes, and 30. Orcades, let him search in any other place but where
they are now extant, and with all his searching by reckoning of the numbers, I
know for certain he shall not easily find them. But the ancient writers had
no certain knowledge of these most remote parts and Islands of the earth in
that age, no more than we in these days of the Isles in the Streights of
Magellane, and the whole tract of New Guiney.

Herodotus had no knowledge of these, it is no marvel: for himself confesses
that he knew nothing for certain, to make report of the farthest parts of
Europe. But lead was brought first from hence into Greece. Lead, says Pliny,
in his eight Book, and in the Chapter of the first Inventours of things,
Midacritus first brought out of the Island Cassitiris. But as touching these
Islands, listen what Strabo says in his third Book of Geography, toward the
end. The Islands Cassiterides be in number ten, near one unto another, situate
in the deep sea, Northward from the haven of the Artabri. One of them is
desert, the rest are inhabited by men wearing black garments, clad in
side-coats reaching down to their ankles, girt about the breast, and going
with staves, like unto the Furies in Tragedies. They live of their cattle,
Gades, and concealed from others this their navigation.

But when the Romans followed a certain Master of a ship (that they
themselves might learn this traffic of merchandise) he, upon a spiteful
envy, ran his ship for the Publius Crassus when he had sailed thither, and
seen how they dug not very deep in these Mines, and that the people were
lovers of peace and lived quietly, desirous also to sail upon the sea, he
showed the feat thereof to as many as were willing to learn: although they
were to sail a greater sea than that which reaches from thence to Britain.

But to discourse no farther whether these were the ancient Cassiterides or no,
and Silly. There be about an hundred forty and five Islands carrying this name,
all clad with grass, or covered with a greenish moss, besides many hideous
rocks, and great craggy stones raising head above water, situate as it were in
a circle round, eight leagues from the lands end, or utmost point of Cornwall
West-South-West. Some of them yield sufficient store of corn, but all of them
have abundance of conies, cranes, swannes, herons, and other sea-foule. The
greatest of them all is that which took the name of Saint Marie, having a
town so named, and is about eight miles in compass, offers a good harbor
to Sailors in a sandy Bay, wherein they may anchor at six, seven, and eight
fathom; but in the entry lie some rocks on either side. It has had anciently
a castle, which has yielded to Stella Maria.
and named the same Stella Maria, in respect both of the ravelines, which
resemble the rays of a star, and the name of the Isle; for defense whereof
she there placed a garrison under the command of Sir Francis Godolphin.

Doubtless these are those Islands, which (as Solinus writes) a troublous and
rough narrow sea separateth by the space of two or three hours sailing from
the coast of the Danmony, and the inhabitants whereof observe the custom of
ancient times. They have no faires nor mercates, and refuse money; they give and
take one thing for another, they provide

Eustathius out of Strabo terms the inhabitants Melanchlanos, because they
were clad in black garments reaching down to the ankles: and as Sardus was
persuaded, they depart out of this world for the most part so long livers, that
they desire to live no longer. For from the top of a rock (as he says) they
throw themselves into the sea, in hope of a more happy life: which doubtless
was the persuasion of the Britain Druides.

Hither also the Roman Emperors were wont to send persons condemned to work
Maximus the Emperor, when he had condemned Priscillanus to death for heresy,
commanded his sectaries and disciples, Iustantius a Bishop of Spain, and
Tiberianus, after their goods were confiscate, to be carried away into the
Islands of Sylly: and Marcus the Emperor banished him, that in the commotion of
Cassius had prophesied and uttered many things, as it were by a divine instinct
of the gods, into this Island, as some are verily persuaded, who willingly for
Syria Insula read Sylia Insula, that is, The Isle of Silly, considering the
Geographers as yet know no such Island as Syria. Ulpian lib. 7. de Mathematicis.
This confining or packing away of offenders into Islands, was in those days a
kind of exile; and the Governors of Provinces might in that manner banish, if
they had any Islands under them: if not, they wrote unto the Emperor, that
himself

In the Writers of the middle time we find not so much as the name of Sylly,
but only that King Athelstane subdued them, and after his return built a
Church in honor of S. Beriana or Buriena, in the utmost promontory Westward of
Britain, where he landed.

Full against these on the French coast, Axantos.
lies Plinies AXANTOS, an Isle right before the Osissimi, or Britain Armorie,
which keeping still the name whole, is called Ushant: Ushant.
Antonine terms it UXANTISSENA, in which one word two Islands grew together,
to wit, UXANTIS and SENA. For this Island lies somewhat lower, now called Sayn,
Siambis.
which butting full upon Breast, is named in some copies SIAMBIS, and of Pliny
corruptly Sounos: about which from East to West, for seven miles together
Mariners call it the Seame.
Touching this Sain, take with you that which Pomponius Mela reports. SENA,
says he, lying in the British sea opposite unto the shores of the Osissimi, is
famous by reason of the Oracle of a French God, whose shee-Priests vowing
perpetual virginity, are said to be nine in number: the Frenchmen call them
Zenas or Lenas, ( for so read I with Turnebus, rather than Gallitenas) and men
are of opinion, that they being endued with especial endowments of nature, are
able by enchantments to trouble the sea, and raise up winds* to turn
themselves into what living creatures they list, to heal all those maladies,
which with others are incurable, for to know also and to foretell things to
come, etc.

Isles aux Motions, near unto Pen-Mac, that is, the horsehead: Gleran over
against old Blavic (which at this day is Blavet) Grois and Bellisle, all which
Pliny calls VENETICAE. For they lie opposite unto the Veneti in little
Britain, Veneti. Insulae Vene cae. Vannes. Venna Caro i. Charles Fi^shing, as
He^gardus says. Nesidae.
who I wot not whether they were so named, as one would say, Fishermen: for
Venna in the ancient language of the Galls seems to signify so much. These
Strabo supposes to have been the founders and stockfathers of the Venetians in
Italy: who writes also, that they intended to have given Caesar battle at
sea, when he minded the conquest of Britain. These Islands VENETICAE, some out
of Dionysius Afer term NESIDES, whereas in the Greek book we read (...), that
is, the Tract of the Islands. Of which, Priscian out of him writes Nec spatio
distant Nessidum littora long,
In quibus uxores Samnitum
Amnitum Bacchica sacra
Concelebrant hederae foliis, tectaeque corymbis.
Non sic Bistonides Absynthi ad flumina Thraces,
Exertis celebrant clamoribus (...).
Nor distant far from hence the shores do lie
Of Islands, which Nessides many call,
Wherein the wives of Amnites solemnly
Concelebrate their high feasts Bacchanall

The Thracian dames make not so loud a cry,
At Bacchus feast, the river Absynts by.


Which Festus Avienus also has expressed in these verses: Hinc spumosus item
ponti liquor explicat aestum,
Et brevis e pelago vortex subit: hic chorus ingens
Poeminei coetus pulchri colit Orgia Bacchi,
Producit noctem ludus sacer: era pulsant
Vocibus and crebris lay sola calcibus urgent.
Non sic Absynthi prope flumina Thraces, and almae

Indorum populi stata curant festa Lyaeo.
From hence likewise the foaming sea displaies his swelling tide,
And from the deep short whirle puffs rise. Here by the water side,
A mighty sort of women meet, the feast of Bacchus fair
To celebrate: their sacred sports last all night long. The air
Rings over head with voices shrill: and under foot, the ground
With many a friske and stamp of theirs in dancing does resound.
Like noises make not Thracian Dames, the Biston wives, I say,
Along Absynthus river, while they use to sport and play:
Nor Indians near swift Ganges stream far in such frantic wise.
Bacchus.
What time to God Liaeus they their set feasts solemnize.


Now that Bellisle is one of these foresaid Nessidae, the authority of Strabo,
from the faithful report of other, does prove sufficiently. For it lies
before the mouth of the river Loire: and Ptolomee placed the SAMNITAE in a
coast of France opposite unto it. For thus writes Strabo. Moreover (they say)
there is a little Island in the Ocean, Samnitae, which are inspired with the
instinct or divine power of Bacchus, and by ceremonies and sacrifices procure
the favor of Bacchus: that no man comes thither, but themselves taking their
barks sail away and company with their own husbands, and so return again
into the Island. Also that a custom it is among them, to take away the roof
of their temple yearly, and to cover it again the very same day before the
sun sets; every one of the women bringing their burden: and look which of
them lets her burden fall, she is by the others torn in pieces: and that
they gathering together the pieces as they go unto the temple, make not an end
before they be out of this furious fit: and that it always usually happens,
that one of them by falling down of her burden is thus torn peecemeale.

Thus old Authors, writing of the utmost parts of the world, took pleasure to
insert pretty lies and frivolous fables. But what things are reported of Ceres
and Proserpine, they carry with them, says he, more probability. For the
report goes of an Island near unto Britain, where they sacrifice to these
Goddesses after the same manner that they do in Samothrace.

Then follow the Isles aux Mottouns, Gleran, Grois, Belle-isle, upon the coast
of little Britain, Niermoustier, and L'isle de Dieu upon the coast of Poictou,
and Lisle de Re, Islands full well known, and much frequented for the plenty
that they yield of bay salt: but for as much as they are not once mentioned by
the ancient Geographers, it Oleron, Oleron. Uliarus.
was known to Pliny by the name of ULIARUS, which lies, as he says, in the
Bay of Aquitaine, at the mouth of the river Charonton, now Charent, and had
many immunities granted from the Kings of England, then Dukes of Aquitain. At
which time it so flourished for marine discipline and glory, that these seas
were governed by the laws enacted in this Island in the year 1266. no less
than in old time the Mediterranean sea by the laws of Rhodes. Lex Rhodia.


Hitherto have I extended the British sea, both upon the credit of Pomponius
Mela, who stretches it to the coast of Spain; and upon the authority of the
Lord Great Admiral of England, Admiral of England.
which extends so far. For the Kings of England were, and are rightful Lords
of all the North and West seacoasts of France (to say nothing of the whole
kingdom and crown of France) as who, to follow the tract of the seacoast,
wan the county of Guines, Hereditary territories in France belonging to the
Crown of England.
Merk, and Oye by the sword, were true heirs to the county of Porithieu and
Monstrevil by Eleanor the wife of King Edward the first, the only heir
thereof. In like manner most certain heirs to the Duchy of Normandy by King
William the Conqueror, and thereby superior Lords of Little Britain
dependant thereof; undoubted heirs of the countries of Anjou, Tourain, and
Maine, from King Henry the second, whose patrimony they were: likewise of the
county of Poictou, and Duchy of Aquitaine or Guyenne, by Eleanor the true
heir of them, wife to the Henry the second; to omit the counties of Toulouse,
March, the homage of Avergne, etc. Of all which the French by their arrests of
pretended forfaitures and confiscations have disseized the crown of England,
and annexed them to the Crown of France; taking advantage of our most unhappy
civil dissentions: whereas in former ages the French Kings were so fore-closed
by these territories, as they had no access at all to the Ocean.

Neptune with their torn sails, or some saved planks, according to their vow:
so I also should consecrate some monument unto the ALMIGHTY and MOST GRACIOUS
GOD, and to VENERABLE ANTIQUITY: which now right willingly and of duty I vow,
and God willing in covenient time I will perform and make good my vow. Mean
while I would have the Reader to remember, that I have in this work wrastled
with that envious and ravenous enemy TIME, of which the Greek Poet

(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
Hore-headed TIME full slowly creeps, but as he slye does walk,
The voices he as slyely steals of people as they talk:

And such again as are not seen he brings forth to light.
But I for my part am wont ever and anon to comfort my self with this
Distichon of Mimnermus, which I know to be most true.

(...),
(...).

Men hard to please
Thou happily may offend:
Though one speak ill
Of thee, some will
Say better, there an end.
SOLI DEO GLORIA.
PHILEMON HOLLAND THE TRANSLATOUR TO THE READER.
Master Cambdens work, entitled Britannia: and it is full twenty six years
since it was printed in English. In which former Impression, I being far
absent from the Press, I know not by what Errata, many gross and absurd
mistakings and alterations of my translation, which was done precisely and
faithfully according to the Authors Original. Whereof to give you but a touch
or taste: Page 23. line 11. the Latin is, quam Cambrica, i. Britannicagens, is
printed, Than the British Britain, without all sense, for, Than the Welsh, that
is, the British Nation. Page 38 line 15. Purple Tapestry remove, for, Purple
Tapistry rid, as it ought to be. Page 200. line 14. of Saint Nicholas, for,
Saint Michael, as it ought to be according to the Latin. Page 266. line 10. the
Latin is, Aerem insalubrem, is crept in, Wholesome air, for, Unwholesome
air, as it should be. Besides, whole Verses and Lines left out, and eftsoons
Substantives used for Adjectives, Adjectives for Substantives; Passive words
used for Active, Actives for Passive; and so diverse other passages, against the
Law of Priscian, and Rules of Grammar. Hiatus and want of number in some
Verses, in other some Hypermeter, all by me translated with full feet and
musical measure: and in some places, for Sense, (...), or down right nonsense,
and such like stuff in above a hundred places. All which now by my means, and
command of the higher Powers, care of some of the H. H. a member of the Society
of STACIONERS, are rectified, supplied, and amended, to the better illustration
of the work, contentment and solace of the future diligent Readers, and
perusers of the said Work. Vale. 85. Aetat. suae, Anno 1636.

PH.

THE SHIRES OF ENGLAND.
BArke-shire, 279 Bedford-shire, 399 Buckingham-shire, 393 Cambridge-shire, 485
Ches-shire, 601 Cornwall, 183 Cumberland, 765 Darby-shire, 553 Devon-shire,
199 Dorset-shire, 110 Durham, 735 Essex, 439 Gloucestershire, 357 Hant-shire,
258 Hereford shire, 617 Hertford-shire, 405 Huntington shire, 497 Kent, 324
Lanca-shire, 745 Leichestershire, 517 Lincolnshire, 529 Middlesex, 419
Monmouth, 631 Northfolke* 467 Northamptonshire, 505 Nottingham-shire, 547
Northumberland, 799 Oxfordshire, 373 Richmond-shire, 727 Rutland-shire, 525
Shrop-shire, 589 Somersetshire, 220 Staffordshire, 581 Suffolk, 459 Sussex,
306 Surrey, 294 Warwickshire, 561 Westmorland, 759 Wilt-shire, 241
Worcestershire, 573 Yorke-shire, 689
THE SHIRES OF WALES.
ANglesey, 671 Brecknocke, 627 Cardigan-shire. 657 Carmarden-shire, 649
Carnarvon-shire, 667 Denbigh-shire, 675 Flint-shire, 679 Glamorgan-Shire, 641
Merioneth-Shire, 665 Montgomery, 661 Penbroke-Shire, 651 Radnor-Shire, 623
The first Index or Table, serving from the beginning of BRITAIN to the end of
ENGLAND.
A
A, The first letter, thus shaped, A 762 c Aaron a martyr, 73 f. 636 f Ab-adam
a Baron, 364 d Aballaba, 761 a Abendon or Abington, 279 d Aber, 21 f Aber Avon,
645 f Aberbury castle, 592 f Aber Conwey, 669 e Aberford, 696 b Aberfraw, 672 f
Abergevenny, 635 a Abergevenny castle defamed for treason, 635 b Abergevenny
Lords, ibid. Abtots, a family, 579 b Abus, the same that Humber, 710 d Academia
in Attica, 486 f Accabler, 21 f Ackmancester, 234 d Acmunderness, 752 e Actons,
364 a Acton Burnel, 591 f Adam de Portu, 269 a Ad Ansam, 448 c Adeliza Queen
her praises, 309 a Aden what it signifies, 117 c Aderborne a river, 245 d
Adington, 510 b Ad Lapidem, 262 d Adminius, 418 c Admirals court, 180 b Ad
murum, 819 c Adraste a goddess among the Britains, 31 c Adrian the Emperor in
Britain, 65 d Ad Rotum, etc. 449 c Adalph re-edifieth Peterburgh Abbey, 512 f
Aeleonor K. Edward the First his wife, 397 a Aeleonor K. Henry the Third his
widow lives in a Nunnerie, 254 c Aeleonor Cobham, 304 a K. Aelfred, a Prince
much troubled, 224 b, c. First Monarch of England, 158 c. Second founder of
Oxford Universitie, 376 b Aelfritha K. Edgars wife, 254 c 262 b. a cruel and
hateful stepdame, 211 d Aelward Meaw, that is to say, white, 217 b Aeneus
Sylvius, that is, Pope Pius Secundus, 818 e Aequity courts in England, 178
Aequivocation of Adam bishop of Hereford, 363 b Aesica, 781 d Aestii, 21 f
Aeternalis Domus, what it is, 645 d Aethelbald the good King of the Mercians,
554 a. stabbed to death, 569 e Aethiopians why so named, 23 c 26 b Aethling,
that is, the Prince, 614 a Aeton, 393 f Aeton or Eton School, 288 f Agelocum,
545 f Jul. Agricola Lieutenant of the twentieth legion in Britain, 53 e.
Propretor in Britain, 54 b. discomfiteth the Ordovices, 54 c, d. conquereth
Anglesey, ibid. his civil and politic government in Britain, 54 f. his
martial skill, 55. his other virtues and behavior, 55, 56. he vanquisheth
the Caledonians, 57. his patience, 57. his Oration to his soudiers, 59. his
victory, 61. his modesty, 62 Agrippina the Empress her haughty mind, 44 e,
f Aidon castle, 808 f Ailesburies gentlemen, 395 f Ailesburie, 395 c Ailesford,
3^1 f Ailwin Healf Koning, 499 e Ainsbury or Ainulphsbury, 497 c Ainulph a
religious man, ibid. Airmins a family, 5^3 a Akemanstreet-way, 377 b
Alabaster-stone, 544 c Alabaster stone about Burton upon Trent, 586 b Alan a
river, 194 c. 246 d Alan the son of Flaold, 589 f Alaricus King of the Goths,
86 b Alaun a river, 259 c. 813 c Alban a country, 126 c Albanes whence they
took their name, 26 b S. Alban of Verlam our Stephen and Protomartyr of
Britain, 73 f. 409 f Albanie, 126 S. Albans a town, 408 c S. Albans Church
and town, 410 c 412 d S. Albans battles, 413 c Albenies Earls of Sussex, 320 e
Albinus, 126 Albina, 24 b Albinus created Caesar, 68. he usurpeth the Empire,
69. is slain, ibid. Albion, 1, 23. whence it took name, 24 a Albrighton, 594
a Alchester, 377 b Alcwin a learned English Saxon, 137 f. 704 c Alborow, 701 c.
731 c. 466 a Aldelme Abbat, 244. a singular scholar and a devout man, ibid.
Aldersgate in London, 423 d Aldgate in London, 423 e Aldingham, 755 d Ale the
ancient English-mens drink, 554 f Alen a riveret, 676 f. 681 f Alexander of
Hales a great Clerk, 365 a Alexander the bountiful Bishop of Lincoln, 383 e.
539 d profuse in building, 549 d King Alexander the Great never in Britain, 32
d Alfreton, 555 e Algar Earl, 379 a Alheale, 14 d Alford in Lincolnshire, 542
b Alingtons a family, 489 e Knights, 406 d Alipius, 79 Allabany, 126 Allectus
his treachery 73. is vanquished and slain, ibid. Allobrogae, 19 Almans whence
they took their name, 26 b. 124 Almondbury, 692 d Alne river, 566 a. 813 c
Alnwick or Anwich, 813 c Alon a river, 801 e Alone, 794 c Alps of Britain, 667
c Alps why so called, 24 Alresford, 262 e All Souls College in Oxford, 382
Alsten more, 799 c Alt a river, 748 c Althorp, 508 d Altars of the Gentiles and
their Religion, 751 d, e Alterynnis, 617 c Altmouth a town, 748 e
Alvertonshire, 723 e Alum made, 217 a Alum earth discoverd by Sir Th. Chaloner,
knight, 721 d Alured, See Aelfred. Alwena a devout woman, 494. d Ambacti, 16
Amboglana, 760 b Ambleside, ibid. Ambresbury, 254 b Ambro. what it is, 127
Abrones, ibid. Ambrosius Aurelius, 128 Ambrosius Aurelianus, 254 b Amersham,
394 e Amphibalus a martyr, 636 f Ampthil, 401 d Anas a river, 297 a. why so
called, 245 c Ancaster, 537 b Ancaster heath, ibid. d Andate or Andates a
goddess among the Britains, 31. 457 e Andradswald, 306 c Audragathins a
traitor drowneth himself, 83 Anderida the weald, 329 d Andernesse, 752 e
Androgeus, Cynobelinus his son, the same that Mandrubatius, why so called,
417 e Anesty in Hertfordshire, 405 f Angel a Province in Dania, 130 Angels, 610
c Ri. Angervil Philobiblos, 381 f Angles or Englishmen whence they came, 130
Anglesey, 671. why so called, 672 c conquered by king Edward the first* ibid.
d. invaded by Suetonius Paulinus, 49 Angotby, 545 a Anger, 440 b Ankam a river,
543 a Ankro the river, 569 c Anne wife to King Richard the Second, 297 d Anne
Bullen mother to Queen Elizabeth, 256 f Anna a Christian King, 466 a Annius
Viterbiensis, 24 Anselm against Priests marriage, 201 b Ansty or Ancienty
liberty, 707 a Ant or Anton a river, 260 e Antivestaeum, 187 Anthony, 193
Antoninus Pius Britannicus, 66 Philosophus, ibid. Anubis Latrans, 17 Apelby,
761 a Apennini, 18 Apollinaris an herb, 98 Appropriat Churches what they be,
and how many, 161 Apthorp, 514 e Aquila his prophecy, 214 c Aquileia the city
commended, 83 Aquitania why so called, 27 Ar, 21 Ara, ibid. Arar, 20 Araris a
river in France, 694 a Arat, 20 Arbeia, 769 c Arches a court, 181 Archbishop of
Canterbury, 136 Archbishops three in Britain, 155. in England two, 160
Arconfield, 618 a Archdeacons, 222 c Archdeaconries in England how many, 161
Archigubernius, 66 Ardudwy, 665 e Areol, 594 e Are a river, 693 f. why so
called, 694 a Arians what they were, 81 Arelate, 21 Aremorica, 19 Arfast Bishop
of East England, 471 f Arden forest, 358 b Arden a forest in Warwickeshire, 565
c Arderns a family, 604 b Argentons, 406 d. 489 e Arians condemned, 77
Arianisme in Britain, 78 Ariconium, 618 d Aristobulus mentioned by Saint Paul,
in Britain, 68 Arlech castle, 665 e Armanthwaite, 777 f Armaturae what they
were, 783 Arms of Ailsburies, 395 d Arms of Will. de Albeny, 320 e Arms of
the Alfretons Barons, 555 e. of the Bainards, 271. d of the Argentons, 406 d.
of the Bardolps, 481 e. of the Blewets, 271 d. of the Bows, 737 b. of the
Bohuns, 311 f. of Brabant, 820 e. of Charleton Lord of Powis, 663 c. of
Colchester, 451 a. of Cusanz. 271 d. of Ela Countess of Salisbury, 249 d. of
the Ferrars, 526 a. of Sir Hen. Guildford, 352 b. of Harold, 617 d. of Hollands
Knights, 749 d. of Th. Howard Duke of Norfolk, 483 c. Of the first Kings of
England of Norman blood, 724. of the Lucies. 768 f. of Lumlies, 742 b. of the
Mauleis, 719. of Montfichets, 453 of the Monthaults, 690 e. of the Mortimers de
Attilborough, 473 b. of the Musards, 555 f. of the Muschamps, 815 c. of Saier
Quincy and Roger his son, 267 Arms of the Percies, 768. of the Percies and
Lucies, ibid. of Redvers Earls of Denshire, 207 e. of the Scales, 405 e. of
the Segraves, 568 f. of the Sturmies, 254 f. of the Lord Stourton, 245 b. of
Vaulx, 786 e. of Vermandors, 304 b. of Vescy, 723 a. 722 f. of Viponts, 763. of
Warren Earl, 304 b Army of God and Holy Church, 509 d Armorica what it
signifies, 111 Armorica, 19.12 Armorican Britons whence they came, 5 Arnulph
of Montgomery conqueror of Penbrochsh. 655 a Arrow a river, 565 d Arrow a
town, 566 a Arthur a British Prince, 128 Arthurs place of Nativitie and death,
194 Ap. Arthur a writer, 632 f Arthurs battle against Mordred, 194 Arthurs
sepulcher, 227 f Arthurs Epitaph, 230 a, b Arthurs table, 776 d King Arthurs
Palace, 221 b Artisans or Craftsmen, 177 Arvandus his children killed, 262 d.
276 a Arveragus, 62 Arundell Earls, 309.310 Th. Arundel Baron of Wardour, 246
a. Count of the Empire, ib. Arundale, 308 d Arundels Knights, 193 Arwerton, 463
e S. Asaph a Bishops See, 679 d S. Asaph a goodly and upright man, ibid. e
Ascohes Knights, 543 a Ascot, 396 a Ashbie Mares, 507 b Ashbie de la Zouch, 519
a Ashburnham, 317 e Ashburne in the Peake, 553 d Ashle manor, 481 f Ashdown,
442 f Ashridge, 395 a Ashford, 335 d Ashwell, 406 a Ashwell Thorp. 472 d
Askerton castle, 782 f Asks a family, 729 f Asserius a learned Monk, 378 c
Assizes what they are, 445 ^ Astbury, 608 f Astley castle, 569 b Astleies
Barons, ibid. b Astleies a noble family, 581 d Astleis Knights, 217 a Astons a
family, 584 e Th. Aston the first head-schoolemaster of Shrewsbury, 596 b
Astroites a stone, 536 c Astwell, 505 e Athelney, 224 b Athelwold murdered by
Edgar, 262 b Athyrston, 569 d Attrebatii, 278 Attacotti, 79.127 Attal-Sarisin,
185 Attilbridge, 473 d Attilburgh, ibid. b Attila the scourge of God, 197 a
Atton a place and family, 722 b Avallon an Island, ^25 e Aubrey a family, 628 e
Audience court, 181 Audre causey, 459 d Audre, 492 e S. Audre or Etheldreda,
ibid. f S. Audries Liberties, 493 c Aventon, 258 d Aven a river in Hantshire,
258 e Avens a family, 485 d Averham or Aram a place, 549 Aufon river, See Nen.
Augusta, See London. Augusta what they be, 424 d Augustus Caesar intended a
voyage into Britain, 39. he neglects Britain, ibid. Augustine Apostle of
the English nation, 336 d. 136. where enterred, 337 f. S. Augustines cross,
342 a. Augustines oak, 578 d. e Aulus Atticus slain, 61 Aulus Plautius sent
into Britain, 40. his exploits there, 41 Mercate Aultun, 269 a Awdleys or
Aldeleghs, Barons, 583 ^ Henry Awdley, 583 f. 584 a James Lords Awdley, 584 a
Awdley end, 452 a Baron Awdley of Walden, 452 d Awkenbury, 501 c Awkland, 738 d
Aulaf the Dane adopted, 261 f Aulbemarle Earls, 715 b Auldby, 709 e Aulcest^r,
566 b Aulton castle, 587 c Avon a river in Somersetshire, 236 c Avon what it
signifies, 358 a Avon a river in Wiltshire, 242 a Avon river the less, 515 b.
517 Avon a river in Wales, 665 e Avon-well, 515 b Aure a yellow or golden
color, 26 Aurelius Conanus a tyrant, 113 Aurelius Ambrose, 259 a Aurenches or
de Abrincis, 349 b Ausley castle, 588 e Aust-clive, 363 d S. Astins Church in
Canterbury, 337 e Ax a river, 206 f Axan minster, ibid. f Axelholme an Isle,
544 b
B
BAblac, 373 c Babthorp, name of a place and family, 710 Babthorps father and
son, ib. b Bacons a family, 463 e Sir Nicholas Bacon, L. Keeper, 461 f John
Baconthorpe the resolute Doctor, 479 b Bad, 21 Badbury hill, 216 e Baddeley,
607 e Bartholmew Lord Badilsmeere, 331 d Badesley, 566 d Baggington, 562 e
Bagots, 586 e Bagmere Poole, 609 b Baines or Bathes much used, 732 Bainards
castle in London, 424 b Bainards, 243 f Bailliol college in Oxford, 381 c
Baine a river, 727 f Bainhams, 359 a Baintbrig, ibid. Baskewell a river, 557 b
Bala a town, 666 c Baldach, 473 f Baldock, 406 c Baldwine a Justice, 395 e
Baldwine le Pettour, 464 b Balshall a Commander of the Templars, 566 d
Bamborow, 813 e Bampfeilds a family, 203 e Bampton, 207 b Ban a river in
Lincolnshire, 541 Banbury, 376 a Banchor or Bangor Monastery, 603 a
Bannavenna, that is, Wedon, 508 Bannes Down, 234 b Bandogs or Mastives, 434 e
Banerets, what title of Gentry, 171 a Baram Down, 345 a Barangi, 154 Barbacan
in London, 433 d Bard, 4.14.15 Bard, 19 Bardolphs Lords, their tenures of
certain Lands, 302 d Bardus, 19 Bardney Abbey, 540 f Bardolphs Barons, 481 e.
548 f Bariden a river, 473 d Barkley Barons, 239 a William Vicount Barkley
Earl of Notingham, 551 c Barklow, 452 a Bark-shire, 129 Barkway, 405 f Barnard
castle, 736 e Saint Barnard College in Oxford founded, 382 b. re-edified, 383
b Barley a town and famly, 405 f Barley the best, 485 b Barnwel Abbey, 487 f.
Castle, 510 c Barnet, 425 e Barnet field, 415 d Barry an Island, 643 a Barries
Vicounts in Ireland, 643 Baringtons a family, 453 d Barington Hall, ibid. Baro
what it signifies, 168 Barons what degree of honor, ib. Baronies many in
Northumberland, 799 c Barons to the Count Palatine of Chester, 612 a. their
office, ib. Barow, 521 b Barows or Burrows, 255 b Barton upon Humber, 542 f
Baruch an holy man, 643 a Bascaads or Baskets, 491 e Basilicae, 743 f Basile,
473 f Basing, 269 b. the honor of the Barons S. John Poinings and Powlets,
Basing Stoke, 269 b Basing Werk, 680 b Baskervils worthy knights, 620 c Bassets
a notable family, 581 f Bassets of Welledon, 514 d Bassets of Brailesford, 553
d Baston, 21 Batable ground, 782 a Bateau, 21 Batersey, 303 a Batherton, 607 e
Bath gate, 557 Bath Earls, 235 a Bath Knights, 172. their dubbing, ibid. Bath
City, 233 b. the hot Waters thereof, ibid. Battle Bridge, alias Stanford
Bridge, 709 e Battle Abbey founded, 317 b Battle of the Standard, 724 a
Battle field, 596 c Battle at Nevils cross, 741 b Battle at Solon Moss,
782 a Battle a town, 317 c Bauchadae, 19 Bawdes a family in Essex, 426 b
Bawdsey haven, 465 d Beachy point, 313 d Beacons, 272 d Beavons of
Southhampton, 250 e Beamfleot, 441 b Bear the badge of the Earls of Warwick,
570 b Beanfield, 695 a Beauchamps, 399 d Henry Beauchamp Earl of Warwick his
style. 570 b. Duke, also of Warwick, ibid. John Beauchamp Baron of
Keddermister, 574 b Richard Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, 563 e. his tomb and
epitaph, 564 a Beauchamps Barons, Lords Brook, 223 f William Beauchamp the
blind Baron, 574 b Beauchamps court, 565 f Beauchamp Baron of Pewich, 565 f
Beauchiefe Abbey, 555 e Beaucliffe, 313 d Beaudley, 573 e Beaudesert, 585 a Sir
Thomas Beaufoe of ancient descent, 564 e John de Beaufort Earl of Sommersert,
230. refuses the title of Marquess Dorset, 217 d Beauforts Dukes of
Sommerset, 414 e Beaulieu, 260 b Beaumanour park, 521 d Beaumarish, 672 d
Beaumeis, 594 a John Beaumont the first Vicount in England, 521 Beaumonts of
Cole Orton aunciently and highly descended, 519 Beaumont a family in
Yorkshire, 693 a Rob. Beaumont of Pont Audomar Earl of Mellent and of
Leceister, 523 c his race or progeny, ibid. e Beavior or Belvior castle, 536 b
Beauvoir or Belvoir vale, 535 d Bebba, 813 f Bebham, ibid. e Ant. Bec or Beck
Bishop of Durham untrusty to his Ward, 328 a. 723. a Tho. Becket slain by
Courtiers, 337 b Becco, 20 Beda, 6. a learned Englishman, 137 Beda venerabilis,
744 a Bedw. 19 Beddington, 302 c Bedfordshire, 399 Bedford town, ibid. e
Bedford Lords, Earls and Dukes, 402 f John Duke of Bedford his style and
monument, 403 a Bedifoyd, 208 a Bedingfeild a place and family, 468 b De la
Beech Knights, 282 e Beeston a castle and family, 607 b Saint Bees, 766 a Saint
Bega a devout Irish woman ibid. Beichiad, 19 Belerium what cape, 1 Belgae in
Gaul and Britain, 219 b. whence so named, ibid. d King Beleus his Habergeon,
11 Robert de Belesmo rebelleth, 591 d. a cruel man, 599 b Bellisma aestuarium,
a frith, 752 Bellister castle, 799 e Beln, Melin and Phelin, all one, 98
Belingsgate in London, 423 e Belinuntia, 98 Belinus a god, ibid. what it
signifies, 391 e Belleland or Biland, 723 b Bellasise a family, 723 b Bellers
a noble family sometime, 522 f Bellotucadrus, 691 d Benefician, what town, 478
f Benedictine Monks, 226 d Benington, 407 f S. Benno, 680 c S. Bennaventa, is
Wedon, 508 c, d S. Bennit in the Holme an Abbey, 478 c Bengley, 815 b
Ben-Gorion, 125 Bensted a family, 407 f Bensbury, for knebensbury, 302 f
Benson, 388 d Bently, 463 e Bear park or Beau park nere to Durham, 741 Bericus
a tratour to Britain, 40 Berengarius le Moigne, that is, Monk, 510 c
Berkhamsted, 414 c Bermingham or Bremicham, a town and family, 567 b
Bermondsey Abbey, 434 b Bernack 514 e Benrers a family, 405 d Berniciae, 817 a.
797 b Bernwood, 393 e. 395 Berohdon or Baradon, 525 f Berosus confuted, 10
Berry by Wicomb, 393 c Berstaple, 208 b Bertelin an Eremite, 584 d Berwick
town, 816 e Berwicks what they be, ibid. f Berwic in Elmet, 696 b Bery, 594 d
Bery Pomerie, 202 a Betula or Betulla, 19 Betheney, See Stafford. Betony, 20
Beverley a town, 711 d John of Beverley, ibid. Bevers in Tivy river what
creatures they be, 657 e Beverston castle, 364 d Beufes of Lancashire, 745 e
Bevils a family, 192.562 a Bezants or Bezantines what they be, 421 a Bibroci,
286 d Bie what it signifies, 543 b Begleswade, 401 c Bigod, the name of Rollo
the Norman, 144 Hugh Bigod, Lord chief Justice of England, 482 c Hugh Bigod
Earl of Norfolk, 482 b Bigod, the name of hypocrites and superstitious
persons, 144 Bigods a family, 465 d Bigots a family, 633 c Bigrames a family,
501 c Billesdun, 812 f Biland or Belleland, 723 b Th. Billing Lord chief
Justice of the Kings bench, 505 e Bindon, 212 b Binchester, 738 e Binchester
penis, ibid. Binbrige Isle, 274 a Birdlip hill, 365 f. 366 c Pirinus the
Apostle of the West Saxons, 384 c Birling, 332 d Birthin a river, 636 c
Birtport or Burtport, 210 e Biscaw won, 188 Bisham, 286 b Bishops of Durham,
735 Bishops of Bath and Wells, 232 c Bishops castle, 189 e Bishops Thorps, 707
c Bishops whether they might hold castles, 244 c Bishops gate in London, 423 d
Bishops their place and precedence in England, 161 Bissemed, 401 b Bissets an
honorable family, 245.574 a Bittlesden, 396 d Bitumen, that is, Sea cole, 735
c Biwell castle, 808 c Bihan castle, 537 a Bithric Lords of Gloucester, 368
Bizacium in Afric, 478 e Blackborne, 752 d Blackburne shire, ibid. e Blacklow
hill, 564 d Blackelead, 767 b Blackemere a Baronie, 598 d Blackemore forest,
213 f Blackeamore, 717 b Blacketaile Poincts 213 Blackewater a Creek, 443 e
Rob. Blanchmains, 518 b Blackeney, 479 a Mercate Blandford, 215 e Blatum
Bulgium, 775 c Blean Leveney castle, 628 d Blatherwicke, 514 b Blechindon, 377
a Blencarn a brook, 763 c Blenkensop a place and family, 800 b Blestium, 617 c
Blickling, 478 b Bletso, 399 d Blewets, 224 c Blisworth, 507 a Blithe, 551 a
Blithe a river, 586 d. 466 e 812 a Bliphborough, 486 e Blithfield, 586 e Charles
Blount or Blunt, Lord Montjoy Earl of Devonshire, 208 d Blounts or Blunts of
Kinlets, 574 why so called, 591 b
Blunts Barons Montjoy, 555 c Gilbert Blund, 461 d Boadicia or Bunduica wife to
King Prasutaegus, 49 Boadicia, or Bunduica a noble and warlike Lady, 406 e. 51
is vanquished and poisoneth herself, 52 Bocking a fat Personage, 446 a Bocton
Malherb, 331 b Bodine what he conceives of the name Britain, 5 Sir Th. Bodley
a singular benefactor to Oxford Library, 382 c Bodman, 191. Boduarie, 679 c
Boeth what it signifies, 732 c Bohuns Earls of Hereford, etc. 621 e Humfrey
de Behun Earl of Essex, 454 Hugh de Bolebec, 396 a Bolebec Baronie, 809 e
Bolebec Castle, 396 a Bolerium, 187 Bollin a river, 610 b Bollingbrooke, 541 f
Bolsover Castle, 556 c Bonosus a notorius bibber hangs himself, 71 Boniface,
See Winifride. Bonvill Lord, 206 c. 231 b. his calamities, ibid. c Bolton
castle, 729 a Borrodale, 767 a Bone-well, 619 f Bonhommes a religious order,
395 a Bonhommes College, 244 Bonium, 602 e Booth a family, 610 c Borsarse
alias Brentwood, 442 Borwick, 809 d Borrovicus, ibid. Boscastle, 195 Boseham,
306 f Bostoke a place and family, 609 d Boston, 532 c burnt and ransacked, 532 d
Bothal castle, 812 d Bosworth town, 518 d Bosworth field, ibid. d Botereux
castle, 195 Botereux a family, 566 b Botherwic, 544 d Botontines, 515 d
Bottlebrig or botolph Bridge, 502 Bought on, 510 a Bovium, 643 c Bourchiers
Earls of bath, 598 c 207 c Bourchier Baron of Berners, 405 d Bourchiers de
Berners Lords, 472 d Bourchiers an honorable family 450 d Bows or Bough a
worshipful family, 731 c. 737 a. why so called, 732 e Bowland forest, 750 b
Bowtetorts a family, 465 b Boxley, 332 c Brachae, 19 Bradenham, 393. e Brance,
19 Briti, ibid. Bridburn a place and family, 553 Bradford, 244 f Bradewardin a
place, 6^8 c Bradwardin the profound Doctor, 618 c Bradstons Ancestors of
Vicount Montacute and Barons Wentworth, 364 a Braibrooke castle, 1513 e
Braibrookes Barons, ibid. e Brackley, 505 d Braibrook, 329 c Brakenbake, 724 e
Brackenburies a family of good note, 737 c Brambles, 274 c Brampton, 783 a
Bramton, 815 b Bramton Brian castle, 619 c Bramish a river, 815 b Bancaster,
408 a Brian de Brampton, 619 c Brand, 568 e Brandons a family Suffolk, 465 e
Branspeth castle, 739 Branonium, 575 a Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, 470 c
Brannodunum, 480 a Bransford or Bensford-bridge, 517 e Brazen weapons, 188
Brazen nose College in Oxford, 383 a Brasmatias, a kind of Earthquake, 620 c
Bray, 286 d. Lord Bray, 297 b. The breach by Greenwich, 328 a Nicolas
Breakspeare, That is, Pope Adrian the forth, 414 f Breakspeare a place and
family, 419 b Brechanius his 24. daughters all Saints, 627 a Breden forest, 224
a Breedon hills, 577 e Breedon a village, ibid. Breertons a family, 608 f. their
death foreshewed, 609 b Breerton a place, 609 Brechnockshire, 627 Brechnock
town, 628 a Brechnock mere, ibid. Brechnock Lords, ibid. Brechnock made a
shire, 677 e Bremenium, 803 Brember castle, 313 c Bremetonacum, 753 c Bremicham
or Bermingham a town and family, 567 Bren what it signifies, 677 Bremin, what
it is, 33 Brennus, 677 Brennus a renowned King, 33 Bretenham, 463 b Breton a
river, ibid. Brent a river, 421 Brent, See Falkes de Brent. Brentmarsh, 230 e
Brentford, 421 Brentwood, 442 a Brentwell or Brounswell, 421 Broses Barons, 113
c. 201 f Breoses a family, 553 d Will. de Breos, or Braus, a strong Rebel, 629
b Breoses Lords of Brechnock* 623 Bretons a family, 556 b Bretts, 128 f
Breusais, 138 f Brian, who so called, 117 Bridlington, 714 d John of
Bridlington, ibid. Brewood, 583 a Bricols, 400 e Bridge Casterton, 534 b
Bridgford by Nottingham, 548 Brig for Glansford, 543 a Brigantes in Britain
rebelled, 43 Brigantes, 685. whereof they took name, ibid. Brill for Burihill,
395 b Breint Fitz Conty, 282 a Brients, 202 c, d Brients Barons, 215 d Brinlo,
568 f Brienston, 215 e Brimsfeild, 365 f Bridgewater, 225 a Earl of
Bridgewater, 225 c Bridkirk, 768 b Briewer Baron, 222 e Bristoll or Bristow, a
City, 237 a the reason of the name, ibid. b
Bret the Primitive of the Britains, 26 Brit or Brith the first name of the
Britains, 25 Brith what it signifies, 26 Britain or Britannie whence it took
name, 27. why late discovered and known, 33. mentioned by Lucretius, first of
any Latin writer, ib. twice Schoole-Mistres to France, 138 Britain the great,
that is, England, 155 Britain the less, that is, Scotland, ibid. Britain how
divided, 154.155 Britain what names it has, 1. the site thereof, 1. the form
of it, ibid. why called another world, 24. the division and compass of it, 2.4
Britain has sundry names, 23 the position thereof in respect of the Heavens,
4. how fruitful and commodious, 3. her first inhabitants, 4. the name, 5
Britain under what sign or Planet, 182 Britain portracted in woman's habit,
24. the Roman world, 45 discovered to be an Island, 61 a province Presidial, 62.
How it was governed under and after Constantine the Great, 62 76. how it became
subject to the Romans, 62. infected by Barbarians, 79. brought to civilitie,
63. called Romania, and Roman I Will, 88 Britains ruin and downfall, 107
Britain and France whether ever conjoined, 346 a Britains came first out of
Gaul, 11.12 Britans, in Religion, language and manners agree with the Gauls,
13.14.15.16.17 Britans employed by Caesar in base services, 38 Britans
generally rebel, 49. their grievances, ibid. Britains cast off the Romans
yoke, 86 Britains how they may derive their descent from the Trojans, 88
Britans in Armorica, 110 Britans of Wales and Cornewale, 112.113 Britans send
Ambassadors to the Saxons, 128 Britans retain their ancient language, 23
Britans long lived, 555 b Britans painted themselves blue with wood, 20 Britans
manners and customs out of Julius Caesar, 29. out of Strabo, ibid. out of
Diodorus Siculus, 29. out of Pomponius Mela, ibid. out of Cernelius Tacitus,
30. out of Dio Nicaus, ibid. out of Herodian, ibid. out of Pliny, 3^. out of
Solinus, ibid. Britain Burse, 428 d Britannica the herb. See Scorby or
Scurvigrasse, Britanniciani what they were, 111 Briten huis, 40 Brithin a kind
of drink, 5 British tongue full of Greek, words, 28 British States submit to
Caesar, 37 British Isles mentiond by Polibius, 33 Of British Perle a brestplate,
38 British names import colors, 26 British towns what they were, 29 Britwales
or Welshmen, 113 Briva what it signifies, 414 Brockets knights, 406 f
Brocovum, 762 d Broge, 19 Brokes by a place, 522 f. a family, 523 a Brom, 467
f Bromesgrave, 574 ^ Bromefield, 677 a Wolter Bronscorn Bishop of Excester, 190
Brooks a family of ancient descent, 611 a Brook, L. Cobham, 329 c Barons
Brook, 244 c Bronholme, 478 e Brougham, 762 d Brotherton, 695 b Sir Anthony
Brown first Vicount Montacute, 482 b Sir Ant. Brown Marquess Montacute, 222
d Broughton, 376 e Broughton in Hantshire, 262 c Brundenels a family, 514 b
Bruges Baron Chandos, 365 b Bruin a family, 442 b Burg-morfe or Bridg-North,
591 b Robert Brus the noble, 500 e Baron Brus of Skeleton, 720 c Bruses a noble
family, 526 b Brutus 5. why so called, 8 Bucken, that is, Beech trees, 393
George Buck, 22 d Buchonia and Buckenham, 393 a Buckinghamshire, 393 Buers a
family, 463 b Walter Buc and his race, 812 b Buckingham town, 396 c. Earls,
397 d Buckhurst Baron, 320 Buelth, 627 e Bugden, 497 d Bulchobaudes, 79
Buldewas or Bildas, 593 e Bulkley a town and family, 607 Anne Bullen or Bollen
Marchianesse of Penbroch, 655 e Bullen or Bollen Earl of Wiltshire, 256 e
Bullen or Bollogne in France, the same that Gessoriacum and Bonoia, 348 d Th.
Bullen Earl of Wiltshire died for sorrow, 257 Bulleum Silurum, 627 e Bulley or
Busley a noble Norman, 551 a Bulverith, 316 e Buly castle, 76^ c Bulnesse, 775
c Bumsted Helion, 452 a Bungey, 468 b Burdos or Burdelois, 473 a Burford in
Shropshire, 590 f Burnt Elly, 463 d Burgesses, 177 Burgh under Stanemore, 760
Burgh castle, 468 e Burgh Clear, 72 c Burgi what they were, 760 f Burly a fair
place, 526 b Burons an ancient family, Burrium, 636 c S. Buriens in Cornwall,
188. why so called, ibid. Burnel Baron, 330 c Burcester, 337 b Burdet, 566 c
Bunbury for Boniface burry, 607 Burghersh alias Burgwash, 320 Bartholomew
Burgwash a Baron 320 b Burghley, 514 ^ Burgh, 727 f Burghsted, 442 e Burgh or
Burrow Barons, 543 f Burn a Barony, ibid. Burnels a family, 591 f Burrowes
what they are, 515 e Burrow bank, 452 e Burrow hill, 522 a Burrow bridge, 701 a
Burrow a town, 522 b Baron Burrow or Burgh, 303 f Borough a town and family,
522 Borough of Southwarke, 303 d Burthred the last King of Mercians, 554 a
Burse of London or Royal Exchange, 439 b Burgh upon Sands, 775 e Burgundians
brought into Britain, 71 Burton Lazers, 522 a Burton upon Trent, 586 b Burwell
castle, 490 Burial of men with legs a cross, 808 a Bury Abbey, 460 e Bustlers
a family, 489 e Busleys or Busseies a family, 535 Busy Gap, 800 f Butlers of
Wem, 592 c Butler of Woodhall, ibid. c Butler Earl of Wiltshire, 256 d Butlers
a family, 748 b Butlers or Botelers of Ireland, 752 f Butterby, 739 Butsiet, 20
Buttington, 662 Burton well, 557 c Byliricay, 442 e
C
CAblu. 21 Cadbury, 221 c Cadier Arthur or Arthurs chair, an hill, 627 c
Cadocus Earl of Cornwall, 197 b Cadugan ap Blethin, 658 c. 662 c a renowned
Britain. Caerulus and Caerulum, 24 Caesar's entry into Britain, 343 e where
he passed over the Tamis, 295 e Caesaromagus, 442 b Caesarea the name of many
Cities, 442 b Iul. Caesar his temperance and small port, 38 his patience, ibid.
conquered not Britain, 38 he neglected Britain, ibid.
Caesares, 164 Caer what it signifies, 204 a Caer Caradocke an Hill, 590 a
Caer Custeineth, 668 d Caerdiff, 642 d Caerfuse, 661 e Caer Gai, 666 a Caer
Guby, 673 a Caer Guortigern, ibid. Caerhean, ibid. Caer Leon, ibid.
Caermardenshire, 649 Caermarden City, 649 e Caernarvonshire, 667
Caernarvon-towne, 668 e Caer Pallad^r, 270 a Caer Phillicastle, 642 a Caer
Segonte, 270 a Caer Vorran, 800 e Caer went, 633 d Caer wisk, 679 d Caihaignes
a family, 395 Caius Caesar meant to invade Britain, 40. his vanity, his voyage
thither, 41. his triumph over Britain, 42 Cainsham, 236 e Calaterium nemus,
723 d Caishoberry, 415 a Calc. i. lime, Calcaria, 699 a Calder the river, 691 a
Caldwell, 731 c Caledonians make head against the Romans, 56 Caloughdon, 568 c
Calphurnius Agricola, 66 Calshot or Caldshore, 260 d Calveley a place and
worthy family, 608 d Sir Hugh Calveley a valiant knight, 608 d Callais no
ancient town, 348 b Calthrops a family, 463 e Came a river, why so called, 486
a Came, 21 Camalet, 221 b Camalet towns, ibid. c Camalodunum, 43. lost, 50
Cambodunum 449. Camb-alan-river, 194 Camboritum, 486 a Camden or Camp den, 364
f Camden the Author his opinion of the name of Britannia, and the original of
Britans, 9 Cambridge in Glocestershire, 362 c Cambridgeshire, 485 Cambridge
defaced and burnt, 488 b Cambridge town and Universitie, 486 c When it became
an Universitie, 489 a Camulus a God, 446 e Camel a river, 194 Camelsford,
ibid. Candishor Cavendish, 554 b Camois Barons, 312 e Candocus see Cadocus.
Cambridge Earls, 495 e Camvills a family, 569 a Camur, 21. Candetum, 20 Cangi
a people in Britain, 611 b 231 a. subdued, 43 Cank-wood, 583 e Canterium, 19.
Cantroed, 20 Cantelowes an honorable family, 514 a Cantlow, 201 f Th. Cantlow a
Bishop and Saint, 619 c Cantium what cape, 1 Canterbury College in Oxford, 381
a Canterbury, 336 c. Canterbury Archbishops Primates of Britain, 338 e Cantred
what it is, 650 b Cantred Bitham, ibid. Cantred Maur, 650 c Can a river, 759 c.
445 d Cancefeilds a family, 755 d Candale or Kendale a Barony, 759 c Canel
Cole, 735 d Canonium is Chelmesford, 445 d Cantabri and Scithians of like
manners, 121 Canvey Isle, 441 a Cantaber a Spaniard founder of Cambridge
Universitie, 487 a Canutus his Apophth. 261 e Canvills a family, 515 c Capgrave
his legends, 646 Capitatio a Tribute, 100 Caradauc Urichfas, 590 c King
Caradock, 633 ^, f. delivered unto Ostorius, 590 a. taken prisoner by Queen
Cactismana, 44. his undaunted courage, ibid. Caratacus Prince of the Dimeiae
657 e. 43 Caranton, 220 Cardiganshire, 657. Lord thereof, 658 c Cardigan a
town, 657 e Careg castle, 650 Carleton a town and family, 472 d Carews of
Surry, 302 c Carews a family, 652 c Carew castle, ibid. Carew of Anthony, 198 d
Carewes a noble family, 202 e 282 d Caries, 202 e R. Carew, 193 Carew Baron of
Clopton, 565 b Careston, 517 c Carlisle, 778 d. Old Carlisle, 773 b. Carlisle had
one Earl, 780 d Carnabies a family, 808 f Carthismandua wife to Venusius a
stout Lady, 48. her loose life and adultery, 53 Carmelite Friars, 351 e.
brought first into England, 813 d Carthmell, 755 a Caribec, 121 Carisbrook, 275
c Careswell a castle and family, 587 Carausius usurpeth the Empire 72.
governs Britain well, ib. slain by Allectus, 72 Carus and Carinus
Emperors, 73 Carminow, 190 Carrs a family, 815 Carr a river, 210 c Carmouth,
210 b Carram, 815 a Carvills a family, 481 a Carvilius, 37 Henry Carry Baron of
Hunsden, his high and noble descent, 408 409 Sir Edmund Carry knight of high
descent, 414 e Cassibelinus General of the Britains army, 36 Cassibellinus
or Cassiavelanus encountereth Caesar and the Romans, 37. is repulsed, ibid.
treats about peace with Caesar, 37 Cassii, 391 c. why so called, ibid. f
Caster, 473 d Caster in Huntingdonshire, 502 a Castigand an high hill, 501 d
Castle in the Peake, ib. 502 a Castle Acre, 481 c. 557 d Castle Ashby, 509 e
Castle Camps, 488 f. 489 f Castle Carry, 696 b Castle Coch, 662 b Castle Colwen
or of Maud in Colewent, 623 b Castle Crest by Lichfeild, 582 e Castle Comb, 243
e Castle Dinas Bran, 677 c Castle Dinas, 628 d Castleford, 695 a Castle Guard,
345 a. 201 c Castle Pain, 623 b Castle steeds, 783 b. 793 d. 808 Castor, 542 d
Catadunae or waterfalls, 759 f Castellan Denis, 194 Catesby a town, 508 b.
anancient family, ib. tainted by Rob. Catesby of Ashbie Saint Ledger, ibid. 431
d Catheri Heretics, 84 Catlidge, 498 b Catmose a vale, 525 f Caterna, 18
Caterva, ibid. Cattieuch lani, 391 Catarick, 730 c, d Caturactonium, 730 c
Caturfa, 18 Caud a river, 778 b Caudbeck, ibid. c Sir Will. Cavendish or
Candish Baron of Hardwick, 556 a Caves, a family, 515 b A Cave wonderful in
Glamorganshire, 643 b Caurse castle, 592 e Causeies or highwaies in Britain,
63. what names they have in diverse authors, 64. by whom and how they were made,
64. in Italy and else where, 64 Cawood, 707 d Caxton, 485 c Cecily Nevill,
mother to King Edward the fourth, 511 b. an unfortunate Lady, ibid. b, c. her
tomb subverted, 510 e Rob. Cecil Baron of Essendon, Viscount Cranburn, 217 c
Rob. Cecil Earl of Salisbury, 250 e Thomas Cecil Earl of Excester 206 a Sir
Will. Cecil baron Burghley, 514 e Cedos, Caesar, 18 Centuries, see Hundreds.
Celtae, whence derived, 20 Cerdick a warlike Saxon, 477 d Cerdick sand, ibid.
Cerdick shore, ibid. Cerastis, 184 Cerealis vanquished 50. he conquered the
Brigantes, 54 Cerne Abbey, 212 b Cerygy Drudion, 675 c Cester an addition to
cities, 517 Cester Over, ibid. Cley-Cester, 518 b Chad a famous Bishop of
Lichfield, 585 e. 441 a canonized a Saint, ibid.
Sir Thomas Chaloner a learned knight, 721 d Chamber in the forest, 607. a
Chamberlaines sometime Tankervils, 389. d Chamberlainship of England, 489. f
Rob. Chamberlain an Archrobber, 531. e Champernouns or Campernulhs, 201. c John
Chandos made Baneret, 171.365. b Chandos Baron, 365. b Chariot fight of the
Britans, 36 Charing cross, 432. c Charles the eight king of France his
Apophthegm. 403. a Charleton in Worcestershire, 578. b Charleton Castle, 594. a
Charletons Lords of Powis, ib. Charlecot a place, 564 f. a family, 565. a
Charnewood or Charley forest, 521. d Charta de Foresta, 293. ^ Charter house in
London, 433. d Chartley castle, 584. f Chure, a fish, 755. d Chateries or
Cheatrish, 494. d Chatmosse, 747. a Chuttesworth, 554. b Chaucer, our English
Homer born at woodstock. 375. f Chaucombs, a family, 568. e Chaumonds, 196. b
Chauncerie, 80 Chancellor, 180 Chaworths, a family, 395 e. 555. descended
from Cahors in Quercy, 549. c Cheapen what it signifies, 243. d Cheardsley,
395. f Chea^ford hundred, 442* c Cherk^^i, 587. d Cheadse, 587. d Chellington,
581. e Chelmer river, 444. d Chelmerford or Chenceford, 445 Chelsey, 421. c
Chen^y Baron of Hersford, 466 Chencies or Chienies an house, 394. a Sir Henry
Cheiney Baron, 401 Chepstow, 633. b. Lords thereof ibid. c Cherry trees brought
into Britain, 324. b Chertford, 258. e Chertsey, 294. the monastery thereof
founded, 294. d Cherwel the river, 373. b. his head. 507. e Chesil a bank or
sandrige, 210. e Che^ses of the best, 601 Cheshire, ibid. County Palatine,
601. b Chesham bois, 394. f Chesterfield 452. e. in Scardale, 556 Chester
Earls, 611. f Chester Earl Count Palatine, 612. a. what Barons he had under
him, ibid. Chester Earldome made a principality, 612. f Chester, or
West-Chester city, 604. c Chester, and Cheshiremen described, 602. a Chesters
what they are, 793. d Chester in the wall, 800. f Chester upon the street, 742.
c Little Chester, 554. c Chesterton under Lime, 583. c Chetwoods a family, 399.
d Chevalry court, 190 Chevin, 698. d Cheviot hills, 812. e Chic, or Chick, the
old name of Saint Osiths, 451. c Chidleys, 203. a Chicheley, Archbishop of
Canterbury, 510. b Chichester, 307. c. Earls of Chichester, ibid. f Chicksand,
401. c Chillingham, 815. c Chilterne 389, c. 393. c. why so called, ^^id.
Chippenham, 243. d Chirke, 677. c Christ's Church in Hantshire, 259. c
Christianity flourishes in Britain, 75, 67, 68. Christ's Church in Oxford,
383. a Chrisanthus Bishop of the Novatians, 84 Churne the river, 366. a Churnet
a river, 587. c Cholmondley a town and family, 607. d Chopwel a riveret, 735.
b Christ Church in Canterbury, 337. b Cirncester, 366. b Cinque ports, 318. a*
which they be, 325 Cilurnum, 806. b Cimbrica Chersonesus, 129 Citizens, 177
Cissbury, 312. d Cistertion Monks. 295. a Civilis a deputy in Britain. 80
Civitas or City what it signifies in Caesar, 417. d Cities by what ceremonies
built by Romans, 102 John Clapham a brave warrior 697. b Clare a noble
village, 462. a noble family of Earls, ibid. b Clarence, 462. b. Dukes
thereof, ibid. Claridon, 240, e Clares Earls of Gloucester, 330 Richard de
Clare his commendation. 416. a Earls of Clare whence so styled, 415. e Claudia
Rufina, a British Lady, 62, 68 Claudius Caesar honored as a God in Britain,
448. b Clausentum, 261. a Claudius Caesar first that vanquished the Britains,
45. he brought the South part of Britain to be a Province, 101 Claudius
Contentus, 341. e Clavering, 453. b Clavering the name of Fitz Richard, 81. a
Claxton, 738. a Claxtons a family, ibid. Clay-Hill, 245. d Clemens Maximus an
Usurper, 341. c Clee Hill, 591. d Cleres a family, 478. b Cley brook, 518. b
Cliftons a family in Notingham, 547 Sir Gervase Clifton, Baron Clifton, 502. d
Cl^ff a town, 329. d Clifford castle, 618. a Cliffords Earls of Cumberland,
618. b Cliftons a family, Earls of Lincoln, 545 Clipsby a town and family,
478. d Clithero castle, 750. a Clives ad Hoo, 329. d Cliveland, 720. b Clopton
a town and family, 565 Clodius Albinus propretor in Britain, 67 Cloudesbury,
749. e Cluid a river in Wales, 676. c Cluid a river, ibid. d Clun castle, 589.
e Clun or Colun, a river, ibid. e Clyto, that is, the Prince, 164. an addition
given to all the Kings Sons, ibid. Cnobersburg, 468. e Cnouts or Canuts delf,
501. b Cobham town, 329. c Cobham Barons, ibid. b Lords Cobham of Sterborrow,
303. e Coc, a river, 696. b Coch or Coccus, 19 Coch what color, 26 Coccium,
745. f Cockar a river, 767. f Cockington, 202. e Cockley Chapel, 745. f Cocks
eyes a worshipful family, 574. a Codanus Sinus, that is, the Oost Sea, 141
Codenor castle, 555. d Canobies what they are, 603. c Cogans, 207. c Cogeshal a
town, 446. a Cogeshal a family, 446. b Coin antique of Aemilianus and Marius
etc. 643. e Coined pieces of embased silver, 65. a, d Coins British and Roman
in Britain, 88. etc. Coinage of Tinn, 186 Coigniers a noble family, 737. d
Coigniers Barons, ibid. Coitie, 643. e Cokains a family, 553. d Coker a river,
753. c Cokarsand Abbey, ibid. Cokermouth, 767. f Sir Edward Cook Knight, 481.
c his commendation, ibid. Cokerington, 542. c Cole a river, 394. a Col a river
near Saint Albans, 414. a Colbrook, 394. a Colepits on fire, 581. d Coals give
evidence of ancient mere-markes, 515. d Coles-Hull or Hill, 681. d Coleshul,
567. c Cole Overton, or Cole Orton why so called, 519. c Colbrand the Giant,
267. a Colliweston, 514. d Colchester, 450. e Colecester, 808. c Colham, 419. c
Colingwoods a warlike family, 813. c Collerford, 806. b Colne a river, 450. a
Carles Coln, ibid. Wakes Coln, ibid. Whites Coln, ibid. Calne a town, ibid.
Coln Engain, ibid. Colepepers a family, 526. b Colonies, 703. a Colonie what it
is, 448. a Colvils, 537. a Columbe a river, 203. a Columbton, ibid. Saint
Columbs, 193 Comata, 20 Comati, ibid. Comb what it signifies, 207. b 393. d
Comb Marton, 20. a Comb, 21 Comb Abbey, 569 a Combat appointed between Henry
of Lancaster and Thomas Mowbray duke of Norfolk, 428. f. Between Roger Bishop
of Salisbury, and William-Montacute Earl of Salisbury, 249. a. Between Edmond
and Cnute, 360. b Comes Britanniorum, 76 Comes Littoris Saxonici, ibid. 325. a
Comes Sacrarum Largitionum, 77 Comes privatarum, ibid. Comes a title of
dignity, 166 Comites what they were at first 165. See more in Earls, Comitatus
Caesaris, ibid. Cominus Atrebas or of Arras, 35.37 Commodus the Emperor, 66
Common Plees Court, 178 Compton in the Hole, 561 c Sir Henry Compton Baron, 561
Compton Murdack, 565. a Composition between King Stephen and Henry Duke of
Anjou, 482. b Composition of names, 27 Concani a Nation in Cantabria, 121
Condate, 608. c Condorcum, 742. c Condover, 592. a Congar, 231. d Congersbury,
231. d Congleton, 608. n Conquests a family, 401. e Will. Cannings his
monuments, 237. f Coningsbees, 415. d. a family of good name and worth, 620. d
Connisborow castle, 689. f Constable Burton, 714. b Constables a great family,
ibid. High Constables of England, 621. c Constantius Chlorus riddeth Britain
of Usurpers, 73. elected Emperor, 74. espoused Helena mother of Constantine the
great, 74. puts her away, ibid. weddeth Theodora, ib. a godly Emperor,
ibid. died at York, ibid. buried there, 703 Constantine the Great Emperor, 74.
his warlike exploits, 75. advances Christian religion, 75 proclaimed Emperor
in York, 703. e. f. his renowned titles, 76. first entitled Dominus Noster,
76. taxed for subverting the Roman Empire, ibid. alters the state of the
government. ibid. Constantine the younger rules Britain, 77. slain by his
brother Constans. ibid. Constans an Imperial Monk, 264. c. 85. is killed,
ibid. Constans Emperor in Britain, 77. holds a council at Sardica, ibid,
killed by Magnentius, ibid. Constantius the younger Emperor, ibid. favors
Arianus, 78. holds a council at Ariminum, 79 Constantine created Emperor in
Britain for the name sake, 270. d. 85. his exploits, ibid. his gourmandise,
ibid. Constantine a tyrant among the Danmoni^ in Britain, 113 Constitutions of
Clarinton, 251 Conwey a river, 667. b. 669. d Conwaie a town, 669 ^
Convocation, 181 Converts their house, 428. b Sir Th. Cook a rich Mayor of
London, 441. f Counts Palatine. See Earls, Th. Cooper Bishop of Lincoln, 540.
c Copes, a family, 376. e Copper or Brass mines, 767. a Coper as made, 217. ^
Copland or Coupland, 765. d John Copland or Coupland, a brave warrior, 775. e.
made Baneret, 171 Coquet the river, 812. e Copthall, 439. ^ Corbets a great
family, 592* e 594 e Corbet a forename, ibid. Sir Will. Cordall Knight, 462. e
Corinaea and Corinaeus, 184 Corinaeus and Gogmagog, 200 c Coritani, 504 Cornden
hill, 662 b Cornelius Nepos, for Joseph of Excestre, 32 Cornavii, 614, 560
Cornovaille in little Britain, 184 Cornage, 787 a Cornwalleies a family, 467 f
Cornwailes of Burford highly descended, 590 f Cornwall a dukedom, 198 c why so
called, 184
Cornwallians soon subjected to the Saxons, 114 Corpus Christi College in
Oxford, 383 a Court Barons, 168 Cornishmens manners, 186 Cornish Chough, 188
Corham in Coverdale, 729 Corbridge, 808 b Corby Castle, 777 f Corstopitum,
ibid. Corve a river, 590 c Corvesdale, ibid. Coway stakes, 296 a Cowling
Castle, 329 d Cosham, 243 c Coughton, 565 ^ Covinus, 18 Costrells, See
Esquires.
Coy-fi a convert Bishop of the heathen, 711 c Coteswold why so called, 364 c
Henry Courtney Marquess of Excester, 206 a Courtneyes knights, 206 b. Earls of
Denshire, 207, 208. Courtneyes, 190 f Cottons knights, 313 ^ Coverts knights,
ibid. Cottons of Cambridge-shire knights, 491 a Cottons of Cunnington, 526 c
Sir Robert Cotton of Cunnington a learned knight, highly descended, 500 d
Covetousness complained of. 562 ^ Coventry. 567 c Coventry Lords, 568 a
Council of the Marches, 590 e Cow a Town West and East, 274 c Cowbridge, 643
c Cradiden, 493 a Cranburn, 217 b Crecan or Crey a river, 328 f Creek Lade,
241 e Credendon or Credon, 396 Creplegate in London, 413 d Cressy a family, 550
^ Crevequeurs, 331 c Crawdundale, 761 f Crew a place and notable family, 608 c
Creden a river, 203 d Crediantun or kirton, ibid. Craven, 694 b Creake in
Cliveland, 723 e Le Craux, 21 Croco or Croke a river, 609 b De Croeun or de
Credonio a Barony, 532 f Crococalana, 537 b Croidon, 302 b Cromwells knights,
497 d Sir Th. Cromwell, 526 b. Earl of Essex, 454 e Cromer, 479 a Croft
Castle, 619 Crofts knights, an ancient family 619 f Crophuls a family, 620 c
Crouch a creek^, 443 b Crowland, 530 b Crowland Abbey, 530. the foundation and
building of it, 531 c. d. e Cruc Maur, 537 c Cruc Occhidient, ibid. Cuckmere,
315 d Cucul, 19 Saint Cudman, 313 c Cuentford a br^oke in Coventry, 567 d
Culchil, 747 c Culfurth, 461 ^ Cumberland, 765 Kings and Earls of Cumberland,
788 a Cumbermer Abbey, 607 e. 799 Cumero, 21 Cuneglasus a Tyrant in Britain,
113 Cuno what it signifies, 98 Cunobelinus, 418 a Cunobelin, 447 b Curia
Ottadinorum, 818 b Curiales what they were, 771 a Cursons a family, 553 c Sir
Rob. Curson Baron Imperial, ibid. Robert Curthose an unfortunate Prince, 361 d
Curcies, 221 a John Curcie his virtues, ibid. Curtius Montanus a dainty teothed
glutton, 342 e Saint Cuthberts parcimony, 735 Saint Cuthbert Bishop of
Lindefarn, ibid. Cworwf, 20 Curwens knights, 769 a Custodes or captains in
every shire, 159 Cuthred King of the West Saxons, 373 f Cyprus called Keraftis,
184 Cyrch, 18 Cythariftes, 21
D
DAbernoun, 297 b D'acre Barons of Gillesland, 594 c Dacre castle, 776 c D'acre
Baron, ibid. Leonard D'acre a Traitor and Rebel. 784 f Dacor a river, 776 c
D'airells or D' Hairells, 369 e Dalaley castle, 593 Dalison or D'alanson a
family, 544 c Dalrendini, 126 Dan or Daven a river, 608 d Danby, 721 f Danbury,
446 b Dancastre, 690 b Danewort, See Walwort.
Danes infest the coasts of England, 139. why so called, 141 they land in
England, etc. 142 Danes massacred by the English, 143 Their detestable
sacrifice, 142 Danegelt atribute, ibid. Danmonii, 183. whence their name
comes, ibid. Daning-schow a riveret, 608 e Dantesey a town, 243 c Danteseys
knights, ibid. Dantrey town, 508 a. the fort there, ibid. Henry Baron Danvers
of Dantesey, 243 c Darby shire, 553 Darby town, 554 c Darby Lords and Earls,
558 d Darcies de Nocton, etc. 543 c Darcies Barons de Chich, 451 c Darent
river, 328 d Darenford or Dartford. 328 ^ Darwent a river and city, 709
Davenport or Damport a place and notable family, 609 a Saint David's land, 653 c
Saint David's an Archbishops See, 653 d David bishop refuteth the Pelagians, 657
b Davery, or de alta rupe, 312 b Dawnes of Utkinton, foresters of Delamere, 607
a Deben a river, 465 b Depenham or Dapenham, ibid. Dee a river, 594 c. whence
so called, 602 c. Dee-mouth, 604 b Dee head, 666 b Devonshire or Denshire, 199
a Walter, and Robert Devreux Earls of Essex, 455 a John Dee a famous
Mathematician, 746 c Decimes, See Tithings.
Decuman a Saint, 220 e. murdered, ibid. Decuriones what they were, 771 Saint
Decombs, 220 e Deal or Dole, 343 a Deanries how many in England, 161
Deanforest, 358 b Deane a place, 514 a Deanes a family, ibid. Deifying of Roman
Emperors, 70 Deiri, that is, Hol-der-Nesse, 136 De la-mares, 233 a De la mere
forest, 607 a De-la-pree, a Nunnery, 509 b D' eincourts Barons of Blankenay,
535 f Edmund Baron D'eincourt desirous to perpetuate his name, 536 a De la cres
Abbay, 787, c John De la Pole Earl of Lincoln slain, 549 a. 388 f De la
bear, an ancient family, 620 c D'elveseyes, a family, 607 e Delgovitia, 711 b
Delgwe what it signifies, 711 b De la val Baronie, 811 f De la ware, 364 c
Dench-worth towns, 281 a Denelage, 153.159 Dengy, or Dancing hundred, 443 c
Dengy town, ibid. Dengy Nesse, 352 a Dennington castle, 284 a Edward Deny
Baron of Waltham, 439 b Denisses, 206 c Denbigh-shire, 675 Denbigh town, 675 d
Denbigh Baron, 676 b Denbigh made a shire, 677 e Depford, 326 c Depenbach, 603
c Deping, 534 c Derlington, 737 d Derwen a river, 752 d Derwent a river, 553 b
Derwent fells, 767 a Deorhirst, 360 a Deorham or Derham, 364 Dercoma, 20
Derechel, 21 Dereham, 482 a Derchefu, 21 Dert a river, 201 d Dertinton, 201 ^
Dertmore, 201 d Dertmouth, 202 c Despencer a noble family, 322 b Hugh le
Despencer, 267 c Despensers Barons, 636 a Devi a river, 258 Devy Bishop of
Saint David's, 226 Deverril, why so called, 245 Dewsborrough, 693 a Devonshire
Earls, 207 c Despotae, 164 Dianaes chamber, 426 a Digbies an ancient race, 525
e Sir Everard Digby, 525 f Alane de Dinant Baron of Burton, 510 a Dimetae, 647
Dimocks a worshipful family, 535 f. 541 c Dimocks the Kings champions, 541 c
Dilston a town, 808 b Dinevor Castle, 649 ^ Dinleys or Dingleys a family, 578
b Dishmarch, 690 e Ditches or fore-senses in Cambridge shire, 490 a Dinhams a
family, 395 f. 207 b or Dinants, Aul. Didius Lieutenant in Britain, 48
Dicalidones, or Deucalidones rather, why so called, 117 Dignities
ecclesiastical how many in England, 161 Diamonds in Cornwall, 186 Diamonds or
Diamants near Bristoll, 239 a. b Dictum, 669 f Diganwy, ibid. Diocesses under
every several Bishop, 160, 161 Disce or Dis a town, 472 e Distent^ns
Gentlemen, 766 f Disart Castle, 680 b Dive a family, 399 ^ De Divisis a
Monastery, 513 e Division of Countries threefold, 154 Divils or Devilsburne a
river, 808 b Divils or Devils dike, 459, 490 c Divils or Devils, 609 c Divils
or Devils bolts, 701 b Divona, 17 Divitiacus a mighty Prince, 34 Dobuni, 354.
whence so named, ibid. Dodo or Dudo an English Saxon, 581, 359 c Dod of S.
Quintins a writer, 142 Dodington, 607 e Dogs of Britain, 263 d. 126. of
Scotland, S. Dogmael, or S. Tehwell, 654 d D'oilyes of Hoch Horton Barons, 375
b Dologethle, 665 e Dolphins, 164 Doomesday book, 153 Domitian tormented with
envy, 61 Don or Dune a river, 689 d S Donats Castle, 643 e Dor a river, 176 d
Dormceaster, 501 e Dormers knights, 395 f. 396 a Dornford, 501 e K. Dorne his
pence, 212 b Dorchester, 384 b. 212 c Dorsetshire, 209 Dorset Marquesses and
Earls, 217 c Dotterell, a bird, 443 c Dove or dow a river, 587 b Dover, 344 b
Dover Castle, ibid. Dovy a river, 665 Dowbridge upon Watlingstreet, 408 d
Dowgate or dourgate in London, 423 e Downs, 313 d Downham, 494 c Draicot a
town in Staffordshire, and a family, 587 e Dragons in Banners, 195 Sir Francis
Drake, 200* e. where born, ibid. his navigation, ibid. Draiton, 419 c Draiton
in Shropshire, 594 b Draiton Beauchamp, 394 f Draiton Basset, 581 f Draiton in
Northamptonshire, 510 b Drax a village, 707 e Driby a town and family, 542 c
Driffield, 711 d Droit-wich or Durtwich, 574 e Dropping well, 700 a Druidae, 4,
12, 13, 14, the Etymology of their name, 14 Druidae in Britain did service in
war, 49. they held one God, 68 Druidae seated in Anglesey, 671 d Drumbough
castle, 775 c Druries a family, 461 e Drystocke, 325 e Duddensand, 754 f Dudden
a river, 581 c Ambrose Dudley Earl of Warwick, 571 a John Dudley Earl of
Warwick beheaded, ibid. Dudleys, 280 e John Dudley duke of Northumberland his
style and demeanor, 821 e, f Rob. Dudley Earl of Leicester, 524 b Dulcitius a
redoubted captain, 80 Dulverton, 220 c Duina first Bishop of Lichfield, 585 d
Duglesse a riveret, 749 c Dun a notorious thief, 402 d Dunbriton frith, 56
Dunham, 610 c Dunmaw, 444 e Dunnington, 521 f. 567 c Dunstable, 402 a. the
cross there ibid. Dunster castle, 220 d Dunstan Abbot, 227 d Dunstan puts
down married Priests, 576 b. 243 d Dunstaburg, 813 e Dunsley, 718 d
Dunseavill, 243 Dunum, 21, 247 Dunwich, 466 c. a Bishops See, ibid. Dunus
Sinus, 718 d John Duns alias Scotus, 814 b Durobrivae, 501 e Dur and Dour,
beginnings and terminations of places what they signify, 209 d Durham city,
739 e Durham College in Oxford founded, 381 f. reedified, 383 Durham
Bishopric a County Palatine, 736 a Dursley, 364 c Durance an house of the
Wroths, 437 e Durocobrivae, 413 e Durnovaria, what it signifies, 212 ^
Durosiponte, 491 d Durotriges whence derived, 209 Du, what color, 26 Dutton a
place and worthy family, 602 f Dwr, 20 Dux Britanniae, 76 Dux or Duke what
title of honor, 164. under a Count or Comes, ib. Dux and Comes the same, ibid.
Dux or Duke a title of charge, ib. a title of honor, 165 Dukes investure or
creation, ibid. Dukes hereditary, ibid.
E
EAdburga a Lady professed religions, 395 c Eadburton a town, ibid. Eadelmton
or Edmunton, 437 d King Eadgar styled Monarch of whole Albion, his triumph, 605
b K. Eadgar the peaceable, 130 a Eadred styled King of Great Britain, 139 a
Ealburg, 701 e Ealdermen, 164 Ealphage a learned Priest married, 201 b Ealpheg
Archbishop of Canterbury executed, 326 d Earl what title of honor, 165 Earls
by office, 502 c Earls or Eorles hereditary, 166 Earls how created, ibid.
Earl Apostolical, 239 e Earl Imperial, ibid. Earls Coln, 450 d Earls
dike, 714 d Earth, 155 Earth turning wood into stone, 401 e Earth a rampire in
Cornwall, 189 Easton Nesse, 467 a East Riding, 709 East Angles, 456, 458 Eaton
in Bedfordshire, 401 a Earth by diverse occasions altered, 1 Eatons what they
be, 63 Eaye, 467 f Saint Ebba an holy virgin, 743 a Ebchester, ib. Ebissa, 128
Eboracum, or Eburacum, that is, York, why so called, 702 d Eccles, 478 e
Eccleshall, 584 c Ecclesiastical livings hereditarie, 595 f Echingham Baron,
320 Eclipses of the Sun in Aries disasterous to Shrewsbury, 598 a Edelfleda
or Elfleda, a noble Lady, 610 d Eden a river, 776, 760 c Edenborgh frith, 56
Edgecombs. 193 Edge an hill, 561 b Edgar Eathling or Aethling 146 Edindon, 244
e Edith virgin, a Saint, 582 b Edith King Eadgars daughter, 246 d Edith a Lady
professed, 395 c Edmund of Langley his devise and presage, 510 Edmund
Crouchbacke King of Sicily deluded by the Pope, 756 b K. Edmunds martyrdom,
467 Saint Edmund a most Christian King and martyr, 460 c S. Edmunds liberty,
459 c S. Edmunds bury, ibid. S. Edmunds dike, 490 f Edmund King of England
piteously slain, 364 a K. Edmund Ironside, 143 Edmund of Woodstocke Earl of
Kent, 353 a Edrick Streona, 595 d Edrick Sylvaticus, 624 e K. Edward the
Confessor where borne, 377 a Edward Confessor, 143 b Edward Earl of Warwick
beheaded, 670 e Edward the First, King of England his praises, 776 a
Edwardston, 463 a K. Edward the Second entombed, 361 a. murdered, 363 b K.
Edward the Third his virtues, 297 d. a most renowned Prince. 278 Edwin the
Prince made away by his brother Athelstan, 213 e Egbert calls his kingdom
England, 138. vanquisheth the Danes, 143 Effingham, 296 f Egelricke a wealthy
Bishop of Durham, 742 Egertons whence descended, 603 Egleston, 736 e Egremond
an arch-rebell, 724 d Egremont castle, 766 a The Eight, 360 b Eimot a river,
762 d Ela Countess of Salisbury, 244 a Queen Elizabeth an excellent Prince,
256 f. her virtues, 292. 297. 298. her tomb, 430. b Ellandunum, 446. d Elen a
river, 769. c Elden hole, 557. e Elenborough, 769. c Elephants bones found in
Britain, 447. c Ellen hall, 584. c Eliot his conceit of the name of Britain, 5
Ellesmer a Baronie, 592. a Sir Th. Egerton Baron Ellesmer ibid. North Elmham a
Bishops See, 466. d Elmeley, 650. e Elmesley, 722. d Elmet a territory, 694. e
Elmore, 362. b Elesly, 485. d Elnemouth, 769. c Eleutherus Pope, 67 Elrich
road, 532 Elsing, 482. a Eltham, 327 Eston, 501. e Elvan, 67 Elwy a river,
679. d Emildon, 814. b Emme Mother to King Edward Confessor cleereth her self
of incontinency, 211 Enderbies, 401 Hugh Enermeve of Deping, 533 Englishmen
converted become zealous Christians, 137. Studious in Liberal Sciences, ib.
Enfield, 437 English names what they signify and imply, 139 Engelrame de Coucy
first Earl of Bedford, 402. f England, 138 English Saxons return into
Germany, ibid. brought thither military knowledge, learning and religion, ibid.
Engines to assault in old time, 400 England full of vices, 143 England divided
into Counties or Shires by Aelfred, 138 Little England beyond Wales, 652
English men whence they took name, 138 Englishmen the guard of the Emperors of
Constantinople, 154 English tongue of what continuance, 133 English Mayor, 681.
e Entweissel name of a place and Gentlemen, 746. a Equites Aurati, that is,
Knights, whereupon so called, 174 Erdburrow, 522 Erdessey, 620. e Erdeswick,
583. e Eriry mountains, 667. d Ernald Bois or de Bosco, 396. b Erewash a
river, 555. c Eryngum in Cornwall, 186 Escrick, 707. ^ Eske a river, 765. ^.
781. c Eslinton, 813. c Espringolds, 400. d Eresby, 541. e Ermin-streete, 64 or
Erming-street, 485. c. 501. f
Erminsul or Irmunsull, 64 Esquires what degree of Gentry, 176 Esquires of five
sorts, ibid. Steph. de Eschalers a Baron, 485. ^ Essex, 439 Essex Earls, 453
Essex Cheeses, 443. c Essexes Knight, 283. f Henry de Essex became a Monk, 681.
d Essex, a family, 443. a Essendum, 18 Essendon, 526. d Esterford or
East-Sturford, 446 Ester or Easter celebrated on the Lords day only, 118 Eston
alias Estanues ad turrim, 444. e Eston Nesson, 506. c Estotovils an honorable
family, 533. b Estre alias Plaisy, 445. a Ethered vanquished and slain, 550. e
Esturmies or Sturmies, 254. f Ethelbert an insufficient King, 143 Ethelbert
King, Martyr, 618. e Etocetum, 582. e Ethelbury, 728. d K. Etheldred, a
virtuous Prince 216. b. his tomb, ibid. Ethelward a writer, 130 Covesham,
Evesham or Eisham, 577. e Eudo Sewer to K. Henry the first, 459. e Eudo a noble
Norman, 541. d Evel a town, 221. b Evelmouth, 225. d Evenlode a river, 376. b
Vale of Eisham or Evesham* 577 Ever or Eure a town, 394. b Evers Barons, ibid.
e Everingham a Baron, 550. d Evers Barons whence descended, 453. b Evers of
Axholm, 813. b Evers noble Barons, 738. e Ewelme or Newelme, 388. c Ewias, 631.
c Ewias Castle, 617. d Eustach de Hach a Baron, 246. b Eustow alias Helenstow,
40^. a Exchequer Court, 177.178 Ex a river, 203. b Exceter College in Oxford,
381 Exceter, 203. f Exceter Dukes, 205. d Exceter Marquess, 206. a Exceter
Earl, ibid. a Exminster, ibid. b Exmore, 203. c Eythorp in Buckingham-shire,
395. f
F.
OF Faculties the Court, 181 Fairefax a family of gentlemen, 692, b. 723. d
Falco or Falques Brent a faithless men* 400. c. 812. b Falcons of the best
kind, 644. b Falkesley bridge, 582. a d Falemouth, 189 Fanhop Baron, 401. d
Farendon, 279. e Farmors Knights, 506. e Fastineog, 666. a Fastidius a Bishop
of Britain, 84 Faulconbergs Barons, 714. a Faustus a good son of a bad
father, 642. c Fawey, 190 Fawsley, 508 Faux what it signifies, 692 Fekenham
Forest, 574. f Feldings Knights, 519. f Fenwick Hall, 809. d Fenwicks a family,
ibid. Ferrars Barons of Grooby, 520. f Henry Ferrars of Baddisley a gentleman
well descended, and as well seen in Antiquities, 568. d Rob. Ferrars how
enterred, 569 Lords Ferrars of Chartley, 584. f Fernham Royal, 394. d Fernham
why so called, 294. e Fetherston Haugh, 799. e Fetherstons a family, ibid.
Fettiplaces a family, 220. ^. 281. Feversham, 334. d Fieldon a part of
Warwickshire, 561. b. 223. a Feldon, 561. b Fenis or Fienlesse, 223. a. 316. b
Fienes, Barons Dacres, 813. b Sir Richard Fienes or Fenis Baron Say and Sele,
376. f The File, 753. a File what it signifies, 715. a Files, ibid. Filioll,
217. c Finborrow, 607. b Finchdale, 742. a Firr trees found in Axelholm, 544. b
Fisburgings, 819. c A Fish poole or Mere by Saint Albans dried up, 411. c
Fishes with one eye a piece, 667 Fishgard, 654. c Fish pond foreshewing the
death of Monks, 609. c Fittons a family, 610 Fitz-Alans Earls of Arundel,
309.310.589. f Fits-herberts an ancient family, 553. d Sir Anthony
Fitz-herbert, ibid. a most famous Lawier, 359. b Fitzhugh, Baron, 730. d
Fitz-Harding Lord of Berkley, 362. d Robert Fitz-Haimon slain, 368 Fitz-Teke,
406. c Robert Fitz-Stephen the first of Norman race that attempted Ireland by
way of Conquest, 657. f Rob. Fitz-Walter de Clare, 407 Fitz-Walters Barons,
446. c Fitz-Walters ensigne-bearers of London, 215. d Fitz-Lewis a family, 442.
e Geffrey Fiz-Peter Earl of Essex, 454. b. a worthy Iusticer of England, ibid.
c Fitz-Stephen a writer, 427. b Fitz-Paine Baron, 215. d Fitz-Warins, 281. b
Sir Fulque Fitz-Warin, 598. b Fitz-Williams an ancient family, 690. a Rich.
Fitz-Punt a Norman, 618 Henry Fitz-Roy, Earl of Nottingham and duke of
Richmond, 551. d Flamborough head, 714. ^ Flamstead, 414. b Flatbury, 578. b
Plavi^s Sanctus, 341. d Fleame dike or Flight dike, 490 Fleet a riveret in
London, 423. f Flemings a family, 646. e Fleming, 202. d. 755. d Flemingston or
Flemston a town 646. e Flemings planted in Wales, 654.652. d Flemish high way
in Wales, 652 Flint shire, 679 Flint castle, 680. d Flint Earls, 681. f
Flixton, 715. b Flixton or Faelixton, 468. b Floddon an hill, 816. a Floddon
field, ibid. Florus a Poet, ibid. Flotes a kind of boats, 597. b Faelix Bishop
of East England, 466. c. 480. c Fluor found in Darby shire, 557 Foix a family,
759 Foliambs a great family, 556. b Foliots a family, 575. c 482. a
Folkingham, 535. a Folkstone, 349. b A Font of Brass in Saint Albans Church,
412 d Forcatulus his conceit of the name Britain, 5 Fordington, 212. d Ford
castle, 815. e The Foreland of K^nt, 342. d Fornesse, 754. ^ Fornesse Fels,
755. a Sir John Fortescue, 396. e Forses or waterfalls, 759. f Forefenses, 780.
the first. ibid. the second, 790. a. the third. ibid. b. the fourth, 16. c
Forestwhat it is, and why so called, 293. c Forest laws, ibid. d Forests in
Sussex, 320. d Fortunie a Tourneament, 407. d Fortunate Islands, 4 Forty foot
way, 511. f. 515. a. 64 Fosse dike, 537. f Fosse wad what it is, 569. c Fosse a
river, 702. b Fosse way, 562. b The fosse, 366. a. 64 Fowls delicate, 543. b.
c Fossards a family, 709. b Fotheringhay Castle, 510. d File of Fouldrey, 755.
c Foulness a river, 711. b Foulness an Isle, 443. c A fountain ebbing and
flowing, 643. f. 650. b Fountains Abbey, 700. e Fowy, 190 Fracastorius his
opinion of stone-fish, 363. ^ Framlingham castle, 465. d Fraomarius K. of the
Almans, 79 Frankners in Britain, 72. destroyed, 73 Fredrick the first Emperor,
held Pope Adrian the fourth his stirrup, 415. a Franks a people of Germany, 122
where they dwelt, 130 Freedstol, 712. a French or Gaulifh provinces cast off
the Roman yoke, 86 Free waren what it was, 694. d Frea or Frico a Saxon
Goddess, 135. how pourtraied, ibid. Fremund vilanously slain, 561. e
registered a Saint, ibid. Fremantle, 272. c Frechevils or Freshwels a family,
555. f Fresh water Isle, 274. a Fretherick Abbat of Saint Albans, 414. c
Frevils a family, 582. c. d Friday, 135 Fredeswide a Saint, 378. a Frisones
come into Britain, 131 Frodesham Castle, 610. a From river, or Frau, 212. a
Frompton, ibid. Iul. Frontinus his exploit against the Silures, 54 Froshwel a
river, 443. d. 444. d Frowen Shoale, 347. ^ Fulham, 421, c Funarius, a name of
Gratianus, 77 Furnivalls a noble family, 587. c Furnivall Barons, 394. d
G
GAbrantovici, why so called, 714. d Gabrosentum, 743. c. 810. a Gael, 121
Gaesatae, 18 Gages, 315. c Gaidelach, 121 Gaideli, that is, Scots, 123
Gainsborough, 543. c Gaiothel, 121 Gaiothlac, ibid. Gal a sweet smelling shrub,
544 Gallath why so called, 23 whence derived, 20 Galba, ibid. Galle, 22 Galls,
ibid. Gauls commended, 22. their exploits, ibid. Gauls named Gomori and Cimbri,
11. their religion, 12 Galgacus a valiant Britain, 47 his oration, 58 Gallana,
802 a Gallatum, 761 d Galtres forest, 723 d Galvus, 20 Gamages, a family, 643
Gamlinghay, 485 d Ganoc, 669 f Gaol, 22 Gargraves, knights, 691 a Garianonum,
477 a. b Garlic growing in plenty, 213 d Order of the Garter, 278 c Garum^a,
20 Garw, ibid. Gascoignes an ancient family, 698 f Gasehound, 263 f Gastenoies,
a family, 553 c Gateshead, 743 b Gavelkind, 325 d Gaunlesse a riveret, 738 d
Gaunts Barons of Folkinham, 535 a Gawthorp, 698 f Geat or Black Ambre, 719 d
Gehennae, 21 Geddington, 509 f Gedney or Godney Moore, 230 c Geduch, 18 Geffray
ap Arthur, or of Monmouth, 5. his narration of Brutus and the name of Britain
discussed, 5 b Geldable a part of Suffolk, 459 c Gelt a river, 783 b Geneu
what it signifies, 190 Saint Genovefs Fernham, 461 e Genounia a Province in
Britain, 66 Gentlemen, 177 George Duke of Clarence murdered, 462 e. drowned in a
butt of Malvesey, 510 e Saint Germain in Britain, 132 192, 410 c. he rebukes
Vortiger, 624 d. preached against Pelagians, 378 f. 707 d Germans called
Scythians, 122 Germans whence they took their name, 26 German words agreeing
with the Persian, 129 Gernegans knights, 729 d Gernons a family, 537 b
Gernston, 472 f Gerrards Bramley, an house and Baronie, 584 b Gerrard de Rodes,
541 c Gerrard a Baron, 584 c Gessi, 18 Gessum, ibid. Gessoriacum, 348 a, d. it
is Bologne or Bullen, ibid. d Geveny or Gevenny a river, 635 Gevissi, 294 c
Giants in Cornwall, 186 Giants teeth and bones, 451 d Giddy hall, 441 f
Giffards a family, 581 e Giffards, 365 f Giffards Earls of Buckingham, 397 d
Giffards Barons, 396 a. 541 b Gilbertines a religious order, 534 c Gildas, 8. a
learned professor, 378 f Gilden vale, 617 e Gillesland Barony, 782 e Gillesland
Lords, 786 e Gilling, 730 a Gillingham forest, 214 d Gilbourgh, 507 f, a fort
there, 508 a Gipping see Orwell, Gipping a village, 463 Girald of Windesor a
valiant Captain, 652 a Giralds or Giraldines a noble and renowned family, 652
b Giraldus Cambrensis Archdeacon of Brecknock, 627 b Giraldus Cambrensis, 8
Girwy, 743 Gervii what people, 491 c Gisburgh, 721 b Gises a family, 362 b
Gisleberi of Clare Earl of Hertford, 407 b Githa Earl Goodwins wife, 207 b
Glanoventa, 812 d Glanvils a family, 469 a Glass, 19 Glass houses, 306 e
Glamorganshire, 641 a Glanford a town, 543 a Glasiers first brought into
England, 743 a Glastenbury Abbey, 226 a Glastum, that is, woad, 19 Glawn, ibid.
Gledaugh, 652 c Glediau, 215 f Glemham, a town and family, 465 e Glen, a
river, 534 d. 815 d Glendal, ibid. Gloucester shire, 357 a Gloucester City, 360
d Gloucester Earl, 368, c. d etc. Gloucester Dukes, 369 c Gloucester Hall in
Oxford built and enlarged, 382 a Gluis, 20 Godiva the wife of Earl Leofrick,
543 d. she freed Coventry from Tributes, 568 a Gods house, 268 c Godstow
Nunnery, 376 b Godmanchester, 498 b Godmanham, 711 c Godolcan or Godolphin
hill, 189 Godrick or Goodrick a good and devout man, 74^ a Godrus a Danish K.
Christened, 223 Godwin or Goodwin Sands, 340 f Godwin or Goodwin the Earl of
Kent his treachery, 295 c his equivocation, 307 a, his frandulent fetch to get
Barkley, 36^ e Gold-Cliff, 634 e Gold and silver veins, 767 b Golden Harnish
found, 816 c Gold and silver Mines in Cornewal, 186 Gomer and his posterity, 10
Gomer what it signifies, ibid. Goodwick, 481 c Gorlois Prince of Cornwall, 195
Gorlston, 468 d Gorges a family, 364 ^ Gormo or Guthrum the Dane, 463 d Gormod,
21 Gormon the Dane, 498 d Gorombery, 413 d Goropius Becanus what he thinks as
touching the name of Britain, 5 Goths language has some resemblance of Welsh
and Duch, 123 Government of the Roman Empire under and after Constantine the
Great, 76 A Goth depainted, 123 Goths a noble Nation, 123 Goths and Vandals the
same, ib. they came from the Getae, 130 Gourmand, 21 Gournaies or Gornayes, 222
e Matthew Gournay, 222 f. 364 Hugh de Gornay a traitor, 472 Gouttes what they
are, 237 b Gower, 646 a Grace Dieu, sometime a Nunnery 521 f Grafton, 506
Grafton in Worcestershire, 574 e Grandebeof a Baron of Normandy, 712 c
Grandison Lord his descent, 286 b Grandison Lords. 617 d John Grandison Bishop
of Exceter, 203 b. 206 d Grand-Sergeanty, 406 c Grant a river. 486 a
Grancester, 486 b Grantham, 537 d Hugh Grantmaismill, or Grantmaisnill, 518 c
Granvill, 645 f Granvils a family, 646 Gratianus surnamed Funarius, and why,
77. perfidiously slain by Andragathius, 81 Gratianus a Britain declared
Emperor by the Army, 84 Gravesend, 329 b Grahams a family, 781 Gregory the
great a means of the Englishmens conversion to Christ, 136 Greleyes a family,
746 b Greeklade, see Creeklade. Greeks inhabited the Coasts, and along the
Isles. 27 Greeks arrived in Britain, 28 Griesley Castle, 553 c Griesleys an
ancient family, ib. e Grenvils. 196 a West Greenwitch, 326 d. Greenwitch, 326 d
Greenes a wealthy family, 507 a Greenes Norton, ibid. Greenes noble Gentlemen,
510 c Grenhaugh Castle, 753 a Greshams College. 4^5 b Greshenhal, 482 a Greve
what it signifies, 330 a Sir Foulk Grevil a worthy knight 517 e Sir Foulk
Grevil father and son worshipful knights, 565 f Greys of Grooby, 520 f Sir
Henry Gray Baron Gray of Grooby, 521 a Greys of Sandacro, 553 d Greys Earls of
Kent, 553 c Th. Gray of Ruthin Marquess Dorset, 217 e Henry Gray Marquess
Dorset and Duke of Suffolk, 217 f 470 c. beheaded, 217 Greyes Barons of Wilton,
396 d. their badge, 621 a. 396 d John Gray Earl of Tankervil, 663 d Greystocks
Barons, 778 c Greystock Castle, 778 b S. Grimbald, 378 c Grimsby, 542 c
Grimstons-garth, ibid. Grimstons a family, 714 a Griphins a family, 507 b. 607
e Grismunds tower, 366 d Gr^n and Gronnes what they signify, 486 b Grooby, 520
f Grossement Castle. 630 b Grossvenours, commonly called Gravenours, a famous
family, 604 b Grosthead or Grostest a worthy Bishop of Lincoln, 540 b. c Ground
most fat and battle, 478 Ground burnt for tillage, 675 c Gruffin ap Conan a
noble Prince of Wales, 670 a Guadiana, 297 a Guaine, 21 Gwain, ibid. Gualt what
it signifies, 20 Guarth what it signifies, 563 b Guarthenion why so called,
624 Guash, See wash. Gueda wife to Earl Goodwin, 363 b Guenliana a woman of
manly courage, 649 c Grerif, 21 Guerir, ibid. Gwif, 19 Guild hall in London,
435 a Guilford, 295 b Guilfords a family, 352 b Guineth Uranc, 19 Guineth, 659
f Guiniad fishes, 666 b Guiscard of Engolism, 502 c Gundulph Bishop of
Rochester, 333 a Gunora a Norman Lady, 620 c Gunpowder treason, 754 a Gunters a
family, 628 f Guorong what it signifies, 325 c Guortimer defeateth Hengist and
the Saxons, 332 a. where buried, 340 a Guvia, 19 Gwin, a color, 26 Guoloppum,
132 Guy Brient a Baron, 212 e Sir Guy of Warwick, 267 a. 564 Guy cliff, or
Gibcliff, 564 ^ Gyn^ecia, 263 c
H
HAcomb, 202 e Hadseigh, 441 b Hadley, 463 d Pope Hadrian the fourth choked
with a fly, 415 a Hadugato a Duke or Leader of the English Saxons, 138 Hagmond
Abbay, 594 Hail a river, 193 Haduloha, 138 Haimon Dentatus, 641 c Robert Fitz
Haimon subdueth Glamorganshire, 641 d Hakeds a kind of Pikes, 499 Haledon, 80^
d Hales Monastery, 197 e. 365 a Halesworth, 467 c Halifax, 691 f Halifax law,
69^ b Halton hall, 808 f Halyston, 812 f Hamden a town and family, 395
Hameldon hills, 215 c Hamon, 260 f Sir Hamon Mascy, 610 c Hampton in
Herefordshire, 620 Hampton Court, 420 b Hamsted hills, 421 b Hanging walls of
Mark Antony, 763 c Hanley Castle, 577 b Hanmere a place and family, 68^
Hannibal never warred in Britain, 32 Hans a river, 587 c Hansacres a family,
578 b Hansards a family, 543 a Hantshire, 258 Hanwell, 376 e Hanworth, 420 b
King Harald slain, 317 a Harald Lightfoot, 379 b Harald Haardred, 707 d Harald
the Bastard, 143 Harald Goodwins son usurpeth the crown of England, 145 His
worthy and Princely parts, 146 Harborrow or Haaburgh, 517 c Harbotle a place
and family, 812 f Andrew of Harcla Earl of Carlisle a traitor, degraded, 780
c Harcourts, 584 e Harden or Hawarden, 680 e Hardes ancient Gentlemen, 339 d
Harde-Cnut his death, 303 b his immoderate feasting, ibid. Th. Harding, 208 e
Fits Hardings Barons of Barkley, 223 a Hard Knot a mountain, 765 e Hardwick a
town, 555 f. and a family, ibid. Haresfield, 419 c Harford West, 653 b
Haringtons or Haveringtons a family, 755 d Haringtons Barons, 526 b. of old
descent, ibid. Harington Lord, 206 e Sir John Harington Baron Harington of
Exton, ibid. Haringworth the honor of the Zouches Barons, 414 a Harleston, 472
e Harlestons a family, ibid. Harold Ewias, 617 d Harold a Gentleman, ibid.
Harptree, 223 d Harrow on the hill, 420 a Harrowden, 510 a Hartle pole, 738 b
Hearts hall in Oxford, 381 d Harewich, 451 e Harewood castle, 698 e Haslingbury,
453 d Hastings a noble family in times past, 584 c Hastings Lords of
Abergevenny, 568 e Hastings Baron of Loughborow, 394 c Sir Edward Hastings sole
Baron thereof, 521 b Baron Hastings and Hoo, 319 b Sir william Hastings Lord
Hastings, 318 f Hastings great Gentlemen in Sussex, ibid. Hastings a town
whence it took the name, 317 f Rape of Hastings, 318 d. Lords thereof, ibid.
George L. Hastings first of that name Earl of Huntingdon, 503 a Hatfield
Bradock, 453 e Bishops Hatfield, 406 f Hatfield Poveril, 445 c Hatherton, 607 e
Hatfield Chase, 690 e Hatley S George, 485 d Hatterel hills, 6^1 c Sir
Christopher Hatton Lord Chauncellor of England, 508 his commendation, ibid. his
Monument, 509 a Havelock a foundling, 542 d Haverds a family, 628 e Haudelo,
Lord Burnell, 330 c Havering, 441 ^ Hawghton Conquest, 401 e Hawghlee Castle,
464 a Sir John Hawkwood, 450 b Haulton a town and castle, 611 Haure, 21 The
Haw, 200 Hawsted, 450 d Hawthorn at Glastenbury, 227 e Hay a town, 627 f Hay
castle, 766 f Headon a town, 713 c Healy castle, 583 e Hartly castle, 760 d
Heavenfield, 806 d Hebrews called Huesi wherefore, 23 Heidons or Heydons
Knights, 479 b Sir Christopher Heidon, 326 c Heil an Idol of the Saxons, 212
Heilston or Hellas, 189 Heina a religious votary, 699 e Heitsbury, 245 d Hieu a
religious woman, 738 b Helbecks, 727 ^ Helbeck a crag, 784 b Helena the mother
of Constantine the Great borne at Colchester, 451 a Helena a devout Empress,
74 Helenum, 187 Helion a family, 452 a Hell-Kettles deep pits* 737 ^ Helmet of
gold found, 537 e Helvius Pertinax employed in Britan, 66. Propraetor in
Britan, 67 Hemingston, 464 a Hemp the best, 210 d Hempsted, 414 c Hen-Dinas,
588 b Heneti whence they took name, 26 Hengham Lords, 472 f Hengist and Horsa
brethren, 127. they signify an horse, ibid. Hengrave, 461 ^ Hengston hill, 196
d Henningham, 450 a Henly in Arden, 566 a Henly hundred, 389 a Henly upon
Tamis, 389 b King Henry the sixth his virtues, enterred and translated, 294 d
King Henry the seventh his virtues, 297 f Henry the fourth Emperor enterred in
Chester, 605 c Henry of Lancaster claims the crown of England, 680 d Henry
Fitz-Roy, 240 b King Henry the second his commendation, 284 e Henry Prince
rebelleth against King Henry the second his father, 465 a Henry the seventh
proclaimed King, 518 c King Henry the sixth twice taken prisoner by his own
subjects, 509 e Heorten, 738 b Heorthus, 135 Heptarchie of the Saxons
described, with several shires under every Kingdom, 157 Heptarchie of the
Saxons, 136 reduced to a Monarchy, 138
Herbert Bishop of Norwich, 475 a Herbert Losenga Bishop, 472 a Herbert Baron
of Shurland, 334 b Herberts Earls of Penbroch, 359 a Sir Philip Herbert Baron
of Shurland, and Earl of Montgomery, 663 b Herberts an honorable family in
Wales, 655 d Le Herbert a way in Wales, 665 f Hercules whether ever any, 207 c
Herefordshire, 617 Hereford City, 618 e Hereford Earls, 621 b. c. etc.
Hereford Duke, 622 a Hereford Viscounts, ibid. Herring fishing by Hollanders,
etc. 717 f Herrings in Yarmouth, 478 a Herrings frequent our coast, 718 a
Herlaxton, 537 d Herons or Heirons a family, 806 b. 815 e Herlot^a, 197 b
Hermae, 64 Herst Monceaux, 315 a Herst what it is, ibid. Hertlebury castle, 574
b Hertford shire, 405 Hertford town, 407 a Hertford Earls, 415 e called
Earls of Clare, ibid.
Herty point, 207 b Doctor Hervey his Causey, 489 c Hervey first Bishop of Ely,
493 d Herward a valiant Englishman, 533 a Heston, 420 a Hesus, 17 Hesselwood,
696 c House, 17 Heveningham a town and family, 467. c Hexhamshire, 799. d
Hextold a river, 807. d Hextoldesham, ibid. Heyford Warin, 377. a Heyford
Purcell, 377. a Hides a family, 281. a Hide what it is, 158, 339. e Highgate
Castle, 778. c High Cross, 518. a High Dike a streete-way, 534. a 64 High
ridge, ibid. Highham a town and family, 463. c Highham Ferrars, 510. b
High-land men, 119.126 Higra 707. c. What it is, 357. e Saint Hilda a she
Saint, and her miracles, 718. e Hills erected, for what purpose, 406. e
Hildersham, 489. e Hildeards ancient Knights, 713. f Hilton a Castle and
family, 742. e Himilco never in Britain, 33. Hinchingbrooke, 497. d
Hindersket or Hunderdskell a Castle, 723. e Hinkley a Baronie, 518. c Hith or
Hide a town, 349. b Hith what it signifies, ibid. Hitching, 406. c Ho, 329. c
Baron Ho, 318, 319. Hoes a family, 542. c Hobarts Knights, and Atturneys
General to Kings, 476 Sir Edward Hoby Knight, 286. b 334. a Hobelars, 272.275.
b Hocke and Hocks old English for mire and dirt, 402. a Hoch Norton, 375. a
Hockley in the hole, 402. c Hodde hills, 215. c Hodesdon, 408. d Hodingdon, 578.
c Hodlestons an ancient family, 699. e. 765. d Hodengs a family, 394. c Hodnet
a town and family, 594. b Hodney a river, 628. a Hoel the good Prince of
Wales, 650. c Holburne or Oldburn, 432. f Holcrofts an ancient family, 608. d
Holcroft a place and family, 747. d Holdernesse a promontorie, 713. c Holdenby
house, 508. e Holdernesse a promontory, 713. c Holdernesse honor, 715. b Holes
within the Ground, 440. d Holland a part of Lincolnshire, 529. why so called,
ibid. Hollands a great family, 519. b and most noble, 749
John Holland of Denshire, 205. a his coat of arms, ibid. d
John Holland Duke of Exceter and Earl of Huntingdon, 205. d Henry Holland
Duke of Excester ibid. his miserable case, ibid. f John Holland half brother
to King Richard the second, beheaded at Plaisi, 445. b Hollands, Knights, 353.
b Hollands Earls of Kent, ibid. John Holland the younger his style, 502. f
Henry Holland Duke of Excester his fall, 502. f Thomas Holland Earl of Kent
and Duke of Surrey, 304. ^. beheaded, 304. c Holme Cultraine Abbey, 773. a
Holmesdale, 294. b Holme Pier Pount, 548. f Holme castle, 296. f Holmes
Chapel, a town, 609. a Holme Lacy, 621. a Holt in Denbigh shire, 677. b Holt
castle, 594. b Holly head, 673. a Holy Island, 814. e Hooten, 606. e Hope
castle, 681. a Horn church, 441. f Horn castle, 541. c Hornby castle, 753. f
Honorius Emperor, 83. succoureth the distressed Britains against invasion of
Barbarians, 86 Honoriaci what Soldiers, 118 Honoriani, 127 Horse running,
723. d Horse, the badge or cognizance of the old Dukes of Saxony, 135 Horse
heath, 489. e Horton, 691. f Hote-Spur, 596. c Hothams a family, 711. d. 721
Howards a Noble Family, 472. c Henry Lord Howard, Earl of Northampton, 516. e
Henry Baron Howard, of Marnhil, 215. c Charles Lord Howard Earl of Nottingham,
551. d Tho. Vicount Howard of Bindon, 213. a Howards Earls of Surrey, 304. e
Thomas Lord Howard of Walden, 452, e. 470. d. Earl of Suffolk, ibid. William
Lord Howard of Naworth, 783. b John Lord Howard, duke of Norfolk, the first of
that house, 483 slain, ibid. Thomas Howard his son vanquished the Scots,
483. c Henry Howard Earl of Surry a learned Nobleman, ibid. Tho. Howard last
duke of Norfolk, ibid. Houden and Houden-shire, 710. c Houghton, 480. a
Howgill castle, 762. c Howley, 693. e Howty, a brook, 608. e Hubert de Burge
Earl of Kent, 352 Hubba the Dane, 208. f Hubbestow, ibid. Huckstow forest,
592. c Huddleston, 696. c Huesi, 23 Hugh the Norman, 212. d. a traitor, 205. a
Hugolin, or Hugh Spenser, 642, b Hugh Earl of Shrewsbury slain, 672. d Hull
the river, 711. c Hull, the town, 712. d Humfrey Duke of Gloucester and his
style, 369. c. The good duke and a favorer of learning, 382 his death, 561. c
Humber an arm of the Sea, 689 542. e Humel or Hymell castle, 514. b Hundreds
or Centuries appointed, 158. d Hungerbourne, 255. c Hungerfords, 195 Hungerford
town, 282. e Hungerford Barons, 245. d. 282 Hunibald a bald writer, 6 Hunsh^l
^ for^, 509. d Hunstanston, 418. b Hansdon, a Barons seat, 408 c Hunt Cliffe,
720. e Huntercombs, a family, 394 c 815, d Huntingdon castle in Hereford shire,
620. c Huntingdon shire, 497. e Huntingdon town, 497. d Huntingdon Earls,
502. c Huntingfeld town and Baron, 467. c Huntly Nab, 720, f Hurling, 186
Hurlers, 193 Hurst castle, 260. d Huscarles what they be, 576. e Hussy the
first and last Baron of that name, 535. d Hyeritha a Shee-Saint, 208. b
I.
JAmes the sixth of Scotland, styled King of great Britain, 141. a mild and
gracious Prince, 298. b James the fourth King of Scotland, slain, 483. c Tho.
James of Oxford a st^dious Antiquarian, 639. ^ Ianus with two foreheads, 97
Iaphets progeny how it was propagated, 10 Iarrow, 743 d Iberi whence they
took name, 20 Iccius portus, in France, a port townelet, 3^ Iceni, 456
Ichnild-street, 456. d Icenii^ Britain discomfited, 43 Idle a river, 550. d
Iermins Knights, 461. d Iermegans Knights, 468. e Ierby a town, 769. c Iervis
or Iorvalle Abbey. 729. c Jerusalem in hand to be re-edified. 79. Iestine a
rebel against Prince Rhese. 641. e Jesus of Bethlems house, 297. e 410. f Jesus
College in Oxford, 383. b John Jewel Bishop of Salisbury, 208. e. a profound
Clerk, 248. e S. Iies, 193 Ikborowgh, 482. b Ike^ild street, 64 Ikening
street, 402. d Ikesworth, 461. d Islands of what use, 478. d An Island floating,
478. d Isle of Ely, 485. c. why so called, 492. f Il-bre, an Isle, 607. a
Ilcester, or Ivelcester, 221. e Ilfarcomb, 207. a Ilkley, 697. c Il-street,
603. e K. Ina, 226. c Innes of Court and Chancery in London, 427. c Inborow
what it is, 815. b Incubi, 17 Infants of Spain, 164 Inglebeys a family, 535.
f. 699. f Ingleborne, 242. c Ingleborrow Hill, 749. e Inglefields an ancient
family, 284. c Inglini bipenniferi, 154 Inis wen, 24 Insula Caeruli, ibid.
Inundations in Monmouth shire, and Somerset shire, 634. d Joan the fair maid
of Kent, 353. b Joan de Acres, 369. b Johannes de Sacro bosco, 692. c John of
Weathamsted, 7 John Earl of Athol cruelly executed, 336. a John of Gaunt his
style, 757. b King John his sword at Lin. 480. f King John called judicially
into question in France, and endited for murdering his Nephew Arthur, 733. d
Saint John's Knights of Jerusalem, 428. a. 433. a Joseph of Arimathea, 68 Joseph
Iscanus a Poet, 204. d Joseph Scaliger, 10 Ipres tower, 319. d Wild Ipres,
332. c. Earl of Kent 352. e Ipswich or Gipwich, 464. c Ireland, the site
thereof, 56 Irke a river, 746. a Irchenfield or Archenfield, 617. e Irt a
riveret, 765. e Irmunsull. See Ermin, 64 Irthing a river, 782. f Irthington,
745. e Irwell a river, 745. e Iron or Iron myn^s, 581. b Isa, a river. See Usa.
Isabel^ de Fortibus, 207. e Isan parles a rock, 763. b Isc river. See Ex. Isca
Danmoniorum, 203. f Isca Silurum, 204. a Iscaw, 20 Isis hair or Isidis
plocamos, 211 Isis a river, 241. c Isis a river in Glocestershire. See Ouse.
Islip, 377. a Simon Islip, 332. c Is-urium Brigantum, 701. c Ithancester, 443.
d Itium is whitsan, not Callais, 348 Iudeal de Totenais, 201. f Ivel the river,
221. b Iulham or Chilham, 336. b Iulia street, 639. e Julian the Apostata
usurpeth the Empire, 79. is declared Caesar, 78 Julius Caesar attempteth
Britain, 34 Julius a Martyr in Britain, 73 636. e Iullaber, 336. b Ivo
Talboys of Anjou, 532. f Ivo a Persian Bishop, 499. a A Jury of 12. men, 153
Justices of the Forest, 293. e Justices ordained by Aelfred, 158 Justices of
Peace instituted by K. Edward the third, 160 Justices of Assizes, 160.179
Justice, or chief Iusticer of England, 178 Justices Itinerant, 179 Justices in
Air, ibid. Justices of Goal delivery, ibid. Justices of Nisi prius, ibid.
Iutae a people in Germany, 128 why so called, 130
Ixning, 459. d
K*
KAderne, 18 Kainho a Barony, 401. d Katharine Dowager of Spain enterred, 513
Keiana Scot, 649. b Keidelston, 553. e Keimes a Barony, 654. c Keina, a devout
Virgin, 236. f Keirch, 20 Kilhop a riveret, 738. c Kelnsey, 714. a Kelsay, 543.
a Ken a river, 753. f Kenchester, 618. d Kendale, or Kirkby Kendal, 759 Kendale
Barons and Earls, ibid. K. Kenelm a Saint, 365. e Kenelworth, or Killingworth,
566 Kenelworth castle, ibid. Dictum de Kenelworth, 567 Kenet the river, 255 a
Keninghal, 472 c Keniwalcsh vanguisheth the Britans, 221 d Kent, 323. why so
called, ibid. Kentishmen right courteous and valiant, 324 c Kent Earls, 352 d
Kentish Pety-kings or Potentates, 37 Kent-sand, 753 f Kentigern Bishop of
Glasco, 679 c a great Clerk, 378 f
Kernaw, 183 Kernellare, what it is, 753 f Kesar, for Caesar, 326 c Kesteven a
part of Lincolnshire, 533 b Keston, 326 c Keswicke, 763 c Ket a rebel, hanged,
473 b Kettel, the name of a family, 543 b Kettleby, 543 a Kettering, 510
Keven, 21 Keven Caer, 661 e Kevenles Castle, 624 a Kevin, 21 Saint Kibie an
holy man, 673 a Kidderminster, 573 f. a Barony, 514 a Kidwelly, 649 Kildale
Castle, 721 e Kighley, a place and family, 693 Kilgarth, 192 Killey, 816 e
Kilgarran, 654 e Killingworth, See Kenelworth, Kilmain Lhoyd, 650 d Kilnsey
Crag, 697 b Kilpeck a castle and family, 617 The Kings Champions, ibid. Kilton
castle, 720 c Kime a noble family, 535 e Kimbolton or Kinnibantum Castle, 501 c
Kindreton, 610 b Kindreton Barons, 609 b Kined a Saint, 646 c Kinefeage Castle,
644 d King what it signifies, 163. his sovereign power, etc. ibid. his roial
prerogatives, 163 Kings of England made heirs to their subjects, 485 e. f
Kings in Britain during the Romans Empire there, 67 The Kings Courts of
Justice, 177 Kings Bench, 178 Kingston Lacy, 216 f Kings Clear, 272 c Kings
knight or Taine, 293 e Kingston upon Tamis, 297 b Kings Delfe, 500 b Kingston
upon hull. 712 d Kings Ditch by Cambridge, 488 c Kingswood Abbey, 364 c
Kinnoburga, 502 b Kinnersley, 620 c Kinton, 561 c Kirkham, 709 d Kirkby
Bellers, 522 f Kirkby Morside, 722 c Kirkby the same that Pontfret, 695 c
Kirkby Lonsdale, 760 c Kirkby Stephen, ibid. d Kirby Thore, 761 c Kirk Oswald,
777 f Kirkton, 532 c Kirsop a river, 781 d Kirtling, 491 b Kirton, 203 d Kits
Coty house, 332 b Kitsons knights, 461 e Knarisborow Castle, 699 f Knebworth,
406 e Knevets a family, 472 c. d Knevet or Knivet, Baron of Escrick, 707 e
Knight what degree of Gentry, 170 Knights simply so called, 173 Knights of
four sorts, 171 Knights Banarets, ibid. Knights of the Bath, 172 Knights
dubbed Earls, 174 Knight a title of dignity, 175 Knights how dubbed, 176
Knights Bachelars, ibid. Knights twelve, employed in the Conquest of
Glamorgan-shire, 641 e. f Knightleys ancient knights, 508 Knighton, 623 e
Kniveton a place and family, 553 e Knocking Castle, 597 b Knoll, 328 a Knolls
Barons de Rotherfield, 389 e Knots a dainty foul, 543 c Knotsford a town, 610
c Knute the Hardy, or Hardy Knut, 143 Knute King of the Danes vanquisheth
Ethelbert, 143 Kowain, 18 Kumero, 10 Kumbri or Kambry, 765 b Kumari, ibid.
Kumeraeg, ibid. Kwrm, a British drink, 31
L.
LAberius Durus slain by Kentishmen, Lac a riveret, 753 d Lacie, 213 d Lacies
Conquerours of Ireland, 631 c Lacie the Norman, 695 d John Lackland, who he
was, 255 f Lacon, a family, 591 d Lactorodum seems to be Stony Stratford, 397
b Laelianus an usurper in Britain murdered, 71 Laetavia, 111 Laeti, ibid.
Laetus a valiant Captain, 69 Laeford, by contraction, Lord, 168 Lanae, 19
Lakes in Staffordsh. of a strange nature, 588 b. c William Lambard commended,
323 b William Lambard his hospital, 327 f Lambith, 303 b Lambley Nunnery, 799
^ Lamborne, 283 f Lambourn Manor, 440 c Lampreies, 574 c Lane the name of a
family, 509 f Lanandiffry, 649 d Lancashire, 745 Lancaster or Loncaster town,
754 b Lancaster Lords, 755 f Lancaster Earls, 756 Lancaster Dukes, 757
Lancham, 463 d Lanchester, 742 ^ Landaff, 642 d Lands end, 188 Lanercost Abbey
or Priory, 782 c 785 c Langerston, 465 a Abbots Langley, 414 f Kings Langley,
ibid. f Langley, 592 a Langho, 750 a Langtons a family, 752 e Langanum, 668 b
Lanheath, 491 a Lapis Tituli. See Stonar. Lacelles a family, 707 e. 724 c
Latham, 749 a Latimer what it is, 598 ^ Latimers, a town, 394 e Latimers de
Corby, a family, 507 b Latimers, Lords, 721 f. 729 d Latimer a surname, 598 c
Lavatrae, 732 d Laver a river, ibid. e Lavellin an high hill, 767 f Lawleyes, a
family, 591 f Lawless Court, 441 e Laws of England in a tripartite division,
153 Law-courts of England, 177 Laws, that is, Heaps of stones, 802 b De la
Lawnds, a family, 542 c Laurence Noel, repayrer of our Saxons language, 188
Laxton or Lexinton a town and name of a family, 550 Layth, 21 Lea or Ley a
river, 406 e Lea, the name of a family, 592 d Leach, 21 Lead of Darbyshire, 556
e League, 21 Leakes Knights, 556 b Leam, the rever, 507 e Leama brook, 561 d
Leamington, ibid. d Leanminster, 17 Leckhamsted, 396 e Leddets, a family, 507 b
Long-Leat, 245 a Ledden a river, 620 e Ledbury a town, ibid. Lee, Knight, 280
c Lee a place and family, 610 c Sir Henry Lee, 395 f Leeds Castle, 331 c Leeds,
694 e Leegh, 441 c Leez, 445 c Legeolium, 695 a Leibourne, 332 c Leiden Castle
built by Hengist, 130 Leightons knights, 593 a Leighton Buzard, 402 e Leighton
in Huntingdon-shire, 501 d Leiton, 439 f Leightons a family, 667 d
Leicestershire, 517 Leicester town, 519 d Leike a town, 587 c Lemster or
Leinster, 619 f Lemster Ore, 620 a Lemster bread, 620 Lenae, 17 Leneham, 331 a
Leofrike Earl of Mercians, 567 e Leofrike first Bishop of Excester, 204 d
Leofrike Lord of Brane or Burn, 533 a Leoftane Abbot of S. Albanes, 393 c
Leolin Prince of Wales his behavior to King Edward, 363 e Lean Vaur a fabulous
Giant, 604 Leon Vaur what it signifies, ib. Leonell Duke of Clarence, 462 d
Leprosy why termed Elephantiasis, 522 d. when it came first into England,
ibid. Lestoff, 468 d Leskerd, 191 Lestuthiel, 190 Lettuy what it is, 399 f
Leuca, 21 Leven a river, 781 c. 782 b Leveney a river, 628 c Levensand, 754 f
Lever Maur, 67 Leventhorps a family, 408 c S. Lewis King of France taken
prisoner, 249 e Lewis of France his pretended title to the Crown of England,
340 Lewis a town, 313 e Lewknors, 312 e Ley-mouth, 440 a Lhan what it
signifies, 631 d Lhan Beder, 657 d Lhan Badern vaur, 658 a Lhan Stephen, 650 c
Lhan Devi Brevi, 657 b Lhanthony Abbey, 631 c Lhan Vais, 672 e Lhan Vethlin,
662 d Lhan Heron, 193 Lhan Stuphadon or Launstaveton, 196 c Lhein, 668 b
Lhewellin ap Sisil Prince of Wales, 680 a Lhewellin ap Gryffith the last
British Prince of Wales, 670 b Lhewellin last Prince of Wales of British race,
624 c. slain, ib. Lhuyd his opinion concerning the name of Britain, 5.24
Library in Oxford furnished, 381 Lichfield, 585 b. an Archiepiscopall See, 585
d Lickey Hill, 574 d Lid what it is, 491 d Lid river, 199 d. 781 f Lida town,
351 a Lid Castle, 781. Liddesdale, ibid. Lidgate a village, 461 f John Lidgate
a Monk, ibid. Liesnes Abbey, 328 b Lievtenants in every County or Shire
instituted by King Aelfred, 159 Lilborne, 515 c Lime river and town, 210 b
Limestone great store, 694 f Limits of the Roman Empire, 789 e, d. see
Scotland. Limseies a family, 567 e Lime a port town, 549 e Line or flax of the
best, 620 a Lillinstone, 396 c Lincolnshire, 529 Lincoln City, 538 b. whence
the name is derived, ibid. Lincoln Earls, 544 e* f Lindsey a part of
Lincolne-shire, 537 f Robert of Lincoln, 313 d Lincoln College in Oxford, 381
Linstock Castle, 778 a Lingeins a family, 665 d Lin 480 d. why so called, ibid.
Old Lin, 480 King Lin, ibid. Linnum Episcopi, ibid. Lin peris poole, 668 d Lin
a river, 547 c D^ la Linde, 213 f Linton or Lenton a town, 547 d Lioness, 187
Lisls a family in the Isle of Ely, 494 d L'isle a family, 276 a L'isle of
Rougmount, 490 b Listers a family, 592 e Vicount L'isle, 280 d Liver a river,
192 Littons a family, 406 e Litchfield in Hantshire, 272 c Littleborough, 549 e
Lites Carry, 224 f Littletons a family, 574 d Littleton alias Westcot a learned
Lawyer and a famous, ibid. Livery and seisin in old time, 340 The Lizard, 189
Llydan what it is, 111 Louder a river and family, 792 Lode works, 184 Looghor,
646 a Lollius Urbicus Propretor in Britain, 66 Lollham bridges, 512 a London,
421 d London an ancient Colony, 50 London called Augusta, 79, 80 London stone,
423 a London wall, ibid. c London bridge, 434 a London highway from Saint
Albanes turned out of Watling-street, 415 b London or Londres, a family, 649 d
Maurice de Londres or London, ibid. c Lonchamps a family, 532 Longford a place
and family, 553 d Long-Meg a stone, 777 e Longvils a family, 397 c Lonsdale,
760 Loo a river, 192 Lophamford, 467 d Lora Countess of Leicester, a reclused
votary, 339 a Lortie the name of a family, 221 d Lothbrooke the Dane, 207 a
Lottery used by Saxons, 135 Lovain a family, 444 e Lovels, 374. a family, 505 d
Lords of Castle Carry, 514 a Lovets a family, 553 d Loughborough, 521 d
Lowland-men, 126 Louth, 542 c Lowy of Tunbridge, 330 a Lowy of Briony, ibid.
Luceni in Ireland, 121 Lucensii in Spain, ibid. Sir Rich. Lucy Lord Justice of
England became a Chanon, 328 b Lucies a family, 769 f Lucius King of Britain,
67 Lucies Knights an ancient family, 564 f Luculleae certain spears, 62
Ludgate, 423 c Ludham, 478 d Ludlow, 590 c Ludlowes a family, 594 b Luffeilds,
396 f Luffenham or Leffingham, South and North, towns, 525 Lug, a river, 619 d
Lugus, what it signifies, 779 a Lullingstone, a town and family, 328 e Lumley
Castle, 742 b Lumleys Barons, ibid. Lune or Lone a river, 753 c Lupicinus sent
into Britain, 78 Lupus Earl of Chester, 611 a Lusoriae naves, 811 d Luthing,
a lake, 468 d 442 a Luthingland, ibid. Luton, 402 e Lutter worth, 517 f. an
Episcopal See, 519 d Lygons a family, 577 b Th. de la Lynde, 213 f Lyquorice in
great plenty growing, 550 f Lyrpoole or Litherpoole, 748 d
M
MAchleneth, 661 b Maclesfield, a town and forest, 610 b Madin-boure or
Madning boure, Madning money, ibid. Madock falsely dealt withal by his Guardian
John Earl of waren, 677 b Maeatae, 796 d Magic practiced in Britain, 234 a
Magnavills, alias, Mandevil, 452 b. Earls of Essex, 453 e Magnavil his end,
ibid. f Magnentius an usurper, 77. called Taporus, ibid. a fortunate Prince,
77. killed himself, ibid. Magnus a Dane, 314 c. his monument, ibid. Magoclunus
a tyrant in Britain, 113 Magon a god, 803 d Mahel Earl of Hereford, 358 f
Maiden Castle, 212 c Maiden Bradley, 24 Maiden way, 761 e Maidenhead or
Maiden-Hith, 286 c Maidstone, 330 e Maidulph the Irish Scot, 242 c Main, what
it signifies, 569 c Mayor of London first ordained, Main Amber, 188 Malcolm
Can Mor, King of Scots, 500 c Maldon, 446 e. forced by Queen Boadicia, 448
Malduit or Manduit, 570 Mallets a family, 223 e Malliveries, 700 b Malmesbury,
242 b Malpas, 603 e. Barons thereof, ibid. Maltravers Barons, 217 a Malvern
hills, 577 b Malveisin, 814 a Mamignot, 326 d Maminots Barons, 332 d Mancastle,
746 b Mancester, 569 c Manchester, 746 a Manchet the finest, 420 a Manchester
why so called, 747 a Mandrubatius, See Androgeus oppressed by Cassibilinus, 37
Manduites a family, 591 e Mangonells, 400 d Mannours or de Maneriis a family,
815 e Mannours Earls of Rutland, 527 a, b. 536 b Manober Castle, 651 c
Mansions what they were, 65 Mansfield a great mercate town in Shirewood, 550 b
Manwarings or Memilwarings a family, 608 a Sir Peter Manwood Knight, 339 b Sir
Roger Manwood Knight, ibid. Marble quarrey, 736 e Marca, 18 Marden, 620 d The
Marches, 589 b Marga what it is, 536 e Margan Castle, 644 e Marga, 20 Margaret
Countess of Richmond, 216 d Margaret Countess of Salisbury beheaded, 250 d
Lord Marchers, 589 c. 165 Marcley hill, 620 b. moves ibid. Marcus made
Emperor in Britain by the armies, 84 Mareschall of Harlots, 294 b Mareschall
Earl of Penbroch why so named, 655 b Mareschall Earl of Penbroch slain at a
Turnament, 407 d Mary Queen of Scots her end, her tomb, 511 c. 513 b Mary
Lady Fane, 330 d Mary Hall in Oxford, 381 d Mary Magdalen College in Oxford,
382 b S. Mary's of Radcliff, 237 ^ Marius a mighty strong man, 779 d Markham an
incorrupt judge, Markham a village and name of family, 550 e Markham lord
chief Justice of England, 550 e Marle, 20.393 c Marleborough, 255 d
Marleborough statute, 256 a Marlow, 393 Marmions a family, 729 e Marmions the
kings Champions, 582 c Marney Baron, 213 a Marnhill, 215 c Marquesites found,
720 f Marquess what degree of honor, 165 Marquess how created, ibid.
Marchland, 690 e Martin Bishop of Tours, against putting heretics to death, 82
Martin Vicegerent in Britain, stabbeth himself, 78 Martins, lords of Keimes,
Martins a family, 654 d Martyrs in Britain, 73 Masons first brought into
England, 743 a Massagetes, Scythians, 121 Massham, 729 c Matrafall, 662 d Mawde
the Empress, Lady of the English, 453 e. King Henry the First his wife, 284 d
Mawde of Saint Valeri a stout Dame, 623 c Saint Maudit Castle, 189 Maugre
Lhewellin a Castle, 623 c Mauleies Barons, 709 c Peter Mauley, 719 c Malt of
Abbington, 280 a Malt how made, 485 b Maundbury, 212 c Maunsels, 641 e Maxey
castle, 515 a Maximus usurpeth the Empire, 82. his virtues, ib. styled
Trevericus Emperor, ibid. Maximus the usurper vanquished and put to death by
Theodosius, 83 Maxstock castle, 567 c Meals what they be, 479 e East-Mean
Hundred, 268 f West-Mean Hundred, ibid. Meansborow Hundred, ibid. Meanuari,
ibid. Meaux Abbey, 712 e Walter Medantinus an Official Earl, 621 Medaghom, 634
b Medcalfes a numerous family, 729 a Medeshandsted, alias Medeswelhamsted,
ibid. Medeswel, a gulf, 512 b Medley, 693 f Medvan, 67 Medway river, 329 d
Meermarkes in old time, 515 c Melborn castle, 554 a Melcomb Regis, 211 c
Melfield, 815 d Long Melford an hospital, 462 Melienith, 624 a Melin, what
color, 26 Melitus a Roman, Bishop of London, 426 c Melkin a great professor of
learning, 378 f Melton Mowbray, 522 e Menai, 668 c Mendip hill, 230 d
Mendlesham, 465 b Meneg, 189 Menevia, 653 d Menils Barons, 721 b Merbury a
place and family, 609 f Mercians of the North, 559 b Merchenlage, 153
Merworth, 330 d Mercury had the charge of ways, 64 Mergate, 413 Merioneth
shire, 667 Merivale, 569 d Merkin, 188 Merlin the Britans Tages, where borne,
649 f Mersey a river, 745 ^ Mesey mouth, 610 b Mershland, 481 a Merton a poole,
749 d Merton, 302 d Merton College, 302 Statute of Merton, 302 e Merton brook
a riveret, 554 d Metham a place and family, 710 Metaris or Maltraith, 529 c
Mettingham, 468 c Merlin Sylvester, the British Apollo, 640 a Michael de la
Pole Earl of Suffolk, 7^ e Saint Michaels mount, 188 Michelham, 315 d Michael
Scotus a great Mathematician, 773 b Middlesex, 419 Middleton Abbey built by
King Athelstane, 213 Middletons a family, 698 d Middlewich, 607 f Mikel bar,
701 f Milburga a devout virgin, 591 e Sir Walter Mildmay a worthy knight, 514 c
Mildred a Saint, 340 b Milstons, 681 a. 556 f Milford haven, 651 d Millum
castle, 765 d Mimmes, 415 d Mineran what town, 407 f Minchins, that is, Nuns,
362 b Mineral stones, 720 f Minshul a place and family, 608 Minster, 334 a
Minster what it signifies, 245 c Minster Lovell, 373 f Misselto of the Oak, 14
Missenden a town, 394 c. de Missenden, Gentlemen, 394 e Mitford, 812 b Mitton,
731 b Mittons a family, 665 d Mixon, 274 e Modwena or Mowen a religious Virgin,
569 e. 586 b. her Epitaph, 586 c Moeles, 196 a. 221 c Mogontus, 691 d Mohuns,
190 f Mohuns or Moions, 220 d Moignes or Monks of Essex a family, 245 b
Moilenly, 676 c Moinglath, ibid. Mole a river, why so called, 297 Mold, 681 a
Molineaux a family, 748 Mona Taciti, an Isle, 671 Mona subdued by Julius
Agricola, ibid. Monastical life or Monkery when first professed, 603 a
Monasteries what they were, 603 c Monasteries suppressed, 163 Monkchester, 810
b Monkton, See Exceter, Monks Laymen, 603 c Monks a family, 208 a Monks
regular or of the Clergy, ibid. Monks Weremouth, 742 f Monmouthshire, 631
Monmouth town, 632 b. the natall place of King Henry the Fifth, 632 e Monmouth
an Academy, 633 e Monow, a river, 617.631 c Montacute a place, why so called,
222 b Montacutes Knights, 510 a Montacutes a family, 222 c Earls of Salisbury,
ibid. 249
Th. Montacute Earl of Salisbury slain before Orleance, 250 Mont Aegle
Barons, 753 f Montchensyes, Barons, 329 a Guarin Montchensy another rich
Crassus, 463 b Montferrant Castle, 709 b Montfichets Barons, 453 c Montfichet
Baron, 440 a. 809 e Montforts, 566 a Simon de Montfort Earl of Leicester, 523
e Simon de Montford the younger disloyal to his Prince, 523 e Simon Montfort
another Catiline, 577 f. slain, 578 a Montgomeryshire, 661 Montgomery town
and Castle, 661 f Montgomerie Earl, 663 b Montgomerie made a shire, 677 Mont
Turold a fort, 513 a Montjoy, 555 Monthault Barons, 680 e Monuments or Tombs in
Paul's Church in London, 426 d. etc. The Moore in Monmouthshire, 694 d Moors
what they be, 759 b Mordants Barons, 399 b Moresby, a place, and name of
gentlemen, 766 c, f Mooreland, 586 e Mor, 21 Morinwyr, ibid. Morimarusa, 11
Morleys, Barons, 315 c. 453 d Morisons, Sir Richard and Charles, 415 a Moregate
in London, 423 d Mordant, 510 c Morton Cardinal and Archbish. of Canterbury,
212 b Morpeth, 812 c Morton Corbet, 594 e Morvils a family, 775 f Hugh Morvil,
that slew Thomas Becket, 777 f Mortimers Earls of March, 619 Mortimers of
Attilborough, 473 b Morwic, 813 b Mortimers hole, 548 e Roger Mortimer the
elder sentenced to death, 624 e Roger Mortimer the last declared heir apparent
to the Crown, 625 a The Mosses, 745 d. whence they come. 747 b The Moto, 783 b
Mont Sorel or Mount Soar Hill, 521 a Mowbray, 304 f Mowbraies a family, the
original of their race, 723 c Mowbray much affected the Templars, 566 d
Mowbraies whence descended, 481 c Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, 482 e.
banished, ibid. Mowbray, 221 f Moult-Grave Castle, 719 c Mountsbay, 188.189
Moushole, 188 Mouthwy, a Commot in Wales, 665 d Moyen, 213 b Moyly Gaer, 679 c
Muchelney, 222 a The Mues, 432 c Munden Furnivall, 408 b. 703 a Municipia, what
they were, 409 Murdacks a family, 565 a. 409 Musards Barons of Staveley, 555 f
Muschamps Barons, 815 c Musgraves villages and a family, 760 d Musgrave Baron,
ibid. d Mustard the best, 359 b Mynyd Margan, 644 e
N
NAdder a river, 245 d Naitanus a King of the Picts, 118 Names of families
altered, 583 e Names of families taken from places, 748 a Names taken from the
fathers forename, 813 b Nannius, 82 Nant Pencarn a river, 639 f Nant-wich, 607
f Natan Leod, or Nazaleod, 258 f Nations the same have sundry names, 23 Nations
at first had names of their own, 25 Navy Royal of England, 333 e Naworth
Castle, 784 f Neath or Nid a river, 645 f Neath a town, 643 d Neath land, 649
d Nectan a Saint, 207 b Nectaridius, 79 Needles, 274 e Needhams a family, 464 a
598 c Needwood, 586 ^ Neirford a town and family, 480 481 d Neirborough, ibid.
d Nen the river his head, 507 c Nen river, 497 a Nen or Aufon river overfloweth
the flat Country, 513 c Nesse, 351. a Promontory, 451 d Nesta a welsh Lady and
a revengefull woman, 628 e Netherby, 781 d Netherwent, 640 b S. Neoth, 378 c S.
Neots or Needs, 497 c Neotus an holy man, 191.497 a Neotstow, 191 Nero the
Emperor how he stood affected to Britain, 48 Nettlested, 463 c Nevern river,
654 d Nevills a family, their descent, 737 c Nevill Lord Faulconberg Earl of
Kent, 353 c Rich. Nevill Earl of Warwick, slain, 415 d John Nevill Marquess
Montacute, 222 c. 403 Rich. Nevill Earl of Warwick, ibid. Rob. Lord Nevill
killed in adultery, 729 c Nevills an honorable name, 769 Nevin a mercate
village, 668 b Newark upon Trent, 549 c Newburg, 672 f Newborrough Abbey, 723 b
Newborroughs or de Novo Burgo, 213 a Will. of Newborrough, 723 b Newbury, 283 d
New Castle upon Tine, 809 f New Castle upon Tivy in Wales, 650 e New College
in Oxford, 381 e Newenden, 351 b Newenham Abbey, 207 a Newgate in London, 423 c
New forest, 259 b Newhall, 446 c Newlands, 767 a New-leame, 495 b Newmerch,
364 b Bernard Newmarch a valiant and Politic Norman, 628 e New Market or
Newmercate town, 459 d New Market Heath, ibid. e. 490 d Newmarch the name of a
family, 221 c Newnham, 401 Newnham Regis, 562 d Newnham wells, ibid. e Newport
Painel, 397 c Newport in Monmouthshire, 639 d Newport in Penbrockshire, 654
Newports a family, 605 d Newports Knights, 594 f Newsted, 547 c Neustria what
country, 144 Newton in Northamptonshire, 509 f Newton in Glamorganshire, 643
Newton in Mongomeryshire, 661 Nicen Creed established, 77 S. Nicolas Isle, 200
Nicolas of Tewksbury, 202 c Nicolans Fabricius de Petrisco a good Antiquarian,
97 Nicolaa de Albeniaco an Inheretrix, 364 f Nid or Neath a river, 645 f 699 e
Nidherdale, ibid. e Niding a name of Reproach, 333 b Niger usurpeth the Empire
in Siria, 68. slain by Septimius Severus, ibid. Ninnius a learned professor,
378 f Ninius, 6 Ninias or Ninianus an holy Britain, 118 Nobilis Caesar, what
title, 104 Nobilissimus the son of Constantine an Emperor, 85 Nobility in
England of two sorts, 164 Noels a family, 284 c Nonesuch, 287 c Normanton
Fields for Dormanton fields, 511 f Norris, 384 a Norris of Ricot, 384 a
Normans, why so called, 144 what outrages they committed, 144
Normans renouned for Martial Prowess, 153 Normans Conquest set down at
large, 145 etc. Normandy given to Rollo, 144 Normandy awarded away from the
Kings of England, 733 d Norrham a town, 816 b North Allertonshire, 723 f. the
fair there, ibid. b North, Barons, 491 b North, Hall, 415 d Northamptonshire,
505 North Elmham, 481 f North Leach, 366 b Northwales, 659 c Northfolke, 471
Northwich, 607 f Norfolk men wrangling Lawyers, 471 c Norwich a Bishops See,
472 a Norwich what it signifies, 473 e Norfolk Earls and Dukes, 482 b Norton
in Suffolk, 464 a Norton Dany, 507 a Norwich a City much endangered, 475 c
North Riding, 717 Northampton, 509 a. why so named, ibid. Northampton field
fought, 509 e Northamptonshire, ibid. f Northamptonshire Earls, 515 e
Northumberland, 799 Nosthil, 690 f Noteley Abbey, 396 a Nottinghamshire, 547
Nottingham, 547 d. why so called, ibid. Nottingham Earls, 551 b Northumberland
Kings, Dukes, and Earls, 819 d Novatians heretics, 84 Nun Eaton, 569 a The
first English Nun, 339 c
O
OBsidianus Lapis, what Cole, 735 c Ochi^hole, 230 d Ock-river, 286 c Ockham
Octha, 128 Odiam, 269 e Odingsels, 567 c Odo Bishop, 333 a Odo Earl of Kent
and Bishop of Baieux, 352 c Oen a welsh rebel, 658 b Offa King of the Mercians
his devout munificence to the Church, 410 f Offa Dike, 421 e. 623 Off Church,
561 e Offton, 463 c Ogle Castle, 812 a Ogmor, 643 a Ogle Barons, ibid. Oilway a
riveret, 636 c Oisters called Mira, 449 f Oister hills by S. Albans, 413 d
Oister pips in Kent, 335 a Okeham, 526 a Okenyate, 593 Oldbury, 269 d Old man
of Bullen, 345 c Old Castle executed, 329 ^ Old street or Ouldstreet, 540 ^ Old
Town, 617 c South Okindon, 442 d O-Neall great Monarch of Ireland, 126 Onions
hole, 271 b Onions Penni^s, ibid. e Orbeies a family, 607 ^ Orcas what point, 1
Orchard the Honor of certain Barons, 223 ^ Ordalium, what trial, 211 a
Ordulph his tomb, 199 e Ordgar, ibid. Ore a river, 465 d Oreford, ibid. Orell a
family, 748 a Oriall College in Oxford, 381 d Original of Nations and their
names, 4 Ormesby a town and family, 542 c Ormeskirke, 744 a Orthotes, 139
Orton or Overton, 502 b Orwell a river, 463 f Orwell Haven, 465 a Orewood, 184
Osgodby, 543 a Osith a virgin, 451 c S. Osiths a town, ibid. b Osney Abbey
founded, 375 c Ostorius Lieutenant for the Romans, 590 a Ostorius his
adventures, and service in Britain, 42.43. his victory, 44. honored with
Triumphant Ornaments, 45 Oswald Bishop of Worcester, a maintainer of
Monastical life, 576 b Oswald slain by Penda, 597 gloriously entombed, 540 f
Oswald, 690 f. 806 c Oswald his Epitaph, 748 c Fables going of him, 540 f
Oswaldslaw Hundred, 578 c Oswestre, 597 c Otherhalfe stone, 191 Otelands, 295
^ Otford, 328 e Otley, 698 d Ottadini, 796 Ottery river, 206 c Otterbourne
field, 803 c Ottery S. Maris, ibid. Overburrow, 753 d Overwent, 640 b Oulney,
397 c Oundale, for Avondale, 510 c Ounsbery Hill, 721 d Ousley, 565 e Ouse a
river in Glocestershire, 367 a Ouse river first called Ure and Your, 689 Ouse
or Ouze river, 241 Ouse the greater, 471 b Ousbourne a riveret, 701 d Owen
Justice of the common Pleas, 592 a Owen Glendowerdwy, or Glendour, a notable
Rebel, 623 c Owers, 274 e Outborow what it is, 815 b Oxfordshire, 373 Oxford,
377 c. made an University, 380 f
Oxford Earls, 389 d Oxney, 351 f
P
PAcatianus, Vicegerent or Deputy in Britain, 75 Padstow, 193 Palace in
Westminster, 431 b Palatine what it is, 601 b Paganells or Painells, 207 b
Pagetts of Beaudesert Barons, 585 a Palatine Counts, 167 Pandon gate, 810 b
Pant a river or creek, 443 b Pannonians whence they took name, 26 Pantulphs
Barons, 594 c Pall, what it is, 336 d Paul Papinianus the great Lawyer, 703 d
Palmer, 366 a Papp Castle, 768 a Parr Earl of Essex, 454 f Parr of Kendale,
759 e Parr Lord of Horton, 509 f Parcus in Varro for a Park, 375 e Parises, a
family, 489 e Parishes first set out in England, 160 Parish Churches how many
in England, 161 Parks in England, 375 e Parkers a family, 463 e Parkers, Lords
Morley, 473 a Parker Baron Mont-Aegle, 754 a Parliament house, 431 c
Parliament, 177 Parrham a little town, 465 e Passham, 397 b Paston, a townelet
and family, 478 f Pastwn, 21 Pattern a Bishop in Wales, 668 b Pateshul, a town
and family, 507 a Pateshulls, 399 d Paul's or Pouls Church in London founded,
425 c Paul's steeple burnt, 425 e Paul, 68 Paul the Notarie, surnamed Atena, 78
b Paulinus first Archbishop of York, 693 d Paulinus preached Gods word in
Lindesey, 539 a Paunton, a town, 537 b Pain Peverell, 488 a Peada a Christian
prince murdered, 512 e Peag-Kirk, 515 a Peake in Darbyshire, 553. why so
called, 556 c P^asen growing of themselves, 351 b. growing out of rocks, 466 b
Peche, 485 ^ Peculiars Court, 182 Pedred or Parret a river, 222 a Pedwar, 19
Pedwardins a family, 532 f Peer of Dover, 345 d Pega an holy woman, 515 a
Pehiti for Pecti, 118 Peincting that Britans used, 31 Peito a Franciscan Prier,
562 b Peitoes a family, ibid. b Peitons of Peiton hall, knights, 491 a Pelagius
an Arch-Heretick, 602 f a Britan born, 87 Pelagian heresy in Britain, 410 c
Pelham, 315 c Pembridges a family, 594 a Pempedula, 19 Pen, by Wicomb, 393 e
Pen, 18. what it signifies, 393 e Pencoh Cloud, 19 Pendle, 19. hill, 749 e
Penguall, what it signifies, 117 Pennigent, 19. hill, 749 c Pen a village, 221
d Penninus, 18 Pentachie of the Romans in Britain, 156 Penuahel, what it
signifies, 117 Pen-Elin, 187 Pensans, 188 Pennant, 191 Penal, 661 c Penbroch
or Pembrok-shire, 651 Penbroch town, 651 c Penbroch Earls, 555 a Pen Maur, 19
Pen Maen Maur, 669 c Pen Maen Bichan, ibid. Penball Crag, 811 d Pendragon
Castle, 760 c Penk, a river 582 f Penkridge, a town, 583 a Penrith, 776 d
Pensneth chase, 581 d Penshurst, 329 e Penworth or Penverdant, 752 d
Pentaphyllon, 19 Penteney Abbey, 481 ^ Peperking, alias Peverell, 443 f Percies
a family, 312 b Perci^aies a family, 722 d Percy Hotspur, 803 c Percy Earl of
Northumberland slain by rebels, 724 d Percepierre, an herb, 237 a Peregrine
Berty, Lord Willoughbie of Eresby, 541 f Peregrines, Falkons, 654 b Perennius a
Minion of the Emperor Commodus, 67. beheaded. 67 Perin, 190 Perith or
Petrianae, 777 a Perles shell fish, 669 d Perles, 765 e Perkin Warbeck, 205 b
Pershor, 578 b Pertinax, Emperor, 68 Peter in Britain, ibid. Peter's Post a
delfe or quary of stone, 696 c Petre of Writle Baron, 442 d Saint Peter's upon
the Wall, 443 e Sir William Petre his commendations, 446 a Peter pence, 226 c
Peterburgh, 512 a Peterril, a river, ibid. Petor, 19 Petoritum, ibid. Petrarie,
400 d Petrock, 194 Petronius Turpilianus sent as Propretor into Britain, 52
Pevensey or Pemsey, 213 e Peverells Lords of Darby, 558 d Peverells a family,
445 c Pever a river and place, 609 e Pewter vessel, 184 Phelips or Philips a
family, 467 Philibert, 269 c Philip Earl of Flaenders, Earl of Kent, 352
Pickering a town, 781 b Pickering Lith, Pickering a Liberty and forest, 722 b
Picot Sheriff of Cambridgeshire, 485 e Picts wall, 789 Picts what it
signifies in old British, 116 Pic, 20 Picts whence descended, the progeny of
ancient natural Britains, 115. why so called, when the Northern Britans,
became so called, 116. divided into two nations, 114 Picts, what become of
them, 118 Piddle a riveret, 213 d Piers Gaveston, 198 Pierpount a family, 548 f
Pigots, 401 c Pilchards, 186 Pilgrimage to our Lady of Walsingham, 479 c Pimble
mere, 666 b Pimthecnos, 15 Pinkneys Barons, 505 e Pinson a Noble Norman, 541 d
Pits, 334 e. 440 Pitchford a village and family, 592 b Placence, 327 b Plague
in Yarmouth, 477 f Plains of Salisbury, 245 d Planarat, 20 Plautius a
governor in Britain, 447 Pleshi Plaisi, or Estre, 445 a Plime river, 200 a
Plymouth, ibid. a Plimpton, 201 b Plin Limon an high hill, 658 b Plin Lin mere,
666 b Plugenet a Baron, 618 a Plumpton Park, 776 f Poenius Posthumous kills
himself, 52 Poinings Barons, 215 d Pointz Barons, 223 f Points a family, 364 b
Poleland, why so called, 27 John de la Pole Earl of Lincoln 469 f. executed,
470. b Pollesworth, 569 e Will. de la Pole, Duke of Suffolk, 469 d. banished,
469 f. beheaded, ibid. Henry Pole Lord Mountacute, 222 d. 453 d Pole,
Cardinal, 206 a Poltimore, 203 c Poltrosse a river, 799 f Pole, 192 Policletus
a favorite of Nero sent into Britain, 52 Pontes, 394 a Poole, 606 f. Pontthiue
County or Earldome in France how it came to the Kings of England, 394 b Poole a
town why so called, 211 e Pomeries, 202 a Pomponius Laetus his opinion of the
name of Britain, 5 Pooles on hill tops, 667 e Popham, 223 e. 256 c Pontfret or
Pomfret, 695 c. infamous for the bloodshed of Princes, 695 f Pont a river, 809
d Port Gate, 808 f Port a Saxon, 210 d Portland, 210 e Portchester, 268 a Port
Peris, ibid* Portsey Island, 268 a Ports mouth, 268 b Portstaw, 313 d
Potheridge, 208 a Potton, 401 c Portcleis, 603 d Portmen, 477 e Portogan, 603 d
Port sholme, 498 a Portskeveth, 633 f Pouderbach Castle, 592 c Poultney a
family, 517 Povers a family, 377 a Powder treason of Rob. Catesby, 431 Powick a
Baronie, 577 b Powis Lords, 663 c Princes of Powis, 663 Powise Land, 659 c
Powlet Lord S. John Earl of Wiltshire, 257 a Powlet his honorable titles, 267
Powderham, 206 b Powndbury, 212 c De Praeriis a family, 607 e Prasutagus King
of the Iceni, 49 457 a Praefecti Praetorio under Constantine the Great, 76
Prefecture what it is, 422 Prerogative Court, 181 Presidium, 563 a Priests
forbidden marriage, 201 Priests married, 576.201 b Priscus Licinius Propretor
in Britain, 66 Priscillianists the first heretics condemned to death, 82
Priests marriage debated of in a Synod, 243 d Prestom, 623 e Prichards, a
family, 628 e Probus Emperor, 71 Preston in Andernesse, 752 d.e Prideaux, 194
Protolitia, 808 d Prittlewel, 441 c Provincial Latin affected by the Britans,
116 Provinces 2. in England, 160 Prowes, 203 a Princes of Wales, 683 The
Prince, his place, and style, 163.164 Prudhow Castle, 808 d Pseudocomites, 167
Puckerich, 408 a Puclechurch, 364 a Pudsey Bishop of Durrham and Earl of
Northumberland, 741 f Pulein a professor in Divinity and favourer of learning,
379 e. 380 c Pulhealy, 668 b Purbeck Isle, 211 e Purcells, or de Porcellis, 377
a Puseies, 280 f Putney, 303 a Pymp, 19 Pyramides of Glastenbury, 229
Pyramidall stones, 701 a Pyran, 193 Pyrry, a drink, 573 d
Q
QUatremans men of good note, 383 f Qeene Borough, 334 a Queens College in
Oxford 381 d Querendon, 395 e Quicke-sands in Holland, 529 f Quincy Saer Earl
of Winchester, 267 b Quintinus, 82 Quintins a family, 731 a
R
RAby Castle, 737 b Raculph Minster, 335 b Radcliffes a family, 767 d Radcliffe
or Redcliffe, 437 d Radcliffe in Bristow, 237 e Radegund, 349 a Radmilds, 312
Radnorshire, 623 Radnor town, 623 c Radnore made a shire, 677 e Radwinter, 446
a Ragland, 636 c Raihader Gowy, 623 a. b Raleghs, 208 e Ralegh a town, 443 a
Ramsey Isle and Abbey, 499 b Ramsey mere, 499 d Rams foreheads, that is,
Promontories, 184 Ramesbury, 256 b Rank-riders, 799 c Ranulph Earl of Chester,
607 b Rapes in Sussex, 306 e Ratis, 20 Ratcliffs Earls of Sussex, 321 a
Ravenglasse, 765 Ravensburne river, 326 Ravenswath castle, 730 b Reads a
family, 577 b Reading, 284 Readsquire a mountain, 802 a Reafan the Danes
Baner, 195 Reche a town, 490 c Recall a river, 722 d Rech dike, ib. Reculver,
335 b Redcastle, or Castle Rous, 594 d Redin, 20 Redhorse vale, 561 c Red
color gives name to many places, 525 d Redbourne, 413 d Redbridge, 262 d Red
rose and white, for Lancaster and York, 725 e Redshankes, 126 Redvers or
Rivers Earls of Denshire, 207 d Redverses or de Ripariis, 201 c Redwald King
of the East Saxons, 465 c Reforming errors a Court, 180 Reginald Pole his
commendation, 216 b Religious houses dissolved, 163 Remney ariver, 631 b. 642 a
Remni what it signifies, 642 a Remigius Bishop of Dorchester, 539 c
Rendlesham, 465 c Renimed, 419 e Reptacester or Richborow, 341 a Repton, 553 f
Requests Court, 181 Rerecrosse, 732 f Reuda, 126 Rheda, 18 Rheder, ibid.
Rhedec, ibid. Rhedecfa, ibid. Rhead a river, 802 a Rheadsdale, ibid. c Rhediad,
18 Rhegium, why so called, 347 d Rhese ap Gruffin, 623 a Rhese ap Thomas a
valiant knight, 650 e Rhie a river, 722 d Rhidale, ibid. Rhia, Baron, 472 Rhre
whereof so called, 319 d Rhodanus, 21 Rutupina littora what they be, 342 Ribel
a river, 749 d Ribelchester, 750 b Ribald L'isle, 485 f Ricall, 707 d Richard
the Second renounceth the crown, 680 d Richard Duke of York claims the
crown, 725 b Richard a renowned Earl of Cornwall, 197 d. his death and
sepulcher, his son Henry murdered, 197 f Richard Coeur de Lion, 380 a Richard
the Third, a bad man and a good Prince, 212 a Richard, Duke of Gloucester an
usurper, 369 f. his practices to win the crown, 370 Richard the First his
praises, 285 Richard the Second his Relics translated to Westminster, 414 f
Richard King of Romans, etc. 414 Richborow, 341 a Richborow decayed, ibid f
Riches Barons, 441 d Richard Lord Chancellor of England, 445 Richards Castle,
619 e Richmond shire, 727 Richmond town, 729 f Richmond Earls, 733 Richmond
the Kings house, 297 Richmonds a family, 778 a Rickmansworth, 415 c Rising
Castle, 481 c Risingham, 803 d Rith what it signifies, 486 a Rivers had Divine
honors, 602 heaped upon them, 698 a Robert bridge, 320 c Robert Earl of
Leicester, 466 c Robert Crouchbacke Earl of Leicester, 519 f Robert Consul or
Earl of Gloucester, 368 d Robert Fitz Haimon, 359 d Robin Hood, 693 a Robin
Hoods bay, 718 c Roch, a river, 745 f Roch Dale a town, ibid. Rochester a
castle, 802 c Rochester city, 332 c Rochester or Roffes a family, 405 d
Rochford town, and Hundred, Rochford Barons, ibid. Rochford Vicount, ibid.
Rockingham Castle and Forest, 513 Rock-Savage, 610 a Roden a river, 594 c
Roding a river, 440 b Roger the magnificent Bishop of Salisbury, 243 a Rogerses
Knight, 215. ibid. Roise a Lady, 405 b Roiston, ibid. Roises Cross, ibid.
Rolrich stones, 374 c Rollo the Norman, 144 his dream and conversion, 144 The
Roll of Winchester, 153 Rome called Constantina, 85 Romania, 24 Romeswork, 343
f Romans foiled and massacred in Britain, 51 Roman Empire in Britain at an
end, 87 Romans in Britain, 34 Romescot, 411 a Romara a Norman, Earl of
Lincoln, 544 e Roos Barons, 532 f Rosamund Clifford King Henry the Second his
paramor, 375 Rosamunds bones translated, and afterward reduced again, 376 c
Rose red and white for Lancaster, and York, 725 e Rosse, 190.714 a Rosseland,
190 Rosse in Penbrochshire, 652 d Rosse in Cardiganshire, 657 c Rosse Barons,
714 a Rosebery Topping, 721 d Rose Castle, 778 c Rota temporum, that is, The
wheel of Times, an History, 790 b Rother a river, 320 a Rotherfield, ibid.
Rotherham, 689 e Rotherham Archbishop of Canterbury, 689 e Rowcliff Castle, 781
c Rouchester, 809 e Round table, 265 b Rowles in London, 428 c Rousses a
family, 467 c Routon Castle, 592 e. 662 Rugby, 562 Rudheath Sanctuary, 609 a
Ruffes, fishes, 476 c Rugemond or Richmont Greies in Bedfordshire, 734 d
Rugemont, 204 c Rumalds shrine, 396 d Rumford, 441 f Rumon, 199 e Rumney Marsh,
350 b Rumney town, ibid. Runkhorne, 510 d Rushbrooke, 461 d Rushton, 509 f
Russel Lord Russel of Thornaugh 514 c Russels, Knights, 578 e Russels Earls of
Bedford, 394 e 403 Ruthin, 676. Ruthlan, 679 f Rutlandshire, 525. why so
called, 525 b, c, d Rutland Earls, 426 f Rutters what they were, 812 b
S
SAbridgeworth, 408 c Sacae 129. Sacasones, ibid. Sadlier, 408 a Sacvil Earl
of Dorset and Chancellor of Oxford, 382 Saer de Quincy Earl of Winchester,
521 a Salisbury Church, 248 a, b Saffron, 453 a Salisbury Earls, 249 c Salarin
a custom or Impost for salt, 608 a Salisbury for Sarisbury, 246 f Salisbury
Hall, 750 c Salkelds towns, 777 e. and a family, 778 a Salmons the best called
Umbrae, 627 Salmon leap in Penbrochshire, 6^4 e Salndie or Sandy, 401 b
Salston, 48 e Salt made, 268 b, e Salt Esse, 196 Salt hills, 529 e Salt
artificially made, 753 b Salt stones, 739 d Saltpits, 573 b, c Saltry Abbey,
500 b Salt pits in Cheshire, 608 a, b Salustius Lucullus in Britain, 62
Saltwood Castle, 349 c Salwarp a river, 574 d Salmonds or S. Amands, 283 c
Samonds or S. Amands Barons, 244 a. 366 e Samothea, 24 Sampier growing
abundantly, 434 a Sandal Castle, 693 d The Sand, part of Notinghamshire, 550 a
Sandalum, 19 Sandgate Castle, 349 e Sandiacre or S. Diacre, 555 d Sands Barons,
269 b, and e Sandon, 343 a Sandy, See Saludica. Sanctuaries, 260 Sandwich, 342
Sanguelac, 317 e Sapcots a family, 501 e Sarasins-heads, 695 a Sarmatians are
Scythians, 121 Sarn Helen a Portway in Wales, 666 a Sasson, 23 Saxon language
maintained by Lectures, 200 a English-Saxons called into Britain, 100.127
Saxons, 119. their valor and cruelty, 134 Saturn well affected to Britain,
556 e Savages a great family, 610 a Saulden, 396 c Scarborough Castle, 717
Scardale, 556 a Schilpor, See Esquires, 176 Scaeva his valor and advancement,
37 Scalbie Castle, 782 e Scilicester in the wall, 806 b Scipio Africanus, where
buried, 340 a Sclate-stones dug, 514 d Scorby or Scurvie-grasse, 328 b
Scordium an herb growing plenteously, 491 f Scoteney a Barony, 542 c
Scottishmen of East-Scotland, right English-Saxons, 129 their fashions, 133
Scots wild or Highlandmens habit sort well with the Goths, 123 Scots whence
they took name, 119 Scots of West Scotland are Highland men, ibid. Scots came
first out of Ireland, 120 Scots when they came to be of name, 125 Scot what it
signifies, 124 Scots a family, 349 Scotus, alias, Duns, 814 b his pitiful
death, ibid.
Scovies, 20 Screking ham, 535 c Screven a place and family, 700 Scroby, 551 b
Scropes Barons, 729 b Scruffel hill, 767 e Scudamores a family, 621 a Sculton,
473 a Scutary, 176 Scythica vallis, 120 Scythians in Spain, 121 Scythicum a
promentory in Spain, 121 Seaton, 206 e Sea Holly, See Eryngium. Sea heard to
groan, 720 c Sea sand good for ground, 199 c Sea is warm, 2 Sea coals, 735 c.
799 d Sea men caught, 466.720 b Seals how they sleep and are caught, 720 c
Seven mile dike, 490 b Seavenshale, 801 f Seckinton, 569 e Sefton, 748 d
Seghil, ibid. Segonax, 37 Segrave a town, 523 b. a family, ibid. Segraves
Barons, 568 c Stephen Segrave his rising and fall, 501 c, d Jane Seimor mother
to King Edward the sixth, 224 Seimors or Saint Maurs Earls of Hertford, 416
Seimor Duke of Somerset, 240 b Seimor or Saint Maur Earl of Hertford, 634 d
Seneca a great Usurer in Britain, 457 c Sejont a river, 668 d Selwood, 233 a
Selwhat it signifies, 271 c Selbeies a family, 812 f Selbrittenden, 351 c
Selaby, 737 c Selbury, 255 a Semarc or de S. Medardo a family, 714 d
Sempringham, 534 d Serjeanties, 213 Seovenburgenses, 829 c Seton, 811 f
Sevenoke, 328 d Sevenoke Alderman of London his Hospital and School, 328 d
Severn river, his head, 661 c commended, 357 d a noble river, 573 d
Severus Propretor in Britain, 65 Severus Emperor, his exploits, 67. he
enters Britain, 69. fenseth Britain with a wall, 69. died at York, 70.703 b
his funerals, ibid. canonized a god, 70
Seward a Poet, 632 d Sexwulph first Abbot of Peterburgh Abbey, 512 c Sezay,
724 e Shafts, 184 Shaftsbury, 214 d Sharnborne, 480 c Shavington, 607 e
Scheaths, 609 d Sheafield, 689 c Shene, 297 c Sheep devour men, etc. 505 c
Sheffelds Barons, 544 d Shengay a Commaundery, 485 e Shelford a Barony, 472 e
Shepey Isle, 333 c Ship of King Hiero, 32 Shipston, 561 c Shirburne a brook
running through Shirbourne, 696 b a town and Castle, 214 a. A Bishops See, 214
b
Shirley a place, and family, 313 c 553 d. 505 e Shires divided into Hundreds,
158 Shirewood forest, 547 b Shires how many in England, 159 Shoad, 184 Shobery,
441 c Shorn, 329 b Shobery Nesse, ibid. Shochlach, 604 b Shoreham, 313 b
Shotwich Castle, 606 e Shrawerden Castle, 597 b Shrewsbury, 595 a Shrewsbury
Earls, 599 b Shropshire, 589 Shugbury a town and family, 561 d Shurland, 334
a Sible Hemingham, 450 b. See Heningham or Heveningham, Sicily the Isle cut
from Italy, 346 d whence it took name, 273 d
Sidlie a learned knight, 332 b Sider a drink, 20 Sidius Geta his good service
in Britain, 41 Sidmanton, 272 c Sidnacester, 543 f Sidneys, 329 e Sir Robert
Sidney Baron of Pensherets and Vicount Lisle, 329 e 280 f Sigebert a tyrant,
272 e Sigga a noble woman, 806 b Silcester, or Selcester, 270 a Silt, ^9 d
Simon Zelotes in Britain, 68 Sinbrech or Simon Brech, 126 Sinodun, 281 b Sion,
420 e Sisters kirks, 714 b Siwards a family, 646 e Siward Earl of Huntingdon,
502 c Skales, Barons, 405 e Skeffington a town and family, 522 e Skeleton
Castle, 720 c Skiddaw an hill, 767 c Skinffrith Castle, 632 b Skipton in
Craven, 694 b Skipwiths a family, 521 b Slebach a Commandery, 652 c Sleford,
535 d Sleep a town, 498 f Smiths a family, 607 e Snath, 729 d Snodhil Castle,
617 d Snowden Forest, 667 a Snowdon hills, ibid. Soar, a river, 517 b Sockburne,
737 d Sodales Augustales, 448 b Sodbury, 364 c Soham, 493 a Solway frith, 775
Solente frith, 267 e Soldurii, 20 Solidurii what they are, 99 Solidarii, 171
Solidus, a coin of Gold, 99 Solyhill, 567 a Solom Moss, 782 a Someries Barons
of Dudley, 397 a noble family, 581
Somerley, 468 e Somersham, 499 a Somersetshire, 220. whence it took name, 220
b Somerset Dukes and Earls, 239 c Somerton, 224 f. town, 220 c Snite a
brook, 549 c Soureby, 724 e Sow a river in Staffordshire, 583 e Southam, 561 d
Sowdiur, 20 South-Anton town, 260 f Southton or Sutton in Herefordshire, 620 d
Southampton Earls, 272 f Southybank, 530 a South rhey, or Sutherey, why so
called, 295 South Saxons kingdom, 321 c South Wales, 659 c Southwels a family,
473 a Southwold, 467 a Spadiards, 185 Spain rent from Afrike, 346 ^ Spalding,
532 b Spaldwick, 501 d Spelwell by Dantrey, 508 Spensers knights, ibid.
Spenser, alias, de Spenser executed, 269 c. De Spenser Barons, Spenser Lord
Spenser, Baron of Wormleighton, 508 De Spenser Baroness, 330 Hugh Spenser, 642
b Spigurnell what it signifies, 312 a Spilmans knights, 480 d Spittle on
Stanemore, 732 f Spittle in the street, 540 e Sponde his tomb in
Torcester-church, 506 b Spring turning sticks and strawes into stones, 518 a
Spurnhead, 714 a Saint Ives a town, 498 f Saint John's Barons of Basing, 269 b
Sir Oliver Saint John, 239 Saint John's Barons of Lagham, 303 e Saint Legiers or
Sellengers, 331 Saint Guerir, or Saint Leech, 191 Saint Lizies a family, 498 a
Saint Lo or Sentlow, 196 a Saint Georges knights, or of the Garter, 485 d Saint
Martins a family, 246 a Saint Mary's a town, 481 b Saint Paul, or Sampol a
family, 544 a Saint Stephens in Westminster, 431 a Saint Maurs or Seimors, 224
a Saint Cler, 591 e Simon, Saint Liz or Selis the first Earl of Northampton,
509 Simon de Saint Liz the second, 515 f Saint John his knights, 241 f Saint
Swithins feast rainie, 265 d Staffords of Blatherwic knights, 514 b Staffords
of Grafton, 395 e Staffords Dukes of Buckingham, 397 e Stafford of Suthwick
Earl of Devonshire, 208 Staffords Earls of Wiltshire, 256 c Staffordshire,
581 Stafford town, 584 d Stafford holds Carborough Castle, 717 e Stamford a
Citizen of London, 208 Standard, what it was, 724 Standon, 408 a Standrop or
Stainthorp, 737 b Stanford upon Avon, 515 b Stanford rivers, 440 Stanford upon
Welland, 533 e an Universitie begun at this Stanford. 533 e
Stanford destroyed, ibid. Stanes, 419 d Stanes forest or waren, 421 c Stanely
the Expensfull Bishop of Ely, 499 a Stanlaw, 606 f Stanleies a noble family,
583 f Stanleies whence descended, 606 Stanleies Earls of Darby, 749 f
Stanemore, 732 e Stannaries, and their Lord Warden, 185 Stanhopes, 549 a
Stantons a family, 553 d Stanwel, 419 c Stanwicks, 782 e Star Chamber, 179
Stations or Mansions in Antonine, 399 f Steanford, 547 c Steort, 187 Stert
point, 201 d Stews, 434 d Stephanides, See Fitz Stephen, Steven Hauh a town,
406 e Stibium found in Darbyshire, 556 f Stiliard, 435 c Stilton or Stichilton,
501 f Stilicho protector to Honorius in his minority, 73 Stipper stones hill,
592 c Stoke battle, there fought, 549 a Stonar, what place, 339 f Stoke Curry,
221 a Stoke Pogeys, 394 c. 521 c Stockepont a pety Barony, 610 Stoke Fleming,
202 Stokesley, 521 a Stone a town: why so called, 783 Stones made by art, 253
a. b Stoneheng, 251 Stoneham, 262 d Stonely Abbey in Huntingdonshire, 501 c
Stoneley, 562 e Stonely Holme, ibid. Stony serpents of S. Hilda, 718 e Stones
with stony serpents in them, 721 a Stony street, 349 Stones resembling Cochles
etc. 363 e Stony stroud, 21 Stoners a family, 389 a Store a river, 408 c Bishop
Stortford, ibid. Stow on the would, 366 a Stow in Lincolnshire, 543 d Stouphs
or Hot houses used much, 681 d Stow in Suffolk, 464 b Stow, 196 Stour river
in Suffolk, 462 a Stour river in Dorsetshire, 214 c Stour mere, 462 a Stour a
river, 573 f Stour a river in Kent, 335 d called Wantsume and Inlade, 339 e
Stourbridge fair, 489 b Stourminster, 215 c Stourton, 245 a Stourton Castle,
581 c Stourton the Honor of the Barons de Stourton, 214 c Stourtons Barons,
245 b their Crest, 245 b
Stradlings or Esterlings a family, 641 f Stradling knight, 641.643 e Strange a
family of knights degree, 480 b Strange de Blackmere, 365 f 598 f. de Knocking,
597 c Strangbow Conqueror of Ireland, 397 d Strat Clud, 676 d Strangwaies a
family, 721 b Strangwaies, 212 f The Cross there, 397 a
Stratford upon Avon, 565 a Stony stratford, 396 f Strait of Callais, 345 e
Stratfleur, 657 Strath what it signifies, 117 Stratton, 196 a Stream works,
184 Strelleys knights, and Sturleys the same, 550 d Strelley Sturley or
Strellegh a town and family, 550 a. b Strensham, 578 c Strettons, 593 a. d
Stretlham, 737 a Strighul castle, or Strugle, 633 Strigulia, 633 c Strigulia
Earls, ibid. Strickland a place and family, 762 ^ Strongbow first Earl of
Penbroch, 655 b Strangbow, 633 c Stroud, a river, 362 b Studia the same that
Universities, 379 c. 381 a Sudbroke, 633 f Sudley the Barony of Chandos, 365 b
Sudbury, 462 e Suffolk, 459 Suffolk Cheeses, 459 b Suffragans to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, 344 d Suerby, 714 b. c Simon Sudbury Archbishop of
Canterbury, 337 b Sully an Island and name of a man, 642. f Sueno King of Danes
subdueth Ethelbert and England, 143 Sunning a Bishops See, 286. a Superstition
of the Britans, Surrey Earls, 304 a Suria the goddess, 801 e Sur-teis,
Gentlemen, 737 Susana in Spain, 12 Sussex, 306 Sussex Earls, 320 e. f Suit in
law between Edward Nevill and Dame Mary Fane determined in Parliament, 636
Sutton Colfeld, 567 b Suthwicke, See Earl of Devonshire, 208 b Suthwell, 549 b
Sutton Vautort, 200 a Sutton Prior, ibid. a Suttons a family, 581 c Suttons
Gentlemen of worth in Notinghamshire, 549. e Sutton in Darbyshire, 556 b
Swaffham, 481 f Swallow hole, 297 a Swale river, 729 e Swaldale, ibid. f Swale
the river used for Baptism, 136 Swanscomb, 329 a Suene Tiugs Kege a Danish
Tyrant, 543 e Swerds delfe, 501 a English Swet whereof it came, 24.596
Suetonius Paulinus Propretor in Britain, 49. His oration and battle with
Queen Boadicia, 51 Swidelme King of the East Angles, 465 c Swines pennies, 550
Swift river, 517 d Swinborne a place and family, 806 b Swinsey or Sinsey, 646 b
Synodes, 181 Syriack tongue mother of all languages, 204 b
T
TAbbes for S. Ebbes, 743 b Tadcaster, 699 a Taff. a river, 650 c. 642 c
Taisborrough, 473 b Talbois Barons, 535 e Talbots Earls of Shrewsbury, 598 f
Talbot Vicount Lisle slain by the Lord Barkley, 364 c Talbot Earl of
Shrewsbury, a worthy warrior, his Epitaph, 598 d. his style and honors, 599 c
Talbot skillful in Antiquities, 182 Talcharn Castle, 650 c Talmachs, a family,
463 e Tame river, 383 e Tame town, ibid. Tame and Isis meet, 384 e Their
marriage poetically described. 384 f Tamis or Thames the river, 241 281 Tamis
why so called, 384 e Tamis how far he ebbeth and flows, 298 d Tamis mouths,
333 f Tamis mouth, 441 d Tamar river, 196 b. 197 a Tamerton, 196 b Tame a
river, 581 f Tamworth, 582 a Tanet a river in Wales, 662 e Tanet or Tenet Isle,
335 d Tanet Isle why called Thanatos, 339 f Tanet inhabitants industrous, 340 d
Tanfeld, 729 d Tania what it signifies, 27 Taran, 17 Taranis, ibid. Tarian, 18
Tascia what it signifies, 97 Task what it is, 409 c Tatershall a Barony, 541 d
Tathai a British Saint, 633 Tatsalls a family, 472 c Tavistoke Abbey, 199 e Taw
river, 208 b Tawstock, ibid. Tawton, ibid. Taxea, 20 Taximagulus, 37 Teave
river, 199 e Tees or Teis a river head, 736 ^ Tees mouth or Teis mouth, 721 b
Teg what color, 26 Teg-Engle, 680 c Teigne river, 203 a Tein a brook, 587 d
Teis or Tees river, 718 c Telean, 642 d Telen, 21 Temesford, 401 b Temd, a
river, 589 e The Temple at Bristow, 238 a Temple, 396 e Temple Bruer a
Commandery, 535 f Templars, 427 d Tenby, 651 b Tenham, 334 d Terminations of
places names, 20 Terne a river, 593 b Terringham a town and family, 397 c Test
a river, 260 e Tetnal, or Theotenhal, 581 e Tetrachie erected by Aelfred in his
Monarchy, 160 Teverton or Swifordton, 203 a Teutates, 17 Tew, 20 Tewksbury,
359 c Thanes, 168 Thaxted, 444 e Thessey a river, 565 Thellesford, ibid.
Thelwall, 610 c. why so called, ib. Theobalds a stately house, 408 d Theocus an
Eremite, 359 c Theodosius an expert warrior sent into Britain, 79. his
exploits there, 80. he recovereth the Roman province there, 80 honored for his
service. 81 Theodosius his son Emperor, 81. he triumphs over Maximus the
usurper, 83 Theon the last British Bishop of London, 425 b Theophilus
Antrochenus, 9 Thet a brook, 471 d Thetford, 471 d. a Bishops See, ibid. f
Thin studious of Antiquities, 160 Thins a family, 245 a Thireos, 18 Thirlwal
Castle, 799 f Thirlwal a family first called Wades, 800 Thirlwall, why so
called, ibid. Thirty tyrants or usurpers at once, 71 Thirstleworth, 420 e
Thonderdach, 17 The One river, 223 b Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Gloucester
smoothred at Calais, 369 d Thoneton or Taunton, 223 Thongcaster, 542 d Thor, a
god, how pourtraied, 135 Thoresby, 774 c Thornaugh, 514 ^ Thornbury, 363 f
Thorndon, 442 e Thorney Abbey, 494 d Thornhils. 693 d Thornton, 396 e Thornton
in Lincolnshire, 542 f Thorps a family, 472 d Thorpston, alias Thrapston, 510
Thredling See Deben, Thresk castle, 724 c Throcknortons a family, 565 e Throgoy
a river, 634 c Thurgarton, 549 a Thurkil, 326 e Thurland Tunstalls, 753 e
Thwengs a family, 721 e Thwengs, 196 a Thyrn, a river, 478 b Tibba a she Saint
and patroness of Falcony, 526 d Tiberius Caesar meddled not with Britain, 4
Tibetofts or Tiptofts Earls of Worcester, 549 c Tibury or Titusbury hill. 262 a
Tichburne, 262 f Tickhil, 690 Ticks hal, 584 e Tideswell, 558 c Tikenhal by
Beaudly, 573 f Till a river, 815 b Tilbury, 440 d Tilliots a family, 782 Tilney
a town, 481 b Tilneys a family, 472 d Tilneys Knights, 481 b Tilneys smeth,
ibid. Tiltey Abbey, 444. e Timbod castle, 624 a Times of the world, 334
Timothy an heriticke in Britan, 87 Tin in Cornwall, 184 Tin of two sorts, 185
Tinworkers common wealth, 185 Tindagel, 194 Tindale, 802 a Tine, 799 e Tine,
802 a Tinmouth, 811 Tio, vel, Finga-Cester, 549 b Tippall, a river, 800 b
Tirells a family, 396 e Tithings or Decimes ordained, 158 Titus his warlike
service in Britain, 42 Titus the worlds joy dies, 56 Tivie the river, 949 b.
where he springs, 657 c Todenay, or Tony, 536 b Todenay or Tony, 414 b
Todington, 365 c Tongue castle, 594 a Tonsure or shaving the Crown, 118
Topcliff, 731 a Torbay, 202 d Torcester, 505 f Torksey, 538 a Torneaments, 407
d Tosto vanquished, 145 Totnes, 201 e Totnesse shore, 202 Touchets a family,
584 b. Barons de Audeley, ibid. Tovie the Kings Standard bearer, 439 d Tovie,
the river, 649 d Toure d' Order, 345 c Tower of London, 423 e Towridge river,
207 f Tourington, 208 b Towton battle, 696 d Trabucks, 400 Tracies, 36^ d
Traiford a place and family, 747 Traith Maur, 666 a Traith Bichan, ibid. Traith
Taff, 642 c Trebellius Max. Propretor in Britain, 52 Treboeth, 605 f
Trederman, 783 b Tr^es under ground, 745 d. 607 Tregaron, 657 d Tregonie, 190
Tregian, ibid. Tregoz Barons, 617 d Trelawnies, 192 Trematon, 193 Trenewith,
661 e Trent a riveret, 213 Trent a river. 547 Treutham a Monastery, 583
Treshams a family, 509 c Trevilions, 196 b Triadum, a British book, 33 Tribet,
29 Tribunals or Courts of Justice in England, 177 Tribunitian auctority, 101
Trihine what it was, 159 Trimarcia, 18 Tripetia, 20 Trophee in Cornwall, 188
Trubridge, 244 e True-place, 802 a Trusbut, 540 e Tuddington, 401 f Tufa a
Banner, 195 Tuisco the Saxons stock-father, 135 Tuisday, ibid. Tunbridge why so
called, 330 a Tunstall a worthy Prelate, 744 d Turbervelis, or de Turbida
villa, 213 e Turbevils a family, 643 e Turkil a Coward, 464 e Turkils of Arden,
565 d Turkil the Dane, 500 b Tirold Abbot of Peterborough, 513 a Turton
Chapel and tower, 745 Turpins Knights, 517 Turets a family, 594 e Turvy, 399
b Tuscets or Touchets Barons Audeley, 609 a Tutbury Castle, 587 f Twede the
river, 814 e Twifford, 813 c Twinamburue, 259 c Tyrants in Britain, 23 Tzetzes
a fabulous Greek writer, 32
V
VAle a river, 189 Vale, 393 b Vale of Ailesbury, 395 c Vale Royal, 608 d
Vallachians why so called, 11 Valle Crucis, 677 a Valect what he is, 663. a
worshipful title, 713 c Valoinois a family, 465 f Valtorts, 193 Valvasores,
168 Vandals and Burgundians in Britain, 114 Vandals brought into Britain by
Probus, 71 Vandelberia, 489 d Vargae, 19 Varia what it signifies, 679 c Vaulx
Barons, 786 b. 510 Ubbanford, 816 b Uchel, 21.190 Vectius Bolanus, 53 Venables
Barons of Kindreton, 609 b Vandraeth Vehan, a river, 649 Venedocia, 659 f
Venutius a Potentate of Britain. 48 Venutius warreth upon his wife
Cartismandua, 53 Verannius Propretor in Britain, 49 Verbeia, the river Wherfe,
and a Goddess. 697 Veres Earls of Oxford, 389 d Vere the good Earl, 390 b
Vere Earl of Oxford became a Monk, 450 d Vere, 202 f Vere Earl of Oxford and
Marquess of Dublin, Verdons a family, 517 f. 620 b Veriad, 19 Vernaies
Knights, 565 a Vernons a family, 567 a Verulam or Verlam City in old time, 408
f Vesey, Barons, 722 c. near to Saint Albons, Verulam Tribute, 409 c Vespasian
his acts in Britain, 41 42 Uffa, 458 a Ufkins, ibid. Ufford a town, 465 c
Valentinian an Arrian, 83 Valentine a rebel in Britain suppressed, 80 Ufford
Earl of Suffolk, 465 c Uffords, 813 b Vicarius or Vicegerent in Britan, 76
Vicounts, what title of Honor, 167 Vicount of Honor who was first in England,
521 e Victor the son of Maximus slain, 83 Victorina, 271 b Victorinus a
commendable governor under Honorius in Britain. 85 Victory what names it
has in diverse languages. 457 e Vecturiones who so called. 117 Vellocatus
Costrell to Venutius marieth his wife, 53 Victrix, a Legion, 604 c Vies, 244 a
Villa forinseca what it is, 391 e Villiers a family, 523 a Vineyards in
Britain, 71 The Vine, 269 d Vines in England, ibid. e Vinyards in
Glocestershire, 357 f Vincents Rock, 239 a Virius Lupus Propretor, 69 Virgins
eleven thousand Martyrs, 197 a. 286 c Visigothi, 294 c Visi Saxones, ibid.
Viscounts a family, Vitsan, 347 d Vitrum, 19 Viterinus, 691 d Ulpius Marcellus
a brave warrior, 66. his vigilance and temperance, ibid. Ulphus his horn, 704
e Ulse a lake, 776 c Ulstley, 773 a Ulysses whether ever in Britain, 32
Ulyssippo, that is, Lisbon whence it took name, 32 Ulverston, 755 c Umfranvils
a family, 806 b. 535 University College in Oxford, 381 c University, a
public school, 381 b Unstrote a river, 138 Voisy Bishop of Excester, 567
Vortigern the last Monarch of British blood, and the bane of his country, 624
b. burnt with Lightning, ibid. Vortigerne alias Gourtigern sends for Saxons,
128 Vortimer a valiant Britain where buried, 538 e Uppingham, 525 e Upton, 577
Vortiporius a Tyrant of the Dimetae, 113 Ursula, an holy Virgin, 197 Ursus de
Abtot, 570. Sheriff of Worcestershire, 578 e Usa, or Isa, that is, Ouse a
river, 296 Usipians their venturous and memorable fact, 57 Uske a river, 628 a
Uske a town, 636 c Utcester, 587 e Uther Pendragon, 195. why so called, 410
Uxbridge, 419 ^
W
WAda a Saxon Duke, 719 b Wadensbourg, 241 d Wadham, 382 a Wahul, Woodhil, or
Odill, 399 c Barons de Wahul, ibid.
Wakes Barons Wake and Estotevill, 202 d. 407, 533 a Wakes of Blisworth, 533 b
Wakefield, 693 d Wakeman of Rippon, 700 d Wainfleete in Lincolne-shire, 542 b
Wales, 615 c, d. 22. annexed and united to the Crown of England, 114 Walch, 22
Walcher Bishop of Durham slain in a Commotion, 743 d Wall by Lichfield, 582 e
Wall of Turfe between Edinburgh Frith and Cluid, 86 Walls end, 811 b Wall of
stone built in Britain, 86 Wallbery, 453 d Walbrooke in London, 423 a Walbeofs
a family, 628 e Walden, 452 b Walde of Earl of Northampton and of Huntingdon,
502 c 515 c. his disloyal treachery, ibid.
Walleran Earl of Mellent, and first Earl of Worcester, 579 a Wallers, 330 e
Wallerond, 618 a Walfleot Oisters, 444 d Walli, Wallon, 22.113 Wallingford, 281
d Wallop or Welhope, a place, 262 Wallops a family, ibid. b Wallot Isle, 443 c
Walmesford bridge, 511 d Walnut-tree at Glastenburie, 227 Walney an Island, 755
c Walpole, 481 b Walshal, 581 f Walsh, a family, 364 Walsh, what it signifies,
113 Walsingham, 470 c Walsingham a town, 479 c Walsingham Knights, ibid.
Walter de Hemingford, 721 Walter, 752 f Walter Espec, 709 d Waltham Cross, 437
d Waltham Forest, 439 c Waltham Abbey or Waltham Cross a town, 439 c Walton
in Darbyshire, 556 b Walton a place and family, 572 Walwick, 802 a Walwort a
herb called Danes-blood, 452 b Wandlesworth, 303 a Wandle a river, 287 f
Wansdike, 241 d Wantage, 281 a Wantsum, or Wentfar a riveret, 473 c. see stour
in kent Ware a town, 407 c Wapentakes, what they be, 159 Ware a Priest and
Baron of the Parliament, 746 a Wests, Barons de la Ware, 312 Warburgton a
place, and family, 610 b Wards, 179 Wardens of the Marches, 799 b Warden of
the Cinque ports, 325 b Wardon, 401 c Wardon Hundred in Northamptonshire, 507 b
Wardour a Castle, 246 a Ward-staff. 440 c Warham town, 213 c Warkworth, 813 a
Warington, 748 b Warnford, 269 a War civil between York and Lancaster
determined in the death of Edward the young Earl of Warwick, 570 Warwast, 201
c Warwickshire, 561 Warwick town, 562 f Warwick Earls, 569 f Warwick in
Cumberland, 778 a Wash a river, or Guash, 525 e Washes a dangerous arm of the
Sea, 480 d Washburnes, villages and families, 577 d Wastes, 806 a Waterfall, 730
c Water divided, 399 c Water Germander. See Scordium, Watford, 415 a
Watchtower erected by C. Caligula, 40 Watlesbury, 592 f Watling-street
highway, 64 Watling-street a town, 593 Waveney, a river, 467 d Waver a river,
773 b Wauburn, 479 a Wauburnham, ibid. Weably, 620 b Weably Ale, ibid. Weald in
Kent, 329 d Wear a town, 205 c Wears the Decay of Excester haven, 205 c
Weddesborrow, 581 f Wedensday, 135 Weedon in the Street, 508 c Weimouth, 211 b
Well ebbing and flowing, 558 c Wells medicinable, 497 d Welsh Poole a town,
662 b Wells Barons, 541 e. 542 b Wells vicount, 542 Wells the City, 223 d
Welland river, 505 b Welledon, 514 d Welhop a riveret, 738 c Wellingborow, 509
f Wenlock, 591 e Wemme, 594 c Wenmans, a family, 384 a Went a river, 690 f
Wentsbeck a river, 812 b Wentsdale, 727 e Wentworth a place, and family, 689 e
Wentworths Barons, 463 c Weorth what it signifies, 582 Were a river, 738
Werburga or Warburga an holy virgin, 508 c. 583 Werburgs Church in Chester, 605
Werith, what color, 26 Work Castle, 815 a Werlam or Verlam City in great
distress, 51 Werlam-street, 64 Werminster, 245 c Werywall, 754 d Wests Barons
de la Ware, 312 d 746 b Westminster, sometime Thorney, 428 e Westminster
Church, 428 f Monuments therein, 429 f Westminster hall, 431 e Westmorland, 759
Westmorland Earls, 763 d Westriding, 489 d West Saxons bring the Heptarchie to
a Monarchy, 138 West^ sexenlage, 153. 159 West Saxons kingdom, 294 c West
wales, 647 b West weals, 184 Wetherby, 699 a Wetherill, 778 a Wever a river,
601 e Wever an hill, 586 f Wey river, 294 e Whaddon, 396 d Wiatts a family, 331
e Wiat his unfortunate end, ibid. e Wic what it signifies, 326.355 Wiceii, 354
f. 573 d Wiches, that is, Salt pits, 573 b Which a town, 575 b Which wood
forest, 374 b Which a learned Canonist, 575 a Wichliff died, 517 f Wickham
Bishop of Winchester, 265 e. his praise, 266 c. d his equivocant mot, 288 d
Wicombe, or wickham a town, 393 d Widdevile or Woodvill a family, 506 c
Widdevill Lord Rivers, ibid. d Earl Rivers, ibid. High Constable of England,
ibid. etc. beheaded, ibid. e
Widdevill, Earls rivers, 405 e Wie river, 358 e. 618 a A wife demised to
another, 312 f Wigenhall, 481 b Wight Isle, 273 c. etc. why so called, ibid.
the Lords thereof, 276 c. d
Wiggin, 749 c Wigmore, 619 c Wigton, 774 b Wilberhams or Wilburhams a family,
607 d Wilberham, 490 b A wild man caught in the Sea, 466 a Wilfride Bishop, 275
d. 308 c Wilfride Archbishop of York 700 c Wilfreeds Needle, ibid. c
Willebrode a learned Englishman, 137 Willey or Willeley, 591 d a river and
village, 245 e. 246
Wharton Castle, 701 d Wheallep Castle, 701 d Wheathamsted, 406 e John of
Wheathamsted, ibid. f Wherfe the river, 696 d. why so called, ibid. f
Whetstons, 339 c Whitehart forest, 213 f whereupon so called, 214 a
Whitehart silver, ibid. Whitchurch in Shropshire, 598 Whitgaraburge, 275 c
Whitgift Archbishop of Caterbury, 542 d. his good deeds, 302 b Whitby, 718 b
White Hall the Kings house, 432 Whitham, 446 b Whitehorse vale, 279 c Whitney a
place and family, 618 Whitsan, 348 b White spurs, 176 Whittington, 598 b
Whorwel, 262 a William of Newborough, 8 William or Wilcock of Mouthwy 665
William of York, 695 c William of Malmesbury, 242 f William Long-Espee, 145,
249 d slain near Damiata, 249 e
William the Bastard, or Conqueror, 145. his title to the crown, ibid. where
he landed, 316 e. invadeth England, 145 he fought with King Harald, ibid. f.
sworn to keep all the ancient laws of England, 414 c. is inaugurated King,
152 disavoweth his title and Conquest, 152. his behavior presently upon
victory, 152. his seal, ibid. he enacteth excellent laws, 153 His policy to
root out and weaken the English, 152 Williams of Tame, 384 a Willibourne a
river, 245 d Willimots wicke, 801 e Willoford, 785 c Willoughby frozen to death
in a voyage, 555 d Willoughbyes Barons of Brook, 244 c. 577 b Willoughbies
Barons, 465.541 e Willoughby of Parrham, 543 d Willoughby earl of Vandosme, 54r
Willoughby knight, 547 c Wilshire, 241 Wilshire Earls, 256 d. e Wilton a
town, 246 c Wilton Castle, 621 a. 721 a Wimundham or windham, 473 d Wimundham
in Leicestersh, 522 Wimondly, 406 c Winander mere, 755 b Winburne what it
signifies, 216 a Winburne minster, 215 e Wincaunton, 221 d Winchelcombe town
and Abbay, 365 d Winchelsey, 319 b Winchel. See Ore, Old Winchester, 809 e. 269
a Winchester, 262 Winchester bishops, 265 e Winchester tower in windsor Castle,
288 d Winchester Earls and Marquesses, 267 b. d Winchindon, 395 f Windesor
Barons, 289 a. 320 ^ Windesors a family, 419 c Windesor town, 286 d. e Windsor
Castle, 288 d Windlesor forest, 293 b Windrush river, 374 a Wingfeld in
Darbyshire, 555 e Winfeilds Knights, 512 a Winifride a learned Englishman, 137.
the Apostle of Germany, 203. d Winkles or cockles on Hil-tops, 727 c Winster a
river, 760 a Winterton a Cape, 478 d Winwidfield, 694 e Winwicke, 748 b Wipped
fleet, 340 a Wire a river, 753 a Wire-dale, ibid. Wirkington, 769 Wirral, 601
e. 606 d Wiske a river, 723 e Withburga a Saint, 482 a Witherington or
Woderington a castle and name of a martial family, 812 e Wittlesmere, 500 d
Witton a Castle, 738 c Wiza a riveret, 773 b Wye a town in Kent, 335 d Woad,
19 Woburn, 401 e Woden, 241 d Woden a Saxons god, 135 Woderington. See
Witherington, Would in Leicestershire, 523. a Wollaton, 547 Woodvil. See Widvil,
Wolpher a Pagan King kills his two sons, 583. became a Christian, 512. d
Wolsey Cardinal a Butchers son, 469 c Wollover, 815 c Wolstane Bishop of
Worcester canonized a Saint. 576 d Wolvehunts a family, 556 d Wolverton a town
and family, 397 Wolves destroyed, 665 Wondy, 634 c Woodbridge, 465 d Wooden,
how pourtraied, 135 Woodhall, 407 Woodham Walters, 446 b Woodland a part of
Warwickshire, 561 b Woodnoths, 607 e Woodstock, 375 d Wooton Basset, 242 a
Woodrising, 473 a Worcestershire, 573 Worcester, 575 c Worcester Earls, 578 f
Workensopl, 550 f Workesworth, 556 e World how it began to be peopled, 11
Wormhill, 556 d Wormleighton, 561 d Wormgay or Wrongey, 481 e Worsted a town,
478 c Worsted stuff whence so called, 478 c Wortley a place and family, 689
Wotton under Wever, 586 Wottons a family, and Baron Wotton of Merlay, 331 a
Wotton under Edge, 364 c Woulds what they be, 364 ^ Wragby, 540 e Wreke a
river, 517 b Wreken a river in Leicestershire, 522 c Wreken an hill, 593 d
Wreshill castle, 710 a Wrexham, 677 b Wriothesleys or Writhosleies, Earls of
Southamton, 273 a Wringcheese, 19^ Writtle, a large parish, 445 e Wrotesley or
Wrothesley a place and family, 581 d Wroxcester, 593 b Wroxhall, 566 d Wulfrune
a devout woman, 581 Wulfrunes Hampton or Wulver Hampton, 581 e Wulpet, 463 f
Wyre forest, 573 e
X
X. No British letter, 97
Y
YAle, 676 e Yanesbury castle, 245 e Yardley Hasting, 509 e Yare, 721, a. a
river, 468 d Yarmouth, 476 f Yeomen, 177 Yeverin, 815 d Y-kil what it
signifies, 714 a Yorkes would, 709 b York City, 701 Yorkshire, ibid. York
Earls and Dukes, 724 e Iron Mines and works, 306 d Ystwith, 658 a Yvo Ellas,
675 c Yvor Bach, 642 e
Z
ZOuches, 201 f. 202 c. whence descended, 519 a Zouches of Haringworth and
Ashby de la Zouch, 224 e Zouch Mortimer, 514 a Zouch killed in Westminster
hall, 519 b Zythum, 20
THE NAMES OF SEVERAL Nations, Cities, and great Towns, Rivers, Promontories
or Capes, etc. of Britain in old time; such as Caesar, Tacitus, Ptolemaeus,
Antoninus, Notitia Provinciarum, and other Authors, have made mention of:
together with the later and modern names.
A ABallaba, Appleby in Westmorland. 761 Abone, Avington or Aventon in
Glocestershire. 358 Abus aestuarium, Humber in Yorkshire. 710 Aesica, Netherby
upon Eske in Cumberland. 781 Ad Ansam, Near Coggeshall in Essex. 449 Ad
Pontem, Paunton in Lincolnshire. 537 Adurni Portus, Ederington. 313 Agelocum.
Little borrough upon Trent. 549 Alone, Whitley in Northumberland. 794 Alannius
flu. Avon in Wiltshire. 243 Alaunus flu. Alne in Northumberland. 813
Amboglanna, Ambleside, happily. 760 Ancalites, The Hundred of Henley. 389 Amnitum
vel Samnitum Insulae, Isles upon the West coasts of Britain in France, 221. p.
2 Andates Lucus, Anderida, Newenden in Kent. 351 Angli, sive Anglo-Saxones,
Englishmen or English-Saxons. 127 Antona sive Aufona, Aufon. 507.508
Antivestaeum, The Cape of Cornwall. 187 Aquae Solis, Bath in Somersetshire. 233
Arbeia, Ierby. 769 Ariconium, Kenchester near Hereford. 618 Atacoti, or
Attacotti, 127 Atrebatii, or Attrebatii, Barkshire. 278 Augusta, See Londinum.
Axelodunum. Hexham in Northumberland. 807 B BAdiza, Bath. 233 Bannavenna, or
Bannaventa, Weedon on the street. 508 Belerium, The same that Antivestaeum.
Belgae, Sommersetshire, Wilshire, and Hantshire. 219 Bellisama flu. Rhibell in
Lancashire. 749 Bennones, High-Crosse. 518 Bibroci, The Hundred of Bray in
Barkshire. 289 Binovium, Binchester. 738 Blatum Bulgium, Bulnesse in
Cumberland. 775 Blestium, Old town in Herefordshire. 787.617 Bonium, Banchor
in Flitshire. 602.681 Bononia, Bollonge in France. 349 Borcovicus, Borwick in
Northumberland. 809 Brannodunum, Brancerster in Norfolk. 488 Bremenium,
Brampton in Northumberland. 803 Brementuracum, Brampton in Cumberland. 783
Brementonacum, Overborrow in Lancashire. 753 Brigantes, Yorkshire, Lancashire,
B. of Durham, Westmorland, Cumberland. 685 Brovonacum, Brougham. 762 Bullaeum,
Buelth in Brecknocshire. 627 Burrium, Uske in Monmouthshire. 636 C
CAesarromagus, Near Brentwood in Essex, forte. 442 Calcaria, Tadcaster in
Yorkshire. 696 Callena, See Gallena. Camboritum, Cambridge. 486 Camalodunum,
Maldon. 446 Camundolunum, See Cambodunum. Cambodunum, Ruins near Aldmondbury
in Yorkshire. 692 Calagum, See Galacum. Canonium, Chensford in Essex. 445
Cantum, Kent. 324 Cantium Promontorium, The foreland of Kent. 342 Cangi, 231
Castra Exploratorum, Burgh upon Sands. 773 Castra Constantia, Constance in
Normandy. 224 Cassii, The hundred of Caishow in Hertfordshire. 395
Cassiterides, The Isles of Sylly. 227 Caturactonium, Cataricke in Yorkshire.
730 Cartieuchlani, Buckingham, Bedford, and Hertfordshires. 391 Causennae, See
Gausennae. Cenio flu. The river by Tregeny in Cornwall. 190 Ceni-magni, See
Iceni. Cilurnum, Collerford in Northumberland. 806 Clausentum, South hanton.
261 Clevum, Gloucester. 360 Coccium, Riblechester in Lancashire. 752 Colonia,
Colchester in Essex. 450 Candate, Congleton in Cheshire. 608 Concangii, Baronie
of Kendale. 759 Condercum, Chester upon the street in the Bishopric of
Durham. 742 Combretonium, Brettenham in Suffolk. 463 Conovius flu. The river
Conway in Wales. 669 Conovium urbs, Caer hean upon Conway in Caernarvonshire.
ibid. Convennos insula, Convey at the Tamis mouth. 441 Congavata, A place upon
Caudbecke in Cumberland. 778 Corinium, Circester or Cirencester in
Glocestershire. 366 Coritani, Northamptonshire, Leicestershire, Rutlandshire,
Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, Darbyshire. 504 Cornavii, Warwickshire,
Worcestershire, Staffordshire, Shropshire, and Cheshire. 560 Corstopitum,
Morpit in Northumberland, forte. 808 Cossini, 833 Croco-calana, Ancaster in
Lincolnshire. 537 Cunetio, Marlborow or Kenet in Wiltshire. 255 Curia,
Corebridge in Northumberland. 808 D DAnmonii, Cornwall and Denshire. 183
Danmoniorum Promontorium, The Lizard in Cornwall. 189 Danum, Dancaster in
Yorkshire. 690 Delgovitia, Godmundham in Yorkshire, 711 Derventio, Auldby upon
Derwent in Yorkshire. 709 Deva flu. Dee in Cheshire. Devana sive Deva urbs,
Chester or West-chester. 604 Dictum, Diganwey. 669 Dimetae, Westwales,
Caermardinshire, Penbrochshire, and Cardiganshire. 647 Dobuni, sive Boduni,
Glocestershire and Oxfordshire. 354 Dorobernia, See Dorovernum. Dubris, Dover.
344 Dunum sinus, The Creek at Dunesby near whitby in Yorkshire. 718
Ducornovia, See Corinium. Durotriges, Dorsetshire. 209 Dur-co-brivae, Redborn.
413 Durnium, See Durnovaria. Durobrivae, Caster near Wandlesworth in
Huntingdonshire. 501 Durnovaria, Dorcester. 212 Durobrovae, Rochester. 332
Durolenum, Leneham in Kent. 331 Durolitum, Old foord upon Lee in Essex. 439
Durosiponte, Gormonchester, 498 Durovernum, Canterbury, 336 E EBoracum, York.
701 Epiacum, Papcastle in Cumberland. 768 Etoletum, The Wall in Staffordshire.
587 Extensio Promont. Easton Nesse in Suffolk. 467 F Fretum Britannicum, The
straight of Callis. 345 G GAbranto vicorum portuosus sinus. Sureby in
Yorkshire, 114 Gabrocentum, Gateshead in the Bishopric of Durham. 743.818
Gallatum, Whealp-Castle in Westmorland. 762 Gallana, Walle-wic. 802 Gallena,
Wallingford. 761 Ganganorum Promont. Lheyn in Caernarvonshire. 668 Garianonum,
Yarmouth. 477 Garienis flu. Yare river in Norfolk. 476 Gausennnae,
Brig-Casterton upon Wash. 534 Genunia, Northwales. 660 Glannoventa, Upon
Wentsbeck in Northumberland. 812 Glessariae, 220 Glevum, Gloucester. 366
Gobannium, Abergevenny. 635 Gessoriacum, See Bononia. H HErculis Promont. Herty
point in Denshire. 207 Hunnum, Sevenshale in Northumberland. 801 I JAmesa, See
Tamesis. Iceni, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridgshire, and Huntingdonshire, 456
Icianos, Icborrow in Norfolk. 482 Idumanus flu. Blackewater river in Essex.
448 Isannavaria, See Banavenna, for they seem to be the same. Isca flu. Ex
river in Denshire. 203 Isca Danmoniorum, Excester. ibid. Isca, Legio Augusta,
Caer Lheon in Monmouthshire. 636 Iscalis, Ivelcester. 221 Isurium, Aldburge in
Yorkshire. 701 Jugantes, whom Tacitus mentions; I wot not who they be,
unless they were the Cantiani, that is, Kentishmen, whom the Welsh Britans
were wont in their language to call Y-Gant. And yet it may seem as probable,
to read Brigantes, for Jugantes. 688 Itium Galliae, Vitsan. 348 Ituna flu. Eden
river in Cumberland. 760.776 L LActodurum, sive Lactorodum, Stony-Stratford.
397 Lagecium, vel Legeolium, Castleford near Pontfreit. 695 Legio 11. Augusta,
See Isca. Legio 11. Victrix, See Eboracum. Legio xx. Victrix, See Deva.
Lavatres, Bows upon Stanemore. 731 Leucarum, Loghor in Southwales. 646 Littus
Saxonicum, East and South coast. 325 Lemanis, Limehill or lime in Kent. 349
Lindum, Lincoln. 538 Londinum, London. 421 Longovicum, Lanchester. 754
Luguvallum, Carlisle. 778 Loventium, Leveny in Brecknocshire. 628 M MAdus,
Maidston in Kent. 330 Magi, Old Radnor. 623 Maglona, Maclenith in
Montgomerishire. 661 Magna, Chester in the Wall near Haltwessell. 800.801
Magnus Portus, Portesmouth, or Portchester. 268 Maleos, Mula among the Western
Isles. 215 Mancunium, Manchester in Lancashire. 746 Mandevessedum, Mancester in
Warwickeshire. 569 Magni, See Magi. Mediolanum, Lhan Vellin in Montgomerishire.
662 Magioninium, Dunstable. 402 Meatae, Northumberland. 796 Margid unum, Near
Bever-Castle. 536 Mena, Meneg in Cornwall. 186 Metaris aest. The Washes
between Lincolnshire and Norfolk. 480 Mictis, See Vesta. Morbium, Morsby in
Cumberland. 766 Maridunum, Caermarden. 649 Moridunum, Seaton in Devonshire. 206
Moricambe aest. The Bay of Caerdronack. 773 Morini, Morinorum Portus
Britannicus, N. NIdus, Neath in Glamorganshire. 645 Neomagus, sive Noviomagus.
Woodcote near Croyden in Surrey, 302 Novus portus, See Lemanis. T OCtopitarum
prom. S. David's head in Penbrockshire. 653 Ocellum prom. Kelnsey in Yorkshire.
714 Olicana, Ilkeley in Yorkshire. 697 Olenacum, Elenborrow in Cumberland. 778
Ocrinum, See Danmonium. Ordovices, Northwales. 615.659 Ostidamnii, 183
Ottadini, Northumberland. 796 Othona, Ithan-cester in Essex. 443 P PArisi pop.
Holdernesse in Yorkshire. 709 Pennocrucium, Penkridge in Staffordshire. 583
Pettuaria, Beverley. 711 Petrianae, Some place near Peterill in Cumberland.
777 Picti, The Picts. 114 Praesidium, Warwick. 563 Praetorium, Patrington in
Yorkshire. 713 Pontes, Colebrook in Buckinghamshire. 394 Pons Aelii, Pont-eland
in Northumberland. 809 Procolitia, Coleceaster in Northumberland. 808 R RAtae,
Leicester. 519 Ratostibius flu. Taf in Glamorganshire. 642 Regni pop. Surrey,
Sussex, and the sea coasts of Hantshire. 295 Regnum, Ringwood in Hantshire. 259
Regulbium, Reculver in Kent. 335 Ribodunum, Riblechester. 752 Rhutupiae,
Richborrow near Sandwich. 340 Ru^unium, Routon in Shropshire. 592 S SAbrina
flu. Severn. 661 Salenae, Salndy in Bedfordshire. 401 Segodunum, Seton in
Northumberland. 811 Segontium, Caer Seiont near Caernarvon. 66 Segontiaci, In
Hantshire. 26 Setantiorum Palus, Winandermer. 119 Scoti, Scots. 684 Seteia
aestuar. pro Deia, Deemouth. 604 Segelocum, See Agelocum. Silures, Southwales.
615 Sitomagus, Theiford in Norfolk. 471 Simeni, See Iceni. Sinus salutaris,
See Gabrantovicorum. Sorbiodunum, Old Sarisbury. 246 Spinae, Spene near
Newbury. 283 Stuccia flu. Istuyth in Cardig anshire. 658 Sulloniacae, Brockley
hill near Ellestrey. 415 T TAmarus flu. Tamar. 196 Tamara, Tamarton. ibid.
Tamisis, Tamis, or Teamis. 384 Tanatos, Tanet. 339 Tesis flu. Tese. 736 Tina
flu. Tine in Northumberland. 799 Toisobios, See Conovius. Tobius flu. Tovy in
Wales. 649 Toliatis, Shepey. 333 Trajectus, Passage near Aust. 358.363
Trinobantes, Midlesex, and Essex. 417 Tripontium, Torcester. 505 Trisantonis
Portus, Southanton. 260 Tucsis, Berwick upon Twede. 816 Tuerobius flu. Tivie in
Wales. 657 Tunocellum, Tin mouth. 811 Trutulensis Portus, See Rhutupia, Tacitus
named Trutulensis, for Rutupensis: as B. Rhenanus supposes. V VAgniacae,
Maidstone. 330 Valentia, 797 Vallum, The Picts Wall. 789 Varis, Bod-vary in
Flintshire. 679 Viroconium, Wroxcester. 593 Vedra flu. Were in the B. of
Duresme. 738 Veneti, Guineth, or Northwales. 660 Venta Belgarum, Wintchester.
263 Venta Icenorum, Caster near Norwich. 473 Venta Silurum, Caer Went in
Monmouthshire. 633 Vennones, High-Crosse. 518 Verlucio, Werminster. 245
Verometum, Burrow hill in Leicestershire. 522 Verolamium, Verulam near S.
Albons. 408 Verterae, Burgh upon Stanemore. 760 Uzella aestuar. Ivel-mouth. 221
Viconia, See Vinovium. Vinonium aut Binonium, Binchester in the Bishopric of
Duresme. 738 Villa Faustini, S. Edmunds Bury. 459 Vindelis, Happily, old
Winchelsey. 319 Vindobala, See Vindomora. 776 Vindomora, Wallesend in
Northumberland. 811 Vindonum, Silceaster. 270 Vindolana, Winchester in the
wall. 809 Vindogladia, Winburne in Dorsetshire. 215 Virecium, Wroxester in
Shropshire. 593 Virosidum, Werewic upon Eden near Carlisle. 778 Voluba,
Volemouth. 189 Voreda, Old Perith. 776 Usocona, Oken yate. 593 Uzella,
Lost-Uthiel. 190.221.225

A Table or Index to Scotland.
A
ABerbroth or Arbroth, 44 c Abercorn, 15 d Abercornor Abercuyning, 28 d
Abereorneth, ibid. d Aberdon new and old, 46 c Ab-Thanes, 7 d Adain what it
signifies, 13 f Air a Sherifdome, 20 c Ainza, 49 b Albainy, 39 a Dukes
thereof, ibid. b
Albinich, who they be, 39 e Alclith, 37 c Al-cluid, 25 a Alectum, 43 c
Alexander Duke of Albanie, killed, 39 c Amber, 48 b. name thereof, ibid. c
Amund, or Almund a river, 40 Andrews an Archbishopric, 7 a Andrews, 32 f
Anguis or Angus, 43 a Earls thereof, 45 a
Annan a river, 16 d Annandale, ibid. Annandale a Territory, ibid. Apollo
Grannus, 13 e Aptera, 14 a Arbella Steward a learned and noble Lady, 26 a
Archibald Duglasse Earl of Anguis, 12 d Ar-Cluid what it is, 25 a Ardmanoch,
52 b Ardossan, 21 c Argathelia or Argile, 37 a Argile Earls, ibid. e Argetorix
a pety Prince, 32 b his wife how she answered Iulia the Empress, ibid. b
Argonauts, 38 c Armitage, 16 c Arran Isle, 22 a Arran Earls, 22 b Arrol, 42
e. Earls thereof, ibid. Arthurs Chair, 14 c Arthurs Oven, 28 f Assinshire, 52
a Athelstanford, 12 d Athol infamous for witches, 40 b Earls thereof, 40 c
John Earl of Athol hanged on high, 40 d Aubigni or Obigni Lords, 26 b Eberad
de Aubigni his devise and coat of Arms, 28 c
Aven a river, ibid. c Azur gotten, 22 e
B
BAclugh surnamed Scot, a family, 16 b Baileries or Bailiwickes, 7 c Baileries
and Ballives their original, 20 a Balmerinoch, an Abbey and Barony, 34 d
Bamff, 49 a Banbrich, a place, 34 d Banoc bourn, 30 a Bankquo, 51 d Bargeney,
or Berigonium, 19 e Barons, 7 e Bas, an Island, 12 f Bean Castle, 50 a Bears in
Britain, 30 f Bernswell, 54 d Berigonium Castle, 38 d Berth, 41 a Berubium, 54
d Berwicke Sheriffdome, 10 c.d Bissets, ^ kindred, 40 c Bitumen, 32 e
Black-knight, 41 a Black-nesse Castle, 15 e Bluidno a river, 18 c Boen, 49 a
Boides Barons, 21 c Borderers, their behavior, 18 a Borthwicke a Baronie, 13 b
Boschain, 44 f Bothwell Earls, 23 d Braid Albin, 39 a Brankensey, 16 b
Brechin, 44 c Brendanus, 22 c Brochty Crag, 43 b Brun-Albin, 39 b Bruses Lords
of Annandale, 16 e Brus discomfiteth the English, 30 b Buchanan, 29 a Beavis
Bulmer, 22 c Buquhan, 47 f Buquhan Earls, 48 d Buth, 22 c
C
CAer Guidi, 15 d Caer Laverocke, 17 e Caledonia in Scotland, 30 c used for all
Britain, 31 e
Caledonia in Epirus, 30 e Caledonian wood, 30 e. 40 c Caledonii whence they
took name, 30 d Castle Callendar, 29 b Cambels a family, 22 f Cambel Castle
and Barony, 37 e Camelot, 29 a Candida Casa, 18 f Cantire, 38 a Cardines a
fort, 18 e Carrict a Baillery, 20 a. 19 e Carric^t Earls, 20 a Carron a
riveret, 28 c Cassile a Castle, 19 f Carthcart a river, 24 b Cathanesse, 53 d
Cathnesse Earls, ibid. Cathcart a Baron, 24 b Craufords a family, 20 f
Celurca, that is, Mont-Ross, 44 Cerones, 52 e Chanonry, ibid. d Clackmans a
Sheriffdome, 32 Claick-geese, 48 b Clannes, 39 f Clan Haton, 35 c Clan mack
Duff, ibid. c Clan Ranalds a bloody generation, 52 c Cluid, what it signifies,
25 a Cluid a river, 23 Cluidsdale, 22 d Clydsforth or Cluydforth, 18 c Cockeram
of a Mason became Earl of Mar, 47 d Cole plot, 32 e Coldingham, 10 e. College
of Justice, 8 d Columban, 38 e Combat between Sir James Lindesey and Baron
Wels, 22 f Comin or Cumen, a mighty family, 36 e Comin a mighty man murdered by
Robert Brus, 17 d Commissariats, 8 f Commissioners, ibid. b Commons, 7 f
Constablery, 6 e Constables of Scotland, 19 c Corneth a river, 28 d County, the
same that Sheriffdome, 6 d County Courts, 8 e Courts Civil, ibid. f Courts of
criminal causes, 9 a Crauford Moore, 22 e Crauford Castle and Earlededom, 22 e
Creightons a family, 17 c Cromarty, 52 d Cromer, ibid. e Cross, 14 c
Cruickston, 24 b Culros, a Barony, 32 d Cumbernald, 29 c Cuningham a town, 21
a Cuninghams a numerous family, 21 f. their coat of Arms, ibid. Cuninghams
Earls of Glencarn, 17 e. 21 f Cupre, 34 b
D
DAl, 37 c Dalkeith, 13 b Dalrea, 37 c Dalrendini, ibid. Dalrieta, 37 d Darly
Lords, 24 b L. Darly husband to Mary Queen of Scots, 22 c David heir to the
Crown of Scotland, famished, 39 c David the first King of Scotland a religous
Prince, 10 e Days longest, 54 b Dee a river, 18 e. 46 a Depth of the sea, 52 c
Dessie a french Captain, 12 a Dicalidonis, 5 a. 30 c Disert, 32 e Diocesses
first set out by Dionysius Bishop of Rome, 65 Donald of the Isles, 53 a Done a
river, 46 a Dornock, 53 e Douglasse. See Duglasse. Dromund Barons, 36 a. Women
of that race right beautiful, ibid. Drum Albin, 39 b Drimem Castle, 36 a
Drumlanrig, 17 d Duff a King murdered, 49 f Duglasse or Douglasse a river, 23 a
Duglas dale, ibid. Duglasse Castle, ibid. a Duglasse a noble and ancient
family, ibid. a. their arms, ibid. b Duglasse Earls of Angus, 36 c. Duglasse
Earls of Morton, 17 d Duglasse a fast friend unto King Rob. Brus, 23 a
Duglasse Earl of Wigton, Duke of Tourain, 23 b Duke a title, when first
brought into Scotland, 7 e Dun a river, 19 f Dunbarre, 11 c Dunbarton
Sheriffdome, 25 c Dunblan a Bishopric, 36 ^ Dunbritton or Dunbarton, 25 a
Dunbritaine frith, 18 c Duncaves bay, 54 d Dun Dee, 43 c Dunfermling, 32 d
Dunfermling Earl, 32 d Dunfreis, 17 d Duni pacis what they be, 28 e Dunkelden,
41 a Dunotyr Castle, 45 d Dunnur a Castle, 20 a Dunsby, 54 d Dunstafag, 38 d
Duplin Castle, 36 b Dyrlton, 12 e
E
EBba Prioresse of Coldingham Nunnery, 10 f. Her chastity and her Nuns ib.
daughter of Edelfrid king of Northhumberland, 11 a Saint Ebbes promontory,
ibid. a Eden or Ethan a river, Edenburough, 13 f Edenburough Frith, ibid.
Eglington a Castle and family, 21 d Elfeing ston a Barony, 29 c Elgina, 49 e
John Eriskin earl of Mar. 47 e Th. Ereskin, Baron of Dyrlton, Vicount Felton:
first Vicount in Scotland, 12 e Ern a noble river, 35 f Esk a river, 13 b
Esterlings, 29 d
F
FAlkland, 34 Fast-castle, 10 f Fergus, 39 b Fergus Lord or Prince of Galloway,
19 b. His Arms, ibid. c became a Chanon, ibid. Fernhersts a Barony, 10 b
Fleanch the Son of Banquo, 51 e Fl^et a river, 18 e Flemings, Barons, 29 c
John Lord Fleming Earl of Wigton, 18 e Fife, 32 c Fif-Nesse, ibid. f Fife
Earls their privilege, 35 Forces, 49 e Forbois Barons, 46 b Fordon, 45 e John
de Fordon, ibid. Forth or Frith, 12 e Fresian sea, ibid.
G
GAlgac or Galauc, 31 f Galloway, 18 Galloway Ecles, ibid. Galloway nagges,
ibid. Galloway Princes and Lords, 19 b Gentlemen, 7 f George of Dunbarre Earl
of Merch, 11 b Girnego, 53 d Glamys, a Baron, 43 b Glasco an Archbishopricke, 7
Glasco an University and Archbishops See, 23 d Glencarn, 17 e Glines, 38
Glotta, See Arran, 22 Gordons Earls of Huntly, 49 Gospatrick, Earl of
Northumberland, 11 b Goury a Country, 42 c Gouryes conspiracy, 12 b Grahams
dike, 28 d Granni, what they are, 13 e Grantzbain or Gramphil, 30 e Greies of
Chillingham, 43 c Guith what it signifies, 15 d
H
HAdinne or Hadington, 12 Vicount Hadington, ibid. Haies Earls of Aroll, ibid.
Haies family almost extinguished, 36 b Haliburtons a family, 12 e Haskhead, 24
b Hamilton Castle, 23 c. a family, ibid. their original, ibid. James Hamilton
Earl of Abercorn, 15 d Hamilton of Peyle, ibid. e James Hamilton Regent of
Scotland, and Duke of Chasteau, Herald in Poicton, 23 d John Marquess of
Hamilton, 23 Hay a strong and valiant man, 42 e Hector Boethius, an Elegant
Hitoriographer, 43 d Height of Hills, 52 c Hellan Leneoc, 22 c Hellan Tinoc,
ibid c Hepburnes a family, 16 b Earls of Bothwell, ibid. 23 d
Herris Baron, 17 e Hii an Island, 38 e Highlandmen, 39 e. their description,
ibid. Holy Ruid house, 14 c Horesci a people, 16 c Henry Percy Hotspurre taken
prisoner by Montgomery, 21 d Howburn, 54 d Hume Castle, 10 d Humes a great and
noble family, 10 e Hume created Earl, ibid. e Hume Earl of Dunbarre, 11 f
Huntly Castle, 42 f
I
James the second, King of Scots untimely slain and much missed, 10 b James
the sixth, King of great Britain, 25 f Ied a river, 10 a Iedburgh, 9 f
I-comb-kil, 38 e Island floating, 24 e Inborow and Outborow, 11 b Inch-Chafra,
36 b Inch Keith an Island, 15 d Innerlothan, 50 b Innermeth, 36 b Innernes, 50 b
John's town, 41 c John Duke of Albany honored by the French, 39 d Iohnstons a
warlike family, 16 e Irwin a river, 21 b Irwin a borough, ibid. c Julius Hoff,
28 f
K
KAledon, 30 d Keiths a family ancient and noble, 45 a Kelso, 10 e Ken a river,
18 e Kennedies a noble family, 19 f Kennedie Earl of Cassile, ibid. Kerrs a
family, 10 b Kerr Baron, ibid. Kerr Earl of Lothien, 15 f Kilconath, 20 a
Kildrummi, 46 a Kile, 20 c Kilflos, 49 f Killian a river, 52 ^ Kilmarnocke, 21
b Kilmonorock, 24 f Kincardin, 36 e King of Scotland, 7 e Kinghorn Earl, 32 c
Kinlosse, 49 f Kinnadie, 37 d Kinrosse, 32 c Kirkbird, 36 c Kirkonbright, 18 ^
Knapdale, 38 c Knights solemnly dubbed, 7 e Kyle, See Kile.
L
LAdeni, 9 Lairds, 7 e Lanric a Sheriffdome, Largis, 21 d Lauden or Lothien, 11
d Lauther a riveret and town, 10 Leave a lake, 38 d Leeth a river, 15 ^
Lennox, 24 d Lennox Earls, 25 d Lennox Dukes, their Arms, 26 Lesley the noble
Knight, 52 f Leth an Haven town. 15 c Levin a river, 29 d Levinia, ibid. Levin
a lake and river, 32 e Levingstons Barons, 29 c Levingston first Earl of
Lithquo, 15 c Lin what it signifies, ibid. e Lindeseies a noble family, 22 f.
36 Lindum, 15 e Lions a family, 43 b Lithquo, or Linlithquo, 15 e Logh Aber a
lake, 38 d Logh Cure a lake, 17 c Logh Err a lake, 35 f Logh Fin, 38 a Logh
Kinkeram, 38 d Logh Lomund, 24 d. 36 e Logh Luthea or Louthea, 50 a Logh
Lothes, 51 d Logh Nesse, 50 a Logh Rhian, 19 b Lough Maban, 16 d Loghuabrie, 51
c Longas a river, 20 f Lough longus, 52 e Lords who they be, 7 e Lorgis slew
Henry the Second K. of France running at Tilt, 52 Lorn a family, 38 c Lorn,
ibid. Lovet Castle, 52 c Loxa or Loss a river, 49 e Lowland men, 5 c Loundoris
a Monastery and Barony, 34 d
M
MAc-Conels, 38 b Mac-Duff first Ea^le of Fife, 35 b Maden Castle, or Virgins
Castle, 14 c Mailross, 10 a Malcolm Canmor, 11 a Mar. 46 a. Earls, 47 c
Marchidun, 10 ^ Mareschals of Scotland, 45 e Q. Mary deposed by her base
brother James, 51 b Marquess a title, when first brought into Scotland, 7 e
Martha enamoured upon Robert Brus, made him her husband, 20 a Maxwell Earl of
Morton, 17 e Maxwels a family, 16 ^ Menteith, 36 d. Earls thereof, ibid. c
Merch or Mers, 10 d Merch Earls, 11 a Mernis, 45 d Methwen or Methven a
Barony, 42 b Metellan Baron Thirlestan, 10 Monks living upon their own hand
labor, 10 Montgomeries a family, 21 Monuments of stone, with their
inscriptions, 27.28 Montrosse, 44 c Montrosse Earls, 36 e Morton a place, 17 d
Mor wiridh, 12 e Mull of Galloway, 19 b Murdack executed, 35 d Murray, 49 c
Murrey Earls, 50 f Murth-lake, 46 Murscamp, 36 b Musselborow a town, 13 b
Musselborow field, ibid. c
N
NAbe a river, 53 f Napier a learned man, 13 c Nardin or Nan Sheriffdom, 50
Nesse mouth, 52 d Nesse a Lake, 38 d Newbottle a Monastery and Barony, 13 b
Nida river, 17 c Nidisdale, ibid. Nights shortest, 54 b Ninian Bishop of
Candida casa, 18 f North Berwick, 12 e
O
OGilvi Barons, 44 f Oliphant Barons, 36 b Olorina an herb, 49 e
P
PAlladius Apostle for the Scottish Nation, 45 f Parliament, 8 a Pasley a
Monastery and Barony, 24 b Peblis a Town, 10 c Penvael or Penvallon, 28 d
Perth the City, 41 b Perth Sheriffdome, 40 b Perth Earl, 42 a Picts divided
into two Nations, 5 a Picts, 30 d Pictland, 11 d Pollac a fish, 24 d Portus
Salutis, 52 e Ponuny a fort, 21 c Princes simply, 7 Prince of Scotland, ibid.
Prophecy of a Stone, 42 d
R
RAmsey, Vicount Hadingson 12 b. his faithfulness and valor, ibid. Ramsey
Earl Bothwell, 23 d Ratra a river, 48 a Ravins trench, 32 e R^dhead a Cape, 44
e Regimund, 32 f Reinfraw a town and Baronie, 24 a Rethven the name of a
Castle and Barony, 42 b Rethvens Conspiracy, ibid b Rheuda, 37 c Rian a river,
19 b Robert, Bishop of Cathanes, Earl of Lennox* and of Merch, 11 c Rosburge
or Roxburg, 10 a Rossia or Rosse, 52 a Rosse Earls, ibid. f Rosse Barons, 24 b
Rothamay Castle, 49 b Rothes Earl, 35 e. 49 d Rothes Castle, 49 d Rothsay
Castle, 22 c Rothsay Dukedom, ibid c Routs, 38 b
S
SAlmons, 47 a Salmons breed, ibid. a Salmons hunted, 17 f Salton Barons of
Abernethy, 45 b Sanctuary, 35 c Sauhquer Castle, 17 c Barons Sauhquer, ibid.
Scone 42 c. a Baronie, 42 c Scottish Sea, 12 ^ A troop of Scots in France, 25 c
Scotland divided into seven parts, 5 c, d Scoutes, 12 f Seincler Barons, 32 e
Selkirk, 10 c Sempil a place and Barony, 24 c Seneschalsies, 6 c The Session 8
d. by whom instituted and when, ibid. Seton, 13. a town and noble family, 13 a
Sheriffdomes, 6 c Sheriff, 8 c Sheriff of Teviot Dale, 10 b Slugh hounds, 18 b
Soland geese, 12 f Solway a village, 17 d Somervill Baron, 23 a South Esk a
river, 44 d Spey a river, 49 d Speyny castle, 49 Sterling Stewarty or
Territory, 26 c Sterling town, ibid. Sterlin or Strivelin a town, 29 Sterling
or Esterling money, ib. States or Degrees of Scotland, 7 c Stewarties, 6 c
Stewarts family how it began and arose, 51 f Stewards a noble family of the
blood royal, 20 f Sir James Stewart guardian to James Hamilton, 22 b Stewarts
the royal line of Scotland whence descended, 25 d Walter Stewart Earl of
Athol, for his parricide cruelly executed, 40 f Strath bolgy, 49 b Strathern,
35 ^ Straith Ern, ibid. f. Earls thereof, 36 d Strath Navern, 53 f Struthers,
34 b Suit between Robert Brus and John Bailioll, 17 a Sutherland, 53 b
T
TAichia, a Territory, 36 e Tantallon Castle, 12 d Taodunum, 43 c Tarbarth, 52
e Tarbar, 38 d Tarvus what it signifies, 54 d Taw the river, 35 c Taw
overfloweth, 41 a Teifidale, 9 ^ Teith or Taith, river, 36 d Tenariff, an
exceeding high hill, 52 c God Terminus, 26 ^. his temple, 28 f Teviot a river,
10 d Thanes, 7 d. what they are, 35 b Thirlestan a place and Barons honor, 10
c Tine a little river, 11 f Toricles, Barony of the Lord Hereis, 17 e
Tulibardin castle, 36 a. a Barony, ibid. and Earldom, ibid. Twede a river, 10
c Twedesdale, ibid.
V
V Turned into M. 45 d Uchiltrey Castle, 20 f Uchiltrey Barons, 21 a Ucthred
Fergus his son murdered by his brother Gilbert, 19 ^ Vecturiones, 5 a. 30 c
Vicount a title, when first brought into Scotland, 7 e Underthanes, ibid. d
Urdehead, 54 d
W
WAll of Hadrian, 26 f Wall of Antonius Pius, 27 a Water of an admirable nature
48 a Wemeseies a kindred, 35 c Wemmis a Castle and noble family, 32 e Whitherne,
that is, Candida casa, 19 a Wifle, a river, 53 d Wigton an Haven-towne, 18 e
Wilford a valiant English Captain, 12 a Wolves, 54 a
Y
YOung Knight Pedagogue unto King James the sixth, 13
Z
ZEister a place and Barony, 12 a Zester a Baron, 10 c
A Table of the names of several people and places of more ancient record in
Scotland.
ABravanus, Rian the river and Logh-Rian the Lake, 19 Alauna, about Sterlin, 30
Bod^tria* flu. The forth and frith, Edenborrough Frith, 12 Caledonia and
Caledonii, 30 Cantae, the people inhabiting Rosse, 52 Carbantorigum,
Caerlaverock, 17 Catini. The inhabitants of Cathanesse, 53 Cornabii. The people
of Strathnavern, 53 Castra alata or Castrum alatum, 52. Edenborrough, 13
Cerones, Assinshire, 52 Calonia Coldingham, 52 Colnie, flu. The river Killian,
22 Corda a town near Logh-Cure, 17 Coria Damniorum, happily Camelot, 29 Creones,
See Cerones. Damnii, people of Cluydsdale, Re^fraw Barony, Lenox, Strivelin,
Menteth and Fife, 22 Dea flu. The river Dee, 18 Diva flu. The river Dee, 46
Epidii, people of Caledonia, 30 Gadeni or Ladeni, Teisidale, Twededale, Merch
and Lothien, 9 Glota ins. The Ifle Arran, 22 Gran^pius Mons, Grantzbaine, 28,30
Horesci, happily the people inhabiting Esk-dale, 16 Iena. The river Ken, 18 Ila
flu may seem to be the river Wifle, 53 Ladeni, See Gadeni. Lelanonius flu The
river Levin, 24 Leucopibia, happily Candida Casa or Whitherne, 18 Lindum,
Linlithquo or Lithquo, 1^ Littus altum seems to be Tarbarth, 52 Longus flu.
Loughlonges, ibid. Loxa flu. The river Loss, 49 Novantes. People of Galloway,
Carick Kyle and Cuningham, 18 Mertae, in Sutherland, Novantum Chersonesus sive
Promontorium. The Mull of Galloway, 19 Nodius flu. The river Nid, 17 Orcas sive
Tarverdrum. Howbune, 54 Randvara. Reinfraw, 24 Rerigonium. Bargeny, 19
Selgovae. The people of Lidesdale Evesdale, Eskdale, Annandale and Nidisdale,
16 Tamea, happily Tanea in Rosse. Taizali. The people of Buquahan 47 Tarvedrum
promont. See Orcas. Tans flu. Tau the river, 35, 41 Vacomagi. The people of
Murray, 49 Vararis. Murray, ibid. Vernicones, happily Mernis, 45 Victoria, happily
Inch-Keith, 15 Vidogara, happily Air, 20 Virvedrum, See Orcas. Uzellum, a place
in Eusdale, 16
The Families of greater worth and honor in Scotland in this Book mentioned.
A
ABercorne Earl, 15 Aberneth or Abernothy, 36 Albanie Duk^s, 39 Angus or
Anguis Earl^s, 4^ Areskin, See Ereskin, Ardmanoch, 52 Arol Earls, 42 Argilo
E^rles, 37,38 Arran Earls, 22 Athol Earls, 40 Aubigny or Obigny Lords, 26
B
BAclugh, 16 Balmerinoch, 34 Bothwell Earls, 48 Buquhan Earls, 48 Borthwicke
Barons, 13 Boids Barons, 21,22 Brus, 16,19
C
CAmbell, 37 Cassile Earls, 19 Crawford Earls, 22 Cathanes Earls, 53
Creictons Barons Sauhquer, 17, 51 Carthcart, 24 Carliles, Carrict Bailives and
Earls, 20 Chasteau Herald Duke, 23 Clan-Hatan, 35 Clan-Ranald, 52 Colvil, 32
Comen, 36.45.48 Culrosse, 32 Cuningham, 21
D
DArnley or Darley, 24 Douglasse or Duglasse, 19 23.45.48 Dromund, 36 Dunbarre
Earls, 11 Dunfirmling Earl, 13.32
E
EGlington Earls, 21 Eriskin, 12.29.47 Elphingston, 29.34.49
F
FIvie Baron, 32 Fleming, 18.29 Forbois, 46 Frasers, 52 Felton Vicount, 12 Fife
Earls, 35
G
GOrdon, 49 Glencarn Earls, 21 Glamys Baron, 44 Graham, 36 Goury, 42 Greyes,
44 Galloway Lords, 693
H
HAdington Vicount, 12 Halyburton, ibid. Hamilton, 15.22.23 Huntley, 13.42.49
Hepburn, 16 Hereis or Herris, 17 Hides, 36.42 Home or Hume Baron de Berwicke,
11 Hume Earl, ibid.
I
INnermeth, 36
K
KEith, 45 Kennedis, 19 Kir, 10.15 Kinghorn Earl, 32.44 Kinloss, 49
L
LEvenox or Lennox Earls, 25 Lindeseies, 22.44.49 Lesley, 34.49 Levingston, 29
Leon or Lion, 32.43 Lovet, 52 Linlithquo or Lithquo Earl, 15 Lorn Lords, 38.49
Lothien Earl, 15 Lundoris, 34
M
MAc-Conell, 38 Mac-Intoscech, 35 Mar Earls, 47 Marshall Earls, 45 Maxwels,
18 Menteith Earl, 36 Merch Earls, 11 Methwen, 42 Murray Earls, 50 Montrose,
44 Montgomeries Earls, 21 Morton Earl, 17 Murray, 36.40.42
N
NEwbottle, 69
O
ORkeney Earls, 53 Olyphant, 36 Ogilvy or Ogilby, 44
P
PEarth Earl, 42
R
RAmsey, 12.23 Randolph, 50 Reinfraw, 24 Rethwen, 42 Rothes Earl, 35.49
Rothsay Dukedom, 22 Roos, 24 Rosse Earls, 52 Roxburgh, 10
S
SCone, 42 Scot, 16 Steward, 25.48.51 Sutherland Earls, 53 Seincler, 32.53
Somervill, 23 Seton, 13 Sempell, 24.49 Sauhquer or Sanquer, 17 Salton, 49
Strathern Earls, 36 Spiny, 49
T
TOricles, 17 Thirlestan^ 10 Tulibardin, 36
V
URquhart, 52 Uchiltrey, 21
W
WEmmis, 32 Wintwoun Earl, 13 Wigton Earl, 18
Z
ZEister or Zester, 10.12
A Table of Ireland, and the Isles adjoining to BRITAIN.
A
ABsenties, 85 Admiral of England, extent of his authority, 232 Alderney, 214
Anglesey, 203 Antrim County, 112 Annals of Ireland, 150 Annals of the Isle of
Man, 205 Arran, 99.214 Armagh County, 107 Arklo, Lords thereof, 90 Arts and
piety sowed among nations in sundry ages, 85
B
BAgnall, 121 etc. Bannomanna, 62 Barry, 78 Base poole, 227 Bernacles, 204
Barnwell, 94.95 Berminghams, 100 Bingham, 10^.103 Bissets, 113 Bishoprics of
Ireland, 73. Poor, 106 Blunt, Lord Montjoy, 77.105 107. Deputy, 133, etc.
Boil Barony, 103 Brehon Law, 140 Britains inhabit Ireland, 65 Britain herb,
222 Britain Huis, 221 British Armory, ibid. British sea, 57. where deepest,
227 Burk, 81.100.101.104.117 etc. Burgus, what. 222 Buth, 22 Butiphant Vicount,
78 Butler, 82.88. etc. Borough Baron, Lord Deputy, 115
C
CAesarea, 65 Cavon County, 106 Cahir Baron, 82 Carew, 76.79.85 Carick Earl,
82 Carausius, 88 Cassiles Archbishop, 82 Casquets, 224 Castle-Conell Baron, 81
Caterlough County, 85 Cattle, 63 Cavanaghes, 85 Causes of rebellion, 101
Caurus the winds, 59 Chamberlan, 224 Cerne Island, 62 Chamber of Ireland, 95
Chevers, 90 Chairly Boy, 113 Clany-boy, Clan-Moris, 75 Clancar Earl, 76
Clan-Donels, 101 Clan William, 81 Clan Gibbon, ibid. Clogher Bishopric, 115
Clare County, 98 Clan Richard Earls, 100 Cogan, 70.79 Connacht or Conaught, 98
Colby, 86 Conaught Lords, 104 Constables of Ireland, 97 Colran County, 114
Columb Saint, 215 Cork, County, 77. a kingdom, 79 Courts of Ireland, 72 Coner
Bishopric, 111 Curraghmore Barons, 79 Croft Sir Hugh slain, 179 Curcy,
71.77.53.209 Curthbert a Saint, 220 Cuttings, Coin, Liverie, 76.101.
D
DArcy, 96 Deemstert, 204 Delton, 96 Dalvin Baron, ibid. Deputies of Ireland,
71 Desmond Earls, 76 Dessie Vicount, 79 Diseases in Ireland, 63 Devereux, 90
Dillon, 96 Donell Gormy, 102 Docwra, 133, etc. Dublin County, 91. City and
University, 92. Marquis, 94 Duke of Ireland, ibid. Dunboin Baron, 85 Dunganon
Baron, 115 Durgarvan Barony, 79 Dunkellin Baron, 100 Dansany Baron, 95 216
E
ENglishmen first entered Ireland, 70 Eastmeath, 95 Essex Earl, 112. Lord
Deputy, 117 Ewst, 216
F
FArn Island, 220 Fermoy Vicount, 78 Farn, Isle, 220 Fermanagh County, 106 Fitz
Eustace Barons, 88 Fitz-Patric, 8 Fitz-Geralds, 82.87 Fitz-Stephens, 70.79.89
Fitz-William Lord Deputy, 121, etc. Fitz-Urse, 107 Fortunate Isles, 217 Frozen
sea, 219
G
GArnesey, 224 Galloglasses, 101.147 Galloway County, 99 Gavalock, 122
Genevill, 97.163 Gersey, 224 Glinnes, 90.113 Goodwin sands, 222 Gormanston
Vicount, 95 Lord Gray, 75
H
Hawks, 63 Hereditarie territories of England in France, 232 Hy, Island, 216
Hirth, ibid. Hobies, 63 Holy Cross of Tiperary, 82 Holy Island, 62.220
Holy-wood, 94 Horses, 63 Houth Barons, 94 Husey, 95
I
IBarcan Baron, 99 Ila, 215 Ienevill, see Genevill. Iona, ibid. Iniskellin,
106.112.101 Ireland called Ogygia, 64. called Scotia, 66.117. inhabited by
Britains, 65. not conquered by Romans, 66. entered by Henry the second, 69.
divided, 72. neglected, 118 Irishmen out of Spain, 66 Irish Monks, 67.110.
taught the English to write, 68. their Manners, 140 Ireland neglected, 218
K
KErry County, 75 Kilkenny County, 84 Kildare County, 87. Earls, Killalo
Bishopric, 100 Killin Baron, 95 Kinsale, 135 Kings County, 86 Kernes, 147
Knight of the Valley, 81 Konctoe battle, 100
L
LAcy, 82.95.96, etc. 203 Leinster, 84 Leinster Marquess, 94 Leicestre, 86
Letrim County, 103 Letrim Baron, ibid. Levison, 135 Limerick County, 81 Lewis,
216 Lindisfarn, 220 Lixnaw Baron, 75 Lovell, 85 Longford County, 97 Londey, 202
Louth County, 105. Earl, ibid. Baron, 106 Lycanthropia a disease, 83
M
MAc Andan, 85 Mac Carty, 77 Mac-Clen, 216 Mac Connell, 102.113.216 Mac Guilly,
113 Mac Donells, 120 Mac Guir, 106.121 Mac Genis, 109.120 Mac Mahon, 107 Mac
Morogh, 69 Mac William, 101.104 Mac Teg, 77 Man Isle, 203. Lords, 213 Mac Swin,
117 Mac She Is, 82 Majo County, 100 Mandeviles, 109.213 Marshall E. of Penbroke,
70, 86 87.155 Marshall of Ireland, 72 Malachie a Saint, 108 Meth, 94. the
Bishop, 95. the Lords, 96 Messet, 155 Monaghan County, 107 Mont-Garret Vicount,
89 Mont-Norris, 107.134 More, 105 Morley, 72 Munster, 74 Muscegros, 99
N
NAngle, 96 Navan a Baronet, 95 Nogente or Nugent, 96 Norris Sir John, 122,
etc. Normandy lost, 226
O
OBrien, 82 O-Brins, 89 O-Cahan, 114 O-Carell, 69 O-Conor Dun, 102.104
O-Donell, 117 O-Hagan, 109 O-Hanlon, ibid. O-Kelly, 103 Ogygia, 62 O-Mahon, 76
O-Maily, 86 O-More, ibid. O-Neale election, 114.120 Earl of Tir-Oen, 122, etc.
Oleron, 232 O-Pharoll, 97 O-Quin, 131 O-Reyley, 106 Orcades Isles, 216.
Earls, 217 Ormond, 82 O-Rorke, 103 O-Swilivant, 76 Ossery Earl, 82 Ougans,
88. O-Tooles, 89
P
PAlladius, 67 Pearls, 59 Pelagius, an Arch-heriticke, 111 Perot, 103
Phelipot, a good Patriot, 224 Poers, Barons of Curraghmore, 79 Prestholm, 20^,
Preston, 95 Professions hereditarie, 141 Plonkets, 94.95.96
Q
QUe^nes County, 86
R
RHeban Baronets, 86 Ridiculous conceit, 75 Ringrom Baron, 77 Roch. Baron, 78
Roscomon County, 103 Russell Lord Deputy, 121 Rugge, 63
S
SAlmons, 59.114 Savage, 112 Saint Bernard, 103 Saint Brigid, 87 Saint
Laurence, Baron of Houth, 94. Saint Michael, 86 Saint Patrickes Sepulcher, 110
Purgatory, 116
Saint Owen, 227 Saxons Islands, 220 Scalmey, 202 Serk, 227 Scots, 117 Shaving
of Irish, 107 Shires of Ireland, 37 Shetland, 219 Sidny, Lord Deputy, 97.121
Silly Isles, 227 etc. Slane Baron, 95 Slego County, 102 Small Island, 201
Smyris a stone, 225 Steward of Ireland, 80 Spaniards in Ireland, 75.77
Stanihurst a learned man, 66 Steptholme, 202 Stella Maria, 230 Stockholme, 202
Strongebow, 69.87 Stukeley, 94 Surley Boy, 113 Sussex Earl Lord Deputy, 121
T
TAlbot, 79, 80, 94, 155 Tanistry, 141 Thule, 218 Three sisters, 84 Tipperary
County, 82. Earl, ibid. Tirconel County, 115 Tirell, 91, 96 Tiroen County, 114
Toam or Tuen Archbishopricke, 100 Trimletstoun Baron, 95 Twomond Earls, 99
Tullo Vicount, 85 c. etc. f Turlogh Lenigh, 115 Tutes, 96
V
VAlentia Baron, 76 Verdon, 97 Vernayle, 155 Ufford, 103 Vergivian Sea, 61
Vescy, 87 Vines why not in Britain, 63 Ulster, 104. Earls, 117 Upper Ossery
Baron, 84 Uriaghts, 114 Ushant, 231 Ussher, 94 Uske-bah, 63
W
WAlsh, 91 Warren, 86, 132 Waterford County, 79. Earls, 80 Weisford County 88
West Mead County, 96 Western Isles, 215 White Knight, 87 Wicklow, 89 Wicker
boats, 59 Wolfmen, 83
Y
YDron Baronie, 85
Ancient names of Places and Rivers in Ireland.
ARgita flu. 117 Ausoba flu. 99 Auteri, 100 Birgus flu. 84 Boreum Prom. 117
Birgantes, or Brigantes, 84 Buvinda flu. 95 Cauci, 90 Conca^i, 98 Coriondi, 77
Darnii near Derrie, 104.116 Daurona, 78 Dunum, 109 Duri flu. 75 Eblana, 91
Eblani, 84 Erdini, 106 Gangani, 98 Hieron Prom. 89 Iberni, 76 Iernus flu. ibid.
Isannium Prom. 109 Laberus, 94 Libnius flu. 91 Logia flu. 116 Luceni, 74
Macolicum, 97 Menapia, 89 Menapii, 84 Medona flu. 89 Nagnata, 102.103 Nagnata,
ibid. Notium Prom. 76 Ovoca flu. 90 Ravius flu. 102 Rheba, 8 Rhobogdii, 115
Rhobogdium Prom. 116 Rigia, 97 Rigia altera, 116 Senus flu. 97 Velabri, 76
Vennicuium Prom. 117 Vennicnii, 115.117 Vidua flu. 117 Vinderus flu. 112
Vodiae, 77 Voluntii, 104
Ancient names of the Isles adjacent to Britain.
ACmodae, 220 Amnitum, See Samnitum insulae, 231 Adros called also Andium, 203
Axantos, See Uxantisa, 231 Barsa, 227 Bergae, 218 Birchanis, 221 Caesarea, 224
Cassiterides, 227 Caunos, 222 Dumna, 216 Ebudae, 215 Ebuda prima, 216 Ebuda
secunda, ibid. Evodia, 214 Electridae, 220 Epidium, 215 Edri, 203 Fortunate
Islands, 217 Glessariae, 220 Glotta, 22.214 Hebrides, 215 Hesperides, 228 Ieta,
223 Limnos, 203 Liga, 227 Lisia, ibid. Mictis, happily Vectis, 223 Menavia, 203,
205 Mona, 203 Monaeda, ibid. Mula, or Maleos, 215 Nerigon, 218 Nessiada, 231
Ocet^^, 216 Orcades, ibid. Pomona, ibid. Ricina, or Ricluna, 215 Sanitum
insulae, 231 Sarnia, 225 Saxonum insulae, 221 Sena, 231 Siambis, ibid. Siade,
227 Sicdelis, ibid. Silimnus, 203 Silinae, 227 Tanatos, 222 Thule, 218
Toliapis, 222 Vecta or Vectis, 223 Venetica insulae, 231 Vindelis. Old
Winchelsey. Uliarus, 232 Uxantisa, 231
FINIS.

