Songs of Mourning: BEVVAILING the untimely death of Prince Henry.

VVorded by THO. CAMPION.

And set forth to be sung with one voice to the Lute, or Violl: By JOHN
COPRARIO.

LONDON: Printed for John Brown, and are to be sold in S. dunstons
Churchyard, 1613.



ILLVSTRISSIMO, POTENTISSIMOQVE PRINCIPI, FREDRICO QVINTO, RHENI COMITI
PALATINO, DVCI BAVARIAE, etc.
COgimur; inuitis (Clarissime) parce quaerelis
Te saluo; laetis non sinit esse Deus:
Nec speratus Hymen procedit lumine claro,
Principis extincti nubila fata vetant.
Illius inferias maesto iam Musica cantu
Prosequitur, miseros haec Dea sola iuuat.
Illa suos tibi summittit (Dux inclite) quaestus,
Fraternus fleto quem sociauit amor.
Sed noua gaudia, sed tam dulcia foedera rupit
Fati infoelicis liuor, and hora nocens.
Quod superest, nimios nobis omni art dolores
Est mollire animus, spes meliora dabit:
Cunctatosque olim cantabimus ipsi Hymenaeos,
Laeta simul fas sit reddere vota Deo.
AN ELEGY upon the untimely death of Prince Henry.
Read you that have some tears left yet unspent,
Now weep your selves heart sick, and nere repent:
For I will open to your free access
The sanctuary of all heaviness:
Where men their fill may mourn, and never sin:
And I their humble Priest thus first begin.
Fly from the Skies ye blessed beams of light,
Rise up in horrid vapors ugly night,
And fettered bring that ravenous monster Fate
The fellon, and the traitor to our state
Law-Eloquence we need not to convince
His guilt, all know it, it is he stole our Prince,
The Prince of men, the Prince of all that bore
Ever that princely name: O now no more
Shall his perfections like the Sunne-beames dare
The purblinde world, in heaven those glories are.
What could the greatest artist, Nature, add
TO increase his graces? divine form he had
Striving in all his parts which should surpass;
And like a well tuned chime his carriage was
Full of celestial witchcraft, winning all
To admiration, and love personal.
His Lance appeared to the beholders eyes
When his fair hand advanced it in the skies
Larger then truth, for well could he it wield,
And make it promise honor in the field.
When Court and Music called him, off fell arms,
And as he had been shaped for loves alarmes,
In harmony he spoke, and trod the ground
In more proportion then the measured sound.
How fit for peace was he, and rosy beds?
How fit to stand in troops of iron heads?
When time had with his circles made complete,
His charmed rounds? All things in time grow great.
This fear even like a commet that hangs high,
And shootes his threatening flashes through the sky,
Held all the eyes of Christendom intent
Upon his youthful hopes, casting the event
Of what was in his power, not in his will:
For that was close concealed, and must lie still
As deeply hid, as that design which late
With the French Lion dyed. O earthly state
How does thy greatness in a moment fall?
And feasts in highest pomp turn funeral?
But our young Henry armed with all the arts
That suit with Empire, and the gain of hearts,
Bearing before him fortune, power, and love
Appeared first in perfection, fit to move
Fixed admiration: though his years were green
Their fruit was yet mature: his care had been
Suruaying India, and implanting there
The knowledge of that God which he did fear:
And even now, though he breathless lies, his sails
Are struggling with the winds, for our auayles
TO explore a passage hid from humane tract,
Will fame him in the enterprise, or fact.
O Spirit full of hope why art thou fled
From deeds of honor? why's that virtue dead
Which dwelt so well in thee? a bower more sweet
If Paradise were found, it could not meet.
Cursed then be Fate that stole our blessing so,
And had for us now nothing left but woe,
Had not the All-seeing providence yet kept
Another joy safe, that in silence slept:
And that same Royal workman who could frame
A Prince so worthy of immortal fame;
Lives, and long may he live, to form the other
His expressed image, and grace of his brother.
To whose eternal peace we offer now
Gifts which he loved, and fed, Musicks that flow
Out of a sour, and melancholic vain,
Which best sort with the sorrows we sustain.
TO THE MOST SACRED King James.
^ O Grief, O Grief, how diverse are thy shapes wherein men lan- ^ guish? The
face sometime with tears thou fill'st, Sometime the heart thou kill'st with
unseen anguish, ^ Somewhile thou smil'st to view how fate, plays with our
humane state. So far from ^ surety here are all our earthly joys, That what
our strong hope buildes when least we fear, a ^ stronger power destroys. ^

1
O Grief, how diverse are thy shapes wherein men languish?
The face sometime with tears thou fil'st,
Sometime the heart thou kill'st
With unseen anguish.
Sometime thou smil'st to view how Fate
Plays with our humane state:
So far from surety here
Are all our earthly joys,
That what our strong hope buildes, when least we fear,
A stronger power destroys.
2
O Fate, why should thou take from KINGS their joy, and treasure?
Their Image if men should deface
'Twere death, which thou do race
Even at thy pleasure.
Wisdom of holy Kings yet knows
Both what it has, and owes.
Heavens hostage which you bredd
And nursed with such choice care.
Is ravished now great KING, and from us ledd
When we were least aware.
The Base.
^

2 TO THE MOST SACRED Queen Anne.
^ It Is now dead night, and not a light on earth, orstarre in ^ heaven does
shine, Let now a mother mourn the noblest birth that ever was both mortal,
and divine.

^ O sweetness peereles! more then humane grace! O flowrie beauty! O untimely ^
death! Now Music fill this place with thy most doleful breath. O singing
wail a fate more truly ^ fune rall, Then when with all his sons the sire of
Troy did fall. ^

1
It Is now dead night, and not a light on earth,
Or star in heaven does shine:
Let now a mother mourn the noblest birth
That ever was both mortal, and divine.
O sweetness peerless! more then humane grace!
O flowery beauty! O untimely death!
Now Music fill this place
With thy most doleful breath:
O singing wayle a fate more truly funeral,
Then when with all his sons the sire of Troy did fall.
2
Sleep Joy, dye Mirth, and not a smile be seen,
Or show of hearts content,
For never sorrow nearer touched a QVEENE,
Nor were there ever tears more duly spent:
O dear remembrance, full of ruefull woe!
O ceacelesse passion! O unhuman hour!
No pleasure now can grow,
For withered is her flower.
O anguish do thy worst and fury Tragical,
Since fate in taking one has thus disordered all.
The Base.
^

3 TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY Prince Charles.
^ FOrtune and glory may be lost and woone, But when the work of ^ nature is
un- done, that loss flies past retur- ning, No help is left but mourning: What
can to kind ^ youth more despightfull prove then to be robbed of one sole bro-
there? Father and mother ask reave- ^ rence, a brother only love, Like age and
birth like thoughts and pleasures move. What gain can ^ he heap up though
showers of Crowns descend, Who for that good must change a brother and a
friend? ^

1
Fortune and Glory may be lost, and woone,
But when the work of Nature is undone
That loss flies past returning,
No help is left but mourning.
What can to kind youth more despightfull prove
Then to be robbed of one sole Brother?
Father and Mother
Ask reverence, a Brother only love:
Like age, and birth, like thoughts, and pleasures move:
What gain can he heap up though showers of Crowns descend
Who for that good must change a brother and a friend?
2
Follow, O follow yet thy Brothers fame,
But not his fate, lets only change the name,
And find his worth presented
In thee, by him prevented:
Or past example of the dead be great,
Out of thy self begin thy story:
Virtue, and glory
Are eminent being placed in princely seat:
Oh heaven his age prolong with sacred heat,
And on his honored head let all the blessings light
Which to his brothers life men wished, and wished them right.
The Base.
^

4 TO THE MOST PRINCELY AND VIRTUOUS the Lady Elizabeth.
^ SO parted you, So parted you as if the world for e- ^ uer had lost with him
her light, Now could your tears hard flint to ruth ex- cite, yet may you never
^ your loves again partake in humane sight. O why should love such two kind
hearts dis- sever, ^ As nature never knit more fair or firm toge- there? ^

1
So parted you as if the world for ever
Had lost with him her light
Now could your tears hard flint to ruth excite,
Yet may you never
Your loves again partake in humane sight:
O why should love such two kind hearts disseuer
As nature never knit more fair or firm together?
2
So loved you as sister should a brother
Not in a common strain,
For Princely blood does vulgar fire disdain:
But you each other
On earth embarc't in a celestial chain
A less for love that heavenly borne affection
To change should subject be and suffer earths infection.
The Base.
^

5 TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS AND MIGHTY Frederick the fifth, Count Palatine of
the Rhein.
^ HOw like a golden dream you met and par- ted, That pleasing ^ straight does
vanish, O who can ever ba- nish the thought of one so princely and free-har-
ted?

^ But he was pulled up in his prime by fate, And love for him must mourn
though all too late. Tears to the ^ dead are due, let none forbid sad hearts to
sigh, True grief, true grief, true grief cannot be hid. ^

1
How like a golden dream you met and parted
That pleasing straight does vanish:
O who can ever banish
The thought of one so princely and free hearted?
But he was pulled up in his prime by fate,
And love for him must mourn though all too late.
Tears to the dead are due, let none forbid
Sad hearts to sigh, true grief cannot be hid.
2
Yet the most bitter storm to height increased
By heaven again is ceased:
O time that all things mouest
In grief and joy thou equal measure love:
Such the condition is of humane life,
Care must with pleasure mix and peace with strife:
Thoughts with the days must change, as tapers waste
So must our griefs, day breaks when night is past.
The Base.
^

6 To the most disconsolate Great Britain.
^ WHen pale famine fed on thee with her insatiate i^^es, When civil broils
set ^ murder free contemning all thy laws, When heaven enraged consumed thee
so with plagues that none thy ^ face could know, Yet in thy looks affliction
then showed less, Then now for ones fate ^ all thy parts ex- press. ^

1
When pale famine fed on thee,
With her unsatiate jaws,
When civil broils set murder free
Contemning all thy laws,
When heaven enraged consumed thee so
With plagues that none thy face could know,
Yet in thy looks affliction then showed less
Thou now for ones fall all thy parts express.
2
Now thy highest States lament
A son, and Brothers loss;
Thy nobles mourn in discontent,
And rue this fatal cross;
Thy Commons are with passion sad
To think how brave a Prince they had:
If all thy rocks from white to black should turn
Yet could thou not in show more amply mourn.
The Base.
^

7 To the World.
^ O Poor distracted World, partly a slave to Pagans sinful rage, partly
ob- ^ scur'd with igno- rance of all the means that save, And even these parts
of thee that live assured of ^ heavenly grace: O how they are de- uided? with
doubts late by a Kingly pen deci- ded.

^ O happy world if what the sire be- gun had been closed up by his religious
son. ^

1
O poor distracted world, partly a slave
To Pagans sinful rage, partly obscured
With ignorance of all the means that save,
And even those parts of thee that live assured
Of heavenly grace: Oh how they are divided
With doubts late by a Kingly pen decided?
O happy world, if what the Sire begun
Had been closed up by his religious Son.
2
Mourn all you souls oppressed under the yoke
Of Christian-hating Thrace; never appeared
More likelihood to have that black league broke,
For such a heavenly prince might well be fear^^
Of earthly fiends: Oh how is Zeal inflamed
With power, when truth wanting defense is shamed?
O princely soul rest thou in peace, while we
In thine expect the hopes were ripe in thee.
The Base.
^

A Table of all the Songs contained in this Book.
O Grief. 1 It Is now dead night. 2 Fortune and glory. 3 So parted you. 4 How
like a golden dream. 5 When pale famine. 6 O poor distracted world. 7
FINIS.

