THE DESCRIPTION of a Mask: Presented in the Banqueting room at Whitehall, on
Saint Stephens night last, At the Marriage of the Right Honorable the Earl of
Somerset: And the right noble the Lady FRANCES Howard.

Written by Thomas Campion.

Whereunto are annexed diverse choice Airs composed for this Mask that may be
sung with a single voice to the Lute or Base-Viall.

LONDON Printed by E. A. for Laurence Li'sle, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard,
at the sign of the Tigers head. 1614.

Pulchro pulchra datur, sociali faedere amanti
Tandem nubit amans; ecquid amabilius?
Verae vt super sint nuptiae
Praeite duplici face:
Praetendat alteram necesse
Hymen, alteram par est Amor.
Vniego mallemplacuisse docto,
Candido, et fastu sine iudicanti,
Millium quam millibus imperitorum
Inque iudentum.
The description of a Masque, Presented in the Banqueting room at Whitehall,
On St. Stephens night last: At the Marriage of the right Honorable the Earl of
Somerset, and the right noble the Lady Frances Howard.
IN ancient times, when any man sought to shadow or heighten his Invention, he
had store of feyned persons ready for his purpose; As Satyrs, Nymphs and
their like: such were then in request and belief among the vulgar. But in our
days, although they have not utterly lost their use, yet find they so little
credit, that our modern writers have rather transferd their fictions to the
persons of Enchaunters and Commanders of Spirits, as that excellent Poet
Torquato Tasso has done, and many others.

In imitation of them (having a presentation in hand for Persons of high State)
I grounded my whole Invention upon Inchauntmens and several transformations:
The work-manship whereof was undertaken by M. Constantine an Italian, Architect
to our late Prince Henry: but he being too much of him self, and no way to be
drawn to impart his intentions, failed so far in the assurance he gave, that
the main invention even at the last cast, was of force drawn into a far
narrower compass then was from the beginning intended: The description whereof
as it was performed, I will as briefly as I can deliver. The place wherein the
Mask was presented, being the Banqueting house at White Hall: the upper part,
where the State is placed, was Theatred with Pillars, Scaffolds, and all things
answerable to the sides of the Room. At the lower end of the Hall before the
Scene was made an Arch Tryvmphall, passing beautiful, which enclosed the
whole Works: The Scene it self (the Curtain being drawn) was in this
manner divided.

On the upper part there was formed a Sky with Clouds very arteficially
shadowed. On either side of the Scene below was set a high Promontory, and on
either of them stood three large pillars of gold: the one Promontory was
bounded with a Rock standing in the Sea, the other with a Wood; In the midst
between them apeared a Sea in perspectiue with ships, some cunningly painted,
some arteficially sailing. On the front of the Scene, on either side was a
beautiful garden, with six seats a piece to receive the Maskers: behind
them the main Land, and in the midst a pair of stayres made exceeding
curiously in the form of a Schalop shell. And in this manner was the eye first
of all entertained. After the King, Queen, and Prince were placed, and
preparation was made for the beginning of the Mask, there entered four
Squires, who as soon as they approached near the Presence, humbly bowing
themselves, spoke as follows.

The first Squire. THat fruit that neither dreads the Syrian heats,
Nor the sharp frosts which churlish Boreas threats,
The fruit of Peace, and Joy our wishes bring
To this high State, in a Perpetual Spring.
Then pardon (Sacred Majesty) our grief
Unseasonably that presses for relief.
The ground whereof (if your blessed ears can spare
A short space of Attention) we will declare.
GReat Honors Herrald Fame having Proclaym'd
This Nuptial feast, and with it all enflamed*
From every quarter of the earth three Knights
In Courtship seen, as well as Martial fights)
Assembled in the Continent, and there
Decreed this night A solemn Service here.
For which, by six and six embarked they were
In several Keeles; their Sails for Britain bent.
But (they that never favored good intent)
Deformed Error that enchaunting fiend,
And wing-tongu'd Rumor his infernal friend,
With Curiosity and Credulity,
Both Sorceresses, all in hate agree
Our purpose to divert, in vain they strive,
For we in spite of them came near t'ariue,
When suddenly (as Heaven and hell had met)
A storm confused against our Tackle beat,
Seuering the Ships: but after what befell
Let these relate, my tongu's too weak to tell.

The second Squire. A Strange and sad Ostent our Knights distressed,
For while the Tempests fierye rage increast,
About our Deckes and Hatches, lo, appear
Serpents, as Lerna had been poured out there
Crawling about us, which fear to eschew
The Knights the Tackle climbed, and hung in view,
When violently a flash of lighning came,
And from our sights did bear them in the flame.
Which past, no Serpent there was to be seen,
And all was hushed, as storm had never been.

The third Squire. AT Sea, their mischeifes grew, but ours at Land,
For being by chance arrived, while our Knights stand
To view their storme-tost friends on two Cliffes near,
Thence lo they vanished, and six Pillars were
Fixed in their footsteps, Pillars all of gold,
Fair to our eyes, but woeful to behold.

The fourth Squire. THus with prodigious hate and cruelty,
Our good Knights for their love afflicted be,
But, o protect us now, Maiesticke Grace,
For see, those cursed Enchanters press in place
That our past sorrows wrought: these, these alone
Turn all the world into confusion.

Toward the end of this speech, two Enchanters, and two Enchanteresses
appear: Error first, in a skin coat scaled like a Serpent, and an antic
habit painted with Snakes, a hair of curled Snakes, and a deformed visard.
With him Rumor in a skin coat full of winged Tongues, and over it an antic
robe, on his head a Cap like a tongue, with a large pair of wings to it.

Curiosity in a skin coat full of eyes, and an antic habit over it, a
fantastic Cap full of Eyes.

Credulity in the like habit painted with ears, and an antic Cap full of
ears.

When they had whispered a while as if they had rejoiced at the wrongs which
they had done to the Knights, the Music and their Dance began: strait forth
rusht the four Winds confusedly, the Eastern wind in a skin coat of the
color of the Sunrising, with a yellow hair, and wings both on his shoulders
and feet.

The Western Wind in a skin coat of dark crimson, with crimson hair and
wings.

The Southern Wind in a dark russet skin coat, hair and wings suitable.

The Northern wind in a grisled skin coat, with hair and wings accordingly.

After them in confusion came the four Elements: Earth, in a skin coat of
grass green, a mantle painted full of trees, plants, and flowers, and on his
head an oak growing.

Water, in a skin coat waved, with a mantle full of fishes, on his head a
Dolphin.

Air, in a skye-coloured skin coat, with a mantle painted with Foul, and on
his head an Eagle.

Fire, in a skin coat, and a mantle painted with flames: on his head a cap of
flames, with a Salamander in the midst thereof.

Then entered the four parts of the earth in a confused measure.

Europe in the habit of an Empress, with an Imperial Crown on her head.

Asia in a Persian Ladies habit with a Crown on her head.

Africa like a Queen of the Moors, with a crown.

America in a skin coat of the color of the juice of Mulberies, on her head
large round brims of many colored feathers, and in the midst of it a small
Crown.

All these having daunced together in a strange kind of confusion; past away,
by four and four.

At which time, Eternity appeared in a long blew Taffata robe, painted with
Stars, and on her head a Crown.

Next, came the three Destinies, in long robes of white Taffata like aged
women, with Garlands of Narcissus Flowers on their heads, and in their left
hands they carried distaffes according to the descriptions of Plato and
Catullus, but in their right hands they carried altogether a Tree of Gold.

After them, came Harmony with nine Musicians more, in long Taffata robes and
caps of Tinsell, with Garlands guilt, playing and singing this Song.

Chorus.
Vanish, vanish hence confusion,
Dim not Hymen's goulden light
With false illusion.
The Fates shall do him right,
And fair Eternity,
Who pass through all enchantements fre:
Eternity singes alone.
Bring away this Sacred Tree,
The Tree of Grace, and Bounty,
Set it in Bel-Annas eye,
For she, she, only she
Can all Knotted spells vnty.
Pulled from the Stock, let her blessed Hands convey
To any suppliant Hand, a bough,
And let that Hand, advance it now
Against a Charm, that Charm shall fade away.
Toward the end of this Song the three, destinies set the Tree of Gold before
the Queen.

Chorus.
Since Knightly valor rescues Dames distressed,
By Virtuous Dames, let charmed Knights be released.
After this Chorus, one of the Squires speaks.

SInce Knights by valor Rescue Dames distressed,
Let them be by the Queen of Dames releast:
So sing the Destinyes, who never err,
Fixing this Tree of Grace and Bounty here,
From which, for our enchaunted Knights we crave
A branche, pulled by your Sacred Hand, to have;
That we may bear it as the Fates direct,
And manifest your glory in the'ffect.
In virtues favor then, and Pity now,
(Great Queen) vouchsafe us a divine touched bough.

At the end of this speech, the Queen pulled a branch from the Tree and gave it
to a Nobleman who delivered it to one of the Squires.

A Song while the Squires descend With the bough, toward the Scene.
Go happy man like th'Euening Star,
Whose beams to Bride-groomes well-come are.
May neither Hagge, nor Feind withstand
The pow're of thy Victorious Hand.
The Vncharm'd Knights surrender now,
By virtue of thy raised Bough.
Away Enchauntements, Vanish quite,
No more delay our longing sight:
It Is fruitelesse to contend with Fate,
Who gives us pow're against your hate.
Brave Knights, in Courtly pomp appear,
For now are you long looked for here.
Then out of the air a cloud descends, discovering six of the Knights alike,
in strange and sumptuous atires, and withal on either side of the Cloud, on
the two Promontories, the other six Maskers are suddenly transformed our of
the pillars of gold, at which time, while they all come forward to the dancing
place, this Chorus is sung, and on the sudden the whole Scene is changed: for
whereas before all seemed to be done at the sea and sea coast, now the
Promontories are suddenly remooved, and London with the Thames is very
arteficially presented in their place.

The Squire lifts up the Bough.

Chorus.
Virtue and Grace, in spite of Charms,
Have now redeemed our men at Arms.
There Is no inchauntement can withstand,
Where Fate directs the happy hand.
The Maskers first Dance.

The third Song of three parts, with a Chorus of five parts, sung after the
first Dance.
While dancing rests, fit place to music granting,
Good spells the Fates shall breath, al envy daunting
Kind ears with joy enchaunting, chaunting.
Chorus.
Io, Io Hymen.
Like looks, like hearts, like loves are linck't together,
So must the Fates be pleased, so come they hither,
To make this Joy persevere ever.
Chorus.
Io, Io Hymen.
Love decks the spring, her buds to the air exposing,
Such fire here in these bridal Breasts reposing
We leave with charms enclosing, closing.
Chorus.
Io, Io Hymen.
The Maskers second Dance.

The fourth Song a Dialogue of three with a Chorus after the second Dance.
1
LEt us now sing of Loves delight,
For he alone is Lord to night.
2
Some friendship between man, and man prefer,
But I the affection between man and wife.
3
What good can be in life,
Whereof no fruits appear?
1
Set is that Tree in ill hour,
That yields neither fruit nor flower.
2
2 How can man Perpetual be,
but in his own Posterity?
Chorus.
That pleasure is of all most bountiful and kind,
That fades not straight, but leaves a living Joy behind.
After this Dialogue the Maskers dance with the Ladies, wherein spending as
much time as they held fitting, they returned to the seats provided for them.

Straight in the Thames appeared four Barges with skippers in them, and
withal this song was sung.

Come a shore, come merry mates,
With your nimble heels, and pates:
Summon every man his Knight,
Enough honored is this night.
Now, let your Sea-borne Goddess come.
Quench these lights, and make all dombe.
Some sleep, others let her call,
And so Godnight to all, godnight to all.
At the conclusion of this song arrived twelve skippers in red capps, with
short cassocks and long slopps wide at the knees, of white canvas striped with
crimson, white gloves and Pomps, and red stockins: these twelve daunced a brave
and lively dance, shouting and tryvmphing after their manner.

After this followed the Maskers last dance, wherewith they retired.

At the Embarking of the Knights, the Squires approach the state, and speak.

The first Squire. ALl that was ever ask't, by vow of Jove,
To bless a state with, Plenty, Honor Love,
Power, Triumph, private pleasure, public peace,
Sweet springs, and Autumn's filld with due increase,
All these; and what good else, thought can supply.
Ever attend your Triple Majesty.

The second Squire. ALl blessings which the Fates, Propheticke Sung,
At Peleus Nuptials, and what ever tongue
Can figure more, this night, and aye betide,
The honored Bridegroom, and the honored Bride.

All the Squires together. Thus speaks in us the affection of our Knights,
Wishing you health, and Miriads of goodnights.

The Squires speeches being ended, this Song is Sung while the Boats pass
away.

Have aboard, have now away,
Hymen frowns, at your delay:
Hymen does long nights affect;
Yield him then his due respect.
The Sea-borne Goddess straight will come,
Quench these lights, and make all dombe.
Some Sleep, others she will call,
And so godnight to all, godnight to all.
FINIS.
AIRS, Made by several Authors: AND Sung in the Mask at the Marriage of the
Right Honorable ROBERT, Earl of Somerset, and the Right Noble the Lady
FRANCES HOWARD. Set forth for the Lute and Base Violl, and may be expressed by a
single voice, to either of those Instruments.

LONDON: Printed for Laurence Lisle, dwelling at the Sign of the Tigers-head
in Paul's Churchyard. 1614.

CANTO. I.
The firrt Song: made and expressed by Mr. Nicholas Laneir.
^
BRing a- way, bring a- way this sacred Tree,
^
^
the tree of grace and boun-tie, Set it in Bell- Annae's, eye: for she, she
only
^
^
she only, she can all knotted spells un- tie. Pulled from this stock, let her
blessed
^
^
hand convey To any suppliant hand a bough, And let that hand advance
^
^
it now Against a charm, that charm shall fade a- way.
^
BASSO. I.
^
BRing away.
^
CANTO. II.
These three Songs following were composed by Mr. Coprario, and sung by Mr.
John Allen, and Mr. Laneir.
^
Go happy man like th'Euening Star, Whose beams to
May neither Hag nor Fiend with- stand, The power of
^
^
Bride- grooms welcome are. Th'vnchar- med Knights surren- der
thy vi- ctorious hand.
^
^
now, By ver- tue of thy raised Bow.
^
2
Away Enchantments; vanish quite:
No more delay our longing sight.
It Is fruitless to contend with Fate,
Who gives us power against your hate.
Brave Knights in Courtly pomp appear,
For now are you long looked for here.
BASSO. II.
^
Go happy man.
^
CANTO. III.
^
WHile dancing rests fit place to Mu- sick granting,
^
^
Good spells the Fates shall breathe, all En- uy daunting,
^
^
Kind ears with joy en- chan- ting. Io Io Io Io Io
^
^
Hy- men, Io Hy- men.
^
2
Like looks, like hearts, like loves are linkt together.
So must the Fates be pleased, so come they hither.
To make this joy persevere.
Io Io Hymen.
3
Love decks the Spring, her buds to the air exposing:
Such fire here in these Bridal breasts reposing,
They leave with Charms enclosing.
Io Io Hymen.
BASSO. III.
^
WHile dancing.
^
CANTO. IIII.
^
COme a shore, come merry Mates, With your nim- ble heels and pates,
^
^
Summon every man his Knight, Enough ho-nour'd is this night. Now
^
^
let your sea-borne Goddess come, Quench these lights and make all dombe,
^
^
Some sleep, others let her call, And so good night, good night to all. go^^
^
^
night, good night, good night, good night to all.
^
2
Have abourd, have now away:
Hymen frowns at your delay*
Hymen does long nights affect;
Yield him then his due respect.
The Sea-borne Goddess straight will come,
Quench those lights, and make all dumb.
Some sleep; others she will call;
And so good night to all, good night to all.
BASSO. IIII.
^
COme a shore.
^
CANTO. V.
A Song, made by Th. Campion, and sung in the Lords Mask at the Count
Palatines Marriage, we have here added, to fill up these empty Pages.
^
Woo her and win her he that can, Each woe- man
So she must take and leave a man, Till time more
^
^
has two Lo- uers: This does Jove to show that want makes beau- tie
grace dis- co- uers. If fair Women were more scant, they would be
^
^
more respe- cted.
more affe- cted.
^
2
Courtship and Music suit with Love;
They both are works of passion:
Happy is he whose words can move,
Yet sweet Notes help persuasion.
Mix your words with Music then,
That they the more may enter:
Bold assaults are fit for men,
That on strange beauties venture.
BASSO. V.
^
Woo her.
^
FINIS.
The Names of the Maskers.
1 THE Duke of Lennox. 2 The Earl of Pembrooke. 3 The Earl of Dorset. 4 The
Earl of Salisburie. 5 The Earl of Mountgomerie. 6 The Lord Walden. 7 The Lord
Scroope. 8 The Lord North. 9 The Lord Hayes. 10 Sir Thrmas Howard. 11 Sir Henry
Howard. 12 Sir Charles Howard.
FINIS.

