THE CONQVEST of the Grand Canaries, made this last Summer by threescore and
thirteen sail of ships, sent forth at the command and direction of the
states general of the united provinces, to the coast of Spain and the
Canarie-Isles: with the taking of a town in the I Will of Gomera, and the
success of part of the said fleet in their return homeward. Which set sail
for Spain the 25: of May, and returned home the 10. of September. 1599.

AT LONDON Printed by P. S. for William Aspley, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard
at the sign of the Tigers head. 1599.

A true report of a voyage made this last Summer, by a fleet of 73. ships,
sent forth at the command and direction of the states general of the united
Provinces, to the coast of Spain and the Canarie-isles.
TVesday the 25. day of May the wind being North and Northeeast, we in the
fleet of Roterdam, being 20. sail of ships, the sun being southewest and
by west, came before Flushing, and ankered near unto Cleiburch; our general
at his coming found the fleetes of North- Holland, and Zeland ready.

Wednesday, the 26. day we remained there at anchor.

Thursday the 27. day of May, we took into our ships (by the Generals
commandment) two gentlemen and four soldiers.

Friday the 28. of May, 1599. the wind being northerly, we waied our anchors,
and sailed from the Weelings with 73 ships, having fair weather, setting our
course west, southwest. We had 3. Admirals in this fleet, whereof the chief
Admiral was the ship of William Derickson Cloper, wherein was embarked the
honorable gentleman Peter Van Do being general of the fleet. This ship
was called the Orange, carrying in her top a flag of Orange color, under whose
squadron were certain Zelanders, with some south and north Hollanders; Ian
Geerbrantson carried the white flag, under whom the Zelanders and ships of the
Maze were appointed. And Cornelius Gheleinso^ of Vlyshing wore in his maine top
the blew flag, under whom were appointed certain ships of the Maze with some
north Hollanders. Thus were we divided into sundry squadrons, but to what end
it was so done, it is to me, and many others unknown.

Saturday the 29. of May, having sight of Callis, ye ships lay to the lee
ward, and stayed for the rereward. The Lord general shot off a piece, and
afterward hung out the princes flag, in sign that the captains should come
aboard him, presently all the captains entered into their boats and rowed aboard
ye General, at which time were two pinnaces sent out of the fleet, whereof one
was the Generals Pinnace, but unto what place they sailed, we were altogether
ignorant. And when the boats rowed from the General, some of them went aboard
the victualers, and took out of them certain fire-workes. The sun
southwest, the General discharged an other piece of ordinance, and put out the
Princes flag, whereupon presently the captains went aboard him, and when our
captain returned, he had in his hand a letter closed up, which he brought
from the General, and we imagined that every captain had received the like,
and then we sailed altogether toward the higth of Blackness, where we
anchored, (which caused us greatly to wonder, seeing we had so fair a wind,)
but we perceived afterward, that this was done, to the end we should there
abide the coming of the great new ship of Amsterdam; for the soldiers which
were appointed for her, were all with us in a ship of our company.

Sunday, the 30. of May, where lying at anchor all that night, the next morning
we set sail altogether having the wind at north east, we set our course west
north west, the weather being fair. The same morning our captain read unto us
those very articles which before had bin read unto us in the prince Mauritz his
Court, and afterward we altogether; and with one accord were sworn to the
keeping of them: At noone we were near unto Beuersier, having a fine gale out
of the east north east, the evening was calm, the foremost ships slacked
their sails, attending the coming in of the hindermost.

Wednesday, the ninth of June, by the break of day we were hard under the
coast of Spain near to Viuero, the wind being westerly, we sailed north west
and by north, and north northwest, the sun southwest and by west; we were
over against the cape Ortegael, we sailed north west and by north, to fetch the
wind: we were in 44. degrees 20. minutes, at twilight, we had the foresaid Cape
of us about 5. miles south west and by west.

Thursday the 10. of June, the wind being at east south east, we directed our
course toward the shore, and might certainly discern that it was the Ortegall
coast of Ortegall, we bore in west southwest directly with the land, and
ordered all things as if we presently should have had battle, and about noone
we had fight of the Groyne, namely the tower which stands near the Groine.

Friday, the 11. of June, at the break of day the wind being at north east
and by east, six of our ships sailed forward south southwest, meaning to
enter the Groine, and there to learn how al things stood. The sun being
southeast, Cape Prior was east from us, we bare south, presently after we
spied two boats coming out of Veroll to learn what ships we were, the rather
because that the day before they had seen our fleet at sea: we sailed by the
wind, and lay in the wind to stay for their coming. The one doubting us would
not come near us, the other boat also durst not approach near us: we called
to one of the Spaniardes, saying we came from Hamborch laden with cordage and
other goods, desiring and praying him to let us have a Pilot to bring us into
the Groine, wherewith the boat came aboard us, so that by our great haste and
policy we got one Spaniard, the other which remained in the boat would not
come into our ship, but presently thrust off their boat, making all possible
speed to get from us. Having now gotten this Spaniarde, he was presently
delivered into the hands of the General, who confessed that there were about
4000. soldiers come into the town, with certain horsemen, 36. wagons with
money, and 300. pipes of wine, to furnish the Spanish fleet, that he lay the
night past in the Groine, and was the kings servant. The sun south south west,
we came with our whole fleet before the Groyne, where we The whole fleet
comes before the Groine.
found the great new ship of Amsterdam under the Town.

At 12. 13. and 10. fadome we cast anchor, so that we might behold much people
both on the shore and upon the walls of the town. From the castle and town
both, they shot mightily with their great ordinance into our fleet, so that
there were above 200. cannon shot discharged, wherewith some of our ships were
hit, but not one man lost, and little hurt done otherwise. There lay an other
castle east ward from the town, which shot also most terribly, but altogether
uncertainly, for we know not that they touched any one ship more then Moy
Lambert, which was greatly to be wondered at, seeing our fleet lay so thick
together, and so near under the castle. There lay hard under the castle 12.
great Gallions, with some french ships, which also now and then shot among our
fleet, but they lay so near the walls that we could do them no harm at
all. The Lord General worthy of al praise, wisely bethinking himself, caused
all his captains and counsel to come aboorde him, that they might together
confer upon this business, and what means might best be found, to invade the
town and the enemy, but they concluded, not to meddle with the land there:
seeing the enemy was there, strong upon his guard, and that 5. weeks past both
from Amsterdam, and by a French man, they had knowledge of our coming; by
reason of the calm, we were constrained to towe out our ships with the boats
in dispite of al their shot, thus we parted from the Groyne without profit, or
effecting of any thing, leaving the Papists of Groyne as we found them. From
thence (the wind being at south southwest) we bent our course toward Cape
Saint Vincent, meaning to go to Saint Lucars, hoping to fall upon them at
unawares, and ere they looked for us.

Saturday the 12. of June, having got a fine gale we ran along the coast of
Galicia, at noone we were before the Island of Cesarian, and set our course
toward Cape Finister.

Sunday the 13. of June, the lord General gave sharp commandment by his
letters, forbidding al men aboorde the ships to use any play, with tables,
cards, or dice, either for money, or for pastime, or upon credit.

Monday the 14. of June, the wind blew so hard out of the North, that we
could not be are our topsailes with our forecourse which sailed south, the
sun was southward, we had Port a Port of us, being in 41. degrees and 20.
minutes.

Tuesday the 15. of June, as soon as day appeared, we had sight of Cape
Roxent, and then we sailed making small way, staying for the coming together
of the fleet: the wind as before, we sailed south southwest, and were in 36.
degrees.

Wednesday the 16. of June, toward the evening we had sight of two strange
ships eastward of our fleet, certain of our ships made toward them and took
them, the one was an english man of war; the other was a Spanish bark with
three missens: at his coming before the General, he said, he had already sent
2. prises into England, and would now with this prise return home: for his
victuals were almost spent.

Thursday the 17. of June, it was very still and calm weather.

Friday the 18. of June, the wind being at north northeast, we sailed south
southwest. The Lord General caused all the Captains with the Pilots to come
aboard him: demanding of them which of them was best acquainted in the Isles of
Canaria: and further, by what means they might conquer and force the said
Islands, and land their people. And abut noone the captains were chosen and
appointed which should command on land. The General gave out new ensigns,
to the number of 9. or 10. according to the number of the ships. The lord
General appointed to each new captain, an Ancient bearer, a Lieutenant, and
other officers, with 130. soldiers and mariners, and instructions how every
one of them should govern himself on the land.

Saturday the 19. of June, the General commanded that the captains should
deliver out victuals but twice a day; to wit, 6. and 6. to a mess: for 6. men,
5. cans of beer of Roterdams measure every day, 5. pound of bread and no
more, a cheese of 6. l. every week, one pound of butter weekly, likewise
pease, beans, or Otemeale twice a day, according to the order. Captain
Harman, and captain Pijc, had each of them commission to command on the land
as captains over two companies of sailors, each company containing 130. men.
Harman Thunesson was appointed Ancient to captain Henricke Pijc, and de Blomme
Ancient to captain Hendricke Hertma^. The ancients were delivered the same day.

The 20. 21. 22. days, we sailed south southwest, the wind being northerly.

Wednesday the 23. of June, the wind was north northeast. The General
commanded all the captains both for the sea and land to come aboard him,
where it was ordained and determined how the battle should be ordered, after
they were landed. According to the altitude, we found our selves to be 36 miles
from great Canaria.

Thursday the 24. of June, we ran our foresaid course. The sun being west
northwest, we saw the land east and by south off us: we sailed east and by
south, and with great labor and diligence bore all that might with the land.

Friday the 25. of June, we continued our course to the land for our assured
knowledge thereof, and perceived it to be Lancerot; we saw also a small land
(which lay between both) called Allegrania, and also ye Island Forteue^tura,
which is 24. miles great, afterward we sailed southwest along the coast of
Forteuentura, which is a land that has very high hills. The sun southwest, we
were past the Island Forteue^tura, and were sailed out of sight thereof, running
as yet southwest: about ii. a clock in the afternoon we had sight of the
Island of great Canaria, for a while we kept our way; but when the General was
assured that it was the grand Canaria, we all The whole Netherlandish fleet
comes before the Island and town of Grand Canaria.
took in our sails, and lay to the lee ward, and so remained until it was
past midnight, then we set sail again and made to the land, our course
westwarde.

Saturday the 26. of June, in the morning the whole fleet sailed west directly
to the land, the wind north and by east, and made all things ready to land;
being now near the shore, the whole fleet let fall their anchors hard by the
great castle, which lies north northwest from the town, from whence they began
to shoot mightily against the ships. The lord General and the vize Admiral
with the other ships that had the greatest ordenance, anchored close under the
castle, and for a certain time they plied each other with their great shot; ye
Generals main mast, and his missen mast were shot through, and his vize
Admiral, namely the great new ship of Amsterdam was shot through 6. or 7.
times; so that some of the soldiers and maryners also were slain before they
entered their long beats to row to the shore: But the ships for their parts,
had so well bestowed their shot on the castle, that they of the castle began to
faint, whereby they discharged not so thick and often as before. Our men rowed
to the land in the long boats, every one full of soldiers, and the ships
which could not discharge their ordenance against the castle, bent them against
the shore, (for the enemy had three brass pieces lying upon the strand) and
many people were there gathered together where our soldiers should land.
Now as soon as the General with the most part of the long boats were come
together, they all at one instant rowed toward the shore, maintaining for a
while the fight on both sides with their shot. But the General perceiving that
the enemy would not abandon the place, with a baliant courage made to the
shore, and altogether leaping into the water up to the middle, maintained the
fight with the enemy. Notwithstanding the enemy no less courageous, would not
yet leave the strond, so that some of our soldiers and mariners lost their
lives before the enemy would retire: for the place was discommodious, and hard
to land; but most of the enemy were slain, to the number of 30. or 36. and
the Governor his right leg was shot off, sitting on his horse. The lord General
Peter von der Do leaping first on land, was thrust in his leg with a pike,
and had in his body 4. wounds more, and was in great danger to have lost his
life, but that one of the soldiers slew the Spaniarde which meant to have don
it; but his wounds were of small moment, and his ancient bearer was slain with
a shot, the Lieutenant General was shot in his throat, captain Kruyc in the
head, 4. soldiers were slain, and 15. hurt in the generals pinnace before
they could come to land: But when our people now with one courage all together
rushed upon the enemy, (leaving their ordenance behind them,) they forsook
the strond, and ran together into the town, carrying with them their Governor,
whose leg was shot off, and he was a Knight of the order of the cross, and
leaving behind them 36. dead carcases on the strond, were presently by our
people ransacked, and our dead people buried. Our men now having won the
strond, put themselves presently in battle ray; the empty boats returned to
the ships, but after our people had taken the strond, the castle did never
shoot shot. After the boats were returned aboard, presently they rowed again
to the shore full of soldiers; our people being all landed, they which for
Twenty f^^^ companie^ strong of t^^ Netherln^^^
the first time had commandment, set us in 7. troops, or battalions, being
xxiiii. companies strong, of soldiers and Mariners, with twenty four
Almeientes. At which time we marched a little forward twenty one a breast, and
standing altogether in battle; The first castle taken.
suddenly three mariners came running to the General, (which had bin at the
castle) telling him that the Spaniards desired to deliver him the castle, so
their lives and goods might be saved: the general with some of the captains
and soldiers went first thither, and presently the castle was delivered into
his possession, hoping on his pity and mercy, and leaving behind them all the
great ordenance, namely 9. pieces of brass, and 6. Iron pieces, and also al
their weapons. In the castle were about 80. Spaniards, some cannoniers, some
soldiors, and some people of the country, for the defense thereof; beside
powder, shot and match accordingly, for the artillery, and also thirty small
pieces or caliuers. Also we found 58. prisoners, the rest were slain with
shot in the fury, and some were run away. The prisoners (which our people had
taken in the road with two Barks, and a ship sunk with our ordenance, as they
lay all 3. hard before the castle) were sent altogether aboorde the ships:
except 3. of the principals which the lord General reserved by him, to the end
he might the better know the state of all things. Presently 80. soldiers were
sent into the castle, who took down the kings flag, and set up the princes
colors. At the same instant two Negros were brought to ye General, which were
fetched out of the mountains, they said that they had lien there a sleep, and
knew nothing of any matter. But now when it began to wax dark, we marched
altogether a great way toward the town, 4. companies of soldiors approached
hard under the town, and other 4. companies had the rereward: those of the
Maze, with the Amsterdammers remained a pretty way from the town, under the
hills; and the Zelanders, with the north Hollanders lay near the waters side,
so we remained all that night in order of battle.

Sunday the 27. of June, after we had now stood al night in battle order, early
in the morning we marched wh al our 7. troops hard under the town of Canarie,
where we remained a while in that order: but because they of the castle (which
lies to the town) shot so mightily among us; 2 of the troops retired under a
hill, where we were a little freede from the castle: for while our people stood
imbattailed before the town, the castle did us great hurt, for sometimes they
shot five or six men with one shot, ere we could entrench our selves before
the castle: but after they perceived that our people had made a small trench
against the shot of the castle, they placed on the hill five or six small
pieces of brass called falconets (which shoot about a pound of powder) and
sometimes they shot boules of wood, wherewith in the beginning they slew many
of our people: so aduantagiouslie had they placed their ordenaunce to shoot
among us. Ten or twelve of our Soldiers ran up the hill, whereof the enemy
took one, and presently cut him in four pieces. Our people seeing that they
so tyranouslie dealte with them, about the evening took a Spaniarde prisoner,
and used him after the same manner. The lord General perceiving that many men
were slain with the ordenance, caused five pieces of brass to be brought
from the castle which we had taken the day before, and toward the evening we
began to make a battery, and the same evening brought into it three pieces,
whereof two were placed presently to play upon the Castle, and the hill: but
that evening were but five or six shot made. While that our men made the
battery, and planted or placed the ordenaunce, the enemy placed his ordenance
in counter-battery: and before our battery could be finished, and the ordenance
placed, many of our men were shot, among who^ Peter vanden Eynde commissioner,
had his leg shot off, whereof he died within three days after. After that it
was dark, al they which lay there before the town were again set in order of
battle, 15. on a rank, and so remained all that night.

The 28. of June, early in the morning every man retired to his quarter, and
then were two pieces more brought to the battery, which also were presently
placed on the Rampire, and so we began to shoot against the castle with 4.
pieces, and with the fifth we played upon the small ordenance which lay upon
the hills. The enemy in the castle laid many sackes of wool, and placed many
tonnes or barrels filled with stones upon the castle walls, supposing thereby
to make some little defense from our ordenance; but when an Iron bullet chanced
to hit the barrels so filled with stones, it did them mighty hurt, for the
stones would scatter marvelously abroad, whereby many of them that were in
the castle were slain. Our men having now with their shot almost abated the
force of the castle, 4. companies marched up the hills, intending to beat the
enemy from thence, which lay there with the ordenance. But the enemy perceiving
himself to be assaulted on all parts, (for most of the ordenance of the
castle were dismounted and made unprofitable, the gate of the town set one
fire by the Generals commandment) about noone they forsook both the castle,
hill, and town, and with all their wives, children, money and Jewels, and all
other things that they could carry with them, fled into the mountains. Which
when our men perceived, they put themselves in order of battle, xv. in a
rank. The lord General seeing the Spaniards shamefullie to fly, caused 2.
ladders belonging to the enemies, to be brought out of a church which stood
without the town, whereof the one was too short, notwithstanding himself
with one of the ladders climed up The second castle and t^^^ of Grand ^^naria
tak^^
the walls, one man at once followed, and by this means entered the town
over the walls. About noone some of our men ran into the castle without any
reencou^ter: the enemy had undermined the gate, but as we approached the wall,
it took fire, but not one of our people was therewith hurt. they had also
skattered powder in sundry places, but our men themselves did fire the same:
and as soon as our people were entered the castle, the Kings colors were
taken down, and the prince of Orenges set up, and we found five pieces of
brass therein. When we were all entered into the town, we put our selves
again into order of battle 15. in a rank in a low ground within the town:
and the soldiers which entered the town by the hills side, brought to the
General a man of Flushing, which they had taken out of prison: as soon as the
General saw him, he went presently with him to the prison, accompanied with
some of our captains, where they found 36. prisoners, which presently were
discharged. And further they declared, that the spaniards had taken with them
2. prisoners into the mountains, which were condemned to be burnt, the one was
an english man, the other a dutchman, which had lien in the holy house. Thus
with the help of God about noone, we won the great Island of Canaria, and the
town of Allegona, battered with their own artillery, and skaled with their
own ladders. Toward the evening we were quartered in the housen, those
wherein the General was, were by writing freed, that no man might take out any
goods, in the rest every one might go, and take what pillage he could find: but
the Spaniards had carried all the best things with them into the mountains, and
in the evening all our people entered the town. Every captain with his company
were severally lodged, but yet we appointed watch on the hills, as well as in
the town, for the enemy showed himself often upon the hills, whereby we were
forced to keep very good watch.

The 29. of June, this morning some of the mariners climed up the hills, but the
enemy (to whom the passage were better known, then to our people) suddenly set
upon them, and killed 20. of them. Toward the evening some 300. of our
Soldiers marched toward a small castle which lay half an hours journey
from the town: but the enemy seeing our people to approach, forsook the place
and fled into the mountains, our men being ascended, they found in the castle
three brass pieces; and after they had appointed a Corporal with certain
soldiers to keep the watch, the rest returned to the city. The same night
the Spaniards took one of our soldiors appointed for a forlorn Sentinel, whom
they presently put to the sword.

The last of June, as soon as day appeared, we began to carry the pillage
aboorde belonging to the General, and captains, as wines and other goods.
About noone 3. chief men of the Spaniards came to our people, which kept watch
on the hills with a flag of truce in their hands, which were straight brought
before the General, and within a while after, there were 2. more brought unto
him: but after they had bin a while with him they departed again toward the
mountains: and in the evening came other 7. Spaniardes to our watch with a
flag of truce, desired to speak with the General: but they were sent back
again into the Mountains.

The first day of July, 1599. in the morning (our people being on the hills) 2.
Friars with three other Spaniards came unto us, desiring to be brought to the
General, which our men accomplished: but the General denied to talk with
them, wherefore they were presently sent back again from whence they came,
for we were then laboring to send the goods a shipboord. Also at that instant
was a sermon in the great church of great Canaria, made by the preacher of
Ysilmond with great devotion, and giving thanks unto God for our great victory,
desiring him that it would please him daily to increase the same, to the honor
of his name: at which Sermon the Lord General was present with four hundred
persons.

The second of July, 1599. we were forbidden by sound of the drum, that no
man should go beyond the forlorn sentenell placed on the Mountains: and to
send back again into the hills all such Spaniardes which came with a flag
of truce, to speak with the General, and to put all such to the sword as
came with weapons. One of our Pinnaces took a Fisherman fishing under the
Island Forteauentura, wherein were 7. Spaniardes, which were brought before the
General, and prently committed to prison.

The 3. of July in the morning we began to send aboard our ships all the bells,
ordenance and munition which the enemies had left behind them, at which time
2000. soldiors were appointed to march to the hills, to seek the enemy, which
lay hid there with their wives, children and goods, as they were fled out of
the town: and as soon as they approached each other, they began the fight on
both sides with great courage, out the enemy was forced to fly, being better
acquainted with the passages of the mountains then our people were. our men
returned with the loss of some 70. persons: among whom captain Iacques
Dierickson with his boatson were slain: the rest came into the town again
into their appointed quarters.

The 4. of July, in the morning we began to burn the town, and with powder
blewe up the castle which lay by the town, and we burned likewise all the
cloisters and churches which were without the town, lying near the water
side. The town burning, our people were set in battle, and in that order
marched out of the town, until they came to Gratiosa, the castle, which we
first took, lying about half an hours journey from the town, where the long
boats received our men, and carried them again aboorde. Presently after we
were departed out of the town, the enemy entered, endeavoring by all means
possible to quench the fire. And while we were shipping our people, the enemy
showed him self some times 5. or 6. in a company, but they durst not approach
us. The rereward of our men being shipped, we put fire to the castle which we
took first, and blew it up: This done, captain Quit embarked himself also
with his soldiers, and pillage which he had taken in the rode, for his ship
wherein he was before was ready to sink.

The 5. of July, lying in the road, in the morning the General discharged two
pieces of ordenance, and afterward put out 2. flags of the princes colors,
thereby giving to understand, that all land captains, and sea captains also
with one of their Pilots should resort to him, whereupon presently they all
rowed aboorde the General; the Pilots which were best acquainted with the
coast, were demanded by the General which were the weakest Islands, and where
they might most commodiouslie land: Toward the evening captain Quvt his ship
was fired, and suffered to drive toward the strond. At which time a new
captain was appointed to captain Jacques Dirriksons ship aforesaid, who was
slain in the mountains, namely captain Kloyers Lieutenant. And the Generals
Clarke of the band was appointed Lieuetenant to captain Kloyer.

The 6. of July, by reason of the contrary winds, and other inconveniences
which happened at this present, and also because such ships, which before were
sent to sea, and could not return by reason of the contrary winds; we
remained in the road, under the castle of Graciosa. About noone 4. Spaniards
came out of the town with a flag of truce to the strond, directly over against
our ships, whereof 2. were brought aboorde the General in one of our long
boats, (the other two with their flag of truce were left behind on the
stronde) which remained with the General until the evening, and then were set
on shore, and so the 4. Spaniardes returned to the town.

The 7. day riding in the road, in the morning 4. Spaniards with a flag of
peace, came to the shore from the town, directly over against our ships: the
fleet seeing them, sent a long boat to the shore, and brought the said 4.
Spaniards aboard the General, these men brought with them the ransom of
certain Spaniards, which had delivered up the castle of Graciosa at the
Generals pleasure, which were set to ransom, every one according to his
ability and office: and thus all the Spaniardes which were ransomed, together
with the 4. spaniardes which brought the ransoms, were set on shore with a long
boat, and departed to the town.

The 8. day of July, two hours after sun rising, the General with all the
ships set sail, carrying with him all the Spaniardes that were not ransomed,
sailing alo^g the coast of great Canaria; in which time Ian Cornelesson
Zwartekeys departed this world, whose leg was shot off at the taking of the
Island of great Canaria. Having now sailed from ye hight of the said Island,
which lay southerly from us, we had sight of captain Hertmans ship, and of 3.
others which rode there at anchor: who, so soon as they perceived our fleet,
waied their anchors, and sailed along the coast with us, which were the ships
that the General had sent to sea. Sailing thus together until the sun was in
the west, the wind began to rise more and more, so that we could not keep our
direct course, but were forced to put to the southwest of the great Island of
Canaria, where we anchored: we had sight of the Island Teneriffa, and of an
other of the Islands of Canaria, wherein is the hie mountain called the Pyck.
This hill was from us 14. miles, but by the great hight thereof it seemed to be
within four or five miles off us, but in the day time when the sun shined we
could not see it.

The 9. of July, lying thus at anchor, in the morning most of the long boats
went a shore to fetch fresh water, such as they could there find, and carried
with them the dead corpse of Ian Cornelesson aforesaid, the Constables son of
the Admiralty of Roterda^, called Zwertkeys, which was there honorably buried
on the high and dry land. This done, we set on fire the wood which lay on the
shore piled and he aped in the woods, but in this place we found not any
Spaniards.

The tenth of July, the boats being all returned to their ships with their
people, every one wayed their anchors and hoised their sails, the wind at
northwest; but being under sail together, the wind flacked, and by reason of
the great calm the ships lay a drift for want of wind.

The 11. of July, in the morning it blewe a stout gale in our topsailes out of
the northeast, but as we approached the Island of Teneriffa, the wind altered
often; six or seven of our ships, and the rest which were next unto the
shore, had sometimes a gale in their topsailes, and sometimes again without
wind: so that we lay a drift, and could keep no reckoning either of the wind
or course, and were forced to alter our course more then 12. times a day.

A declaration of the taking of Gomera one of the Islands in Canaria, and how we
afterward left it.
THe 12. day of July failing thus with great variety of wind, under the great
Ila^d Teneriffa, the day appearing, we had the wind more certain, filling our
topsailes with a full gale from the northwest: And when it was fair day light
we saw our fleet scattred far one from another, by means of the foresaid
mutable winds. Some ships lay driving by reason of the calm, and other some
had a little gale, but the most part of our fleet were west of us, toward whom
with all speed, we with the rest of the ships made. Being al come together, we
endeavored to reach the Island Gomera, wherein is a little town: toward the
evening many of our ships were near the Island, but the most part were to ye
lee ward; so that before it grew toward the evening none of us could come near
the town. Notwithstanding in the twilight and shutting up of the evening: Ian
Garbrantson Admiral of the white flag, his vize Admiral, and a Pinnace
following, were come near the town. Thus the Admiral sailing so near to the
Island, they of Gomera discharged 2. pieces at him, but touched him not. the
said. Admiral seeing this, passed on a little farther with the other ships
which were near him, and then took in their sails, and cast their anchors.
The other ships which were behind, labored all they might to come also under
the Island to them.

The 13. of July, the Admiral of the white flag lying thus at anchor near to
Gomera, the greatest part of the fleet were yet in the morning between the
Island of Teneriffa and Gomera, so that part of the ships were beyond the
town, and must sometimes cast about to conducte the others in, which were in
the lee of us. When we had now for the most part passed the hight of the
Island, the General gave a signl to all captains to come aboorde him, being
under sail, directing his course to the Island of Gomera, and the other ships
did their endeavor to follow him, and anchored about the neck of the valley,
lying north north east off the town. The ships being all come to anchor, the
captains entered presently into the long boats, and rowed aboorde the
General to know his mind: And after they had been a while in the Generals
ship, they returned to their ships, and 4. companies of soldiers were chosen
out, and landed in the valley. Which done, all the ships waied their anchors,
and sailed directly toward the town, and then came to anchor again. After
that all our ships lay thus together in the road near the valley, before the
town: we discharged certain pieces against the town, but they made no show at
all of resistaunce; for they had buried four brass pieces as soon as they
had sight of us, which lay on the strond near unto a small castle; the other
six companies were also set on land in the long boats, without any
resistance: for the Spaniards with their wines, children, and The town (...)
Gomera ^^^^doned by Spaniard
all their goods which they could carry with them were fled into the
mountains. The first 4. companies that were landed, as they marched along the
hills side toward the town, perceiving that the enemy fled with all his goods
toward the hills, sent out a certain number of soldiers to intercept them,
and to take from them the goods which they carried away. And to accomplish this
enterprise, our soldiers descended the hill into the valley, meaning
suddenly to set upon the Spaniardes; but the enemy perceiving their intent,
hid themselves in caves which were near unto them, until our soldiers were
in the valley. The spaniardes perceiving that they were strong enough to
encounter with our people, suddenly leapt out of their dens, and beset our
soldiers on both sides. Our people seeing themselves thus compassed with
their enemies, behaved Eighty Ne^^^^landers (...) diverse Sp^^^ards sliane
themselves most valiantly, so that many of the spaniards lost their lives, and
80 of ours were slain in this valley: among whom were 2. Lieutenants (the one
was Meerbecks son, and the other was Lieutenant to captain Bynon) which had
received above 50. wounds in their bodies, so pitifully were they massacred,
thus were these worthy champions intercepted. The rest of these 4. companies,
which were not present at this fury of the spaniardes, toward the evening,
descended the hills and marched into the town. Presently after this, watch was
appointed in all places of ye town, and some of the soldiers began to dig the
ground, to seek for such goods as the Spaniardes had buried, but at that
instant they found nothing, except only certain pipes of wine.

About the sun setting was brought in a spanish prisoner, which was delivered
to the Prouest marshal, by the Generals commandment, to the end he might bring
them to all such places in the Island, whereas the Spaniardes had hidden their
goods. But because nothing could then be effected by reason that the evening
approached, and it began to be too dark, the Spaniard was committed to a keeper
until the next morning for the purpose aforesaid. But the night being far
spent, and the keeper taking small regard to his charge, the Spaniard secretly
stole away and ran to the mouniaines.

The 14. of July, in the morning the long boats rowed again to the shore, and
carried aboorde such goods as the enemy had left behind them, which for the most
part were wines, for they had carried clean away all other things into the
mountains, and had left almost nothing in the town, but only the wines which
they had buried in the earth: In the afternoon our people found 3. bells, which
they had buried in the fields, where corn had grown.

The 15. of July, in the morning our people running up to the hills 10. or 12.
in a company to hunt and seek for pillage, were suddenly environed by the
enemy, and 6. or 8. of them slain; the rest saved themselves by flight. About
noone there was a general muster taken of all the soldiers, to see how many
we had lost: and such ships as were appointed to return home, began to
deliver out the victuals. The same day were two copper pieces found: whereof
the one was 16. foot and half long, and the other about 14. foot.

The 16. day in the morning the Lord General gave notice to all captains to
resort to him aboard his ship, because some of the captains had not sent
victuals unto the soldiors that were on land, whereby they suffered hunger, and
sundry of the soldiers had complained to the General thereof: At afternoon,
the enemy came to the hill which lies over the town, crying and calling unto
our men to come and fetch again their muskets, and toward the evening many
mariners with their weapons landed, and at that instant also all things were
ordered to march very early the next morning up the hills to fetch again our
muskets, caliuers, and other weapons, which the Spaniards before had in
mockery, and giving wise willed us to fetch from them. But now when all things
were ordered for this service: the same night arose a strong gale of wind,
increasing more and more, that in the end it grew to a mighty tempest, that
notwithstanding our fleet did ride under the Island Gomera in the road before
the town, some were forced to way their anchors and to put to sea, to prevent
the mischief like to happen to the ships, by reason they lay so near one
another. And when those ships were a little way in the Sea, they cast their
anchors, and there remained. By this occasion the generals aforesaid enterprise
was kept back: we judging it as a warning, that the General should spare and
preserve his people from the bloodthirsty spaniards, which had their holes and
dens in the hills, and perhaps might have taken away many of our lives. And
here by the way; by the name of the Island Canaria, the Spaniards may rightly
be called Canarians or Canes, for Canaria is by interpretation, dogs kind,
for they ran as swift as dogs, and were as tyrannical and bloudthirsty as the
ravening Wolf, or any other wild beast, which they sufficiently manifested,
for as soon as they could lay hands on any of our people (like unto mad curs,
agreeing with their name Canaria^s) they would presently woary them.

The 17. this hurtful night ended, and the tempest over passed, and alaid, the
courageous soldiors were all in readiness, desirous to execute this piece of
service, exspecting and desiring nothing more, then to march up the hills, and
to encounter their idolatrous enemies. But upon good consideration, this
enterprise was stayed, and some 300. soldiers sent into the same valley, where
3. days before our people had been suddenly compassed, intrapped, and slain
by the Spaniards. Our soldiers being come to the valley aforesaid found no
resistance, neither could once see a spaniard; but found a small piece of brass
about a fadome long, and two barrels of gunpowder; and when our soldiers
perceived that there was no good to be done (forbearing to mount the hills,
because they had no commission so to do) with such things as they had they
returned into the town. The evening now approaching, the General commanded to
carry aboard the ships, such goods as they had there found, and dug out of
the ground, which was accordingly done and accomplished, among which things
were three brass pieces, some bells and other goods.

Sunday the 18. of July, we remained at anchor in the road of the Island Gomera.

Monday the 19. of July, remaining yet in the Island Gomera, and seeing that the
Spaniardes continued in their secret holes, and dens of the mountains, we set
fire on the town, and as near as we could burnt down all places, as Cloisters
churches, hermitages and houses, remaining yet in the town until it was
noone. After that all this was accomplished; we the united soldiers forsook
the town, and presently the Lord General, with all his company, went aboard the
ships. Thus we left the Island Gomera burning, which was never before done by
any nation. The Spaniardes seeing that the soldiers were departed out of the
Island, with all speed possible, in great heaps came running out of their
secret caves and holes, to quench the fire, like as they of Allegona in the
Island of great Canaria before had done.

Wednesday the 20. of July, we lay still in the road before Gomera, in this time
2. of our soldiers were put into captain Cloiers ship, and in lieu of them, we
received out of his ship 2. others, which were hurt, with two Spaniards.

The summary or brief declaration of the Admirals departing toward the West
Indies.
After that the General had left the Islands, he gives order to the fleet,
takes his leave of all the Captains and officers in most honorable sort: he
aduanceth the voyage to the West Indies with his Navy: the rest of the ships
return into the low Countries, every one from whence he came.

AFter that the Island of great Canaria was by the united soldiers taken, and
won by force of Arms, and the Island Gomera conquered, for sundry reasons they
were forsaken, after they had carried to their ships such things as they found,
fired the towns, churches, cloisters, and houses, and rased their Castles. The
Lord General commanded all Captains and officers of the fleet to resort
unto him aboard his ship. The same principals being come accordingly, he
welcomed them and showed them al friendship he could, thanking them for their
good and faithful endeavors which they had showed in this service, which he
performed with a singular oration, praying Almighty God that he would
vouchsafe to be his only loadsman, and merciful defender, in all his
enterprises, to the honor of his name, and happy success of the united
Netherlandish provinces. After this, the lord General again in most friendly
sort, and kind speeches, persuaded and desired all the said captains and
officers, (alleging many reasons and examples) to persevere in their good
beginning of true and faithful service for God, and for their good Lords and
principal magistrates, the honorable gentlemen and states of the united
Netherland; and to the good liking of their valiant and high borne gentleman,
and governor General prince Mauritz, their principal lord and commander,
etc. with these and such like matters the day was spent.

Wednesday the 21. of July, the wind was northerly: The lord General commanded
all the captains and officers to resort unto him: and in most courteous manner
again the second time, took his leave of them all, ordaining and appointing
in his place as Admiral General over all those ships which were to return
home, the valiant captain Ian Gerbrantson, desiring and straightly charging
them al there present, to show all obedience and duty unto him, as to his own
person, and that they should make his mind known to all others which had not
been there present. After these speeches, and leave taken, the Admiral Ian
Gerbrantson put out the princes colors in the maine top: and the honorable
gentleman Peter von der Do presently caused the princes flag also to be
spread; and as soon The Neth^^landish (...) divide th^^selues into^ ^^
compani^^ whereof (...) one retur^^^ homewar^ and the o^^^^ proceede^ for the
w^^^ Indians.
as the sun was southwest, all the ships at one instant waied their anchors,
and hoised their sails, taking leave now the third time one of an other, in
most brave and triumphant sort, and in this manner departed the one from the
other. The lord General with his fleet, set this course south southwest, with
36. ships, and the Admiral Ian Gerbrantson ran east by the wind, with 35.
ships, with intent to return home.

Wednesday the 18 of August, sixteen ships of our fleet which were sent to
return home, being in company together in the latitude of 36. degrees and 10.
minutes, the wind southwest sailing northeast, before it was noone, we
perceived 2 strange ships under sail coming out of the northwest, toward Two
Spa^^^^ prizes tak^^
whom we made, and at afternoon we ouertooke them, and made them our prises:
they were both Spaniardes, the one was a small Bark, and came from Cape de
Blanco in 21. degrees, laden for Woluis in the Condate where they dwelled. In
the same ships was a merchant of Cyuill with 47. men, each of their ships
having two cast pieces, and every man his musket, but they made no show of
defense, or offending. There was also found laden in the same ships, sixty
thousand dry hides or skins, esteemed to be worth 6000. ducats as they
reported, there were also found two bags with money, in the one was 11. hundred
single rials, and in the other 10. hundred and forty single rials, with two
Buts of train oil, and two barrels of gum Arabique.

Thursday the 19 day, we the abouesaid 16. ships were together, beside the two
spanish ships, 4. ships of war of north Holland, 4 ships of Wars of Zeland
and one ship of war of the Maze: the captain whereof was Antony Leonardson, all the rest were victualers. The wind west northwest, we sailed northeast, and by
north in 36. degrees and 45. minutes. The captains had been all aboard the
Admiral in council aduising what were best to be done in this matter of the
Spaniards prises.

Saturday, Sunday, the 21. and 22. of August, our said fleet of 18. ships kept
yet together, we found our selves to be in 39. degrees, 6. minutes. The sun
south and by west, the wind blew up at west north west, we sailed north
northeast, and north and by east, Lysborne was east of us.

Monday the sixth of September, the wind westerly, we ran east, at noone we
sounded, the depth was 50. fadome water, we found small white shells with
needles therein, in the hight of 49. degrees 20. minutes, the sun southwest, we
had sight of Vshant, we ran northeast and by north.

Tuesday the 7. of September, the sun east south east, we saw England, a
mighty blustering gale of wind from the south southwest, we sailed north
north east. The sun southwest, came to land at Gawstert. Afterward we
turned and sailed east south east: In the evening it blewe so much wind, that
we were forced to strike our maine top mast, and we ran the whole night with
two courses by the wind.

Wednesday the 8. of September, the foul weather continued, the sun east and
by south, we had sight of the I Will of Wight north northwest of us, and ran the
whole day, east northeast with the foresatle by the wind: as the evening
approached we saw Beuersier, in the night and second quarter we passed by Dover.

Tursday the 9. of September, as soon as the day began to appear it was
calm weather, and dark, the sun southeast, we lay still before Newport all
the ebb. The wind easterly, in the afternoon the wind came northwest, we set
sail again, running al night by the wind with our foresaile.

Friday the 10. of September, 1599. by the break of day we were before the
Maze, the sun southwest, we arrived by the help of Gods mercy and grace before
the Brill.

Since then, there is arrived at Texell another ship of war, whereof one Cater
of Amsterdam was captain, the which was severed from the fleet in this voyage by
tempest, and thought to be lost. The said captain met with some prises, and in
company of two english ships took a Caruell of Aduiso, very richly laden
coming out of India, and having more men then the english, shared half of the
goods with them, and so came home this present month of October.

FINIS.

