OBSERVATIONS in the Art of English Poesy.

By Thomas Campion.

Wherein it is demonstratiuely proved, and by example confirmed, that the
English tongue will receive eight several kinds of numbers, proper to it self,
which are all in this book set forth, and were never before this time by any
man attempted.

Printed at London by RICHARD FIELD for Andrew Wise. 1602.

To the Right Noble and worthily honored, the Lord Buckhurst, Lord high
Treasurer of England.
IN two things (right honorable) it is generally agreed that man excels all
other creatures, in reason, and speech: and in them by how much one man
surpasses an other, by so much the nearer he aspires to a celestial essence.

Poesy in all kind of speaking is the chief beginner, and maintayner of
eloquence, not only helping the ear with the acquaintance of sweet numbers,
but also raising the mind to a more high and lofty conceit. For this end have
I studied to induce a true form of versefying into our language: for the
vulgar and vnarteficiall custom of riming has I know detered many excellent
wits from the exercise of English Poesy. The observations which I have gathered
for this purpose, I humbly present to your Lordship, as to the noblest judge of
Poesy, and the most honorable protector of all industrious learning; which if
your Honor shall vouchsafe to receive, who both in your public, and private
Poemes have so deuinely crowned your fame, what man will dare to repine? or not
strive to imitate them? Wherefore with all humility I subject my self and
them to your gracious favor, beseeching you in the noblenes of your mind to
take in worth so simple a present, which by some work drawn from my more
serious studies, I will hereafter endeavor to excuse.

Your Lordships humbly devoted THOMAS CAMPION.

The Writer to his Book.
WHether thus hasts my little book so fast?
To Paul's Churchyard; what in those cells to stand,
With one leaf like a riders cloak put up
To catch a termer? or lie mustie there
With rimes a term set out, or two before?
Some will redeem me; few; yes, read me too;
Fewer; nay love me; now thou dot'st I see;
Will not our English Athens art defend?
Perhaps; will lofty courtly wits not aim
Still at perfection? If I grant? I slye;
Whether? to Pawles; Alas poor book I rue
Thy rash self-love, go spread thy pap'ry wings,
Thy lightness can not help, or hurt my fame.
Observations in the Art of English Poesy, by Thomas Campion.
The first Chapter, entreating of numbers in general.
THere is no writing too brief, that without obscurity comprehends the intent
of the writer. These my late observations in English Poesy I have thus briefly
gathered, that they might prove the less troublesome in perusing, and the more
apt to be retayn'd in memory. And I will first generally handle the nature of
Numbers. Number is discreta quantitas, so that when we speak simply of number,
we intend only the disseuer'd quantity; But when we speak of a Poem written
in number, we consider not only the distinct number of the sillables, but also
their value, which is contained in the length or shortness of their sound. As in
Music we do not say a strain of so many notes, but so many sem'briefes
(though sometimes there are no more notes then sem'briefes) so in a verse the
numeration of the sillables is not so much to be observed, as their waire, and
due proportion. In joining of words to harmony there is nothing more offensive
to the ear then to place a long syllable with a short note, or a short
syllable with a long note, though in the last the vowell often bears it out.
The world is made by Simmetry and proportion, and is in that respect compared
to Music, and Music to Poetry: for Terence says speaking of Poets, artem qui
tractant musicam, confounding music and Poesy together. What music can there
be where there is no proportion observed? Learning first flourished in Greece,
from thence it was derived unto the Romans, both diligent obseruers of the
number, and quantity of sillables, not in their verses only, but likewise in
their prose. Learning after the declining of the Roman Empire, and the
pollution of their language through the conquest of the Barbarians, lay most
pitifully deformed, till the time of Erasmus, Rewcline, Sir Thomas More, and
other learned men of that age, who brought the Latin tongue again to light,
redeeming it with much labor out of the hands of the illiterate Monks and
Friars: as a scoffing book, entitled Epistolae obscurorum virorum, may
sufficiently testi^ie. In those lack-learning times, and in barbarized ^taly,
began that vulgar and easy kind of Poesy which is now in use throughout most
parts of Christendom, which we abusiuely call Rhyme, and Meeter, of Rithmus and
Metrum, of which I will ^ow discourse.

The second Chapter, declaring the unaptness of Rhyme in Poesy.
I Am not ignorant that whosoever shall by way of reprehension examine the
imperfections of Rhyme, must encounter with many glorious enemies, and those
very expert, and ready at their weapon, that can if need be extempore (as they
^^y) rhyme a man to death. Besides there is grown kind of prescription in the
use of Rhyme, to foreall the right of true numbers, as also the consent ^f many
nations, against all which it may seem a ^^ing almost impossible, and vain to
contend. ^ll this and more can not yet deter me from a ^wful defense of
perfection, or make me any whit ^^e sooner adheare to that which is lame and
vn^eseeming. For custom I allege, that ill uses are to be abolisht, and that
things naturally imperfec^ can not be perfected by use. Old customs, if they
be better, why should they not be recald, as the yet flourishing custom of
numerous poesy used among the Romans and Grecians: But the unaptness of our
toongs, and the difficulty of imitation dishartens us; again the facility
and popularitie of Rhyme creates as many Poets, as a hot summer flies. But let
me now examine the nature of that which we call Rhyme. By Rhyme is understood
that which ends in the like sound, so that verses in such mane^ composed, yield
but a continual repetition of tha^ Rhetorical figure which we term similiter
desinentia, and that being but figura verbi, ought (a Tully and all other
Rhetoritians have iudicially observed) sparingly to be vsd, least it should
offen^ the care with tedions affectation. Such was tha^ absurd following of the
letter amongst our English so much of late affected, but now hist out of Paule^
Churchyard: which foolish figurative repetition crept also into the Latin
tongue, as it is manifest in the book of Ps called praelia porcorum, and an other
pamphlet all of Fs, which I have seen imprinted; but I will leave these
follies to their own^ ruin, and return to the matter intended. The ear is a
rational sense, and a chief judge of proportion, but in our kind of riming
what proportion is there kept, where there remains such a confusd inequality
of sillables? Iambick and Trochaick feet which are opposd by nature, are by
all Rimers confounded, nay oftentimes they place in stead of an Iambick the
foot Pyrrychius, consisting of two short sillables, curtalling their verse,
which they supply in reading with a ridiculous, and unapt drawing of their
speech. As for example: Was it my desteny, or dismal chance?
In this verse the two last sillables of the word, Desteny, being both short,
and standing for a whole foot in the verse, cause the line to fall out shorter
then it ought by nature. The like impure errors have in time of rudeness been
used in the Latin tongue, as the Carmina prouerbialia can witness, and many
other such reverend bables. But the noble Grecians and Romans whose skillful
monuments outliue barbarism, tied themselves to the strict observation of
poetical numbers, so abandoning the childish titillation of riming, that it
was imputed a great error to Ovid for setting forth this one riming verse, Quot
coelum stellas tot habet tua Roma puellas.
For the establishing of this argument, what bette^ confirmation can be had,
then that of Sir Thoma^ Moore in his book of Epigrams, where he make^ two
sundry Epitaphs upon the death of a singin^ man at Westminster, the one in
learned number^ and dislik't, the other in rude rhyme and highly extold: so that
he concludes, tales lactucas talia labr^ petunt, like lips, like lettuce. But
there is yet another fault in Rhyme altogether intolerable, which is that it
inforceth a man oftentimes to abjure hi^ matter, and extend a short conceit
beyond a^ bounds of art: for in Quatorzens me thinks the Poet handles his
subject as tyrannically as Procru^stes the thief his prisoners, whom when he
ha^ taken, he used to cast upon a bed, which if the^ were too short to fill, he
would stretch the^ longe^ if too long, he would cut them shorter. Bring before
me now any the most selfe-lou'd Rimer, and le^ me see if without blushing he be
able to read hi^ lame halting rimes. Is there not a curse of Nature laid upon
such rude Poesy, when the Writer i^ himself ashamed of it, and the hearers in
contemp^ call it Riming and Ballating? What Divine in hi^ Sermon, or grave
Counselor in his Oration will allege the testimony of a rhyme? But the
deuinit^ of the Romans and Gretians was all written in verse: and Aristotle,
Galene, and the books of all the excellent Philosophers are full of the
testimonies of the old Poets. By them was laid the foundation of all humane
wisdom, and from them the knowledge of all antiquity is derived. I will
propound but one question, and so conclude this point. If the Italians,
Frenchmen and Spaniards, that with commendation have written in Rhyme, were
demanded whether they had rather the books they have published (if their tongue
would bear it) should remain as they are in Rhyme, or be translated into the
ancient numbers of the Greeks and Romans, would they not answer into
numbers? What honor were it then for our English language to be the first that
after so many years of barbarism could second the perfection of the
industrious Greeks and Romans? which how it may be effected I will now
proceed to demonstrate.

The third Chapter: of our English numbers in general.
THere are but three feet, which generally distinguish the Greek and Latin
verses, the Dactil consisting of one long syllable and two short, as vi^uere
the Trochy, of one long and one short, as vi^ta, and the Iambick of one short
and one long, as amo^r. The Spondee of two long, the Tribrach of three short,
the Anapaestick of two short and a long, are but as servants to the first.
Diverse other feet I know are by the Grammarians cited, but to little purpose.
The Heroical verse that is distinguished by the Dactile, has been oftentimes
attempted in our English tongue, but with passing pitiful success: and no
wonder, seeing it is an attempt altogether against the nature of our language.
For both the concurse of our monasillables make our verses unapt to slide, and
also if we examine our polysillables, we shall find few of them by reason of
their heaviness, willing to serve in place of a Dactile. Thence it is, that
the writers of English heroicks do so often repeat Amyntas, Olympus, Auernus,
Erinnis, and such like borrowed words, to supply the defect of our hardly
entreated Dactile. I could in this place set down many ridiculous kinds of
Dactils which they use, but that it is not my purpose here to incite men to
laughter. If we therefore reject the Dactil as unfit for our use (which of
necessity we are enforst to do, there remain only the Iambick foot, of which
the Iambick verse is framed, and the Trochee, from which the Trochaick numbers
have their original. Let us now then examine the property of these two feet,
and try if they consent with the nature of our English sillables. And first for
the Iambicks, they fall out so naturally in our tongue, that if we examine our
own writers, we shall find they unawares hit oftentimes upon the true Iambick
numbers, but always aim at them as far as their ear without the guidance of
art can attain unto, as it shall hereafter more evidently appear. The
Trochaick foot which is but an Iambick turned over and over, must offorce in
like manner accord in proportion with our British sillables, and so produce an
English Trochaicall verse. Then having these two principal kinds of verses, we
may easily out of them derive other forms, as the Latins and Greeks before
us have done, whereof I will make plain demonstration, beginning at the
Iambick verse.

The fourth Chapter, of the Iambick verse.
I Have observed, and so may any one that is either practiced in singing, or
has a natural ear able to time a song, that the Latin verses of six feet,
as the Heroic and Iambick or of five feet, as the Trochaick are in nature all
of the same length of sound with our English verses of five feet; for either
of them being timed with the hand quinque perficiunt tempora, they fill up the
quantity (as it were) of five sem'briefs, as for example, if any man will prove
to time these verses with his hand.

A pure Iambick.

Suis and ipsa Roma viribus ruit.

A licentiate Iambick.

Ducunt volentes fata, nolentes trahunt.

An Heroic verse.

Tytere tu patulae recubans sub tegmine fagi.

A Trochaick verse.

Nox est perpetua vna dormienda.

English Iambicks pure.

The more secure, the more the more the stroke we feel
Of vnpreuented harms; so gloomy storms
Appear the sterner if the day be clear.
The English Iambick licentiate.

Hark how these winds do murmur at thy flight.

The English Trochee.

Still where Envy leaves, remorse does enter.

The cause why these verses differing in feet yield the same length of sound,
is by reason of some rests which either the necessity of the numbers, or the
heaviness of the sillables do beget. For we find in music, that oftentimes the
strains of a song can not be reduct to true number without some rests prefixed
in the beginning and middle, as also at the close if need requires. Besides,
our English monasillables enforce many breathings which no doubt greatly
lengthen a verse, so that it is no wonder if for these reasons our English
verses of five feet hold pace with the Latins of six. The pure Iambick in
English needs small demonstration, because it consists simply of Iambick
feet, but our Iambick licentiate offers it self to a farther consideration;
for in the third and fifth place we must of force hold the Iambick foot, in the
first, second, and fourth place we may use a Spondee or Iambick and sometime a
Tribrack or Dactile, but rarely an Anapestick foot, and that in the second or
fourth place. But why an Iambick in the third place? I answer, that the
forepart of the verse may the gentlier slide into his Dimeter, as for example
sake divide this verse: Hark how these winds do murmr at thy flight. Hark
how these winds, there the voice naturally affects a rest, then murmur at thy
flight, that is of it self a perfect number, as I will declare in the next
Chapter, and therefore the other odd syllable between the^ ought to be short,
least the verse should hang too much between the natural pause of the verse,
and the Dimeter following, the which Dimeter though it be naturally Trochaical,
yet it seems to have his original out of the Iambick verse. But the better to
confirm and express these rules, I will set down a short Poem in Licentiate
Iambicks, which may give more light to them that shall hereafter imitate these
numbers.

Go numbers boldly pass, stay not for aid
Of shifting rhyme, that easy flatterer
Whose witchcraft can the ruder ears beguile;
Let your smooth feet enured to purer art
True measures tread; what if your pace be slow?
And hops not like the Grecian elegies?
It is yet graceful, and well fits the state
Of words ill-breathed, and not shaped to run:
Go then, but slowly till your steps be firm,
Tell them that pity, or peruersely skorne
Poor English Poesy as the slave to rhyme,
You are those lofty numbers that revive
Triumphs of Princes, and stern tragedies:
And learn henceforth to attend those happy sprights
Whose bounding fury, height, and weight affects,
Assist their labor, and sit close to them,
Never to part away till for desert
Their brows with great Apollos bays are hid.
He first taught number, and true harmonye,
Nor is the laurel his for rhyme bequeathed,
Call him with numerous accents paisd by art
He Will turn his glory from the sunny clymes,
The North-bred wits alone to patronise.
Let France their Bartas, Italy Tasso praise,
Phoebus shuns none, but in their slight from him.
Though as I said before, the natural breathing place of our English Iambick
verse is in the last syllable of the second foot, as our Trochy after the
manner of the Latin Heroic and Iambick rests naturally in the first of the
third foot: yet no man is tied altogether to observe this rule, but he may
alter it, after the judgment of his ear, which Poets, Orators, and Musitions
of all men ought to have most excellent. Again, though I said peremtorily
before, that the third, and fifth place of our licentiate Iambick must always
hold an Iambick foot, yet I will show you example in both places Where a
Tribrack may be very formally taken, and first in the third place, Some trade
in Barbary, some in Turkey trade.


An other example. Men that do fall to misery, quickly fall.
If you doubt whether the first of misery be naturally short or no, you may
judge it by the easy sliding of these two verses following:

The first. Whom misery can not alter, time deuours.


The second. What more unhappy life, what misery more?
Example of the Tribrack in the fifth place, as you may perceive in the last
foot of the fifth verse. Some from the starry throne his fame deriues,
Some from the mines beneath, from trees, or herbs,
Each has his glory, each his sundry gift,
Renowned in every art there lives not any.
To proceed farther, I see no reason why the English Iambick in his first
place may not as well borrow a foot of the Trochy, as our Trochy or the Latin
Hendicasillable may in the like case make bold with the Iambick: but it must be
done ever with this caveat, which is, that a Sponde, Dactile or Tribrack do
supply the next place: for an Iambick beginning with a single short syllable,
and the other ending before with the like, would too much drink up the verse
if they came immediately together.

The example of the Sponde after the Trochy. As the fair son the light some
heaven adorns.


The example of the Dactil. Noble, ingenious, and discreetly wise.


The example of the Tribrack. Beawty to ielosie brings joy, sorrow, sear.
Though I have set down these second licenses as good and ayreable enough, yet
for the most part my first rules are general.

These are those numbers which Nature in our English destinates to the Tragic,
and Heroik Poem: for the subject of them both being all one, I see no
impediment why one verse may not serve for them both, as it appears more
plainly in the old comparison of the two Greek writers, when they say,
Homerus est Sophocles heroicus, and again, Sophocles est Homerus tragicus,
intimating that both Sophocles and Homer are the same in height and subject,
and differ only in the kind of their numbers.

The Iambick verse in like manner being yet made a little more licentiate, that
it may thereby the nearer imitate our common talk, will excellently serve for
Comedies, and then may we use a Sponde in the fifth place, and in the third
place any foot except a Trochy, which never enters into our Iambick verse, but
in the first place, and then with his caveat of the other feet which must of
necessity follow.

The fifth Chapter, of the Iambick Dimeter, or English march.
THe Dimeter (so called in the former Chapter) I intend next of all to handle,
because it seems to be a part of the Iambick which is our most natural and
ancient English verse. We may term this our English march, because the verse
answers our warlick form of march in similitude of number. But call it what
you please, for I will not wrangle about names, only intending to set down the
nature of it and true structure. It consists of two feet and one odd
syllable. The first foot may be made either a Trochy, or a Spondee, or an
Iambick at the pleasure of the composer, though most naturally that place
affects a Trochy or Spondee; yet by the example of Catullus in his
Hendicasillables, I add in the first place sometimes an Iambick foot. In the
second place we must ever insert a Trochy or Tribrack, and so leave the last
syllable (as in the end of a verse it is always held) common. Of this kind I
will subscribe three examples, the first being a piece of a Chorus in a Tragedy.

Rauing war begot
In the thirstye sands
Of the Lybian Isles
Wastes our emptye fields,
What the greedye rage
Of fell wintrye storms,
Could not turn to spoil,
Fierce Bellona now
Has laid desolate,
Void of fruit, or hope.
Th'eger thriftye hind
Whose rude toil revived
Our skie-blasted earth
Himself is but earth,
Left a skorne to fate
Through seditious arms:
And that soil, alive
Which he duly nursed,
Which him duly fed,
Dead his body feeds:
Yet not all the glebe
His tuffe hands manured
Now one turfe affords
His poor funeral.
Thus still needy lives,
Thus still needy dies
Th'vnknowne multitude.
An example Lyrical.
Greatest in thy wars,
Greater in thy peace
Dread Elizabeth;
Our muse only Truth
Figments can not use
Thy rich name to deck
That it self adornes:
But should now this age
Let all poesye feign,
Fayning poesy could
Nothing feign at all
Worthy half thy fame.
An example Epigrammicall.
Kind in every kind
This dear Ned resolve,
Never of thy praise
Be too prodigal;
He that prayseth all
Can praise truly none.
The sixth Chapter, of the English Trochaick verse.
NExt in course to be entreated of is the English Trochaick, being a verse
simple, and of it self ^epending. It consists, as the Latin Trochaick of ^^ue
feet, the first where of may be a Trochy, a Spon^ee, or an Iambick, the other
four of necessity all ^rochyes, still holding this rule authentical, that ^^e
last syllable of a verse is always common. The ^^irit of this verse most of
all delights in Epigrams, ^ut it may be diversely used, as shall hereafter be
de^^ared. I have written diverse light Poems in this ^^nde, which for the better
satisfaction of the rea^er, I thought convenient here in way of example (...)
publish. In which though sometimes under a known name I have shadowed a feigned
conceit* yet is it done without reference, or offense to any person, and only
to make the style appear the more English.

The first Epigramme.
Lockly spits apace, the rhewme he calls it,
But no drop (though often vrgd) he straineth
From his thirsty jaws, yet all the morning,
And all day he spits, in every corner,
At his meals he spits, at every meeting,
At the bar he spits before the Fathers,
In the Court he spits before the Graces,
In the Church he spits, thus all profaning
With that rude disease, that empty spitting:
Yet no cost he spares, he fees the Doctors,
Keeps a strickt diet, precisely uses
Drinks and bathes drying, yet all preuailes not.
It Is not China (Lockly) Salsa Guacum,
Nor dry Sassafras can help, or ease thee;
It Is no humor hurts, it is thy humor.
The second Epigramme.
Cease fond wretch to love so often deluded,
Still made rich with hopes, still vnrelieued,
Now fly her delays; she that debateth
Feels not true desire, he that deferred
Others times attends, his own betrayeth:
Learn t'affect thy self, thy cheeks deformed
With pale care revive by timely pleasure,
Or with skarlet heat them, or by paintings
Make thee lovely, for such art she uses
Whom in vain so long thy folly loved.
The third Epigramme.
Kate can fancy only berdles husbands,
That's the cause she shakes off every suter,
That's the cause she lives so stale a virgin,
For before her heart can heat her answer,
Her smooth youths she finds all hugely berded.
The fourth Epigramme.
All in satin Oteny will be suited,
Beaten satin (as by chance he calls it)
Oteny sure will have the bastinado.
The fifth Epigramme.
Tosts as snakes or as the mortal Henbane
Hunks detests when huffcap ale he tipples,
Yet the bread he graunts the fumes abateth:
Therefore apt in ale, true, and he graunts it,
But it drinks up ale, that Hunks detesteth.
The sixth Epigramme.
What though Harry braggs, let him be noble.
Noble Harry has not half a noble.
The seventh Epigramme.
Phaebe all the rights Elisa claymeth,
Mighty rival, in this only differing
That she is only true, thou only feigned.
The eight Epigramme.
Barnzy stiffly vows that he is no Cuckold,
Yet the vulgar every where salutes him
With strange signs of horns, from every corner,
Wheresoere he commes a sundry Cucco
Still frequents his ears, yet he is no Cuccold.
But this Barnzy knows that his Matilda
Skorning him with Haruy plays the wanton;
Knows it? nay desires it, and by prayers
Daily begs of heaven, that it for ever
May stand firm for him, yet he is no Cuccold:
And it is true, for Haruy keeps Matilda,
Fosters Barnzy, and relieues his household,
Buys the Cradle, and begets the children,
Pays the Nurces every charge defraying,
And thus truly plays Matildas husband:
So that Barnzy now becoms a cipher,
And himself th'adultrer of Matilda.
Mock not him with horns, the case is alterd,
Haruy bears the wrong, he proves the Cuccold.
The ninth Epigramme.
Buffe loves fat vians, fat ale, fat all things,
Keeps fat whores, fat offices, yet all men
Him fat only wish to feast the gallous.
The tenth Epigramme.
Smith by suit diuorst, the known adultres
Freshly weds again; what ails the mad-cap
By this fury? even so thieves by frailty
Of their hemp reserved, again the dismal
Tree embrace, again the fatal halter.
The eleventh Epigramme.
His late loss the Wiuelesse Higs in order
Eu'rywhere bewailes to friends, to strangers;
Tells them how by night a yongster armed
Saught his Wife (as hand in hand he held her)
With drawn sword to force, she cried, he mainely
Roaring ran for aid, but (ah) returning
Fled was with the prize the beawty-forcer,
Whom in vain he seeks, he threats, he follows.
Changed is Hellen, Hellen hugs the stranger
Safe as Paris in the Greek triumphing.
Therewith his reports to tears he turns,
Peirst through with the lovely Dames remembrance;
Straight he sighs, he raues, his hair he teareth,
Forcing pity still by fresh lamenting.
Cease unworthy, worthy of thy fortunes,
Thou that could so fair a prize deliver,
For fear unregarded, undefended,
Had no heart I think, I know no liver.
The twelfth Epigramme.
Why droopst thou Trefeild? will Hurst the Banker
Make dice of thy bones? by heaven he can not;
Can not? what is the reason? i will declare it,
They Are all grown so pockie, and so rotten.
The seventh Chapter, of the English Elegeick verse.
THe Elegeick verses challenge the next place, as being of all compound verses
the simplest. They are derived out of our own natural numbers as near the
imitation of the Greeks and Latins, as our heavy sillables will permit. The
first verse is a mere licentiate Iambick; the second is framed of two united
Dimeters. In the first Dimeter we are tied to make the first foot either a
Trochy or a Spondee, the second a Trochy, and the odd syllable of it always
long. The second Dimeter consists of two Trochyes (because it requires more
swiftnes then the first) and an odd syllable, which being last, is ever
common. I will give you example both of Elegye and Epigramme, in this kind.

An Elegye.
Constant to none, but ever false to me,
Traiter still to love through thy faint desires,
Not hope of pity now nor vain redress
Turns my griefs to steares, and renu'd laments
Too well thy empty vows, and hollow thoughts
Witness both thy wrongs, and remorseles heart.
Rue not my sorrow, but blush at my name,
Let thy bloody cheeks guilty thoughts betray.
My flames did truly burn, thine made a show,
As fires painted are which no heat retain,
Or as the glossy Pirop faines to blaze,
But touched cold appears, and an earthy stone,
True colors deck thy cheeks, false foiles thy breast,
Frailer then thy light beawty is thy mind.
None can thou long refuse, nor long affect,
But turn'st fear with hopes, sorrow with delight,
Delaying, and deluding every way
Those whose eyes are once with thy beawty chained.
Thrice happy man that entering first thy love,
Can so guide the straight raynes of his desires,
That both he can regard thee, and refrain:
If graced, firm he stands, if not, easily falls.
Example of Epigrams, in Elegeick verse. The first Epigramme.
Arthure brooks only those that brook not him,
Those he most regards, and devoutly serves:
But them that grace him his great brau'ry skornes,
Counting kindness all duty, not desert:
Arthure wants forty pounds, tyres every friend,
But finds none that holds twenty due for him.
The second Epigramme.
If fancy can not err which virtue guides,
In thee Laura then fancy can not err.
The third Epigramme.
Drue feasts no Puritans, the churles he says
Thank no men, but eat, praise God, and depart.
The fourth Epigramme.
A wiseman wary lives, yet most secure,
Sorrows move not him greatly, nor delights.
Fortune and death he skorning, only makes
The Earth his sober Inn, but still heaven his home.
The fifth Epigramme.
Thou telst me Barnzy Dawson has a wife,
Thine he has I grant, Dawson has a wife.
The English Sapphick.
Faiths pure shield the Christian Diana
Englands glory crowned with all deuinenesse,
Live long with triumphs to bless thy people
At thy sight triumphing.
Lo they sound, the Knights in order armed
Entering threat the list, adrest to combat
For their courtly loves; he, he is the wonder
Whom Eliza graceth.
Their plumed pomp the vulgar heaps detaineth,
And rough steeds, let us the still devices
Close observe, the speeches and the musicks
Peaceful arms adorning.
But whence showers so fast this angry tempest,
Clowding dim the place? behold Eliza
This day shines not here, this heard, the lances
And thick heads do vanish.
The second kind consists of Dimeter, whose first foot may either be a Sponde
or a Trochy: The two verses following are both of them Trochaical, and consist
of four feet, the first of either of them being a Spondee or Trochy, the
other three only Trochyes. The fourth and last verse is made of two Trochyes.
The number is voluble and fit to express any amorous conceit.

The Example.
Rose-cheekt Lawra come
Sing thou smoothly with thy beawties
Silent music, either other
Sweetly gracing.
Lovely forms do flow
From concent deuinely framed,
Heaven is music, and thy beawties
Birth is heavenly.
These dullnotes we sing
Discords need for helps to grace them,
Only beawty purely loving
Knows no discord:
But still mooues delight
Like clear springs renu'd by flowing,
Ever perfet, ever in themselves eternal.
The third kind begins as the second kind ended, with a verse consisting of two
Trochy feet, and then as the second kind had in the middle two Trochaick
verses offoure feet, so this has three of the same nature, and ends in a
Dimeter as the second began. The Dimeter may allow in the first place a Trochy
or a Spondee, but no Iambick.

The Example.
Just beguiler,
Kindest love, yet only chastest,
Royal in thy smooth denyals,
Frowning or demurely smiling
Still my pure delight.
Let me view thee
With thoughts and with eyes affected,
And if then the flames do murmur,
Quench them with thy virtue, charm them
With thy stormy brows.
Heaven so cheerful
Laughs not ever, hory winter
Knows his season, even the freshest
Summer mornes from angry thunder
Iet not still secure.
The ninth Chapter, of the Anacreontick verse.
IF any shall demand the reason why this number being in it self simple, is
placed after so many compounded numbers, I answer, because I hold it a number
too licentiate for a higher place, and in respect of the rest imperfect, yet is
it passing graceful in our English tongue, and will excellently fit the subject
of a Madrigall, or any other lofty or tragical matter. It consists of two
feet, the first may be either a Sponde or Trochy, the other must ever
represent the nature of a Trochy, as for example:

Follow, follow
Though with mischief
Armed, like whirlewind
Now she flies thee;
Time can conquer
Loves unkindness;
Love can alter
Times disgraces;
Till death faint not
Then but follow.
Could I catch that
Nimble trayter
Skornefull Lawra,
Swift foot Lawra,
Soon then would I
Seek auengement;
What Is th'auengement?
Even submissely
Prostrate then to
Beg for mercy.
Thus have I briefly described eight several kinds of English numbers simple
or compound. The first was our Iambick pure and licentiate. The second, that
which I call our Dimeter, being derived either from the end of our Iambick, or
from the beginning of our Trochaick. The third which I delivered was our
English Trochaick verse. The fourth our English Elegeick. The fifth, sixth, and
seventh, were our English Sapphick, and two other Lyricall numbers, the one
beginning with that verse which I call our Dimeter, the other ending with the
same. The eight and last was a kind of Anacreontick verse, handled in this
Chapter. These numbers which by my long observation I have found agreeable with
the nature of our sillables, I have set forth for the benefit of our language,
which I presume the learned will not only imitate, but also polish and amplify
with their own inventions. Some ears accustomed altogether to the fatnes of
rhyme, may perhaps except against the cadences of these numbers, but let any man
iudicially examine them, and he shall find they close of themselves so
perfectly, that the help of rhyme were not only in them superfluous, but also
absurd. Moreover, that they agree with the nature of our English it is
manifest, because they entertain so willingly our own British names, which
the writers in English Heroicks could never aspire unto, and even our Rimers
themselves have rather delighted in borrowed names then in their own, though
much more apt and necessary. But it is now time that I proceed to the censure
of our sillables, and that I set such laws upon them as by imitation, reason,
or experience, I can confirm. Yet before I enter into that discourse, I will
briefly recite, and dispose in order all such feet as are necessary for
composition of the verses before described. They are six in number, three
whereof consist of two sillables, and as many of three.

Feet of two sillables.
Iambick: as reue^nge. Trochaick: Be^awtie. Sponde: co^nsta^nt.

Feet of three sillables.
Tribrack: as misery. Anapestick: miseri^es. Dactile: De^stenie.

The tenth Chapter, of the quantity of English sillables.
THe Greeks in the quantity of their sillables were far more licentious then
the Latins, as Martial in his Epigramme of Earinon witnesses, saying, Musas
qui colimus seueriores. But the English may very well challenge much more
license then either of them, by reason it stands chiefly upon monasillables,
which in expressing with the voice, are of a heavy carriage, and for that cause
the Dactil, Trybrack, and Anapestick are not greatly mist in our verses. But
above all the accent of our words is diligently to be observed, for chiefly by
the accent in any language the true value of the sillables is to be measured.
Neither can I remember any impediment except position that can alter the accent
of any syllable in our English verse. For though we accent the second of
Trumpington short, yet is it naturally long, and so of necessity must be held
of every composer. Wherefore the first rule that is to be observed, is the
nature of the accent, which we must ever follow.

The next rule is position, which makes every syllable long, whether the
position happens in one or in two words, according to the manner of the
Latins, wherein is to be noted that h is no letter.

Position is when a vowell comes before two consonants, either in one or two
words. In one, as in best, e before st, makes the word best long by position.
In two words, as in settled love: e before d in the last syllable of the first
word, and l in the beginning of the second makes led in setle^d long by
position.

A vowell before a vowell is always short, as, flii^ng, dii^ng, goi^ng,
unless the accent alter it, as in deni^ing.

The dipthong in the midst of a word is always long, as plai^ing, decei^uing.

The Synalaephas or Elisions in our tongue are either necessary to avoid the
hollownes and gaping in our verse as to, and the, t'inchaunt, th'inchaunter, or
may be vsd at pleasure, as for let us, to say let us, for we will, we will, for
every, every, for they are, they are, for he is, he is, for admired, admired, and
such like.

Also, because our English Orthography (as the French) differs from our common
pronunciation, we must esteem our sillables as we speak, not as we write, for
the sound of them in a verse is to be valued, and not their letters, as for
follow, we pronounce follo, for perfect, perfet, for little, littel, for
loue-sick, loue-sik, for honor, honor, for money, money, for dangerous,
dangerus, for ransom, raunsum, for though, tho, and their like.

Deriuatiues hold the quantities of their primatiues, as deuo^ut, deuo^utelie,
propha^ne, propha^nelie, and so do the compositiues, as de^se^ru'd u^ndese^ru'd.

In words of two sillables, if the last have a full and rising accent that
sticks long upon the voice, the first syllable is always short, unless
position, or the dipthong does make it long, as desi^re, prese^rue, defi^ne,
propha^ne, rega^rd, manu^re, and such like.

If the like dissillables at the beginning have double consonants of the same
kind, we may use the first syllable as common, but more naturally short,
because in their pronunciation we touch but one of those double letters, as
ate^nd, ape^are, opo^se. The like we may say when silent and melting consonants
meet together, as adre^st, redre^st, opre^st, repre^st, retri^u'd, and such
like.

Words of two sillables that in their last syllable maintain a flat or falling
accent, ought to hold their first syllable long, as ri^gor, glo^rie, spi^rit,
fu^rie, la^bour, and the like: any, many, pretty, holy, and their like, are
excepted.

One observation which leads me to judge of the difference of these
dissillables whereof I last spoke, I take from the original monasillable,
which if it be grave, as sha^de, I hold that the first of sha^die must be long,
so tru^e, tru^lie, ha^ue, ha^uing, ti^re, ti^ring.

Words of three sillables for the most part are derived from words of two
sillables, and from them take the quantity of their first syllable, as
flo^rish, flo^rishi^ng long, holy holiness short, but mi, in mi^ser being long,
hinders not the first of misery to be short, because the sound of the i is a
little altered.

De, di, and pro, in trisillables (the second being short) are long, as
de^sola^te, di^lige^nt, pro^digall.

Re is ever short, as remedy, refere^nce, redole^nt, reuere^nd.

Likewise the first of these trisillables is short, as the first of benefit,
general, hideous, memory, numerous, penetra^te, seperat, timorous, varia^nt,
various, and so may we esteem of all that yield the like quicknes of sound.

In words of three sillables the quantity of the middle syllable is lightly
taken from the last syllable of the original dissillable, as the last of
deui^ne, ending in a grave or long accent, makes the second of deui^ni^ng also
long, and so e^spi^e, e^spi^i^ng, deni^e, deni^i^ng: contrariwise it falls out
if the last of the dissillable bears a flat or falling accent, as glo^rie,
glo^rii^ng, envy, e^nuii^ng, and so forth.

Words of more sillables are either borrowed and hold their own nature, or are
likewise derived, and so follow the quantity of their primatiues, or are known
by their proper accents, or may be easily censured by a judicial care.

All words of two or more sillables ending with a falling accent in y or ye, as
fai^relie, demurelie, beawtie, pi^ttie; or in ue, as ve^rtue, re^scue, or in
ow, as fo^llow, ho^llow, or in e, as parle, Daphne, or in a, as Manna, are
naturally short in their last sillables: neither let any man cavil at this
licentiate abbreuiating of sillables, contrary to the custom of the Latins,
which made all their last sillables that ended in u long, but let him consider
that our verse of five feet, and for the most part but of ten sillables, must
equal theirs of six feet and of many sillables, and therefore may with
sufficient reason adventure upon this allowance. Besides, every man may observe
what an infinite number of sillables both among the Greeks and Romans are
held as common. But words of two sillables ending with a rising accent in y or
ye, as deny, de^erye, or in ue, as ensue, or in ee, as foresee, or in oe, ^s
forgo, are long in their last sillables, unless a ^owell begins the next word.

All monasillables that end in a grave accent ^re ever long, as wra^th, ha^th,
the^se, tho^se, too^th, ^o^th, thro^ugh, da^y pla^y, fea^te, spee^de, stri^fe,
flo^w, ^o^w, she^w.

The like rule is to be observed in the last of dissillables, bearing a grave
rising sound, as divine, delaie, retire, refuse, manure, or a grave falling
sound, as fortune, pleasure, rampire.

All such as have a double consonant lengthning them, as wa^rre, ba^rre,
sta^rre, fu^rre, mu^rre, appear to me rather long then any way short.

There are of these kinds other, but of a lighter sound, that if the word
following do begin with a vowell are short, as does, though, thou, now, they,
two, too, fly, dye, true, due, see, are, far, you, thee, and the like.

These monasillables are always short, as a, the, thy, she, we, be, he, no,
to, go, so, do, and the like.

But if i, or y, are joined at the beginning of a word with any vowell, it is
not then held as a vowell, but as a consonant, as Ielosy, iewce, jade, joy,
Judas, ye, yet, yel, youth, yoke. The like is to be observed in w, as wind,
wide, wood: and in all words that begin with va, ve, vi, vo, or vu, as vacant,
view, vine, void, and vulture.

All Monasillables or Polysillables that end in single consonants, either
written, or sounded with single consonants, having a sharp lively accent, and
standing without position of the word following, are short in their last
syllable, as scab, fled, pa^rted, God, of, if, ba^ndog, a^nguish, sick, quick,
ri^ual, will, pe^ople, si^mple, come, some, him, them, from, su^mmon, then,
prop, pro^sper, ho^nur, la^bour, this, his, spe^ches, go^ddesse, pe^rfect, but,
what, that, and their like.

The last syllable of all words in the plural number that have two or more
vowels before s, are long, as vertu^es, duti^es, miseri^es, fellowe^s.

These rules concerning the quantity of our English sillables I have disposed
as they came next into my memory, others more methodicall, time and practice
may produce. In the mean season, as the Grammarians leave many sillables to
the authority of Poets, so do I likewise leave many to their judgments; and
withal thus conclude, that there is no Art begun and perfected at one
enterprise.

FINIS.

