Camelles Conclusion.
Camelles Conclusion, and last farewell then,
To Churcharde and those, that defend his when.
A Man that has mo things then two, to put him unto pains,
Has even so many cares the mo to work him weary brains.
So I, that late have labored hard, and plucked at my plowe,
Am come to town, where now I find mo matters then ynowe.
Mothen I looked for by much, mo matters to then needs,
Mo makynges and mo medlynges far, then I have herbs or wedes.
And all against me one alone, a sorry simple man,
That toils and travails for my food, to earne it as I can.
And gladly would in quiet be, to swinke and live in rest,
But dreamers will not su^er me, they nettle so my nest.
A surreioinder, dreamer bringes, the second a decree,
A mariner brings in his bore, and he the third will be.
And so they join and (...) in ^ease, god grant them well to run
For I shall show them if I can, a course er I have done.
The dreamer first full we. I know, I shook him by the sleue,
Whereat the other. ii. I trow, are angrye and do grieve.
But that no force be as be may, here gothe the beast abroad,
Dreamer awake, maryner row, decree man look abroad.
The beast will turn I lay a grote, and give you all a tryp,
Why now syrs now, now foot it well, this beast begyns to skyp.
And first to maiste^ dreamer tu^nes, and his surreioyndre to,
Wherein all things be well he says, that he does dream and do.
He dreams he says and truly means, to put things in good stay
Short sir dreamer, a bandy ho, that ball must needs away.
If that your dream have such intent, then has it an effect,
And that effect your Western Will, would not have men suspect:
But take it as a dream says he, and fantesy of the head,
A fyner freke by Roode then you, I have his works well read.
Although he chop in chorles terms, and carpes in uncouth speech,
Yet know I with a finger wet, where wise men might him seeche.
That if he whyp his whirry so, he may chance lick a clown,
To whyp it under water quite, and craire and carriage drown.
But sens he is become my judge, and judges me amysse,
In notyng me quite out of rule, as his wide wisdom is,
He shall well know, and so shall you, and the decreer too,
That for my rule, when I was young, this was I taught to do.
My father put me first to school, where I a master had:
Of whom I had precepts and strypes as fitted for a ladde.
He taught me there to fear my god, and love him with my might.
To serve the king, and pray for him, and all his counsel right.
Then next to honor those my friends, that kept me so at school,
And this while I a scholar was, was every day my rule.
And syns that time, my vycar has full like a christen man,
Taught me to tread in gods high way, and keep it as I can.
To be obedient to the king, and to the law also,
And do my duty to the powers, and let their matters go.
Que nostra su^t carare lo, he titled at my door,
And bad me printe it on my posts, and spread it on my floor.
And leele love and labor eke, he bad me learn to know,
And keep my plowe for profit sake, and thank god to I trow.
And told me how there hanges a bell, within our paryshe church,
which he does twange each morning rathe, before we go to wurche,
That tales to me, and others mo, our neighbors there about,
This term which I shall tell you now, as I can bring it out.
Que supra nos, nihil ad nos, this bell tynges us to kenne:
And this he said the bell warnde me, as it did other men.
And when I saw this Dicars when, I was so bold to tell:
That Dicar in his draffyshe dream, had not herd this bell well.
And then for thy, forsooth and god, my horn and scrape I took:
And scratched in a few feet lines, for dreamers on to look:
And so sir thus I meant no more, but minded him to know
His duty (as I meant mine own) and farther not to go,
Till in his toys he tickled me, as lofty ladde on loud,
And shope me shares to sharp me with, to carpe out of a cloud.
And if you roll thus out of tune for raynyng him this way,
To keep him self in order such, as he should do I say:
And take the judgment to your hand, and term me out of rule,
Then trow me well, you turn me wide from Camel to a mule.
Which camel can not crouche withal, nor carry with him home,
But shape and shake it to your selves, like lumpes of your own lome.
But welaway, I wander wide, for Churchyard meant it well.
And so he says, and so say you, and so your writings tell,
So sometimes houses fyred are, by meaning well in lyghtes,
And then the meaning is but marde, and they mad meaning wightes.
But sens you will needs have me seek the meaning of this when,
Mean it to those whom it does touch, and scuse it as you can.
And then let wise men deem and judge atwene Dicar and me.
Which of us two is out of rule, I mean or I or he.
And first let me now are you all, what signifies this when?
That ca^^es with him at his tail, so great a iarryng than.
Hold is it in hand a present time, or future time to come?
Or is it admirantis word, as school men call it some.
It must needs mean a matter mad, as far as I can see,
But on go to, your wits are fine, mean you it out for me.
Dream* does dream, and whens us out, a wondre of these whens,
Whereof some whens are wonders well, and meet for whens men's
But some from gammuth gront and groan above ela a note:
And those wild whens ar whend to large, I dare you gage my cote,
what when is this, that he whens out, when justice ioynes to truth?
whose seat is that? how ioynes justice? dreamer say on in sooth.
And nodde your noddles nowein one, and make a trinity.
Full workmanly to work this when, if that it will so be.
And first way well what justice is, to whom it does pertayne,
who swaies the swoorde, who does decree, look to the matter plain.
From whens he comes, what bra^che he bears, and who and which him use,
And answer justice to the wrong, wherewith you him accuse.
And mean your meaning as you mean, and dream not in your sleep.
And show what ioly order now, in this your when you keep.
But short to make of all your whens, to take the principal,
This is among the rest the worst, and stands the last of all.
when Rex does reign and rule the roste, lo thus you raunge at last,
A marvelous when that such a when, should out in print be paste.
Does not Rex reign sir dreamer now? what whennyng term is this?
If Rex reign not? who reigns then? a saucy when this is.
And whend at length and large in deed, beyond a subjects wit,
That god defend that I should dream, or that, or like of it.
And yet I trow I have a byll for cattall that I sold:
That says how Rex has reigned vi. year almost I dare be bold.
And either is your when full false, or my byll is not true,
And which is truest of them both, let me now ask of you.
As for my self I make no doubts, but that your when is wrong.
And that Rex reigns as he has done, and shall I trust reign long.
Which as in school I was first taught, to pray that he may do.
So every subject let him seek to have that prayer too.
Thus could I touch some other whens, wherein you when at large.
A great deal paste your compass to, and as much past your charge.
But those It leave by light of this, for to be scande and seen*
To those that better judgments have, then you or I. I wene.
And now will take your the^ in hand wherwyth you knit your when
In publyshing it thus to me, and to all other men.
Than balefull barnes be blithe you say, that here in England won:
Our steyfe shall stynt you undertake, our dredful days are done.
An assurance here you make, that baleful barnes we be,
And that in strife we are also, and dreadful days do se.
But God defend it should be true, which your full scantycke hedde:
Has publysht to so open eyes, for to be seen and read.
For once for me I make no doughtes, nor no good subject el^es:
But we a noble soueraygne have, as al our statutes tells.
And as al orders else besides do will us for to know:
Who gouernes us and is our head, and rules us al also.
And under him have other powers to see that law be done:
To gree and tune us in accord, if we be out of tune.
Under whose rule and order eke, al we that subjects be:
Do live and join as fytteth us, in one for to agree.
And in the town where I do dwell, I know no strife or dread:
But every man there lives in tune as subjects to their head.
And meddels not but with their plowes, and sometime with their bow:
And prate with Peter and with Paul, their duties for to know.
And learn so for to keep them still in order as they can:
Except such wranglers wrangle them, with such large when and than
And so I trust they do else where, which for my part I pray,
That long we may so join in one, what so your when does say.
But yet such dreadful whans and thens, which does the matter mar
Were better quight, pulled out of sight, then showed as they are.
And so show western will from me, and wat and Herman too.
And will them wind their takle well, not as they wont to do.
For if they lean to learn such whens, it will be long I fear,
Ere they will channel well their craire, that should them safely bear.
Domine saluum fac regem, and da pacem in diebus nostris. T. Camel.

The harteburne I owe you is, if you come to Lynne,
I pray you to take my poor house for your ynne.

Imprinted at London by Hary Sutton, dwelling in Poules

Churchyard, at the sign of the black boy.


