THE SPIRITVALL DIRECTOR DISINTERESSED.

According to the spirit of B. Francis of Sales, Bishop and Prince of Geneua,
Institutor of the Order of the Visitation of our Bl. Lady.

By the most Reverend Father in God JOHN PETER CAMVS, Bishope of Belley.

Translated out of French by A. B.



AT ROAN.

M.DC.XXXIII.

CATHOLIC READER.
THIS SPIRITVALL DIRECTOR DIS-INTERESSED, having out of his charity toward us
passed the seas, deserves enterteinme^t. And because his language is unknown
to many, I will be his Interpretour, to the end his zeal of souls may shine
to all, and such fruit be reaped of his wholesome and charitable counsels, as
is desired. These lines of mine wanting authority to move thee to relish the
sweetness of the Auctour: hear the eloquence of rare Causin of the society of
JESUS who has given him, and his works, this Elogie, in the end of the second
part of his holy Court, which flowing from so Religious, and learned a pen,
will be inuitation enough to peruse this work. His words are these.

I may well say, I were stupide and ungrateful, if I should not confess to
have been much excited, to prosecute this labor by the honorable Inuitations,
which my lord Bishop of Belley has used toward me in his works. I cannot set
too high a price upon his recommendation in such a subject. For he is verily
one of the most able, and flourishing spirits, that ever handled pen. To see
the number of his books, one might say, he began to write, so soon as to
live; and to consider their worth, it is a wonder how so many graces, and
beauties, which others attain not but with much labor, increased with him, as
in a soil natural for eloquence. If there be any slight discoursers, who
amuse themselves to argue upon some words of his writings, it is not a matter
unusual, seeing we are now in an age, where there are some who revive the
example of those corrupted Grecians, that preferred a sauce made by the Cook
Mithecus, before the divine works of Phidias. More need not be said, read and
follow the Direction of this DISINTERESSED, purely, without any other, then
thy spiritual, INTEREST.

Farewell.
ADVISE TO THE READER.
BOTH in the beginning, and in the end of this book, I render a reason, ample
enough, of the subject which gave it birth; And I satisfy (me thinks) the
obiectio^s which may be made against many points therein by me handled, which
might have served for matter, and ornament to a preface. I touch here many nice
and delicate strings, the event whereof will prove as it shall please the divine
Providence. I cannot warrant it, I may only here assure in words of verity,
and Charity, not feigned; that my intention was sincere, and without passion,
in composing this work, and that I rather thought thereby to serve God in my
neigbour, then to prejudice any. This is only as it were a Commentary upon the
third Chap: of the first part of the Philothea of my B. Father Francis of
Sales, Bishop of Geneua; and though I give a Carreere large enough unto my
spirit, suffering it to run into the Christian liberty of its thoughts, I
believe nevertheless, not to have swarued from the conceits of this holy
Prelat, from whose mouth, I have hertofore heard things which had even as much
quicknes, and vigor, (not to say rigor) as those which I here produce,
albeit he had milk, and honny under the tongue, and that his words, no less
then his manners were steeped in an incomparable sweetness. If I mingle here
wine with oil in imitation of the good Samatitan, it is to heal the wounds
which have need of this dressing, and where suauitie ought to be accompaigned
with a wholesome bitterness. My principal intention in this little work is, to
furnish devout souls with a touchstone to discern the true from the false
Directour, by the mark of Interest, of his Dis-interessed Charity. I here set
down arts to know the pure alloie, and to distinguish it from the
sophistical, to the end we may become good coyners according to the counsel
which some ancient Fathers say to have flowed from the mouth of our lord. To
give assistance to this choice, I framed this address; Choice of so much
importance, as there are few practices in the spiritual life which in
necessity surpass it. I present unto thee here, READER, near sighted
spectacles to see things at a small distance, which thou peradventure have
never well perceived by reason of their remotenes, there being question of many
acts, for the most part hidden, and diuerted from the knowledge of the vulgar.
Read this without other Interest, then the glory of God, and thy salvation,
and without respect of persons by a preocupate opinion; and when thou shall
have met, in a Directour, with the qualities which I note unto thee in this
book, fear not to commit thy bark, to the guidance of such a Pilot; For
doubtless under the wind of heavenly grace, he will cause it to arrive at the
haven of salvation, and immortality. To conclude, I submit with all my heart,
both this treatise, and all those which have, or may issue, by the assistance
of God, from my spirit, and from my pen, unto the judgment, and to the
correction, not only of the holy Church* and of her visible Head, the chief
Bishop, but also of her Doctors* whom I reverence as my Masters.

We under written, Doctors in the Faculty of Divinity, do certify, that
we have diligently read and examined a certain book entitled. The Spiritual
Director disintressed according to the Spirit of B. Francis de Sales Bishope
and Prince of Geneua, Institutor of the Order of the Visitation of our B. Lady:
composed by John Peter Camus Bishope of Belley: In which we judged nothing to
be contrary to the doctrine of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church.

Given at Paris this 6. of August 1631. DESCLEVES. A. DE BREDA.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
The first Part.
CHap. 1. The occasion of this treatise. p. 1 Chap. 2. Concerning Directours
who hear not Confessions. 5 Chap. 3. Spiritual liberty moderated. 10 Chap.
4. The anguish of a soul divided between a Director, and a Confessor of
different opinions. 13 Chap. 5. Concerning Theorie without Practice. 18 Chap.
6. The surly Director. 24 Chap. 7. Subject of murmr. 30 Chap. 8.
Justification. 36 Chap. 9. Spiritual counsel touching Directors. 41 Chap. 10.
Three qualities necessary to a Directors. Science. 50 Chap. 11. Prudence. 54
Chap. 12. Charity. 58 Chap. 13. That true Charity is dis-interessed. 65 Chap.
14. Of three sorts of Interest. 70 Chap. 15. Of the delectable Interest. 80
Chap. 16. Of the honorable Interest. 91 Chap. 17. A character to discern the
ambitious Director from the generous. 94 Chap. 18. Authority seasoned with
Charity ^ Humility. 100
The second Part.
Chap. 1. Of opiniatiue Directors. 113 2. Of the Jealous. 115 3. Of those who
captiuitate souls. p. 123. 4. Of such as magnify of purpose their condition,
be it Pastoral. 133 5. Be it Cenobiticall. 137 6. Of the honorable Interest
of Confraternities as well Parochial, as Cenobiticall. 141 7. Of bad
emulation. 146 8. Of the vow of particular obedience. 159 9. The band of
dilection. 170 10. Of the profitable Interest. 175 11. That it leads unto
flaterie. 178 12. The artifice of complainte. 183 13. Against the complaints
of Pastors. 186 14. Wherein they are excusable, and how lawful. 201 15. Wherein
unjust. 209 16. Consideration upon Poverty. 212 17. Advantages of the secular
Poverty. 219 18. Against the complaints of Cenobite Directours. 225
The third Part.
Chap. 1. Reasons opposed to Cenobiticall complaints. 229 2. Of the labor of
hands. 240 3. Of founded Cenobites, and whether complaints be just. 247 4. Of
those of Mendicant Directours. 252 5. Of those of Pastors, touching the
poverty of their Churches. 256 6. Of those of Cenobites touching the poverty
of their Communities. 261 7. The indiscreete zeal of some Cenobites in the
multiplication of their howses. 265 8. A remonstrance thereupon and advise. 274
9. Indiscreete fervor. 281 10. Complaints of Mendicant Cenobites and their
examen. 290 11. A digression concerning laybrothers, or servants. 298 12.
Whether they be exempt from the labor of hands. 329 13. Of the brothers of the
Quire amongst the Mendicants. 341
The fourth Part.
Chap. 1. One may use the best things ill. 345 2. The origin and Institution
of Mendicants. 357 3. The objection touching strong Mendicants refuted. 364 4.
Two passages of S. Austen and a notable example 368 5. Touching the Mendiciti^
of Lay-brothers, and of Chorists. 369 6. Whether their complaints are
receauable. 390 7. The force of the complainte. 395 8. The Director Cenobite
truly Dis-interessed. 400 9. The commendation of Theatins. 403 10. Concerning
the Cenobiticall Confraternities. 421 11. Against covetous pretentions. 417 12.
Subtle and interessed designs. 420 13. The spiritual Director disinteressed
is without artifice, 430 14. He has no respect of persons. 431 15. Nor to his
profit. 438 16. Artificial commendations of Alms. 444 17. An agreeable
encounter. 450
The fifth Part.
Chap. 1. Concerning particular interest and Community. 464 2. Two famous
examples, 468 3. Against both the giving and receiving of presents. 474 4. The
dis-interessed Directour shuns incombrances and affairs. 481 5. He ought to be
an Angel. 488 6. Who is the most dis-interessed Directour, the Pastor or the
Cenobite. 491 7. Difference betwixt the Pastor and the mercenarie. 497 8. Of
virtue exercised by sallies or by continuation. 503 9. That charity of
obligation and Pastoral excels Ceno^itieall vows. 510 10. The touchstone
of true Charity is the charge of souls. 520 11. That maintenance is due unto
Pastors by Justice, unto Cenobites only by favor. 527 12. A demonstration of
the reuennues of Pastors and Cenobites. 533 13. The deplorable condition of a
certain Pastor. 544 14. A sigh upon this misery. 551 15. Of
foundation-hunters. 593 16. The free service of Cenobites. 568
The sixth Part.
Chap. 1. Spiritual Hunters and Fishers. 574 Chap. 2. Of the choice of a
Directour. 577. 3. Industrious advantages of Cenobites, their union. 580 4.
Their glittering virtues. 588 5. Their defects are iudiciously concealed. 595
7. That the contempt of Paslours is a great fault. 603 7. The division of
Pastors and of Cenobites. 607 8. An evident demonstration. 615 9. A saying of
a holy personage. 10. The principal design of this treatise. 621 11. What it
is to aid the simple in the choice of a Directour. 625 12. That this choice is
necessary. 627 13. That it wounds not confidence. 611 14. Answers to some
objections. 635 15. An advise touching this work. 643 Chap. 16. A protestation
and conclusion. 652
THE SPIRITVALL DIRECTOR DISINTERESSED.
THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. I. The Occasion of this treatise.
THERE are some years past, since I was called unto one of the greatest cities
of this kingdom, next unto PARIS, for the distribution of the bread of the
sacred Word, dureing the time of Aduent and Lent. Amongst the ears of corn
which ripened in this ^aruest; a person worthy of regard, and truly full of
honor, and piety, desired some particular assistance from me, for the
guideing of her interior. Her ordina^ie Confessor was a venerable Priest of
her parish, one of sufficient capacity, and most exemplar life. She had for
Director a famous preacher, of a most austeere Order; but such as did not apply
it self unto the administration of the Sacrament of Penance. I found this soul
(other ways solidly devout) in that anguish of spirit, which Job calls, a
certain ha^geing, or suspention; Not in the suspention of powers, whereof the
speculatiue divines speak, and which approaches unto ecstasy: But that whereof
I discourse, proceeds of the uncertainty, of that whereof she ought to
resolve her self, in diverse occurrences, When the moral opinions of her
Director, and her Confessor prove opposite. To speak the truth, this haleing
of the spirit, divided betwixt two considerations equally probable, as a piece
of iron hangeing betwixt two Adamants, is such a torment, as can only be
known by him that feels it: Place a man equally pressed with hunger, and
thirst, between meat and drink; With out doubt he Will (like a shipp which
burns in the sea) perish in his proper remedy. For where will you have him
first to begin? To eat and drink both at a time, nature permitts not. The
soul whereof I speak being Hungry, and thirsting after Justice, Which is to
say, extremely desirous to do well; and findeing it self some times upon the
same occation persuaded by the one, and dissuaded by the other, falls into the
agony of a Woman, Which endures the pains of Child birth, and cannot be
delivered; the vehement panges of her desire giueing her most tedious throws.
For one to build, and the other to demolish, is not the way (says the
Wiseman) to raise a great building. It is like the Roape maker in the
Emblem, wherein the ass gnawed asunder the cord as fast as he wrought it. It
is the Webb of PEN^LOPE wouen in in the day, and undone in the night. Besides
the bitterness of spirit, this entangled it in a labyrinth of scruples, whereof
it nether could perceive the entrance, nor find the outgate. And not to lie, I
could never approve this distinction which some make of Direction, and of
Confession, as if they did sever things precious from what is base, and to
speak in school terms, the ARCHITECTONIQVE from the TECTONIQVE.

CHAP. II. Concerning Directors who hear not Confessions.
I Could never find it good, that Confessors should not direct: Nor that they
who meddle in directing should not receive Confessions. I cannot likewise
comprehend, how Directors who will not hear Confessions, can profitablely
meddle in giueing council in a pratick, Whereof they hade only a cold and
superficial Theory: Nor conceive the stupide and indiscreete patience of
Confessors, who see their honey spoiled by droanes which cannot makit; Who only
deal in a trade, whereof they are wholly ignorant. I speak not without ground,
with this little touch and motion of Zeal, because the experience of. 25.
years both publicly, and privately employed, with sufficient attention unto
the service of souls, made me know, that some pull down more by ignorance,
then by malice, that which the science of others erects in good consciences
with much labor. I do not say that these companies which abstain from
heareing Confessions do ill: No truly, because to speak properly, this
office is more Pastoral, then Cenobiticall; seeing indeed the same tends to
the conservation of their Clausteriall discipline, which they conceive would
thereby be dissipated and relaxed, though other Congregations no less austeere,
and reformed; and who proforme this function, with much fruit and edification,
are not of the same opinion; grounded upon this sayenig of the Apostole, That
Charity seeks rather the advancement of Gods glory, then its proper
interest. But that which I find of difficulty, is, that the vnexpertnes in an
occupation which is the art of arts (since it is the guidance of souls
wholly internal, and in the face of God) causes them to put their sickle into
an others harvest, and by their directions to spoil (who cannot without the
seal of Confession be very internal) the wholesome and holy Economie of
Confessors. I verily believe they have no intent to do ill; for who could
judge otherwise then well of the good intentions of such, as by the austeritie
of their lives cast forth the good odor in Jesus Christ, like unto that of the
Myrrh, which distills from the wounded tree. A comparison which the eternal
wisdom takes to it self. But I know well, that the success of things does
not always answer the intentions: And that S. Paul did not always act the
good which he would, and that he was so^times the cause of evil, which he
willed not. I speak boldly in this for as much as it is of certain knowledge.
I think then, it would be to the purpose, to show unto these our Masters the
DIRECTORS, so severe to their bodies, and so delicate in their spirits, and who
are content to eat the sins of the people, without the pain or yrksomnes of
heareing them; that they should either wholly dedicate them selves to this
practice, as the other austeere and reformed orders very worthily do, should
enter into the powers of our lord, and visit the interior Jerusalem with the
serching lamps at the Tribunal of Penance; or that without embroileing the
labors of the skillful with their advise which they deliver as Oracles,
yssueing from the horn of David, and salvation; They should contain them
selves in a devout silence, which would be far more perfect. and profitable,
then to intrude themselves into families, and consciences, trayning into
captivity simple souls, laden with sin, ledd by diverse desires, and
continually learning, without being able to arrive to the knowledge of Truth.
Charity, without emulation, or contention, has pressed me to make this censure;
Which is not yet so strong, as the case deserves; for as much as there arise
from these co^tradictions, sundry impediments, to hinder the advancement of
many souls in the way of God. And his dinine goodness gruant, that this
seemeing Piety, which tends to particular profitt, hurt not the particular
profitt of true Piety, which alone can say with the Apostle, It Is you that I
seek, not yours, It Is your soul, and not your goods. Our fishing is for the
souls of men, not for their substance.

CHAP. III. Spiritual Liberty moderated.
NEither would I yet by blameing this variety avoid one gulf to run into
another. All extreamitie is naught. I would not willingly take away from a
soul, the liberty of searcheing every where, for able and pious men, to
conferr with them about the affairs of her salvation. For though the Scripture
places Knowledge and the Law in the Mouth of the Priest (note this
particular) and puts every word to be determined in the Mouth of two or
three: yet nevertheless other where it says, that salvation consists in diverse
counsels; There are never too many when they are good; and then are they such,
when they oppose not one another, struggling like Esau, and Jacob. Let the
soul then remain in full liberty, for this respect; because where the spirit
of God dwells there is the true liberty: Liberty of the children of God;
Children of the Free, not of the Bondslaue; and who have not the spirit of
servitude, but that of adoption, which makes them cry Abba Pater. Only let
discretion, the salt and seasoning of all virtues, serve it for a Torch to
auoied the incommodities, which are found both in the unity, and
multiplicitie, the same being subject to dangerous ties, and to an Empire on
the one side, and a Thraldom on the other; which make, the yoke
insupportable, when it is forced. And this engulfeing a soul into the trouble
of incertitude, resembles these travelers, who lodge every where, and rest no
where* and these Bees which make no honney, when the spring ouer-abounds in
flowers, because the delight they take in flying up and down, causes them to
forgett to return into their hiues, and there to lay up provision for winter.
If some time it be needful for a soul to be thus divided, betwixt a
DIRECTOR, and a CONEESSOR, at least let these two persons be both learned, both
devout, both expert, both charitable, and wnanimously conspireing to the good
of that soul, which co^mitts it self to their guideance, to the end, that as
one iron cleeres another, and as one diamond polisheth another, they way
explicate their difficulties, according to the occurrencies, without further
entangleing them, or subiecting this spirit to the torture: The which will
happen if both of them be Good practitioners, and well exercised in that
profession, which goue^nes the keys of Heaven, bindeing, and vnbindeing
consciences. But not so, in case one of the two be only versed in the Theory
of that Theology which is called Moral.

CHAP. IV. The anguish of a soul divided between a Director, and a Confessor
of different opinions.
NOw as if two horses which draw a coach be not well trained, or pull not
alike, there is danger, the one aduanceing the other going back, the one
turneing on one side, the other on the contrary, that they euerturne and break
it in pieces: So likewise if a poor heart be rent, and as is were torn in
sunder by two different guidances, what can it hope for, but to dye under so
cruel a torment? and to find his punishment even there, where it ought to
expect consolation, and its direction unto grace? I have set forth that which
is already spoken, upon the subject of this pious soul, wearied in this manner
by the different opinions of those who did conduct it, and like unto a shipp
that cannot find the port, being tossed to and froe, at an instant by two
contrary winds. Haueing therefore compassion of its pain, which only
proceeds from the excess of Meekenes, fear, and docilitie, I thought my
self obliged to correspond by my slender assistance, unto the confidence,
which it testified to repose both in my public, and private speahes. I took
then upon me this care, amongst diverse others; and not withstandeing my daily
imployements in preaching, I repaired at certain hours, to the Tribunal of
Penance, which is in the church, as a Poole for sheep, and as the Founteine of
the house of Jacob, applied to the purgation of humane imperfections: I found
this soul then in such sort lost in servile fear, and all worneout with
scruples, bredd by the contradiction of these guides, as being ledd by force it
knew not well what way it went, so contrary was it unto it self. The pain
which I took to restore its spirit unto a quiett and reposed seat, God he
knows, that in my retirement I cast my thoughts on this soul, and that I
ardently prayed for its consolation. In the end God heard the preparation of
its heart, and disperseing these obscurities, and discontents, caused the
splendor of his face to shine upon it and rendered it the Joy of its salvation,
and confirmeing it with his principal spirit. These fears too servile, and
mercinary, as much swollen with self-loue, as void of divine dilection, by
little and little, dissolve them selves, and charity being diffused by the holy
Ghost into its heart, this starr whose influences are so benign, made, like
the sun in the spring, to open the flowers in the land of its interior. And
when this sacred virtue, Queen of all others, had somewhat dilated its soul,
the excessive terrous, as the shadows of the night, became dispersed by its
amiable b^ames. And this soul aduanceth with so much ardor, and vigor in the
way of God, that it seems rather to fly, o^ runn, then to walk. I left it in
this good disposition, after I had finished the course of my preacheings, and
was upon the point of retireing unto my residence. And because experience made
me know, that all the trouble of its spirit, sprunge from noe other source,
then the Antipathie of the counsels of her ordinary Confessor, and this
blessed Director, who was as great a Theoritian, and Rhetoritian, as the other
a good Practitian, and experienced in the government of souls. I freely
councelled her, and according to God, without any constraint (as S. Peter
says) that if she would have a Director besides her Confessor, she should make
choice of one, who had the knowledge of the Theorie, joined with the Practice,
and who did actually dedicate, and exercise himself in the service, and
guidance of souls, at the Tribunal of Penance. For be he never so
understanding a man, yet defective in the experime^tall part, he cannot prove
otherwise then unfit, and unable (not to call him a bad, and dangerous
Director) and one blind leadeing another; since he putts himself upon an Art,
which he used not, and whose Practick is sometime as far distant from the
Theoricke, as the North from the Southe.

CHAP. V. Concerning Theorie without Practice.
What I then spoke with the Sourdine, I do now publishe with the Trumpett;
What I said unto one soul, I speak unto all; What I councelled in particular,
and private, I preach upon the house topps; what I set forth with my tongue, I
sign it with my hand by this treatise; And I say again, that a Director
without Practice, that is to say, without experience, is a hollow read, on
which no man ought to lean: For as much, as by this fair theorie without the
use, he spoils all, in lieu of perfitting: he hinders in steed of advanceing;
he darkens where he should illuminate; he imbroiles in place of disintangleing,
he imprisoneth, where he ought to free; he demolisheth where he should build,
he misleades in lieu of directing; and causes to stray, where he should
reduce. And like unto that temerarious of the fable, who ambitious to guide the
chariott of the Sun, gave fire where he thought to have produced light;
troubleing the spirits, and breaking the brains, whose weakness is no less
worthy of pity, then their subtlety culpable, who practice upon their
docilitie an imperious government, which comes very near unto tirannie. Every
one is not an Elias to guide well the chariott of Israel; It is an act whereto
certes knowledge is needful; but much more experience, which to speak the
truth is not attained but by practice, not unlike unto that of Phisitiones, who
become not able but by use. And indeed who in a dangerous sickness, would putt
his life into the hands of a Physician well versed in greek, and Arabique,
and who in his art should speak wonders, yet wanted the Practick? Who would
comitt his cause unto an Advocate, whose memory were stuffed, with the leaves
of the Code, and the Pandecte ye^ knows not the ordinary way of the court?
Who knows not that a simple Attorney wanting both Latin, and learning, shall
better manage a business, then the ablest Professor in the laws? To become a
Good Painter, it suffices not, to talk well of colors, shadows, proportions,
if he know not by the pencille how to set forth his work. So it is in all
arts, all sciences, and professiones: And who can be found, who knows not the
great Chaos between the Theorique, and the Practique? He who swollen with a
self-opinion, through the conceit which he has of the same, thinkenig himself
to be a great master therein, is his own deceauer, and this passage of the
divine Apostle may be applied unto him; he that thinks himself to know
something in which he knows nothing; as yet knows not in what manner he
ought to know. All which causes me te say, that a Soul which for its greater
security, or consolation, would consult with a Director besides its Consessor,
in respect two eyes see more then one; and one brother assistes another; ought
to choose one not only expert in the administration of the Sacrament of
Penance; but of a capacity, and experience so transcendinge, and surpassing
its ordinary Confessor, that no emulation, or dispute be made between these
Angels, about the body of Moses, that is to say, about the guidance of this
heart, which with all candor and simplicity, yields it self up into their
hands: Otherwise it undergoes the danger of resenting many contradictions in
it self, and the same panges of mind which Rebecca suffered in her body, when
she complained of those two nations which in the persons of the twins did
combatt in her sides. If then the Church guided by the holy-ghoste, gives but
one Pastor unto a flock composed of diverse sheep, yea and even in her full
extent, which is vniuersalle, acknowledges but one Pastor, as she makes but
one body, and one flock, In what manner can one only soul be divided in its
government, unto so many Confessors and Directors who often in lieu of cure,
cause siknes: As that ancient Emperor said toucheing the multitude of his
Physicians, to which he artributed the cause of his death. I do not therefore
absolutely blame a man, for consulteing with diverse; for one cannot take
council enough, in a thing of so great importance as salvation, on which
depends an Eternity: Nor the haueing diverse Directors at one time, as we have
in the Ecclesiastic, and Politic state, many Superiors over us, though
subordinate one unto the other, and of an unequal power: for as I said before,
when a Director has a great height, and eminency much elevated above the
Confessor, as well in the Theorique, as the Practique, there is never any
debate, because the greatest light, obscures the lesser, and in that respect
there needs no deliberatio^ which council to follow. But excepting this
case, I say (and think therein to speak according to the spirit of God, who is
life and verity) that this occurrence is dangerous unto a Soul which finds
it self sometimes betwixt two yrons, and as it were wauernig in such sort,
that it knows not which way to turn it self, seeing evil every where, and
good on no side, though many times it is not so, nor can there be a more
tedious torment, then that of an erroneous conscience.

CHAP. VI. The surly Director.
THe person of Whom I speak was in this state; for though her DIRECTOR, made
more noise, and was in more vogue by his preacheing, I know not whether he
yielded more fruit then her CONFESSOR: a man full of zeal in the service of
souls, who did many good works without soundeing the trumpett, serueing God
with his substance, and with covered dishes, as our savior commands in the
Gospel. This I know, and with assurance, that he had far more experience in
the conduct of souls at the Tribunal of Penance, then the DIRECTOR; though he
beleeud it not; and that the DIRECTOR contrariwise, esteemed himself much more
fit then he, and endeavored like a Pedant upon all occasions, to govern both
him, and the penitent Soul with a browe far more humbleing, then humble; and
who had much more of the Pharisie, then of the Publican. When this good Priest
gave unto this pious Soul some spiritual advise, which he conceived
profitable, she presently related it unto the DIRECTOR, as unto her
touchstone; if it pleased not this Preacher, he declamed against it with full
voice, and with such scornful, and despiseing terms, no less vnbeseemeinge
the mouth which uttered them; then honorable unto the modesty and patience of
him, unto whom they were addressed. How often had the austeere Empire of this
sufficient DIRECTOR caused the Penitent person to forsake her CONEESSOR, if he
had not been affrayed to loose the absurd practice of his lofty Theorie, and
that the streams of this source, should have been spent upon other Meadows
then those of his own house? And then seeing himself to have gotten the
absolute dominion, both over the spirit of the Penitent, and the CONFESSOR, it
delighted him to overthrow with the impetuous blast of his mouth, all
whatsoever the other had endeavored to buid up solid: and to pluck up whatsoever
he had planted, before it had taken any deep root, seldom giving any other
reason, then the ignorant condition of this poor Confessor, and of a man little
versed in these Anagogies (for this word pleased him) of the superessentiall,
and supereminent life. He treated him as one of a mean spirit, little
illuminated, and no ways skillfull in the interior, and contemplative life,
not so much as vnderstandeing those fair terms of the mystical Theology,
which with their emphasie astoinsh the World, and which are more like the
language of Angels, rather then of men; so far are they above the base and
low style of the Earth. To conclude, he made use very authentically of the
privilege which the Apostle gives unto the spiritual man, which is to Judge
all others, and not to be Judged by any. When I had discovered this whole
mystery (which certes was not of iniquity yet where I noted a manifest
injustice) I placed my self on that side, which I esteemed the more lust
according to the imitation of our savior, who vpheld the penitent Mary against
the censure of the Pharisie. I took part with the Confessor oppressed by this
Rabby, whose wine he dimolished and dissipated, sometimes like the boar,
sometimes like the fox, to the great trouble, and damage of this Soul, which
was incomparably better counseled and directed by her own prudent, capable,
and charitable Confessor, who cheerely understood her whole interior, then by
this imperious Director, who only beholding the superficial part, and that
which he could only gather by a bare conference, made himself grow into an
Art whereof he had no practice, neither could he exercise it being restrained
by his Institute. I took then this creature off from this double torture, and
leaueing her in the ordinary question of the judiciary seat, which God has
established in his Church, I freed her from the extraordinary question of this
unexperienced Director, whereof she found her self much eased, as of a
troublesome yoke, or rather of an insupportable burden, a burden which he
himself who laid it on, would not perchance, have so much as touched, with the
tip of his finger.

CHAP. VII. Subject of Murmr.
THis passed not without Murmr, the use whereof is no less frequent amongst
those of the other world, then that of the Winds, and the Waves on the sea,
according to the testimony of S. Bernard; But what imports it if men blaspheme
us, or speak evil of us, so that God give us his blessing? Whether by
reproach, or by good fame, so as his divine goodness be served therein, we have
our only end. The cause of Quipps was not so much the zeal of the Soul, as
the bitter and contentious zeal about the privation of certain commodities
which proceeded from this precious Direction. For there is this difference
between zealous persons, that some are eaten up with the zeal of the
spiritual good of their Neighbor; but the zeal of the others consumes their
Neighbors goods, Shall I say, provided I break not the bond of concord, nor
yet the chain of Perfection, I love certes Plato, and Socrates; but I love
much more the truth, so that it be charitable, and respectfull; because it is a
testimony that the same proceeds from a Charity, which is true, and full of
respect. I will say then, that this person of whom I speak, was aged, without
children, in state of Widow hoode, and, which is the point, well accommodated
with the goods of fortune; And who, by a liberality truly magnificent,
distributed a great part thereof to the needy, so that one might say of this
person, as does the Psalmist; happy is the man, who mercifully gives* Alms,
for thereby prepares he the way, to receive in the day of judgment a
fau^urable sentence; because the merciful shall obtain mercy: And the
eternal sentence ( Come ye blessed of my father) shall be given in the
examination of the works of Charity. Thus goes on the Psalmist, sayeing, he
who distributeth, and largely gives to the poor, shall be declared Just for
ever; he shall be exalted in glory, and he shall reap the benedictions which he
shall have sown. Notwithstanding in the distribution of these goods, I
observed no little inequality; for the Confessor who did undergo the weight,
and heat of the day, and who had no other means to live, then that which his
diligence in the service of the Altar might yield him, in such sort as I said
in the beginning, besides the salarie of certain Masses, received no
gratification from this Soul: the Pastor of the parish, as much as nothing,
according to the custom of this present age; the hospitalls and the rest of
the poor, were little assisted; the mass of the chief liberalityes
streameing, by means of the Direction, I know not well whether directly or
indirectly, opportunely, or importunely, by reprehendinge, by menaceinge, by
prayeing, or by presseing, into the house of the Director; and in such sort,
as the complaints which the fupposed heirs cast forth with loud cries,
arrived even unto mine ears* When the battrie was changed, and that with in
the Magazines of the heavenly Wisdom, order was establissed concerning her
Charity, before too much disordered, the bubling streams of this fountain
appeared without, the waters were divided every where, the bread was broken
unto the necessitous, hospitality open unto strangers, and the sick; they whose
birth or misfortune, or rather the divine Providence, had seated in poverty,
found them selves comforted, as well as they who with an incomparable
preeminency, through I know not what Thcologie, which I understand not, call
them selves the Evangelical poor, as if the poor of all sorts were not
recommended in the same Gospel. From thence the indignations and tears, from
thence the complaints, and tumultuous garboiles, as says that ancient Poet;
as if I had taken away a direct rent, or rent of direction, from a house which
had renounced it. This is not spoken of me without ground, because I had no
sooner turned my back to repair unto my flock, but that I was welcomed with a
hayle of calumny, for this occasion which I have most ingenuously, and
faithfully declared, and by a storm of detraction raised by sacred tongues,
and so sugared, outwardly, as they seem all honey and milk, but within (I dare
not say with the Psalmist,) that there lay hidd the venom of the Aspe, an
animal whose sting is the more dangerous when it is least perceived, and the
evil sooner ressented, then known from whence it Comes. I was thus beaten and
stoned, (though in my absence) for an advise, which I believe, that noe man of
true sense, and void of passion, will adiudge to be evil, or contrary to the
spirit of God, whose honor loves judgment.

CHAP. VIII. Justification.
BEing advertised by my frinds, that the specious and shining midday devil,
did sift in such manner, that little repute, which the better sort afforded me;
and weighed it in profane weights, and not of the Sanctuary of spiritual
counsels, which without artifice I had learnt, and communicated without envy
(as the wiseman says, speakeing of what he knew) God by his mercy so
established my heart in grace, that I was no ways moved with this news;
knowing that we ought by good to overcome evil: and the remembrance thereof
would have perished in my memory, even with the sound; had I not been
advised, nay obliged, by persons of eminent dignity, and meritt, to place
(being absent) my penn in lieu of my tongue, and to couch in writeing, this
blessed spiritual counsel, whereof the noise was so great and the speech so
diverse: Which I did most innocently after my arrival at my ordinary
residence, saying with David, Olord I will sing forth thy iustifications in the
place where thou have assigned the abode of my pilgrimage. In this I yielded
unto the desire of those persons of quality, (whose will was to me a law, and
whose judgment had great authority over mine) rather then to my own peculiar
inclination, which was to be silent in sufferance, saying only in my heart to
God: I remained mute, and have not opened my mouth; for it is thou that have
permitted, if not given, this stroke; It is in thee to free me from this
calumny, or to deliver me up unto it: Yes father let it be done according to
thy pleasure; Thou know wherein we should give way, or whether we should
oppose the malicious tongue, that plots deceitful wiles: Thou have sharp
arrows, and coals of desolation, wherewith thou may purify those polluted
lyppes, that have more need of purifeing then those of the Prophet. Thou
can enuirone me with the Buckler of thy truth, impenetrable to those darts,
thrown in obscurity, against those that are right of heart, and sent with
that feeble force, that they seemed to come from the hands of children: Thou
can by the sple^dor of thy countenance, discover the ambushes laid in darkness
against the reputation of the innocent: Thou o lord that confoundest, and
ouerthrowest tho haters of peace, and who haueing it in their mouth do not
carrye it in their heart: Thou that promisest to give it to such as love thy
law, and that scandalle shall not reach them. So far then was this tempest
from breeding any disquiett in me, that I praised God, for that he had cut my
sack, and compassed me about with gladness; Solaceing my self with the Apostles,
in suffering some reproach in the service of God, for a Soul. In fine, being
overcome by the entreaties of those whose frindshipp might command me, I
resolved upon a small defense, blessing our lord that taught my hands to
skirmish, and my fingers to fight: I sent them therefore a breife discourse
which bears this title A spiritual aduertiseme^t to Penitents about the
choice of a Director. It fell immediately into di^erse hands whose curiosity
caused many copies: and as waters which pass through mines do much alter the
cleerenes of the spring, so the course of ^a treatise becomes troubled passing
through the hands of copists, whereby the faults are infinitely multiplied. And
upon notice given me not long since, that a printer went about to putt to the
press one of those copies thus maimed and corrupted in diverse places, to
hinder in some sort this evil office, I reuewed that little work wherein the
reasons were thike, and the words locked up, because I had much labored for
brevity, to the end curious spirits might not languish after the ready
knowledge of the truth of a fact, or proposition, I have much enlarged the^ in
this treatise, where I chiefly tie my self unto order and method, as unto that
which conduces more unto cleerenes, which I highely affect.

CHAP. IX. Spiritual Counsel touching Directors and Confessors.
BEfore I deduce them I think it necessary to knitt together that which I have
said concerning the act which gave occasion unto this webb, with this ensueing
discourse. As I was then meditateing on my return unto my residence, I
remitted this Soul, healed of her scruples and vexations, into the arms of
the heavenly Providence, haueing given her for a rule and level of perfection
in her vocation the Philothea of my blessed father, assuring her that if she
observed this rule, she should live before God in sanctity and Justice, both
now and in all eternity. And haueing caused her return unto her Confessor,
whom I found to be an excellent man, and very able to guide her; I assured her,
that followeing his counselle and direction, which I judged very good and
wholesome, and walkeing simply, and confidently under this conduct, she could
not but, arrive at a secure harbor. I told her bosides plainly and roundly,
that I did not approve of this double guide, of a Confessor and Director at one
time, unless the Director were as well versed as the Confessor in the practice
of the Sacrament of Penance, and made ordinary profession thereof: moreover I
required in this Director, so much advantage both in science, and experience,
above the Confessor, that he were able to be his master; So that the opinions
both of the one and the other might not so combatt one another, that the spirit
of the party directed, should stand doubtful and divided in it self:
further, though I would not take part with inconstancy, knowing that one of
the Prophets makes instablitie to be a punishment of the sins of Jerusalem,
yet nevertheless in the act of Penance, and the interior, I sided with
liberty; and as I did not find fault with the tyeing ones self to one
Confessor or Director so that distraction were easily avoided: So neither did
I commend that voluntary servitude, not being ignorant, that either extremity
might be vicious. And as in the one it were to rely too much upon a creature,
malediction being pronounced in holy writ against him that trusts in man* and
putts his confidence in the flesh, which is but hay and dust: So in the other,
it were to fly from branch to branch, and buzze over ever flower, but never
to make honey: perswadeing my self, that in the temper of a mediocritie
governed by discretion, one might* stick to an unity, without renounceing a
plurality, and some times to make use of a plurality, and not do injury to
an unity. This I showed her by the example of two holy Congregations of
Woemen', the one of Carmelites, whose holy and Angelical life casts forth a
sacred odor in JESUS CHRIST which embaulmes the whole church: The other of S.
Marie of The Visitation founded by my blessed father, which as the little
Violett of March, grows low and in the shade, but fayles not to send forth a
most odoriferous sweetenes, and a sent of most holy example, Now in these two
sorts of communities, they enjoy this freedom, by their constitutions, for
all of them to take in general, diverse times in the year, extraordinary
Confessors; and in particular, this grace is never denied to a sister, when it
is reasonable and aduantageous to her consolation, or spiritual profitt. As
for the rest, concerning conferences with learned, devout, and spiritual
persons, the same is not only granted them with a holy freedom, but likewise
counseled and persuaded, in regard of the ample benefitts which it brings to
the progress^ of the Soul, in the way of salvation: Though I am not ignorant
that the plurality of counsels, some times, perplexeth spiritts, cheefely
those of the sex which has infirmity for its share. But who knows not, that
there is nothing so good, which may not by excess or abuse be depraved? If
then such a liberty be given unto women, both reformed and enclosed, liueing
under a far more strict discipline, then a secular person who has its Soul
in its own hands, why might not she then justly make use (with the blessing of
God) of so honest, and profitable a license, consulting with diverse Oracles,
and according to the Apostle, making trial of many spiritts, not to tie her
self unto any but the good? It is therefore in my opinion a thing no less
tormenting, and dangerous, so to oblige oneselfe unto a Director, or Confessor
as not to endure the approach or relish of an other: as to change every day
without relyeing upon any one. Wherefore this advise of an ancient wiseman, who
would that me should love so, as if we should one day hate, and that we should
hate, as if we should one day love, seems to me may well be practiced in the
subject whereof I speak, in suffering ones self to be spiritually guided by a
Director or Confessor, as if the next day he were to loose him (which happenes
every day in the frequent transmigration which the conuentalls make. And so to
leave any one, as if short time, he were to give him self up again to his
direction. By this means he shall preserve his spirit in a perfect liberty,
which consists in a total disingageme^t of all that is not God, what soever
pretense he may conceive not to regard any creature, but in God, and* for God,
and in some relation which the thing created has to the Creator. For to
conclude, no man can serve two Masters, It is necessary that we haueing but
one heart, it should dwell in God alone; The bed is to strait the covering to
short, two cannot remain covered therein. Ah! Let God live, and who is like
unto God? And who would not break all other chains, but that chain of
perfection which linkes us unto him? O liberty of my heart, thou art too
generous ever to subject thy self to any other then to God alone, or to regard
any will but his, In obaying those whom he has given us for Superiors, and
placed over us, to whom he commands the same obedience as to him self,
because he speaks unto us by them, and who hears the^, hears him, and who
despises them, despises him. All obedience is imperfect which has any other
aim; for which cause the Apostle exhorts servants to yield obedience unto
their Masters, not as to men, but as to God; And the Apostle teaches us, to
receive a Prophett in the name of God, and not in the name of the Prophett
himself, if we desire God for our reward. It was in that spirit of perfect
liberty which, I counseled that Soul in her election of a Director, and
Confessor, without separateing those two qualities of the same person, in case
she should think it fit for her spiritual advantage, to putt her guidance
into other hands then those wherein I left her; And to serve her for a torch,
and rule in this choice, I marked her out the fourth chapter of the first part
of my B. fathers Philothea, where that holy Prelate, in few pages, comprehends
no less judiciously, then succinctly, whatsoever is necessary in this behalf.

CHAP. X. Three qualities necessary to a Director, Science.
But toward the conclusion he desires three qualities in this Director, which
I explicated unto her one after the other, though insisting cheefely on one,
which in this place I purpose to deduce more at large. He ought to be (says
this divine person) replenished with Charity, Science and Prudence. If one of
these three parts be wanteing in him, there is danger in placeing ones self
under his conduct. Behold few words, but which contain a very large sense, and
which are as the foundation and basis whereon the ensueing discourse is built.
He wishes in him Science; for if one blind man lead another, how can it
otherwise happen, but both of them must fall into the ditch? Leave the^, says
our savior of the bad Priests of the law, they are blind, and leaders of the
blind. For if we be obliged to seek the law from the mouth of the Priest, is
it not necessary that his lips should be gardians of Science? When the Oracles
become dumb, they cease to be Oracles, and the dogs ordained for guarde, when
they bark not, are nothing wroth. If in every art ignorance be blamed, even to
the point of being culpable, when one is ignorant of that, which by his
profession he is obliged to know; how much more will it then appear in the
Art of Arts, which opens and shuts Paradise, and which conducteth
souls, to the blessed and cursed Eternity? The blood of such as loose
themselves by the default of those that undertake (though incapable) to guide
them, will not an account thereof be demanded at their hands by the Prince of
Pastors? If the salt be come infatuated, and the light extinguished; Wherewith
shall a man season? wherewith shall a man enlighten? If those who ought to
bear the Science of our lord through the world, have not the Science of the
voice, nor the Science of Saints, to wit, that which inspires sanctity, and
gives the knowledge of salvation unto the people; If they have not the key of
knowledge to distinguish leprosy from leprosy, that is to say, mortal sin,
from that which is not mortal, how could they teach the Science of goodness and
discipline, and to have this sayeing of the wiseman applied unto them, that
the knoweing lips are a precious fountain? Truly where there is no knowledge
(says the same Wise man in the Proverbs) there can be no good for the Soul.
And as a child finding no milk In his mothers breasts, does dry up,
languishe, and perish; so a Soul languisheth, and fami^heth when she finds no
pasture of instruction from the mouth of her Director. For the bread of life
and vnderstandeing which should be broken unto little ones is her nouriture, and
without the word of life, and life eternal, she cannot direct her stepps to
the ways of Peace. He then who has not this bread in his house, let him not
meddle in the conduct of people; nor performo the office of Aaron, unless he
know how to resolve difficulties, and to lead the sheep in the pastures of
the knowledge of God. It is true, this knowledge, absolutely speaking, is not
requisite in an eminent degree (although S. Gregory calls the government of
souls the Art of Arts) so that it be accompanied with great Charity, a
virtue (says the Apostle) which edifieth so much, as an eminent knowledge
without it becomes puffed up with Vanity. It suffices that it knows to
discern good from evil, the precious from the base; and that with the
simplicity of the dove, the Prudence of the serpent may find place.

CHAP. XI. Prudence.
NOw by Prudence we must not understand that of the flesh, which the Apostle
calls dead, and which being of the earth is termed terrestrial, animal,
diabolical; this Prudence is only to do evil with more subtlety, but a
subtlety which only deceaues the eyes of man, not of God, before whom all is
naked and open. But we understand the heavenly, of which the wise man says,
the knowledge of saints is Prudence, Prudence, says Job, which is not gotten
but by long time, to wit, by much experience, according to the sayeing of
that ancient, that use ingendreth it, and memory does produce it; In a word,
by Prudence I understand experience, which being in a high degree, and joined
with an indifferent knowledge, is much more desierable in the Director of whom
I treat, the a profound knowledge, with a slight experience. The reason of
this is evident, in regard, that for the conduct of Souls, there is more need
of action, then of contemplation, and to make them good, then learned. The
following of virtue, and flying of vice, consisting more in action then
speculatio^ in deeds, then in discourse. And we speak here rather of a
conductor, then of a Doctor; and of a zealous conductor, then a soareing
Doctor, of a purifieing and burning Seraphin, then of a knoweing and teacheing
Cherubin. It is enough that he have conrage to cry out without ceasing, and to
represent unto the soul the filth of sin, better to make her conceive a
horror thereof. It suffices that with the Psalmist, he bids the wicked leave
their iniquity, and that they raise not up their horns against heaven; that
they learn to do good, and cease to do evil. That he earnestly endeavor in
season, out of season, reproueing, beseeching. rebukeing in all patience, and
Doctrine. That he Constrain the straied sheep to return unto the good way,
which leads them to the eternal fold. It is enough that he has a ready way
of exhorteing, with a holy knowledge, and that he bring sinners to compunction,
correcting them in the spirit of lenity: That he also teach the well disposed
the divine paths of grace and glory. Thus much for Science* but as for
Experience it has noe bounds, and though it be great, it cannot be too great.
For the heart of man being a depth without botome, and a labyrinth full of a
thousand windeings, who can penetrate the spirit of man but the spirit of God?
Since that it never remaineing in the same state, one might sooner comprehend
the change of the moon, and the causes of the flux and refluxe of the sea,
then the various motions of the spirit of man. How then can this experience,
daughter of action, and Practice, who has only a superficial and general
knowledge, which they call Theorie? Wherefore I think I spoke according to
reason, sayeing that that Soul takes pleasure to destroy her self, and is
witty in her own deceit, which committs her guidance unto a Director, who,
be he never so learned in divinity; and in the pulpitt should speak the
la^gage of Angels, and of the most able-men; is yet defective in practice, and
unexperienced in the administration of the Sacrament of Penance.

CHAP. XII. Charity.
But nevertheless Science and Experience without Charity little ^uayle, which
made the Apostle say, If I have the gift of Prophecy, and know all the
secrets of Sciences, yet have not Charity, I am nothing. After this powreing
himself forth into the commendation of this virtue, which can never be
sufficiently esteemed, since the God of virtues himself is Charity; He shows
by a long enumeration, that she comprehends all others in Eminency, and is
their Soul, and their life. She is then the Chief, the General, the
necessary Quality, requisite in a Director. Without her, it is a body without
a soul, a soul without spirit, a spirit without life, a guide without eyes,
a fire without hea^e, a torche without light. If he were as knoweing, and as
eloque^t as an Angel; without Charity, he is but a resou^ding piece of
brass, a ringling bell; without her, should he give all his goods to the
poor, his body to flames, it profits* nothing, whereas all things cooperate,
and redounde tot he good of those who have the divine dilectio^. This quality
is in such sort recommended unto Pastors, and Guides of Souls, as who
resolves not to put down his life for the salvation of his brother, is not
worthy to execute this Angelical office. Let the Soul then in her choice
well consider, whether the Director whom she electeth, be very charitable,
which is easy to be known, as a tree by the fruit, because Charity, much
more then Faith, shows her self by works. Where love is, there is the
operation, and where there is no operation, love is not. It is a fire whose
actiui^^e is inseparable. Would we see the marks, and liueries thereof? Let us
not seek them in any other place, but in the great, and divine Apostle, who
was wholly replenished therewith. Charity, says he, is patient, benign, not
envious, not perverse, she is not puffed up, she is not ambitious, She seeks not
her proper Interests, she is not provoked to anger, she thinks no evil, she
rejoices not in injustice, but her joy is in the truth; she suffers all
things, believes all things, hops all things, bears all things. She never
falls away. Whether Prophesies shall be made void, or tongues shall cease, or
knowledge shall be destroyed. These Apistolicall words deserve to be written
upon a diamond, nay rather upon the tables of our hearts. O that we would
ponder and ruminate on them as we ought! How many tastes should we find in
this manna? How many secrets should we therein discover, not only to aid us
in the choice of which Ispeake, but also for our own perfection* But where
shall a man find a Director, who has a Charity accompanied with so many rare
qualities? And hence it is that my blessed father so dearly prizeing that holy
person John Auila, who says, that one amongst a thousand is scarce to be
found, thinks, that such a one is hardly to be met withal amongst ten
thousands. This is to take away the hope of findeing one, yea truly a man
complete in all points. But as we leave not to esteem the silver of the
moon, though therein some sports appear; so we should not omit to make use of
a man, and to value him, albeit the gold of Charity arrive not to the last
Charact. Otherwise there would not be a Bishop in the church, if all the
qualities, which S. Paul desires in them ought to be necessary, before they
were raised to this dignity, by the imposition of hands, It is true, that for
the conduct of Souls, there would be required the perfection of the Seraphin,
the better to purge, illuminate, and accomplish. It is true, that Charity is
therein required in a supreme degree, together with all other virtues which
accompany her as their Queen, Patience, Meeknes, Humility, Verity, Justice
and the others, which the Apostle notes, and those also which he names not.
But without stayeing to decipher all that great retinue, I undertake not to
set forth in its full luster more then one quality, which is essential unto
the subject whereof I treat, and fundame^tall for defense of the counsel which
I gave; as also to prove the Justice thereof, against detractions. Hence it is
that Charity seeks not its proper Interests. Whence I gather this
proposition, whereof I will declare the truth. That to make a good election of a
Spiritual Director he ought to be Dis-interessed; which is, that unto the
knowledge and experience which I have represented, be joined Charity de void
of proper Interest. This being well understood, let him not fear to embarke
himself under his conduct, where he cannot but make a very happy voyage under
so assured a Pilott. But as soon as one shall perceue the rock of proper
Interest, let him speedily retire, as a vessel which is in danger of
shipwreck. Behold the whole Basis, and true subject of this discourse, which
caused me to take pen in hand for the pulling of verity out of the throat of
calumny; to stopp and shutt up the mouth of detraction, and cause iniquity to
lie, turneing its malice on its own face, to its confusion; So shall the woe
return, and its malignitie fall back upon its own head. And I assure my
self that this will prove profitable, to diverse penitent and pious Souls; Who
when I shall have caused the scales, and filmes fall from their eyes, will know
that all is not gold that glisters, and that amongst diverse Jewels that
appear precious, there are some doubletts, and withal, that the finest are
not the best.

CHAP. XIII. That true Charity is dis-interessed.
TO divide this matter according to order, we will first speak of this Charity
dis-interessed in general, and next we will discribe the Interest in
particular, to the end this touchstone may discover the false from the true,
the pure from the bas^: alloy. That Charity carries us to love God for the
love of him self, and our Neighbor for the love of God, there is no doubt. It
is also out of controversy, that Charity, whether she regard God, or she
carry us toward our Neighbor, is a love of Amity, not of Concupiscence, a
distinction very common amongst Philosophers and Divines. By the love then of
concupiscence, we affect in another our own interest, in regard of the
pleasure, honor, and profit, which we expect or draw from thence. But the
love of amity (in which co^sists properly the essence of Charity) is a love
wholely Dis-interessed, and which only and purely respects the good of the
person loved, and not its own. Although we will or procure it in God, for God,
and according to God, without other pretense then the glory of God, who
reco^mends unto us such a dilection in imitation of his own purity. It is
therefore my commandment (says the son of God unto his disciples) that you
love one another as I have loved you; and how has he loved us, but with an
incomparable purity of intention, haueing nothing to do with us for our
goods, but only out of the too great, that is to say, extreme Charity,
which he bare toward us? Oh if this be so how little of this pure gold is to be
found in the world? Wherefore the scripture counsels us to buy it if we desire
to grow rich, I mean of this pure Charity, which makes us to love God, and
our Neighbor without any respect of our selves, and of our own proper gain.
For who is there that contemplates and seeks God purely for him self, without
thinkeing either to avoid hell which is servile; or to gain Paradis^ which is
mercenarie? But who does simply good to perform an act acceptable unto God;
since the Psalmist him self (a man according to Gods own heart) auoweth that
his heart was carried toward the works of Justice, in respect of the
recompense which he hoped for? But I do not intend here to examine, in what
co^sists the high point of the love of God without any proper Interest; but
only to see wherein consists the Charity disinteressed, which we ought to
bear toward our Neighbor, principally in the Direction of Souls. For this
sacred oil, this precious Balm loses its odor, and value, when the same is
mingled with the liquour of any other pretense whatsouer, then that of the
glory of God, in whom, by whom, and for whom we love and serve others. And it
is in this sort that God has recommended our neighbor unto every one of us,
making a rigourous law, not to hope for any thing from him by lending, a law
much more severe in the distribution of spiritual graces which ought to be
communicated gratis, as they are freely bestowed, under pain of falling into
the ignominy and chastisement of the infamous crime of Simon the Magitian. It
is this Charity disinteressed, which produces the true zeal of Souls, and
which causes those that are therewith enflamed to say what the ancient king
spoke unto Abraham, give me the souls, and I leave to thee the rest. And with
S. Paul; I desire to become an Anathema for my brethren; and moreover, I
esteem all things less then dung, so that I gain JESUS CHRIST, and acquire
unto him souls. O how happy is he who has been found without spott of
particular pretense, and who has not runn after gold, nor trusted in in the
quantity of treasures. But who is the man? That we may sound forth the
praises, which the wonders done by him in his life, have merited. It will be he,
who shall be found free from all the interests which I now go about t^ describe,
and him may we take for the true Spiritual Director dis-interessed.

CHAP. XIIII. Of three sorts of Interest.
ALl that is in the world (says S. John) is but concupiscence of the flesh,
concupiscence of the eyes, and pride of life, which is to say, voluptuousnes,
Avarice, Ambition. And would to God, as the vapors of the earth mount not unto
the stars; so these vices might not be fastened to them who are like the stars
fixed in the firmament of the earth, raised above the top of mounteines,
which is the holy Church, a city placed on a mounteine, and the pillar, and
firmament of truth. But alas to the great grief of the good, we behold but
too much abomination, and dessolation in the holy place, that is, in the
manners of such, as ought to carry before others the light of the doctrine of
salvation, and to preserve them from corruption, by the salt of their good
example. Alas (says God by the mouth of the Prophet) how comes it to pass
that may beloved committs so many evils in my house? How much malignitie does
mine enemy cast into the most holy of all vocations? How much darnell of Vice
does the enimi^ man sow in the field of hearts peculiarly consecrated to me,
and dedicated unto the most sacred Ministeries? All the Prophetts are filled
with exclamations, menaces, reproaches, and inuectiues against the Priests which
stayne their priestly dignity with Avarice, and Pomp. And though the witten
law had but shadows, and figures; we see under the law of Grace too many
verities of this subject. But to avoid the malediction of Chain, and with
Constantine to cover their defects with the mantle of modest silence, we will
content our selves (speaking in general not to give occasion of offense for
fear of opposeing the Ministry to blame) in sayeing that all the
Philosopheors have observed three sorts of Goods, the dilectable which respect
the body, the honorable which have relation to the Soul, and the profitable
which concern the faculties employed in the distribution of fortune: So
likewise there are three sorts of Interests one of pleasure, another of
Honor, and the third of profit. And these are the maine engines, which move
the great fabric of this world, so often described in holy writ. They are
well figured in the Oxen, pigeones, and moneytables whereof our Savior purged
the Temple, when he chased from thence the buyers and sellers, vpbraideing them
that they made the house of his father, wholly consecrated unto divine offices,
a denn of thieves. For what do the pigeones represent but voluptuousnes, and
infamous commerces accompanieing it? What the Bulls, hut proud and ambitious
hearts elevated in Glory? What the Bancks of usurers, and exchangers of money,
but the covetous desire of perishing goods? O lord IESV, ah when will thou come
again with a whipp in thy hand, to purge thy house of imperfections which
these mischeiuous Interests cause daily to creep into it? When will thou make
joyful those other Saints who adore thee therein, but when thy Priests shall be
clothed with Justice? Yes, when they shall be decked with the ornaments of
salvation, which are exemplar virtues, then thy faithful servants shall have
great joy. But alas, o savior of the world; when I see thee assalted in the
desert, by the common enemy of our salvation, and of thy Glory, with
temptations which represent unto us these three Interests; who can promise to
himself an exemption from like encounters? And considering our weakness, and
the force of our enemy, who dare assure him self of the victory, without a
puissant assistance of thy Grace? When this cursed spirit solicited thee to
change stones into bread, was it not to make thee quitt the rigor of fasting,
for the pleasure of the palate? When he invited thee to throw thy self down
headlong, had he not a design to make the march upon the wings of the wind,
and to try if he could induce thee to vain glory? And when he promised thee
the possession of so many Empires, which he set before thee, was it not to
see if he could steal into thy heart the Covetous desire of Earthly goods? If
then he presumed to dare all this upon the greenewood, what will not he do
upon the dry? And how much advantage will he have over weak and frail men,
carryeing earthen vessels, which become broken by knocking one against the
other? But I find no more exprese figure hereof, then that which Ezechiel in
the eight chapter of his prophecy writes, speakeing of the idolatries
committed in the Temple before the Idol of Zeal, God causeing him to pierce
the wall thereof, to behold the disorders which his Priests committed there in
secrett, in corners: He first saw certain women, who satt moorning for
Adonis, a lively simbole of pleasure, the very name whereof should not so much,
as fall into the mouth of a christian, according to the command of the
Apostle. Afterward he saw old men (signified by the word Priest) who,
smelling to an odoriferous nosegay, adored the riseing sun; An expressemarke
of ambition, which feeds it self with vapor and smoke. But he saw a third
company of such as adored all sorts of liueing creatures creeping on the
ground; A very clear representation of the abomination of avarice, a passion
which is fedd with earth, creepes on the earth, and adores the mettalls drawn,
for man's disaster, out of the entrayles of the Earth. O how far are the
faithful servants of God, and just dispensors of his mysteries estranged from
these miseries, and from boweing their knees before these wretched Idols?
Indeed they resemble pigeons, and Bees, who cannot endure to make their aboade
in places infected with noisome smells, subject to noise, and where the birds
of pray have recourse. The bad odor of pleasures, the noise of ambition, and
vannies, and the unjust pray of couerous desires, do so affright them, as
what soever has but the resembla^ce of any pleaseing, vain, or profitable
Intertst, makes them fly, leaving Judea (which word in the sacred language
signifies Confession) to retire them selves unto the Mountains, saueing them
selves from the Babylon or confusion of these disorders, within the retraite of
a holy interior solitude, free from these contagions, desireing rather with
Moses (as says S. Paul writeing to the Hebrews) to be afflicted in the
service of God, then to dwell in regal honors and delights, esteemeing
contumely for Christ fare greater riches, then all the treasures of the Egypt
of the world. Such are the birds of Paradise, who descend not here below, but
by the thread of simple necessity, laboureing with their hands (as S. Paul)
being no burden to any, nor coveting any thing that is another, contenting
them selves, only with food and coatheing, such as the use of natute
requires, not that of superfluity, and like to the perfect sphericall figure,
which touches no^ the table perfectly seen, but in one point. Certes there
are very few of these people; nevertheless some there are; and though hard to
be pointed at (for they live in obscurity amongst the dead of the world as
sleepeing in their Sepulchers, and free amongst the dead, unknown to men, and
known to Godhidden from all, and from whom nothing is hidden) yet there are
more of them* then is imagined, and who bend not their knee to Baall, before
that image of gold and Silver, the workmanship of men's hands, which is called
proper interest, Nor before that statue variously colored in its composition,
and made of so many mettalls, which was turned into dust by a little stone. But
let us obseru^ at a nearer distance, and by retayle these three Interests,
beholding them with a strong water, used in the parteing of mettalls, which is
to say, with the spirit of discerneing, to the end we may avoid the Snares
which S. Anthony saw to cover the face of the Earth, and establishe our feet
on the firm stone, on the liueing Rock.

CHAP. XV. Of the dilectable Interest.
I Will insist very little upon the detestation of him who regards pleasure;
because in the subject which I handle, I cannot persuade my self, that there is
any one of those who are called to the direction of souls, so abominable, as
to cast such a sca^dall in this way of heaven, which they ought to teach,
vnluki^y transforming the stone of edification into that of offense; and that
which ought to unloose, into a snare or gynne the most execrable, which can be
immagined. And although the doctrine of Wisemen, and of many miserable
examples, cause us to know that there is nothing so holy, that finds not its
profaner, nor any thing so good, which an ill minded man may not deprave, the
son of God him self who come for the redemption of the would, being the ruin
of diverse and a rock which crusheth to pieces those on whom it falls; and the
Sacrament of his body, which is the beginning of life, and life eternal, does
it not render culpable of death, and death eternal such as receive it
unworthily? If then so ill an use may be made of so adorable a Sacrament which
is the sun of all others; how much more easily may a lost soul abuse the
same, whereof they of whom I speak ar^ distributors? Since in the^ has been
placed the word of reconciliation, and unto them the keys of heaven have been
committed. Truly how spiritual soever a^ man be, or conceive himself to be, it
is necessary carefully to remember that he is environed with infirmity, that
the spirit is prompt, but the flesh feeble; that he is flesh joined unto a
spirit, which tends of it self to Sin, through an inclination which the sense
receaues from its origin; but retournes not from thence, nor is raised up by
its own proper forces. Here it is, where, according to the Apostle, we ought
to walk prudently, and as it were upon the ashes which cover the embers. The
Sanctity of David, the Wise-dome of Solomon, the strength of Sampson prove in
this dangerous encounter, but misery, but folly, but Weakness. The flesh is a
traitorous Dalila who seeks only to poule the spirit, and deprive it of its
force, its resolutio^s, and to deliver it up to its enemy, sin, which will
make it blind, and bind it with cords, that it cannot untie it self. It is a
Iahel who presents milk unto this Sisara, to take from him the life of grace,
when she shall have lulled him asleep in the sleep of sin. Alas! the
Angels them selves, whom the Scripture points out by the name of the children
of God, will find beautiful the daughters of men, which peradventure are
under their conduct, and from whose acquaintance arose Giants the horror of
heaven, and the monster of the Earth. Adam in the state of Justice and of
grace, haueing one only woman to conduct, for fear of distasteing he, was
seduced and ledd by her unto this rebellion, and to eat the fatalle morsel of
the forbidden fruit ^ which was the true box of Pandora, and the source of all
our miseries* Go and trust then in this domestique enemy, which is our flesh;
enemy so much the more strong, by how much the more infirm, after so many
horrible lapses wherewith both the profane, and sacred histories are but too
full. LOT who was so holy and so just in a city the most abominable of the
earth, what did he committ in the desert? Had the sense respect unto blood, and
(as a Prophett says) did not blood touch blood? Ammon blindad with his passion
did he not violate all the duties of nature? and was there not one of the
children of Jacob, and the like of David who defiled the bed of their own
father. Certes as all good is possible to a believer, so noe evil causes
horror to the Wicked. After that once God and his judgments are taken from
before their eyes, at all times and in every place their ways are corrupted.
What did not the Children of Aaron, and those of Heli, in the most Holy places?
Truly it happens but too often, that communications which are all pure,
innocent, and spiritual in their beginnings, become in time all sensual;
edification by humane misery groweing scandalous, gold becoming black, and
silver turning to dross; even as the holy fire in the destruction of
Jerusalem made by the Babylonians being cast into a Well dureing captivity,
was changed into dirt. How many Nabuchadonosors for esteemeing them selves
Gods, became beasts? Man being in honor (says the Psalmist) and not
understanding him self, became like unto unreasonable creatures. Behold that
which the holy Bishop of Geneua the blessed Francis de Sales represents upon
this subject of communications, good in the beginning, and becoming evil by
the contagion of corrupt Nature, treateing of frindshipps in the third part of
his Philothea: For me thinks that nothing ^an be said more judicious, or more
profitable. S. Hierom that severe Director, and who had so many holy souls
under his conduct, cries out strongly, according to his ordinary style,
against the too frequent commerce, too free conuersations, affected words,
impertinent laughteres, dangerous priuacies, suspected familiarities with
persons of the infirm sex: but principally he invayeth against prese^ts, even
against the least, because they are so many chains of hearts, and ince^diaries
of impurities. Let every one say what they list, it is a hard thing, be a
soul never so circumspect, that an intention have not always some thing of
the sinister, as well in giueing as in receaueing presents. The same is so
shadowed and subject to elusion, as often times under the cloak of Charity,
Charity is offended; and, as the Apes their young ones, we strangle by too
much embraceing. Take it not that way, you think no evil, but the diuill is
always there to think for you, and continually lays ambusches at your
heels, and for the weaker part, and less defended: It Is to handle an
artificial fire, which burns when we least imagine. There is no trusting of a
Serpent, it may come to pass that he sting you not (says S. Hierome) but
there is much more lykelihoode to believe that he will stinge you: say the same
of the sex which deceived man, after the Serpent had deceived her. But I will
press this Interest no farther; because it is the most covered, and most hard
of all, in the subject I treat of; but such, as sometimes sparkling forth,
causes the greater scandalls, and for which no punishment rigourous enough can
be ordained. I will believe that God has a particular care to preserve from
ordures this founteine of the house of Jacob, ordained for the purifieing of
unclean persons. We likewise see that our savior who suffered in the company
of his Apostles, by the ambitious, covetous, usurers, blasphemers, persecutors,
wratfull, indiscreete, incredulous; could never endure a person suspected of
any dishonestie. It was demanded of Plato, why in his laws he had not ordained
some punishment against Patricides; because (said he) I do not believe that
nature produces such horrible monsters. And when one demanded on a certain
time of a Lacedemonian, what was the condemnation of Adulterers in Sparta, he
answered merrily, to pay a Bull, who had a neck long enough to be able even
from the topp of the mount Taygetus, to drink of the river Eurotus, and it
being replied, that it was impossible to find such an animal, It is no less
hard (replied again the other) to find an adulterer in Lacedemonia. For my
part I think, that the like ought to be said of those of whom I speak, and
that a man must needs be worse then a devil, and extremely wicked, to abuse
the remedy of all evils, and to make poison of the Antidote. It is a small
matter to say that such as should become so desperate, would procure thereby
their own damnation, which the Apostle speaks of those who after the vow of
continency, follow the desires of sensuality, covering their fault with the
Veil of an honorable Sacrament. But one may say that they need a particular
hell, or that there is no chastisement rigorous enough, to punish a crime which
cannot be committed without horrible sacrilege, nor named without detestation.
Leaueing then this work of darkness, let us pass to the two other Interests,
the honorable, and profitable, which are as the Midday devil, and the arrowe
which flies in the day, because they are sought for in this function whereof I
treat, with so fair and plausible pretenses, that the best eyes are dazelled
thereat, and the most judicious become thereby surprised.

CHAP. XVI. Of the honorable Interest.
NOw the honorable Interest is two ways secretly sought for* so much the more
subtle, as less distrusted. For there are some who make use of Directors, to
mount indirectly to some ambitious pretense, those layeing their snares a far
of, and insinuateing them selves into the Spirits directed by such guiles, as
are better concealed the^ known, they use them as stepps and degrees to raise
them selves to those places, where unto they pretend: and for that respect they
leave no stone unmoved to erect their building, and to bring it to perfection.
We have a very express example thereof in the Gospel of the two Children of
Zebede who caused this ambitious request to be made unto our Savior by their
mother, Who grounding herself, upon the right of parentage (as if Sion were
built upon flesh and blood) came adoreing and demandeing: command lord that my
two Children may both of them sit near thee, the one at thy right hand, and
the other at the left: Whereunto our Savior made that excellent answer which
every one knows. O how many ambitious Directors inmploy even tatlinge women
in solicitations, great ones in vndethand laboreings, sometime for the
cheifest chaires, sometime for the most famous Auditories, thus converting the
Thones of verity, into Theaters of vanity. How much do they make use of
them, and of their impertinent recommendations, and importune requests, to
obtain of great ones, and Princes, benefices, offices, dignities, Prelatures;
Ambition leaves nothing behind, it makes a ladder of every wood. Well then,
make account of these INTERESSE^ DIRECTORS in their designs of their own
advancement, who guide you through the Vales of Humility, which way them
selves go not, walking upon the ropps of mounteines, and on the wings of the
wind, but do you that which they say, and imitate them not in what they do.
It is true and every one knows this distinction which the Gospel teaches us,
but the practice thereof is so difficult, as more men reflect on the deed, then
on the word; and if nothing comes out of the sack, but what is in it; how would
you have a vain man to speak other then vanities, and false follies? Turn
thy self away from those (says the Apostle to his Timothy) who have only
the appearance of piety, but renounce it in effect.

CHAP. XVII. A Character to discern the Ambitious Director from the generous.
THere are others who not findeing them selves capable enough or befrinded, to
aspire unto great charges or preeminences, haueing nevertheles a swolnespirit,
proud, and puffed up with self-opinion, do establish in their mean
condition, a certain Empire, by their artifices, on the simple credulity, or
credulous simplicity of some, who place themselves under their conduct. I must
deciphere their Character, to the end we may fly them, like as the bees do
from places subject unto resounding Echoes. And to the end it may appear,
that I have, noe design to weigh down one scale, to raise up the other,
according to the deceiptfull use of the false balances of humane judgment;
nor that I would by a false weight, incline to any side, let i^ be known once
for all, that in this Treatise, I intend to blame the ^ice of proper Interest,
be it under what roabe soever; as well secular, as claustrall, as well
Pastoral, and Sacerdotall, as Conuentuall and Cenobiticall. For as I am not
ignorant, that in the one, and in the other condition, there are very holy
Directors, and most Dis-interessed: so know I but too well, that there be some
whose designs are not so holy, not so Just, as they need not to be yet more
sanctified, and justified; nor so pure as they may not well say with David, O
lord wash me yet more from my injustice. Let him the^ who shall look into this
glass which I am about to present, consider whether he has the spotts which
it represents, and let him endeavor to remove them, purifieing his intentions,
taking away what is earthly and humane, from a fu^ctio^ which ought to be
altogether heavenly and divine. You shall then know it by this; whether a
Director has wind, and presumption in his head, according to the ancient
Proverb, whether he carry hay in his horn, whether he takes upon him a
certain ascendancy over the spirit he directs, whether he speak with a
certain authority austere and cholerike, whether he make himself the
vnderstandeing, the sufficient, the learned; whether he be self-conceipted and
will rule the roast, whether he will not suffer one to reply unto him with
humility, whether he disgrace the mild and respectfull oppositions which are
made contrary to his opinions, whether he take agreate deal of state upon him
like a Rabbie, like a Master, like a Pedagogue, or to say better, like a
Pedant, whether he desire to hold an Empire of regencie over a mean scholar,
whether he affect that his reasons should be p^ised as decisions, his decrees
as Oracles, his ordinances as inviolable laws. I say not that he should
forbear to speak in this function, as haueing authority; for he is there, in
the place of God, upon the seat of Justice, judgeing the tribes of Israel,
the tribes of our lord, who give testimony to his glory by the confusion of
their confession, I say not that he should fail to correct the unquiet, the
scrupelous, the vnrulely, and to have (as that Prophet) a forehead of diamant
to be a hammer breaking the stony hearts, and bruzing the face of the mighty;
let him not cease to resist evil even to their face, and to overcome it with
good: let him not fail to reprehend such as are reprehensible, conjure them to
ame^dment, to reproach their rebellion against God, to tell the house of Jacob
her true faults, and to make her ashamed of her crimes. Nothing must be omitted
to rouse up the sinner from the sleepie lethargy of his iniquity, he must
sigh from the heart, as if he roared, imitating therein the Lioness, who
findeing her whelp laid fast a sleep, and thinkenig him to be dead, wakes him
with her roareings: he must cry out Lazarus come forth, Sinner cease to do
evil, retire thy feet from wicked ways, preuaricator ^etourne to thy heart.
No no, humility consists not in such baseness of heart which is called
cowardice, or timiditie; It is a virtue noble, strong, generous, but of a
courage respectfull, benign, sweet, and like unto steel, whose temper is so
much the more strong, by how much it is the more sweet and pliable. Let then
in the name of God a true value be set upon authority; let the Penitent be
made to understand, that it is the Spirit of God which speaks unto him by the
mouth of the Director, as it is written, they who have by the imposition of
hands the science of the voice, speak not as of them selves, but it is the
holy Ghost which speaks in the^, and by them. Let the Director raise himself
sometimes with S. Paul, and if he must needs holily take glory, let him glory
in our lord, let him magnify his ministry, let him say, what, seek you to
know by expeperience that it is JESUS CHRIST who speaks in me? Sacred and
Apostolical terms!

CHAP. XVIII. Authority seasoned with Charity and Humility.
But let him season, for Gods sake, these sallies with so much sweetness that
therein truth may appear without vanity, and that Charity which (says the
Apostle) is not ambitious, may therein shine in all simplicity. Correction
without the spirit of suauitie is a bitter Coloquintida, which putts death into
the Pottage. God inhabitts not the whirle-windes, nor dwells he in the
firebrarnds, in the noise of the Torrent, in the voice of the Thunder of diverse
waters; but in the whistling of a most sweet and pleaseing gale. Antimonie ill
prepared is a dangerous Medicine, and although the viper be mingled with the
Treacle, yet the quantity thereof is so small in comparison of the other
ingredie^s, as the poison has noe force to hurt. There is a certain naurall
sharpnes in correcting, which is to be te^pered with so much modesty, and
aromatised with so much grace, as it resembles, being righ^ly valued, those
green walnutts, and preserved Quinces, whose bitterness is drowned in sugar.
We ought to imitate the good Samaritane, who powered wine into the wounds of
the hurt man, but mingled with much Oil, to the end they being cleansed by the
sharpnes of the one, they might be healed by the vnctio^ of the other: and to
do like the chirugio^s who dipp the points of their lances in oil before
they open the impostume. Breifely, to give correction unto our neighbor, like
as the cakes of the Sacrifice of the old law, wherein there was very little
salt, amongst a great quantity of milk, and meal, and to cause him to take
it as wine of the Palm, and the pomegranett, whose tarte sweetness, and
sweetish sharpnes is much more confortatiue, and delicious, then distasteful.
Certes it is necessary to use authority, for as the secular arm bears not
the Sword for nothing, but to revenge crimes and cause them to feel a just
chastisement; so is it not in vain that the firery sword, to wit the sword
of the flameing word of God, is placed on the tongue of the Priest, who, as a
Cherubin guards the entry of Paradise, ought to use it for the glory of the
God of hosts, to penetrate and transpeirce the hearts, and to arrive even
unto the very division of the Soul, of the Spirit, of the Marrowe, and of the
nerves. But it is needful that this direction should be always amiable, and
that mercy should swime aloft, above this act of Justice. It is needful that
this authority exercised over Souls voluntarily submitted, and who offer
voluntary sacrifices unto God at the feet of his Ministers, should be
seasoned with much respect, and dilection: and since it is the authority of
God which is reverenced in Directors, they ought therefore to practice it with
the spirit of God, with is Charity it self. For in conclusion, they have not
power to authorize themselves, but to authorize God in souls, and to cause him
to reign in them by dilection* Wherefore the good are called the children of
divine dilection. Neither do I know whether this spiritual authority
consigned to Director (without the act of the keys which binds or loses)
be given them to perform the act of authority; but I know well that it is
given them to perform the act of Charity. The son of God whose preistood is
eternal, being a Priest for ever according to the order of Melchesedech, and
to who^ all power is given, in heaven and in earth, and all right of judgment;
is well called a Lion for his authority; but he is also termed a lamb for
his Charity, yet a lamb dominator of the earth, to show with how much
Charity, and Humility, he has tempered his authority reigning by the wood
of his cross which was accursed and infamous, before it became sanctified and
glorious. And beareing his key, to wit, his scepter on his shoulder; And what
is this scepter, but the cross, on which being exalted he gave testimony, a^
the same time, of his extreme Charity, drawing all unto himself; his humility
annihilating him thereto as a tender worm; the reproach of the world, and the
refuse of the people; and his authority eclipseing the sun, made the earth
to tremble, the stones to splitt, the graves to open, the dead to rise again,
and astonished all nature. But who sees not what a thunderclapp his authority
has made, even to draw verity out of the mouth of his enemies, who were
constrained by so forceable and conuincing testimonies to acknowledge him for
the son of God, causeing the confession of him to issue out of the same
place, from whence came blasphemy, that his Charity and humility are yet
become more famous, because they are much more esteemed in the holy scripture,
which only speaks of this excess of Charity, which caused him to give his
life, for the propitiation of our sins, and of his annihilation, and
humiliation, which made him obedient eue^ to death, and death of the cross.
This ^ayd he himself, like a good Pastor, and Prince of Pastors, and Bishop of
our souls, and Director of Directors, that he came to serve, and not to be
served; having for that cause taken upon him the likeness of a slave in becoming
man, and (speakeing to his disciples) I am, said he, in the midst of you as a
wayter at table not as sitting with you. In this spirit, not of authority,
but of Humility, the great Apostle would be understood by the faithful, in
so many places, where he cales himself, not only a servant of Jesus Christ,
but for Jesus Christ a servant of all those who believe in him, and who desire
his coming. Then says he, let every man regards us as servants, and
ministers of God, and dispensers of his mysteries. Besides he adds, that the
chief point is to find amongst so many dispensors one faithful. What means
this, to find out one faithful, but such a one as putts not his hand to the
portion of his Master; and who, like Joseph, touches not his spouse, with is
Glory; Glory which God reserues to him self, with such a Ielosie, that he
protestes never to give, nor communicate it to any? Now, is not this to touch
the apple of his eyes, and there where he is most sensible, and to say with the
first rebellious angel, I will place my seat upon the North, and I will be like
unto the highest, which then is done, when the Director assumes, appropriats to
himself the reverence given him for the authority of God, of whom he is the
Image in his function of remitting sins, and of the guidance of souls. And
deserves he not the same intertainement which the ass in the emblem received
who gloried in the adorations which the idolaters made to the goddess Ises,
whose image he carried, as if those honors had been addressed to him? It is
not unto you o Directors to whom so much respect is borne, it is to him who
bears the keys of death, of hell, and of life, and who has made you the
porters, in giueing you the use of them, and whathaue you which you have not
received of this sovereign Lord, to whom only thanks are due and in whose
name you preach remission of sins, he remitting them by your ministry when
that you vnt^e those who are laden with heavy chains of inquition? Were it
not an impertinent thing, for a treasurer of a Prince, if he would that he unto
whom he delivers a sum of money by order from his Master, should remain his
debtor? Is it fit for the instrument to attribu^e to it self the honor of
the workman, and for the pensile to appropriate to it self the glory of the
Painter? An Angel in his splendour appearinge on a time to S. (...)hn, who
taking him for God would have adored him, said, do not this, Iam but thy
sellow servant. O vain man who art no Angel but a counfeller of the earth,
and made of earth, and shall return to earth, what a shameful lesson does
this celestial spirit give to thy vaniti^? Whereof can thou boast dust and
ashes? And who art as the dust, the shittle-cock of the wind, which ^osseth
thee hither, and thither, whirleing about thee. Return, return into thy
self and remember to say (reflecting on the Souls which put them selves under
thy conduct) they are reasonable spirits Christian spirits, reasonable spirits,
which are not to be led with abridle, and sharp Caueson like unto horses, nor
bruised with a bar of Iron as earthen potts: With the same measure that I
shall measure unto them, I shall one day be measured my self. This will assuage
thy haughty humor, which carries thee to great things, and will make thee
tend the ear of thy heart, to those words of the Prince of the Apostles, Above
all things have a continual Charity one toward another, because this virtue
couers the multitude of sins. Assiste one another without murmr. Let every
one, according to the grace which he has received from God, communicate the
same as a good dispensor, unto others. If any one speak, let it be as the
words of God; If one exercise any ministry, let i^ be by the virtue which God
has given him, to the end that in all things God may be glorified by
JESUS CHRIST, unto whom is glory and empire world without end. Do you see how
the empire and authority of all that which passes in the conduct of Souls,
ought to be referred unto God, to whom alone apperteines honor, and glory?
Not unto us o lord, not unto men, but unto thy name let praise be given. As the
inferious would serve and obey better, and with much more perfection, if they
regarded no other then God in the person of those whom he has placed over
them; So superiors would much more perfectly command, if they were thrust on
and induced by noe other spirit then that of God, which is the spirit of love,
of good will, of dilection, and of accomplished suauitie.

THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I. Of opiniatiue Directors.
TO this Charecter of Ambitious Interest, I join another which is, when the
Director is so wedded to his own opinion, as not being content to despise
other men's, he blames them with outragiou terms, and with savor of
insolency. The same is not only against Charity, but likewise against
Modesty which requires that of our selves, and of our capacity we still
nourish humble thoughts* and that we prevent others with honor, and with a
fraternall tenderness; that we respect their reasons, although they seem to us
weak. There is a certain notable difference between common oil, and that of
Balm; both of them being put in a vessel full of Water, that swims on the
topp of the water, and this falls to the bottom. But in case you make lamps
thereof, in extinguisheing the match of that which shall be composed of common
oil it will cast forth a stinking smoke; if of the other, there will issue
forth a perfume of an odoriferous savor: Such is the difference found between
the Directors infected with the Interest of vanity, and the disinteressed: For
they willing to have their conduct preferred before all others, draw upon them
selves an ill odor, by which they thought to rise in esteem. But the other,
who giueing place to all by a difference of Humility, and respect, as an
aromatique Balm, becomes an odor of life unto life, and a pleaseing savor unto
JESUS CHRIST. Certes true Charity is not riotous, it endures all, it
believes all, it hops all, it rejoices not in wickedness, but its whole
delight consists in truth. In it she rests, not being solicitous whether it
proceed from her own spirit, or from any other.

CHAP. II. Of the Jealous.
FRom thence we gather an other passage of the same Apostle, to wit, that
Charity is not Ielous, whence we learn how much is wanteing in those
Directors, who through childish Iealousies (for envy slays the little ones
says the Wise man) become into xicated when they who once were submitted to
their conduct, consult with others then them selves, and receive their
benediction. Who would believe this weakness of spirit to be in such strong
persons, who seem to carry others? Who would imagine that so light a matter
were so hard for them to supporte, since they them selves lay upon the
shoulders of these poor Souls, as upon packhorses insupportable burthenes?
Alas, it is nevertheless but too too true, and would to God it were less
frequent; I speak in general, I scandalize none, noe not the Ministry it
self: But to speak the truth there is every where but too much of man, and
this ancient proverb is found too true, that the office declares the man,
which is to say, makes known his little or great worth. This little empire
which some seek to establish is much suspected of tirannie. This bitter zeal
reprehended by S. James which breeds contentions proceeds from a wisdom
which is not from above, but earthly. Let us conclude with the same Apostle,
and declare how it is a diabolical animal. It is an animal, because Ielosie
is an animal passion, and of the sensitive appetite; but is devilish, when
through malice it thwarteth the good, and opposes greater glory of God. Moises
that charitable man, who for the conservation of his brethren offered to be
blotted out of the book of life, was far from this fantastical humor, being
solicited to oppose himself against certain persons that prophesied, why said
he, become you Ielous of me? I wish that all the people might prophetie, and
that our lord would bestow on them his spirit. Some one with a more discreet
zeal may answer with S. Paul, are all Doctors? are all Apostles? are all
Prophets? Pedagogues enough, and few fathers. But it is easy to reply, that
the spirit of God does breath where it pleases, that he is able out of stones
to raise up Children to Abraham, to speak in the midst of stones, or to make
the very stones them selves, as he made the Ass of the Prophett, to speak.
And though he of whom they are Ielous, might have some defects, yet will he
never prove so ill qualified as Saul, Baalam, Cayphas, who as wicked as they
were, ceased not to be true Prophets. I do not deny but there is a good
Ielosie for souls, and their advancement in virtue, whereof the Apostle said, I
emulate you with the emulation of God, for I have resolved to consecrate you
entirely unto Jesus Christ. Such was the Ielosie of the Angel who guarded S.
Cicelie and was the preserver of her integrity. And one may conjecture by the
words of Daniell to those auntie^ts who would have seduced chaste Susanna, that
this Saint had a protector of her virginity. The zeal of Phinees, and that
of Mathathias are renowned in holy scripture. And the Apostle wills that we
pursue the better gifts* But who sees not that this Ielosie is all in God, and
of God? unto whom it is to be wished that every soul were immutablely fastened.
Oh how much is it Dis-interessed; and purged from all self love, and how far
different from that which is wholly filled ther-with, and is the root of all
emulations, enuies, brawle^, contentions which S. Paul reprehends with so much
vchemencie in his Epistles to the Romans, in the 1. and 2. to the Corinthians,
to the Galathians, to the Philippians, to Timothy and to Titus; as also S.
James in his Canonical. For this is tumultuous, imperious, boisterous, and
seeking it self rather then JESUS CHRIST; and the other is sweet, quiett,
peaceable, and makes us glad to behold in another that which we our selves
want, to the end God may be glorified in all and every one. Such was the zeal
of that holy Priest John de Auila, who desisted from the enterprise of an
Ecclesiastical Congregation of holy life which he had begun, when he saw on
foot the Society of JESUS, which he thought might suffice for that time, not
diuersifying Institutes without necessity, which is rather to multiply Orders,
then to magnify the service of the great Master, who ordaines all for his
glory. Those are the great souls who only desire the advancement of the
kingdom of JESUS CHRIST, not careing by whom it it be done, that others reign
without them, what does it importe the^? that others are noble, and they
ignoble, that others are strong, and they weak, to them it is indifferent;
that they die, so as JESUS reign in their hearts, is their desire, and it is
the sum of their wishes, to have the favor to suffer death for the Absalons.
The vessel of the flesh and of proper Interest is it broken? Their Charity is
dilated. The pitcher of self-loue (as a holy father of the church says) is it
burst in sunder? The lamp appears which puts to flight the Army of Madian.
They who be thus disinteressed are well pleased, that the souls under their
conduct do consult whith others, to the end their counsels haueing passed the
examen, and touch, might cause them to be observed with the more assurence, in
case they grow good, or correct them where moderation is requisite. He that
walks in this simplicity, proceeds with much confidence. If likewise they see
them selves rejected, and abandoned by such, as will walk according to the
desire of their own hearts, and follow their proper imaginations, they are not
there with contristated, but praise God who had both trusted them with those
souls, and resumed them. Are they blamed or blasphemed? They pray. Do men
curse them? They bless. Are they persecuted? They endure it, esteemeing them
selves the excrement, and dross of the world; Are they forsaken for others?
They have but a little virtue, if they have not so much as that Pericles, who
being rejected in the election of the Pretorship, many haueing had more voices
then himself, rejoiced that the town of Athens had so many honest men. Such
was the love which he bare to his country.

CHAP. III. Of those who captiuate souls.
BUT when Jealousy arriues to this point (behold another mark of distinction)
of bindeing, and looseing souls, by taking from them the freedom not only
of consulteing with others, but also of disburdening their consciences unto
them: Certainly this tyranny is not of that sort which can or ought to be
endured, if there remain the least spark of vigor, or light of reason. And if
the cause be not very manifest, this proceedeing is extremely suspected of
ambition, of false dealeing. He that does ill hates the light, he that
follows our Savior, walks not in darkness, and detesting its works, walks
honestly in the day of perfect cleerenes, rejoicing like that Roman whose house
was so open on all parts as one might look into it on every side. The first
thing which the Wolf does when he seazes on a sheep, is to lay hold on her
throat, to hinder her from cryeing, and calleing for, by her voice, the aid of
her Pastor. Our Savior says of him self, that he had spoken nothing in
secrett, but openly to the world. If no other but wholseme counsels be given,
there is no doubt, but they may be communicated. Good of it self casts forth
its beams as the light; We ought not to blush at the Gospel, nor at the
knowledge taught by the son of God crucified, if we will not that he be
ashamed of us before his Father. S. PAVL was very far from this humor, which
enthralls souls, so often repeateing, that he only gives counsels, noe
commands, and that he lays nor snares nor ginnes. How does he cry out against
those, who said, I am of Apollo, I of Cephas, I of Paul? Why, were Apollo,
Cephas, Paul, crucified for you? Noe noe, all are yours, and you are Christ's,
and Christ is Gods. The Director, who without a solid cause, and withal held
good and just by the Penitent (who likewise shall do well therein to take the advice of some other person prudent in the mystical word, as the Wiseman
says, that is, experienced) ties a soul in such sort, as that he forbids it
to consult with another, ought for this sole action (I speak it boldly,
because it is necessary) to be shunned as a Rock. For although he has neither
in his counsel, nor in this prohibition any sinister design, yet gives he
advantage unto the Tempter, who will lay snares for him, and who more subtle
then Archimedes, desires but a point to plant his engines, and so remove by
them a settled heart from its proper seat. I repeat once more the better to
engraue this important advise in the readers mind, that a Director, which will
not be forsaken for another, and who is disturbed at this mutation, ought to
be abandoned, and changed for another. S. Bernard advises Pope Eugenius never
to bestow Benefices on such, as shall require them; because says he, only by
their demanding them, they declare them selves unworthy to obtain them. We
must observe the same in the subject whereof I speak, and speedily shake of the
yoke of him, whose ambltious Interest, seeks to make his Penitent'd slave.
Let us boldly break those bonds, let us cast off this unjust yoke; He that
dwells in the heavens will laugh at their folly, and commend our courage, in
the preservation of our just liberty. I know there is noe rule so general,
which admitts not some exception, and that there may happen cases, which will
oblige a much dis-interessed Director to inuit one sweetly, and without any
obligation, or constraint to return, now and then, unto the same Tribunal,
to find whether he has kept his promise, whether he has avoided the
occasions of sin, and whether he has been faithful in the execution of
counsels given him, to get out of that precipice. Return, says the spouse
three times in the Canticles, return Sulamitesse, return, that we may
behold thee. But this is done after so sincere, so lirle enforced, so sweet a
manner, as it is easy to see, that the bridle is flack, and that the reins
are governed by a gentle hand, and that the Penitent him self is condemned by
his own judgment, and follows therein rather his will, which assisted by
Grace tells him, that it is good for him so to do, then the motion of him that
putts him forward without pressing, and brings him in without oppression. O
how differently do the gentle beams of the Sun and the impetuositie of the
Northeren Wind despoile man, and how easy to be discerned. Feed (says the
Prince of the Apostles, speakeing to the Pastors, and conductors of souls) the
flock of God which is committed to your charge. But how? (Mark Director) not by
constraint, but voluntarily, not as haueing domination, Signioritie, Empire,
over the Cl^rgy of our Lord, but by a good example, procedeing from the bottom
of your soul; that when the Prince of Pastors shall come, you may receive at
his hand an incorruptible crown of Glory. O how well said this great and
general Vicar of JESUS CHRIST? and according to the doctrine of his Master,
who before had said unto his Disciples; the kings of Nations exercise their
Empire with power, but you shall not do so: Contrariwise let the greater
amongst you, be as the lesser, he that preceedes as the follower, and he that
commands as the servant. Certes I have always much esteemed the moderation of
a wise ancient, who seasoned his commaundments with such a temper of modesty,
as he seemed rather to entreat, inuit, and persuade, then to use his
authority. All yields to love, there are only voluntaries in its vessel,
none pressed: There is nothing so powerful as love, whose force the Scripture
compares to Death, and Hell: Meekenes shall have all the earth for its
heritage, says the Psalmist, heritage conquered neither with bow, nor sword,
but after a manner, so much the more firm, as more amiable. Whereas the manner
of commanding with power, and authority, which God blames so much in Pastors
by Ezechiel, destroys much more then it edifieth, retardeth souls in the way
of Virtue, more then it aduanceth them: Because naturally Pride is hateful
unto God, and men. For who can bear with Patience the foolish guidance of an
arrogant, and stern countenance, and the Magistrall tone of these people, who
like those whom the Gospel reprehends for dilateing their Philacteries, and
enlargeing their fringes that they might be esteemed great obseruers of the
law never think them selves sufficiently raised, but by the debaseing of
others, nor their authority over souls established, but by the contempt of
others, who peradventure hade more of Gods talent to govern them. A Monck^
called Demophilus in the time of S. Denis Ariopogite Apostle of our France,
haueing chased away with fist and feet a poor Penitent sinner, who in his
opinion unworthily approached to the sacred Mysteries, therein iudgeing of him
as the Pharisie did of Marie Magdalen coming to kiss the feet of our
Savior, to wash them with her tears, to annointe them with her sweet
ointments, and to dry them with the hair of her head, and after this great
scandal excited with a false zeal in the face of the church and people,
boasteing thereof as of an heroical act, was sharply reprehended by that holy
bishop of our Guales, as we read in a learned and eligant epistle which he
wrote unto this insolent person, who rejoiced in his evil, and took glory in
his confusion; teacheing us by this badd example, and by an other no less
noteable of Carpus bishope of Candie, with how much sweetenes, and moderation,
the Conductors of souls ought to make use of the voluntary submission which
they render them for the love of CHRIST, who being Lord of all, was well
pleased to be subject to JOSEPH and MARIE.

CHAP. IIII. Of such as magnify of purpose their condition, be it Pastoral.
But observe a little the malice of Self-loue; when this imperfection perceiues
it self discovered on the one side, it couers it self on the other, and seeks
to mount unto the empire by another way, whereby one may soon perceive, that he
who preferrs himself before others, falls into such a degree of folly, as for
the cure thereof there is more need of Helebore, then reason. And if his
envy, and Jealousy chance to be discovered, then he becomes yet more
ridiculous, for there is none but derides the Envy of Cain, of Joseph's
brothers, of Saul, of Aman, and such like franticks; wherefore it is necessary
to mask it under some other artifice, which is practiced when a Pastor comes
to raise the dignity of a Parish by his discourse unto Souls under his
condct, sai^ing* that it is the mother church of a faithful Christian, that it
is there where he is regenerated of water and the holy Ghost, that the Pastor
spouse of this church is his true father; that it belongs unto answer for the
Souls which live within the limitts of his parish, that there is an obligation
there to receive the Sacraments; that their assistance is due, that there the
Parochial Mass has great advantage above the private Masses which are heard
else where; that the Sacraments of Baptism, of Matrimony, of extreme Unction,
are there administered; as also from thence is taken the holy Viaticum to carry
unto the sick, and that it would be of greater ed^f^cation there to receive the
two other Sacraments of Penance, and the Eucharist, then elsewhere, in regard of
the good example which those of the same parish owe each other, and a thousand
other such like reasons which they who serve in Parishes may bring for the
maintenance of Order, and Hierarchicall police. Besides if one would rest
there, and content himself with the praises and preheminencies justly due unto
churches, in this manner, it were in some forte excuseable, though self-loue
plays there his part openly enough, under the cloak of the Interest of
honor, and preference, the man hideinge himself under his dignity, and that
of his church; a subtlety too gross not to be discovered. But when one
vncases himself, and exceedeing the bounds of good ma^ners, comes to declame
against persons, and places of privileges, against the troops of succor
which the General of the Church-Militants army sends for the aid, and
defense of ordinary Pastors, and that insteede of approueing their labors, and
assistance, they are blamed, as overthrowing order, and troubleing the state of
the hierarchicall policy: t^uely this shock is too boisterous, and shows too
apparently, that there is some other motive then the zeal of souls, and of
the glory of God, which causes these words of precipitation: and that it is
the honorable Interest, which spurs on such spirits, whose tongues frame those
complaints so full of injustice. Seekeing then to fasten the Laietie to their
Parishes as statues to their Niches, pictures unto their frames Planets to
their heavens, without giueing them a decent liberty of visiting other
churches, were truly under the cloak of political order, to overthrow the
order of Charity, with the sacred spouse has established in his holy seller,
which is to say, in his paternall providence.

CHAP. V. Be it Cenobiticall.
LEt us now behold the other side of the medall, and say misery on all sides,
not to say mischief with the Prophett: For if the Pastors are not excuseable,
who keep their sheep so subject, and enclosed in their parkes, as not to give
them the liberty some time to feed in the pastures of Piety where they may
be nourished, and made fatt by wholesome doctrine and good example (qualities
which are found in churches of well reformed communities how can a man cover
the practice of those who by a little empire so much the more potent, as less
apparent, and so much the more binding, as more interne; divert the sheep
from their foldes, alienate them from their pastors, allure them from their
parishes, and by an art not of Thessalie, but of persuasion, cause the harvest
of others to pass into their own fields. But this being not the place to
speak of the profitable interest, let us only trea^^ of the honorable. I
wish that a particular Director would not tie unto him self the Souls which
he conducts. Who sees not the crooked way of self-loue, when he entertaines
them with the excessive esteem of the Cenobiticall state in general, willing
by this thundering crack, to deface that of the Pastoral, as if it were of
less value? When it is displaied with a curious search, and with magnificent
words, how many Emperors, Emperesses, Kings, Queens, Princes, Princesses,
Dukes, Duchesses, great lords, and ladies have left the pomp of the world, to
retire them selves into cloisters? How many saints and great persons, from
thence have been taken out, to be Popes, Cardinals, Bishops? How many Martyrs,
Confessors, Doctors, have therein been eminent in Sanctity, and learneing? And
then when he shall come to his particular order, what will not his mouth utter
out of the abundance of his heart? It is a common place, out of which there is
noe getting forth, when one is once entered, What soever is holy, what soever
is pure, what soever is eminent, what soever is of good odor in the church of
God, is there heaped together: It suffices to be of it, or at least to be
associated thereunto, to receive letters of filiation, to participate of so
many Fastes, Disciplines, Vigills, Prayers, Mortifications, Studies, Singings,
Preacheings, Pilgrinnages, Sufferances, and such like works, which are therein
exercised, and practiced. O what a happiness to have a colligation with all
this? that one may draw unto himself so many great and little cords, so many
girdles, so many scapulars, Rozaries, so many Tertiaries, or Tertialets, so
many confraternities, congregations, associations which are so many young
shoutes of the Empire of Orders, which extend their branches even unto the Sea
of the world, and their plants unto the rivers of secular families.

CHAP. VI. Of the honorable Interest of Confraternities as well Parochial, as
Cenobiticall.
BUT what? It seems you blame so many holy Confraternities established for
the salvation of so many Souls, approved by the holy Sea, and which bring
forth so noteable fruit through out all Christendom. Alas I would blame my
self, who am (thanks be to God from my whole heart) for the most part moved
thereunto by my desire to participate with all those who fear and serve God.
Ah! God defend me from so criminal and odious a thought: Noe truly, I do not
reprehend the thing, nor its good countenance, but only the imperious hook
hidden under these fair apparances: For (reserueing to speak hereafter of the
profitable Interest) who sees not, that this is to bring the young Ass to her
Dame, and that they are so many bands whereof use is made to authorize, if not
the particulars of an Order, yet at least the Order of these particulars, who
sitting at the stern of the whole Broterhoode giude at their pleasure those
who are embarked in the vessel? We will treat by and by of the abuse of
Confraternities, as well in Parochial churches, as Cenobiticall which look
after profit; Here we will only speak of him who makes by this industrious
Piety, and ingenuous devotion, heads and governors of people, such, as by
their condition have renounced this charge, and who haueing departed out by the
great gate, do^ nevertheless reenter by those little ones, and withdraw the
gouerme^t of Souls from those who by their offices are charged with them, and
are answeareable before God and his vicegerents: in some sort also
trauerseing, not to say overthrowing, the Order of Hierarchicall policy and
discipline. Of this I do not speak without book; For in the proper fould,
wherein I was placed a sentinel, I have herto fore discovered certain
Tiercelets as birds of passage coming from a far, making their roundes and
visits, exerciseing in lay families and purely secular, under the cloak of
these filiations, acts of spiritual jurisdiction, causeing account to be given
of actions, making of faults (as they call them) ordaining, commaundeing,
inioyneing exterior penances, causeing them to kneel and to ask pardon, in
the same manner, as if they had exercised full Cenobiticall authority: If this
be not for the cobbler to go beyond his last, I know not what is. For being
thus, as it is most true, that there is no Confraternitie in which the rules or
constitutions oblige to a venial sin, I say more, there being no rule (one
only excepted) of all those which the church approves for the government of
Cenobites, that oblige under pain of sin, unless it be in the breach of
sollemne and essential vows, proceeding from the property of the vow which
cannot be infringed, as the Apostle teaches us, without acquireing damnation.
Who sees not, that though one be enrolled under the Standerds of all these
Confraternities, as well seculars as regulars, he is tied to nothing in rigor
of justice, nor with burden of conscience, nor has other prerogative, save
that they who have given their names into these holy societies, gain all the
graces, and indulge^ces which the holy sea has distributed unto such as therein
shall be registered, by performing the works and conditions annexed to these
privileges. Now then to affect such gouerments, which are only for the more
decency, and to the end all may pass in good order within the Confraternitie,
to make obligatory laws under pain of sin, and bands which tie men by
dependencie on superiors either Parochialls or claustria^ls, who see^ not that
it is to turn Charity into Justice, Justice into judgment, and judgment,
which is the fruit of Justice, as the Prophett Amos says, into wormwood?
Hence so many obseruances which are truly most holy in claustriall devotion,
but often in the civil, very vnfit^ and which cause much murmurings and many
disorders in families, I have said enough to be understood by those who ought
to understand me, one must not so much blow the nose, that insteede of
purgeing the brain, the blood gush forth.

CHAP. VII. Of bad Emulation.
YET hitherto I find all supportable: but when one passes the line, and that
to eleuate the direction of Cenobites, some debase, some desesteeme, some cry
down that of Pastors, and of those who under them labor in the clergy, and
in the Hierarchicall order, it is that which wounds Charity, it is that
which offends verity, it is that which ruins modesty. That Cenobites praise
Cenobites may pass, similitude is mother of amity, amity of esteem, though
it be to bring in the Proverb drawn from those animalls which scratch one
another in the month of may* Let the Priest commend the the Priest, let them
magnify the ministry as much as they please, let them advance it with all
their power, yet will their words be infinitely inferior to the just
greatenes of this dignity, which the very Angels the^ selves reverence, and
the son of God himself has taken never to leave it. But let these men take
heed, how they undervalue those who make profession of the state of perfection,
and that he that eats, disdain not him that fastes, because all have received
of our Lord, some so, and others so, and all are servants of one Master,
though after a different manner of service. For as all the Angels are spirits
serueing the divine Majesty; So likewise are all the Priests as well of the
clergy as the Cenobitts all visible Angels of the God of battles. Let them
not be so indiscreete to say of these aids, the Romans will comeand take from
us our dwellings, which is to say, such as are extraordinarily sent, and as
missionaries of the Sea Apostolic, as if the Pastors themselves did not
receive their ordinary mission from the self same spring, since the whole
church is founded upon this Rock. This Emulation would not be good, but rather
injurious unto him who holds on earth the leiftenancy of JESUS CHRIST, who can
send laborers into his vinyearde in such time, in such number, and after such
a manner, as to him shall seem good, exercising by them his full power and
seuereigne authority. Otherways, who should reject them, should reject in
them, him that sent them, and every one knows how much David was irritated at
the outrage done unto his Ambassadors. And these are not only Ambassadors
of the Sea of S. Peter, but also of JESUS CHRIST, exhortinge Souls to
reconcile themselves to God. But likewise on the otherside, it is to be wished,
that Cenobites in the exercise of their mission, which is only by way of
addition, would give honor unto whom honor is due, as tribute ought to be
paid to him who has right to levy it: yielding unto Pastors as well
Diocesans as subalternes, as well unto Priests as unto other Ecclesiastics of
the clergy the respects which their rank deserves, without giueing by terms
of contempt, or of little esteem* occasion offense unto some, and scandal unto
weak Souls. Let them adorn, with as many elogie^ as they shall please, the
Cenobiticall life, whereof there be great volumes which place the excellency,
dignity, utility, glory, eminency, and perfection thereof above all that is
in earth, even above the dignity of Kings, and Popes, let them extol it at
their pleasure above the Angels, saying with the Apostle, do not we judge the
Angels? How much more the seculars, and the twelve tribes of Israel? Let them
produce their Apocalipses, and let them show us one of their Patriarckes with
the world under his feet, with all his crowns, Baudricks, and Miters another
with crosses, Crosiers and Pastoral ensigns for his footestoole; and other
holding the arms of God like another Moises, and hindering him from casting
upon the world the firery darts of his wroth, by the three scourges which
depopulat it; Another beareing up with his shoulder the church of S. John
Lateran mother and matrix of all others, being ready to fall although the son
of God has called his church the Pillar, and foundation of truth, which can
nether fail nor perish; that he has promissed thereunto the assistance of his
spirit even unto the consummation of Time, and engaged his word of truth which
remains eternally, that all the gates of Hell shall never prevail against it;
let them call them selves the salt, and light of the erath, the most
illustrious portion of the flock of Jesus Christ, the Apostles of the new and
old testament, that Heaven would dissolve, that the earth would be swallowed
up, and that all the whole Mass of the universe, would return into its first
Chaos without the science, conscience, documents, labors, austerities,
prayers, and meritts of Cenobites. We will conceive thereof yet more then they
can be able to say. We will willingly leave them in this brave esteem, in
this odor of life unto life, that their flowring vine cast forth its perfume;
that every one runn after them in the odor of their Unguent, and their druggs.
But at least that this exaltation reach not so far as to depresse an Order
which Jesus Christ approved, not by his Vicar-generall, but established it him
self, and wherein himself is rancked, being made eternal Priest, Prince of
Pastors, and Bishop of our Souls. If they be Hebewes so are the Ecclesiastics
of the clergy, who by an odious word are termed seculars, which scarce one
would give unto Laics. Are they Israelites? so are the Pastors* Be they of the
seed of Abraham? so are the others: let, us raise the text, and fill the sail
with the Apostle; If they are Ministers of Christ, the Pastors (not to speak
indiscreetely) are yet more then they, exeeding them in labors, and how so?
Behold it in this scantling. Who labors most in the administration of the
Sacraments* whether Pastors, who have seven upon there shoulders to administer
at all times, in all places, all hours, by charge, by state, by obligation of
conscience: or Cenobites, who have two of the^ even at ease in their churches,
in their Tribunalls, in their Altars, without charge, without obligation
without any duty on their part. Observe for this purpose the tenth chapter,
and the two next followeing of the second to the Corinthia^s* for it troubles
me to tra^sport hither the sharp and forcible words thereof, which would bear
a certain inuectiue air, drawn out of their trunck; and which would seem
bitter out of the impetuous stream of this Apostolical torrent. It is a bad
way to advance himself in glory, by obscureing that of another, as if one
could not raise him self, but by making others his footestoole. Such is the
misery of the world, that there can be no generations without precedent
corruptions, nor profit raised to one, but by the damage of another. But to
believe that some do all, and others nothing, that they who are obliged to
labor should be unprofitable servants; and such as have no obligation should
bear the weight of the day; to place the principal in lieu of the accessory,
and the light for darcknes, in calling good evil, is that which urges the
patience of Job* To call Pastors dumb dogs, Seaes without water tossed about
with winds, barren trees twice dead; scu^ms of the sea, Wandering stars,
feeding themselves, and other such like cherisheings taken out of Jude, and
sinistrously applied, is a little contrary to modesty. To cry that they have
wakned the guardes, and sentinells of the church in sight of Heresy whilst the
dogs slept, to compare them selves to the Geese of the Capitol, is to do
like new Wine which pollutes the vessel in purging it self of its scumme. To
call Priests, surnamed seculars, with a certain accent of ill grace, people
doing their own will, as if a solemn vow made betwixt the hands of a
Prelate in the Sacrament of Order, of which they are never to be dispensed
withal, did not as much take a may the will from a man, as a vow made without
the Sacrament: and in which one may be dispe^sed for diverse causes; as if the
forsaking of himself reco^mended in the Gospel unto all Christian of what
condition soever he be either in the single life, or in Marriage, did not take
away proper will so much blamed by the spiritualists which is the ground of all
sin, and the only fuel which nourishes the eternal flames. As if he who
conformes his will unto that of God, obeying his law, could be called proper
voluntary, and as if after the vow of obedience offered up between the hands
of a superior, a man might no more make use of his proper will, and by very
absurd consequence should become impeccable. O God, how the children of men
deceive the^ selves in their waights, and how their judgments are subject to
caution, since that they weigh them in weight and weight, which is to say the
virtues, and faults of another in one weight, and their own in another; unjust
both in the rigor of the one, and in favor of the other. Let us close this
passage slippery enough, with this sweet^ sayeing of S. James, If any man think
him self to be Religious (by this name you may think that he speaks of all
those who are of the Catholic and universal Religion, not of those who
apply this general and proper name to all Christians, unto particular
assemblies) not bridleinge his tongue, he deceaues his own heart, and his
Religion is vain. Religion pure and without spott toward God, is to visitt
the Orphans, to assist the Widows in their tribulations, and to preserve
themselves from the contagion, and ordures of the world. Now who does this, but
he, that in the sonn^ of God toward his Neighbor is deuoide of all Interest
of Vanity? For it is that wind which makes the tongue to play, and sturrs up
murmurs. Let the Penitent then take heed in the choice of a Director, whether
he prefer him self above another, whether he contemn him, whether he speak
ill of him; or whether omitting the person, he raises his own condition, beit
Clericall, be it Cenobiticall, whether he prefer his Church, his Parish, his
Order, his Rule before others, with excessive terms, or which importe a
debasement of others functions, or Institutes: For without doubt such a head
has more need to be governed, then to meddle in conducting, and he cannot be
secure in such hands; to him agrees the motto Physician cure thy self.

CHAP. VIII. Of the vow of particular Obedience.
LET us conclude this character of honorable Interest with this passage; which
in my opinion as it is the more remarkable, so is it the more euitable. The
same, is when a Director of what condition soever of Cenobite seeks by his
persuasions to entangle a soul in obligations or Vows of Obedience personal,
or local, that is, to confine it to a certain place unto the Direction of a
particular Order, desireing under the pretense of the greater meritt, or more
ample perfection to range it under the laws, which establish an interior
Empire, to the prejudice sometimes of the condition of the person guided. From
thence one falls into a blind Obedience, laudable peradventure in some case
(for I know that grau^ and holy Authors have commended it, making use of the
examples of Isaac, and the daugter of Iephte) but dangerous in many others, if
therebe no exception of things commanded, and forbidden by God himself, whom
we must rather obey then men; for as much as it is subject to be led into
precipices, if the guide who directs it be not well assured. I know that here
some allege wonders, and that the scripture seems to thunder from all parts
against proper Wisdom, proper Will, proper motion, that those who think them
selves wise, are truly fools; that, we ought to be as little children: that
the obedient man speaks of victories; that Obedience is better then Sacrifice;
that our Savior rendered himself obedient even unto the Cross; that he who
walks plainly, walks confidently, and a thousand such like allegations. But
likewise on the other side, when we are advised to mingle the Prudence of the
Serpent with the simplicity of the dove, it seems that obedience takes not
away the spirit of discerning, which makes us to render unto God, and unto
those who hold his place over us, a reasonable service. If one beat our ears
with this sayeing of David, I was made O lord as a horse under you, and behold
I am always with you, cannot we reply with the same Prophett, man being
placed in honor, understood not his dignity, for which cause he has been
compared unto horses, and made like unto them? When they who diue into the Sea
to fish for Pearls, descend into the hollow places, they there cause light by
oil which they carry in their mouths: To find the pearl of perfection in a
particular Obedience, I conceive that the oil of discretion is therein most
necessary, that we may clearly see what we do; otherwise in steed of growing
rich in Virtues, we runn the hazard to become like that inconsiderate of the
Apocalips, poor, naked, and miserable. You see well that I speak here of a
special obedience, of a particular soul unto a particular Director, not of
that which is made in the solemn, and public Vow of the Cenobiticall life.
For though this same has need of some kind of light to discern, whether
that which is commanded by the Superior be not contrary to the divine law;
In all that is indifferent to be performed, it need not be had. But the other
is much more in the hand of his own counsel, and ought to walk with much
more circumspection, even in such things as seem indifferent, and as if it
marched on flowers, where some serpente might lay ambushes at its heels. What?
(will one say) can you find fault with the simple and secret Vows of
particular obedience, which so many holy souls have made unto their Directors,
of which the examples are reported by the blessed Francis of Sales in the 4*
chapter of the first part of his Philothea? Thanks be to God, I think I have
some practice in that book, as also some knowledge of the spirit of that holy
Author: But to take that place precisely, he brings only one of S. Elizabeth
of Hungary who putt her-self under the obedience of Doctor Conradus, with an
extraordinary submission; he speaks nothing of a Vow. Marry he adds
indeed, that S. Teresa* besides the vow of Obedience* which she, as Religious,
had made unto her Superiors, made yet a a particular vow, unto one of her
Confessors, which is a superabundance of Piety, laudable truly in this great
Saint, but which would not be so peradventure in another. For in a Monastery
of women, what Superior would approve, that one of the Sisters should make the
like vow of special Obedience* Which causes me to answer by this ancient
Proverb, that one Swallowe makes no summer, nor a particular action a general
example. Let us say then, that this subjection made by a settled purpose, or by
vow, may be good when it proceeds from the frank, pure, and free will of the
person that subiecteth himself, without any necessity, precipitation,
persuasion, or induction; even as the first Mirrhe which comes out of the
tree, by way of sweet gum, or distillation, is much more esteemed then the
second, that is drawn out by inscisions, scrapeing, or scratching of the
rind. Wherefore the Spiritual Director truly dis-interessed, does not only
not exact, nor ever persuade such an obligation and Obedience, but when fervor
suggests it unto the soul, under his conduct, he makes long trial, whether
this motion preceede from the spirit of God, or from some indiscreete, and
immoderate zeal: and does not inconsiderately permit this tie to be made,
what soever Image of Sanctity the action made by the Vow, of it self do
bear. For albeit on the one side a good work receaues some augmentation of
Value, according to all diuines^; yet it is a medall of both sides, and a knife
of two edges, and on the other part there is often danger, and always
Jealousy of some impertinent obligation. And it is needful that the Director
be like an honest woman, not only free from all evil, but also from any
suspicion thereof: the integrity of reputation, or rather the reputation of a
perfect integrity, being extremely necessary in souls to serve God with
profitt and edification. I know a soul which being willing to oblige it self
by Vow to perform some act of Piety, was dissuaded from it by the B. Francis
of Sales, one of the most holy, and most dis-interessed Directors that ever
was: Notwithstanding he did not thereby hinder it in the execution of that act,
which ought to be reiterated every day, contrariwise he exhorted the
continuation of the same by constant purpose and firm resolution: But he was
not of opinion that a vow should be therein used, because (said he) vowed
actions, though of their own nature excellent, yet by accident are they
subject to great scruples and perplexities. I would willingly lay open the
conceit of this holy Prelate, who was not only a man, but a Seraphin on earth,
and who had the gifts of counsel, intelligence, and of Wisdom in a very
eminent degree, as his writeings do sufficiently testify. I likewise know
that he held at the trial of interior mortification, and humiliation a great
and holy soul more then eight or nine years, before he would promitt it to
make an entire retraite from the world, and to consecrate it self unto God by
an absolute abandoning thereof; and if his quiet, humble, and condiscending
spirit (if ever there were any such) had not yielded unto the opinions of a
great Prelate; the holy Congretion which he has founded, had remained in the
simple obligation, according to the first Institution without passeing further
into solemn vows entitled An order under the rule of S. Augustine: So far
was this holy Pastor from the spirit of constraint, and servitude, so highely
did he prize voluntary Sacrifice; and how great an enemy was he unto this
domination which some Directors establish over souls, by this so fair a way
in appearance, and so aduantagious, by their imperious pretenses. This is not in
the least sort to derogate from the prerogative of holy vows, so much
commended in holy scripture, and by all antiquity. No truly, and who could
do it without sacrilege, and blasphemy? But nevertheless a man may say thereof
as of the Arc which was so holy, and yet notwithstanding it did not belong to
every one to touch or look into it. The examples of the Bethsamits, and of Osa
are dreadful for this cause; and the censor is not put into the hands of all
the world. He who can take it let him take it, it is said of one of the
Evangelical counsels; and all conceive not this word; it is spoken upon the
same subject. And the scripture it self does admonish us not to vow rashly,
sayeing that it is much better not to vow at all, then not to render the vow
when it is made. Surely the Director truly dis-interessed will never settle
him self in the confidence of a soul by such a way. For as Jealousy is a
mark of sick love and accompanied with distrust and suspicion, so they who
make use of these industries to bind souls, and oblige them to their
persons, or to their Churches and communities; witness how much they are
distrustful, either of their proper conduct, or of the inconstancy of the
directed souls, which is to dis-oblige them by obliging them, as the Jealous
hate in loueing, for as much as their love has all the effects, and all the
marks of hatred.

CHAP. IX. The Band of Dilection.
THe true band of souls in the sacred commerce whereof I speak, is that of
perfection, and that of perfection is that of Dilectio^. There is the perfume
drawn from the Spouse, perfume which has all its force in its sweetenes;
there is the band of Charity, that band of humanity whereof the Prophett
speaks, band which tyeth the little lamb to the sides of her dame, and the
chicken to the henn, band most strong, though very gentle: Band which tied
the Apostles to the son of God, when they were fast joined to the words of
his mouth, as little children upon the bosom of their mothers. Lord (said S.
Peter in this tender sense) to whom shall we go, but unto thee who have the
words of life, and life eternal? The soul, which by a respect accompanied
with a holy confidence; cherishes its Director with a gentle amity, but
strong, sweet, sacred, wholly spiritual, is much more powerfully tied and
submitted unto him, then by all those means, which the desire of mainteyneing
ones self in credence, and authority, causes them to invent; who desire to
command with an iron rodd, and not with that of Aaron, all covered with
flowers and fruits. Even so then as they who sail by a coaste covered with
shelfes, and rocks, gain the shore, saueing them selves under the lee in some
creek, when they perceive the Wind to rise, for fear least the tempest drive
them against the rocks hidden under water in despite of all their industry: So
the well advised soul which seeks to secure its salvation, ought to walk
prudently ( caute) as says the Apostle, and to join by so just a temper its
submission unto its Director, with an honest and Christian liberty, as no
sooner shall it perceive the wind of the imperious Interest to blow on his
side who conducts it, and that he assume over it, an odious, or unlimited
domination, or which is worse, to make use of it as a footestoole to ascend to
honorable pretentions, sometimes intreateing it, to recommend him unto such a
Prince or Lord, to bring him into favor and credit, or to procure for him some
dignity, or Benefice, and to render him the office of Bersabee toward Solomon,
who demanded Abisaig Sunamite for a wife unto Adonaias, whereof for certain
reasons of state, she was denied by the king: Or rather that wherein Joseph
requested the Cupp-bearer, that he would suggest unto Pharao for the setting
him at liberty, or some other such like practices. As Soon I say, as it shall
perceive this interessed humor, let it fairly withdraw itself, and that with
the least noise possible, from this conduct; because it is a Prophett which
speaks unto the wind according to the phrase of Jeremy, and who sowes wind,
shall reap Whirle-winde and tempest. And the Prophett which is full of wind
says Ose, is cause of much iniquity. The safest way then is to withdraw it
self from those Prophets, who speak not but of vanity, whereof they have their
heads full; against whom Ezechiel in his 13. Chapter cries out with open mouth,
and whereof one may say with the Apostle, that haueing the vnderstandeing
obscured, they walk in the vanity of their senses, and that the Whirle* wind
of darkness is prepared for them. Whence you may judge, how far they ought to
keep themselves a loofe, who desire to walk as children of light, to follow
the stepps of him, who is the light of the world, who is all splendour, and whom
darkness cannot comprehend.

CHAP. X. Of the profitable Interest.
BUT there is enough spoken* and perhaps too much for those who love more
shineing, then netling, glittering then enflameing truths, of this honorable
Interest, or rather ambitious and imperious. Let us now turn the point of our
discourse toward the Profitable, armeing our style against the young fox who
gnawes the roots of the Vineyard of our Lord; and as those of Sampson, who put
the fire into the haruests, or rather who reap there where they have not
sown. But before the entry into this nice point, I repeat again once more
(for as the great Stoic says he has not said enough this word, Discitur,
who has not sufficiently learned this word, discitur) that I will not touch
any particular man, nor yet any particular condition, my discourse addressing
it self as well unto Directors who are of the Order of the Clergy, as unto
those who are of the Cenobitick. Which I say, to the end every one may profit
in this lesson, and do not as the Apes who break the lookeingglasses wherein
they see themselves so ugly, in steed, of amending their deformity; And the
Cammells who trouble the Water, Wherein they see the bunches on their backs,
their long necks, their little heads, their monstrous and disproportionate body,
not being able to reform their deformity. For it happens oftentimes that they
who discover faults unto the house of Jacob, to the end they might be amended,
receive nothing but murmures, and outrages, in recompense of their good office,
and are stoned for their good work; which the scrip* teaches us to have
happened unto diverse Prophetts* and unto the son of God himself, who upon
this subject said one day to the Jews, woe be to thee Jerusalem who killest
the Prophetts whom God sends unto thee, when they speak unto thee, pressing
truths, and which are distastefull: Woe be to you who do reedifie the
monuments of the Prophetts, which your fathers have stoned and massacred. But
what glory is it o IESV my Savior, to suffer persecutions and maledictions
for thy name, and for the service of this verity, whereof thou have prepared
the publication in thy life time. O Soul thou shall know the Character of the
Profitable Interest in the proceedeing of a Director by diverse marks, of
which behold the first.

CHAP. XI. That it leads unto Flattery.
THis mischievous devil (for how can I otherwise style this miserable motive)
comes from a far, makes his preparatiues in silence, hides the hook under the
bait, and is so much the more crafty and cautelous, by how much the more
masked, disguised, and less perceived. Sometimes the Director spurd on with
this Interest, regardes his particular, and personal profitt, sometimes that
of his church or community. One ought to be awake and stand upon his guard,
keep himself upon his ways, and not to run riot. In the first case, the Guile
is less covered, in the second, it is more subtle all over; What soever some
say there is more of the terrestrial, then the celestial, of the temporal,
then the spiritual. The eale lies under the rock, and the serpent under the
grass. Observe well this discourse, for the tongue has its root in the
heart, and from the abundance thereof it speaks. When this prof^table
Interest is absolute Master, it causes him whom it animates, to answer in
mild and gracious terms, (in a word) in flattery. He excuses the faults of
a Penitent, he speaks not unto him but of the mercies of God exceeding his
Justice, he places light for darkness, he lessenes the evil, he puffs up with
the hope of pardon, he puts soft pillowes under their elbowes, (it is the
phrase of the Prophet) reprehe^ding such as praise the sinner, and bless the
wicked. Do you see a fouler plaieing upon his little read to call the foul
into his netts? Words are soft like oil, and yet they penetrate like darts;
they enter as water, and as oil into the bone, it is the honey of Heracle,
extremely sweet, but dangerous, because it is gathered on the herb, called
wolfe-bane. It troubles the sight, and causes dizzines of the head, all
effects of Flattery. For it is received with sweetness, it clouds the
judgment, and causes the strongest brains to turn, a domestic beast, said
an ancient, most dreadefull. The whale to nourish her self, makes use of a
meruellous art, for being extreme heavy, and as a mountain moueing in the
heart of the sea, she cannot go to the chase of other Fishes, and make thereof
her pray, what does she? She makes, as some say, but as others think, she
finds the Ambergris, and casteing it out of her throat, this sweet odou^
draws about her all the fishes smelling it a far of, which being gathered
about her serve for a pray unto this great Colossus, which deuoures them.
They say that the Panther, a cruel beast, does likewise draw by the odor
which comes from his skinn, the simple beasts which approach him, and that
he deuoures them one after the other. Behold you therein the proceedeing of a
Fatterer, whose honyed words attract by complacence, those whose substance he
seeks to suck. Shall I speak it (to cut of in a word this first point) all
counsel either Interessed, or which tendes unto profitable Interest is to me
suspected; let others see, and excuse it as they will, perhaps they have
reason, and perchance I am not in the wrong. But I can hardly persuade my
self, that so badd a cause as Flattery can produce a good effect. The
dis-interessed Director does neuerso far debase himself, as to speak the
language of a slave, neither is he a man of riches, esteemeing what soever is
not of God as filth. His words are plain, and free, he boldly reprehendes
what is reprehensible, without respect of persons, and without fearing the face
of the powerful, or humane disgrace; knoweing that to complie with men, makes
him not the sernant of God. His Charity does never disguise evil, but as it
is good and true, it can only praise real goodness, and that too after a
manner which cannot begett vainty and presumption in the person praised,
because it is only commended in God, and to whose grace all the glory of the
action is referred. It is not that it knows not how to eleuate the courage of
the pusilananimous, to secure their fears, and to consolidate their hope: but
it is after so civil, so honest, so generous a manner, as it is easy to
judge, that all its pretenses are heavenly, and that it makes use of no earthly
motive.

CHAP. XII. The artifice of Complainte.
FRom this sordide and Flatteringe language, it is easy to slide unto another,
no less remiss, which shall serve for the second stroke of this Character. It
is that of Complainte. The words of this air are presseing, though
unpleasant, and importune. It is like the proceedeing of woeme^, who are never
so strong, as when they complanie; their weapons are their tears, but tears
so powerful, as cause the arms to fall out of the hands of the most
resolute. Let one of them cry, and weep in a house, she becomes mistrisse
thereof; and there is nothing that a husband leaves undone, or grants not to
make her hold her peace. An excellent personage of our time very iudiciously
said, that virtue is no more virtue when it complains; and that it is worthy
of contempt when it demands anything, since it ought not to have any reward,
or prize, out of it self. What shall we say then of those who make lucre of
P^etie (as the Apostle says writeing unto Timothy,) without considering that
the greatest gain which can be made, is to have piously that which suffices
For we brought nothing into this world, and certain it is that we shall carry
away nothing with us, but haueing our noriture, and wherewith to clothe us, we
ought to be content. For they who would be rich, fall into temptation, and into
the snare of the devil, and into many unprofitable and hurtful desires, which
plunge men into destruction, and ruin; For the root of all evil is
covetousness of goods. Hitherto are the words of the vessel of Election to a
Pastor and Director of Souls, whon he exhorts some lines after, to fly all
avarice, and all pretentions of the earth, and not to place his hopes in the
uncertainty of riches, but in the liueing God, who gives us all things
abundantly for our use. And indeed, o Director of what condition soever thou
art, whether of the clergy, or Cenobite, what cause can thou have to sound
forth this foolish Complaint, and to speak more sweetly, this manner of
Complainte in the ears of thy Penitent?

CHAP. XIII. Against the Complaints of Pastors.
PErhaps, o Pastor, you will say your Benefice is of too small a reueneue, if
that be it, why did you receive it? Why put you upon your shoulders a charge of
which you should have foreseen the incommoditie, as well as the burden? Is it
to have D^na that you were circumcised? Is it for meat that you put your self
in the state of single and clericall life? If you have taken orders on this
title, either you know its value, or you are ignorant of it; in both cases you
have offended the Bishop who imposed hands on you, unto whom you affirmed that
it was sufficient for your maintenance, otherwise he had never, nor ought he to
have proceeded to your co^secratio^. If that you have received the Caracter of
Preisthood under the title of Patrimony, why do you complain of the poorenes
of your benefice, since upon all occasions your Patrimoniall substance, may
supply that defect, and then you will serve God purely in your cure without
Interest, without stipend you will freely play the souldioer at your own
charge; You will honor God with your substance, if it be lawful so to call
your Paternall reueneue, as if you received it not of God, as well as the
reueneues of the church, since all the earth and the fullnes thereof is his, who
made heaven and earth. You may be peradventure o Director a simple Priest
settled in a Parish, and serueing souls under the Pastor of that Church: You
have only (say you) that which comes from the temporal liberalities of those
unto whom you render spiritual duties. Then, most beloved brother, you have
surprised the Bishope who has conferred on you the Sacrament of Order. For
being not conuentuall, you ought to have a Patrimoniall title. If that your
testimonials were false, see you not that this poverty whereof you complain is
the punishment of your falsitie? It is not man whom you have deceived but God,
as said S. Peter to Ananias, who by a just judgment turned your sorrow
upon your own head; and made your iniquity to descend upon your crown. Who
is it that compelled you to sacred Orders? It is a voluntary Sacrament, no man
is forced thereunto. If it were to serve God, and the Souls in God purely,
behold a good intention; but if it were to live on the goods of of the Church,
and on the service of Altares, such an intention is sinister, for one ought not
to Euangelize to eat, but eat to Euangelize. Why do you approach unto the
Altar, which is the marriage banquett of the lamb, without the nuptial
garment of Charity, whose property is not to seek its proper Interest? What,
were you made Priest to live, or did you desire to live to be made Priest?
Certes it is well done to be made Priest to live, marry spiritually, not
temporally; otherwise it were by a preposterous order to make the spirit serve
the body, and Eternity time. Noe, we must not embarke our selves in so holy a
vacation by the calling and will of the flesh, and of man, which is to say, for
earthly considerations; but through the inspiration of God. He that does
otherwise deceaues himself, and abuses others, neither is the rule of Charity
established in his heart. S. Paul being called from heaven to so holy a state,
immediately (says the sacred text) he gave no place to flesh and blood. Is it
not a shame both for you, o Preistes, and for the Church of God to see that
after the taking of holy Orders, you presently hu^t after some condition,
either of Vicar, Chapleine, Attendant, or Clerk, to gain your liueing after a
manner almost mercenary, as if you would make of your sacred Ministry a
profane trade? I will not say to what indignities you abase your dignity; nor
how you vilify your Ministry in lieu of exalting it according to the counsel
of the Apostle. You had done better to remain a laick, and to live of the
labor of your hands, without giueing scandal by your leuitie, that is to say,
without bringing a reproach to the Leuiticall Order, by casteing yourself into
functions without lawful title, capable of mainteyning you decently, without
stoopeing unto sordide conditions, and which I dare not express for the
reverence due unto you, and which I bear you: And which is worse, without
devotion, without inspiration, without vocation from above, so that you come
uncalled, and runn not being sent. Whence you fall into the pit of poverty
which you yourself have made. And then who would not laugh at him (says the
Scripture) who is bitten of a Serpent, going about to enchaunt him? Upon this
ill foundation which you yourself have laid, what reason have you to complain
of your poverty, that a man may not with more Justice reproach you, for your
intrusions into Orders? For by what other name can I call the little shame of
those, who by false, and supposed Patrimoniall, and Clericall titles, oblige a
bishop to impose hands on them? You will alleadg^ perchance this ordinary
sayeing, which you make your great Buckler, that he who serves the Altar,
ought to live by the Altar. It Is true that he ought to live thereby, but not
sordidly, and dishonorably as you do. It is certain that every mercenarie is
worthy of his hire; but the children of the Spouse, such as you are, and
dispensors of the venerable Mysteries, ought in my opinion, to follow another
way, since in the Gospel the mercenary is opposed to the true Pastor; such as
the Director whilst he feeds a soul subjected to his conduct. But not to
press farther, and pardoning the first fault committed in the root, which is
to say in the reception of a sacred Order under an unlawful title; let us do
indulgence, and let us patiently give ear if one demand of us; What will you
then have a poor Priest to do? It is not permitted him to labor, if he had
the ability, nor to beg, in case he were not withheld with shame; Will you
then have him to die of hunger, in a shameful poverty for want of
complaining? Certainly this were too unjust a degree of rigor, that he should
exclude the case of necessity, and too miscrable is the grief (said an
Ancient) which has not a voice to complain. We must allow that to the
resentiment of Nature; the short tongue (say the the Toscane Proverb) has an
ill toothe, and calamity is naturally complaining. Would I hinder him that
drownes himself, from taking hold where he may? did not the ancient law
forbidd to mussell the mouth of the Ox, who labored to tread out the corn?
Is there any thing more just, then to see that every one profitt in his labor?
The stipend shall be for your work says the sacred word; My poor brethren, I
should be too cruel, if I would hinder that which God and nature permit; It
were to violate all law divine, and humane. So far be it then from me to add
grief unto the grief of your wounds (as says the Psalmist) or afflict the
afflicted, as contrariwise, I esteem it very good, that you essaye to procure
your comfort, by the ways which the holy Ghost shall suggest unto you, if you
love and fear him. But for Gods sake call to mind, that you are Phocions, and
not Tudippians, that in your sufferances you ought to show generositie and
constancy not cowardice; because you are not reeds of the desert, but pillars
of the Temple; but elevated steeples, but eminent towers placed in the sight of
God, Angels, and men. Regard the stone or Rock from whence you were cut out;
and see the Quarrey from whence you were drawn. Remember that you are citisens
of the holy places, and domestics of God, built upon the foundation of the
Apostles, and Prophetts, and founded on the cornerstone which is JESUS CHRIST.
Consider then the Author and consummator of our faith, who being rich of
himself and of a house replenished with glory, and riches, having in himself
all the treasures of his Father, and the fullnes of the divinity dwelling
corporally in him: vouchsafed for the love of us to become poor to enrich us
with his poverty. See you not (as the Apostle says) that he enriched us, not
by his poverty, to wit in giving us his riches, but with his poverty, as if
he said that in this poverty we shall find inexhaustible mines of treasures
and heavenly graces. It is that which S. Hierome teaches us, when he says,
that he is abundantly rich, who is poor with JESUS CHRIST, with that most
amiable Savior, who says of himself, by the mouth of the Psalmiste, I am
poor and accoustomed to labors from my youth: as also, I am a beggar and
poor, but our lord has care of me: If the head be in poverty, where is that
delicate member, that would live in plenty. It is for those who live in the
palaces of kings, (says the greatest amongst the children of men) to be
sumptuously clothed, and to live in delicacies, and sweetenes; not for such as
make profession of following JESUS CHRIST who died poor, and naked upon
Mount-Caluarie. Reduce into your memory the whole life, and conversation of our
Savior in the days of his flesh, you shall see him poor in his birth, in his
concealements, in his laborious life, in ^is death, and even after his death,
being laid in a borrowed sepulcher. He says likewise of himself, that he came
not but to euangelize the poor, he declares them happy, he takes upon
himself the obligations of the good deeds done to them in his name, even to a
cupp of cold water. Moreover this modle of perfection, though very often pressed
with necessities, a^ when his Disciples did pluck up the ears of corn to
sustain nature, yet did he ever let fall a word of complaint? Contratiwise,
did he not say unto his Apostles, when I sent you through the world to announce
the doctrine of salvation, without scripp, without shoes, without staff,
without purse, did you want any thing? If you cast down your eyes on those who
have followed his stepps, and who were near unto him in the odor of his
example, all were poor. The most holy Virgin, S. Joseph, the Apostles, and so
many other blessed souls, which in the very infancy of the Church cast all
their goods at the feet of the Apostles, practicing to the letter, this saying
of our Savior. If thou will be perfect, go sell all that thou have, give it
unto the poor, and follow me: And those others of whom the world was not
worhy, who retired themselves into the deserts, covered with illfauored
skinns, poor, necessitous, famished, miserable, afflicted, dwelling in the
caves of the earth; those had nothing, and yet possessed all things; Certes
they possessed all, since they had God with them more worth then all things,
without caring for the multiplicitie of transitory goods, they rested in the
unity of this sovereign, and eternal good; Wherefore God said unto Moises, I
will show thee all good in manifesting my self unto thee. He surely is too too
covetous, whom this good suffices not, from which all other good is derived,
and descends. It is a good and a treasure which neither rust can corrupt, nor
can be forced away by the hands of thieves, nor consumed with fire and deluge.
He that is not content therewith, will never be content with any thing. In this
spirit David said, What will I in heaven and earth, but thee o my God, the
part of my inheritance for ever? O my God said S. FRANCIS, thou art my all.
Let us seek this true and only good, and all the rest will be added unto us.

CHAP. XIV. Wherein they are excusable, and how lawful.
Peradventure I have too much extended, and raised my self, speculations so
much stretched will not be comprehended by such as are pressed with Adamantine
nails of necessity. For as he that is satiated reiects the honey comb, (as
the wiseman says) so^ he that is starued, sauores not spiritual discourses.
If the appetite be not pacified he murmurs. Israel it self distasted the Manna
as a hollow and light meat, although it were so heavenly and admirable. I
desce^d then from this high style, and to accomodate my self, and communcate to
the necessicie of Saints, and of Gods anointed, I will more nearly examine
their complainte. We are inco^modated with Poverty, unto whom will you have us
temporally to address ourselves, but unto those who have recourse unto us
spiritually? Does not the Apostle teach us, that they who sow the spiritual,
may reap temporal comfort? Would to God my dear brethren that we had the
spirit of this holy! Apostle, to the end, we might do, and say like him. For
the^ might we use his terms, and take the testament of God by our mouth. But
all they who allege his words have not his feelings, witness that which S.
Peter said unto such as abused the divine ^wrritings of that Vessel of
Election to their own perdition. It is true, that S. Paul complained
oftentimes of his anguishes which reduced him even to the point of being
weary of his life, and to cry out miserablely* Who will free me from the body
of this death? And moreover, I desire to be dissolved to fly unto
JESUS CHRIST. He speaks of his pouerties, of his sufferances, of his weakness,
of his nakedness, of his hunger, of his thirst, of his beatings, of his
perigrinations, of his perils, and troubles by sea, and Land, in such sor^e as
he seems to groan under the weight of so many afflictions: In the mean
while lifting up his head in the midst of these torrents, he does like the
Palm rise up under the burden, and does rejoice, and glory in his
infirmities, and tribulations, knowing that the rose of, virtue grows amongst
these thorns. He semetimes represents his poverty and wants after a manner*
which seems to accuse those of ingratitude, and little compassion, to whom he
rendered services, with words that have the sound of reproaches; but
afferwardes he tempers the same with so much sweetenes, as he does like the Be
which steepes his sting in his own honey and he gives sufficiently to
understand, how much his Charity is. Dis-interessed, and that they are not the
goods, but the souls which he seeks for, to gain the^ to Jesus Christ. For
he glorifieth God, because he knows how to abound, and also to suffer want,
that he knows how by the labor of his hands, to gain what is necessary for
him, not only for his own living, but also for the entertainment of his
companions, not to be chargeable to any, not careing to exact of the faithful,
which he could lawfully do, and by right of Justice, to the end (says he)
that all pass honestly amongst us, as well becomes Saints. These are not
then, to speak properly, complaints which S. Paul sometimes uttered of his
necessities, but free representations of his wants to the faithful, that as
members of the self same body they might help to bear one another burdens,
to fulfill the law of Jesus Christ, and his divine precept, which recommends
ones Neighbor to every one; a precept which obliges under pain of sin,
when the necessity of him that implores our aid is extreme. If then the
poor Director, convert misbeseemeing complaints into a simple and candide
declaration of his necessity, without any art, yea rather without deceit,
there is noe doubt but God who is the God of hearts, and who has not only
those of Kings, but also of all particular men in his hand, will give such
motions as shabbe requisite to cause him to be assisted with a frank and free
will, by such a Soul as should feel it self importuned with complaints; which
have always some image of reproach, and every one knows how ill the
reproaching tone sou^ds in ears beaten therewith. But to give a greater
indulgence, a more ample means, both of breathing, and sighing unto him who is
pressed with the stinge of necessity, according to the sacred counsel, give
strong drink unto those, who have their spirit in bitterness, I will serve as
with the hand of a midwife such as are in this affliction, and help the^ to
be deliured of their grief. I will then presuppose that the Priest who
complains, should become poor by misfortunes which are common, in the
miseries whereof the world is replenished, and which the vulgar attribute to the
crosses of adverse fortune, though in effect they are but the strokes of the
divine providence. I will imagine that losses by fire, hayle, storms, deluge,
banqueroutes, suites, wars, unjust pillages, and other scourges have taken
from him, or wasted his reueneue, be it Ecclesiastical, be it patrimoniall;
and in conclusion he is brought to poverty. In this case w^ll you not have him
complain? And to whom may he more tenderly make his complainte, then unto
those who come unto him for their interior direction? Of whom can he with more
reason hope for a temporal assistance, then of such as expect from him a
spiritual? He knows their consciences; why should he not lay open unto them
his necessities? We have already satisfied this objection, in as much as we
have permitted the discovery of wants, provided it be not by way of complainte,
since that manner is doublely unjust; It being first injurious to God, and
secondly unto him who receaues the complainte* Unto man; For in what is he
culpeable of this necessity? Is it he who has reduced him into this
necessity? Unto God; For if one hair of our head fall not without his
ordinance, and if he hauecare of the least sparrowes, is it not to contest with
his Providence by co^plaining of the is eue^ts, since they only are effects of
this first cause? I, but he complains unto the Soul Directed, after the
manner of beggars, who represent their miseries unto passengers to the end they
should take pity on them, and comfort them with some small alms. Let them
do there like thei^e poor, who (to draw unto them the liberality of such
unto whom they present their misfortunes) are careful not to use co^plaintes
which have the least air of reproache. For insteede of mollifying hearts, this
way, they would harden them, and produce contrary effects to what they pretend.

CHAP. XV. Wherein unjust.
BUT* when one makes complaints of the little Charity that is in the World,
when one exaggerates his necessity, and which being but indifferent, he
paintes it forth as extreme, with pressing and importune terms, which
testify either a great greedines, or an extreme impatience of suffering, or
too slender a confidence in the Providence of God; this truly takes much away
from the credit of the Director, and of the edification, which one should
expect both from his doctrine, and example. It can not be denied, that
complaints are only made of some thing which displeases us; and whereof we
would willingly be exempt. Whosoever complains of the poverty, which God
sends him, witnesses that the state in which God has placed him, is not
pleasing unto him, and in this manner, he does not only oppose the di^ine
will, but is outrageous unto Providence; which doing nothing but for the best,
all cooperating to the good, ought not by consequence to be controled by our
weak prudence. Who knows not that adversity, though dis-agreable to sense, as
Lia, is equally daughter of the eternal Laban, no less then prosperity which
seems fayer as Rachel* as also that the first is not more fertile in virtues
and merits then the second? He who loves God alone, in the one and the other
fortune, is equally content in both; for in all he may be vinted unto God.
The rodd of Moses was miraculous in his hand, out of it, a Serpent. Poverty
out of the hand of God seems horrible, but considered in JESUS CHRIST, and in
those who have most nearly followed and immitated him, it is all admirable, and
desirable; it is the precious pearl which so many great lords abounding in
dignities, possessions, and delights, have purchased in renouncing all. Saint
Francis called it his dear mistress; Even a Stoic could well know its value,
calling it a very great good, but unknown unto the most part of men. The
ancient Philosophers heretofore held it in such esteem, even in the darkness of
Paganism, that their actions make to blush for shame, diverse children of
light, against whom these Pagans will one day rise up in judgment of
comparison. Blessed are the poor of spirit, says our Savior, for unto them
belongs the kingdom of heaven. Accursed (said the blessed author of the
Philothea) are the rich of spirit, for the misery of hell is allotted them.

CHAP. XVI. Consideration upon Poverty.
Give here a little attention, for this consideration imports. The better to
understand this doctrine we will observe with the great Card. Bellarmine, that
there are three sorts of poor; some are poor in effect, and in affection;
these are they whom God having placed in the state of poverty without their
election, are content therewith, and have no desire of riches which trouble
them; such was the holy Toby when he said unto his son, our poverty
suffices us: And in conclusion, although we ^ead a poor life, yet shall we
have enough, if we fear God. Such was Job, when deprived of all his
commodities, he said with an admirable courage; our lord gave me them, our
lord has taken them from me, blessed be his name for ever. There be others
who are poor in affection but not in effect; these are they, who amidst the
abundance of goods, set not their affection upon them; and who have nether
there heart in riches, nor riches in their heart, like unto the Apothecaries, who
have poison without being poisoned, and who rather possess them as
depositaries and dispensors then as proprietaries; Great souls, says the
stoic and who use silver plates as if they were of earth, and far greater
the^ those who contented in their real poverty, use earthen vessels as if
they were of silver. Such were these great saints who in the abundance of
riches set not their hearts upon them, as Abraham, Joseph, David, Gregory the
great, Saint Lowis, S. Edward, S. Elizabeth of Hungary, and so many others who
were amongst the goods of the erath, as the mother of pearls in the midst of
the Sea, without touching the least drop of salt water, not having their hearts
open but toward heaven, like the Halcyons neast. The third sort of poor is of
those who are so in effect, and not in affection, and who finding poverty
i^cksome, use their utmost endeavors to get out of it to become rich; Such,
says the Apostle, are subject to fall into the snares and ambushes of the
Devil, and into miserable desires which plunge men into death, desires which
kill the sloathfull, says the wiseman, who are gnawen therewith as with
worms; and these last are they who ordinarily become importune by the
continual complaints which they make of their poverty, calling heaven and
earth to witness. People whom the Apostle calls swollen, proud, covetous, more
lovers of the^ selves then of God. Shall I speak it in a word. These are the
rich of spirit, which may be reduced as the poor of spirit, into three
classes* For some are rich both in effect and affection, these are they, who in
the midst of great wealth, burn with an ardent thirst to get more; men rather
possessed by their riches, then they possess them, starued and dried up like
Tantalusses in the midst of abundance; needy in plenty, and as the
horsleeches, always crying, bring, bring; Hidropicks, increasing their
disease by drinking; Serpents, fedd with earth, and who adore gold and silver,
works of men's hands: and in my opinion, one may better call them poor then
rich, since their desires are never satisfied, so that they are unfurnished of
what is wanting to their covetousness, he being truly rich who desires
nothing, and who is content with what he has. There is an other sort, who are
rich in effect and not in affection; because desiting nothing more then that
which God has given them, they possess treasures, in their cofers, but not in
their minds; ready to leave them, or keep them, according as God shall please
to recall them, or leave the^ in their custody. There is a third kind, which
are rich in affection, and not in effect; these are such as fill the air with
their complaints, and importune men's ears with their lamentatio^s; for that
having the affection wholly insected with the desire of riches, which they want,
they do nothing else but aspire, sigh, and hunt after their acquisition,
placing their soneraigne good in things, the bad use whereof leads many
inconsiderate persons, into the greatest evil. If then we desire to be truly
rich, the Apostle counsels us to love the true riches: and what are they, but
the treasures which never decay? And where are they found, but in heaven, where
disasters and misfortunes have no access? It is there where one ought to lay
up treasures, and the Spiritual Director, who seeks to heap up else where
shows that he is not wise but of the Wisdom of the earth, not of that above;
Wherefore he ought not to be followed in a way, wherein he has misled himself.
Observe then whether he will prove of the true poor, or rich of spirit, of
whom I am about to give the marks* and thereupon judge whether he be Interess^d
or no. The which you shall know by the tone of his complaint; for if it be soft
and gentle, it is a sign that he receaues this trial of his fidelity from the
hand of him who mortifieth and quickneth: who plungeth into the Abisse, and
draws out again: But if it be sharp, eager, and pressing, it is a testimony
that this visitation of God pleases him not, and which likewise will not turn,
as Job says, unto the safety, to wit, the benefitt, of his soul.

CHAP. XVII. Advantages of the Secular Poverty.
O Poor Director how prejudicial is this complaint unto you, since it
violently takes from you two excellent advantages, which you might draw from
this poverty, that would be as honny out of the rock, and oil from the
slinte? For first, this not happening unto you by your own choice (where there
is all ways, how pure soever the intention be, some kind of propriety) but
by the sole divine ordinance, adorable in all his ways; see you not that this
sufferance would be very perfect, and mount up as the smoke of the myrrh, and
the incense, in odor of sweetness before the throne of God: If you receive with
a cheerful heart, and free will, what befalls you from this dear hand, always
amiable, whether it cherishes, whether it chastises, whether it give, whether
it take away; a hand wherein consists our Lot, and which forms our destiny:
If you say with the king of the poor, unto his eternal father, yes father,
because it has been thought good in thy sight, yes, let thy will be done unto
me on earth, which thou have ordained in heaven, thou give me this chalice,
and why shall not I drink it, yes, I will drink of this wholesome cup, and will
call upon thy holy name; such as may be the heavenly will, let it he done in
me and upon me, yes Lord, for I am thy servant, and the son of thy
handmayd, and a passionat adorer of thy eternal decrees; thou have prepared
for me this poverty, in which there is nothing pleasant, but the hand that
gives it. I receive this blear-eied L^a, and will love her for the love of
thee, who did so much love her for the love of me; for, is it not for me
that thou becamest poor, o my Savior? Thou, who before thy taking upon thee
the form of a slave, were replenished with so much riches. The other advantage
which you ^oose by your unjust complaints, o my brother, is that you depriu^
your self of the honor of the most excellent of all pouerties: For being alone
and without aid in the single life, besides not tied to any society whence
you may hope for assistance, (for the brother who is aided by an other is
secured, says the Wiseman, as if he were within a fortress) you are more
immediately depending on the providence of God, and may say with David; help
me, Lord, for I am poor and alone: As also I am singular, which is to say,
alone, even unto my last passage: And moreover, it is thou Lord who have
established me in a singular hope. The poverty of the Ecclesiastics of the
Clergy, reduced unto necessity; is a poverty truly poor: For besides that it
is shamfull (the word poor Priest being turned into a ridiculous Proverb)
neglected, despised, reviled, subject to taunts and reproaches; it has this of
miserable, to be deptiued of succors, and abandoned, seeking consolation and
not finding it even amongst friends, who mock at it, laugh at it, and wagg the
head at it. They who are thus forsaken, have they not a greater part in the
abandonings of Jesus Christ on the Cross, then such as are well assisted in
their poverty? And may they not say with the Psalmist; It is thine Lord to
receiu^ me, and to place me in shelter, under the shadow of thy wings, since
my father and my mother, and all my friends forsake me, and fly from me, as if
I were dead; and give me up to oblivion, not only in their memory, but in the
affection of their heart. That is the great advantage which the divine author
of the Philothea observes in the poverty of seculars, above that of Cenobites,
for as much as that dishoners, and leaves in inexplicable miseries, and without
support of those who live in community. But this, besides that is proceeds of
proper election, is a poverty, glorious, honorable, cherishing, respected,
succored and assisted within, and supported without; in esteem and vogue in
the world, and placed in high degree, and prime rank of all pouerties; having
only on its side commendable, the prerogative of a vow, and of
dis-apropriation, which is a quality more spiritual and speculatiue then
real, material, and solid: A quality which gives it the name, the splendor
and brightness of virtue, whose only shadow is worthy of honor and reverence,
but not the pressing incommodities, and sharp sufferances which are felt in a
single poverty, abandoned and necessitous: So that they have the glory of
poverty, but not the incommodities: And the others have the incommodities, not
only without honor, but also with reproach. Which be it spoken without
prejudice unto the excellency of the poverty vowed in communities, which
places such as embrace it, in this high and triumphant state of perfection, so
much extolled by writers, and Whereunto, in some some, may be applied this
saying of the Apostle; Having nothing, and possessing all things.

CHAP. XVIII. Against the complaints of Cenobite Directors.
SOme nevertheless of this condition leave not to form complaints, which we
must now examine, having already, with a lively, Christian, and as I believe,
charitable liberty, reprehended those Directors who are of the Order of the
Clergy. But before I enter into this matter, which is of it self ticklish
enough; I had need to fortifi^ my self with a distinction, which the no less
learned then devout Cardinal Bellarmine furnishes me withal, in the 41.
chap. of his book entitled of Monks, wherein ^^ speaks of the means whereof
they live; it is his manner of speech, and these are his proper terms. This
excellent and holy person then says, that the Cenobites draw that which is
necessary for their liuelihood four ways, which may be reduced to two kinds
of regular life; the one, of those who are founded and rented; the other of
such as are called Mendicants, and who live by their begging. The first then of
these four sorts, is of those who live by their labor and industry, buying
and selling to draw from thence profitt, whereby to live; These are Bellarmines
own words; The second of those who live on the goods which they have brought
into the community, whereof they make a stock, which afterward they distribute
unto the brothers, according to their necessities without having any thing
proper. The third of those who live upon foundation* made by pious persons, who
have given sufficient revenues to entertain a certain number of Cenobites.
The fourth, of those who live of mere begging, without receiving any lands,
heritages, rents, foundations, or other revenues, immovable, and founded. Of
the three first sorts, live such as beg not; and of the last, such as have by
their institute, the title of Mendicants. Now in the four chapters following,
the Cardinal whom I have cited, proves as learnedly as the Monks; first that
they are not obliged to labor with their hands, as the ancient Cenobites did.
Secondly, that they may live of the goods, which they brought into common;
which is without contradiction. Thirdly that they may sustain themselves of
the foundations made to this purpose, by the founders of Monasteries. Fourthly
that begging being permitted by the Church to certain Orders, one cannot blame
it without note of heresy: Refuting besides, all the opposite errors to these
verities, so strongly, that after so exact a haruestman, one can make but a
very ^light gleaning. It therefore only remains, for me to show in this
subject, that of what fashion soever a community lives, the complaints of
poverty, which the Cenobiticall Directors make, can not be just. In the ensuing
part you shall see the reasons.

THE THIRD PART.
CHAP. I. Reasons opposed to Cenobiticall complaints.
VVherof complain you, o Cenobites, when you say with a pitiful tune, that
you are poor? Since that without a species of sacrilege you cannot be rich,
nor proprietaries, the vow of poverty once made. Of what do you complain, bur
of your own choice and of this best part which you have taken with a free
will? Believing, as it is true, that it is good for a man to be so. Of what do
you complain? Is it for having embraced an Evangelical Counsel so holy and
so fit to aspire unto perfection? According to that: all that thou have, give
it to the poor and follow me. Alas see you not that by your complaining of
counsel, you frame a kind of complaint against the Consellor as if he who is
called the strong God, Co^sellor, Prince of peace, Angel of the great Counsel
could or would give counsels which were not worthy of him, who has in
himself all the treasures of Wisdom, and knowledge of the eternal father. Or
rather of what do you complain but of your selves repenting the good which
you have done? Even as a sinner who should repent him self of his ill doing.
Of what do ^ou complain but of charging your selves with a burden which your
^itle fervor and courage cause you to find too heavy? Though the son of God
called it sweet and light, having himself carried it on his shoulders all the
days of his life. O God, do not o^cplaine of this holy election; for this
were to putt your mouth against heaven, and seek to correct the works of God
which are all perfect, and without repentance; Though it be said that God
seeing man so vngratfall was touched with an interior grief of heart, and
repented himself that he made him. But perhapps you groan under the
sharpness of te^porall incommodties which press you. When S. Bennett, to
overcome a temptation cast him self all naked amongst the thorns, and S.
Francis rolled him self upon the snow for the like; had not they good reason
to complain the one of the priking of the thorns, the other of the coldness
of the snow? And he who would plung himself into a river to wash himself,
should he have reason to complain that water wett. I Never yet hard say that
fasting glutts, nor that poverty inrisheth, roses grow not but amongst
thorns, and there is no day but has his night, All virtue consists in action,
and in action hard and difficult: if vowed poverty be a virtue, (of which noe
man doubts) must it not have, as chastity, Obedience, Patience, Humility, and
all the other virtues, some suffera^ce or labor annexed to the practice
thereof, otherwise what merit were there to exercise it? The proper action then
of virtuous poverty, is to suffer patiently and joyfully necessities, wants and
scarcities. Happy is poverty, said a great stoic, if it be pleasant, but I
deceive my self, goes he on saying, it is not poverty if it be cheerful and
content. Why, o Cenobite, can you well think to have the glory of an honorable
poverty without feeling the discommodities thereof? Are you ignorant that
crowns, are not to be gotten but by lawful combatts? And would you gain that
of poverty without being pricked with the points of necessities? Is it to be a
delicate soldier that you were inrowled under the standard of the Cross? Do
you imiagine that it would suffice to honor God with your lips and to
sacrifice unto him solemn words, without putting your self into the practice?
He who voweth Chastity, ought he not to resist sensual temptations? And if he
feel them as did S. Paul, ought he not to have recourse unto grace, to the
end his virtue be perfected in his infirmity? He who promises obedience ought
he not to be ready to suffer a thousand contradictions and repugnances in
himself to attain unto a perfect resignatio^, mortification, and an entire
renounciation of his own will. And would then he who vows poverty have for
nothing (to wit, without sufferance) this precious pearl? Is it not to acquire
it, and for its love, that he has renounced all the substance of his goods?
For I speak here of Priests Cenobites, who I suppose have left some
possessions in the world, not of such as having nothing gain much more then
they loose, by putting themselves into Cloisters; and then of what does he
complain? If he feel the dolours of this voluntary circumcision, might not
one say unto him in some sort, as unto Saphira, it was lawful for thee to
keep thine own and to do like the young man in the Gospel who retired
himself unto his goods not being able to digest the counsel of perfection;
But after he had put his hand to the plough to look back is that which cannot
be done, without declaring ones self unfit for the conquest of heaven.
Peradventure my Brother you expect in this life the hundred fold which our
Savior promised to S. Peter, to his Disciple, and to such as shall leave all
to follow him; but see you not that this intention would be impure and too
mercenary, not willingly to give an alms but in hope of this hundred fold, and
after this reckning is there an vserer or covetous man who has not been
liberal, to give one for a hundred? If you complain repining at what you have
left, it is yet worse, for it is a kind of reproach made unto God, to whom we
have rendered in the person of the poor, that only which we have received from
him; for what temporal, corporal, or spiritual thing do we enjoy which we
have nor received? And if we have received it from him what do we give him?
Are not these rivers, which naturally return unto the Sea from whence they draw
their Origin? And moreover what need has he of our goods? If we ca^ call
ours this title portion of the Universe which is all his, whereof he only
permitts us the use; so the Spouse who was wholly her beloueds in body, heart,
and affection, did she not confess that having given all the substance of her
house for the love she bare him, she thought to have done nothing: Were it
possible that an Evangelical Nazarite, a soul consecrated to God, by a vow
so holy, could amidst the Manna of the desert of Cenobiticall life, long after
the ognyons and fleshpots of Egypt? Would one foul his feet after he has
washed them? would one put on again his garment after he were unclothed? It
is to usurp the very Words of Job, but in a far contrary sense, who will
grant me to be as in my days past when I washed my feet with butter, and the
rock powered me rivers of oil? This is to imitate the cowes who thought to
ouerturne the Arc which they drew when the voice of their calves resounded in
their ears. If perchance, o Cenobite, you are poor in the world, and being
brought up in study by your community you are arrived to the state of
Preisthood, under the title of poverty, and afterward employed by your
Superior in the direction of souls devoted to your Order, what cause have you
to complain of a title which has honored you with the character which you
bear and could not obtain in the world for want of means? Is it that the
incommodities of poverty seem unto you less supportable in the service of
JESUS CHRIST, then in the world? behold, behold him unto whom you are
dedicated, behold your Captain, and judge whether you be more poor and more
incommodated then he; It is a yoke which he bears with you, and it would not
be a yoke unless you were two who carried it, for grace is never wanting unto
him who is not wanting unto grace. Grace which causes this yoke to putrefy,
(it is the word of a Prophett, which is to say, sweeten) at the face of oil,
to wit, by the suauety of the unction. It may be that you would have the
honor of poverty and the same commodity, which the rich enjoy, an vnequality
of spirit which ca^ not fall on a person of good sense; for it is to desire
the triumph without victory, the victory without combatt, the combatt without
peril and the peril without pain. There is noe virtue without labor, noe
glory without virtue, noe reward without meritt, noe honor without charg; and
the Maxim of the la^ teaches us, that he who receaueth some profitt ought
likewise to take part with the discommodities annexed thereunto. One can not
receive an inheritance without being charged with debts; otherwise it were to
imitate those children unto whom honny is given upon their bread, and who cast
away the bread after they have licked up the honny. Shall I here dare to
speak a bold word with the Prophett Amos, I why not? It is God who speaks,
and his judgments are true and justified in themselves; Behold that which the
oracle says, harken unto this saying; fatt cows which inhabitt the mountaigns
of Samaria, why do you wrong the needy, and deceive the poor, who say unto
the great ons and the Lords, bring, and we will drink; our Lord has sworn by
his holy one, that lo the days shall come upon you: and a little after, your
teeth shall be set on edg in all your communities, and you shall have want of
bread in all your houses.

CHAP. II. Of the labor of hands.
BUT let us examine more nearly, o Cenobitts, your poor manner of living,
which Bellarmin notes, and let us see whether in either of them you have just
cause to complain; As for the first which concerns the labor of hands, if
you say that is an old custom which is noe more in use, and that it was then
good, to wit in the days of those coals whereof we are but the ashes, I would
willingly know whether we pretend unto any other Paradise then that whereunto
those good ancient Cenobitts aimed who labored with their hands, and eat
their bread in the sweat of their brows; or likewise whether we have received
some new Gospel which promises us Paradise at an easier rate then unto them
who got it with violence, and to speak according to S. Paul, in labor, in
travel, in watchings, in hunger, in fastings, in cold, in nakedness, in
poverty, in anguish, in misery, in affliction, as dead yet living: or whether
we have received some indulgence or privilege which frees us from this pain,
and exempts us from this ordinary toil, as we are not subject to the power and
jurisdiction of Ordinaries. You will say with this Learned Cardinal, that the
same was good and practiced in those ancient Monasteries, as well of Egypt as
of the other parts of the world, where many lived in common, not hundreds
only, but thousands of Monks according to the report of histories, who were
all Laics, their Superior only excepted, who for reverence unto the
Sacerdotall dignity was called Abbot, which is to say, father: But since that
Priesthood began to multiply amongst Monks, the use of the labor of hands is
not only Lesned, but abolished amongst the Priests; let us add, and even
amongst the lay brothers, who in imitation of the fathers, have left the
labor of hands to apply themselves to holy contemplation, and the prayer of
rest and recollection where they do wonders; because the holy Ghost who is
simplicity it self, is pleased to communicate himself unto simple spiritts;
Notwithstanding I refer my self unto what S. Austen says upon this subject,
in a whole book of the manual labors of monks; and the complaints which he
makes of this* defect in the thirty one Chapter of the first book of the
customs of the Church, whereof I will only give this touch. It is noe ways to
the purpose that in this life (he speaks of the Cenobiticall) where the
Senators (these were the greatest Lords of the Roman Common wealth) are
laborious, and take pains, the artificers should grow idle, and do nothing,
and where the Lords of villages resort forsaking their goods, their delicases
and commands, there the down, who were their vassalls, should live daintily;
Is not this delicat sloth in your judgment touched with a delicate hand? No,
no, says he in the same book, you must not in this sort be idle, but rather
show unto men by your labor, that you have not chosen this kind of life to
spend your days in sloth and idleness, but rather enter heaven by the narrow
gate which is that of sufferances and labors; otherwise this saying of the
Gospel will beat your ears, what do you here all the day without doing
any thing? And this other, sluggard, go to the emi^t, and let this little
creature give a most shamfull lesson unto thy slothfuln^sse; learn the like of
the be, and know that it is ordained, that he who labors not, should not eat.
During the time the Manna fell upon Israel who so ever was negligent to rise at
the break of day to gather up his portion, fasted that day. The great Patria^ke
S. Francis, did he not call brother-flies such amongst his companions, as would
needs live upon the labor of others, without contributing of their own, after
the manner of drones, who seek in the winter time to live upon the labor of
bees. If then a Cenobite were in a community not mendicant by institute and
privilege, and had no other means to live but by the labor of his hands*
should it not be injustice in him being unwilling to take pains, yet to make
complaints of his necessity? might not ^ man with reason ask him why he choose
this kind of life, if unwilling to practice it? And a secular artisan who were
expert in a good trade, and would suffer hunger rather then exercise the same,
and apply his labor thereunto, should he not give more ground of derision
then pity, in case he complain of his want, having arms, health, and
strenght to support him in performance of his work? But peradventure we
frame* these reasons to little purpose, since this manner of living, being noe
more in use amongst the Cenobits, there are few Monasteries (except those of
the Mendicants) which have not their living settled by the second and third
means, which is to say, by the goods brought in or gathered together in
common, or by the foundations of pious persons.

CHAP. III. Of founded Cenobites, and whether their Complaints be just.
IF then a Director Cenobite ^iside in a house where the institute is to live
of reueneues according to either of the manners, what cause would he have to
complain of his particular poverty; since that in a Conuentual family well
governed the distribution of the common goods is made into particulars with a
justice si exact, as every one has what is needful for his liuelihood,
clothing and all other commodities of life? If the Director complain of his
community and of his Superiors as not receiving things justly necessary, sees
he not that like Cham he discovers the shame of his fathers and of his house,
and that this complaint gives rather occasion of scandal then subject of
edificatio^? And to believe that they are fitter to exasperate souls then to
reclaim; and to take them of rather the^ to allure them? Have they not reason
to say within themselves let those people first well order their own
community, and then will they well direct others? He who (says the Apostle
speaking of a Pastor) knows not how to order his family nor rule his
domestics how will he be able to govern in the house of God, and wisely to
dispose thereof? And what kind of Directors are they, who know not how to guide
them selves? But some will reply, it is of the poverty of the house they
complain, not of their own particular. O wife of Jeroboam why do thou
disguise thy self? No, no we run upon a hot sent, we understand the
dublings, we know how to keep our selves from chang. We will presently
speak concerning the specious complaints, which the Pastors and Cenobits make
of the poverty of their parishes and Co^uents, litere we will only touch the
personal which have so much the more ill grace in the mouth of a Cenobite, as
they seem to yield unto propriety, a vice so much detested by all the
Ascetiks, who hertofore denied Christian burial unto such, as at their death
were found to be tainted therewith giving them the sepulture of asses. For in
fine what would the Cenobite? What pretends he, by this complaint, but to be
eased in his own particular of the necessity whe^with ^e says he is pressed,
under color of the poverty of the house where he lives? And might not one ask
him why he left his goods in the world, whereof he could have lived without
importuning any, to putt himself into a disaccomodated house, in an order
which needs foundation, since it is not of the rank of mendicants, and founded
according to the two kinds of which we treat. If he were acquainted with these
incommodities during his nouiship why did he become professed, and having made
his profession, why did he give testemony of his repentance by his complaints?
If the pressing necessities of the house or of the order were concealed from
him, was he sinceerly dealt withal? Is it after a manner as they use to call
hawks to the fist to hood them, and to cause fish to enter into the wicker?
some are so sollicitous to understand a nouice, to sound the depth of his
soul, and the whide circuit of his interior, why then will the professed use
such diligence to hide them selves from them, and will not give them a clear
sight of all the particularities of the community? Must one make profession to
learn what belongs to a professed? Again from the receiving of the habit of
the nouice unto the privation there is some return into the world, but after a
solemn profession there is no time to say I was ignorant, I thought not, I
knew not; for he must remain in this sentinel not to remove till the great
Captain sounds the retreat at the hour of death. Whosoever ever descends from
this regular cross whereon he is fastened with the n^iles of the three Vows,
cannot be a child of God; there must h^ die, to live for ever; For who
perseuereth not therein till the end* cannot find salvation. What soever
complaint then, a Cenobiticall Director, of an institute which ought to live of
foundation, and rent, might frame; cannot be admitted; since it taxes the
community of injustice, in the distributions of necessaries, When it tends to
particularity, or propriety, When it accuses the indiscretion of the
complainant, for as much as he casts himself into the labyrinth, wherein he
finds himself entangled.

CHAP. IV. Of those of Mendicant Directors.
THe mendicant Cenobite has yet less ground to complain of his particular
poverty, because he could not be ignorant of that of the community, wherein he
putt himself, which, having nothing assured, save that which is most firm of
what soever is stable, to wit, the infallible providence of God, cannot permit,
or give unto such as range themselves under its banner, but what the ordinary
begging may afford. He then who will draw some particular succor, or comfort
from a Directed soul, should not he prove in some sort propri^tary, and
injurious unto his community, from which alone, he ought to expect his
necessaries, and not from persons abroad, and by ways* which being secret,
cannot be but indirect, and reprehensible? He will also say that it is not his
own particular want whereof he complains, but of those of his brethren, and of
the whole community. Behold he^e the son of Adam, still couers himself with
figue leaves, and how proper and particular love co^ceals it self under the
shaddowe of a focietie. But Adam where art thou Tell me thou son of the old
man, art not thou one of those brothers, and he whom thou cherishest most, of
all that little poor community? If that be at ease, have not thou all thou
desire? The safety of the common wealth, is it not the particulars? When the
vessel is saved from shipwreck, do they perish who are in it? They who
traficke in common of that which is within, have they not their part of the
profit, when it is arrived at the haven? It is that which we must now examine,
to wit, wheither the complaints are just, which the Pastors, and the Cenobites
make of the poverty of their Parishes, and of their Monasteries. As they go
first in the procession for the venerable antiquity of their order, so also
shall they have the preeminency in the reprehension; that the Diocesan Pastors
have a little more power, and jurisdiction over such Pastors as are subordinate
to them; For as concerning others, although they be not out of the bosom, yet
are they nevertheless out of the precinct of the ordinary Hierarchy; not rising
by their exemptions, but from the authority of the head of the Church; a tie
which S. Bernard compares to the fair disposition of that man, whose feet
should be immediately fastened to his head, without interposition of other
members of the body; such a contracting, that the pencills of painters, no
less subtle then the inventions of Poets, have not yet met with any thing
so admirable. This conceit coming from so great a saint. I b^l^eue that the
report which I thereof make, cannot be taken in ill part, but by those whose
sight is offended by the light.

CHAP. V. Of those of Pastors, touching the poverty of their Churches.
TO what purpose then do some Pastors in the Direction of souls to them
commit^ed, become importunate in laying open the poverty of their Churches, if
it be not to share in the commodities which they desire should be given
thereunto? Is it not more honest, and more suitable to the dignity of a Pastor
to represent in all simplicity, and without any show of complaint the
necessities of his Church, Whether it be in ornaments, in buildings, or in
light, or else in the foundation of some Chappells, services, or
confraternities, most sweetly causing the sheep to understand that the parish
is their mother? and that well-bred children, and abunding with the goods of
fortune, get no honor in leaving their mother naked, and in necessity,
without proceeding to exclamations, to reproaches, to inuectiues: For that does
manifest some particular interest; as thirst, and eagernes to drink, though it
be but water, shows some feauourish disposition. If the dormitiue, and sweet
medicines or mild, and gentle remonstrances made in terms of cordial
verity, and Charity not feigned be unprofitable in regard of the hardness of
ha^ts, after charity, (which never goes without longanimitie, and patience)
marches Justice, providing that the Bishop ordain things necessary for that
respect, and that he, in case the people be stubborn, demand aid of the
Magistrate for the execution of the ordinances which concern the necessities
of the service of God, and the maintenance of holy places, and sacred
ornaments. The same may be said of the entertainment, and maintenance of
Pastors, which is due in all justice both divine, and humane, and which may be
sweetly, peaceably, and quietly demanded, by ways which can only be odious
unto such as curse the day, and who conceiving iniquity bring forth injustice:
For that purpose are designed Tithes; and for pa^ishes where there are none, as
in Towns, other rights are ordained forth maintenance of Pastors, which ought
to be received with humility and gentleness as well beseeming those who feed
the flock of God, without of a sordid lucre, as S. Peter says, but franckly,
and amiablie. To what end is it then to fill the air with complaints, which
cannot be exempt from suspicion of avarice, though possibly the heart of his
tongue which utters them, be not infected with this evil? I do not say that
the Institution of the Confraternities, is not holy, and whence souls receive
very great profitt, it being a powerful spurr unto piety: But when a Pasto^
makes use of them, to draw advantage, and to increase his reuennue, who sees
not that this little stream degenerates from the purity of its source, and
that the intention of instituting these devout assemblies, does no ways suit
with this design? There is a sort of white Adamant which repulseth the iron,
which is attracted by the black. The Director who has true charity, which is
the Adamant of hearts, will dart far from him all these interests, which rather
seek profitt secretly, then with the trompet. As concerning other abuses of
Confraternities of Par^shes, which, principally in the country, lead unto
banquets, and other dissolutio^s of the mouth, as if the kingdom of God,
consisted in eating, and drinking, and not in the joy, and peace of the holy
Ghost, I will not here speak* since that the very naming of these disorders,
is enough to blame them, and to reprehend the Pastors, and Directors, of such
assemblies, who insteede of sharply reprehending such expenses, no less odio^s
then vicious, take part therein, authorisinge by their example, that which ought
to be destroyed by their speech.

CHAP. VI. Of those of Cenobites touching the poverty of their Communities.
LET us now see, if the complaints which the Cenoticall Directors power out
into the ears of those persons whom they conduct, have any more reasonable
air, when they speak of the poverty of their Communities, then when they
trea^e of their particular incommodities. I will say (to the end I may not
irritate the bees, according to the ancient Proverb) yet less; this word is
short, but true, and behold the proofs. Let us always remember the
distinction of Cenobites who live of foundatio^s, and such as get their living
by begging, who therefore are called mendicants; because this difference is very
considerable. Touching the first, if their foundation be ancient, and well
established, it is altogether evident, that they cannot complain of poverty,
unless there be dis-order in the community, disorder which, as the anathema of
Saul, and Acha^, causes that nothing prospers. What may one say wnto such,
but that they reform themselves, and then all will abound with them,
according to the infallible promise of our savior, seek first the kingdom of
God, and then all will be added unto you? Yes, but this will be a well reformed
community, yet the foundation will be new, and consequently weak enough: This
argument seems vnanswearable, and yet is it the most feeble of all, whose
complainte is least receauable. For if all communities be established either of
goods brought thither by such as enter therein (as is practiced in the new
erected Monasteries of women) which has made the order of S. Bennet, so great
and rich, and other foundations, as the learned Bellarmine notes, whose
doctrine I here follow, step, by step in the 23. Chap. of his book of monks;
Or if they he grounded on the foundations of great, and rich personages whose
piety erecteth, and indoweth entire Monasteries (which is common in Italy,
and Spain, of France I Say nothing) why do these people complain that these
new howses have no soundations? But if they who come in, bring nothing, why do
you receive them, in case you have neither the means to maintain them, nor
the faculty, or permission either of Church or Magistrate to live by begging?
Why place you the carte before the horses? A^e not men they who ought to
establish and endowe howses, and not the howses to endowe the men? Such as have
no means to live in the world, and being ashamed to ask, and loath to take
pains, say that they cannot there work their salvation, ought they to find
their life plentifully provided for, in that country which you call out of the
world, in places most peopled of great towns, and in howses whether they
bring nothing but Alexanders part in his conquests, hope?

CHAP. VII. The indiscreete zeal of some Cenonobites in the multiplication of
their howses.
But is it not behouefull to save solues which would be lost in the world, and
to trust in the Providence of God? o fair words! o beautiful head said the
fox of the fable, having found one of marble, but much better would it be, if
it had brains! The indiscreete zeal, and without science, makes faults, in
thinking to perform heroicke acts: It is not good husbandry say the clownes to
nourish peacocks, for though they eat spyders, and mise, purifying the howses
of these vermin, yet do they otherwise greater mischeifes, for they uncover
topps of howses, and fright away tame pigeons, with their cries. It is the same
with indiscreete zeal, which sometimes by chance produces small benefitts,
but on the other side committs a thousand* impertinencies, and causes a
thousand perplexities; Plunging in the subject whereof I speak, such as think
to retire themselves out of the world thereby wholly to apply themselves unto
God, into thornie cares, into secular negotiations, which the Apostle forbids
those who are dedicated unto God, and into a thousand labyrinthes which I
rather desire to cover with an ingenious, and charitable silence, then to lay
them open by my discourse. My dear brethren give ear unto S. Peter, who
forbids you to walk in your fervor, and to David, who tells you that the
honor of the king of glory loves judgment; and be not ashamed to learn your
lesson touching your exterior carriage, of the weaker sex, since in the
interior passages of the mystical Theology we learn so many holy docume^ts
from women and maids, of eminent piety, whose infirmity, God has chosen to
confound stringth, and ignorance, to abate the swollen pride of the science of
the most learned, from whom he has hidden his secrets, and revealed them unto
these simple souls, whose writings do ravish us. Observe then the actions of
the Conuentuall maids, who like you begin their Orders, their reformations,
their families, their Communities. Behold these prudent Virgins, and how they
walk with the lamp in their hand, to wit, with consideration* and discreet
government: They receive not amongst them, any maid which may be a charge unto
them, and who has not a competent dowry for her enterteinement; but of the
other class, which is of such as bring much more with them, the^ is necessary
for their maintenance, and who assist in building, in founding, in adorning, in
establishing* the number is far greater; Therewith they become founders,
ben^factours, and other lesser Suffrages, who by their good government place
immediately their howses in that state, called the happiest, which is rather to
give, then to receive, and to be rather profitable, then burdensome unto the
common wealth* This example is domesticke, at your doares, before your eyes, it
is not far fetched; those are little ants, learn their Economie. So have the
ancient Cenobites done, who liu^d of foundations: For they rece^ued not any
one amongst them, who brought not wherewith to entertain him, in case the
house being otherwise founded was no^ capable to receive some soul, eminent in
piety, or learning, though deprived of the goods of fortune. Consult with the
prudent Virgins, and propose unto them a maid of gold for virtues, and
devotion, yet without money, and without patrimony, fear not that they will
find her vocation to be assured; they will furmish you, not to admit her
amongst them, with as many excuses as you please, and they will no wa^es
doubt, that this weak soul, according to her sex^* shall be lost in the
world, and they will tell you wonders of confidence in Gods Providence. On the
other side present unto them a maid very rich, but of a froward and harsh
spirit, o! she shall not want vocation: what merit is it to break this hard
brain; when she is once entered, they having well framed others, will willingly
show her the spiritual works of mercy, so as she perform the temporal
toward them. After this manner guide they their affairs, without being
chargeable to any, and without making great enterprises which afterward cause
them to hang down their heads, imitating that indiscreete buylder reprehended
in the Gospel, who began to build, but measured so ill the proportion of
expense, as he could not finish it, exposing himself unto the scorn of his
neighbors. There is a holy, and venerable Order of Cenobites, which makes
profession of a great solitude, and which has longer continued in the rigor
of its first strictnes, then any other in the Church of God, that Order walks
a leaden pace in the erecting of new howses, and never sendes a a colonie, I
would say, a community, until the house be entirely built, and wholly
founded, as well for the maintenance of the Cenobites, as of the buildings,
desiring rather to have a few Conuents well ruled, and well endowed, then a
rabble of little howses which distroye the Claustriall, and Conuentuall
discipline; many beginnings, and the consummation to no and. An art of the bad
spirit, who thereby endeavors like Pharao, to cause the Israelites to perish,
ordeining that their children should ^e ^ast into the current of waters: And
like XERXES, to cause the river Gindes to dry up, by dividing it into many
streams. And to speak the truth nothing sooner brings to decay the policy
of a Conuentuall Order, the^ the unlimited multiplication of house(...) for if
it be hard to frame good subjects, whose submission may be entire, it is much
more hard to mere with good Superiors, who ought to be as the bones, the
sinnows, and the supporters of the body: And experience shows that in small
communities, observance does easily slacken. Add that this desire to extend
themselves in number of habitations causes that they receive men to fill them,
without much choice, many elected, and few called; laying aside the
unprofitable, the incapable, the remiss, who have as good teeth as the rest,
but have nether arm, nor tongue, to labor corporally or spiritually, and in
the mean while, are no less expencefull then the laborers in the vinyeard,
and oftentimes more; for as the wheel of the chariot least greased, makes the
most noise, so they who have least of the unction of grace, are the greatest
complainers of their entertainment, and as the Prophet said of Israel, if they
be not filled, behold they murmur. May I be permitted to speak unto these
Sirs (although the ordinaries may not ouerlooke them, nor have any thing to say
unto them, for it belongs unto the^ to teach others) only by the way* of
fraternall* charity, and in the same fashion as I would desire to receive of
them a good aduertissement for the correction of my faults, according to the
precep^ which our Savior gives us, gently ^o correct those who stray out of
their bounds, and to receive with a willing heart the same grace, when an other
shall advertise us of our errors.

CHAP. VIII. A remonstrance thereupon and advise.
Will it, I say, be permitted me to show that it would be much more expedient
for to grow by the root, then by the branches, which is to extend themselves
in the exercise of virtues, rather then in the multiplity of foundatio^s, and
not to leave Mary's good part, for the toil and trouble of Martha; inseparable
trouble of so many new missions, and Conuoyes. No the perfection of an order
consists not in the number of men and howses, but in the exact obserua^ce of
the rules, and Institute. If the number caused the excellency, the world would
carry it from those that leave it; for there are ^lwaies many more secular
laics then of those who abandon the world. An army less in multitude but
well ordered, is stronger then a great one where disorder puts all into route
and confusion. But why is it necessary to take much thought, or use many words
for the proof of a truth altogether evident, and which experience makes
palpable? No, no, at the Tribunal of God, you shall not give so strict an
account for not enlarging your order and multipling your dwellings, as for the
ill husbanding of virtues, and for many other imperfections which wage
continual war against us. And besides where there is no hearer says the
wiseman, what need is there to powere out our speech? The passion of
spiritually multiplying themselves, being so vehement in zealous souls, as
that: which God inspired in nature by his words increase and multiply, is not
so ardent: For the other is so much the more pressing by how much it has a
fairer pretense to advance the glory of God in the salvation of souls, by
bringing to him many servants; whence such as are once taken therewith cannot
acquit themselves; because they would think to lose all their perfection. No,
the passion which carnal fathers have for the advancement of their Children,
to lodge them we^l, to provide for all their necessities to erect them howses,
bears no comparison with that of Cenobiticall fathers and Superiors in
extending, multiplying advancing enriching building magnifiing and causing
their blessed instituts ^o flourish; And God grant, said an ancient father of
the Cenobites unto his b^^thren who pressed him to reedify the Monastery and to
make it greater; that by enlarging our terrestrial cells we do not straiten
the habitations which expect us in the mansion of our heavenly father. It is in
vain to oppose reasons and words unto a torrent which can not be stayed by any
banks. Go on then in the name of God, our dear Brethren go on dilating
your selves always forward, and never return back noe more then the birds of
the Prophett, ascend always or desce^d like the Angels on Jacobs ladde^
without stopping in your motion, I ^ell you from my very heart as Rebeccha's
brothers told her when they sent her by Eliezer to be the spouse of Isaac; you
are our sister increase into thousand thousands: let your Orders flourish more
and more, let your Brethreren multiply and surpass in number the stars of
heaven, and the sands of the Sea: Yet is it not very certain that by
multipling people the glory of God is magnified: since that experience, which
your passion causesh you to ignore, makes us to see that you spiritually ruin
yourselues by that whereby you think temporally to establish yourselues; that
the Wisdom of the flish obscureth that of the spirit, as the moon receaueth
Ecclips by the opposition of the earth, and that thinking to advance the glory
of God by multiplication, you diminish it by inconsideratio^ It is in my
opinion the judgment of the holy Ghost, who by the mouth of the Church his
true oracle teaches us in the last Ecumenicall council, that the multiplicity
of new institutes places so many Children on the breast of Christian piety, as
it thereby becomes dry; which be it spoken with due reverence to the Sea
Apostolic that does nothing therein but maturebly, holily, and upon just
necessities; for who can say unto it why do you so? since that the sovereign
Bishop holding the general government of the ship of the universal Church
knows better the necessities thereof, the^ any particular Pastors, who a^^
only called unto part of the solicitude, not unto the fullness of the
absolute power and auctority reserved only unto him. Now to return to my
first purpose; whence this digression (which will not be unuseful) touching
the multipliing of Cenobiticall houses seems to have some what putt me our of
my track; I say that if such as make new foundations complain of their
poverty, their complaint can not be justified by their inconsideration which
causes them rashly to enterprise works, wherein they take ^o ill a bias that
one need not wonder (whatsoever confidence they alleadg in the providence of
God) if they prosper so ill therein, as in the end their harp is changed into
lamentation, as Job says, and their voice into the accent of those who weep*
What might a man then do to cause these complaints to dry up in their mouths,
and to satisfy this remediles appetite of founding howses and making new
establishments? Concerning which, I should bidd them to ask of their ancient
fathers Cenobites, and of those who have preceeded the^ in the like designs;
and they will answer them, follow our stepps, pursue the tracts of our
example: Receive not any amongst you, who bring not unto the community means
to live; as no Priest: is received into sacred Orders, without title (I speak
here of Cenobits living of rents.) Or else take no^ new howses, unless they be
sufficiently endowed by founders; and do not receive more people then the
revenue of the house can mantaine, as you see in Cathedral and Collegiall
Churches, there are bu^ so many places for Canons or Prebe^daries, as the rents
of the chapters can mantaine. And if some offer themselves to be
brother-seruants, admit only such as know some trade, and who by their act
and labor, shall be able to gain their living, in serving God and the
community; so should you want nothing, nor have occasion to complain.

CHAP. IX. Indiscreete feruor.
BUT going on this pace, you will say, one should not much advance. For
foundations are rare; more rare such as entering into communities bring with
them means to entertain them; and besides, this were to tie the hands of the
Divine Providence, and subject it unto humane prudence which is folly before
God. I know not truly whether this prudence be a folly, but I am certain that
indiscretion and temeritie are noe marks of wisdom, and likewise the example
of the women which I have formerly mentioned, and which erect so great a
number of Monasteries, every where, and always well founded, at least in
time, makes us clearly to see and to touch with our very finger, that their
conduct is full of security and benediction. Moreover if you who are
transported with this zeal have the gift of miracles, and of multiplying
loaves in the desert, as the some of God, or oil and milk as the Prophett, or
to cause manna to descend as Moses, you should have good reason to assemble
together much people without being sollicitous for their nourishment, bu^ to
receive many persons who fain^ in their way having nothing to eat, and then to
cry for succor, to complain; is it not rather to accuse your indiscretion,
then to stir up others to compassionat your miseries, seeing you fall into the
ditch which your self have made. You demand in beginning, or rather you begin
in demanding, and are you so ignorant Logitians that you know not the nullety
of the Argument which is called Petitio Principij: you cry out providence,
providence, you think to walk upon the wings of the winds and upon the
waters as S. Peter, and as soon as you find the want of any thing in a house
where you have nothing nor brought any thing, you cry Lord save us, and your
weak faith testifies your mistrusts by these lamentations; perceive you not
when it coms to the effect the weakness of your protestations, and that like
S. Peter you make great propositions of confidence which you perform ill
enough? the satyr in the fable the first time that he saw fire thought it so
beautefull as he ran to embrace it, but he scorched his skin and beard. War
is sweet says the ancient Proverb, unto those who have not tried it: The
Children of Ephrem did wonders in shooting at butts, but in the field they
fought with their heels before their Enemies. In the beginning of an institute
there are no thing but lamps of fire and of flame, nothing but feruours,
nothing but courage; let us go, let us go and let us die with him, said
the Apostles, when they r^ away at the taking of their Master. So sing our new
establishers, let us only go, let us begin, let us adventure, what can not
we do in him who strengthens us? If he should kill us yet would we hope in
him; when he sent his Disciples without scripp, without staff, without shoos
in the dispersion of nations what did they want? All is made for Gods elect,
all is for us, if we be all in him whether life or death, at the worst the
earth may be defective for us to live, but not to dye. O fair resolutions so
that the effects correspond thereunto! but when a S. Peter at the voice of a
silly Chamber* maid changes his note; when after so many brave protestations
one descends to complaints, then may one say with the Prophet, how is the
gold changed, and its good color lost. And what pity is it to see the stones
of the Sanctuary dispersed in the heads of the streets, and the valiant
Israelits armed with so many glorious propositions of suffering, running up and
down the streets, and into howses, to receive comfort in their necessities,
and defning with their cries the ears of persons, who have put themselves
under their spiritual conduct, that by their assistance they may be taken out
of the labyrinth wherein they entangled themselves through their own
imprudence: For they would not have run as it were at random, nor fought as
writers in the air, but seriously purposed to establish themselves, not upon
foundations of hope rather melted and rotten, then well grounded, if they had
not laid their foundations, as says the Apostle, upon hay and straw; straw,
says the Psalmist, the shitle, cock of the wind and the symbol of
inconstancy. From thence arise these complaints which yield noise enough but
little fruict, and take from them the glory which is given to Solomon for having
built the Temple of our Lord without causing to be heard the noise of hummers,
Sawes, or any other iron tools. The ancient Cenobites have not so done in
their time; for they walked a leaden pace in their beginnings, they undertook
few Monasteries and those in the woods and solitudes, in places remote from
the commerce of men, so that they had no desire to importune, since they did
fly them* and living there of the labor of their hands, and of their
husbandry, as also of the goods which their companions brought into their
communities, or else of the voluntary offerings and legacies which the
faithful Laics gave them to be remembered in their prayers; they have in
continuance of time heaped together this prodigious multitude of goods, which
now serve to maintain the pomp and riolt of Commendatories and great men, who
find nothing more fatt, or delicious then the bread of the Crucifix, giving for
a pray unto birds and dogs (that I say not worse) that which was gathered and
ordained for the nourishment of Saints. These in their good husba^dry labor
without complaining, but the new founders of our time without taking pains,
imagine, that it is sufficient to ask, and to complain, if one give them not
what they desire; calling heaven and earth to witness and inuaying against the
ingratitude of the world which knows not how to esteem nor acknowledge, as it
ought, the great and notable services they render unto it. A complaint like
unto that of pedants who puffed up with a little learning in the small Empire of
their schools do nothing else but accuse the blindness of the age which know
not how to value their merit to advance them to the dignities of the common
wealth, and to yield them a share in the government thereof. Behold touching
those Cenobites who by their Institutes ought to live of reuenus and rents, or
of their labor, and who being not actualy founded but* only in possibility,
have so pressing a desire of being founded as through their importunities they
never suffer in repose the souls which range them selves under their
direction, until they have thereby procured the foundation, the good deeds and
comforts which they aymd at. If these complaints be just, others see; as for
me I acknowledge the weakness of my sight and spirit to perceive and conceive
their justification; for if there be any thing in the world which ought to be
done gratis and dis-interessed, it is the guidance of consciences.

CHAP. X. Complaints of Mendicant Cenobites and their examen.
Peradventure we shall find more Justice in the complaints which Mendicant
Cenobites may make who meddle in the function of Directours. For since noe
other living is allotted them then by begging, if they find not therein the
comfort which they ought to expect in their necessities, what can they do but
complain, thereby to move at least some compassion in souls and to change the
hearts of stone into tender and sensible hearts of flesh? but they shall pardon
me if I tell them that they thereby do quite contrary unto what they pretend;
because making open profession both by their discourse and their life of
remitting all their cares unto the Divine providence, they destroy by their
complaints what they edify by their actions, imitating the Lions of Libia who
to make men loose their trace, brush out with their tails the marks which
their paws imprint on the sand. And besides, in saying after a sighing, and as
it were, reproching manner, that Charity is grown very cold, gives occasion to
the world to examen whether it be active or passive, to wit whether it be
their own or that of seculars, whose doors they frequente. For there is noe
coal so dead which is not reinkindled by the neighborhood of one that is
burning; so the Charity of Cenobites when it is true excites that of the
people, who of all the Rules of the law understand none so well as this; I give
to the end thou may give unto me, I do well, because thou prouokest me so
to do. They who truly seek God never want any good* the Manna would sooner
fall from heaven then necessity should overtake them. The just man is never
forsaken nor ever reduced to extremity of want; such as show Charity unto
souls find good souls enough charitable toward their bodies. But as God
loves him who cheerfully gives alms, so does he cheerish him who for his
love sufferrs with alacrity the inseparable necessities of mendicity, in
imitacion of Job of whom it is written that amongst so many strange and various
abandonings, not the least word fell from his mouth, which expressed
discontent. What? would I then take away a thing so natural as complaint when
some incommodity is fallen? I am no enemy to Nature in this point, and it were
injurious to reason (out of matters of faith) to strive and bandy directly
against sense. S. Paul permitts even the most perfect to weep moderatly and
tenderly over the dead; our Savior himself having given us the example when
he groned and shead tears upon the death of Lazarus. But it is always
needful that reason should be mistress, and that during the most violent
tempests, a man should never abandon this stern. Nevertheless in the subject
whereof I treat, it seems that I might have just cause to forbid it since the
incommodity which begetts it, is neither casual nor vnpremeditated, nor
necessitated, but sought for, but embraced, but voluntary and deliberatly
chosen; For I pray you, the Cenobite who puts himself into a company of
Mendicants, does he not well know that the same is not founded, but as the
earth whose mass is balanced by its proper weight in the midst of the air?
that the community to which he has tied himself by his profession, and which
is obliged to nourish and keep him sound and sick has no assured reueneue?
that what it demands of the people of the world, who are not obliged, by any
contract or any duty of Justice toward it, if it be not in a case which
binds every Christian to help his neighbor in extreme necessity? Of whom
then ought he to complain who has nothing and unto whom nothing is due if
nothing be given him? unto whom are these reproaches addressed but to himself
being like spittings cast up against heaven which fall back upon the face of
him who spitts them? My wounds, says David, are putrified because of my
indiscretion knowing that his harm proceeded from himself: Who is ignoran^
that to unclothe one self a long time before he lays him down to rest, is not
the way to go warm to bed? It is not therefore, (alas no) tha^ I reproach the
holy mendicity of Orders approved by the holy Sea; for it is enough that this
Oracle speaks to make me humbly give place, saying with the Scholars of that
ancient Philosopher: He spoke it. But if a Prophet hertofore took upon him
this respectfull license to say unto God, o Lord, thou art just and yet I will
tell the just things in making to the a reasonable demand: Why shall it not be
permitted us without censuring this sacred Mendicity of Cenobites authorized by
the Church, to say, that as there is nothing so good nor so holy in the state
of nature, and of grace, which one may not abuse either by wickedness or by
imprudence: So may it also happen, that they unto whom this permission is
given, make use thereof, peradventure otherwise then this infallible Sea
intendes, which has approved their manner of living. For as the Cenobites who
live of foundations and revenues entangle themselves in necessities where they
establish themselves in certain places without competent rents for their
maintenance, whereby they ruin their discipline, multiplyinge in such ^ort
howses, that they cannot provide for their people as is befitting good
subjects, and good Superiors, to the end the rules and obseruances may there
be kept according to their rigor in full vigor: Even the Mendicant Cenobites
may dissipate the spirit of their Institute by the same multiplication, and
when they make their abode in such poor places as they are not able to draw
from thence the comforts which they expect for their liuelihood; or else, when
they receive therein so many brothers that the cities and towns, which admit
them, cannot conveniently provide for their entertainment.

CHAP. XI. A digression concerning lay-brothers, or servants.
PRincipally when they place amongst them a great number either of
lay-brothers, or brothers of the Quire who are not fit for the service of
souls: For though they may be otherwise very virtuous, and make their prayers,
and exercises very profittable within; and be raised to high degrees of
conte^plation, yet the world which is not so subtle, nor speculatiue, has not
so much regard to interior as exterior actions, and as it has not eyes but
in the head, it believes nothing of men, but what it sees or hears of them,
saying with that servant of the gospel, thy speech does manifest thee. And to
speak truth since these institutes are said to be established to serve as
aides unto those who govern; which the Apostle calls (opitulations,
gubernations) and likewise take the title of coadiutours of the Diocesan
Pastors: I see not to what purpose they admit, and receive such as have not
talents to perform cle^icall functions, of preaching, and administration of
Sacraments. For to say that they receive youth, who seem, to have a
disposition thereunto, and that they instruct them for this purpose,
notwithstanding that sometimes the success frustrates their intention; and
that such as they esteem fit become unable for these actions, so that they
remain as it were superfluous, and ouer-numerous, serving only to sing, and
perform the other m^aner offices of the convent, that were, more excusable, in
case these howses whereof I here speak; were rented, and able without charging
the public, to nourish with their superabunda^t reuennues those who should
not be fit, for the exercise of Mary, and solitude: But it is to be believed
that they who live not but of alms, and beg from day to day, do not demand
them gratis, but for the charitable service which they render to the people,
reaping the temporal, of those unto whom they distribute their spiritual
labors. And concerning brother-seruants, I do not comprehend in this kind of
life where in the most are stated, since they being never able through their
incapacity to aspire to Priest hood, nor unto clericall functions, or likewise
to the service of the Quire, it seems that the right of demanding alms is
not acquired, but because the Church approues it by sufferance, or suffers it
by approving: For as much as they cannot, according to the use of common reason,
reap where they have not sown. But if one allege for their justification,
that there are of this condition amongst the rented Cenobites, it may be
answered that they are there as servants (for which cause they bear the name
of servants) who are contented with their nouriture, and with their clothing
to be enterteined, as well in health as in sickness by the community, to which
they give and offer themselves, whence in some places they are called brothers
Oblates, Which is not so amongst the mendicant Cenobites, who have no right to
have servants at the expense of the public, being a thing which would be
found ^range in the world, if a man reduced to mendicitie, had diverse
servants, who should go up and down searching after necessaries from house to
house, whilst he employed himself in study, and conte^plation. The poor,
impotent, or blind have sometimes other poor to conduct, carry, or lead
them; but the necessity of these miserable persons sufficiently declares, that
though they cause themselves to be guided by others whose eyes and shoulders
they borrowe, yet themselves in person are they that ask and beg, and not
the servants or helpers. To bear the glorious title of mendicants, and never
to beg; and as the be drinks the dew which falls upon the flowers, to drink
and eat the sweat of poor brother servants, who continually trott up and
down through the dirt; who have their mouth in the dust; whose soul sticks to
the pauemens: and who run from house to house to seek nouriture for their
Reuerences: Is it in your opinion suitable to their rank, whom that great
Saint whose Seraphicall charity deserved the marks of the stigmats of the
son of God, called brotherflies? But whilst these poor laybrothers go and
come like the little flies, or Nymphs, to gather flowers about the town, and
field, as upon a landskipp, the mother bees remain in the hiue composing the
honey combs of public and private exhortations, whereby piety and virtue are
inspired into directed souls. It is true, and since the Church so finds it
good, who can dislike it, if he will not show the loss of his common sense, in
contradicting the common sense of all the faithful? It is nevertheless possible
that some good Cenobite will like this reason without prejudice to his rights,
privileges, and repose. Is it enough to be called mendicants, to live only of
alms brought in without going to seek them? enough to nourishons self of
things asked, without humility to ask them? It is true that Kings, Princes*
and the great men of the world, gather their reuennues by their Officiers,
Receauers, Treasurers, Overseers, Cofferers, Factors; and many rich persons,
and of great quality, receive their rents even with their own hands. The
Cenobites themselves who live of foundations, gather that which is due to them,
by their Procuratours, who are grave Fathers and of note, not relying wholly
upon their lay-brothers, unless they be of an approved fidelity, and of an
intelligent wit to negotiate. I know not whether there be any secret
pruiledge, and whereof I am ignorant, in the mendicant societies, which raises
them to this height, of causing their necessities to be sought for by such as
have least right to ask them. For if there were some such captious spirit
(whereof there be enough in the world) who should demand of a begging brother
for whom do you ask of me this alms? He ought to answer him in words of
verity, and of an unfeigned chatitie. It is partly for me, partly for holy
personages serving at the altar, in the pulpit, in the Confessionary, in the
Quire, and in the direction of souls. And if this captious person should
reply, brother you are in good health, you are strong and able, you might gain
your living by your labor, or by service in the world, and since you render no
spiritual for^ice, why do you demand of me a temporal succor for your
self? If it be for others, I wonder that they so little esteem the good done
them, in bestowing on them liuelihood (although it be not in so little, as of
thir^y parts of men, there are no less then nine and twenty which go, which
run hazards, which trauelle night and day in all fashions to gain it) as they
take not the pains to ask it themselves, sending only their servants like
apparaters. It must needs be that they make little compte o^ things and persons
of the world* these are the strong Gods of the earth powerfully elevated, and
so rapt with the knowledge from above, as they no more remember the necessi^ies
here below. Go cause them to descend from this Thabor that I may know to
whom I give my goods, and if they be profitable for souls, let them visit
mine, I will receive them as Prophets, but their servants and staff, is that
which I know not, and which works neither miracle, nor impression in me. So
it is that some penetrating spirit might send back these good brothers, for
reasons rejecting their plea. They might peradventure say, that their masters
are not of such a humor, as to disdeine their profession of mendicants, and
that to honor this glorious mendicity, they go some times a begging in
person, and it is also possible, one may reply unto them, that this is so rare,
that as one swallowe makes no su^mer, so acts so little used cannot form great
habits. This happens scarce so often as the eclipses of the sun, or of the
moon, which ravish the ignorant with admiration, and cause souls most tied to
the earth, to behold heaven* And moreover who knows the intentions of these
actions which we ought always to take in the best part, and not to touch the
brand where it burns? For since all the actions of men are, said Epictetus,
like meddalls of two faces, and vessels of two ha^dles, who shall assure us
whether these so rare humiliations, be true, or feigned, done simply or for
some end, since the Gospel gives us to understand that there is no virtue,
which is not counterfeited by some vice, and that one may fast, give alms,
and other such like actions, for to be seen of men, rather then of God?
Nevertheless even by the common practice, we may easily discern amongst such
as live of begging, those who have chosen Mary's best part in keeping
themselves in repose, and in the holy vacancy, at the feet of our Savior,
from those who are put unto the toils, and troubles of Martha; and it belongs
to the active life of laybrothers, to nourish the contemplative of those of the
Quire, who a^^ as the Cherubins, and Seraphines of the highest Hierarchy. And
besides if one should set upon these good brothers and say unto them, my
frinds I see well that you are like unto bees, which gather of flowers, and
make honey, but not for them selves; unto sheep which carry fleeses to cloth
others; unto oxen which plowe the field, when the harvest shall not be theirs;
unto birds which make neasts, not for their own use. Tell me, if you had
remained in this unclean world, upon whose head are heaped all the inuectiues
which are in holy Scripture, as the maledictions were auntiently cast upon the
emissary goat, which one chased into the desert: Would you have been contented
(since it seems that your condition called you unto servitude) to serve a
master which would oblige you, being poor, to go seek for his and your
living, amongst your neighbors of the town, and country; and who perhaps at
your return would treat you as liberally, as the good master did the
prodigal child. But of courtesy and even in good truth, and without
dissimulation, that if you say, you serve in this country, out of the world
where you are (I understand not that which Plato imagined to be in the lowest
Planets) through a far purer intention, and for a reward far more eminent;
since like that ancient Painter you labor not, but for eternity, the Apostle
commanding the servants of secular persons to render service unto their
masters, not as unto men, but unto God, opens them the gate to purify their
intentions, and to render them as straight as yours. And finally these masters
whom you serve out of the world, in quality of Laymen and servants, though
they allege all the Scripture to show you allegorically, tropologically,
anagogically (terms which you well know) that they are Angels, and Gods,
and that truly God speaks by their mouths, and that it is from thence you
ought to receive the law, and learn the science of Saints, albeit these be
men, and shall die, and be judged like other men, and the ceremonious and
magnificent excellencies of your vows excepted, I see not, why the other
servants which are under subjection in the world, may not take their masters
for Gods in the same sense, since their authority over them, represents that of
God. And if you say that these men whom God has placed over you, and who has
called you into bands, do you the honor as to hold you for brothers, and
children of the selfsame community: One will answer that honest men and
such as live Christianly in the world, esteem not their servants as slaves,
but according to the saying of the great Stoic, as humble souls, or rather,
as brothers in JESUS CHRIST, called unto the same beatitude. For they know it
is unto them, these Apostolical words are addressed, Masters be you benign
toward your servants laying aside threats, knowing that both their Lord and
yours is in heaven, and that before him there is no exceptions of persons. That
if you will understand the precept which the same vessel of election gives
unto servants, who desire to render their duty Christianly, behold his divine
words, Servants be obedient to your masters according to the flesh, with
fear, and trembling, in the simplicity of your heart as to CHRIST, not serving
to the eye, as it were pleasing men, but as the servants of Christ, doing the
will of God from the heart; se^uing with a good affection, as to our Lord, and
not to men, knowing that every one what good soever he shall do, that shall he
receive of our Lord, whether he be bond, or free, Behold how the good and
faithful servants who are in the world, and have piety and their salvation in
recommendation, carry themselves in their duty, being subject in all reverence
unto their masters, not only unto the wayward, according to the doctrine of
S. Peter. And we must not ask where are the servants of this condition, for
besides that they who are in this observance either know not their own virtue,
or if they know it, cover it as much as they can by humility: It is certain
that God in the corruption of the world, so much exaggerated by those who have
left it, reporting the wolf to be sometimes greater, sometimes less then he
is, according to the humor of those with whom they meddle. God always reserues
to to himself in all estates many thousands of men, who bend not their knee
before the Idol of vice: Yes yes the deluge* is not so great, nor so universal
as there are not always many souls saved from ^his inundation of the world:
and Paradise is not ever so open to those who are gone out of it, to put
themselves into Cloisters, but that some one is shut out of the gate. But what?
on the otherside it is so cried down by such as have made a glorious breaking
therewith, as it seems who soever remains in this Babylon, and flies not unto
the montaines of the high state of perfection, runs the way of perdition. An
opinion not only unjust and irroneous, but also would be heretical, if
obstinatly mainteyned, as very well said blessed Francis de Sales in the first
part of his divine Philothy. Tell us not then o good brother-seruant that it is
the fear of damning your self in the world, and the desire of saving your
soul in the Cloister (which you call religion, as if there were no religion
but in the same) that has reduced you into the state of voluntary servitude
wherein we see you; a servitude which for JESUS CHRIST, is more excellent then
even the Diadem of kings. Say not that you cannot work your salvation in the
world, if you distinguish not unto us the corporal, from the spiritual; for
concerning this it were impiety to say that one might not work it; but
touching the other, if it be hunger which has chased you from this place, to
find your living in a begging piety, or if it be permitted so to speak, I
know not whether this gainful motive render you laudable before God, and
whether this be not, as says S. Paul to make lucre, or profitt of piety.
This word peradventure will touch some of this sort, in the aple of the ey,
who were great, noble, and rich in the world, and wanting learning to enter
into the power and dignity of Preisthood, have left goods, and honors to put
on a Cenobiticall weed in quality of lay-brothers, casting themselves into a
Cloister, not to be served, but to serve, and serve in fastings, watchings,
hunger, thirst cold, nakedness, and other incommodities which the Apostle
recou^ts: and to serve for the pure love of God having the will free, and
without any necessity spiritual or temporal. Sirs (for your present condition
shall not hinder me to respect your quality past) I know that not only your
intention, but also your action is holy, generous Christian, heroic, laudable,
and worthy of an hundredfolde, and of an eternal rewa^d: For who can but
admire in you so great a change of the right hand of God, for whom you are
become, of great, little, of exalted, debased; and to speak with S. Paul, of
wise, fools, of noble, ignoble, and as the excrement of the world? But
nevertheless I see not (with submission to the Church of which one ought no more
to search a reason, then a article of faith) that all this acquireth you more
right of asking either for your self, or others, though some hold that they
who have given all their goods unto the poor, according to the council of the
Gospel, have right to demand alms of the rich, and such as may help them:
For if that were, who sees not but a pa^ticucular Priest, or as you call him,
secular, giving to the poor his patrimoniall title, or renouncing his
benefice, would have right to beg, and to exact his maintenance of whom be
should demand it? And not only a particular Priest, but also every Christian,
Laick, and secular, since the Counsels are generally given to all Christians,
of what condition soever, who may practice them according to their calling,
although they be not vowed but by Clarks, and Cenobites. Now I pray you could
this particular man with reputation, go to ask his living after this sort?
give me the alms which you owe me, because I have distributed all my goods
amongst the poor, and have only left unto my self the right of demanding my
necessaries. Some will say that this is not permitted, but unto those who have
put themselves into communities; and one may ask what authority by the
Ghospe^l, and what prerogative in this, have the communities above particular
persons? And whether it be a thing more fi^ting, and less chargeable unto the
public to beg for fifty mouths then for one, and one which shall beg for
it self, by it self, not by a servant; Brother I say unto you when you shall
have abandoned Earldomes, Marquisates, and the Empire it self, as did Charles
the fifth, to become the beggar for the community, without the right and the
faculty which the Church gives you, you have none at all to ask, either for
your self, or for their Reuerences who send you a begging: Not for your self,
since you labor not for the public, nether corporally nor spiritually: nor
for others, who ought themselves to beg, if they will with justice bear
title of Mendicants. A Notary, an Aduocat, an Attorney, a Judge, a Physician, a
Tradsman, taking nothing for his pains and serving the Public gratis, should
he have right to send his servant through the city to demand his
necessities? And who would believe him when he should say that his Master
performs all his functions for nothing? Would not one reply, tell him, let him
live by his art* and let him not be ashamed to receive his pay for the same.
And besides, should not this servant rather have told his Master, and since
you give me no maintenance but that which I find my self, it were better done
of me to provide for my self alone, then to carry a double burden in
susteining my self and you also by my travel. What if one reply that they who
employ lay-brothers in begging, labor of their part in study, to attend unto
preaching, and the conduct of souls, and to that, one brother aides another,
in so much as one gives not unto such as demand, but in respect of them?
Behold an admirable winding-out. They who ask, ask for such as ask not, and
they that ask not, ask for those who ask. Where upon it were good to know,
whether they who ask not, eat an equal share, or for those that ask; or
whether such as ask, fast alike, or for those that ask not, or whether both
the one and the other, eat by proxy, or in proper person. But it is
impossible that they who study, meditate, sing, or contemplate, employ
themselves afterward in Clericall functions, and in the service of souls, by
preaching, and administering the Sacraments should beg, themselves; wherefore
it is necessary that they cause it to be done by others who have not these
talents. Certes I confess that the same is impossible, and that it is likewise
necessary, for them to cause their living to be demanded by others. But I ask
if it were necessary that they should embrace the impossible, and by what
necessity and constraint they have been moved thereunto: For since they must
needs know that they could not beg, and at the same time excecute their
spiritual talents, which God has given them for the service of souls, why
became they Mendicants, by state, and profession? Or besides, embracing this
condition, did they intend to place themselves therein, to beg by others, or by
themselves? One will possibly say that the Prophets have had their servants,
which is very common in the Scripture, and that who received the servants, had
the same reward, as if he had received the Prophet. Moreover that in the
Hierarchy of the Church the Bishops have Priests for their aids, assistants,
and coadjutours: And the Priests for their servants have Deacons, who for that
cause are called Ministers. For the holy Council of Trent say^th, that the
sacred Hierarchy is composed of Bishopps, Priests, and Ministers by them
understanding the Deacons. Observe us well here, then every Mendica^t Cenobite
will have a servant as an inseparable shadow of his body, and per-aduenture
for that cause it is that they go not, but as the Disciples, by two, and two,
and this Cenobiticall joining of payers shall be framed according to the model
of the Hierarchy, o how well is this taken! The Bishop has a Priest for
assistant, the Priest a Deacon, but it is the functions of the holy Altar, in
the divine offices, and other sacred Ministeries, not in the service of the
common life: For who ever heard say (unless it be by abuse, and profanation
which ought rather to be detested, then reduced to example) that a Priest is
servant, or better to expres my self, a drudge of the Bishop, and a Deacon,
drudge of the Priest, for to seek and provide his meat, to dress his garden
and his chamber, to sweep his house, and to perform other base actions, such
as are done by laye-brothers in a Cloister for the service of their Reuerences?
That though a Bishop be assisted at the Altar by Priests* and the Priest by the
Deacon, does it follow that the Cenobiticall Director, or Preacher may not
sing in the Quire without having with him a laie-brother, nor preach, nor
confess without a lay brother by his side? The Priest which assists (for so
ought one to say, and not to serve) the Bishop at the Altar, the Deacon, and
the Subdeacon, who assist the Priest in divine offices, have they not their
part in the same office, as the holy ceremonies, and order of singing, whether
of the Epistle, whether of the Gospel, whether of other parts, sufficiently
declare? But what part has, or ought to have the laie-brother, in the sermon
made, or in the confession administered by the Cenobiticall preacher or
Confessor, unless it be to go a begging for him? As who would say, the Priest
is ordained to serve the Bishop, or the Deacon, the Priest. To what purpose?
to go seek for, and prepare him his meat. Hence I gather that to desire
multitude of servants in the state of poverty, and of vowed poverty, and of
perfect poverty, and of mendicant poverty, is a divinity the understanding
whereof is reserved to such as are in the practique; ingeniously confessing my
ignorance herein, and that my Theory and speculation cannot penetrate into
these mysteries; and that these secrets of the Cloister are unto me as closed
letters, and closed with many seals: And much less to penetrate them, with
the sight. Nevertheles since in Schools without prejudice to faith, one may
diversely dispute upon the points of our belief, and bring reasons for things
which are above all understanding, and which should be no more believed, if
they were known by demonstrations like unto those of humane sciences, for
as much as faith and sight are incompatible, reason grounded upon experience,
says an ancient Father, taking away the merit of faith, which according to
the Apostle, is of things invisible and not appearing: Why may not we exercise
our ratiocination upon that which is no ways of faith, but of some points or
dispositions of policy, and Ecclesiastical discipline, which are as morrall
laws, that is, subject to change, and to be diuersified according to times,
and occurrences, principally in the Cenobiticall state, where we see many
variations, and novelties? Let us go on then with less doubt, but with that
charity which chaseth away fear, to frame as yet some considerations upon the
condition of such as are called brother-seruants in the Societies which
profess mendicity. I have already declared that whether they were rich or
poor in the world before their entrance therein, they had no other right to
beg then what the Church gave them, in consideration, as I think, of the
service which they rendered unto Cenobiticall Priests, which perform the
Clericall functions, according to their institutes; So that without believing
them to be Popes, one may call them, servants of the servants of God, or
servants of the Prophets.

CHAP. XII. Whether they be exempt from the labor of hands.
BUT it is no small question to know whether the Church permitting them to
beg as well themselves as for these whom they serve, exempt them from
laboring with their hands, and from living of their labor, or from living
only by begging. Let no man think that I desire to move contention, seeking
here, according to that ancient Proverb, a mite to divide, and knotts in a
bull-rush. For there is question here of their conscience, and consequently, of
the good of their souls. I know that S. Thomas in the little work which he
composed to refute the objections of those, who in his time rose up and wrote
against the institute of Mendicants Cenobites was very eager to show, that the
Mendicants are not obliged, like the ancient Ancorites, and Cenobites, to take
pains with their hands: A doctrine which has been received with applauses,
and almost Canonised, or made Canonical, like a divine Oracle, by such as have
exactly practiced it, by a most delicate Saboth. But when this good and
Angelical Saint gives his reason thereof, and of this exemption from the labor
of hands, whereby to gain ones living, he only applies it unto those, who
administer the Sacraments, who preach and teach justice unto others,
presupposing that this labor much more excellent then the Manuell, merits very
little, if it gives not liuelihood unto him that does use it. Besides, nether he
nor Bellarmine, who follows his doctrine in the book of munks, in the fourth
chapter, will not have those who perform the functions of preaching, and
administration of Sacraments to demand any thing as due unto them of Justice
or equity, but only of pure charity, as it is for pure charity, and not by
obligation (unless it be that of their institute) they render these good offices
unto souls: Whence I draw these arguments; that if amongst Mendicants, only
such as labor spiritually in the service of souls, are exempt from the labor
of hands, and who may demand their living though of mere charity, and not by
any title of Justice; what shall ^e say of those who no ways perform these
functions (as there are many amongst the Mendicants, even the very Priests
themselves) and ^ho have nether capacity nor are able to perform them, as the
laybrothers, the very name of laics sufficiently declaring the^, not to be any
part of the Ecclesiastical Order. Shall such in conscience be exempt from
laboring with their hands, and from susteining their life by their labor,
having both health, and ability to work; possibly will one say that manuell
labor, and of hands, as unbefitting Priests, is in some sort forbidden them,
and consequently, that amongst the Cenobites, such as bear this carracter are
therhence exempted though they perform not the clericall functions. For the
difference betwixt particular Priests not Cenobites, and Cenobites, is very
notable, because they have, or ought to have, an Ecclesiastical, or
patrimoniall title sufficient to maintain the^, without practicing, or
exercising mecanicke arts. But the Cenobiticall Priests have no other then that
of their poverty, and mendicity, which has been only approved by the Church,
in regard their institute, applies, and appoints them to the service of souls,
and the help of Pastors, as well in the administration of Sacraments, as of
the word of God. Let then such as go not a begging, nor perform the services
of the house, like lay-brothers; nor confess nor preach, nor assists souls,
consider by what right they drink and eat, the sweat, and labor as well of
lay-brothers, as of the preachers, and Confessors of their house, and whether
the seraphicall founder of the Minors would not have put them into the Order of
brother-Flyes. I do not say this so much to reprehend them, as to advertise
them to think of the account which they shall render for having lived in the
land of Saints, of the labor of others; and for having embraced a profession,
and institute which they exercise not; and for being of the number of the
children of Ephrem, who made a fair show, but knew not how to fight. Let them
remember that God hates the peace of those whom he has destined to war, and
that every tree (witness the figtree cursed by our Savior) that bears not
fruit according to its kind, is in danger to be cut down and reduced into
ashes. It is not enough to wear the habit of a mendicant, to have the outside
of a preacher, Confessor, Director; the cause is known by the effects; and by
the fruit the tree. It is not likewise sufficient to bear fruits, if they
are not ^ounde, and entire, not corrupt and wormeaten, or like unto those which
grow on the shore of the Read Sea, which have the outside, and appearance of
fruits, but within are only filled with dust, wind, and smoke. Peradventure
they unto whom I speak, will mock at the charitable advise I give them, but
God, whom no man derides without punishment, may chance one day to laugh to
their loss, in causing them to render a reason of their dealing, and demanding
of them fruits according to their kind; that is, fruits of preaching,
direction, and service of souls, according to the institute whereof they have
made profession, and received their susteinance, and entertainment. The little
bees want not this judgment, to chase away from their hiue, the lazy droanes,
which are willing to eat the honey, but are not industrious to make it. But the
Cenobiticall profession has this defect, that one cannot send out of the hiue
of the Cloister such as are unprofitable, and these fattbellies, which have
nether back nor feet to go a begging, nor tongue nor spirit to speak and
instruct, in a word, who have nether mouth nor spirit, and who are only good
to fill up a number, and to consume the goods of the earth which they enjoy,
like that tree of the Gospel, unfruitfully. For touching the poor laick, I
am not ignorant that they labor much, and peradventure no less then Israel
under the masters of the works of the king of Egypt, because the subtlety,
which the learned, aduantagiously use toward the ignorant, and the simple, to
make them carry the burde^s which they would not touch with the tip of the
finger, is not unknown unto us; and we sufficiently understand, that every man
who labors in what sort soever, is worthy of his hire. We commiserate these
poor beggars when we see them carry, like poor beasts of burden, the sin
which the people redeem by alms. And percha^ce take more compassion then they
who employ them, and for whom they travel; I would only seek their
institution in the right which they might have to demand their living without
being subject to the labor of other men; and I do not believe that they can
find it in any other place, then in the happiness which they enjoy in spending
their days, being fastened thereunto by the nails of vows, in serving the
Angels of the Lord of hosts, which are the Cenobiticall Priests employed in
the administration of Sacraments, the distribution of the word of God, and in
the service of souls for the aid of Pastors. After this sort they become the
temporal coadjutours of those unto whom the Church has not given right to
beg without the labor of hands, unless in quality of spiritual Coadjutours
of Pastors, obliging them by their institutes which she has approved, for the
help of ordinary Pastors, as being troops of Supply in the Church militant.
Be you then very humble, o brother-seruants, and take a good consideration of
your selves, knowing that since you nether are, nether can be admitted unto
sacred Orders, whether in regard of the rank you hold amongst the Cenobites,
or else out of your incapacity for learning, you are but laybrothers, and
servants, to the Priests of your Orders, though it be said that in some of your
Instituts they of your condition may be Superior of howses, of Provinces, and
likewise bear the quality, and authority of Generals, in respect and in
consideration of some of your founders, and Institutours, whose great and
profunde humility has with held them from aspiring unto the dignity of
Preist-hood. Remember that in this condition of servants you eat, in some
sort, the bread of those whom you serve, since it is by them, and for them that
you have right to beg it, and in this manner as the true balm is made by
taking the quintesence of all liquors, practice this saying of S. Paul, be
subject and submitt your selves unto every creature for the love of
JESUS CHRIST. Let the me^dica^t Priests be likewise careful who have the
talents required by tho Institute to try the Spirits, the vocations, and the
capacities, not to admit unto their profession so many persons who want the
qualities requisite in those of their vocation; qualities which have caused
their Orders to be approved, and not to multiply amongst the lay-brothers and
servants, but when bare and pure necessity shall cause them to have use of such
aides. I speak not this so much for avoiding by this means the public
charge, as for the discharging of their own^ consciences. For to what purpose,
when there are three, four, seven, or eight Cenobiticall Preachers, and
Confessors in one Convent, will it be fit that the public bear the burden
of fistie, threescore, and sometimes an hundred mouths, as well of
lay-brothers, as of others, who do nothing else but-sing in the Quire, and
sometimes (which is but too true and two common) with so little edification, as
their silence would give better satisfaction.

CHAP. XIII. Of the brothers of the Quire amongst the Mendicants.
IT is true, singing is good, but unto them it is only accessory, it is not
the basis and foundation of their institute: It has been admitted for the
consolation in God by Psalmody of those who should be tired with the pains of
study, of preaching, and administration of Sacraments. It is not but that the
divine laud is an Ange^^call functio^and which shall remain with the blessed
in heaven, where they shall praise God in his mansion for ever and ever, says
the Psalmist. But it is not the principal function of such as are said to be
obliged by their Institutes, to Clericall actions. And let not these Chanters
allege unto us, that by this division of Cenobites of the Quire, and the
Cenobites of the Chair, and of the Confessionary, their Orders are like unto
that Sulamite in the Canticle, where are seen nothing but Quires of combatans,
and armies of Quiresters. And this example so often resounded, and this
colewort, so many times sodd, of the hands of Moses, elevated whilst Iosue
fought. For to ouerturne these fair excuses on the faces of those who cover
themselves with these idle pretenses; I ask of them, if in a battaille or
combat there were five hundred trompetts which should sound the charge to
five or six Champions, who should fight by themselves, were it not a
ridiculous thing? And if Iosue with so many thousands of Israelites had lifted
up their hands toward the holy places, that is to say, toward heaven, as
Moses, would Moses alone with his sword have overthrown the army of the
Amalachites? Prayer is good, it is true, it works miracles, or rather obteines
that God works them; but it is in such as are assigned to a contemplative
life. They who by their vocation are called unto the service of their
neighbor, are not principally tied to the Quire. It is not that I blame it in
Mendicant Cenobites, ah no* (for who can dislike a thing so holy) but I say
that it is not their prime, and chief function the which brings in esteem the
most learned company amongst all the Cenobites, and unto whom one may not
without envy, deny the glory of learning and of piety, which consecrating it
self unto all Clericall functions for the honor of God, and the service of
our neighbor, has left the singing in the Quire, not only with just cause,
but also with profit. I do then nether reprehend the use and feruice of the
Quire, nor the mendicity, but I only advertise such as make profession thereof,
not to make the principal of the Accessory, and the Accessory of the
Principal, by filling their howses (which ought to be as the towers of David,
and Arsenalls full of arms, swords, bucklers, and retraits for men ready for a
spiritual war, against vices, and error, armed with the sword of the spirit,
which is the word of God) with persons unprofitable to their Orders, and who
only knowing how to sing, should be better placed in founded and contemplative
howses, destined unto the exercise of Psalm(...).

THE FOVRTH PART.
CHAP. I. One may use the best things ill.
THere is much difference betwixt blaming a thing, and the ill use, or excess
which may be committed therein by inconsideration. That Spartan did ill in
causing all the vines of the territory of Lacedemonia to be rooted up, who
should rather have corrected the abuse which one might make of that liquour,
which rejoices the heart of man. Mea^e is a thing both good and necessary* but
too much hurteh the health, and oppresses the stomach. One may use a sword
for good and ill, the magistrate uses it for justice, a villain to murder.
There is no thing so holy in it self, which a profane man may not turn into
ill, even the divine Scripture, by reason whereof it is not committed without
consideration, unto the hands of the vulgar, the devil himself alleging it,
to tempt our Savior, and diverse, as S. Peter reporteh wresting at that very
time the Epistles of S. Paul, from their true sense: how much more easy is it,
to abuse institutes, which like clear streams in their source, become daily
altered, and troubled by the progress. What is ordained for one use, is by
course of time insensibly diuerted to another, and I have seen very
authentic privileges given upon lawful causes unto Cenobites of very good
life, to exempte them from the violence of a Diocesan Pastor, whose life was
of little edification; to serve, an age and an half after very vicious, and
irregular Cenobites of the same house, against an Ordinary of great virtue,
and of holy conversation. Is not this altogether against the intention of the
holy Sea, who having had no other aim but to defend the poor, and innocent
from the insolent domination of one powerful abusing his authority; never
intended to maintain the disorder, against a lawful power, and ordained by
God. There is nothing more holy, then the new institutes of communities, be
they founded, or mendicants, which God has from time to time raised in his
Church, like to many rounds sent by him about the walls of the militant
Jerusalem; and like so many plants whereby he renews his vinyeard, restoring
it by these newfeathers which embelish and inuiron with variety, the youth of
the Eagle. Yet nevertheless the holy Ghost speaking by the Council of Trent,
as forseeing that from thence through humane misery, disorder might arise,
forbidds the multiplicity of them, as we have formerly noted. And moreover to
show that the multiplication of Mendicant companies, might chiefly bring both
oppression to the public, and confusion amongst themselves, the Council
permitts the four Orders of Mendicants, which then were, to receive rents, a
grace which was received of all except the Order of Minors, for as much as the
Mendicant poverty, was the foundation, and as it were, the basis of their
rule. The which is so well practiced, that through Italy and Spain almost all
the Conuents of those whom we call Mendicants, unless such as we have named,
have foundations and settled reuennues. But since the Council, there are risen
so great a number of new institutes, as well founded as Mendicants, and so many
new reformations, God so permitting it for the assistance of his Church
diversely assaulted and molested by new troops, as we have counted, even unto
five and twenty Orders besides all those which are unknown to us) of only
Mendicants: All different Orders, and which have almost every one Generals
apart. Touching other Orders of Cenobites who live of rents, and inheretances,
and who have Generals apart, I know not precisly the number, but peradventure
it is no less then that of mendicants, and these are much less^ burde^some to
the Public; because their howses live by their labor, and by husbanding of
their goods, like other families of the common wealth, and they support the
charges thereof, as the other Citizenes, according to the occasions of
necessities which occurr: Though Cenobites in their own particular, by reason
of dis-apropriation are no less poor, and in the same state of perfection for
that regard, as also of vows, then the me^dicants. I know that God, and
nature, or rather God by nature (let us add) and by the Church, does nothing
which is not profitable; yet as we see autumne^ wherein the fruits answer not
the abundance of flowers of the precedent spring, and as vines cast forth many
shootes which are fit to be cut of, to make the grape prosper: So in the best
designs, and which come from God, humane affections which are cast away, some
times engender ouergrowing^, which make them appear like that gaie Colossus of
the king of Asiria, wherein there was a little gold, and silver, mingled with
much copper, iron, and earth, and whose fall caused by a little stone,
manifests, that the same which before appeared so glittering, and high, was
but dust, and ashes. How many things are there in nature which unto us seem
unprofitable, and nevertheless serve for many uses which we know not? There are
likewise things which we hold dangerous, and hurtful, as poisons, wild
beasts, hayles, and tempests, which serve the divine providence for many good
uses. That which is the death of one creature is the nourishment of an other;
the very flies, and little worms serve for food unto the small birds: the
variety of creatures extremely beautifieth the face of the universe, and
announceth the glory, and greatness of the wroker. How know we whether he who
is more then Solomon, and Assuerus, will not display unto us the wonders of his
magnificence, in the agreeable multiplicity of so many Cenobiticall Institutis,
as the good Platus very amply shows in his second book of the good of the
state called Regular? If it be so, as there are great appeara^ce; is it not
rather our parts to admire this disposition then to controlle it? Who know
whether God permitts not this multiplication of mendicant Orders, principally
of that which is called Seraphicall, the Church saying in the prayer of its
holy Institutor that God by his merits does amplify the Church from time to
time, by the increase of new issue, for to exercise the liberal charity of
the giuers, by the quantity of the demanders, who say with S. Austen give me
the earth, and receive heaven, in exchange. Conceive you that to be a burden?
In nowise, no more then feathers are a burden to birds, for without that
weight they would not be light, nor lift themselves up into the air. To
receive the Prophets of God, is it not to receive God himself, Who has said,
whatsoever you shall do unto the least of these, showing the poor, it is to
me the good deed is done? And besides if there were no other reason, the^ that
God permitts, and the Church approues it, who will not kiss the earth under
this authority? Who would demand reasons after this will, as if this will,
were not reason it self? Reason infinitely divine, above all humane reason. I
have not likewise set forth all which I have alleged, to justify this
authority, knowing that this is a tearing rock, which causes all the vessels
which strike against it, to suffer shipwreck, and that it is a most foolish
temerity, and too presumptious audacitie, to extol ones judgment above that
which is ordained by this supreme Tribuall; these are the very words of a
father of the Church. But I only desired to sownde whether they who use this
faculty of begging* which has been granted to their institutes to contain
themselves within the limits prescribed them, and whether they perform the
functions, in consideration whereof they obtained this privilege. This is of
fact whereof one may dispute, the other of right, which is to be reverenced in
so much as he who searches the Majesty, is oprest with glory. Now as a river
how deep so ever its bottom be, swollen with winter raines, or melted snowes
which in the spring time fall from the mounteines, ouerflowes its banks, and
spreads it self over the feilds, if it cause not great spoils, it does
always make plashes, and leaves behind it, sand, or mud. So the Cenobiticall
societies, besides the great graces wherewith the holy Sea savors them in the
beginning of their institutions, go always augmenting them by progression, and
increasing themselves in continuance of time, rather in number of men, then in
virtue. It often happens that the favors which have been shown to saints,
and worthy personages who have had the first fruits of the spirit, and who
have made good use thereof, pass unto their successors, who are indeed heirs
of their habits, not of their manners, of their rules, and of their howses, not
of their observance, and of their capacity? And so that which has been done
for the good, and profitable, abusiuely serves the bad, and unprofitable: Which
we read in the cronicle of an excellent Order, which I will not name; For as
in a time of great contagion, the Cenobites sung the Litanies near the tomb
of their blessed founder, and repeated diuerstimes, o our holy father pray for
us; a voice came forth of the sepulcher, which answered unto these Cenobites,
far differing in their manners from the Sainctity of their institute: Nether
am I your father, nor are you my children, by which he reproched them defect of
their observance, and how much they were fallen from the first charity of those
who had established their Order, which heretofore had been so flourishing.

CHAP. II. The origin and Institution of Medicants.
FOR it is true that the assemblies of Mendicants, as of choice compainies;
and, if one must so say, of troop of voluntairs, and light horsemen, have been
admitted in the Church (which before had only approved founded Cenobites) to
preach, and administer Sacraments by mission, and permission and for the aid
and ease of Pastors: There consists the principal end of their institutes,
and not to sing, or to employ themselves in the service of the Quire, for which
cause they are not so necessary unto Pastors, nor in the conduct of souls,
since that so many other Cenobites living of foundations, so laudablie exercise
themselves therein: So that if now for one preacher and Confessor there are
found amongst them thirty, as well Chorists, as laybrothers, even amongst the
most reformed, who see not, that herein they exceed the limmits of the
Churches intention, which never was to send us so many Chanters, of whom one
may say, as the Spartan said of the nighting all: Thou art only voice and
nothing else. And indeed of these four principal Orders which bear the title
of Mendicants, there are three (two of which have the rule of S. Austen) which
no ways mentions mendicitie: Yet less that of S. Basile, of which there are
so many Cenobites in the east who live of their possessions or rents, or of the
labor of their hands. The first then which bore the standart of mendicity in
the Church, was that great, and Seraphicall Saint, founder of the Minours who
was therein contradicted, yea with in his own Order which was sifted, and
divided since his time by those who would live of foundations, and those who
would remain in the rigorous observance of the letter, of this holy rule,
which was given him from heaven, as unto an other Moses upon the mount Aluerne
as the Chronicles report. The founder of Preachers who being of the Order of S.
Austen, called Cannon Regulars, carried the banner of preaching against the
Albigeois, and a great frind of the Seraphicall Institutor of the Minours,
could hardly approve of this mendicity, until he had seen the splendour of the
Divine Providence to appear in that famous Chapter of Nattes so well discribed
in the admirable Cronicles of Minors, where so many thousands of Religions
lived of the Alms brought them from all parts without their demanding it; a
miracle compared to that of the multitude nourished in the desert, by the
loaves which our Savior multiplied. For then the blessed founder of Preachers
seeing the great advantage of the mendicity, above all rents, and reuenneues,
not only renounced those which he possessed (in so much as his Order, but then
begun, had not he heaped up much together) as also those which he might
possess; to cause his Disciples to follow the same kind of life, as that of
the Minours. The heremites of Saint Austen, and them of S. Basile, under the
title of the mountain of Elie, followed this trace, and so they framed amongst
themselves in the Church, in the compase of four ages, these fou^re Mendicante
communities; three of which have not begun their Institute in mendicitie, but
only in imitation of that of Minours, who concerning their Institution being
the last in the date of time, were the first in the practice of mendicitie,
which until that time, had not been in the Ecclesiastical Order. This
novelty stirred up certain spirits, transported with a bitter zeal without
discretion, and I might also say, without science, but they had too much of it,
not of that of Saints grounded in charity which edifieth, but of that which
puffs up, and which causes such as possess it, to sin, and makes them to
receive condemnation by their own judgment. These wrote venomous inuectiues,
full of collar, and boldness, against these holy Institutes, against whom S.
Thomas composed those divine treatises which serve for sword, and buckle^, I
would say, as offe^siue, and defensive arms, for all the Mendicants. The
authority, learning, and piety of this great Saint, who was indeed, rather
an Angel, then a man, rendered the names of the Authors of these Satyrs,
infamous; Who had done like the Giants of the Poets, burying themselves under
the mountains which they themselves had raised. For he turned their dolor,
and iniquity, upon their own heads, with so much efficacy, as he cut off,
without recovery, the heads of this hydra, for ever stopping the mouth of all
detracters, by his thirtee^th opuscule, and the two following, out of which he
afterward drew, those excellent resolutions which he brings touching the
Cenobiticall Mendicitie, and the labor of hands, in the 186. question:
secund^, 2. Far be it then from me to touch upon this Cenobiticall Mendicitie,
and this exemption from the labor of hands, so well defended, and by so many
reasons, and authorities, as, if I should be so ill minded, as in this point
(from which God preserve me) to iustle or reprehend them, I were not able; and
if I might, truly I would not for all the world hurt, or give a shocke unto
fraternall charity. But reprehending the bad use of a good whence arise these
unjust complaints of some Cenobiticall Directors, I think not to offend a
condition altogether holy, and which is not culpable of the faults of some
particulars, who make ill use of the happynes which they enjoy to be therein
placed, complaining to ill purpose of suffering some incommodities,
inseparable to the Mendicant poverty, which by a modest silence would turn
unto their merit before God, and their glory before men.

CHAP. III. The objection touching strong Mendicants refuted.
NOw in these excellent works of S. Thomas, by me cited, I have made an
observation whereof I will speak here a word in passing. He often enough
refuteth, chiefly in the fifteenth Opuscule, the objection drawn from that
law of the Code which is made against the sturdy beggars. A knot which this
great and incomparable spirit could cut a sunder with a back blow, as the
Guardian was by Alexander, and yet nevertheless he seems to be so moved and
pressed therewith, as if it were no small difficulty unto him, to untie it. He
makes a retraction in the Question of his sum, which I have cited in the fifth
article, wherein he shows himself to be as every where else, a better
Philosopher and Divine then a Ciuilian. For this law speaking only of these
Qu^ymans lazy sluggards who being strong vigourous and very healthy, love
rather to gain their living by begging then by working, their lazines causing
them to wipe away all shame, and to prefer a fatt idleness, before an honest
labor, who sees not that the public Justice has risse^ to chastis^ these
blood suckers, who by their devices draw to themselves the alms which should
be better applied for the comfort of those that are truly poor, and in a
pressing necessity? What comparison then can one make (unless it be by a
black, and injurious malice) of these rascals who are as the ratts, and
vermin of common wealths, with the Sainctity of those, whose voluntarily
vowed, and Mendica^t poverty, the Church approves, in consideration of the
great services, which they render unto Pastors, in instructing and directing,
by way of aid and assistance, the souls of the faithful? What a mockery were
it to call him sluggard who cooperats in the art of arts, which is the
feeding of souls, an art as it is more difficult, so the more laborious and
perilous of all others? Now as the pride of those who hate the true good still
ascends, so nether was it simply with the lay-brothers, nor those of the
Quire, those defaming adversaries of the Mendicants grappled, but they fell
more by fury then reason, upon the Preachers, and Confessors of these holy
Orders, therein Coadjutours of the ordinary Pastors, delegated for that end by
the Sea Apostolic. Was not this to imitate the dog who biteth the stone and
not the caster, addressing themselves to those that are sent, and not unto him
who sends them, whose eminency is too much exalted to become subject unto the
reach of so base persons, and who were in the obscurities amongst the dead of
the world? And that which is more considerable, is, that these excellent and
most useful Institutes, were then in their birth, and as young shootes which
had not as yet gathered moss. All such as were admitted therein; having, as the
first Christians, but one heart and on^ soul, and the self same pretention
joined with a sufficiency to serve souls, and help the Pastors in their
charges, when the burden would have been dreadful upon the shoulders of
Angels. How then could they have filled their lungs, and cried alowde, if they
had not seen that which is since come to pass, the fleets of brother
servants, and of Chorists, mingled amongst so few Preachers and Confessors, as
one may say, that in these armies, the baggage and the followers (which the
Latins call by the name of impediments) infinitely surpass the champions.

CHAP. IIII. Two passages of S. Austen and a notable example.
HOw strongly would they have resounded these passages of S. Austen in his
book of the works of Monks (whereupon S. Thomas as well in his, 15. Opuscule,
as in his Summa in the Quest: cited article 5. makes so excellent
interpretations) the first whereof is in the 22. Where this Eagle of Doctors
speaks thus. Many of an abject and servile condition in the world, embrace
this holy profession of serving God (he speaks of Monachisme) abandoning the
rusticke, and clownist life, or shopps of tradsmen, and the mecanicall labors,
where it is not evident, whether they came, with a good purpose to serve God,
or else to fly a poor, painful, and laborious life, and to be clothed, and
feed without doing any thing, and besides honored of those by who^ they were
before despised, and trodden under foot. Can such justly excuse themselves
from the labor of hands, being convinced thereof by their first life, which
they gained by the sweat of their brows? And in the 25. Chapter, if they will
not work, let them not eat: For piety ought not to be the cause that rich
men humble themselves, to the end the poor grow proud. I will confirm this
discourse of S. Austen, by a notable example which I had from the very mouth of
a learned and devout Cenobite, of a very reformed Order, who taking with him,
in his visit a compagnio^ (for he was then Provincial) who had the honor in
the world to be a lackay, and afterward cook to a gentleman of worth, a frind
and benefactor of the Order, wherein be was received, at the entreaty, and
recomendation of his master, being one day arrived at an Episcopal City where
there was a Covent of the Order, he was presently invited by the Bishop, to
dinner, according to the civility, and hospitality, so much recommended to
Prelates: And a few days after, the Archdeacon who had the first place in the
Cathedral, next to that of the Bishop, and a great frind of the Order, invited
him likewise to his table, where having been very well, and honorably
enterteined, the lay-brother only went away discontented, murmuring unto his
Provincial, against the arrogancy, and inciuilitie of the Archdeacon, who
carried himself, said he, like a petty Prelate; and had not done him more
honor, then the Bishop; because the Archdeacon having placed the Provincial
with much respect in the prime place, took the second to himself, and had
given only the third unto the venerable brother, saying unto him, brother sit
you down there, complaining of the ruderies of the Archdeacon, Who had not the
wit to know the value, and merit of a reformed Cenobite, such as he was, or
conceived himself to be. I will no^ amplify in words the greatness of this
vanity, which speaks enough of it self, since he having changed newly the
habit, and not the condition, for, of a footman become a beggar a broad for
the Coue^t, which he did not exercise on horsbacke, as you may well believe,
and which in being employed in the service of the kitchen, he complained that
an uncivil Archdeacon, had not used him, as the Bishop did. The Provincial
told me that he had washed his head with a strong lee, but perhapps he washed
those animalls, whom such washings profitt little. I bring not the example of
this impertinent to draw other consequence, then the confirmation of Saint
Austens words, against the proud poor who glory in that state which the rich
take for humility. For as we know that there are many ^oo well conceited of
themselves, and lift up their horns in communities, who had been in the world
the refuse, and scumme thereof, even basnes it self, insolently abusing the
sainctity of their habit, and profession. Also we are not ignorant, that there
be infinite of others, who, whether they have left much, or nothing, carry the
cross of JESUS CHRIST, which so much sweetness, humility, and modesty, as they
may say with the Pfalmist, that they loved rather to be abjects in the house
of God, then to be great; and rich amongst the Tabernacles of sinners. But let
us behold another passage of S. Austen in the 28 Chapter of the same book,
concerning the works of monks cited by S. Thomas in his Opuscule and in the
article which we have noted. The most subtle adversary of our salvation, has
dispersed here and there, under the habit of Monks, an infinity of hipocrits.
Who roame through Provinces, all of them begging, and requiring the
enterteinment of a fatt, and profitable Mendicitie, or the price of a feigned,
and counterfeit Sainctity. Where unto the great Saint Thomas answeares most
truly, that S. Austen blames only those who would live at their ease, by
begging, without labor. Now the Cenobites who preach, and administer the
Sacraments, take pains enough to have right, at least by charity, humbly to
demand their living; which is also most just, and most true.

CHAP. V. Touching the Mendicitie of Laybrothers, and of Chorists.
But whether this concern the Lay-brothers, and these who only serve in the
Quire, is that whereof he speaks not, and that is it which were good to be
known, being in a manner probable, that the Church had no intention in sending
aids unto Pastors, to whom she permitts mendicitie, to permit also a great
number of people, which render no service unto souls, and who might otherwise
live, being healthful and strong, by their labor, or by their goods. 3.
Thomas adds, that three causes might authorize mendicitie, and make it lawful,
even in the world it self. The first, humility, which he proves by the
example of those who being great, and rich, for to do penance, and to humble
themselves vow to make pilgrimages asking of alms. The second vtility, as when
one beggs for the making of a bridge, or a Church, for the public use. The
third necessity is, when a man is brought to such extremity, by his disastre,
that having lost all his goods, and being unable to live by the labor of his
hands, is constreined to have recourse to the charity of others. And why said
he in these three cases, that which is permitted to seculars, shall it not be
so to the Mendicant Cenobites? certes that strongly, argues for those who have
left their honors, and their goods in the world, to live in humility, and
poverty in the service of God, and for the Preachers, and Directors of souls,
who by their institution make bridges to pass into heaven, and edify walls,
to wit the manners of the spiritual serusalem. Let them who are more
penetrating then my self, observe whether that agree unto those who have
nothing, know nothing, nor do any service at all to souls. And concerning
the case of necessity, besides that the same is not subject to ordinary laws,
it ought to be understood of the vnvoluntary necessity; for otherwise there is
no need willingly to put ones self into the state of necessity. In fine
there is no question of knowing whether the exemption, from the labor of
hands, granted to Cenobites, who serve souls with permission to beg, be
good; for the bare approbation of their institute, done by the Church, or by
her head sufficiently declares it: But only whether they who wear the same
habit, and perform not that function, ought to enjoy this Cenobiticall
privilege; and whereas the seculars, of what soever condition they be, have
permission to work, and not that of begging; whether they are in state of
being able to live o^ their labor, to wit, whether the Regulars, who are not
employed in the service of souls, and who otherwise are strong and healthy,
have power to beg without laboring. And it must not be said that they
labor, in serving them that labor; for first it were necessary for them to
prove, that they who labor in the service of souls, having made the vow of
poverty, and mendicity, have right to cause themselves to be served, and their
needs to be demanded by their servants, which we have here above weighed; and
besides that, they should show that the Church had given them power to live of
their labor, who attend to the instruction, and direction of the people. Of an
express permission of this, I know nothing, but that she suffers it, I see,
and it is that which stays me, and that which makes me, as in matter of faith,
to render my understanding captive, and reduce my reason into servitude.
Possibly one will say, that in founded communities there are store of
Lay-brothers, oblates, Conuerts, Servants, (call them as you please) who live
of the service which they render unto those of the Quire. And for a particular
example they hold by ancient tradition in the Abbay where S. Bernard was
Superior, that in the time of this eminent person (one of the greatest lights
which has appeared in the Church since the Apostles) there were 700.
Cenobites, 300. of the Quire, and 400. Laybrothers, which is gathered even by
the number of chaires, or fomes which are in the Quire, 300. for those that
attend to the psalmodie, and the divine offices; and 400. which are in the body
of the Church; where the Conuerts were seated. But there is a great chaos, and
an extreme difference in this point, between the founded Cenobites, and the
Mendicants: For the founded live of their own, be it by the good husbandry of
their ancestors, be it of that they have brought unto the stock of the
Community, be it of their proper labor, be it of certain donations, or pious
legacies given by great Lords, or rich persons. They make the best of their
lands, they cultiuate their possessions, gather their rents, and in sum
without being chargable either to public, or particulars, they live as
private families in the world, of their reuennues: In case of war, famine, or
plague, of tempests, firings, robbings, and many other losses, and misfortunes
whereof this life is full, they fast, suffer, and sustain these disasters
without other assistance, then from their frinds and parents, without
burthening the public. Even unto Clareuallis it self from whence we have
taken the example, one may say, that their reuennues proceed rather of the
labor and good husbandry of Cenobites, as well Co^uetrs, as those of the
Quire, then of the liberalities of great men, who truly have given thereunto
some thing, but far from the maine. For then the brother servants laboring
continually without any propriety, or particular interest, fasting, and
perpetually mortifying themselves, and aiming at nothing, but the service of
God and the community; this union was able to heap together enough to
purchase a Province, if they had not labored according to the counsel of S.
Paul to succor the needy, to whom they had more care to give alms, then to
enlarge their possessions. Even they who are honored with the dignity of
Preist-hood were not exempt from the labor of hands, as is easily gathered out
of many Homilies of S. Bernard, which he cutts of in the midst of a discourse
in regard of the bell which called the community of Chorists to work. And in
the very rule of S. Bennet it is said, that the Scapular (both common to
Priests, and Conuerts) is a kind of garment proper for the labor of hands.
Unto all this I add, that if a Convent be founded with sufficient reuennues to
maintain its conuentualls, they have no more obligation to corporal labor,
then rich seculars; the Conuerts satisfying their duty in serving the Priests:
and Chorists of their house, performing their office, since that their
Instituts, and founders only oblige them to retirement, closure, sol^tude,
silence, prayer, and contemplation, not unto the service of souls, or
clericall functions. It is not so with the mendicant Cenobites, who besides
that, they profess a more strict poverty, since it reaches even to the
community, which cannot possess any immovable, are yet obliged by their
Institutes to the service of the public, in the administration of the word of
God, and of Sacraments, for the aid of Pastors, and in consideration thereof,
they have permission to demand their necessities, so that the people be not
surcharged; which may happen by the superfluous number of the brother-Conuerts,
and of those who only serve in the Quire; for which cause principally they
were not established in the Church. Besides, in case of the three scourges of
plague, war, and famine, when they find not their necessaries in particular
howses, they repair unto the body of cities which have received them to be
mainteyned at the expense of the public, where they find liberal assistance.
Observe now by this difference whether they who serve but in the Quire amongst
the Mendicants, as also the Lay-brother or Conuerts who are only employed to
beg for the Preachers, and Confessors of their Orders, satisfy by this
service the foundation of their institute, and the intention of the Church
which approved them; or whether they have any obligation to work, I say, to
gain, at least, part of their living, by the labor of their hands, at times
when they are not employed in these services. For put the case, that a
brother-seruant, should not go a begging but one day in the week, and should
rest the other six, would he satisfye his rule, or the commaundemnt of God,
which ordeyneth that one labor six days, appoynting only the seventh for
repose? And if the Chorist after seven hours allowed ordinarily for sleep,
bestows three or four, in singing in the quire, what shall become of the
thirteen which remain of the four and twenty. For four hours of the
alternatiue singing, do they require twenty to take breath? Touching
Preachers and Directors of souls, it is not the same, in so much as, according
to the quicknes, or dulnes of spirits there be some to whom the function of
preacing costeth little time, and study, and others who labor strangely ^o
perform it well, and with fruit that holy imployement. They have always
their minds bent unto their sermons, and there be such, who spend all the
year to pollish and prepare the sermons of one Aduent, or one lent. Concerning
the Directors, they are to tied by the ears, and occupied in such sort, and
(if one may say so) prostituted to all those that demand them, and have
recourse unto them, dividing to every hour, and purpose the the waters of
their science through places distributing the fountaynes of their doctrine,
according to the spiritual needs of souls, which consult with them, as they
can only dispose of some moments here and there spiritually, if they be
attentive, to visit prisoners, the sick, miserable persons, afflicted, and
who have need of consolation, whereof there is always abundance in the great
cities. Let us say then for the satisfaction of Chorists, and brother-Conuers,
that if their conscience reprehends them not, and that they find themselves
reasonably charged with profitable labor, and which may redound to the
advantage, whether spiritual, or temporal, of those from whom they demand
their maintenance, they ought to remain in peace, and only set before their
eyes, the cenobiticall state being a very lively image of the terrestrial, or
celestial Paradise according to the ample comparisons which S. Anthony in his
sum, and S. Jerome Platus in the 4. Chap. of his 3. book of the happiness of
the Cenobiticall life, make thereof; yet fail they to live there without
labor; for though the kingdom of God consists not in meat and drink, but of
joy, and peace in the holy Ghost, yet nevertheless even in the state of in
noce^cy, and in a garden of delight-which produced fruit in all seasons, our
first father was placed therein by the hand of God to labor, and keep it. It
is true say the morrall divines that the traueiller is exempt from fasting
which is of precept, but that is to be understood, if the toil of the journey
be such as takes away the necessary forces to sustain fasting, together which
the pain of traveill. In your judgment he that should ride at his ease upon a
good horse, or in a coach, would he have cause of exemption from fasting? And
if the man who makes a great and long voyage a foot, but by too little iourneys
as a league or two in a day, according to the condition of his persons shall he
have occasion to break the fast? And if he rest himself whole days, during
that time of repose, shall he not be obliged to fast? Say the same of those who
amongst the mendica^ts serve only in the Quire, or to go a begging whether
this labor be such unto them as it may be incompatible with all other, they
have with out doubt right to live of their mendicity according to the
permission which the Church gives to their Orderes. If it be not so, there is
some reason to doubt thereof, whose decision I seaue to our Masters. The
example of the Apostles laboring with their hands, and to live by their labor
after the forsaking of all, after their assumption to the Apostleshipe, in
preaching, administering the Sacraments, and governing the whole Church, is in
my judgment, and argument most pressing, and whence I see not in my mind how
they can over happily wind themselves out, who seem to have taken as a task
to bannish the labor of hands, from the Cenobiticall and Mendicant howses.

CHAP. VI. Whether their complaynts are receaueable.
But to what purpose, will one say unto me, is it to make so ample a
digression for the examination of the mendicity of those brotheres who serve
only in the Quire, and of the Conuerts, who are amongst the mendicante
Cenobites, seeing that those no ways meddle neither in preaching, nor in the
direction of souls, and nevertheless you speak in the beginning of the
unjust complaints of Spiritual Cenobiticall Directors? Behold two of weight
and measure, and receuable as I believe, by every iust-Spirit. The first reason
is, that for the most part the Lay-brothers as least judicious, and advised,
are they who more lowdly sound fourth the complaynts of their poverty, when
they want some thing which they esteem to be needful for them. I would now
willingly show the^ their injustice, and that they have yet much less right to
complain, then to demand, by the proofs which we have brought: The which I
say in case that the complaints proceed from their own motion. But for so
much as oftentimes they are but the echoes of the voice of those who send them
to beg, and who are united with them in the same interests, and resembling two
violls which resounde in the self same time, though there be but one of them
touched, or those poor Twins which Pliny mentions, whereof the one
communicats unto the other the nourishment. Do you not conceive that I ought
to refute in them the complaints which the Cenobiticall Directors cause to be
made, of the necessity, and needs of the little community? But behold a reason
which seems to me more powerful then the preceedent; which is, that there are
many of these brother-Conuerts, and more of those that serve only in the
Quire, and no ways in preaching, nor in confessing, who intrude themselves
into the spiritual direction, and conduct of some devout persons, with no
less boldenes then impertinence, and nether the one, nor the other are
supportable. For if one ignorant lead an other, what will follow, but that
they both tumble into the pit of ignorance? Who will not blame the audacitie
of those who without authority, put their hand to the Censor, and without the
science of the voice, secretly usurp the Office of teaching in the Church,
making themselves sourdines, not being able to be trumpets in the house of God?
An insupportable abuse. and which is little less then the sacrilege of those
who enkindled the sacrifices with a strange fire. And as there is no fault,
which is not colored with some pretexte, nor a doublet which has not a soil
to make it seem a true stone, they ground themselves on the example of some
ancient persons, eminent in Sainctity, of whom God made extraordinary use to
teach his ways unto men, who had nether the carracter of Preist-hood, nor the
quality of Doctors in the Church of God; without considering that they wan^
the virtues which authorized these Saints, who walked only in humilltie, and
simplicity, whereas these exalt themselves by presumption and subtlety. I will
say more, that this arrogancy reaches even unto women, who being forbidden
to speak, and having commandment to hold their peace in the Church, to take
upon them in this point under the cloak of I know not what spiritualitie, and
interior life, to serve for Directrices unto certain souls in the world,
whose devout stupidity is little less rediculous, then the arrogant vanity of
these Doctresses; who counterfeiting the Prophetesses, the learned and
courageous women as Debora, Moses sister, Anne, the Thecuite, and Judith, and
under pretexte that S. Brigget, S. Mattilda, S. Gertrude, the blessed B. Angela
of Foligny, the B B. Catherines of Sienne, and of Genua, and the great S.
Teresa, have had particular gifts for to understand and explicate the
mystical ways, they imagine themselves to have the same knowledge and
capacity, although they be as farr^ distant from the sufficiency, as from the
virtues of these eminent Saints.

CHAP. VII. The force of the complainte.
SOme peradventure will think that this were with too much rigor, to examine
so light a matter, as the complaint; but they who know how to weigh as it
ought, the importance, and the force of a lamenting voice, much more powerful
over hearts, then is, I will not say the dropp of water which wears, but the
Iron which breaks the stone, will (I assure my self) judge that there is no
Sergeant, nor officer who exacts that which is due with a more imperious
command or vehemence, then does a pressing supplication, or an importune
complaint, in so much as it seazeth' on the soul by the parts which are most
tender, and delicate, to wit, piety, and shame. For he who complains of an
other, reproacheth him, if not expressly, at least tacitly, of cruelty and
avarice; two vices which no man will acknowledge in him self, and to remove
the suspicions of these blemishes in the opinion of the world there is no sort
of humanity, and liberality which is not used: So that amongst all the crafts,
for the obteyning what one desires, I find none more subtle then an
industrious complaint. So it is said that the Hiena which is a rauinous
animal counterfeits in her den, or on the way, the lamenting voice of a man,
to allure unto her the passenger, natural compassion inviting help, that she
may surprise and devour him* The crocodile uses the like stratageme by his
tears, which are turned into a proverb to signify a dissembled and
malicious complaint. If you will see a natural effect of this power, consider
a little infant^ who by his cries, tears, and sighings, becomes the master of a
house where there are none that endeauours not to satisfy his desires for to
quiet him. And in the Gospel the Judge, otherwise unjust, was he not
constreyned to do justice unto the widdowe that pressed him? Did not the
importunate cries of the Cananean enforce the Apostles to beseech our Savior
to receive her prayer, to the end they might be freed from the sweet, yet
nevertheless tedious tyrany of her complaints? Whence it comes to pass that
women become mistresses in howses, and usurp by this art the authority of
husbands, who give way to avoid their cries, of which they stand more in awe,
then do the women of their blows. Imagine what conclusion I draw from
thence, which I will leave to those who have the guifte of understanding. I
will only say by the way, that I do not believe that the Church, which has
permitted the Mendicants to demand gratis, and for charity, has likewise
given way unto them, to complain of those who give them nothing, when they
obtain not their requests: Much less to cry down, that I say not, rende
them in pieces, by their murmures, and to hurt or impeach the reputation of
such as are less favorable to them. For there are to be found so few
discreto amongst them, as they believe, that that who gives them not, takes
from them, who is not on their side, is against them, who does them not good,
does them hurt; who once fayles them in what they desire, may make account to
have never given them any thing: and who bestows not on them what they
demand, offeres them an affron^, showing themselves in occasiones no less
strong enemies, then weak frinds. Now when we shall have yielded, in respect
of the Churches permission unto this holy Mendicity, and exemption from the
labor of bands, the argument touching the excessive multitude of persons, and
of Cenobiticall Mendicant howses, would yet still remain, which is, as I
believe, vnansweareable, and this multiplication without excuse. That it is so,
ask, even the most reformed Cenobites themselves, and hear the seemly noise,
and the strong oppositions which they make, when there is question of
establishing some new house of Mendicants in city. It is there where the game
is discovered, and where virtue walks unmasked, and causes us to discern
whether it be charity without interest, or else interressed emulation which
plays her part.

CHAP. VIII. The Director Cenobite truly Dis-interessed.
ALL these takes no place in the Cenobiticall Director truly Dis-interessed,
because having no earthly pretense in all his guidances nether for himself, nor
for his Comunity, wholly reposing both himself and it, in the bosom of the
divine Providence, which has ^ general care of all, and a most particular
regard of those who adore and serve it, as of so many instruments of his glory,
he remaynes in peace, and joy, amongst the crosses of necessity, like unto the
Salemander, which lives, in the fires; to the Dolfin, and to the Eagle, which
take delight in the tempests of the sea, and of the Air, never feeling
himself so near unto God, as when he seems to he forsaken by him, remembering
himself of so many, and so many promises touched in the divine Word, which can
never either fail or decay, of an infaillible assistance: Cast thy thought, and
all thy care betwixt the arms of our Savior, says the Psalmist, and he will
nourish thee, nether will he permit the just to floate in vncertaynties; they
who seek our lord, never want any good. Of what then should he complain? Of
the divine Providence in which he has ankored all his hope, and wherein there
is far more confidence, then in his own wisdom. Of the person whom he
directs? by no^ means; well knowing that he is accursed who puts his trust in
man, and that the golden Colossus of the king of Assirians fell into dust,
because it had feet, and a basis of earth. He then holds his peace, and
cherishing the sufferance of his want, as a Lia whom the eternal Laban had
caused him to espouse, he places his expectation in silence, and in hope.

CHAP. IX. The commendation of Theatins.
We have a perfect moddell hereof in a most holy, and truly admirable
Congregation which God beholds as a treasure in the feilde of his Church. It
is that of the Priests called Theatins whose Order flourishes in Italy, where
they have a great number of howses. John Peter Carassa of a great and
illustrious family in the kingdom of Na^les, and Bishop of Thiete in the same
realm, having assembled together some number of Priests in his Dioses, very
eminent in sainctity, invited them to leave their benefices by his example: For
having at the Popes feet renounced his Bishopric, he placed himself amongst
them to lead a true Apostolical life; wholly abandoning himself to the
providence of God, by an excellent confidence. They undertook all the
functions of the Clericall life (calling themselves likewise regular Clerks)
joining prearching, and the direction of souls in the way of salvation, unto a
very exemplat life, principally in an incomparable poverty. For to draw in
this place some lineaments thereof, first they are not proprietaries of howses
where they dwell, but the foundation, and consequently what soever ^s there on
built, appertains in property unto some Lord, or Burger of the city where
they are established, and all their moueables belong unto the holy Sea. Besides
they can possess nether lands, nor rents, nor possessions, nor any settled
reuennues, nor such as consist in any husbandry. Moreover they cannot carry the
wallet, nor beg through the city, nor in howses, nor in the country, nor
ask any thing of any one who soever, nether by themselves, nor by any
interposed persons. They receive the alms, and charities which are given them,
with humility, but it is without seeking them, or causing them to be sought
for. Besides, that which is remarkable, they never speak of this kind of
life, nor of this abandonment unto the divine Providence, in their familiar
enterteinments with strangers, for so much as that will open the gate to
disguised, and indirect demands* They never open their mouth to complain of
their necessities, how pressing soever they be, although I piously believe that
in extreme necessity, and in peril to dye of famine, they might cause it to
be made known to some frinds, otherwise in my opinion, this were in some sort
to tempt God: And I learned in many places of Italy that they never found
themselves reduced to this point of extreamitie, the Divine Providence always
preventing their extraordinary confidence. I will here speak one thing to the
glory of God, which I observed conuersing with them. The first time was at
Florence, where having some time preached in their Church, and before Madame
the great Christian Duchess of (...) araigne, who is a Princess of great
virtue, and piety, and much devoted unto this Institute; I often chanced to
treat as well with the Superior as others of that house, and to discourse of
their Institute: But when I touched upon the string of their extreme poverty,
and resignation unto the divine Providence, which did not permit them to
demand their necessaries, like the other Mendicants, how reformed soever they
be, they gave me no answer at all, to the purpose; and the more I pressed
for answer, the more they withheld themselves from this discourse, until an
Italian gentleman aduertized me that it was their coustome, after this sort to
shift, when any one fell to speak of this subject, which they avoided in their
communication as a rock. I made at Rome, at Venice, at Padua, at Millan, the
like trials, and putting them upon the same matter, I found them as men
without ears, and without tongues, their mouths in this respect (though
otherwise learned, and eloquent; for they have amongst them the most famous
Preachers of Italy) being barren in replies. In your opinion the Directors of
this stamp; are they dis-interessed? Do they astonish the world with their
complaints, and with recital of their necessities, as many Cenobites do, as
well founded, or to be founded, as Mendicants, who have no discourse more
common, nor ordinary, then of the wants of the little community, of the
poverty of the Convent, of the frosen charity, of the few alms which they
receive; of the small comfort which they draw from the world, of the great and
extreme penuryes where unto they are reduced, and a hundredth other such like
chapters of common places, which are so many commentaries upon that passage of
the Prophet, speaking of the Messiah, call his name, make have, dispatch to
take away, and bring in the booties; as if they were so many Benjamins, unto
whom was given the surname of an animal, which I will not name, that lived
only of prey? Is it not time think you, that we cease, to touch this string
of the unjust complaints of Spiritual Directours, be they Pastors, or
Cenobites, founded, or Mendicants? In a lute though it has many strings, yet
that which is oftenest touched, is the smallest, called the treble, it is that
which bears away the sound, and makes it more pleasing to the care, by its
shrille, and pearcing tone; these complaints like trebles lay the ground for
the better discovery of the Interessed Director; for which cause I have so long
touched upon this string, as the highest and most important: Let us now descend
to some others, and only touch them in passing for fear least this lesson
last too long, and offend those unto whom this music might cause the Megrim.
As the bird by her note, so the interessed Director is known by his complaint,
and this tone quickly repulseth the souls to whom this harmony is importune;
and which will not understand the part which he would have them to sing.
Likewise the more subtle know better how to guide their design, using more
hidden artifices, which I must discover for the good of simple souls, and the
confusion of such as by their baits draw profitt from their simplicity. I
undertake not here to produce them all, for who but God can sound the depth,
or the secret of man's heart? But by the scantling of some, one may arrive to
some knowledge of the rest.

CHAP. X. Concerning the Cenobiticall Confraternities.
We have already blamed the abuses committed in the confraternities of
parishes whose institution being so holy and so laudable ends too often by
evil coustome, both of feasts, and dissolutions, where the very Pastors
engage themselves not without scandal, and bad example. Such as are erected in
howses of Cenobites, carry themselves with more prudence, I know not whether
with more simplicity, the disorder therein does so much appear, and
paraduenture interest reigns less there. I speak here to the end one may
understand me, of those devout confraternities, and Societies of persons,
merely Laics, and Seculars, which are sometimes instituted in parishes under
the title either of the blessed Sacrament, or of our lady of pity, or of S.
Roch, and so of others: Sometimes in Churches of Cenobites, under the titles,
either of the Cord, or of the Rosary, or of the Girdle, or of the Scapular, or
of a third Order, or of the Angel Guardian, or of some other Saint, or of
some divine mystery, or of the name of Jesus, or of the five wounds of our
Savior, and the like. There are certain Chappells appointed for the
assemblies of these Confraternities, there is an Order established, Officers
created as well for the spiritual, as for the temporal government of these
Societies (for there are some which have foundations) to the end that all there
march in good order, as is well beseeming those who aspire unto true piety,
which sainctifieth souls. These institutions are so holy, and produce so
great good effects in souls, in what Church soever they are erected, be it
Parochial, be it Cenobiticall, as they cannot be sufficiently recommended, nor
the people enough exhorted to come in and to make themselves partakes of all
that fear God. There are exercised so many good works, by the provocation of
the good example which the Brothers give each to other, as one may truly say
with the Psalmist, that it is a good thing, and pleasing, to see brethren
unanimously aiming at the Butt of true virtue; the same casting forth a perfume
like unto that of Aaron, which does imbalme the whole Church. But as the
Cantharides never fasten, but upon the best fruits, so the bad spirit does
always lay ambushes, on the high ways to* heaven, and casts wood on the
best bread, for to trauers the most wholesome designs. And as there is an
art, though wicked and deceiptfull to change amities, spiritual in the
beginning, into sensual in the end: So of these assemblies which in their
origin, respect nothing but heaven, he uses them as a mean, either to heap
together earth, or for some other disorders which make a God of the belly. We
have made this appear in the co^fraternities of parises, which often times, if
their Diosesan Pastors be not vigilant in their frequent visitations, to take
away the abuse thereof, degenerate into banquets, amongst the virgiers, the
Priours, Receauers, Treasurers and principal Officiers who in lieu of giving
unto the poor, the collections, or remainder of the alms, of the
Confraternitie, after the maintenance of the Chapel, of ornaments, and of
lights; and insteede of making ancient Agapes, to wit, some repasts for the
necessitous, be it of the Confraternitie it self, be it of strangers, they
bestow it on themselves in merrime^ts, and to color this abuse, they call
thither the Pastor, who not able to hold the reigns of these unruly horses,
suffers himself to fall into this ill costume, whereas at the outmost, he can
but perform the deuoir of a man, nor but hold his place at the table. But in
Confraternities which assemble themselves in Churches of Cenobites, it is
otherwise; for the temporal remains there, and the spirituallis largely
distributed unto the Brothers and Officers Layckes, and Seculars, to these the
dew of heaven, to the others the fatt of the earth; for after the building,
adorning and illuminating the Chappells in all manners, both necessary and
magnificent, a thing very laudable, since it is bestowed for the beauty, and
ornament of the house of God, the saying of the Gospel is here in force, that
which remains, be it given to the poor; and to what poor, if not to the
Evangelical, whereof the holy Agapees are made in the Refectory? I blame
nether the Confraternities, nor their Order, nor their gonerment, nor their
collections, nor their buildings, nor the ornaments, nor the employment of the
remains, to the use whereof I have spoken, which cannot be but holy, but good,
but just, but lawful. But behold the rock hidden under the creeping water;
if the Director Cenobite who has his part in the Agapees, preach, press
opportunly importunely, the souls under his conduct, to inrole themselves in
the confraternity, with any reflection on profitable Interest, unto him
therehence might accrewe, together with the rest of his community, who sees
not here the mark and carracter of one Interessed? here might be applied the
art which Daniel discovered with his ashes, but that I fear the lance might
be too sharp, or too hott, and the ulcer too tender, and that they cannot
endure the touch thereof, who have not the patience of Job, though like him
they seem to be upon the dunghill, and call themselves the offall, and scumme
of the world, and the last of men.

CHAP. XI. Against covetous Pretentions.
LET us take away, let us take away all sordid gain, and all pretention of
lucre, from the house of God; let us weed the garden of the Church, and
rooting up the bad herbs; let time give place to eternity, and the earth to
heaven. O Christians, but chiefly o Ecclesiasticts, if you confide only in the
commodities of this life, are you not the most miserable of all men living? And
what will it avail man to gain a whole world, if he think not upon the
salvation of his own soul? Is not the Spirit of more value then meat, as the
body then the garment? O Directour let your stafte of direction be only an
address unto the kingdom of God, not a rod of gold, nor a rule of Acan, to
measure the substance of an other; These lakes which regard only the present
retribution; are snares of scandal, rather then stones of edification. To what
purpose is it to build the sepulchers of the Prophets, and to make for your
profit, bread and wine, of the sepulture of the just, converting, contrary to
the intention of the Church, to their own use, that which is ordained to
eleuate souls to God. He who has found a faithful frinde (that is a
charitable Director, says the Bl. Author of the Philothea) has found a
treasure; see you how a penitent ought to find a treasure, in his Director,
and not the Directour in his penitent? This Director is a medicine of life and
immortality unto the penitent, and not the penitent, a medicine of temporal
life in Mendicitie unto the Director. If the eye be simple, to wit, if the
intention be right, all the body will be clear; that is, all the actions will
prove works of light, for the good intention is a lamp of spl^ndour* which
dissipateth the darkness of subtle and interessed designs*

CHAP. XII. Subtle and interessed designs.
AWay with these artificious complaints, which some make even when they have
that which suffices, to keep the world in awe, and cause it to suspect
necessities which only consist in the fear of those who cryout like certain
animalls, before one flea them, unto whom might be said with the Apostle, no,
no, your sufferances are not such as you have yet resisted dolou^s even unto
blood; your voice is a voice of thunder which never rowles within the cloud
without causing rain: For this complaint makes us like the daughter of Caleb,
to desire the inferior, and Supe^iour waters, that is, to inuoke the ^uccours
of great, and little, to water your Terrene. And God grant that your earth
having often received dew, be not like that whereof S. Paul speaks, which
renders no thing but briars, and thistles, in lieu of sweet and sauory
fruits, that is reproaches, insteede of thanks. There are besides other
industries, so much the more fruitful, as subtle, and the more they are
subtle, the less are they perceived. I will not vnueile them, for fear of
appearing rather offensive to those who use them, then officious unto such, as
are taken with them. S. Paul notwithstanding is never so sharp (though his
style be vehement in the reprehension of all vices) as when he thunders against
those who insinuate themselves into hearts by sweet benedictions, those who
promise Paradise unto such as do them good, and who have so many fair reasons
to make good their saying, alleging for that purpose the sea of scripture,
with all its fishes, I would say its passages. In your opinion, do they not
give that which they have not, and are they not very liberal of a thing which
does not yet apperteyne unto them, and that the same Scripture in so many
places, makes it unto us, so violent and difficult a conquest. The Lamies
says the Prophet, have opened their breast, and given suck to their young,
but such a milk as brings them asleep insteede of nourishment. My child,
says the wiseman, they who give thee suck, do not wish thy good, I would
willingly add, but they wish thy goods. There are certain people in the
world, who roame like Gypsies from City to City; from Province, to Province,
who go every where, and abide in noe place; they make great show of being
fortune tellers, and understand nothing therein, but whylest they hold your
hand, and tell you wonders upon the middle cross braunching line, and other
tea^mes, of their iugling art, they have one of their eyes on some other part,
and often times after they have told the good fortune, they have done; and you
find the misfortune. Sometimes when one eleuates our Spirits unto the good
fortune ( ad bona ventura) of the eternity, it is conceived to the good
fortune ( ad bona ventura) of the temporalitie. And as there are many whose
heart is estranged from God whilst they honor him with their lips; so are
there some, whose belly is glewed, and their eyes fixed on the earth, whilst
their discourses are in heaven. Admirable Archimedeses in their arts, and who
desire but a little point to place thereon the foot of their engines, and to
raise from its center all the mass of the heauyest of elements. It is not that
the Rosary, the Scapular, the little Cord, the blessed Girdle, and other sacred
marks, are not holy things, provided that this blessed girdle, this blessed
Cord, be given with intention to draw us from earth, by showing us heaven, so
that there be no other pretense then to raise us thereby from the earth to
heaven, not to take from us, the goods of the earth, upon promise of heavenly.
For though I know that by a divine, and holy Alchimie this change is made of
lead into gold: It is not allwaies known whether it proceed from the pure
intention of these blowers who do not so liberally offer heaven unto those who
have not the earth. These are the insnarers who co^ceale hearts: aspiring to
pray, under the fleeses of innocent lambs, of whom we ought to beware, and
according to the council of the Gospel, to avoid this leaven which corrupts
the best paste. Consider your ways, o Penitent: and advise whether the hands
correspond unto the voice, do not err therein as blind Isaac, make no compact
as Iosue with the crafty Gabeonits, observe as the Prophet whether the wife of
Iereboam be not disguised, and committ, not your selves to these who devour
the poor of spirit, in secret, and who eat them without noise, as a morsel
of bread. A little astention on those who praise themselves, not as peacocks who
behold themselves in their feathers, but for bread, or on those who
extraord^narily extol such, as do them good; and you will see that as beasts
of hire; so men of praising, are ordinarily of base esteem; from thence these
great Paranimphes, these Panegyricks, these Elogies, of Confraternities, of
third Orders, of merits, of Indulgences, of paticipations, of Associations, and
other brave things which truly taken in their true sense, are holy, venerable,
and most desirable; but these meddalls have two sides, have two hands, one may
take them by the leaft, or by the right, and they who distribute them, do not
always correspond to the sincerity of those who receive them: Happy
nevertheless are these, since tha^ without heeding the defects of channells,
they omit not to refresh themselves with the waters of grace, and to draw them
with joy, out of the fountains of our Savior. I hate moreover this other
artifice which enterteines, be it of settled purpose, be it by impertinency,
scruples, to the end it may render them always useful: Who will not fly from
such physicians as foment the discease in others to nourish themselves of their
goods? I should never have thought the same of Spiritualls, if our Savior in
the Gospel had not aduertized me, that there are some, who strain a gnat,
and swallowe a cammell. Were it not a thing wo^thy, not only of blame, but
also of notable punishment, if of a Confessionary, one make a bank of
particular Interest, a laborers farm, a merchants shop, a Procurers, or a
Notaries study, where one enters but to leave there more the^ he carries away;
a nett to catch somewhat else then fishes; and an art to gain other
merchandise then souls to God? Nether do I believe that so base a temptation
can assail persons who have even had the courage to forsake all to follow
JESUS CHRIST, in his nakedness, and in his poverty, and who are arrived to such
a hight of contempt of gold, and silver, and of all the Treasures of the
earth, as they make no use thereof, at least, with their own proper hands,
causing the charities of that kind which are given them, to be received by
Seculars; whose piety, and fidelity is known unto them; afterward employing
them according to their necessities, in buildings, in vestments, in moueables,
or in victuals. Wherein they testify their generosity in some sort like to
that of the great Grecian Captain, who pursuing a victory, and meeting with a
very rich buckler, covered with plates of silver, which one of his enemies had
thrown down, the more nimbly to save himself by flight, tourning himself
toward one of his soldiers, said unto him* Co^pagnio^ take this bucker, for
thou art not Themistocles. A generosity w.ch has likewise some truth of
rese^blance unto that of great lords, who handle not their silver and their
reuennues but by their Treasurers, or Cofferers, as being an occupation
unworthy of their imploime^t. A paralele which might be added unto the
comparisons of the Monk, and the king, Which S. Chrysostom makes, and Hierome
Platus very strongly urges in his second book of the happiness of the
Cenobiticall state, in the sixteenth Chapter.

CHAP. XIII. The spiritual Director dis-interessed is without artifice.
THe truly dis-interessed Directour as well of the Clergy, as Cenobitique,
has no cunning in his conduct, for that he has no frail and terrestrial
pretention, he goes on freely, because he walks directly. Besides he has
likewise the true wisdom of God, assisting him; wisdom which never dwelles in
a malicious heart: For the spirit of discipline, says the wiseman, flies him
that faineth, and whose double and deceiptfull lips, speak in a heart, and in
heart, in regard that which he says is far from his thought. So soon as then
o Directed soul, you shall p^rceaue that in the conduct of him who guides you
there is a sordid artifice, and tending to propter Interest; I say unto you
with an ancient Poet: Avoid these rocks, these couetuous shores, all darkened
with shipwracks. These people seeks themselves in you, and not God in you, nor
you in God. They who seek themselves in others, deserve not to be sought by
others.

CHAP. XIV. He has no respect of persons.
THey merit yet less to be sought for Directours who have regard unto the
appearance of persons, an imperfection so much blamed in scripture, principally
in the epistles of S. Paul, S. Peter, and S. James, perticularly in the second
chapter of the Canonical where he makes a strong inuectiue against those, who
do great honor unto the rich, and despise the poor, which he concludes in
those words, whosoever is an excepter of persons commits sin, and is
reprehended, by the law, as a transgressour. And I pray you to what purpose,
shall the spiritual Directour, who ought to regard only God, in a soul, or a
soul in God, take consideration, not of his body, but of his goods, which are
only made for the transitory life of the body? Meat is made for the belly,
and the belly to receive the meat, but God will distroy both the one and the
other. Besides is it not God who has made both the great and little, as the
wiseman teaches us, and who has the same care of the little as of the great?
To what purpose then shall a Pastor, a spiritual Directour be he a particular
Priest, be he Cenobite, called into some part of the solicitude of souls by
the Prince of Pastors, and bishop of our souls, swerve from the model, which
is showed him, upon the mountain of perfection, having more attention, and
care for the rich, then for the poor. Is he ignorant that our Savior came to
Euangelize the poor, and that he gives for a mark of his coming unto the
disciples of his precursor, carry tidings to your Master that the poor are
Euangelized. And himself in the days of his flesh* and of his conversation
amongst men, did he not desire to be, and appreare poor? In his birth, in his
life, in his death, there is nothing but litlenesse, and poorenes; he suffers
himself to be held for the son of a carpenter, did commands his Apostles
that they permit the little ones to come unto him, and declares unto them that
if they become not like unto little Children, they shall have no part in his
kingdom. He calls the poor blessed and allotts them heaven for their
heritage, and promises this advantage unto such as for his love shall have
embraced poverty, to make them to sit upon seats, and to cause them to judge
the whole world. It is the eternal wisdom who heretofore said by the mouth of
the wiseman, that his familiar conversation was with the simple and little ones,
and that his spirit rested not but upon the poor, the humble, and those that
feared him. It was in mud the sacred fire of the Temple was found by Israel at
their return from the captivity of Babylon, and certes, it is in the dreggs
of the people, to wit, amongst the poor, and the little ones, rather then
amongst the rich, and the great men of the world, that the fire of charity, and
of true piety is sou^de. And if the Director has the true zeal of souls,
(which one may call the pure flower of Charity) though he sifte them never so
much, yet will he find that the little ones have the fatnes of the wheat of
devotion, and that the great ones ordinarily have but the sou^de, the straue,
the noise, the crack without any solidity, for so much as the good seed, is
suffocated in their hearts, by the thorns of vanities and sollicitudes of the
world. But the mischeife is, that we fall upon that saying of an ancient Poet.
Every one may set his bounds in a barren soil, the fat is gotten with labou^
but yields the more fruit. The most part of Directors seek their own
Interest, and not that of JESUS CHRIST, and will not, as if they were
Goldsmithes, or Iewellers, work but upon gold, and precious stones. Upon a
time one reproached a Philosopher, that none but of his sect, who then made
profession of contemning goods, were to be seen at the gates of the rich, he
answered with more subtlety then truth, that they went as Physicians unto the
most infirm, meaning that they carried the precepts of their philosophy,
which served as so many remedies against vices, unto such as were most infected
therewith: But one replied unto him with more truth then subtlety, that they
went thither truly, like Physicians, rather for gaynes then to restore health.
The same may be said of spiritual Directors, of what condition soever they
be, when a man sees them so careful of those from whom they may expect some
profit, and so little attentive to the service of the poor. For though they
could cover themselves with the excuse of the Philosopher, in saying that they
runn unto those, who being more engaged, and entangled in the vices of the
world, have more need of help; yet nevertheless it is apparent, that this is a
false pretense, and that their intentions are different from their words. For
if they say true, why do they not, like the blood which runs to the defective,
or most feeble part? The little ones, the poor, and the miserable, are
ordinarily the most necessitous, I do not say temporally, that is clear, but
spiritually, the most part of their vices grow, forwant of instruction; for if
they did know the deformity of sin they would have it in horror, and this
horror, would divert them from committing it. If they do ill, it is by the
corruption of nature, rather then by a foul, and deliberate malice, and for
that no body shows unto them the good which they ought to follow, and the
vice which they ought to fly, they oftentimes do more good the^ they know
of, where as the great ones and the rich, much better instructed, never committ
evil, but they know it, and know much more good, then they do.

CHAP. XV. Nor to his profit.
Moreover observe where these Directors who have regard unto the appearance of
persons level the most part of their aims, and you will see, that they
inuiting the rich to gain heaven by means of the earth, endeavor themselves
to gain earth by heaven. If there be an Obit to be founded, which is to preach
for its Parish, or for its Convent, presenty they espy the dangerous maladies,
and when soever there is any speech of Testiments that they may be remembered
promising boldly eternity for a morsel of temporality, provided that it fall
into their hands. For to preach for the poor, for the necessities, and needs
of others, cannot be but laudable. But if the most just commendation of a man
become odious when it proceeds from his own mouth, how much-more sordide shall
the discourse be which tends to proper Interest, the scripture always blaming
it under the name of filthy lucre? When one speaks of restitution unto these
good personages, have they their ears open? And with how many windings do
they confound this matter, to fish in troubled water? What vigilancies are
employed in visiting the widows, and Orfanes in their afflictions, which S.
James calls a pure and immaculate religion; certes little enough. But such
persons as embrace single life, or widdowhood, and who have grown old in
marriage without children, and without hope of issue, abounding with riches, o
how are they visited, o how great need have they of consolation, of
spirituallity, and that the mystical Theology be well rung into their ears! o
how sweetly and mellodiously do these qualities of these founders,
foundatrices, benefactours, benefactrices, there resounde. There is no merit
equal to that of foundations, of holy communities, of building of Churches,
of ornaments: For note, the same is in the rank of those good deeds, whose
merit, and reward, increase every day even in heaven, where the Saints increase
in glory, at the same time, when use is made of the goods which they left in
earth. Apollo plants, Paul waters, and God gives the increase. Is there
question of laying the first stones toward buildings? o that a man could well
understand into what gardens he ought to cast those little stones of Daniel
which come from the mountains: Let one erect foundations and buildings, let
one know well how to sound the trompet, to praise good works at the gates,
to wit, the porches of the Church, that the assembly of Saints, know well to
extol the glory of alms, even to cause the stones to speak, procuring arms
and inscriptions to be engraven for a perpetual memory, let one sound forth
the saying of David, the just shall be in an eternal memory, he shall not
fear bad reputation, his justice shall live for ever, and ever, and his horn
shall be exalted in glory. Is there question of buryalls? What marbles, what
Piramides, what Obelisques, what triumphant arches are erected to the
magnificence of founders, how the Angels dispute who shall have the body of
Moses; but it seems some may tell me, you dislike, that one exhort those to
do great good deeds, unto whom God has been liberal, against that which the
Scripture teaches in so many places, pressing us to perform redily all the
good we can, not to suffer our selves to be surp^ised by the night of death,
when one can work no more; but to labor in good works whilst we have time
to do good unto all, principally to the domestics of God, and so make for our
selves frinds, of the Mammon of iniquity, who may receive us into the eternal
Tabernacles, Ah! it is far from it, but I endeavor to take away the ordure,
and the scumm from the midst of this deformed charity, which ought to be
pure, chiefly in the inte^tion of him who persuades these good works. But who
sees not, in all the practices which I discover, how much the artifices of
these good Directors falsify that good coin, wherein they deserve no less
punishment, the^ they who corrupt that which is current? Children of men* how
long being heavy of heart, will you seek vanity, and your own proper
Interest? It is not then the actio^ of the giver which I touch, for howsoever
it be, he shall receive according to his work and shall not fail of his hire:
But I have an auersion unto the industries of such as, enclose within their
netts, the souls which committ themselves to their conduct, more full of art,
and craft, then of sincerity and candor.

CHAP. XVI. Artificial Comendations of Alms.
We know, thanks be to God, that Alms is a grateful, and good thing, and
that who gives it with a true dilection, though he should bestow all the
substance of his house, yet would he think it nothing. We know that it
delivers from death, that it cleanses from all sin, that mercy is bestowed on
the merciful, that he who is adicted to this virtue, disposes himself to
receive of God, a favorable judgment, and to hear at the consummation of the
would, this saying of the last sentence in his favor: Come the blessed of my
Father, because, I was hungary and you gave me to eat. On the contrary, let
the memory of him perish from the earth, not only of the dying, but of the
living, who has forgotten to do mercy: For God wills mercy, rather then
sacrifices, or victimes. And as water quenches fire^, says the wiseman, so
Alms stifleth sins. To conclude, we know that unto those that will give,
shall be given, and that a full, superabundant, and runing-ouer measure of
retribution, shall be powered into their bosom. But is it not an insupportable
abuse, to make of so many Oracles of the holy Ghost, baits, and lures to
draw the goods of the simple, to particular profit? And if the Preacher, be he
Pastor, be he Cenobite, who preaches too often of Alms, and over much
presses this matter, is presently said by the vulgar, to speak for the
wallet, and loses the credit which he had gotten by his sermons; how much
more odious ought a particular Director to be who fowls the souls upon this
subject, and endeauers to cause them to leave their Cloak, not by the strong
blasts of the northern wind, but by the mildnes of the sunn-beames, by words
gilded with a thousand heavenly blessings? O the brave conceit of S. Austen,
reported by Bellarmin in his book of Monks, upon that passage of the Psalmist
amongst the Cedars of Libanus which the just have planted, the sparrowes will
build their neasts. They who plant these Cedars, says that eagle of
Doctors, are the great, and the rich of the world, who hearing with fear,
these divine words, blessed is he that is mindful of the poor, and the
beggar, instantly sell their possessions, their lordships, and their
superfluous and superabundante goods, which puff them up with vanity, and
give them to the servants of Jesus Christ build them Churches, and Monasteries
beautified with pleasant gardens, and there the little sparrowes gather
together, nesting themselves, and disneasting them. what praises are wanting in
S. Hierome unto those great and devout Roman Dames who at his persuasion,
built so many Monasteries? And John Diacre, how much does he exalt the glory of
S. Gregory the great founder of so many howses Cenobites, which he ^r^cted of
his patrimony, as the learned Bellarmine notes in the book by me alleged,
Chapter 44? There needs but such a passage as that of S. Austen, or such
examples, well urged to the purpose, to make a rich man's mouth to water, and
cause him to lay a fair foundation to eternize his memory, both in this and
in the world to come. The same happiness every day, and is an action both good
and holy. But who would search with a probe the intention of these
remonstrances, I know not whether one should not find therein, proper
interest? I clearly see that they would hide themselves in the press, as Adam
rann hastily into the thicket of the wood, but they have a witness in heaven who
knows the secrets of hearts, and before whose eyes, all is naked and
discovered, witness he, who exhorted to the Cord, to draw unto his party a
great benifit explicated to the letter, (I know not whether according to the
Spirit) this passage of the Psalmist. The Cords are fallen to me in excellent
places: For truly my inheritance is most noble to me, meaning that the Cord
was his principal inheritance, inheritance most base to some, and yet noble
and aduantagious unto this man. Now tell me whether this be to use, or abuse
the Scripture, whether it be to speak seriously, or to deride the ignorance of
the rude? Think not neuersheles that I do not much commend, and esteem as
fathers of the poor, those who give their goods to the Church, and who will
not have any other heir nor other inheritance, then the Crucifixe. For it is
much more just that the sainctuary possess the inheritance of Laycks, then to
see the Laycks possess by inheritance the sainctuary, and as heretofore the
Gentiles, so now the Gentlemen to enter into the inheritance of our lord.

CHAP. XVII. An agreeable Encounter.
I Will relate to this purpose, and by the way, a suitable occurrance, which
upon a time was told me by a noble man who settled a great Abbay upon one of
his Children, who scarce seven years old, was called lord Abbot, as if one
should say, my Lord the fathers child; now the father of this infant father,
told me in excuse, that for a great number of years this Abbay was belonging
to his house, and it concerned him, not to suffer it to fall into the hands of
strangers, in regard his predicessours had been partly founders thereof, and
heretofore bare so much devotion there unto, as they were willing, their land
which was near, should releive it, and become voluntary feoditories and
vassalls of our lady to whom this Abbaye was dedicated. Thereupon I replied unto
him, that the case was much altered, since in times past, his house raised the
Abbay and now the Abbay depending of his house, of mistres, was become servant,
tributary and as a woeful farm. Behold how by these changes the face of the
world is turned. The Directour truly dis-interessed, will discourse soberly of
Alms, where he shall think it fit to be spoken of, when his advise is
required, he will shun as a rock, his particular profit, settling a true order
in the charity of the soul which he conducts. And what is the true order, but
that with the devout Cardinal Bellarmine in the last chapter of his book of
Monks* draws from the Doctrine of S. Thomas, which is, to distribute his goods
where one knows there is most necessity? For it is not enough to give ones
goods, but he ought to bestow them wel^; alms is so much the more accompanied
with judgment, in respect that God is then served, not only with his
substance, but also with the spirit, by the discretion of the application. I
will shutt up this passage with a notable consideration of my blessed father,
the great Francis of Sales, Bishop of Geneua. He was upon a time called into
one of the principal cities of this state, to distribute there the word of
God. As being the Adama^t of hearts, touched with devotion, he was instantly
accoasted, by diverse mystical, and spiritual bees, which swarmed about the
sacred flowers of the documents of his mouth, to draw from thence a honey of
piety. Of them he saw diverse sorts and guided by different hands. Now this
man who was all judgment himself, having cast his eyes upon the workmen who
labored in the vinyeard of this city, as well by their public sermons, as
by their private directio^s, took principal notice of two, who by two ways
quite contrary, yet holy, aimed at the same butt, which was to eleuate the
souls under their conduct, to a solid piety. The one was Cenobite, of an
Order very renowned and examplar, the other Ecclesiasticke, of the Clergy,
living of a patrimony much more ample then the reuennue, which he had of his
benifice. The first governed the souls which put themselves under his conduct,
by the way of fear, of rigor, and of exterior austerity, and held them too
subject, and tied to their exercises, as nothing could happen, though never so
little, to put them out of their course without causing them to enter into
troubles, into scruples into remorces, into bitterness of spirit, which were
strange. Besides they were so strongly tied unto this Confessor (and by
themselves: for this truly pious person was for his own particular very
dis-interessed) that they would have thought it a great crime to regard, or
consult which an other. These persons used much prayer, and mortification, but
visited very few hospitalls, prisons, poor, and necessitous; always in the
Churches, at divine offices, at Sermons, at Indulgences, insatiable therein:
Not that alms came not out of their purses, but the greatest part went to the
holy community of the Directour, who thereof had no greater share then the rest,
though he were next unto God, the principal motive of this abundance. He was
an enemy of propriety, and of presents which were addressed unto him, remitting
all to the Superior of the house, who caused this precept exactly to be kept
by the community, not to refuse any thing, and to demand nothing: For the
community never demands, yet well may the particular for the community, as a
member laboring for the whole body. Moreover these souls did judgment, and
Justice, by the fear which they had of the judgments, and justices of God,
not certes by that fear which excludes love, but by the same which being put
in the balance with this, turns the scales. Now as the thunder tearing the
clouds, causes them to dissolve into rain, and prepares the hindes to
disburthen themselves of of their calves, as says the Psalmist according to
the interpretation of S. Hierome: and as he who is pursued by a bull, by a
mastife, or by some furious beast, casts him his cloak, to save himself by
flight: So there is nothing which does so much persuade to redeem sins by the
works of mercy as fear: For when the terror of hell seiseth on a soul, and
causes her to conceive what it is to lodge in the devouring fires, and in the
eternal flames; is there any thing which she will not give, for her delivery,
as says Job? O God says David thou have moved the earth, and thou have
troubled it, heal the contritions thereof; for it is greatly moved. He speaks
of a soul fastened to the earth. And if the fire which causes the meat to
roste, looseneth the flesh from the bones, how much more will the apprehension
of that of hell separate a soul from earthly affections? O God, no, I do not
say that this holy person had in these terrible remonstrances, so base a
thought; but as the effects do not always follow the intentions,
paraduenture these souls as the scholars of an ancient Philosopher took that
by the left hand, which he presented by the right, wherefore I present the
effect of this cause of what design soever it was animated. The souls
contrary wise, which God had inspired to range themselves under the conduct of
a simple Priest (the which I say to serve my self of the terms of common
use, not conceiving a Cenobite to be a double Priest) were incited by an other
spirit; which was that of simplicity which excludes not wisdom, and of that
charity which as the Apostle says chaseth away all servile and scupelous
fear, only having in their hearts, that which in the scripture is called
chaste, and holy, and which ought to continue even in eternity it self.
Charity was their predominant starr, and as the roof of their mystical
edifice; and humility their foundation. Sweetness and candor shined in their
deportments and docility, which the Apostle calls divine, was in their spirits,
and they being disingaged of exterior things enjoyed that interior freedom
of which it is said, where the spirit of God is, there is true liberty. They
loved God with all respect, and with a high and incomparable esteem, and their
neighbor in God tenderly, and cordially. They visited the poor, the widows,
the Orphans, the sick which were without succor, in their miserable cottages,
or in the hospitalls: and if they had any fear, it was of their Confessor,
never approaching the tribunal but with trembling, as if he had been that
Cherubin armed with a firye sword, keeping the gate of the terrestrial
Paradise. And though he inspired into the^, only love and charity, and
recommended unto them nothing so much as a mutual benevolence in God,
according to the so frequent lesson of our Savior, and of his well beloved
disciple, yet nevertheless their confidence in him, was accompanied with so much
reverence, as it was a wonder that this banished not the other. Besides he was
so far from all Interest, be it of dominion, be it of profit, as to avoid the
same, he commanded them oftentimes to take some other Confessor, to the end
his counselles might be the more assured, if they were approved by others, or
that he might correct them, in case they were in any sort doubtful, or
defective: And to shun what soever tends to profit, his advice extended it
self to all, except the distribution of their goods, telling them that it was
a case reserved to the unction of the holy Ghost, who teaches his ways to
the merciful and meek. Yes, for is it not he who infuseth charity into hearts,
and who establishes therein convenient Order; enemy of presents both great and
small, having learned of the wiseman that they blind the spirit of the most
wise; and estranged from all profit, not only sordid, but also that which
being permitted by the most severe laws, cannot be esteemed dishonest without
offending the Church it self, who has approved the use and rule thereof. Also
he was provided of goods of fortune to enjoy this beatitude which consists in
giving rather then receiving, and content with food and apparel suitable to
his condition, he held nothing more aduantagious then sufficiency with piety,
that which seemed profitable unto others, unto him was a detriment for
JESUS CHRIST; being certain that they who receive some recompense of their
labors in this world, abate so much of that which attends them in the other.
He forbade nothing so severely to those who served him, as to take
gratification of such as came to obtain of him sp^rituall assistances; and if
any one took liberty so far forth as to receive the least thing, he wished
him not the leprosy of Giezi, but of the religation of Agar he was assured; he
gave him his pasport not to have any part in this Anathema which he had in no
less horror, then that of Acan. Briefly, not to draw more in le^ght the
deffences of these Directours, behold the judgment of the holy Prelate, from
whom I take this story. These two men said he, were both of them prudent and
faithful servants of God, and who taught justice unto souls by diverse ways.
Such as were conducted by the first, had much fear of God, and much charity
toward their Directour, or at least for his community, and their charity was
in the Order. They of the second had much love of God, and of their neighbor,
and the Order consisted in their charity, and they had much fear and respect
of their Directour, who besides the necessary conferences for their needs in
the house of God, had no other private entertaynements, nor any visites, nor
conuersations in howses; which is the property of corrupted, and unsavory
salt. Both of them had God before their eyes, and for the only object of their
intentions, and prete^tions; both of the^ not with standing singular in their
conducts, according to the division of heavenly graces whose variety is
compared to diverse colors which the sun makes to appear on the neck of a
pigeon: And different in this, that the one though very Dis-interessed in his
own particular, was nevertheless engaged in the Interest of his community: but
the other had no regard unto any Interest, nether for himself, nor for any
other, God being his prime, and only moveable.

THE FIFTH PART.
CHAP. I. Concerning particular interest and Community.
TO say the truth, although the Cenobites have a notable advantage in a vowed
remuneration of all which they do or may possess in the bosom of their
Order, yet nevertheless on the other side the dilection, and election, as also
preference which they are obliged to have for their Institut whose habit they
bear causes them to enter by another, yet not a false gate, into the
interests of that body whereof they are members, interest so much the more
stinging, and more pressing, as they are more colored with the beautiful
Ennamell of the glory of God, which often enough serves for a foil unto
selfloue. But a man, free from any other society then that which is common to
him, or to all the faithful, or to the Ecclesiastics of the Clergy which
have no other Order then that of the Hierarchy established by the son of
God, who is a Priest for ever according to the Order of Melchisedech, is rather
in the state of giving, then receiving, and if plenty place him not in the
first, sufficiency which puts him under the lee of necessity, exempts him from
the last. Peradventure one will say unto me with the wise man, that he is truly
blessed who dispiseth gold, and puts not his trust in treasures: But where is
the man and we will praise him? If it besome Cenobite who in nodding his head
makes this objection, one will reply to him, that when he shall have shown a
man of his condition exempt from the interests of his Order, and contemnig the
profitt of the holy Co^munitie, many shall be presented to his view who
without support, of the Community, use goods of the world, as if they used them
not, who do no evil with the^, although they have the power; and who being
able to transgress the law of God, yet do they incline and subject
themselves theru^to. The hand of God is not shortened, his works are great and
exquisite in his wills, he has secret servants, and others in view, as well
in the world, as in the Cloisters: And there is nothing, says an ancient
Poet, more unjust then an impertinent man, who approues of nothing but what be
does himself; a Pharisie who is not like other men, his hands and tongue
against all, and draws against himself, the hands, and tongues of others. A
great and most noble servant of God, who retiring himself out of the world
(wherein he had borne eminent offices) brought with him great goods into a very
holy Congregation, on a time told me, to the honor of him, who had been the
Institutour thereof, and whose holy memory in benediction before God, and men;
that this devout personage, never gave unto him, nether during his life, nor
at his death one word of commendation, congratulation, nor so much as thanks
for so many commodities which he had brought into the Co^munitie; judging that
he was unwilling to put him in peril, by some vanity which this applause
might have settled in his soul, to loose the recompense which he ought to
expect, much greater in heaven, then in earth. In your opinion, was this holy
personage ttuly dis-interessed? Did he aim more at earth, then at heaven? Did
he regard the soul which put her self under his conduct, or her goods? O well
might he have said with that spiritual Giant, the holy founder of the
company which carry the name, and the cross of JESUS, even to the extreamities
of the east, and of the west: The earth seems unto me abject when I
contemplate heaven.

CHAP. II. Two famous examples.
TO this purpose I call to mind an agreeable history which is written in the
spiritual meddowe, an ancient book, and of approved authority. Amongst the
Ancho^ets of the first ages, there was one called Abbot Ammo^ who received
under his discipline in his hermitage, a young brother named John. Amongst
other mortifications which he exercised for the space of twelve years, this
one is notable, to wit, that what soever good he did, the Abbot never gave him
a pleasing word, always testifying unto him, and of purpose, coffeehouse,
to keep this nouice in a continnuall humility, and contempt of himself. If
the master animated by the spirit of God, were industrious to try his
disciple, the same disciple, was no less simple, nor less plyant, performing
all that was commanded him, exactly, and with alacrity. The Abbot Ammon
falling sick, and being reduced to the last period of his life; the
neighboring hermites came to visit him, to assist him both corporally, and
spiritually, in his passage; unto whom he made many excellent remonstra^ces;
his tongue speaking from the abundance of his heart: he feeling himself
pressed with his last hour, called unto him his faithful, and humble
disciple, took him by the hand, and wringing it, said unto him, only three
times, Adieu with a languishing and dying voice, and having commanded him some
service, which obliged him to depart out of the cell, he said unto those who
were come to see him, my brothers, I assure you that this young monk is a
Saint, and upon exact trial; for during the space of twelve years, that he
remained with me, I never spoke unto him any word which might give him to
understand, that I received any satisfaction of the services which he rendered
me, although they were notable, and very accomplished; and he never gave reply
to my reprehensions, albeit of purpose, I made them sometimes very unjustly,
nor ever remained discouraged by my reiectings: Respect him then from hence
forth, as a faithful servant of God, and who is very dis-interessed in the
services which he renders him. Might I be so bold unto this Cenobiticall
example, to conioyne another purely secular, and moral? The great Marishall of
Mon-luc (one of the ablest Captains which France had in his time, and who in
those brave commentaries which we have of him, makes appear his great
sufficiency, and experience in the a^te military) having lost in a combat, one
of his sons, a brave and valiant gentleman, and a worthy branch of so
generous a courage, as that of the father, as the corpse was brought unto him
dead, I could not said he beholding it with a dry eye, wish him a more
honorable tomb, since he dyed with sword in hand, for the service of his
Contry, and of his Prince; all of us, bearing arms, are but victimes destined
unto this Sacrifice. There is but one grief which touches me to the heart,
which is, that this poor boy died, before I could have the means, to make
him know, at least at the extremity of his life, the esteem which I made of
his valor; certes it was wholly other in my heart, then in my tongue, for that
blessed him, whilst with this, I spoke unto him injuries, and reproaches, able
to take away the courage from the most generous. He never ran hazards that I
paid him not with threats, and when he was hurt, or performed best, it was
then that I charged him with most outrages. The same astonnished the world, who
saw me so prodigal of praises toward persons that deserved them not, and so
covetous toward my no own blood of that which cost so little. That which we
now said of this great Captain, of the Abbot Ammon, and of the Superior of
the Congregation, is in my judgment, a most excellent mark in a spiritual
Directour, for though he ought to encourage the faint hearted to good, yet must
he take heed of praising those which straye from their duty, into the desires
of their hearts; and of blessing the wicked, and of saying Peace, Peace, where
there is no Peace. The words of praise are always suspected of flattery, and
S. Gregory says very well, to praise a wiseman in his own presence, is to
scourge his spirit, and torment his ear. This slavish, and servile langage is
extremely misbeseeming the mouth of a Directour, and an infallible note of
some secret ptetention.

CHAP. III. Against both the giving and receiving of presents.
BUT there is an other dumb langage which makes it self to be understood more
by effects, then by words, and which in being more efficacious, is also more
affectiue. It is that of small or mean presents, as well active, as passive, I
would say, as well such as the Directour gives, as those which he receaueth. O
God preserve me from blaming the sainctity of things which I am about to name,
in nowise, for I should offend both heaven and earth, the which is far from my
thought: but who knows not that Interest, which is a self-loue, very subtle,
does glide into every place, and penetrates even into the Sanctuary it self?
S. Hierome violently exclaimes against these little presents, too frequently
used, which are made between the Directours, and the persons directed. He
makes a catalogue of those in his time, of handkercheifes, of linen, of
fruits, of garments, and the like commodities under color of gratitude and
assistance; w.ch being little, are not regarded nor seem any thing. O how does
this great Saint given to austerity in his life, and who lie disinteressed
strongly inueigh against those Flies which by little and little become Elephants.
A small present with a great affection makes a deeper impression in a soul,
then a great benefit accompayned with ill will. A little spark sometimes
causes marvelous flames. And then who knows not, as an ancient said, that
gifts, imitate baited hooks, which present a folly to catch a great fish. He
who has found benifitts says the great Stoic in the excellent Tract which
he composed on this subject, has invented lines to fasten hearts. That husband
who had espoused a rich but an imperious wife, said that for a dowry he had
sold his authority. The Director who is so ill advised to receive them,
immediately loses his credit, and the holy liberty which in him is necessary
for the reprehension of vices. Behold how the Prophet Elizeus rejected those
of the leprous Naaman: No, no, said S. Paul, refusing all assistance, I have
hands to gain by their labor, what is needful for me. One offered money unto
S. Peter, he angerily rejected it, and with such sour terms, that they
proceeded to an Anathema: let thy money lead thee into thy perdition: Who can
believe to obtain the gift of God, and to possess it at so base a price? The
Directours are Judges placed upon the seats of judgment, judging in this life
the tribs of Israel. Who knows not how great a crime it is in a Judge to
receive presents. Their right hand is filled with presents says the Psalmist,
crying down the unjust Judges. For which cause an ancient Paynter represented
the just Judges of Areopagita without hands, to show that they were
incorruptible. Upon this subject the great Apostle delivered a sentence which
ought to be held^ for an Oracle, and which cannot be deep enough engraven in
the spirit of Directours, we must not if it be possible, owe any thing unto any
one, but dilection according to God. How far from this purity are they, who
use their penitents as children amongst whom to stir up some honest emulation
in teaching them Chatechisme, they distribute Images, beads, and other little
gifts? Ah! no, it is not that cosses, meddalls, relics, and Reliquaries,
Rosaries, Tablets, hallowed lights, Coronets, or Images of certain holywoods
by the name of some great Saints; It is not I say, that all this is not good in
it self, and that the use thereof is not commendable. But who sees not how
Interest slides like a serpent under these beautiful flowers, whereof it does
impair, venomous as it is, both the freshnes, beauty, and grace? A
Lacedemonian one day smelling Spitnard, and recreated with the sweetness of that
odor, a curse light on them, said he, who sophisticate this perfume, and who
abuse it in their delights. O God, the blood of thy son which is a balm
powered out, and whose grace is dispersed, by virtue of the keys given unto the
Church, amongst these blessed things, is sometimes employed by interessed
Directours to serve as baits, to arrive unto pretentions of earth, which thy
spirit has not revealed unto them: when shall it be lord, that thou will with
whip in hand chase away these merchants from thy house, and the sellers of
pigeons, gifts of thy divine Spirit? How blame worthy are they who making
profession of guiding souls, and to think of nothing else, but the government
of their interior faculties, have more attention to acco^modate themselves
with their exterior facultyes? Rowers, who turn their backs to the place
where they tend, Physicians, who take in refusing: Turne^ sols, whose flower
tournes toward the sun, but the root into earth: Like to the raynbowe in
the heaven, wonder of the eyes, and the ornament of nature: Observe how it
carries the top of its arche ^oward heaven, whilst as a pumpe it suckes water
from the sea to bedewe the earth: Resembling the eagle who looteth her self in
the sky, at least to the sight of those that behold her soar, or when one
thinks that she looks steadfastly upon the sun, she has her eyes fixed on
the earth to espy there her preye on which she is wholly bent. I will not
explicate more clearly these conceits, which will be sufficiently known to
these Directours of what condition soever, to whom these are addressed. And I
rather desire to seem obscure then biting in these reprehensions although we
must never spare vices, nor treat them with a servile hand, were they under a
Myter, or under a Diadem.

CHAP. IV. The dis-interessed Directour shuns incombrances and affairs.
THe Directour truly Dis-interessed does good only to the poor, and
distributes gratis, to the most rich, the heavenly unction which he received
gratis; his liberty and his authority have no price; his virtue is his proper
recompense, or rather the service of God, which is his only part, his crown,
and his hire. Who offers him goods does him an injury, being rather disposed to
receive with joy a disgrace, and an affront then a benefitt; and an injury then
a commendation; so that he may gain JESUS CHRIST. Breefly he says from his
very heart, with the generous S. Teresa. God is my sole part, and my only good,
all that is not he, to me seems nothing. Fear not that he will entangle
himself in the spiders webs, the affairs of this world which men call,
according to the present time, encombrances. As these cobwebs hinder the
Economie of the bees, so the secular turmoiles disturbs that of grace; wherefore
the Apostle absolutely forbids him who is dedicated unto God, to meddle therein.
And if S. Ambrose that great light of the Church, raised from the tribunal of
judicature, to the Ecclesiastical throne, and as capable of affairs as any
man that lived in his time having atteined unto the Episcopal dignity, would
never give his advice touching marriages, war, and negotiations; to what
purpose shall a Directour as a busied Martha entangle himself in howsholde
affairs, in rents, in offices, in buying, and selling, intruding himself into
all these under the cloak of Charity; and oftentimes limeing there with, the
wings of his desires, as S. Augustine speaks, being hard to touch pitch
without defileing ones hands therewith? I do not say for all this that one may
not resolve consciences, when there happen doubtful cases, and which trouble
the repose of scrupulous souls. The sun passing over the mud, does not yet
infect his beams. I only speak of those who thrust themselves into the
temporal affairs of such as consult with them about their spiritual, called
by S. Paul, the subuerters of howses, and disturbers of families. They are
always making curious and improfitable inquiries after the goods, and
reuennues of a house, they desire to know what expe^ces is there made, what
frugality, what are the titles, the lordships, the possessions, what retinnue,
what table, what cheer, what humor, what alms are distributed, what company
one frequents, what are the inclinations, what designs, what pretentions, what
charges, what negotiations, what traffic, what offices, what benefice, and
what not? Moreover these interrogatories are made with so much cunning and
subtlety, as one cannot perceive them. He who has discovered all that is
pretended thinks he has said nothing. If the Master be more reserved, the
wife will have more tongue; if the father and mother say nothing, the children
will talk, if not, the servants or waiting maids; to conclude there is
nothing so hidden which these inquisitiue Masters discouuer not; nothing so
secret which they find not out; and as they chase with full sent, and without
change, with time, address, and patience; there is no game which comes not to
the point, nor hitts their poper Interest. Will you know the form of this
carracter, behold it in the words of S. Hierome writing to Pauline. Account
him whom you shall hear to speak often of the goods of the world, except of a
simple alms, which is rarely denied unto the necessitous, rather for a
ba^cker, or negotiatour, then a Monk? These are the proper terms of this
great Saint, one of the most Dis-interessed Directours that was in his time.
It is unto them, that one might apply these words of S. Paul in the Chap. 3. of
2. Epist. to the Thesalonians, we understand that there are certain amongst
you, that live without order unquiet, and who do nothing but curiously engage.
And he adds, we advertise those that be such, and exhort them in our lord
JESUS CHRIST, that they eat their bread working with silence. When a hawke
fetches her tournes over the bird which she intends to make her prey, to try
which way she may catch it, the falconers say that the hawke dares the
partridge, or any other foul. So these Directours which walk indirectly, by
compasses, and to speak according to scripture, in a circle, may be said to
dare the souls, and captiuate them both plume, and substance. I cannot but
infinitely commend the pure and sincere government of some Orders, wherein it is
forbidden, by rigourous constitutions, unto the Master of the Nouices, or to
any other Professed, to inquire of the Nouices, what goods they have in the
world, or to induce, or exhort them to leave them, unto the howses, where they
setl^ themselves, leaueing the same to their full and free disposition, and
unto that which the holy Ghost: shall dictate unto the^. The which declares a
great candor, and right intention, free from all pretention, and sordide
Interest. And though it be credible that he who gives his body, his soul, his
liberty, and his couduct, dureing his whole life, unto a community, will not
be unto it, a niggard of his goods, which howsoever he must leave, in making
his will, before his solemn profession, yet this Ordonance justifies the
proceedings of Orders, which never ought to be blamed though some particulars
give themselves liberty in the practice of their rules.

CHAP. V. He ought to be an Angel.
ONe may say unto me that I desire so great a purity of intention, in a
spiritual Directour of what condition soever, be it pastoral, be it
Cenobiticall, as an Angel were requisite to practice it, which I auowe to be
true, and that not only there would be required a^ Angel, but also if it were
possible, more then an Angel to undertake the direction of many souls, since
that every Angel Guardian has enough of that which is committed unto him.
Besides the best moddel which the Spiritual Directour can propose to himself
in this Angelical function, which he exercises on earth in Gods behalf, is
that of Angels. They have no other Interest, in the Custody of souls, then
that of the glory of God: for what can they pretend of us? They likewise who
are known unto us in the Scripture, declare, by their very names, their
actions, and their functions toward God. For Raphael signifies the medicine
of God, Gabriel the fortitude of God, and Michael, who is as God. In fine these
are the inflamed spirits of charity, who all serve God, and are sent to guide,
and guard these who are called to the inheritance of salvation to fill up the
ruins thereof, and the places which are become void by the fall of the Angels
Apostataes. They who have eaten of the root of the herb called Angelica,
have a sweet, and pleasing breath. O how good an arrival has he made that
has met with a Directour entirely dis-interessed: truly he is an Angel in
the form of man, or a man wholly Angelical, who only regards the souls, in
what body soever they are lodged, without considering whether the persons be
great or little, fair or foul, poor or rich* all his pretention being no
other then the service of God, in those souls. Excellent men, Angels of the
testament, Angels of good council, and able, as Raphael, to deliver us from
the perils of the world, and to raise us before God unto an eminent fortune,
When Tobie the father would have presented unto the Angel who conducted his
son, the moyitie of all the great goods, which came to him by the marriage of
Sara, he testified to them that his treasure was in heaven, and not in the land
of the dead, and that his invisible meat was to perform the will of God, who
sent him.

CHAP. VI. Who is the most dis-interessed Directour, the Pastor or the
Cenobite.
BUT it is no small question to know who comes nearest to the imitation of
this Angel, to wit, who is ordinarily more dis-interessed Directour, Pastor,
or Cenobite. For the admirable praises wherewith all the books of those men are
filled, touching the cenobiticall (which seems too base) bu^ Seraphycall,
Cherubicall, raise it so high in the Godlike state of perfection, that it even
passes our view: Not like smoke which vannisheth, the more it flies up, but
as the eagle takes her mount by the force of her wings above the clouds: I
know not whether the same be called, to walk upon the wings of the wind; or
otherwise to walk highly and admirablie, and to raise it self, above it self.
This is that which we o^ght to examine, without bitter zeal, if it be
possible, and without contention. If know that the Cenobites, are very
liberal, in reproaching unto Pastors the quality of mercenaryes, casting in
their teeth, that they labor not, but upon hope of hire and gain: And I have
been sometimes astonished, that S. Thomas in his thirteenth Opuse: and the two
following pressed with zeal for the defense of Cenobites, and answearing those
who in his time opposed the institutes of Mendicants, suffered himself to fall
into this reproache, he who all Angelical, testifies, amidest the heats of
disputes, a moderation and incomparable modesty. But if it be permitted to the
Scotists in matters very sublime, to contradict the opinions of this great
Saint, the honor, glory, and Oracle of the schools, it will be much more
tolerable in this subject which is no wise of faith, but rather of fact, then
of right, more narrowly to examine whether this reproache be lawful, or of
more base alloy. The which we shall perceive by diverse marks, whereof behold
the first. What seek the Pastors, whether Diocesans, or Curates, or simple
Priests subordinate to them? (This is that which is called the Order of the
Clergy) in the charge of souls? If you believe the words of precicipitation,
and rash judgments of some Cenobites (I say of some, well knowing, that there
are amongst them truly Saints, and whose words are no less reserved, then
their life exemplar) without doubt they seek nothing therein but honor, or
profitt. If I would cite the Authors who use this odious language, I should
cause whole Orders to blush, but the respect I bear unto the good, hinders me
from replying according to their temeritie to these temerarious Judges: I will
nevertheless speak the truth without regarding the appearence of persons, (a
vice which we have already blamed) but with all possible charity. Now before
the entrance into this slipperie passage, I had need to declare here, that I
do not compare the bad Pastors, that is, such as dishonor their ministeries
by their scandalous life, with the good Cenobites, for the weapons would not be
equal: Nether will I speak of unruly, or dis-ordered Cenobites, to wit, who
no ways observe their rules, but contrariwise violate, and break them almost
in every point, with the good and virtuous Pastors: for to turn the wrong
side of the meddall here, were foul play. There are in the one and the other,
both virtuous and vicious, true, and false brothers. We see but too many
Pastors, and Cenobites that live dis-orderly, who by their lapses, and actions
of bad example, resemble steeples which by their falling beat down the
Churches, whe^^of standing they were the ornament. He then, that stands on his
feet, let him take heed that he fall not. Let us leave there the bad, they
are Ethiopians, and Leopards, whose skin is hardly to be changed; let us not
labor at this Pumpe out of which there can come no clear water, nor good
odor out of this sink of the vessel of the Church. Let us imitate
Constantine who cast into the fire the memorialls which were presented unto
him, wherein were couched the licentious deportments of some Ecclesiastiques,
an^ as he was willing to cover them with his robe, let us behold them in
silence. For the subject which I handle this word is sufficient, that there are
but too many bad Pastors and unreformed Cenobites, who in the service which
they render to souls, seek nothing but their own interest; base and
mercenary spirits, for whom the storm of darkness is prepared, unless they take
a more excellent way, which is that, of a pure and dis-interessed charity* Let
us speak then only of those, who* both in the one and the other condition
perform their duty, or strive to do it, showing themselves as true servants
of God, in all patience, sweetness, austeritie of life in the word of truth, in
charity not feigned according to the doctrine of the Apostle. Let us see who
setts the best foot before in that service of the great Master, and of the
Prince of Pastors, Bishop of our souls JESUS CHRIST. For as there is gold of
diverse carracts, so are there diverse degrees of charity; and as in heaven
there is a disference of brightness amongst the stars, and different mansions
in the Heaven of Heavens, so are the degrees of charity different i^ souls.

CHAP. VII. Difference betwixt the Pastor and the mercenarie.
LET us then handle here the square, rule, or golden measure of charity, to
take the dimentions of the mystical Jerusalem* and let us say, that
Pastors, as well Diocesans, as subalternes, or Curats, are by state obliged to
expose their lives for the sheep committed to their charge. Let us concerning
this point give ear to the divine sentence which cannot be denied without
impiety, nor contradicted without blasphemy, there is no greater charity
then to give his life for his frinds. Let us add hereunto, the picture of the
true and good Pastor drawn out-of the chap. 10. of the Gospel of S. John.
The good Pastor gives his life for his sheep, which is to say, is obliged
to give it: But the mercenary, and he that is not Pastor; see you how he
distinguishes the mercenary from the Pastor* and how he makes it apparent
that the mercenary is not Pastor, and that he who is Pastor is not mercenary.
He adds, the mercenary is he to whom the sheep apperteine not. Note that he
who has no sheep of his own, and serves nevertheless the sheep, is not
Pastor, but a simple servant, and mercenary without flock: Let us follow the
text. He (that is the mercenary) sees the wolf coming, and flies, and the
wolf deuoures, and disperseth the sheep. Who is he that flies, whether he
who is obliged by state, and condition, and by divine law to an actual
residence, what storm soever happen, be it of plague, of war, of famine, of
persecution, of heresies, or other such like; or he that is not tied unto any
care, nor charge, and not having any obligation, may retire himself from these
afflicted places, his coutry, and the place of his abode, being wheresoever he
likes best; and who peradventure should think to tempte God in exposing*
himself rashly to hazard without any necessary obligation, according ^s it is
witten, who loves and seeks peril shall perish therein. Let us now put the
last finger to this Evangelical picture. The mercenary flies, says S. John,
and he gives the reason of his flight, because he is mercenary; and that the
safety of his sheep concerns him not, in respect he is not charged with them.
But the true Pastor who knows that this blood must be required at his hands,
and the salvation of the people committed to him becomes a part of his,
astonished with so many threats uttered by the Prophets, particularly Ezechiel
against the bad Pastors, who abandon their flocks in time of need awakeneth
his solicitude, and reviving his courage, exposes himself to labor, and
danger, inclining his heart unto all the iustifications of our lord, for the
retribution which he expects from him alone. Let us now observe with what air
they behave themselves in the guidance of souls, and in this hazardous
occupation where is given touth for touth, eye for eye, soul for soul, who
marched therein only by delegation, by mission of assistance, by extraordinary
commission as troops of releefes, and voluntaries: This last saying
sufficiently declares, that if they labor therein, it is but volu^tarily, and
as it is for pity, so truly is it some times pitifully. For as they govern
only such souls, as voluntarily, and of their own election without any
obligation, commit themselves to their conduct; so on their part have they the
choice in this great harvest, of what ears of corn they please; in this great
draught of fish which they like best, casting the rest into the water, to
send them back to their proper Pastors. In so much that as the people of the
world, do not make use of them, but in such manner, and as long as they
please; so do not they serve the persons of the world, but so long, and in
such sort as they think best. The place of their residence, or rather of
their continual pilgrimage, being that which is most conformable to their
liking, or to the Order of obedience: wandering stars, to use the phrase of an
Apostle, whose moveable influencies work not so strong impressions, for so
much as, they cast not their glimmerings, and sparklings, but by way of
passage, where as the Pole-starr always fixed, is the level whereby all
Mariners direct their nauigations.

CHAP. VIII. Of virtue exercised by sallies or by continuation.
How soever I deney not, but that some upon occasions of plague, of wars, of
heresies, mainly endeavor the service of both soul and bodies, and sometimes
more then the Pastors, who feel themselves daunted in these tempests: As it
often enough happens at sea, that a passenger dureing the storm will guide
the stern, or perform other offices wherein the Pilots are wanting, where
courage by the vehemence of apprehension is abated. But we do not here compare
virtuous persons, with the defectiues; we will speak only of the duty which
the truly virtuous perform in these occurrences; and when I say, duty, I
mean that of the charge, and obligation of the office. When the Cenobites
shall retire themselves under the lee, who can say unto them, why do you so?
Why fly you, why do you abandon the stern dureing the tempest, since that
their condition does no ways tie nor oblige them thereunto. But the Pastor
cannot without an ignominious and shamfull decay of his reputation, strike
sail, nor avoid the combat; and since there are certain sallies of courage,
and valiancy, nowise coming from true valor, which ought to proceed from a
mature judgment, from a settled deliberation, and from a temper of a constant,
and courageous mind in the place of danger. These impetuous passions, which
collar, and rage stir up in duells; these sallies which push-on so many
soldiers into battles and assaults, are seldom animated but by the brute of
the example of others, of the out cries of the multitude, of the clattering of
arms, of the sound of drumms, of fistles, and trumpets; of the thounder of
cannon, and musket shotts; such a one heated and headlong runns into it, who
would never have thrust himself forward in cold blood, and upon
consideration. Even Interests themselves, whether glorious or profitable, are
sometimes the principal motives of this valor. Virtue which consists in a
temperate mediocritie, has none of these sudden motions: Its fire is equal;
its light is like that of the sun, by sweet successiue rays, not like that
of stars, which produce not, or if one may so say, bring not forth theirs but
by sparklings. For example, who sees not that a continual sobriety, and
exactly observed, and a moderate fast according to the laws of the Church, is
more commendable, then those excesses of abstinences which some violently use,
though seldom enough, sometimes fasting two or three days together, eating
but once a day a little bread, and drinking only a little water, sometimes
absteyning out-of ceremony from all meat which had life; sometimes all
concocted nourishment, sometimes eating only when the stars appear, and when
these days are past, from whence they are drawn by force, as men use to do
from bad ways, nothing but discorders are to be seen in their diet, whether
for quality, or quantity; and was it not for this cause that God said by a
Prophet, that he liked not the abstinence of some Jews, because in the days
of their fasts, he found them filled with their proper wills? For the same
reason he rejected their Sabothes, and their feasts. God wills that every
plant produce fruit according to its kind, and in due seasons, and that its
leaves fall not away. I do not speak this any ways to diminish the value,
and luster of the great actions, and enterprises which sometimes Cenobites
perform, for the service of souls, and of the Church; be it in missions
amongst heretics, and infidells; be it to extend the faith, and to power it
out into the hearts of Barbarians, and Savages, to the farthest parts of the
earth, the which Hierom Platus most amply shows, in the 12. book of the
happiness of the Cenobiticall state. But I say that the continual, and
uninterrupted service of good, and vigilant Pastors, though of less noise, is
not of less fruit, since that to preserve their goods already acquired, is no
less virtue then to get new. The Comets, are more apparent then the stars,
yet no man dares to compare them, to the stars of heaven, no more then the
fires of the earth, to the elementary which is above the region of the air,
albeit the effects of the same which is with us, especially that of thunder
astonisheth us much more. And it was for that cause that the Precursour of the
Messiah, leading a Savage and retired life, from the commerce of men, was of
greater esteem amongst the Jews, then our Savior himself, whence they did
not accknowledge him, though he were daily in the midst of them. And if
besides this ordinary, and continual duty which the good Pastors render unto
their sheep, having always an eye upon their flocks, as heaven has his upon
the earth, because they must render an account unto God, of the souls to them
committed; and if they keep the fire of sacred dilection, perpetually lighted,
upon the Altar of their hearts, saying with the Apostle, and with the same
feeling, that they are burnt with the scandalized, infirm with the sick,
touched with grief for the afflicted, even willing to become Anathema for
their brethren; if, I say, unto this uninterrupted care in time of peace, and
of prosperity, they add the great effect of perfect charity, which is freely to
expose themselves to death, for the service and salvation of others, I know
not what thing, the most austere Cenobites might desire, or even practice of
more perfection.

CHAP. IX. That charity of obligation and Pastoral excels Cenobiticall
vows.
TO desire or to think only to compare the way of poverty, such as is
practiced in a community, be it founded, or mendicant, with the highest top of
Charity, Queen of virtues, to will, in hazarding ones life, by state, for the
good of souls, were to make himself, rediculous, rather then worthy of
answer. For concerning the two other vows, of Chastity, and obedience, no
man doubts but that Priests, as Priests, perform them more solemly, in regard
they are tied, and annexed unto the Sacrament of Order, then the Cenobites, as
simple Cenobites. And besides for that of poverty we have already declared how
much its advantage is balanced by the eminent qualities of the singular, and
secular poverty. Peradventure some will reply according to the new divinity
beyond sea (the last censure of the Prelates of the Gallicane Church, and the
Sorbon, sufficiently noteing that whereof I speak) that Cenobites serving
souls without obligation (which is true) and without Interest (which is the
thing in question) render more pure service then the Pastors, who are obliged
thereunto by office, by state, and by duty of justice; and that this purity
extremely exaltes their charity. But to retort this argument which seems
plausible, on the face of those that propose it, I say first, that though
charity be without controversy the greatest of all virtues, the scripture
declaring it in expres terms, such a case may nevertheless happen, that
Justice ought to be preferred before it for example, some one owes much, and he
is inspired to give great alms, is not the same man obliged to prefer
justice before Charity, and to pay his debtes, before he distributes his
liberalities to the poor, the very Order of Charity so requiring it? I say in
the second place, that this purity of Charity, as some take it, is rather an
impurity, or to speak more mildly, an imperfection in Charity; for being free
and voluntary without obligation, there is always some mingling of proper
will, which will endure no yoke nor tie, and which says, though most
secretly: I will not serve, or else in magnifying its tongue, says our lips
are our own, who is our Master? Who is he that has right to command us?
But behold the force of the reply, if it follow that the Cenobite has a more
pure Charity in serving souls then the Pastor, because he is not thereunto
obliged by duty, and Justice; it will follow that the Layck, and Secular,
living in chastity poverty, and obedience without any obligation of vow,
shall serve God more purely, and perfectly then the Cenobite with all his
vows, which being made, oblige him by duty and Justice, to render unto the God
of Jacob, the vows which the lips have distinctly pronounced, which were to
destroy the maxims of the who school, abuse the sainctity, and eminency of
vows, and of vowed cou^sells, and to turn topsie-turuy, this glorious and
sublime state of perfection, for which the Cenobites contend with as much
ardour as republiques for their liberty. For since they prefer themselves
before all Priests of the Clergy whether Canons, or the dignityes of
Cathedral, or Collegiall Churches, and before Priests subordinate unto the
Ordinary Prelates, and sometimes (since they are so pleased) before the
Ordinaries themselves, yea even (if they think good) before the Ordinary of
Ordinaryes; (for what bounds can a vanity have, covered with an apparent
humility, which extolls it self above all that is great and holy on earth, in
the sacred Principality which is called Hierarchy) and ground this preference
in this magnificall state of perfection, upon the servitude of their vows
which ties the^ to God, by a holy slavery, to be preferred before a Royalty:
ser^itude which they have even the courage to prefer in perfection before the
sacred character, and which eternity it self, will never take away from
Preisthood; that rendereth such as bear it, like marked slaves eternally
consecrated to the service of God and of his holy mysteries, eleuating in this
sort simple veiled nu^ns, and Lay brotheres that have no part in the Sacrament
of Order, nor in the Clergy, to a state of more eminent perfection, then that
of Priests, the Anointed and Prophets of our lord, his Lieutenants on earth:
they who have the keys of heaven, the word of reconciliation in their mouths,
who detayne every day, the son of Justice, on the altars, and at whose voice
God kimselfe becomes obedient in the most adorable Sacrament of the Eucharist:
And in that of penance ratifiing in heaven the sentences which they pronounce
here beneathe. If, say I, they ground this preeminency which they frame to
themselves, on their vows, which make that necessary, and of obligation of
Justice, which before was but voluntary; and which change Counsel into
commandment; why altering the battery, will they that Charity (the sun of
virtues, and in whose presence all other virtues, both divine, and humane have
no more light then the stars in the presence of the Planet that makes the
day,) be not so much the more excellent, as she is the more necessary, and that
she ought to be exercised by state, and obligation of Justice? Chastity,
before it be vowed, is but of counsel, he that will follow it, let him
follow it; who shall be without necessity, and master of his will, and in
power to embrace it, let him embrace it; since it is good for a man to be so,
and better to live in continency, then to engage himself in nuptial commerce:
It is notwithstanding but of Counsel says the Apostle fearing least some
might take his persuasions for a precept, and so to cast a snare into tender
and scrupulous consciences. But after it is promised unto God, one may not
violate his faith without acquiring his damnation. And who will say that a
Chastity vowed, and consecrated unto God, does not acquire by this vow and by
this consecration, an admirable advantage over that which is not practiced but
for a time, and which in expectation of the marriage, is free from
voluptuousnes, but not from the will of loosing its integrity in a lawful use?
The same may one say of that degree of charity which obliges Pastors by
office. They may refuse the Pastoral* state being offered them; but when they
have embraced it, and as long as their Pastoral solicitude lasts, it is not
in them to recant, no more then for a Cenobite his vows. And if the practice
of three virtues of their own nature simply morrall, which make the three
essential vows of the Cenobiticall life place such as have made profession
thereof, in the state of perfection, not those which practice them without
vow, though very perfectly; why shall we not say that the Pastors obliged by
state, and by duty, unto the highest degree of Charity, without which all
other virtues are nothing, no, not the giving of all that he has, in alms,
nor the Martyrdom of fire, says the Apostle: I say more, which alone without
the rest, is more worth then all the rest together, without it; although I
know that with it, all the other enter into a soul when this virtue is true
and accomplissed. Why, say I, shall not we auerre, that this virtue exercised
by duty, and obligation of Justice, is more excellent then when it is exercised
even in the same degree, but without any obligation, then that bond of the
proper will, which may without sin, as well withdraw it self from this good,
as to apply it self thereunto? And let no man allege here the holy
obedience, nor the Institute: For as nether the Order, nor the Superiors, of
any Cenobiticall Order, are any ways obliged unto the conduct of secular
souls, nor have any charge of them; so may they not give any mission, or
obedience, save by the sending, and subordination of Pastors, who are
principally charged and answearable for them. And besides we speak here of the
state, and of the Order either Hierarchicall, or Cenobiticall, not of
particulars who are e^gaged, in the one or in the other condition: And we say,
that the Pastoral Order is obliged by state so the highest degree of Charity,
which is to expose ones life for the sheep of JESUS CHRIST, the which is not
of precise, absolute, nor necessary duty in the Cenobiticall Order: this work
being obligation unto that, and of supererogation unto this.

CHAP. X. The touchstone of true Charity is the charge of souls.
BUT if you will see the touchstone to discern the good gold of true and
unfeigned Charity, behold it. Let us observe on what side, and in what Order
is the charge of souls: for it belongs unto the good Pastor to carry the
strayed, and infirm sheep on his shoulders, and to sweat under this weight,
in taking not only the burden of his neighbors, but his neighbor for a
burden. It is proper unto fathers and mothers to carry their children in their
arms, and on their bosom, as it is written of Benjamin the well-beloued of
Jacob, who reposed on the breast of his father. This tender and paternall
feeling caused S. Paul to say, my little children whom I trauelle withal,
until CHRIST JESUS be formed in you. Now it is most evident that the Pastors
alone are charged with souls, and lincke their salvation, with that of their
sheep: That wihch made S. Hierom to say, writing to a person unresolved
whether he should become a Monk, or remain in the Clergy; If thou will be a
monk, what do you in the Cities? The very name of monk, which is as much to
say, as solitary, does it not call thee to the desert? But if thou will be a
Clarke, to wit, Priest, or Pastor, live in such sort that in the salvation of
others, thou may manage thine own. There is nothing which the Cenobites, I
say, the most reformed, fly and fear so much as the charge of souls, and
nevertheless it seems that there is nothing which they seek, with so much
passion, as to govern, and guide them by their particular directions. Who goes
about, I will not say to hinder, delay, or contradict, but attentively to
observe them, touches them in the aple of the eye, prouokes, and irritates
them in such sort, as he presently goes for an heretic, or schismatic, or at
least for an ignorant dolt; this is to tickle them in places where they are
most sensible; this is to be blind in their Institute, and not to know the
Butt, and design of their Order, sent to sustain, uphold, establish, wants
but a little, that some say not in a reformed language, to reestablish the
Church of God, that without these supportiue Arches it would fall to ruin, and
desolation. Notwithstanding whilst they desire the direction of souls without
charge, leaving unto Pastors as the beasts of burden, the charge without
direction, who sees not that they suck, and draw the milk of sheep, that is
to say, of people, and after they have taken away the cream, they leave the
curds, and whaye, unto Pastors, like unto those children to whom honny is
given upon their bread, who having lickt up the honny, cast away the bread? Is
not this a pleasing policy to go about to have the profit, without charge,
and without obligation, and to leave the charge of the office, unto those who
have so scanty a share in the benefice, as we will presently show? what reason
permitts that he feed himself with the flesh of the flock, and cloak
himself with the wool, who takes not the care to feed it, nor to be
accomptable for the same? If the soul belost, immediately will they say we are
clear of his blood: a strange language, and like to the tone of him who said,
am I my brothers guardian: Is not this to immitate the grasshopper, which lives
of nothing but dew, in drinking the sweat of the browe of the workmen who
have taken the vinyeard to task at their perils, and fortunes, and who are
accomptable for the same unto the great Master. From thence proceed these
frequent contestations, between the Pastors, and the delegated Cenobites, as
happened betwixt the shepherds of Loath, and Abraham. The Cenobites embracing
all the Clericall functions without being so much as willing that they of the
Clergy should no more cast their eyes on the Cenobiticall conducte, then if it
were an Arc which one durst nether touch, nor behold; a man might say of
them, that they would imitate Partridges so desirous to become mothers as they
take the eggs one from the others: But here there is but one sort of
partridges, which accommodate themselves, with the eggs of others. For that the
Pastors of the Clergy should guide the Cenobiticall soul is that which is
not seen, and that which is not tolerable, and that which some would call
overthrowing of all Order, and of all policy: For they have not the spirit of
the institute, nether do they know all the little secrets which the world is
not worthy of. But that the Cenobites govern guide, direct Dioceses by
Episcopal authority, when they are raised thereunto, and secular souls by
thousands, be it by preaching, be it by penance, be it by administration of
Sacraments, particular visits, and conferences, that brings but ornament, and
comfort to the policy, of the Church, and to the Hierarchy. Besides the
partriges which have as it were disclosed the eggs of others, nourish these
little ones, as if they had laid them themselves. But the question is, to know
whether they who are so eager in Directions of the souls which are not of
their fold, are willing to feed them, or to be fedd by them, as also to
charge themselves with them, or to be answearable before God for the same; or
rather to serve them by way of spiritual enterteynment, and only of passage,
or to draw from them some temporal releife. Of which though we have strong
conjectures, yet nevertheless God alone ought to be judge who knows the secrets
of hearts, alone penetrates the interiours, and discernes intentions.

CHAP. XI. That Maintenance is due unto Pastors by Justice, unto Cenobites
only by favor.
IF it be so that upon this subject some Cenobites make not their mouth so
little when there is question to speak of Pastors, but that they will say
very openly, and without using a parifrase, that they serve not souls, but for
hire, and attend not their offices, but for the profit w.ch they receive of
their benefice. One might avoid them as with a buckler, with this verity of
God, Judge not, and you shall not be judged. Who are you that judge your
brother, and the servant of God, it belongs to his master to know whether he
be standing or fallen: It is equally forbidden unto him who fasts, to despise
him that eats, as unto him who eats to mock at the faster; who has made us
Judges in a Tribunal where God alone sees clearly, since he has reserved unto
himself the scrutanie of thoughts. But I rest not there, I will that this
reproach be verified in some persons (for it cannot be universally, the Church
having by the grace of God, some Pastors, so little addicted to the profit of
their charges, that they give unto the necessitous, more then they receive of
their benefices) what sinister consequence might one draw from thence, would
it be that this salerie were unjust even when it should be exacted? Certes the
same would manifestly contradict the doctrine of the Apostle, all divinity and
all Justice, which wills that every good work have its reward. For if there
be a spiritual marriage (as no man doubts) between the Pastor and his
Church, to wit, the assembly of the faithful to him committed, there ought to
be reciprocal obligation of some duties, and that the Pastor feeding his
sheep with words and examples, and giving them spiritual food by the science
of the voice, should draw from them his temporal maintenance, by a duty, and
obligation of Justice, on their parts toward him. It is not the same with
Cenobites, who not being tied by obligation of justice, to any flock; so by
obligation of justice nothing is due unto them, from the people: And if they
render their service unto souls voluntarily, and not by duty nor charge, they
may thereby receive comfort in their temporal necessities; but without an
obligation, which has any form of debte. Their rights (if they have any) are
but of Charity; those of Pastors, of justice, whereof to defraude them is a
sin, and a great burden of conscience, the which one cannot say of that
which is exacted by the others. This is not that they ought to murmur at the
benefitts which the faithful bestow upon those who aid and help them in the
administration of their charges, if they will not hear this rude, but just
dismission, take that which is yours, and carry it away, why grumble you?
because I am good, what wrong do I to you, for the fatt of an other? is his
advancement your ruin? Cardinal Bella^mine, whose authority in all things,
and principally in this, cannot be suspected by any Cenobite, in chap. 42. lib.
3. de Monach: citing the first Clementine tit. de Decimis, acknowledges the
power of demanding maintenance of the people, belongs only to Pastors, and
not to Cenobites, otherwise these should have right to gather the tithes, which
is contrary to the Cleme^tine alleged, which does not attribute them, but to
Pastors, whereupon this great Cardinal concludes, that the Cenobites cannot of
justice exact any thing of the people, but only to demand through charity,
that which is necessary for their liulihood, as outof charity, not out of
justice, no^ by obligation they preach, and administer the Sacraments. This
being so, who perceiues not, not only the nullitie, but the impertinency of
the reproach made unto Pastors, that they perform not their functions, but
for the profitt which they reap thereby, since that this recompense follows
their charge by duty of justice, as an inseparable shaddowe of the body which
it always accompanies? But there is yet an other more sinister and more
odious sense in this accusation, the weakness whereof we now come to examine,
which is, that some would thereby give to understand, that since Pastors
performing not their functions but for profit (which is false, good Pastors
having no such base tentation, but more noble thoughts, seeking things above*
and not those of the earth, in the service of souls) the troops of relief,
are despoiled of all Interest, ask not any thing, render all their services
for nothing, are not burdensome to any, and to speak with the Scripture,
fight, at their own cost, and serve souls at their own charges. This is the
great conclusion that they would draw from this reproache, so boldly (not to
use. any sharper phrase) advanced, so poorly proved, so rashly maintained, so
odiously repeated, and so easy to be cast back upon the face of its Authors.

CHAP. XII. A demonstration of the reuennues of Pastors and Cenobites.
BUT not to give cause of offense to any according to the remo^stra^ce of the
Apostle let us rest satisfied in representing simply, and such as it is, the
temporal Interest, which accrewes unto Pastors by service of souls, and that
which the Cenobites gather thereby, as well founded, as Mendicants; And by this
demonstration which I will make, no less evident then if it were
Mathematical, it shall appear who are the most Interessed Directours, Let us
compare the revenues of the Pastoral state, with those of the Cenobiticall,
and we shall discover who they are that suck the milk of the people. Let us
behold first the fine husbandry which the Cenobites have used, as well in the
contry as City, and then we will consider, that of Mendicants both in Cities
and Contry: and from theme we shall judge who are they who have had more care
of the affairs of the earth; Pastors, or Cenobites. And because it would be
an endless inquiry, and without bound, to run over the universal Church,
and the particular Dioceses, I will contain my self, in the part of the
solicitude, which the divine providence has been pleased I should have; and
within the narowe compase of the little fold, which was committed so my
government: By this pawe, you will know the Lion, by this scantling the whole
piece, as Israel by the greatness of some fruits judged of the fertility of the
land of promise. I know, that there are things incomparably greater, and
wherein consequently, the inequality which I go about to show, is much more
extreme; and I likewise know, that the recital thereof, would breed horror,
and the very thought of it strikes me with an extraordinary compassion: But not
to go far to seek what is at my ga^e, I will content my self with sheafes
of my own growing. This little Diocese then, consisting of near about four
score parishes, there are not three of the^, whose reuennue is worth fourscore
crowns: There are many which yield not twenty, or five and twenty crowns a
year for the maintenance of the Curate; for the greatest part, they are
reduced to a miserable portion, (which I am ashamed to call congruous, since
there is so much incong^uitie in it) of forty crowns; such is the tax which
the secular Justice seteth for the food and clothing of a Curate, and his
Clarke, for I do believe that is intended that he should not say alone. The
Diocesan Pastor has no^ much more then an bundred crowns a monthe for his
enterteynment. Behold in a few lines, how all the means of the Pastors of
this Diocese, wherein I have been placed as sentinel. I omit to say that
there are more then five and twenty, or thirty Curates which having no more
means, have double charge, to wit -- two parochial Churches to serve, and
without any Vicar: and in two such places, where the earth is not seen
vncouerd with snow, but six months in the year; and where the learned, and
eloquent Panigarole said, having passed the Alps, that he would not dwell
there so much as in picture. Their sufferances cannot be expressed, nor conceived
but by experience, no more the^ the rigours of the winter, which reign there
almost allwaies and which cause the rocks to split; the y^e, the hoarie
mistes, the continual snowes, the horror of the solitude, the company of
bears, the precipices at all times. Let us now be hold in what sort the
Cenobites, are there accommodated. Besides the body of Canons of the Cathedral
Church which was regular, and secularised (as they term it) about fifty
years since, there are but two howses of men Cenobite^ founded, and one of
women, of ancient foundation, there are two, of women, which we have
introduced into the City, that by little, and little, establish themselves, and
gather together some reuenneus for their living. There are besides these, six
Priories of the Order of S. Benedict, which are called simple, because they may
be held for Commendataires which have only the tonsure of Clerks, which is
not an Order, but only a disposition; of whom I have seen but one residing in
his benefice. As for the Mendicants, there are two howses as well in the City,
as in an other little Town, which are of ancient election, and one of
reformed, which we have established in the Cathedral City. But not to extend
this catalogue further, and to come to the point, behold the division of the
goods of the Diocese; I say of tithes, and of all else, there are thirty, or
five and thirty founded Cenobites, of whom there is not so much as one, that
preaches, nor administer Sacraments, nor renders any service to souls, unless
it be by his prayers; which enjoy 9. parts themselves, without care, without
charge, without labor, the tenth whereof, which closes up the total remainder
for the portion, as well of the Diocesan Pastor, as of all the Curats who
bear all the burden of the heat, and of the day, and being charged with
souls, perform all the services, and all the Functions necessary for the
maintenance of Piety, and Religion in the people. Behold a part of the good
husbandry which the founded Cenobites have used in the Contry upon the goods of
the Church: being eue^ become masters of Cures by the Patronages, and
presentations, the Carats, of whom they are Patrons, and Nominatours, being
their perpetual Vicares, and calling themselves, for honors sake, wanting
nevertheless the charge of souls, Primitive Curates, and the Diocesan Pastors,
Collatours ordinary: though in four Months of the year (his Holiness having
eight) not able to conferr with full right, which is so say, so denominate
unto fifteen Cures by conferring them. You think that this is all; hear
other news: Three or sour Abbays of the neighboring Diocesses take the
tithes, and have Patronage in many Cures: Two Abbesses, the one within the
Diocese, the other without, near upon two days journeys distant, have ^ight
to take tithes, and to present Curates to many Cures, (imagine how they can
judge of the capacity of the presented) and it was never in my power, (what
diligence soever I used) to discover how it happened that women whose
profession is of Closure, were come so far, as to get Tithes, and Patronages
in a Diocese, which was then under the dominion of a stranger Prince of
France. There is no simple Priorie which has not the Patronage, and the Tithes
of five or six Cures which become ruyned therewith: Briefly, it is so
lamentable a spoil, as there is ^carce a Pastor who has bread, whilst the
rest that do nothing for the service of souls, (and would to God that many
did nothing worse) are in abundance, and as fatt kine, feed themselves upon
the mountains of Samaria. Is this all? Not the half. For think you that the
Mendicants live of nothing? I have often visited such a parish, where I was
assured that in the harvest, they had almost gathered as much by holy
Charity, as the others by the Justice of tithes. Is this all? Nothing Less;
there is not a month which yields not unto those who trott up and down the
contry, and hills, a special co^tribution; of wool, of butter, of wood, of
cheese, of oils, of fruits, of flesh, of wines, and what not? Is this all?
There is not a day in the year that by their questors, they are not at the
gates of howses in towns; and by the visitts of their Directours in the halls
and chambers, as well to see the sound as the sick, as to converse with
souls. In sum, I make account that the Mendican arm has no less hold, in
this little Diocese then the founded (in others I know that it is much greater)
and nevertheless, i^ furnishes but two Preachers, and four Confessors* whose
sufficiency God knows: Yet has it this advantage over the other, which has
not one only laborour. Amongst the Curates I will speak here to Gods glory,
whose grace has made them such, I have not met with very ill livers; none
rebellious, disobedient, or unruly; all catechize, many exhort sufficiently
enough; some have well e^ough studied in divinity; there be some who have read
Philosophy, and preached many whole lents, as well in the Cathedral, as in
diverse towns of the kingdom, even honored with the Court of Parliament, and
have given content to their Auditors, and after all this without presumption,
and without complainte, serve alone two Parishes, some of them being distant a
great league the one from the other, in such Savage mountains, as they cause
horror to behold them; and content themselves with forty crowns a
convenient portion to pass over the year sweetly, and cheerfully, amiddest
all these toils employed in the service of God, and of souls, without
complaining of their poverty, without thinking of the state of perfection,
without publishing their pains, their fasts, their sufferances, without
magnifying themselves, or without causing others to thunder out their good
works; to conclude without sounding the trumpett, and without using so many
gestures, to seem great Saints, as also to live by this reputation.

CHAP. XIII. The deplorable condition of a certain Pastor.
But let us not go out of the precincts of our little city. There are both of
the chapter, and in howses of community, three score and fifteen Cenobites,
besides the howses of nunns. Now all this is exempt by privileges from the
authority of the Diocesan Pastor; there is but one parish depe^ding of the
Chapter, which has but one perpetual Vicar; the chapter being primitive,
Curate, Patron, and receauer of all the tithes; this Vicar is assisted only by
one Priest, who aids him, in quality of a subuicar, they, have in charge of
the fowls of the whole town, of three neighboring villages, and of a large
parish annexed to that of the Town which is dista^t a good league. Of two
howses of men Cenobites, they are aided but with four Confessors, there are
but two that preach, whereof one is not for the Town, but only for the
country, and most commonly out-of the Dioceses. Behold all the assistance
which they receive from the three score and fifteen Cenobites. There are at
the gates of the city, two founded howses of Cenobites, the one of men, the
other of women, whose reuennue joined to that of the Chapter, amountes to two
thousand five hundred pounds sterling in rent. I reckon not the Mendicants, who
alone know what they draw from the people: For their begging comes not into
account, though by their number, and by the great buildings which they erect
every one does, and which the the founded dare not to have a thought of
enterprizing, one may judge that they do not live, nor build of nothing, much
less of the labor of their hands. Nether do I speak of two Monasteries of
women, which we have established in the town near fifty in number, for
these are chargeable to no body, every one living of the dowry which she
brought, and so by little and little they founded themselves. Behold the number,
and the reuennues of Cenobites, of the troops of releife, of delegates, of the
priuileged, of exempts. Let us now see the division of those younger brothers,
and of Pastors, who will they, nill they, are their elders; and let us behold
in what sort these are suppla^ted, and how the greater serve the lesser. These
eminent people of two great parishes, of a city, and of four villages, have
but one vicar, and his clarke to serve him, and who has charge of souls, but
what means have these two Priests, the one Pastor, the other his compagnion?
Who will believe me; but rather, who will not believe me after 24. years
experience? They have not five pounds a piece to spend yearly in food, and
clothing. They have not a deneer of all the offerings that are made in the
Church; the chapter receiving all, and the ^astour (whose table is mine, having
kept him about me many years, in quality of a Priest of honor, and
compagnion, assisting me every day at the Altar) assured me, that at the end of
the year, that which was given him for the administration of the five
Sacraments, which the Curates dispense, did not amount to two crowns. Hereby
judge what the liberalities may be in villages. Now compare 75. Cenobites
without any charge of souls, with two poor Priest charged with the souls of
two parishes in an Episcopal City, and of four neighboring villages;
compare two thousand, or five and twenty hundred pounds sterling yearly that
they get by one means or other, to wit, by rents, or by begging, with twenty
pounds a year, and then judge who are more Interessed, or Dis-interessed, the
less mercenaries, or hirelings. Consider whether they, who are in plenty, and
in repose in sight of the eye without solicitude, says the Apostle, which
accompanies such as are charged with souls, have cause to complain of their
poverty, of frozen charity, of the ingratiutde of the world; and whether
these poor Pastors who as sheep hold their peace whilst they are shorn,
or rather whilst they are fleade, and eaten, who exclaim not, Who want a
voice to complain, who grumble not, who suffer without groans, and without
uttering a word, who plead not, who give the cassake after the cloak, the
doublet after the cassak, stripped even to the shirte, naked as Jacob upon a
dunghill; ill clothed, worse fed, exposed to cold, to heat, to hunger, to
labor, in all times, in every place, at all hours, without cesse, always
bent, always watching, always employed, ready to go upon the least word, at
the least sound of the bell, fastened, subject, tied, submitted to every
creature, servants of all for JESUS CHRIST; anguished, miserable, afflicted;
besides despised, and as it were trampled under foot, without being respected
of any, but contrariwise contemned, disdained, as the refuse and filth of the
world. By whom? by their own subjects, by those unto whom they administer the
holy things; whom they feed with sound doctrine, and good example: By whom?
by those who owe unto them double honnour, and of whom they may say, I have
nourished Children, and behold they have despised me.

CHAP. XIV. A sigh upon this misery.
O Poore-Pastours, may it be permitted to sigh upon your misery? and to say
unto God, in the terms of the lamentable Prophet, Lord, remember what is
happened unto them, behold, and consider their reproach: Their heritage (their
holy tithes) is passed away to strangers (to those who have nether care nor
charge of souls) their howses, their honors, and their goods are in the hands
of those who be not of the H^erarchie, they are made like Orfans, without
father, and their Churches the mother of people, are become widows; they
drink their proper water for monney, they buy at a price their own wood;
they are pressed, oppressed, surcharged; and they have no repose, nor
relaxation in their wearines: yet if it were permitted them to hold out their
hand to their proper sheep, and to demand of them bread: But whilst it is
permitted unto others, to demand it without obligation of doing any thing,
unless they please, without solicitude, and without charge: Pastors are
commanded to have the charge and the care, and forbidden to demand alms:
This which is a glory, and a commodity unto other Priests who are not of the
holy Cl^rgie, tournes to their reproach, and is imputed unto them, as a shame,
for a reason unknown unto us, and rather of flesh and blood, then of the
spirit. I speak Lord of the good, and who serve thee in simplicity, and
sincerity of heart, walking before thee in all the perfection which possible
they can: It may be that their Fathers, or their Ancestors have Sinned, and
are no more, and now these bear the punishment of their iniquities. They who
heretofore were their servant, and their aids, and who said that they came
to their succor, have taken dominion over them, and no man thinks of redeeming
them from so hard a hand. The masters of the works of the king of Egypt,
were never more rude unto Israel when they took from them the straw, and
forbore not to demand of them as many bricks. These have the same charges as
their Predecessors, and not their tithes, nor reuennues: People of an other
world have entered upon their goods only leaving them a small part, they give
them but a miserable portion, showing themselves almost as rigourous as the
master of the Prodigiall in the Gospel; and for an increase of reproach unto
Pastors of sheep as they are, and so called by thy mouth, O Lord, they are
so bold as make them of the condition of this Prodigal. Behold o great God,
and consider how they are vilified, by those who are their inferiors in
dignity, who have made vintage of their goods, and who have brought under
tribute, those who were hertofore the Princes of peoples and Provinces. The
Ramms, heads of flocks, find no^ pasture for themselves, but the droanes, and
the Caterpillars, have devoured all. The Priests and the Auntients are consumed
in the City, and have demanded meat, to revive their souls, and sustain
their life. The most noble children of Sion, the Pastors covered with the
prime, and the most pure gold of charity, since they are obliged by their
state, to give their lives for their sheep, have been reputed lost vessels,
for sheards of broken potts, for persons of earth and dirt. These stones of the
Sanctuary are dispersed through the heads of the streets, and the merket
places, and how comes it to pass, but since the Fairies, and the Sirens have
discovered their breasts, and have given suck to their young ones? Since that
the daughter of the people, daughter whom the people nourishes, remains in
the desert of her retirement, in the cave of her enclosure, as cruel as an
Ostridge which deuoures, and digests all; which turns all into her substance,
and finds nothing too hard, nor too hott. To what e^d Lord do they put their
mouth into the dust, to try whether in this extreme humiliation, they may
meet with some root of hope, and some appearance of recovery, and to expect in
silence thy salvation: since that they themselves, who have dispoyled them,
laugh at their miseries, and say that their gold is obscured, and their fair
color changed, and grown pale: And that with good right they who lived
heretofore in delights, and were clothed with scharlet, are stretched out on
the dunghill as mortified, and not dead, as possessing all, and having nothing.
O mockers how much more justly might one cast back your darts of laughter upon
your selves, and say, that appearing dead to the world, by this death which is
called civil, scarcly are you well mortified, and making show of having
nothing by your poverty, rather in show then effect, you have all, you suck
all, you attract all. And I pray you after this fair division of the lion,
where all is on one side, and nothing on the other, as we have made to appear,
after that the rented Cenobites have drawn unto their Communities, and tied to
their howses, all the tithes of Pastors, and almost all the Patronages of
parishes, making them their children, and servants, who were heretofore their
Fathers, and Masters. Does it well become them in your opinion, to call
themselves the poor Euangelicks, to say that the Pastors, are proprietaries,
and possessours of their own will; that thy do nothing but for profit, and
diverse other reproaches which I will not relate, and which are no less unjust
then misbeseeming, and odious, in mouths so sweet and sugared, as seem to
breath forth nothing but words of milk, and honnie, and so sacred, that they
pass all for Oracles of verity, and for terms of humility, and of charity.
Certes if the Church did speak so dis-aduantagiously of Pastors, that were
more tolerable: for the works of an adversary to true piety, are so many
flowers, and crowns; but as those bees which make honny stinge most, so the
strokes given by the hand of a supposed frinde, wound more, and carry a blow
so much the more strong, as the less foreseen. This is that which causes so
strange an imprecation, and which I should not dare to repeat with David,
against that man who secretly persecuted him, though he had lived peaceably
with him, and in all familiarity, even often to eat together, and to walk as
compagnions in the ways of God. We will take good heed of making the like,
but we will only desire more moderation of speech from them, who sounded, have
to their reuennues drawn all those of Pastors; or who having no foundations,
are every day at their gates, or at those of their sheep, for to cloth
themselves with the substance of the sheep, whereof they have none, and
whereof they fly the charge, so excessiuely delicate is their charity, and
their conscience tender, because they know that the same is of great burden,
and that this weight is dreadful even upon the very shoulders of an Angel,
which is admirable in those who make profession, not only of an anglicall, but
of a Seraphicall life. Besides if they were content to have risled the Pastors
of the Patronages, and Tithes, which they have drawn from them, and to have
ceased, by their beggings, from depriving them of the just succors which they
might expect of their sheep. If they were satisfied in dividing amongst
themselves, the spoils of the conquered, without making so bad use of their
victory, as to give to understand the contrary of that which is, placing
darkness in the place of light, and calling those rich, and Interessed in the
service of souls, whom they have reduced to extreamitie of misery, at least in
the Contry; and publishing themselves poor, to finish the utter ruin of the
Pastors of Towns, and to reduce them to the poverty of their compagnions:
One would only compare them to that Savage Animal which I will not name, and
whereof the Prophet speaks, which kicks at its mother as son as she has
given it suck. But when by secret devices they pass from the contempt of
Ministers, to that of the ministry, and auert the people from the asse^blies
of their parishes, and foment the distaste which they may have of the ancient
policy of the Hierarchy, to runn after the novelties of Institutes, and of
Delegats which every day produce new swarms, and new Colonies under the
specious cloak of the glory of God, which couers all the designs of
particular Interest; this is that which gives a just cause unto Pastors to
dislike this proceeding, which undermines the foundations of the Hierarchicall
state, and brings to ruin, that which JESUS CHRIST has established, and
edified, ordaining that his Church should be governed by Pastors, obliged and
tied to the care, and feeding of souls, not by delegates who have no charge of
them, who perform therein but what they please, in what manner they please, as
long as they please, and so much as to them is aduantagious, and honorable. So
that now as well as ever, one may know the truth of this ancient Apothegme.
That which CHRIST takes not ( quod non capit Christus) he means the tithes,
the Fisque, to wit, the Tallage carries it away ( Rapit Fiscus) but he should
have added, that the Quest takes up the rest of the glenage ( Carpit Questus)
It is true that the Cenobites of ^untient foundation, and who have made up
their hand, make much less noise then the new, like unto the bees which fly
not during the winter, being content to live in peace, and shut up, of the
honny which they gathered in the summer. But the new ones, as well the founded,
as living of mendicity, are they, who are in part the cause of this
coffeehouse of Pastors, who menace the Gallican Church with a very
dangerous scisme, if God by the hand of the two sovereign powers, spiritual
and temporal, take not order therein in good time, according to the particular
care which his paternall Providence has always had of this Monarchy.

CHAP. XV. Of Foundation-hunters.
FOr besides that the Mendica^ts called reformed, are always bent to extend
their Orders, by new howses; they who ought to live of foundation, and not of
begging, are nok less eager to people, and dilate themselves, which they
cannot do without may difficulties, and according to the form of their
government. For in lieu of receiving only those amongst them (as the women
do in their new monasteries) who should bring their maintenance with them,
founding themselves in this sort by little and little, without disaccommoding
any; they receive indifferently such as bring, or bring not, imagining that it
will be as easy for them in demanding boldy, to obtain foundations, as for
the Mendicants to get from day to day Alms, for their ordinary living. What
happens thereby? besides the trouble, some importunities, which cause much
murmuring, that frustrated of their expectations indiscreetly conceived, they
move heaven, and earth, to draw themselves out of the ditch of necessity,
which they themselves have dug, And seeking to establish and found
themselves, at what price soever, they leave nothing unattempted. The dying
flies, says the wiseman, spoil the sweetness of the perfume, he means, that
when the flies do but lightly play up and down over the balm, or some other
odoriferous liquour, it receaues but little hurt: But when they are taken, and
putrify therein, that changes the purity of the odor. Yet the passing alms
which the mendicants gather are supportable according to the capacity of the
places where they establish themselves: But for those who would found
themselves without bringing any thing to the community, and without doing any
thing, nether with their hands, nor their husbandry, but only in begging
abroad with courage and boldness (not to use ruder terms) it is necessary that
they take their aim very high, and behold a farreof, entire inheritances,
deceauing the right or collateral Heirs, who seeing themselves deprived of
their expectations, by mystical practices more temporal then spiritual, fill
the Air which complaints, the bars with suites, and the world with garboills.
To speak the truth, if we were yet in the time of the Churches infancy, when
the faithful brought all their goods without reservation, to the feet of the
Apostles, these good personages who call themselves our successors of the
Apostles, but not leading an Apostolical life, would quickly compase their
pretentions; but be it that they have not altogether, so much virtue as the
Apostles, be i^ that the world which know not JESUS CHRIST, nor has eyes good
enough to peceaue their perfections; where fore it being not so fervent to do
them good, as in those primative times, we must not wonder if amongst so many
new institutes, there be some that have so ill a share, and consequently
complain of cooled Charity. Amongst many new coins there is always some
one, which being worst accepted of, does not pass so current as the rest.
Rebuke, says David, the wild beast of the Reed of the desert, which is
beaten with every wind, and the congregation of Bulls with the cowes of the
people, and exclude those who are tried by silver. I leave the explication, and
application of this passage unto him who will; as likewise this other of Esau,
the deluge of cammells shall cover thee; and that of the Dromidaries, of
Madian, and of Epha, liking better for my part to seem obscure then subtle in
an allusiue sense. It suffices me to have shown in general that the Pastors
who alone bear the burden, and the charge of souls, reap not thereby so much
profit, and consequently, are not so much interessed in their direction, as
they who by an admirable limbecke, knew how to extract pure of pure, and to
reserve to themselves the government of such as they please, and in such sort as
they please, and so long as they please, without making themselves answerable
either before the Pastors of the earth, or before the Prince of Pastors who is
in heaven, and to draw from thence utility without any solicitude.

CHAP. XVI. The free service of Cenobites.
IF we should descend to particulars, it would be easy for us to show that if
the Pastors, and the Priests subordinate to them in parishes, receive some
farthings and some pence, given out of a pure and liberal acknowledgment, by
those unto whom they administer some Sacraments; (which is according both to
laws, and good manners.) the Mendicant Cenobites afford not their service for
nothing, but have their enterteynment of the people, who do not principally
give them temporal goods, but first in consideration of God, who recommends
mercy, more them Sacrifice, and next of the spiritual assistances which they
obtain thereby. They who imploye them in the pulpitts of Parishes, are not
ignorant that the not reformed, have hands as well as the particular Priests,
and that the Communities of the reformed, know well how to receive that which
is presented them, in consideration of the particulars of their body, who have
performed this office; so that nether the one, nor the other return thence
empty: No not even they, who being well founded, should have more reason to
practice the doctrine of the Apostle, who wills, that such as have wherewith
to feed and cloathe them, should distribute freely the spiritual graces,
which they have freely received by imposition of hands. And if in the
Confessionaries, they seem to testify more gratuity, we entreat them to
consider, that at the same time they administer the Sacrament of reconciliation
unto a very few souls which by inclination, and voluntatily put themselves
under their Conduct, or which themselves have drawn; their brother servants,
are at men's gates in the City, or in the Contry, demanding indifferently at
euety doare, and receiving releife from many howses whereunto they render no
service at all. There is more, which is, the Diocessan Pastors, and much more
the Parochialls, are restreyned within certain bounds, where their power,
their abode, their reuennue, their charge, and their jurisdiction are limited:
But the Cenobites go indifferently through all parishes, Diocesses, Provinces,
and kingdoms demanding their necessities, and receiving them of the faithful
without obligation of any duties, by the state, and condition of their life,
then such as they are pleased to render them. For to say that the Institute of
some obliges them to serve souls, it is to presuppose that which is not, to
wit, that there should he some Cenobiticall Institute which were charged with
souls: The which would directly shake the whole Hierarchy, and the maine
policy of the Church, which only attributes the charge of souls unto
Pastors by office. And this would be to take a trote too high, a wide mark,
and to aim amiss, in daring to say with the Apostle extraordinary sent for
the conversion of nations: My daily in stance is the solicitude of all the
Churches. For who has establissed them over the Ordinary Pastors, thus to
run every where, and to intrude themselves into the administration of their
functions? If they allege their privileges granted by the holy sea, and from
that rock whence Pastors are drawn out, and where unto they have relation,
as unto the Center of the unity of the Church: Let them read them well and
they will not find, that the Vicar general of JESUS CHRIST, the successor of
S. Peter, has ever intended any thing to the prejudice of ordinary Pastors,
who called by God unto part of the solicitude, not unto the fullnes of power;
fullnes of power which only the sovereign Bishop has received from God, not
for destruction, but for edification, and on condition to govern the Church by
ordinary Pastors, as S. Paul says in Chap. 20. of the Acts of the Apostles,
preaching to those of Ephesus; Take heed to your selves* and to the whole
flock over which the holy Ghost has placed you Bishops to rule the Church of
God, which he has purchased with his blood. I will forbear to couch here the
words following in this passage, for fear least some perverse spirit should
conceive that I would make an odious application.

THE SIXTH PART.
CHAP. I. Spiritual Hunters and Fishers.
IF that some Cenobites well founded, apply themselves freely to the conduct
of souls, therein certes are they very commendable; as likewise some Pastors,
who having an honest and sufficient maintenance, labor in like sort. But if
the Cenobites, who by their institute have right to live of foundation, though
not yet founded, take in their direction some kind of gratuitie; it concerns
them, well to purify their intentions: For having not only a purpose, but
also need, and necessity to build, to found, and establish themselves, it is
very hard that humane respects, do not come cross in the way; and that the
desire of accommodating themselves, make them not to take hold of occasions,
which may present themselves in the direction of souls: And behold the rock
under w.ch the Eele is hidd, and the stone of edification in appearance, changed
into the stone of offense in effect. For when they pearce into an heritage,
when they will acquire a founder, a foundatrice, gain the favors of a
benefactour, of a benefactrice, there are not so many sleights in the art of
hunting, which pursues the savage beasts, and birds; nor in that of fishing, as
they practice, who of fishers of men and souls, become fishers of goods, of
foundations, and of heritages, unto whom this saying of Jeremy may be applied:
Behold I will send many fishers (says our Lord) who shall fish them, and
after that I will send them many hunters, that shall hu^t and chase them, from
every montaine, from every little hill, and from all the caves of rocks. So
easy it is for spiritual men who judge others, and are not judged by any, to
bring, or if you like better, to lead sensual men, and little versed in
spiritual and mystical subtilties, whither they will. This is that whereof a
penitent ought to be heedfull, who has the simplicity of a dove joined with
the prudence of the serpent, and to be circumspect in resorting, according to
his choice, unto places free from rocks of Interests, and the snares of hunte^s.

CHAP. II. Of the choice of a Directour.
I Am not ignorant that a Judicious man ought always for his conduct, to
address himself unto the best Directour, and chiefly unto the most
Dis-interessed, as also unto him whom he shall know to be void of any other
pretention then the service of God, and of his eternal salvation, without any
regard of earthly things. It is ever better to choose a good Cenobite, then an
ill Pastor, or a bad particular Priest; this is too manifest: And likewise on
the other side a good Pastor, and a good Priest ought rather to be chosen for
a Directour, then a bad and irregular Cenobite. But what will a good
Parishioner do, that shall see himself betwixt a good Pastor which God has
given him, and unto whom he is obliged by the reciprocal duties of a son to
a father; and a good Cenobite whom he has no obligation to choose, that is, no
ways charged, with his soul, whereof he may every day free himself at the
obedience of his superior, and whom the penitent himself may leave without
other reason then his will, and without sin: I suppose them equally prudent,
virtuous, charitable, spiritual, and capable; behold a soul well divided. If
you put a piece of iron between two loadstones, doubtless it will not ^dheare
to either, in case they be both of equal bigness, and the one having as much
attractiue virtue, as the other, and placed in equal distance: For the iron
being as powerfully drawn on the one side, as on the other, remains
necessarily balanced in the middle; but if in greatness or proximitie there be
never so little difference, you will see that the iron will be drawn either to
the greatest, or to the nearest, in sum, to that which shall have the most
attractiue force. It is the same with a soul which seeks a Directour; If the
Pastor be more learned, more devout, more capable then the Cenobite, without
doubt she will not abando^ this good Father of her soul which God has given
her, for him* who at the most can be only her tutor for a time, yea according
to his fancy, and without any obligation on either side. There are always
enough Pedagogues, but few Fathers says the Apostle. But also on the other
side, if the Cenobite have notable advantages of integrity, of science, of
piety above the Pastor, who sees not that it were want of judgment
perceiving the better, to make choice of the worse, since that there is free
liberty of election? But the personal qualities supposed equal, both in the
one, and the other, who sees not but the neernes of the Pastor, and the
duties, and reciprocal bands betwixt his flock and him, are more powerful
attractiues then what soever the other can allege of the Saints and sanctity
of his Order, which notwithstanding all his productions, will be always more
young, more feeble, less authorized, and less Apostolical then the
Hierarchicall Order of S. Peter, establissed, and erected by JESUS CHRIST
himself?

CHAP. III. Industrious advantages of Cenobites; their union.
BUT I pray you observe some industries which yield herein much advantage unto
Cenobite^ even in the supposed equality of merits, and of good qualities of the
persons. It is, that the Parochial Pastors are not so Locked up in
Communities, nor yet as much united, as the Cenobites. For though they be in
the Diocesan, and Synodall Community, and within the body of the holy
Hierar^hie, yet live they nevertheless within their parkes and sheepfolled;
assembling themselves but once or twice a year at Synodes, and for so little a
time, that they have not means to make any great colligation* Whereas the
Cenobites living always under the same roof, eating at the same table,
singing in the same Quire, assembling themselves daily in the Chapter, in
conuersations, at study, at conferences, taking their rest in the same
Dormitory, having their honorable, and profitable interests in common, the
same fire, the same bread, one only purse, and that which is more, one sole
and only pretention, which is the glory of God; and consequently, the
splendor, augmentation, and reputation of their Order; you may judge that
these assemblies so fastened, tied, and retied (as they call that of Religious)
have much more vigor, then they who are separated, unbound, and (if one may so
say) scattered here and there, in the dispersions of nations. From thence they
get prerogatives which eleuate the Cenobites, who would be but mean in their
qualities, and sufficiencies, if they were forth of their Orders, and were
particular Priests. For there be lookingglasses which enlarge the objects, and
make cherries appear as bigg as melones; and as there is a river of Beotia
wherein the fishes seem^ to have scales of gold, which taken out of those
waters, are like unto others: Even so there are many Directours Cenobites, who
draw their principal esteem from that of their society, and who are as the
bearde, honored when it is fastened to the chinn of a man, and trampled under
foot when it is separated by the razor, or cizers. They often resemble
certain ge^tlemen, who not having much personal merit, derive it, either from
the heroic acts of their ancestors, or from the antiquity of their race, or
from the wealth of their howses: A bucket of water being cast into a lake
conserues it self, which were it spilt upon the ground, it would dryevp. The
reason whereof is, that the particulars of Orders, back one an other, and have
as it were made ^ compact, and league, to publish the wonders of their
Institutes, of their rules, of their obseruances, and of the virtues of those
who are as the bones, the pillars, the supporters, the lights, and the chief
ornaments, and arches thereof: So that praising one another, and publishing
every where their heroic acts, for to extend their young branches from Sea, to
Sea, and their shoots even to the extremity of the earth, it is no maruelle if
their reputation be known by such a one as never saw them; and afterward
coming with a preoccupated spirit of an opinion of greatness, which causes him
to hold for a Propher, a man of mean virtue and science, what can he speak
but of Oracles, principally if he be out of his contry, of his acquaintance,
and of his parentage? For then he is reputed for a man wholly of an other
world, and such an one as the bad rich man requested of Abraham for to go to
exhort his brethren. It is nor that I dislike these industries; being
permitted to praise in God, not only ones Naighbour, but also his own soul
as David said, and to magnify his vocation, and ministry, as did S. Paul,
provided that the same, end in the glory of God, according to the council of
our Savior saying to his Disciples, let your light so shine before men, that
they seeing your good works, your father which is in heaven may be honored
therein. But who is it that lights a candle to hide it under a bushall being
ordained to be set on a ca^dlesticke, and to enlighten all those who are in the
house. Laud being an incense or perfume due unto virtue, in Gods name, let it
be offered unto her, in what part soever she be found, be it Jew, or be it
Greek. The Cenobites can never have so much honor, but the good Pastor will
yet wish them more: For one cannot enough honor the piety and sanctity, which
shines amongst the good Cenobites. The ancient Pastors have well declared it,
fra^ckly dispoiling themselves of their Tithes, and of their goods, in the
co^try therewith to inueste, and to enrich the founded Cenobites, submitting
themselves unto their nominations and Patronages. But that which can nether be
suffered, nor excused, is, that some Cenobites abusing the reputation which the
outward austerity, or the inward retirement purchases amongst the people unto
their Orders, content not themselves to despise the Pastors in their fowls,
but pass from thoughts, to words of disdain, decrying, that I say not,
dismembring, not only the actions of some, which being publicly heard, ought
to be publicly reprehended; but generally debasing the dignity of the
Pastoral and Sacerdorall state, and making it inferior to the monastical,
and Cenobiticall state, for reasons grounded upon the doctrine of S* Thomas,
ill enough understood, which I could evidently show, if I had undertaken to
treat of that subject; the same tending only to this point, to draw unto them
people, as to the most perfect Directours, as being placed in the state of
perfection; (for they please them selves with this term, which dazells the
eyes of the simple, and of those, who are ignorant in this subtle matter of
the school) desiring thereby to exalt themselves, by debasing of others, and to
cause themselves to be valued at the cost of an others reputation. I omit many
particular reproaches, only to tie my self to that of Interest, which I handle
more precisely in this treatise, wherein I think to have made clearly enough
appear that these guards of the walls (for what signifies this word Cloister,
but a closure of walls) not being content to have taken away the cloak from
the Pastors, do also hurt, and strike them in their condition, seeking to
render them odious to their own sheep, whose affection is the most precious
treasure of their charges.

CHAP. IV. Their glittering virtues.
THey say that the Adaman^ loses the natural property which it has to draw
Iron, in presence of the Dyamond. The Cenobiticall life seems like unto this
precious stone by the great sparkling of its exterior, which by the nudity,
rude and patched habitts, gross in their matter, strange and diuersified in
their forms, and differing from the common use by the settled, and mortified
countenances, the renown of disciplines, of hair shirts, of hard bedds, of
visio^s, of ecstasies, of rauishments, of prophesies, and revelations, of
supereminent, and superessentiall contemplations, begetts meruellous opinions
of its excellency, in the opinion of the world. The life of Pastors, I say
of the good, is more shaddowed, and of less luster, it is common, and
accomodated* to the deportement of the vulgar being necessary to render it self
all to all, for to gain all: It imitateth not that of S. John, rude in its
habit, Savage in its aboade, terrible in its retraite, wild in its
conversation* austere in its food; but it follows the traces of our Savior,
who lead a common life, in his meat and his clothing, in his manner of
conversation, indifferently with the good, and the badd, to cofirme those in
virtue, and to withdraw these from vice. Moreover, as they are alone, and
particular in their ordinary life, not associated in communities, they are not
praised by any, they comme^d not themselves, all their praises being only for
God. Contrariwise they do their utmost endeauours not to fall into the fault
of that king of Israel who exposed his treasures to the pillage of his enemies,
for having showed them; They guard their secret for them, they hide from their
leaft hand, the good which their right hand does, they serve secretly the
hidden God, they sound not the Trumpet when they perform any good work, they
do not frame gestures, nor metamorphize their faces, to seem great fasters,
they do not counterfeit their counte^nance to gain the reputation of austere,
and severe persons. On the other side, they make themselves popular, and
familiar, and like the good leaven of the Gospel, they spread themselves into
the dowe o^ the mass of the faithful, therein to communicate the spirit of
God; being the salt of the earth, they season others by their communicatio^,
and as S. Gregory says, speaking of Pastors, they make themselves like
stones of salt, which the sheep use to lick, to preserve themselves from the
corruption of the world, and to get an appetite of divine things. They disperse
their springs of grace, and spiritual service abroad, and divide the waters
of wholesome wisdom through the market places, prostituting themselves to whom
so ever has need of their help. But it is without noise, and without crack,
as obliged thereunto by their duty, without exte^ding their Philacterys without
enlarging their fringes, and without great boasts of an exho^tation, a visit
of the sick, a spiritual conference, and having done all they can, they never
think to have satisfied their duties, always esteeming themselves
unprofitable servants. And if they chance to discontent some particulars,
either by their severity, or by their negligence, then the tongues sharpen and
whett themselves against them as rasors; for a light d^fect, they forget all
their services, they charge the^ with imperfections which they have not, they
impute unto them all the miseries of the place of their residence, when they
cannot take hold of their actions, they calumniate their intentions, and
designs; If they be good husbands, they take them for misers, If they be
almes-giuers in secret, they publish them for covetous, If they shall do
miracles with JESUS CHRIST, they will say that it is done in the name of
Beelzebub: and the world which is all Lost in malignitie, hating like an owl
the light of virtue, more ordinarily defameth the good then the bad Pastors.
It is not that it spares those whose actions are reprehensible, for if it knew
how to accuse the good of faults which they have not, imagine whether it has
the art of a^plifying the true vices of the disorderly: of the least things it
frames scandal, and of true scandalls, it makes capital crimes, and animated
with the spirit of that old serpent homicid^ from the begming, it seeks not
the conversion of a sinner, and consequently his life, but cries out, take
him, take him, crucifye him, raze him out of the land of the living, and let
his name be put in oblivion* and to say the truth, the scandal is so much the
more odious, when it proceeds from those who ought to be the light of the
world, and from whom the edification of good example ought to issue; and this
is it, which S. Gregory says the Pastor who gives it, cuts the throat of
his sheep, insteede of feeding them, and kills them in lieu of nourishing
them. Woe to the world by reason of scandalls, it were better for him who is
cause thereof, to be cast into the bottom of the sea, with a millstone about
his neck. O Pastors this touches you for your condition placing you on the
Theater, and on the Candlestick, a spectacle to God, Angels, and men; your
actions (as the house of tha^ Roman) being open, and in view on all sides, it
concerns you, so prudently to walk, and take so great heed of your ways,
that you offend not the eyes of any: otherwise the contempt of the minister
will suddenly pass to the ministry, what lesson soever our Sa^iour has given
in the Gospel unto your sheep, that they should follow your goods precepts,
and not imitate you in you^ vicious deportments.

CHAP. V. Their defects are iudiciously concealed.
IT is otherwise with Cenobites* whose faults (for they are not impeccable, nor
all returned to the ^riginall justice of the first innocence) are soon covered
and hidden in the press of the Community, and veyled with the walls of the
Cloister impenetrable to secular ^ies; so that unto them, does in some sort
agree, that which David said of those whom God favors in covering their
sins, and in putting them in shelter under the covert of his countenance from
the tongues of contradiction, placing them under the shaddowe of his wings,
until iniquity pass. It is not that I blame this prudence which knows
dexterously how to hide the defects, whose deformity may decay the luster of
the reputation of a holy Order, and change this good odor of life, unto life,
which the good example of others does every where cast forth. For who knows
not that it is one of the offices of Charity, to keep secret the
imperfections of our brethren, and to take away all occasion of scandal? I
say only that the Cenobiticall condition has this advantage, and this
commodity of covering the faults which by infirmity the particulars may commit,
within that cloud which David places about divine things, and within that
stormy clouds wherewith the Poets inuiron their imagined diuinities: So that
it is the same with Cenobites, as with Physicians, whose good successes the
sun manifests, and the earth covers their faults, as those of the
Vestalls: They want no less then Pastors, nether envious persons, who by
their venomous tongues take from them the honor of many good deeds, which they
practice within their howses; nor reproachers who impose upon them many evils
which they commit not; nor flatterers, and adhearents who attribute unto them
great perfections, which peradventure they have not. But in this case, who sees
not, that this beatitude beholdes them, whereof it is said in the Gospel, you
shall be blessed, when men shall speak ill of you, and shall speak the worst
they can, but falsely, and in hatred of my name rejoice you then, for your
reward will be great in heaven. And besides, who could without injustice blame
the wise government of those, who to preserve the honor of a whole assembly
(which might be blemished in the opinion of weak spirits by the imperfection
of some particulars) do what they can to hide that which may offend the eyes
of others, and to divert from the knowledge of our neighbourg, that which could
not yield him any edification. Who is ignorant, that scandal makes faults much
greater then they are in their own nature? And does not the scripture teach
us, that it is the greatest mischeife that ca^ come unto the world? To avoid
then this rock, the enclosed life of Cenobites (whence comes the word
Cloister) retired from commerc^ of the vulgar is to them much auaylable,
secret, and mystical, and impenitrable to co^moneies, unto whom familiarity
breeds contempt, only valuing that whereof it has little knowledge, and
which, it rarely sees. None rise more early to see the sun break forth, of
the Aurora: The ordinary use of this great torche of the world, source of all
brightness, makes its light less admirable, if any comet appear in the heaven
during the darkness of the night, every one leaves his bed, and his repose to
behold this simple Meteor. So was the Precursour of the Messiah beheld by the
Hebrews, whilst the Messiah himself, the true son of Justice being in the
midst of them, as it were dazelling their eyes by the beams and light of his
life, and his example, was by them unknown. For though he were wholly without
spott and without stain segregated, and separated from sinners for as much as
concerned sin, and more elevated then the heavens as the Apostle teacheeth
us; albeit he conuersed on earth amongst men, in the days of his flesh, yet
nevertheless his ordinary freque^tation being with publicans, and sinners, and
as a Physician who seeks after the sick to cure them, and as a good Pastor
seeking out the straying sheep to bring them unto the fowlde, and to force
them to return; and his life being common and familiar according to the
exterior, becoming all unto all, to gain all, this continual assistance
which placed them as a frequent spectacle before men, made them less
acceptable to the vulgar, who having no judgment but in the eyes, nor eyes but
in the head, esteem nothing valuable and great but that which is rare, and
that which appears more seldom to the view. To say the truth, as nothing so
much, and so often ingendreth contempt, as familiarity, inward conversation,
and ordinary commerce; so nothing does more advance worth, reputation, and
esteem then reseruednes, retirement, and raritie. And hence it is that the
manner of life which the Cenobites lead, gives them the preeminence in the
opinion of people, above the manner of life which the Pastors are constreined
to lead, to satisfy the obligations of their charges. For they, showing
themselves less often to the world, and even in a manner prepared, composed,
affected, striking the sense of those who considere, and judge of the interior
man, by the exterior countenance, as of a tree, by the bark, and the leaves,
are doubtless, much more esteemed then they, who continually mingled amongst the
people for all purposes, in their employment, and actions, in their habits, and
in all their exterior are like unto other men, in imitation of our Savior who
reuesting himself with our nature, would render himself in all things
conformable to his brethren according to the flesh; and for that cause is he
called not only man, but the son of man. Likewise the good Pastors have
this advantage, that judicious persons, and who know how to balance the worth
of things, not by common weights, but by those of the Sanctuary, sufficiently
acknowledge, that if they have less of the smoke of reputation, they have not
less of the fire of charity; if they make less brute, they yield not less
fruit, and if they have less of appearance, and show, they are not less in
effect and profitt, for the glory of God, and the service of souls.

CHAP. VI. That the contempt of Pastors is a great fault.
But after all, that which I find little to be endured, and unworthy of persons
professing so reformed and exemplar a life, as the Cenobites, is the contempt
too well known, and too apparent, which some amongst them least considered and
peradventure less considerable, use toward, not only bad Pastors, and
vicious Priests, (a very just contempt proceeding from a lawful auersion from
vice) but also toward the Pastoral state, and that of particular Priests,
whom out of their courtesy, they call seculars, as if their carracter (which
the very Angels themselves reverence) and their solemn vow, did not
sufficiently separate them from laics, and from those who are entangled in the
desires of the world. They say, that when the loadstone is rubbed with garlic
or grease, it loses its natural force which it has to draw Iron. We must
not wonder if the Pastors, or particular Priests, who are as their Coadiutours
in Pastoral functions and service of souls, have so little power over those
whom God has ranged under their conduct, and committed to their charge, since
that tongues, rather feigned then holy, and rather filled with venom of the
aspick, then with combs of honny, make them so odious and so contemptible to
the people, as it seems some Laics take glory in withdrawing themselves from
the obedience of their Pastors, to follow the way, and the voice of
mercenaries, and of conductours borrowed and chose^ according to their own
fantasies. Certes it would be easy to retort this contempt on the face of the
contemners, and of those who are the authors thereof, if the consummatour of
our faith did no^ teach us, that as it is a more blessed thing to give, then to
receive benefitts; so is it more honorable, and aduantagious, to suffer
outrages, and injuries, then to do them. Only that which is deplorable in
this depraved artifice, is, to see, that this cursed profitable Interest,
called by S. Paul the root of all evils; has no other aim then to divert
(as Tertullian says) the streams from their true channells, to cause them to
flow upon lands which have no right, nether directly, nor indirectly to be
watered therewith in changing justice into judgment, and under the cloak of
charity, in offending justice. For in fine, though they feign, they deceive,
and dissemble, there consists the true motive of so great contradictions
appearing in the City of God, of so great contentions, of emulations, of
murmurs, which change the stones of edification, wherewith they should build
the walls of the mystical Jerusalem, into stones of offense, and scandal. For
as all are not Apostles, nor Doctors, nor Prophets; so all the Pastors have
not the patience of Job, for to suffer so many blows from those, unto whom
heretofore they have put bread into the mouth, and who daily feed themselves
with the flesh, and cloth themselves with the woll of their sheep, whereof
they shun the charge. All have not force to e^dure so many foyles and
opprobries without any answer, and without making it appear, that they who
accuse them of seeking only their proper interests in the feeding of their
sheep, and in the exercise of their functions, are much more covered then they
with this leaprosie of Giezi.

CHAP. VII. The division of Pastors and of Cenobites.
THis is that which I think to have made appear in this writing, by
demonstrations more then Mathematical, upon the ground-plott of a little
Diocese, in this prodigeous inequality which I have shown; where, according
to the division of the Lion, which is turned into a proverb, the goods of the
Church are almost all on the Cenobites side, and very few on the Pastors.
Besides I may say, that in comparison of diverse others, which I know well,
they are favorably enough treated, and liberally divided. For as it is in the
great diocese where they find great means, so is it also there where the
Pastors have been more sifted, more reaped, and more largly vintaged, by those
who communing only to their succors are become their masters, and being
only troops of supply, and scatered ranks of the Hierarchy, are in process
of times, and by diverse industries, become mistresses of all the goods of te
contry, and towns, drawing the tithes, and Ecclesiastical possessions to
their side, and all the rest by begging: For I can say with as much assurance
as truth, speaking generally, that is, casting a view upon the whole mass of
goods destinated to those who serve the Altars, that the Pastors have not the
fiftieth part thereof. And concerning the labor, that the Cenobites have not
the hundredth part thereof. As for the charge of souls, that the same wholly
belongs to Pastors, who watch over them by state, office, and obligation, as
being thereof to render an account to the just Judge: And that the Cenobites
have not any part therein, since they casting upon the shoulders of Pastors
what soever is dangerous, difficult, painful, and burdensome, reserve to
themselves, that only, which is honorable, and profitable in the government,
and delicate direction of certain personages of choice, and election: And if
they sometimes descend to the conduct of the little ones, and of the poor, it
is by starts, and sallies which are quickly cooled, and like unto a fire of
straw shining, but little heating; sparkling, but little burning, flashing, but
of little durance. Let us cast an eye upon the Contry, and ask the Pastors
there, what helps they obtain from Cenobites; they will answer you, that
they who are founded serve them to no other purpose, then to gather up the
tithes of their parishes, allotting them a most miserable portion thereof; And
that the Me^dicants suffer them to be seen, and heard once, or twice a year,
in the time of harvest, whether it be for goods, or for souls, I leave the
decision thereof unto him that knows the secret of hearts. And if some at other
seasons of the year go up and down Catechizing through villages, which is no
less rare then swallows in the winter, it will be either to satisfy the
obligations of some foundations destined to that exercise, or else because the
must of fervor, and the first fruits of the spirit of devotion is yet warm
in the beginning of an institute, or of a reformation; or to assist some
establishme^t, or to acquire reputation to the Order, all this under the
resplendent cloak of the glory of God. But when this first charity is past,
and this first boiling grown cold, and faint, farewell my missions, and my
Catechismes. O how the sweet repose, and the holy vacancie of Mary is a much
better part, and more desirable, then the toil of busyed Martha; and how good
a thing is it to expect salvation of God in silence and hope? It is not that by
this discourse I would render the Cenobiticall labor less consiand pay a
disdain with lik^ money: One fault is not covered, nor blotted out by another;
and this were imprudently to fall into the same error which we reprehend. The
only aim of my intention is, to show that indeed profitable Interest being
the most odious, and unjust reproache, not to say outrageous, that can be
offered to Pastors in the function of their offices, is incomparably greater
on the part of the accusers, then the accused. But the importance is, that the
one fights in open feilde, the others by the mine, and by the spade: And the
play of these being more covered, the gain is greater, and the conduct more
subtle. The one resemble particular receauers who gather only the small
parcells; and the other resemble the general, whose receipts are only of
great sums, and sometimes of whole inheretances, and of foundations entirely
established. It is true that some Pastors, and some Priests, their
subordinates, receive that little which is freely given them, for diverse
services which they render unto such as employ them in the functions of their
charge. It is true also that many Cenobites do the same, principally they
whos^ Communities are not in so strict an observance, or rather loosned from
the rigor of their rule, or else, to use their own term, mitigated. If that
some more ridged, and punctual* obseruers of their Institutes, in the
administration of the Sacraments of Penance, and of the Altar, reject those
slender alms, which the faithful are accustomed to give by a Laudable
acknowledgment, the same certes is worthy of commendation, and testifies the
purity of their intentions in the exercise of these divine, and sacred
ministeries, well beseeming to distribute freely, as they freely received the
power to communicate them. But if it be permitted, by the effects to arrive
unto the knowledge of causes; when a man sees that the fame which they push
back with one hand, returns more abundantly into the other, that this is
rather a sowing to reap a more ample harvest, then to refuse; that it is to
slep back, to leap the better; that it is, to hazard a sly, to catch a fish;
and to let go a flea, to have an Elephant. I know not whether under this
judicious proceeding, there would not be less simplicity, then prudence, and
more hidden interest, then in a simple, humble, and innocent reception of that
which is offered in form of alms. Let others observe, but I remember that
mine ears have heard speech of great murmurs upon this subject.

CHAP. VIII. An evident demonstration.
But to behold these theses, or general propositions, in the particular
Hypotheses and in singular examples. If some Pastors some Priests, which are
as their Coadiutours in Parishes, receive some stipend proportionable to their
labor at the service of the Altar, in the actions of their Ministry, having
no other goods nor reuennues for their maintenance, but those benefitts there;
Judge I pray you; whether the Cenobites, who being Mendica^ts find not
abundantly what soever they want, not only of necessaries, but for ornament,
and magnificence in a Men^icit^e, supported by public authority: Judge I say,
whether they celebrate the divine offices, and whether they labor for nothing.
We know in France (principally in the Belgicke, where the Commands are
unknown; and where Regularity is without compare, in a more exact observance
then in the Celtique) that there be Cenobiticall howses, which have even a
hundred thousand crowns of rent, and where there be but fifty, or three score
Cenobites at the most, which make profession of no other exercise then to sing
in the Quire: Consider if you please, whether these good persons say their
office for nothing and whether that which is distributed to these of those
Communities, amount not to more, then those slender liberalities which the
Pastors, and Priests receive in Parishes, for acknowledgment of their labors
concerning the Mendican^^ of those parts, amidst the simplicity of these
people, whose manners are extremely sweet and candide, certes, one may say,
that they have as much goods as they please, and that they are as Masters of
the goods and fortnnes of the Burgers, who are but as their farmers; For to
demand, and to obtain, is to them almost the same thing: The which one may
conjecture by the magnificence of their howses, which are so many Palaces; the
pomp, and ornaments of their Churches, which are so many terrestrial images
of the celestial Jerusalem. And though the Parish Churches be there also very
well adorned (such is the piety of those good people) yet are they nothing
comparable to those of Cenobites; Whereby one may easily discern, who they are
that draw more from seculars, whether Cenobites, or Pastors; and by
consequence, who are most interessed in the direction of souls.

CHAP. IX. A saying of a holy Personage.
THe same makes me to remember a saying told me, many years since, in my
return from the first voyage I made to Rome by one of the greatest Prelates of
Italy in eminency of dignity, learning, and piety, and in his Pastoral
function, successor of a great Saint: for being fallen into discourse of
Cenobiticall privileges, and exemptions, which hinder the Prelates, they
receive not from Cenobites the help, which they might expect from them in the
exercise of their charges: Believe me, said he* as a man knowing them, the
space of thirty five years, whilst I held the Pastoral staff in one of the
greatest Diocesses of Italy, that those persons have more attention to their
own affayers, then to Cures; are more sollicitous, in ad^ancing of their
howses, Orders, and institutes, then to assist Pastors, or to procure the
glory of God in the service of souls. A speech which he repeated more then
fifteen years after, to an excellent person, who after great and illustrious
imployme^t in the world, having contemned it to choose his retraite in a holy
Assembly, living under the Hierarchy and power of Ordinaries, did me the
honor to accompany me, in an other voyage, which I made into Italy, for some
public and weighty affairs. I ever since noted the feeling of this holy
man, whose lips are guardia^s of science, of verity, and from whose mouth
issue Oracles, which may serve to my judgment, for a law. It is not that I
pretend to apply this speech to any Order, or any particular Cenobite,
contenting my self only in comparing the Pastoral state, with the
Cenobiticall touching the profitable Interest, in the conduct of souls, and
lively to demonstrate, on which side it leanes most, speaking of these two
sorts of conditions in general. For I am not ignorant, that in vocations,
there are always some good and some bad, and that there may be therein some
Pastor more Interessed then some Cenobite, as also some Cenobite more
Interessed then some Pastor. My inte^tion is only to overthrow this false
objection which pretends to cast all the profitable Interest on the part of
Pastors.

CHAP. X. The principal design of this Treatise.
Having now painted out the diverse marks, were by one may discern the
profitable, and honorable Interest of Directours, and thereby to know, who
shall be the Interessed, or Dis-Interessed; what does there remain but that
one should choose the last, as an assured guide in the way of salvation; and
that the first be avoided as a rock, and a shelfe, from whence nothing but
shipwreck can be expected? For if the Bl: Francis of Sales, (whose precepts I
have followed in this treatise, and whose doctrine has served me, as the
threade of Ariadne in this labyrinth) declares that if the Directour be
defective in one of these three qualities, of Science, Prudence, and Charity,
there is danger in trusting to his conduct, how much more will it be perilous
to commit ones self thereunto if his Charity be false? And it cannot be true,
if it be Interessed, since the great Apostle teaches us; that the proper mark
of true Charity is to be without Interest. Without doubt the peril will be
so much the greater, as the more hidden, and like unto those rocks, whose
points appear not above the superficies of the sea; for being covered with
water they are the less euitable to the most expert Pilotts. If the Interest
be delightful, it is so much the more pestilent, as it pretends to force
honor. If it be honorable, it seeks to reduce liberty into servitude, which
is no less precious then life: If it aim at profitt, it tends to the
diminution of the goods, which are like that cloak of the Spouse, which she
complains to have been taken from her, by the guards of the walls; goods, the
abundance whereof is not necessary, nor desirable, but their want redoubtable,
according to the judgment, of the wisest amongst men, who did not demand of
God, either pouerti^, or plenty of riches, least that the one, or other of
these extremes might draw him into some vicious ir^egularity.

CHAP. XI. What it is to aid the simple in the choice of a Directour.
IT is then principally to assist Penite^ts, and simple and devout souls, in
making choice of a good Directour, that I compiled this li^le work, to open
their eyes, for the discerning the true from the false alloy, and to advertise
them to take heed of putting themselves under the conduct of an interessed
person, whatsoever prudence, and science he may have: For where Charity is
wanting (and it is instantly wanting, when Interest takes place) prudence is
changed into craft, and science into subtlety, qualities more prejudicial,
then profitable in the way of God, where a man must walk in simplicity, to
walk in assurance. They say that the little birds willingly assemble together
about the Kestriel, by reason of the hidden property which she has to drive
away by her note the birds of prey. The docume^ts of this book, being well
considered, will have the same effect, and serve simple, and pious souls, to
beware of falling into interessed hands, which the Psalmist compares to the
claws of the Lion prepared for prey. In vain says the wiseman, are netts
laid to take birds whose flight is upward, because they perceive them a far
of, and enter not. The wary; and well advised spirits, see well enoug the
snares which I discover, and are careful not to fall therein, but it is the
simple whose eyes I vnseele, to cause them to see clearly in so nice, and
important a matter. I think my self obliged to perform this good office to
my neighbor by order of Charity, which inuites me to set the blind in his
way, and to Euangelize the poor and the ignorant. An ancient Poet said very
well, who hinders not (being able) some one from perishing, sins as much as
he that should procure his death. The which may be applied unto him, who does
not advertise a traveler to avoid a dangerous passage, and where he goes to
his destruction in peril of loosing his goods, his honor, or his life; what
then will it be, when it concerns his eternal salvation, whose loss is
irreparable? Principally since God has been pleased that I should be one of
these sentinells in his Church (the same signifies the name of Bishop) which he
has placed upon the walls thereof, this mystical Jerusalem, who cease not
day and night to walk the round, and to watch, and cryout against the
dis-orders, which may be committed, as well within as without her precincts. So
that I may say with that Poet, being not ignorant of evil, I teach simple
souls to withdraw their feet, from these subtle devises. The which I do in
furnishing them with this dish of butter, and this honny comb, which causes
one to choose the good, and reject the evil, to wit, in teaching them, the
counselle of counselles, which is, to make choice of a good Directour, who may
counselle them as is expedient, and without other Interest then that of
salvation. No man, as I think, if not altogether void of reason, can dislike
that the Penitent, or a person who would live devoutly, should make choice of
his Directour, since that we see, that for the conduct of our goods, and of our
bodies, we choose such Proctours, Advocates, Physicians, and Chirurgions, as we
esteem fit for us, and in whom we repose most confidence.

CHAP. XII. That this choice is necessary.
ANd we must not say that this is to make the parties, and the sick, Judges
of their judges, and exalt the inferiors over those who ought to be their
Superiors, and whose counsels they should hold for Oracles; for otherwise in
all our actions we should walk like blind men, suffering our selves to be
guided in our goods, in our bodies, and in our souls, as if we had no manner
of understanding, and the light of our eyes were not with us. And if no man
find fault that he who desires to take a sea-voyage should choose a vessel
and a Pilott to guide his navigations, why shall it not be permitted to make
choice of a Confessor, and to examine whether he has the qualities requisite
to steer us unto the haven of salvation. Our consulting with Lawyers and
Physicians, makes us not renounce the natural understanding which we have of
our affairs, and of our heath, much less do we renounce that which we have
of our proper conscience when we take the advice of a Directour. And though it
be needful to submit ones judgment unto his advise, it is not meant, that one
ought wholly to renounce the light of discretion, otherwise it were, by
becoming devout, to loose the quality of reasonable. No, no, it is not only
the Directours, but also the Directed, that the Scripture teaches to prove the
spirits, and to discern whether they be of God, to make trial of all, to
hold ones self unto that which is good, and to mingle the prudence of the
serpent with the simplicity of the dove. A Directour truly dis-interessed will
not be offended at this trial, but will say unto God with David; prove me
lord, and try me, burn my reins, and my heart: For as he who tenders good
money, nether fears the touchstone, nor the sheeres, though well may he, who
puts away the false; so he who has no other aim but God, in the conduct of
souls, doubts not the examine which is made of his actions, of his words, no
nor of his intentions: For when he should be tried by fire, there will not be
found in him iniquity. By this examine he who is holy, is yet more
sanctified, and he who is pure, is yet more purified. Gold put into a furnace,
is there purged without consuming; if there be any dross it is spent in the
flame. The Prophet, true servant to God, rejoiced when he saw his lips
purified by a burning cole, which an Angel had taken from the Altar. These are
the vlcerated bodies, which dread the shock, and the spirits (whose virtue is
weak) who fear the touch. When the Apostle said that he was made a spectacle
before God, the Angels, and men, you may think that he feared not to be
waighed on all sides, to the end he might be esteemed as a minister of God, and
a lawful dispenser of his mysteries.

CHAP. XIII. That it wounds not confidence.
IT is yet less to be imagined that by this examine of the Interessed, or
Dis-interessed Directour I cast a distrust into the minds of Penitents, and of
persons directed, and banish from thence the confidence which devout souls
ought to repose in their Directours. For as, before the trials which I teach,
it is needful according to the Apostle, to walk prudently ( caute) and as it
is written of the Machabees to march in battle with judgment, and Order, (
caute and ordinate) and as the Proverb says, to march bridle in hand. So
after that the sincerity of the Directour, and his prefect charity deuoide of
Interest be known, the confidence reposed in him, becomes more entire, and
absolute: For as he who is not temped, knows nothing, so no man is known
unless he be tried. It happens herein, as unto trees, which fasten in their
roots, the more they are shaken by winds. And if we be obliged by the
Scripture, and by the documents of the greatest Masters in the spiritual life
to have a diffidence of ourselves, why shall we not have the like of others,
whom we know yet, less then nor selves? The holy writ admonishing us, in so
many places, not to lean on staves of reeds: Cursed be he who trusts in man,
and makes flesh his arm, which is no other then grass, and grass on the
topps of howses, withered before it be cut. Who knows not that man's greatest
enemies, are his domestics, and most familiars? Blessed is the man who is
always fearful, and who places his: stability in his apprehe^sio^. Who can be
ignorant that it is nether our brother, no^ man, who has redeemed us, that it
is nether Apelles, nor Paul, nor Cephas, who were crucified for us, and that we
ouhgt to place our rest and hope, in God alone? Who regards the Directour
otherwise then in God, and ought else then God, in the Directour, will never
have any true confidence in his Directour: For as the rod of Moses miraculous
in his hand, was out of it a serpent, so man considered apart, and out of the
hand of God, is rather a devouring serpent, then a rod of direction of the
heavenly kingdom. And we must not for the gayning of an Empire, and authority
over feeble spirits, lull them a sleep with these fair words of obedience,
of resignation, of mortification, of renouncing ones self, of annihilation of
proper judgment, and of proper will, and of the ruin of self-loue, repeating
unto them, even to wearisonnesse; that saying of the Psalmist, I am made like a
horse before God, to be always with him. For if the same be not understood
with judgment, and discretion, and as says S. Paul, with a reasonable
service, it is the means by this doctrine (good and most holy, in it self,
being rightly understood) taken which an ill by as, to beastifie, rather the^
to mortify creatures, unto whom God has given the use of reason. It is the
means to imitate those bird-catchers, who take birds with a glass; And I say
with the Prophet, or rather with God, speaking with this Prophetical mouth.
Son of man be upright in thy self, and believe not every spirit, principally
that which thou shall see never so little interessed in his counsels, for
nothing so much obscures the judgment, as the filme of proper benefitt.

CHAP. XIV. Answers to some objections.
I Well foresee that some spirits, peradventure interessed, or perhaps only
nice, will make diverse judgments of this treatise, and if they cannot bite
upon the reasons; they will gloss, according to their humors, upon my
intentions: But mee-thinks, that at the very entrance, I have so plainly made
appear, the occasion inuiting me to write upon this subject, as no man will
conceive that I had other design, then to speak truth in my own defense. For
I have not composed this work, but by encounter, and rather, to ward the
blows of calumny, then to assault. If that I defend my honny with the sting,
why shall I be rather taken for a droane, then for a be? I am not ignorant
that the night-birds hate the light, which is so pleasing to those of the day.
And there are barbarous people under the burning zone, who shoot arrows
against the sun, when it scortcheth them with its rays; so are there
persons, who kick against the spurr of truth, and who pay with reproaches such
as tell them of it: I omit not howsoever to pray unto God with the Psalmist;
that he take not from my mouth, the word of truth, whatsoever auersion they may
conceive of one, who love it not. For I am sufficiently taught, that to
displease the bad, by this way, is to gain the good favor of the better
fowls. No, I will not be ashamed of the Gospel, nor will I forbear to
testify the word of God For it justifies it self, in it self and I believe,
to have so well supported my reasons therewith, as it will be hard to shake me,
without iustling it. Environed with this buckler of truth, I have no cause to
fear the darkness of calumny, nor the arrow which flies in the day, nor the
ambushes of obscurities, nor the assauts of the midday, devil. I esteem it a
small matter, may I say with the divine Apostle, to be judged of men, whose
judgments have for the most part unjust balances, my witness is in heaven, and
it is God, who judges me; If I should please men, I could not be his servant:
And thou, o man, who art thou, that judges the servant of an other? Do thou
not know, that in what thou iudgest him, thou condemnest thy self, since thou
undertake that which God has reserved to himself, which is the knowledge of
hearts? And if thou say that I declare my self herin too openly partial for
the Pastors, and unequal toward the Cenobites, do thou not see that as a
Balaam thou beholdest the army of Israel on one side, for to have, if not
lawful, yet at least some apparent ground, to curse it? For who knows not
that I blame the Interessed Directour with what roabe soever he be covered, of
what condition soever he may be, be it Pastoral, be it Cenobiticall? It is
true notwithstanding, dear Reader, that as the heart being seated in the midst
of the breast, as a sun amongst the Plannets of the little world, does not
leave nevertheless to incline a little more to the one side, then the other,
without loosing for all tha^ his situation, and as in his course he varies, and
changes the seasons, without leaving his Ecliptique; so do I well believe,
that God having placed my unworthiness amidst the Pastors of his Church, I have
(me thinks) as much right to love this Hierarchicall Order established by
JESUS CHRIST himself, and to love it with a love of election, and of an
election of preference, before all the Cenobiticall Orders, which are only of
humane, and positive law, and which the holy Sea may as well abolish, as it
has approved them, (as we have seen in those of the Templars, and of the
Humiliats) and to destitute, as it instituted them; seeing that in this
dilection of preference, every Cenobite has an inclination, and a particular
the, not to the Cenobiticall Order only, and in general, but unto that in
particular, whose livery he wears. Furthermore these advantages, Prerogatives,
Preeminencies of the Pastoral state, and of Preist-hood, are so far above
that of the Monastical, and Cenobiticall (not-withstanding the resounding, and
writing, of the tongues, and the soaring penns of some Cenobites) as if I would
handle this Scholasticall and Hierarchicall matter, I believe that there would
come out of my cabinett, an Antimoine, which in what manner soever I might
prepare it, would give gripings, and convulsions to many cacochimicke spirits,
subject to the coqueluche. I will nevertheless abstain, I will hold my peace
with humility, and deteine these verities in silence, for that they might
cause the megrime in those, whom over strong persumes offend, and hurt the
weak eyes of such as cannot endure too great a light. If no other then the
same charity which caused me (as a Harpocrate) to put finger on the mouth,
presses me to resume the pen upon this subject, for repressing the
intemperance of some tongues transported to words of precipitation: For the
love of Sion the holy Church, sometimes we must not hold our peace, when
need requires. Woe be to him, that Euangelizeth not. The arms of ou^ war,
are not material, but spiritual; powerful nevertheless to destroy whatsoever
^leuates it self by the spirit of pride. Here I rested satisfied, in making
known the meddall by the back side; the horse running in the list, by the
figure of the overthrown* and the excellency of the beauty, by the opposition
of deformity, and teaching that which ought to be embraced, and proposing what
ought to be avoided. I would say, that by the muddy colors of the Interessed
Directour, which ought to be avoided, I exalt the bright ones of the
dis-interessed, which ought to be followed, and sought after. So I make to
appear the brightness of the day, by the darkness of the night, giving the
precepts of virtue, by the lively reprehensions of vice, imitating therein those
who make the best kind of Tapestry, the beauty of whose work shows it
self only on that side where they work not, or those who paynte glass,
whose draughts appear not, but on the side where the colors are not laid. He
that would know, who is the true Dis-interessed Directour, let him consider
the same who is free from the defaults, which in this writing I noted of him
who is Interessed; and let him boldly take this guide, for the conduct of his
soul, and he shall make a most happy, and most assured voyage toward
Christian perfection: Let him not regard the habit, but the dispositions; let
him not sufferre himself to be surprised by the eyes, nor by the exterior,
but let him observe the actions, which proceed from the interior; this foorde
being well sounded, let him pass with assurance; otherwise let him beware
least the torrent of a preoccupated opinion, carry him not into precipices, and
that too late he repent not himself, for having followed the counsels of an
Interessed man.

CHAP. XV. An Advise touching this work.
Moreover before I take the pencell from of this piece, I shall be well
content, my reader, to discharge my self of a verity, with all simplicity,
and fidelity. Thou shall know then, that in the year 1624. having published
the picture of two opposite Hermites, under the title of Herimante, I chanced
in this devout history, to place the good, and stable Anchorites, in this state
of perfection, so much boasted of by the Cenobites, and whereof they are so
jealous, as they desire alone to possess it, without communicating the same
either unto Hermits who have made their vows betwixt the hands of Ordinaries,
or unto other Ecclesiastics of what quality, and in what sacred Order soever
they may be seated, not leaving it, but with regret, and with harsh limitations
unto Diocesan Pastors, rather for the respect of their rank, and ministry,
the greatest in the Church of God, then for the condition and kind of life.
Thereupon arise Cenobiticall murmurs which resemble those little motions of the
superficies of the Sea, which precede the te^pests. This proposition was
esteemed new, and as if I had iustled the whole school, and shaked the
foundatio^s of Cenobiticall greatness, I passed by the tongues, as by the pikes,
for they were pearcing tongues. The same year preaching the Aduent, and lent
at Tolose, I set forth a little book of piety entitled An Introduction to
civil devotion, the very inscription whereof, struck into a dumpe some who
were afraid of their own shadows, as if I had intended to secularise
Devotion which before was held, as it were, wholly Regular, and teach some way*
to save ones self in the world where the Cenobites cry out, all is lost, and
say with full mouth those words of David, All have declined* all are
unprofitable, none do good, no not one. But chiefly that which put them into
an ill humor, were certain chapters where I treated of the good use of
Parishes, and Cenobiti^all Churches where my advise was not altogether found
conformable unto theirs, whereat the Mountains sumed for being a little touched,
though with all possible modesty, and respect. Many threats were cast forth of
writing against the same, but the memory thereof perished, with the sound, I
will believe that the second cogitations shut up in silence, were more prudent.
The year after, I composed that tragical history of Petronille, which has
caused so much noise. Being better informed by the advice of the great Gerson,
and of many other famous scool-men, and particularly of blessed Francis of
Sales my Oracle, advise by him couched, in his ^heotime, in terms clear
enough, concerning the state of Perfection, which they attribute unto
Parochial Pastors, and particular Priests, no less the^ to Cenobites, I
renewed this matter, and having placed my self, on that side, which to me
seems most just, and most reasonable, I am not able to express the clamours
of Cenobites against me, even to extremities, which, for the honor, and
reverence I bear them, more then for my defense, I dare not repeat. In sum,
this matter wholly scholasticall, and more subtle then solid, a matter
otherwise the most indifferent, and problematicall of all those which are
disputed on the bench, became against me a matter of faith, and is if I had
shaken the principalls, and iustled an undoubted Maxim: Consider you whether I
were darkened by tongues, which have in their power the good, or bad reputation
of such as please, or displease them. To calm this great storm proceeding
from so weak a beginning (as the great rain that came forth of the little
clo^de, which the Prophet saw) I was counseled by some friends, to testify
unto these exasperated souls, that I had a more sweet, and respectfull feeling
of their condition, then they imagined; Which I did by that true encounter
which I described, under the title of the unknown Traveler, wherein I think
to have delivered, touching the privileges, exemptions, and qualities of
Cenobites, things so aduantagious, as I believe that none of their profession
has spoken thereof, without flattery, with so much excess, though they be
liberal enough to publish, be it by voice, be it by proof, the preeminence
which they attribute to their manner of life. I thought in this sort, to have
reconciled my self unto them, and having mollified their courages, to have
restored my self into their good favor. But it fell out rather by my mishap,
then by my fault, contrary to my design* for whether it be that these spirits
being once disturbed, are not so easily appeased, as certain liquours which
do not so quickly grow cold when they are once heated; whether it be, that
in that writing I defend my self, as a free man, by the mouth of an Aduocat;
whether it be that I praise them not, like a slave, and in a servile manner,
which is very far from my humor, I have sound by experience, that it is with
them, as with bees which are not easily quieted being once irritated* and which
sting oftenty mes even those who acco^modate their hi^es, and do them service.
For taking advantages of that little work, a^ if I had made a recantation of
that which I advanced in the Petronilla touching the state of perfection though
therein I speak not of it, they make a trophie of my modesty, and in lieu of
acknowledging with what adua^tages I had spoken of their Cenobiticall policy,
and of their manner of life; they have led in triumph my good inte^tion, and
cha^ging judgment into wormwood, went about to persuade, that the fear of a
censure caused me to retract from what I had written, touching the state of
perfection, whereof I treat not at all, in the Unknown Traveler; and also,
that like the Satire in the fable, I blow hott, and cold with the same mouth.
Certes, I never had so good opinion of my self, nor of that which I write, that
I should think my self not subject to error I believe nothing of my self
above humane, and of so great persons which have heretofore made retractations
of what they had sometimes set down with inconsideration, that when I should
imitate them in their humility, and ingenuitie, I would think my self rather
worthy of praise then of blame. Notwithstanding I may say with truth, that as
for the opinion of Gerson, and many other grave Doctors, touching the state of
perfection, wherein they rank the Pastors, and Priests, as well as the
Cenobites, I have always consta^tly held and mainteyned it; and if I should
once treat to the full depth, and according to the dignity of the subject, I
could make appearet that the Cenobites are not by their life, and state, in
such degree of elevation as they imagine, and that, that of the Pastorat, of
Preistood, and of the holy Hierarchy, is as much above their condition, as
the highest region of the air, above the lowest.

CHAP. XVI. A Protestation and Conclusion.
BUT what will they now say, or rather what will they not say of this
Directour Dis-interessed, where I lay open many things, which peradventure will
not please them? Truly they shall say what they will (for who can hinder those
from speaking, who in quality of spiritualists will judge the whole world
without being judged by any.) It shall suffice me for my justification* to
declare that my intention was never, either in this treatise, or any other, to
offe^de or prejudice any one, much less a holy condition, which I respect,
and honor as I ought: so likewise have I been very careful* not to reprehend
here, and less to blame, either privileges, or Mendicity, or Orders, or
Foundations, or Exemptions, or Community, or retirement from the world, or
sequestered life, or Vows, or Beggings, or possessions, or preachings, or
directions, or any of the functions of Cenobites, since they are all approved,
and authorized by the holy Sea, and their exercises so profitable to the
Church of God. O no, I do not set my mouth, nor my pen against the heavens.
Whosoever shall curse this holy condition, or who only shall speak ill of
it, let him he accursed, and who shall bless it, let him be replenished with
benedictions; it is the sister of the Sacerdotall, and Pastoral state, let it
increase into a thousand, thousands: I only note some abuses which may be
indifferently committed by the Interessed Directours, as well Pastors, and
particular Priests, as Cenobites. I blame their unjust reproaches, the
artificall complaints, the reciprocal co^tempts of the one, and the other, the
dominations and tyranicall Empires, which some hold over weak souls, the
subtilties, the artifices, the industries to arrive unto diverse profitable,
honorable, or delectable pretentions. I aswage the presumption of the proud;
I persecute the excess of Interest, contrary to charity, which seeks not its
proper advantages. I exclame against the sower countenance, and the
Pharisaicall lauen which is no other then hypocrisy. Who can take ill, if he
be not ill himself, and tied to the seat of iniquity, that I reprehend the
vices which alter so holy a condition as that of Spiritual Directours,
troubling, and infecting those pure springs* from whence rivers of graces
should flow unto the people, as the Palestines spoiled the wells of Jacob? It
is said of two ancient Poets of very different humuours, that the one in his
verses, made continual inuectiues against women, and the other praised them;
whereupon a pleasant wit said, that the one painted them such as they were,
and the other, such as they ought to be. I do, herein this work, some such
like thing touching Spiritual Directours; For, representing the Interessed in
all their colors, I make appear, by their defaults, what the good, and Dis
interessed ought to be: So the picture of the one, will serve for the knowledge
of the other. If some bad Pastors, or Cenobites, behold in this glass some
Ideas of their imperfections, let them not so much blame the looking glass as
themselves, and that in this glass which presents them such as they are, let
them learn to become such as they ought to be, and take occasion, rather to
correct, the^ to irritate themselves, and to grow better rather then to put
themselves into coler against him who admonishes them. If they so well
respect: my labor, it will nether fear indignation, nor detraction: After
all, if I suffer calumny for having said the truth, and if I be stoned for a
good work, I will not leave to possess my soul in patience, reioyceing to
endure some thing for the name of God, and for justice, I should become
Anathema for my little brethren, who are the simple souls unto who^ I give this
address of the good choice of a Spiritual Directour. Having found him, such
as I propose unto them, to wit, entirely Dis-interessed, let them believe to
have met with a treasure, and as the wisema^ says, a medicine of immo^tality:
Let them boldly hold themselves to this prudent, and faithful servant of God,
whom he has placed over his family: Let them think to possess in him, the
pearl of the Gospel, whose price is inestimable, and which comprehends in
his worth, all the spiritual goods which ca^ be desired. For in fine, it is
the counsel of counsels, to have an Angel of good counsel who may direct
our stepps in the ways of God, and of eternal felicity. Devout soul, you
will know him by the same trial, by which the good gold, and true balm is
discerned. This mettle is the purest, and most weighty of all mettles, and that
which least mingles it self with others, and which is most easily severed by
the fire. The Spiritual Director dis-interessed, has not any impure
pretension i^ the delectable Interest, he has none in the vanity of the
honorable, being rather disposed to abase himself by the weight of his
nothing, then to exalt himself, to command. He intangleth himself no
further, in the incombrances of the profitable, esteeming all things dung, and
ordure, provided that he serve JESUS CHRIST in souls. The true Balm never
loses its good odor, sinkes under all liquours, and preserues the body from
corruption. The dis-interessed Directour has the same qualities; he is never
in odor of death, unto death, but in odor of life unto life by a sweet and
exemplar purity. He does not assume an elevated, and imperious authority, by
ambitious Interest, over the souls which he conducts, nether does he suffer
himself to be corrupted by pretensions of avarice. O how happy is the soul
who has found such a guide, a visible Angel, who conducts her, like the
young Toby, in the way of salvation through the dangers of this life I counsel
you, o pious soul, to buy this pure gold, if you will be en^iched with
spiritual goods: But how are you to buy it? Let it be as the milk and honny
of the Prophet, without giving money: For divine graces, are not so acquired,
and possessed, but by prayers, and tears. For it is by these hosts wherewith
God is invited to give us that which we ask of him: He understands the
preparation of hearts, and the voice of those who earnestly beg his aid in
their necessity. Furnish your self by the same means, with this aromaticall
Balm, whereby you may be preserved, from all corruption of sin, to the end
you may be through-out a good odor in JESUS CHRIST, unto whom with the Father,
and the Holy Ghost, be honor and glory, in all time, and Eternity.

FINIS.

