CAMPIAN ENGLISHED. OR A TRANSLATION of the TEN REASONS, in which EDMUND
CAMPIAN (of the SOCIETY of JESUS) Priest, insisted in his Challenge, to the
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge Made by a PRIEST of the Catholic and
Roman Church,

Vidi mulierem ebriam de sanguine Sanctorum, and de sanguine Martyrum IESV.

Apocalypse. c. 17. Printed with License. M. DC. XXXII.

Let the courteous Reader be pleased to correct the faults escaped in printing
as follows:
Page 24. lin. 17. Shill, read, skill. 30 6. fo, read, so. 37.10. ob, read^,
of. 16 payers, read, prayers. 42.5. Tohy, read, Tobie. 49.16. achowledgeth,
read, acknowledges 71.11. suth, read, such 91.6. vnworthiby, read,
unworthily. 98. penult. exhihited, read, exhibited 97.19. moning, read,
moving 20. fast, read, fasts. 1^9.2. vohappie, read, unhappy.

20. manntrs, read, manners. 147.18. it, read, in. 178.15. testore, read,
restore. 183.12 in, read, is. 189.1. bryas, read, briars.

The Translatour's EPISTLE DEDICATORIE to the ENGLISH FATHERS of the Society
of JESUS.
MOST Virtuous, Reverend, and Learned MEN; To whom should I rather address
this my small labor, then to yourselues, who are partly interessed in the
Person, whose Work is here translated, since you are all members of that
Society, in which he dyed: partly, in the Cause with him, since you have
devoted yourselues to the propagation of that Religion, for which he dyed? In
which Combat no doubt he well remembered (though in a different sense) those
words of a holy Father: August. l. 1. Confess. c. 5.
Moriar, ne moriar.

The Work, which at this present receaues from me, an English tincture and
dye, is in its Original of such worth, that I need not to merchandise and
stall forth the value of it, seeing your own Judgments can best censure
thereof. For I presume, that diverse of you have (I will not say, read, but)
even studied the Book it self. Only this I will maintain, that the Author
has here in discoursing of the supreme Mysteries of the Catholic Faith,
invested (as it were) and clothed them in such roabes of speech, as best sort
to their Reverence and Majesty; since a Man is able to glass in this small
Treatise, the full perfection of Elocution and Oratorie.

His Virtues, Learning, Christian fervor, and Resolution, I will not here
endeavor to display; for I grant, I am not able to pensill them forth; Who was
in his own time reputed (by his enemies) evil, because he was remarkably
good; And whose Centrall cogitations were ever fixed upon the gayning of
Souls, for which (as above I intimated) he dyed the death of Saints: Who now
ioyeth, in that he then lamented; and laugheth, in that he wept: Ps. 125.
Qui seminant in lachrimis, in exultatione metent.

Now for my more peculiar dedication of this my Translation (besides the
reasons above sett-downe) my own respectfull affection toward your Order
inuiteth me thereto: Which affection is not grounded without just cause. For
you are the Men (I mean your Order) designed to repair and re-edifye the
decayed Walls of the City of God: you are the Men, whose province and charge
is not only to re-estate the Catholic Church in such Countries, out of which
she in former times has been unworthily exiled; but withal (to speak in the
Idiome of the Prophet) to Esaias. c. 54.
enlarge the place of her Tents, and spread out the curtayns of her
habitation, even among the Gentiles: you are the Men, whose function in
Catholic Countries is so to organize (as I may say) the Soul of youth, as
that it may receive the Information of Learning and Piety: you are the Men,
who do indoctrinate your Penitents and followers (howsoever H^resie and her
Attenda^ts bark to the contrary) in true Allegiance to their Temporal
Sovereigns; And therefore not undeservedly was that worthy Soldier, the old
Prince of Parma (once Governor of the Low-Countryes) accustomed to say, That
for keeping of a Town in duty and Loyalty to the Civil Magistrate, he had
rather have it fortifyed with a College of Jesuits, then with a Garrison of
Soldiers; since by the one (said he) Obedience is procured chiefly through
servile fear of man, by the other through fear of God, and of their Soul's
perdition: To conclude, you are the Men, who not only by Inherencie, but even
by Production, may be justly styled Literate and Virtuous; since you no less
plant these Qualities in others, then you enjoy them in yourselues. So desirous
you are to spread and fructify in all worthy and charitable Actions. But
what is here your remuneration and Reward? Give ear unto the Prophet, and
exult: Daniel c. 12.
Qui docti fuerint, fulgebunt quasi splendour firmamenti; Et qui ad iustitiam
erudiunt multos, quasi stellae in perpetuas aeternitates.

I would not be thought by any, as if I were persuaded, that besides
yourselues, the Church of God were not furnished with many others, who most
painefully labor in the Vineyard of our Lord, much enriching and cultiuating
it, by their pious endeauours. No. God forbid, my Affection should so far
transport my Judgment. For I (even with joy) acknowledge, that there are
throughout all countries of Christendom, (and even among my own Rank of
Priests in England) many others, most learned, most zealous, most religious,
most laborious in the spiritual good of their Christian Brethren; and who
would be ready to engage their blood for the Salvation of Souls. For here we
must rest assured, that as in the Celestial, so in our terrestrial Jerusalem,
Joan 14.
Multae mansiones sunt, there are many different states and Professions of
men; yet all (though by several ways and courses) leaueling at one and the
same Mark.

Only this I say ( most Worthy Men) and this at all times I will say: The
Church of God has received that comfort and benefitt by your Order, as that
Luther and his brood (for Truth and Falsehood ever move about one and the same
Center of Religion) had made far greater incursions throughout Europe, had
they not been withstoode and beaten back by Persuading, by Preaching, by
Writing, by Prayer, by exemplarie lives, and by diverse other forcible means of
Men of your Profession. This then being a verity undeniable, the less is any
one to marvel, why I do dedicate this my small work to you, since I see,
you so peculiarly dedicate yourselues to God. And thus humbly beseeching you to
vouchsafe (now and then) your charitable remembrance of me, in the times of
your chiefest Devotions, for the expiating of my maniefold sins, I cease ever
continuing.

Yours in all respectfull Obseruancie.

THE TRANSLATOVR'S EPISTLE TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader; Having ever allotted (for my private studyes) certain
hours from the daily exercising of my function of Priesthood; and lately
vnbethinking me, what profitable labor I might undertake, whereby others might
be bettered (for I willingly acknowledge that Principle: bonum est sui
diffusiuum) my imagination could not fix itself more firmly on any other
Subject, then in translating the Ten Reasons, which contained a Challenge made
to both the Universities by that Blessed Saint, Father Campia^ of the Society
of JESUS; Who after much spiritual good by him done, suffered death in Queen
Elizabeth's days; he so purchasing life, by loosing of life: Who might then
well expostulate with his Enemies in the words (not comparatively, for that
were blasphemy, but allusiuely) which our Savior did with the Jews: Joan c.
10.
propter quod opus (bonum) me lapidatis?

Now touching the Book here translated; it is in the Latin Original most
exquisit, both for the Ar^ therein, and for the Matter veyled under the Art.
And for the first; Whereas Rhetorike chiefly consists in applying Reason to
the Imagination, for the more easy inuading and moving the will, that it may
give an assent to the Understanding, this point is so fully performed by the
Author, as that I think, even therein, it may ouermatch any so small a part
of Tullie's Works. For to insist a little in the style or Dialect of writing: We
find therein such proprieties of most significant words, where he undertakes
to deliver a thing in proper terms: such swelling Metaphors (yet not forced)
here and there dispersed, for the increasing of the sense: such choice use of
F^equentatiues, and Diminutiues, when either the point expressed is often
iterated, or through an Extenuation is to appear little in the Reader's eye:
such vehement and ingeminated Interrogations, for the greater asseueration of
the matter discussed: such short Transitions and deliueries of himself in few
words, when either the subject expressed was done in haste, or when but
incidently it is spoken of; such precise Climaxes or Gradations of words
(especially of Epithets) placed in order, that thereby the sense may by degrees
tise, and become more full: briefly (to omit many other ornaments of Speech)
such elegant Apostrophies to the Universities, and other closing Epiphonema^s
and Acclamations, when the point has been largely amplifyed, or fully treated
of: And all this is performed with that (...) and perfection of A^t, as that if
we do take away any one word, and insert in its place any other Synonymous
word, the sense partly quayleth. We may add hereto the compendious shortness of
his style, and the lof^ines of it. The shortness (it being void of all
spinositie and obscurity) exacts more cunning, and the rather in respect of
the plenty of the Matter, which those few Leaves do inuolue. For we see, more
skill is required to draw a curious picture, in a little Table, then in a large.
Now the sublimitie of the style is such, as that through many Schemes and
Figures of Oratorie, it may be well called C^thurnall and stately; his pen
indeed flying therein a higher pitch, then ever Phaeton, who (accor^ing to the
Poets) was carried in his Father's chariot. Which Circumstance of writing
implye^h a far greater difficulty, by reason of the peculiar subject it
being matter of Divinity and Controversies in Faith. And yet ^uen in this
point he observes that (...) or Decerum, so much exacted in true Rhetorike:
for where the subject to be expressed, is not of any sublime, but of a mean
and low Nature, there his words run low, and he in such places purposly uses
certain Flats and Playnes in his style; which resemble humble and pleasant
vales, seated among lofty hills.

Besides all this artificial furniture of Speech, there is found a wonderful
Christian fervor in his words, well discovering his vndauted spirit, and fiery
desire to suffer for the Catholic Religion, which fire nothing but his own
Blood could after extinguish; And accordingly he had that felicity granted
him, as to Apoc. 7.
wash his robes in the blood of the Lamb: Happy man! who by once loosing his
Breath, performed a double death; by the one he satisfying the due of Original
sin; by the other, his particular sins: Whose death was so working and
moving with D^ctour Case of Oxford (the greatest Philosopher, that our English
Universities have brought forth in this time) that diverse months after the
execution of Father ^ampian, and Mr. Sherwi^ (that most holy Man) the D^ctou^
being in London, and behoul^ing their heads and quarters upon long poles over
one of the Cittie-gate^, said in great vehemency to one in his co^pani^:
Conciona^tur and adhuc, and adhu^; their dead ^odies pr^a^h to this day, even
to this instant. And to pro^eede furth^r; this Apostoli^all man (I mean Father
Campian) being upon the ladder, and ready to be cast of, took these words of
the Apostle for his Text, to discourse of to the people: 1. Co^. 4.
Spectaculum facti sumus mundo, and Ang^lis, and hominibus; a s^ntence the most
apposite and choicest (in respect of all circumstances) that the New Testament
could affo^de. But the Officers would not suffer him to proce^de forward. In
like sort, he at that time looking up toward the sun, said to his
fellow-prisonner M^. Sherwin: Be of coura^e, Man; within this hour both of us
(through Christ his m^rcie) shall be far^e higher above the sun, then now we
are under the sun. By which passages we may easily see, how far he was from
all consternation and dismaydnes, being indeed most present to himself, as one
replenished with heavenly comfort and resolution, and justifying in himself
those words of holy Writ: Anima mea in manibus m^is semper.

But to return to the Book: All this curious structure of words, serves but
as the mother-of-pearle to enclose within it the pearl itself, which is the
Matter and Subject there handled: For under his lines are briefly contained
most choking and unanswerable Arguments in defense of our Catholic Religion;
since the materials of this Treatise are indeed an abbreuiated draught of all
chief Articles of Faith, controuerted between the Protestants and us;
branching itself forth into all those principal heads of proofs, which other
more copious books do at large unfold: So as the huge and learned Volumes
even of Cardinal Bellarm^n's Controversies may not unaptly be called a Scholia,
serving to paraphraze and comme^t this litle-greate work. Which Diamond-worke
(for being small in quantity, it is most preciable) has gained (through its
own worth) such a hand of estimation in the Church of God, as that in most
Catholic Countries, it has enjoyed the Honor (a privilege not granted to
any man's writings in this Age) to have been commonly printed and bound-vp
together in one Volume, with the small works of several most ancient and
learned Fathers, treating of the like Subject in general Controversies in
Faith; as with Tertullian de Praescriptionibus, Vincentius Lyrinensis contra
Haereses, Cyprian de Vnitate Ecclesiae, and Austin de vtilitate crede^di:
Fathers, of which the youngest lived within four hundred years after Christ
his Ascension. Neither is the conjunction of this Treatise with the ancient
Father's Works done without just cause; since I dare pronounce it (not as an
amplification, but) as a measured Truth, that (not speaking of holy Scripture)
so much doctrinal matter of Faith, and so much Oratorie, delivered in so high a
key, we^e never sin^e Christ's tim^, com^re^ended in Latin within so few
leaves. And thus much touching the Book in its Original.

Now concerning the Translation: It is done faithfully, and wholly agreeable to
the sense of the Author, and is as litterall, as the Engli^h with any
elegancie (according to my shill) will well bear with the Latin: The same
frame and form of speech (I mean the same Figure^, Caesur^s, and Cadence^, of
the Latin) is precisely (as much as possibly may be) kept in the English. And
though in the censure of many it has been imagined, that the English tongue
would not well suite with so high a style, and that (perhaps even for this
particular reason) this Work has been forborne to be translated by any
English Catholic; yet in my judgment the English (after trial once made, and
good stoare of words at hand) does even in this point well comport with the
Latin, and is thereby rather much aduantaged and graced, then prejudiced; And
the Translatour is much eased herein, as having in a readiness such curious
moulds or frames of Elocution, to cast his matter in. This liberty I have
taken to my self, that (now and then) where an English word of a more full
signification, by way of a Metaphor or otherwise, does occur, then the Latin
affords (and this some times falls out not by reason of any defect of the
Author, but through the fullnes of the English) I make choice of the said
English word for the greater redundancie of the sense. In like sort (here and
there, though rarely) I have inserted a word or two, to make the drift of the
Author to appear more turgent and forcing in the English (and, thereby to
begett a Pathos and to move the Reader, more fully) then the compendious
shortness of the Latin (being translated without any addition) would carrye.
But now will any illiterate Literalist (who dwells only in the bare letter
of the Latin) find fault herewith? If any of that rank do carpe thereat, let
that man know, I hold him to be over seruilly Grammatical, and to taste
strongly of Pedanticall Scholarisme. My proceeding here, is most warrantable:
For since Words are the images of the Notions of the Mind, why should we no^
lay on the fairest colors of speech, that our skill can afford, it being
directed only to make the picture to appear more lively? and that the Words
may st^ike the Imagination (and consequently the Will) more intensely? I ever
here except, where the Subject of the Translation is the sacred Writ of God,
in the translating whereof a literal playnesse is the best Eloquence; and want
of Art, the chiefest Art; since this Subject cannot brook, either adding to,
or taking from.

I do not here intimate the least touch, as if any blemish were in the
Autographon, or that it were possible for any Translation to equal it. No;
silks dyed (we ever see) do loose the glass and beauty of their primitive
colors; And Campian translated, much diminishes the luster and grace of
Campian in the Original. But howsoever this my Translation will be entertained,
it is undertaken; first and principally, for the good of those, that understand
not the Latin; since pity it is, that such a Maistre-peece, as this, wrought
by an English Man, should be concealed from Men, for their being meare English:
Secondarily, to vindicate and redeem this Work (so far as in me lies) from
the indignity and wrong it suffered from the pen of one Stock, a Minister in
London; who (being, a^ blockish, as a stock) some twenty years since,
translated this Treatise with the shuffling, silly, and weak Answer thereto
of D. Whitaker's, Father Campian's Aduersarye. But that Stock did so adulterate
and deprave this Work, as that I grant, it much grieved me to see it pass
under so rude and gross a fyle; his labor tending only to contaminate and
soil the beauty thereof with his durtie quill.

But to leave this point, and to turn myself to thee ( good Reader) if thou ^e
Catholic, I could wish thee to peruse this T^eatise for thy greater
corroboration and strengthening; if a Protestant (as, o, too many thousands in
our poor Country are) then for thy instruction and Conversion. And if thou
remain in this latter state, implore God to give thee his Grace to embrace his
Truth, on what side thou shall find it to be. But these thy prayers are not to
be made with a tepiditie and could indifferency, but they are to be powered out
incessantly, vehemently, and strongly; that so thou may say with the Prophet,
Ier. 38.
Prostraui ego preces meas; seeing Prayers in zeal and fervor of heart are a
pleasing and grateful Sacrifice to God; if not so performed, then no sacrifice
at all, since here the Altar is without fire. But I will not enlarge myself
any further, for fear my Porche be over great for the House, and therefore
with this I leave thee, and rest

Thine, in our Savior JESUS CHRIST.

To the most Learned and Celebrious ACADEMIANS of Oxford and Cambridge EDMUND
CAMPIAN wishes Health.
WHEN this year past, by my chosen institution of life, and command of my
Superiors ( Most excellent Men) I returned into this Island, I did find
storms much more boisterous and rugged upon the coasts of England, then those,
which I had lately escaped in the Brittan Ocean. After I had entered into the
heart of the Realm, I saw nothing more usual then unusual punishments;
nothing more certain, then uncertainty of danger. I closed myself together,
as well as the present state of things would permit, being mindful of the
Cause, mindful of the Times. And for fear, that perhaps I should be
apprehended, before my entrance-in was rumoured, I presently did set down in
writing, Who I was, that was come; What I sought after; What manner of war,
and against whom, I did proclaim. The first draught of it, I eue^ kept about
me, that, if so I were taken, it also with me might be taken: A Copy thereof I
delivered to a friend, the which (truly without my intention and priuitie) was
made known to many. The Adversaries do with great indignity and atrocitie
entertayne this Writing being divulged; And among other things, they most
maliciously insist upon, that I being but One, dare in matter of Religion send
this Challenge to them All; Although it is certain, that I should not be alone
in this Combat, if the disputation might proceed by public Warrant. Hanmer and
Chark have shaped an Answer to my Demands. What was it at the length? Most
idle and frivolous. For not any answer sorting with their honors, but one
they give, which one they shall never give: We embrace your challenge, the
Queen promises open security, make haste, and fly over to us. In lieu
hereof, these two blotters of paper cry out, with a multitude of obstreperous
words: Fie of thy Sodalitie, thy seditious molitions, thy arrogancy, thou art
a Traitor, doubtlesly a Traitor. Ridiculously! Why do Men, as if scarce they
enjoyed but their five senses, make such profusion and waste of labor,
charges, and their own reputation? But as concerning these two (of which the
first out of Religion vastly runs upon my said Writing; the other even
brea^hing malice, rudely tumbles and tosses it up and down) there is late^y
published a small Treatise for them to pe^vse, which discourses (so far
forth, as is th^ught convenient) of our Society, of the iniuryes offe^ed us by
these kind of men, and of the function, which we undergo. Now to me it
remained; (because I see, the chief Protestant Doctors prepare for me the
rack and gallows, not the Schools) to war^ant with you the cause of this my
proceeding; and to point out those branches and heads of Matter (harbingers of
my desired future D^sputation) which have distilled into me so great confidence
and security: And further I would hereby wish you, who are more peculiarly
^bliged thereto then others to espouse you^ serviceable days chiefly to t^is
incumbencie and lab^ur; since CHRIST, the Church, the Commonwealth, and your
own Sou^e's welfare exact thus much from you. If I, as enjoying pregnancie,
learning, art, reading, memory, should provoke any one skillful and
experienced Adversary, I might justly have thereby bewrayed in me a swelling
vent^sitie and pride, as neither rightly balancing myself, nor them: But if I
looking upon the Cause of Religion with a dispassionate, vnpreiudging, and
single eye have thought myself able enough, to demonstrate this Sun to shine
in its Meridian, your Ingenuities ought not to rest disedifyed thereby; but
freely to grant to me (being embarked in so great an Action) this seruour,
which the Honor of JESUS CHRIST my King, and the impugnable Truth have
produced. You well know, that Marcus Tullius in his Oration for Quintius, when
Roscius did (...) to obta^ne the Cause then controuersed, if he could but
euict, that seven hundred miles could not be run in the space of two days,
did not only little rega^de the elocution of Hortensius, but neither of those,
when excelled Hortensius in his Art, as the Philippies, the Cottae, the
Antonies, the Crassi, who^e re^^e countena^ces were full of R^etorike, and to
which men himself ascribed all perfection in Oratorie, and stoare of fyled
w^rds; For there is as c^^taine Truth of that radiancie and splendor, that no
impostures either in gallantrie of speech, or in the matter itself can
ouerclowde it. Now this, which we here vnde^take, is more clear and
illustrious, then was the Thesis or Subject of Roscius. For if I can but make
good, that there is a Heaven, that there is a God, that there is a Faith, that
there is a CHRIST, I do come of victorius. May I not then be he^e courageous?
may I not here show an inexpugnable confidence^ Certainly, hanged, drawn, and
quartered I well may be, overcome I cannot be; Since I ancker myself on those
Doctors, whom that Spirit did i^struct, which is neither vanquished, nor
deceived; How then can I here loose the honor of the day? I humbly beseech
you, that you would be but content to be saved; this is the Butt ob my desires;
which one request if I may obtain, I shall be far more hopeful in all the
rest In the meane-time render yourselues wholly up to this solicitude and
Warrfare, batter at the ears of CHRIST with your incessant payers, become
breathless in your diligence and labor herein; And then doubtlesly you shall
find the matter to stand, as (abstracting from all Circumstances) it is in
itself; that is you shall find our Aduersari^s ^o use strange tergiue^sations
of distrust and despair; and us (as being securely grounded) ready to expect
and wait for this field of Combat, with all composed se^enitie of mind, and
spiritual resolution. I here forbear to spread myself in more words, since
in the rest following I direct further speeches to you.

Fare you well.
THE REASONS of the Challenge of EDMUND CAMPIAN made to the ACADEMIANS of
England.
The first Reason. THE SACRED SCRIPTVRES.
IN the throng of so many things, which proclaim our Aduersarie's guilty
diffidence in matter of Religion; there is not any point so much preuayling
therein, as the Majesty of God's sacred Writ, being by them most unworthily
dishonored. For after they have spurned at the authorities and consents of all
Witnesses, they are finall^ b^ought to this one shift, that they a^e not able
longer to subsist and stand, exc^pt they make violent incursions and sallyes
upon the said Divine Bo^kes. Doubtlessely these men discover themselves to be
in the extremest peril; and being in these straytes, they are most desperately
r^solued to expect and endure the danger of the last shot. What forced the
Man^ch^es August. l. 28. contra Faustu^. c. 2. and de Vtilitat. ^reden li ^. 3.
to read with a maleuolent and troubled eye the Gospel of Matthew, and the
Acts of the Apostles? Dist^ust in their Cause, and d^speration. For with these
volu^es of Holy Scripture they were wounded; since they denied CHRIST to have
been borne of a Math. c. 1.
Virgin, and dreamed, that the Holie-Ghost then descended from Heaven, when
their Paraclete (that most blasphemous and wicked Persian) first stepped forth
and appeared to the world. What constrained the Irenaeu^ l. 1. c 26
Ebyonits to discanon all the Epistles of Paul? De^peration For these retayning
their dignity, Circumcision, which those men labored to revive, was wholly
antiquated and disannulled. What induced Luther (that flagitious Apostata) to
alleuiate the worth of the Epistle of James, by stiling it Iuth. in Non.
T^stam. Ge^m. Praefat. in Epist. Iacobi. Vid^ l de Captiuit. Bab. c de extrem
unction and Cent. 2. Magd page 58.
Contentious, swelling, dry, strawy, and unworthy the spirit of Apostle?
Desperation. For with this writing the wretch was appaled and confounded, when
he enthroned Justice in the only seat Iac. 2
of Faith. What caused the littar or p^sthumi of Luther at one push to thrust
out of the Canon of the Bible, the Books of Tohie, Ecclesiasticus, the
Machabies, and diverse B^bl. Geneu.
others equally calumniated by them for their Serpentine malice borne to th^se
former? Desperation: since by these Divine Oracles they are utterly foiled, as
often as they dispute of the patronage Tob 11.
of Angels, as often as they impugn the doctrine of Eccl^s. 15.
Fr^e-will; as often as they entertayne any discourse of the state of the
faithful 2. Machab. 12.
departed; as often, as they make assault upon the Article of Intercession 2.
Machab. 15
of Saints. But what? Is the matter brought to this issue? Is pertinacie in
judgment, and insolent Bouldnes arrived to this ascent and strain? Are not
our Adversaries afraid, after they have betrampled (with all contempt) upon
the Church of Christ, upon Coun^ells, the seats of Christ's Apos^les, the
Fathers, Martyrs, Emperors, Assents of all People, ancient Lawe^,
Vniu^rsities, Histories, briefly upon all steps or prints of Antiquity and
Sanctity; and further have publicly dogmatized, that all Controversies are to
receive their inappealable trial only from the written Word of God; Are they
not afraid (I say) nevertheless, thus to have mangled that very Word yet
remaining, by having hewed from thence (as from the whole body) so many, so
good, so fair parcells thereof? The Caluinists have paired away (not to speak
of some small passages) seven The Books he, Baruch, Tobias, Judith, Sapie^tia
E^^les. and the two Machab.
Books out of the Old Testament: The Lutherans the Epistle of James, and
through their malignant disaffection to this, five Epist. to the Heb. Epist. o^
Iu^e, 2. Epist. of Peter. 2. and 3. of John This appears from Lu^her in
P^aefat citat. Magd^burg. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. K^mpnit in exam Conc. Tride^t.
Sess. 4.
other Epistles; which at some time, and in some place heretofore, have been
called in question. With these our late spiritualized Brethren of Geneua Bibl
Geneu
do range (as Apocryphal) The Book of H^ster, and almost three whole Chapters
of Daniel; which the Anabaptists (their pew-fellowes) long since with a
scornful and subriding contenance have exploded. O with how much more
modesty did Austin proceed, who composing the sacred Catalogue of Scripture,
took not for his boundarie therein the Hebrew Alphabet, with the Jews; nor
the private revealing spirit, with our Sectaryes; but measured it with that
very Spirit, with the which CHRIST does inanimate the whole Body of the
Church: Austin. de doct^in. Christ. l. 2. c. 8.
Which Church being the Guardian of this Depositum (as the Heretics do
suggest) and not the Mistress, has challenged to itself long-since, by the
authority of most ancient Counsels, all this Treasury; Which point of late
the Council of Trent Vide Council. Tride^t. s^ss 4.
has in like manner acknowledged. The same Austin Vi^. M^l^b. Can. l. ^. de
lor. Theolog. c. 9.1^.11.
elaboratly disputing but of one small branch of Scripture, could not be
induced to believe, that the Book of Wisdom, which so long had received its
further strength from the judgment of the Church, from the long hand of Time,
from the approbation of the Ancients, from the secret instinct or Dictamen of
the faithful, should after all this through the precipitate rashness, or
swispering co^tradiction of some one fellow or other, be rejected, as a Austin
de Praed^st. Sanct. c. 14.
Book adulterate and spurious, or unworthy any place in the Canon of
Scripture: But what would the said Father say, if he were here conuersing upon
earth, and should behold diverse Luthers and Caluins to become Bible-makers, who
with their polishing fyle and castigation have shaued the Old and New
Testament: Neither have they strooken out the Book of Wisdom only, but diverse
other parts besides, from the whole bulk of Scripture; and this with such a
magistralitie and peculiar delivery of themselves, as that whatsoever of this
nature is not vented out of their shopp, the same should through a phreneticall
resolution be spitted at, and loathed, as wares untrimmed and not saleable?
These men, who are forced to descend to such a dire and execrable refuge,
though they be much honored through the assenting tongues of their followers,
though they t^afficke at pleasure in Church-liuings, though they have gained a
popular applause by their often Sermoning, though they jointly threaten in
words and writing the sword, torture, or the gallows against Catholics;
neue^thelesse they are found to be, but men overthrown, dishonored,
contemptible, and whose Cause even in its maisterveyne lies mortally
a-bleeding: Since they assuming to themselves a censo^ious and correcting
authority, and sitting (forsooth) as honou^able Judges, do obliterate and
deface with their expunging ^enne ^uen the Tables of Sacred W^in, i^ so it
seems to endanger them in any sort. Is there any man (though but initiated
in this kind of study) who will fear the petty (though subtle) forces of
such enemies? Which enemies (not being able to withstand the first onsett) so
soon as they appear in the eye and presence of you (Learned Men) and make
their flight to these their cony-holes, as relying therein upon their familiar
Spirit or Genius, are to be entertained not so much with words of contumely,
as with hissing and trampling of feet.

I would demand of them (for instance sake) by what right or privilege, they
thus cleave and tear a pieces the Body of the Scripture? They return this
horse and dry answer, that they do attempt, non exscindere, sed ^xcernere, not
to cut of any true parts, but to cull out the suppositions and forged. By the
authority of what Judge do they attempt this? By the spirit of the
Holie-Ghost; they reply. For this very evasion (being a cardinal point, and
great mystery in their art) is delivered by In^tit. l. 1. c. 7 (...) 4.5.
Calvin, that he might decline the judgment of the Church, by which all
Spiritts are tr^ed. Why then do several of you wound with your pens several
parts of the said Scripture, since you all promiscuously vaunte of enjoying the
same Spirit? Are you not here plunged and stabled? The Spirit of the Caluini^ts
achnowledgeth six Epistles, which Epistles are wholly rejected by the Spirit ^f
Luth^r; And yet they both (we must presume) were endued with the Spirit of the
Holie-Ghost. The Sixth. Sen^ns. l. 8. Haer. 10
Anabaptists do style the History of Job, a fable; as being intermixed with
Tragical and Comicall matter. By what means know they this? The Spirit so
teaches them. Castalio Praefat. in Cant. vide B^zam. in Praefat. ante Comment.
Calu. in I^sue.
(that goatish and lecherous companion) was not ashamed to prize the mystical
Canticle of Solomon (which all Catholics do admire, as the Paradise of the
Soul, as the Hidden Manna, as most choice delights in Christ) at no more, then
as a loue-song made to one's Lemman, or as an amorous discourse had with the
wayting-maydes of the Mistress. From whence sucked he this? from the Spirit. The
Apocalypse of John (where every line according to Hierome, Epist. ad Paul.
sounds some sublime and magnificall point) Luther, in ^xam. ^^n^il. Trid^nt.
^^ss. 4.
Praefat. i^ Apocal
Brentius, and Kempnitius (such rigid Aristarchi they are) do note with a
Theta of condemnation, as censuring it to be defective; and there-vpon they
wished, that it might loose the honor of being reputed Scripture. Who was here
their Instructour? The Spirit. Luther Luth. praefat. in N^^. Testam. Germ.
through a preposterous zeal ballanceth and compares the four Gospells
together, and advancing the Epistles of Paul much above the three first, he in
the close of all, peremptorily and Senatour-like, decrees the Gospel of John
only to be acknowledged as fair, true, and most principal; because as much as
in him did lie, he willingly would have made the Apostles partakers of his
contentions in matters of Faith. By whom was he here warranted? By the
presumed soueraignetie and domination of the Spirit. Yea this our diminutiue
Sermon. de Pha^^^. and Publican
Brother blushed not to disgorge some wanton and petulant words against the
Gospel of Luke, by reason that the exercise of Virtue and Good Works is
therein frequently inculcated. Who instilled this into him? The Spirit.
Theodorus Beza. in Luc 22.
Beza so commanded over the written Word, as that he dared to traduce (as
corrupted, and by some mean vitiated) that most sacred and hidden sentence out
of Luke 22. Hic est calix, nouum testamentum, in sanguine meo, qui (...).
(calix) pro vobis fundetur: This is the Chalice, the new Testament, in my
blood, which (Chalice) shall be shed for you: Because this texture of words could
suffer no other exposition, then that of the Wine in the Cupp, turned into the
true Blood of Christ. Who revealed thus much to him? The Spirit. Briefly,
whiles every one belieueth in his own Spirit, they do belie the name of the
Spirit of God, with most horrible blasphemy.

Who run these divisions of desperate boldness ( Learned Academ^ans) do they
not betray themselves? are they not easily vanquished? are they not in the
presence of such indicious Men, as you are, laid prostrate with the least
encounter? May I be afraid to dispute with these in defense of the Catholic
Faith, who without all faith and integrity have thus dishonored the Word, not
of man, but of God?

I here forbear to speak, how these men in their Versions of Scripture have
perverted the Scripture; they standing chargeable with most insufferable abuses
of this nature. I am loath to snatch this labor out of the hands of Gregory
Martin my Colleague, and one most skillful in the Tongues, who more accuratly
can perform the same; upon whom and some others this task is now laid. The
atrocitie, which here I labor to vn-fould, is far more facinorous, and
scarcely piacular: There are certain petty Doctors (forsooth) stepped up, who
even drunk with an impetuous frenzy, and bearing themselves great, as if
they did carrye about with them the Holie-Ghost, have laid their profane
fingars upon God's own Hand-wryting: condemning many passages thereof as
maimed, as imperfect, as false, as surreptitious: Some parts of it they have
corrected, some (by circumcising the Text) corroded, and others wholly
disauthorized. And for their Sanctuary in these their irreligious procedures,
they are glad to entrench themselves in Luther's Spirit, as in a rampire
fabricated of Phantasmes and painted walls; that so they may not be wholly
dumme or mute, when they fall upon such Scriptures, as do impugn their
Errors; And yet they find no less difficulty to fortifye and strengthen
their Cause thereby, then if they should, by endeavoring to supp up sparks of
fire, or eat stones.

This then first Reason or Motive (which I have planted, as a murthering-peece,
in the foreparte of my challenge) seems to me most pressing and strong; the
which, after it had (in my own sight) fully played upon the feeble and broken
forces of the Adversary, did (I confess) give courage to a Christian Man, and
to one trained in this kind of fight, to wage war in defense of the Crown
of the Eternal King, against the scattered relics and troops of the
profligated and wasted Enemy.

The second Reason. THE SENTENCE of Holy Scriptures.
AN other Allectiue, whereby I am invited to this Conflict, and which has
elevated and lessened in my apprehension these men's strength, and much
encouraged me to make a second charge upon them, is their continual affected
sleights in expounding the Scriptures, being loaded with deceit, but void of
wisdom. You shall instantly ( worthy Men) even feel and touch the same (so
gross and palpable it is) And for this end I appeal to you the rather, as to
my Auditors.

For example; let us demand and redemaund, why the professors of this new
Sect have excluded Christ from the Mystical Supper, and here exiled all
Trans-elementation. If they once but name the Gospel (the true History of our
Sauiour's speeches, life, and actions) we presently join issue. The words
thereof even depose the Truth in our behalf; Hoc est corpus meum; hic est
sanguis meus. Mat. 26 Marc. 14 Luc. 22.
Which words were so powerful and preuayling in the ears of Luther, as though
he much coueted to become a Zwinglian, whereby out of the riot of his malice he
might disadvantage the Pope, yet being here wholly ouerborne with the stream of
the Text, he forcedly yielded in part to the truth; and Epist ad Arge^tin.
confessed no less unwillingly Christ to be truly and really present in the
most holy Sacrament, then the Mat. 8 Marc. 1.
Devils long-since convicted with the Miracles of Christ, did vociferate and
noize him to be the Son of the living God. Well. Go on forward: The naked
Written Word fortifyeth our side, and debilitateth our Adversaries. But the
true Sense of this passage is here to be questioned. This we may infallibly
pick out of the words subsequent: Corpus meum, quod Luc. 22. Mat. 26
pro vobis datur. Sanguis meus, Marc. 14
qui pro vobis effundetur: My body which is given for you; My blood, which
shall be shedd for you. Hitherto Caluin's Cause is thornie, and fraught with
difficulties; Ours expedit, clear, and obuious. What is further to be done?
Confer the Scriptures herein, they say; so much they seek to impropriate the
Scriptures to their own use. We reply: nothing more to be desired. The Marc.
14 Luc. 22.
Gospells do unanimously conspire; Paul 1. Cor. c. 10. and 11.
assenteth thereto; The Words, the Sentences, the whole contexture do most
appositly and reverently repeat and ingeminate the Bread, the wine, a Mat. 16
remarkable miracle, heavenly Joan. 8.
food, his flesh, his body, and blood. Nothing here Enigmaticall, nothing
darkened with the mist of obscure phrases. Nevertheless our Adversaries still
persist in great estuation and heat, and never make an end of their further
altercation and wrangling. How are we then to proceed? I trust Antiquity
(which even Reverence forbidds to control) is no liar, but here she may be
heard; and what both sides through their reciprocal iealosie cannot perform,
that the venerable hoarie-head of all precedent Ages, being more near to
Christ, more remote from this Controversy, may indisputably determine. This
they do not brook; They are (they say) by this course betrayed; they
incessantly cry out: the word of God is a pure fountain; the Commentaries of
men they utterly reject. Most calumniously! most idly! Let us forcibly insist
in the Word of God; they byas and pervert the sense: Let us attend it with
answerable expositions of holy Interpreters, the sentinalls of the Church, in
every Age; they withstand. The Period of all is, that except thou will be
content to stand to the judgment of the guilty, no judgment of these matters
must pass. Shame they not, thus to give ground in their disputes? And thus
they bear themselves in every Controversy of Faith, ventilated between both
parties: Of Grace infused, of inherent Justice, of the Visibilitie of the
Church, of necessity of Baptism, of the Sacraments and Sacrifice, of the
Meritts of Holy men, of Hope and fear, of Disparitie of Sinne^, of the
Soueraignetie of Peter, of the Keys, of Vows, of Euang^licall Counsels,
finally of all other Questions we have frequently alleged and discussed
diverse texts of Scripture (and those most choking) in our Books, in our
Discourses, in the Churches, in the Schools: Our Adversaries but elude and
shuffle them of. We have adjoined to the said Texts (for the sealing up of the
matter) the sorting Scholiaes and constructions of the ancient Greek and Latin
Fathers: They contemn and slight them. But what is the closure of all?
forsooth Doctor Martin Luther, or else Philipp Melancthon, or certainly
Zwinglius, or without all doubt Calvin and Beza have most infallibly Oracled
the Truth tou^hing the former points. Shall I so much wrong any one of you, by
reputing him of so stopped a nose, as that being premonished, he cannot strongly
sent so thick and gross an artifice? Wherefore I freely confess, that I
greedily thirst after your Academicall Schools, that so in the Theater and
sight of yourselues, I may weaken and ruffle these crisped and effeminate
soldiers, they being once brought out of their shades into open view; but this
not through any strength of mine (who stand not in a hundred part paralelled
with others of our Religion) but through the force of a most preuayling Cause,
and impregnable Truth.

The third Reason. The nature of HOLY CHVRCH.
AT the very hearing of the word ( Church) pronounced, the Enemy did grow
pale: Nevertheless one imposture he has excogitated, of which I much desire*
you should take notice, that thereby you may more easily deprehend the ruin
and mendicitie of falsehood. After he had diligently observed, that both in the
Prophetical and Apostolical Scriptures there was made frequently most
honorable mention of the Church: As, that it is called the Holy Apoc. 2
City, a fructiferous ps. 7.
Vine, a mighty high Esaias. 2
Mountain, the right and Esaias. 35
straight Way, the only Cant. 6.
Dove, the Kingdom Mat 13
of Heaven, the Cant. 4.
Sp^use and Ephesians. 5
body of Christ the pillar 1. Timo^. 3
of Truth; that Society, into the which the Holie-Ghost (then promised) Joan.
14.
instilleth all healthful things, that Society, upon the which, the Mat. 1^
Devil (though swollen with malice) through out all the parts thereof, could
never fasten his teeth with ^nie deadly bitt; briefly that Society, against
the which, whosoever is contumacious Mat. 18
and refractorie (although with his tongue he preaches Christ) yet he can have
no greater share in him, then any Publican or Heathen. Now in regard of these
Panegyricks the Adversary dares not in express words openly impugn the
Church, which the Scriptures do so much magnifye and celebrate: Therefore the
name of the Church he subtly retayneth, the thing it self by defining he
utterly overthrows; thus he making the Being of the Church, to consist in a
Not-being. For he has attempted to delineate and draw the Church with such
Calu. Instit. l. 4. c. 1 number. 2. and 3.
proprieties and shadows, which do keep her in a continual latencie; and as
being removed from all sensible apprehension (like to Plato's Idea) do expose
her to the sight of some few men, and those only, who being rapt Spiritualists,
can comprehend with their nice imagination this aerie body, and can with a
transpearcing and searching eye find out, and steadfastly behold the members
of this Sodalitie. Where is any candor in this proceeding? Where ingenuitie
and playnenesse, the Attendant of Truth? What Scriptures, what sententionall
Resolutions, what Fathers do thus pensill forth the Church? There are Epistles
written to the Churches Apoc. 1
of Asia, there are also several written by Peter, by Paul, by John, and other
the Apostles; The planting, propagation, and expansion of Churches is
abundantly recorded in the Acts Act. 8.10. and sequent.
of the Apostles. What do all ^^ese passages of Scripture enforce? Do they
euict those Churches to be made known and manifest only to God and holy men,
or otherwise to Christians of all sorts: But certainly; Durum telum
necessitas. Commiserate them. For since these men, during the full space of
fifteen hundred years (after long disquisition and search made) could not
light upon one City, one Village, one House empoysoned with their Nouelismes,
until that unhappy M^nke Luth^r.
had polluted a Virgin (devoted to God) by incestuous copulation, or that
Swash-buckler and Roaring-Boy Zwingl.
of Heluetia had conspired against his Country, or that Calvin.
Stigmaticall fugitive had impatronized himself of Geneua; no wonder if they be
constrained to vaunt of their Church (if ani^ Church they will challenge) (...)
lying in a perpetual obscurity; and to make claim to those for their
Progenitors, whom neither themselves had known, nor any others have ever
seen. Except (perhaps) they glory in some of their chief Prodromi and
forerunners, whom to have been positive and formed vide Henr. Pantal. in
Chronog.
Heretics, is evident; As, Aerius, Iouinian, Vigilantius, Heluidius, the
Iconomachi, Berengarius, the Waldenses, Lolhardus, Wicliff, Huss, from all
which they have begged certain pestilent fragments of Doctrinall speculations;
greedily indeed licking up much of that poison, which those former had vomited
out in their blurred papers. Wonder not ( Academians) if I nothing fear these
empty smoakes, the which so soon as I shall come to the height of your
presence, will be most easy to dissipate and dispell. For this is our
Sermocination and discourse.

Tell me (o Protestant) will thou strike sail, and yeald to that Church, which
has ever enjoyed in former Ages an vneclipsed and glorious Conspicuitie?
Altogether (replies he) and without appeal. Let us then perlustrate the
places and times. To which Church do thou subscribe? To the Congregation of
the Faithful. Who were the Men? Their names indeed do lie interred in
oblivion; but it is evident, that many such did then live. Evident? To whom
is it evident? To God. Who dares mantayne this groundles assertion? We, who
have received from the Lord herein sublime Enthusiasmes and illuminations.
Fabulous toys! How can I be drawn to believe this? If thou did burn with
an inflamed faith, thou would as certainly know this, as thou know, that
thou do live.

Spectatum admissi risum teneatis? Whereas the divine Word commands all
Christians to range and join themselves to the Church; to take heed of being
slain by the spiritual sword, to live in peace in the house of God; to lay
down their souls upon the affiance of the Church, as upon the pillar of
Truth; here to determine all complaynts and accusations; to repute men
disincorporated and cast out from thence, but for Heathens: Is it possible
then, (as if Christ instantly intended to repudiate his Spouse) that it should
not be known, during the revolution of so many Hundreds of years, where the
Church was, or whether in all that time it remained in its full Orb, but rather
suffered an utter disparition; or who they were, that appertayned thereto? Or
will our Adversaries, notwithstanding all this, still whisper in Corners, that
there (there only) the Church is, where their Gospellers, and such only, as
they suppose to be predestined, are to be found? From whence it ineuitably
resulteth, that if one should deprave and calumniate the authority of his
spiritual Prelat, he offends not, if so he can be persuaded, that his said
Prelat were at that time in mortal sin, and had finally fallen from the
Church.

Whereas then I called to mind, that our Adversaries have fabricated such
deceiptfull Stratagems, wherewith no Church in any former Age was acquaynted;
and that they being deprived of the thing itself, would in these straights
nevertheless seek to possess (and therein rest solaced) the naked sound of a
poor Word or Name, I was much animated at the remembrance of your Christalline
and clear Iudgemenrs, and did undoubtedly promise to myself, that as soon, as
you had discovered these subterfugious Sophistications and frauds even from the
Adversaries own confession, you (as Men of true resolution and fortitude)
would instantly cut asunder all such netts and illaqueations, wouen to ensnare
your Souls, unto your own interminable perdition.

The fourth Reason. COVNCELS.
IN the infancy of the Church, a most weighty question and doubt touching the
practice of the Ceremonies of the Law (which then much afflicted the weak and
tender minds of the Belieuers) received its final decision from a Council of
the Apostles and Seniours, upon that occasion assembled. The Sons did then
believe their Parents, the Sheep their Pastors charging them in these words:
Visum est Act. 15
Spiritui Sancto, and nobis. In aftertimes there followed four Oecumenicall
or General Councels, ready ever and pressed to extirpate any Heresy, budding
up within the circle of those Ages. Which Counsels have gained such a hand of
Authority, as that more then a thousand years since, wonderful Honor was
ascribed unto them, even as to the Gregor. l. 1. Epi. 24.
words of the Holie-Ghost. I will not exspatiate a farre-of; for even here at
home, the said Counsels did obtain their ancient soueraignetie and inviolable
dignity; and this by the concurrent and joint consent of the whole Ann. 1.
Elizab.
Parlamenr. In proof whereof, o England (my most dear Country) I call thee to
witness. For if thou will reverence rhose four Counsels (as thou did then
make some fair and suspicious approaches thereof) thou will afforde supreme
honor to the Bishop of the first Sea, I mean to Peter: Nieen. Can. 6.
Chalced. art. 4 16 Constantinop. cap. 5.
thou will acknowledge an Incruent Sacrifice Ephesians. Council. Epist. ad Nestor.
Nicen. can. 14.
of the Body and Blood of Christ upon the Altar: Thou will humbly beseech the
blessed Martyrs, Calced. Act. 11.
, and all the Court of Heaven, to advocate and intercede to Christ for thee:
thou will restrain voluptuous Apostataes from all execrable yoaking together,
and public Nic. Council. apud Socrat. l. 1. c. 8.
incest: briefly thou will do many things, which now thou forbearest to do,
and wilt forbear vide Chalced. Can. 4.7.16.24
to do many things, which now thou do. But to proceed: I do here
undertake and give my hand, to demonstrate (when just occasion thereof shall be
presented) that the General Counsels of all succeeding Ages (and particularly
that of Trent) were equally prized and reverenced with the first four. Now
then I being thus encamped and strengthened with the inexpugnable fortress of
all the General Counsels; why may I not enter into this Combat, with a
cheerful alacrity; being ready to charge upon the Enemy, what way soever
he betakes? since I will produce prooffes so evident, that he cannot detort; so
warrantable and authorized, that he shall not dare to deny. Perhaps he will
labor to rauell out the time in idle and unnecessary surplusage of words; But
if I have taken (Notable Men) your true height, he shall not be able to enchant
either your ears or eyes. Now if any man shall become so dissolved and loose
in judgment, as to balance himself (being but one) with all the Senators and
Doctors of the whole world, and those incomparably more famous, ^ore holy,
more learned, more ancient; I would willingly behold that meretricious and
frontlesse Countenance; the which after I have once exposed to your sight, all
the rest I will leave to your more retired and morning thoughts.

In the mean time this I will auerre, that whosoever seeks to dis^steeme and
abrogate the authority of a Council (with due circumstances celebrated) it
being in this respect the last Resort or T^ibunal, and above all Appeal; that
man seems to be of no counsel, no wit, no brains; and not only in points
Theological short, but even in matters Civil, impolitick and iniudicious. For
if the Spirit of God has ever shined upon the Church, doubtlesly then is the
time of darting forth its beams and influences, when the Religion, maturitie,
learning, wisdom, and dignity of all Churches dispersed upon the face of the
earth are gathered into one City; and there they even besieging the ears of
God with their prayers, do by the interueniencie both of all Divine and Humane
helps, for the mining and searching out of the Truth, implore the Spirit Mat.
28 Joan. 14.
promised, that by its direction they may decree healthfully and prudently for
Man's soul.

Now let any He^eticall Sr. John, or Superintendent stepp out, let him lift up
the eyelids, draw awry his nose, rub his forhead (his Mimicall gesture thus
commenting his, inward mind) finally let him with all scurrilitie and
ignorance judge his own Judges, the very eye and carriage of Heresy; what
Comicall sport, what matter of laughter will this empty Trunk afforde? Luther
l. de Capt. Babil.
is found to say, that he preferred the voices and judgments of two good and
learned men, consenting in the name of Christ (he did mean himself, and
Melancthon) before any Counsels, though never so numerous, never so ancient.
O circulation and winding inflexions! Kempnitius in Exam. Council. Trid.
in like sort dared to subject the Council of Trent, to the censure of his
own vertiginous and gyddie head-peece, and to cause the worth thereof to pass
through the strait report of his embasing tongue. What gained he? eternal
shame and infamy. Whilst this excentrous and irregular Sectarie (except he
give a full stopp in the mean time to his present course) will be interred in
the grave of Arius; the Council of Trent* the more accession of years it
shall hereafter enjoy, the more will be attended on with honor, reverence, and
estimation. Good God! What confluence of several Nations, what peculiar choice
of Bishops of the whole World, what splendor and fastigious dignity of Kings
and Commonwealths, what most remarkable and profound Divines, what sanctity,
what tears, what fastings, what Academicall learning, what skill in tongues,
what pearcing subtilitie of wit, what incessant diligence and labor, what
infinite reading, what riches of virtue and literature did replenish that
sacred and holy Consistory? Upon occasion one time I did hear diverse great
and learned Prelates (of which number, Antonius Archbishop of Prague was one,
by whose sacred Hand I am created Priest) much glorying, that for some few
years, they had made their stay in that School: they further affirming, that
they never received from Ferdinando then Emperor (to whom otherwise they had
been much obliged) a more princely and magnificent Benefitt, then this was;
that some of them being sent as Legates out of Pannonia, had their places and
suffrages in the Council of Trent. Of which thing the Emperor being
advertised, and as willing to accent this one courtesy above the rest, did
regratulate the said Bishops at their return, in these words: Aluimus vos in
Schola optima. Now why did not our Adversaries (being invited thereto by
public warrant) hasten to this Synod, that so they might in open view ^efell
those, against whom they m^tter like froggs croaking out of their little holes?
To salve their engaged honor therein, they reply, that they could not securely
repair thither; since solemn stipulation. and promise (made upon the like
occasion) was not kept with Hus^ and Hi^^ome of P^ague. Who did inf^inge it?
The Doct^urs (say they) of the Council of Constance. It is false; for that
Council gave not any stipulation. The true state of these two men was this.
Huss had never lost his life, but that being a perfidious Huss.
and turbulent fellow, (as ever rowing the Oa^e of Sedition) and escaping by
flight (though after brought back) which Sigismund the Emperor had interdicted
him upon the danger of his head, and violating all Conditions made by him to
the Emperor, he labored to eneruate, or rather frustrate the authority of
his Letters Patent. A precipitate and headlong malice did ouerreach this
Incendiarie; For after he had stirred up great combustions and Tragedies in his
own Country of Bohemia, he was commanded to make his stay at Constance; He
contemned the prerogative of the Council; demanded warrant of the Emperor.
The Emp^rour sealed thereto. The Christian World (more potent then the
Emperor) unsealed. To renounce his Nouelismes, this Arch-heretike could not be
induced; he perished. Now Hierome Ie^^me ^f Prage.
of Prague (to wind the matter up in few words) came by stealth to Constance,
was protected by no man; Being apprehended, he was conuented; He pleaded his
Cause, was entertained kindly, enjoyed his liberty, was cured, abiured his
Heresy; He after relapsed; he was burned. But why so often do they exagitate
this straying and alone example among many hundreds? Let them reuolue their
own Annals. Was not Martin Luther himself (hateful to God and Man) cited at
Augusta Anno 1518.
before Cardinal Caietan, and did he not there eructate and belche forth what
he could, and yet as being secured by the Letters of Maximilian, went he not
away peaceably and without danger? The same Martin, being commanded to appear
at the Cittye 1521
of Worms, though then Caesar and diverse Princes of the Empire were highly
offended toward him, did not the Word of Caesar (whose Eagles pownce scorned to
seize upon so base a pray) become his Sanctuary? To conclude, were not the
Antefignani and most eminent men among all the Lutherans and Zuinglians, even
in the presence of Cha^les the Fifth (an enemy to Heretics, a Conqueror, a
supreme and absolute Lord) after promise for their safety once given,
permitted to exhibit their Confessions August. Confess.
of Faith, so often renewed at the Dietes of Augusta? and did they not depart
with all impunity and freedom? Just in the same manner did the Council of
Trent vide Council. Trid^nt Sess 15. and 18.
provide most ample cautions for the Adversary, repayring thereto. He would not
vouchsafe to use them. Notwithstanding he much vaunteth and exalts himself in
corners and private Conuenticles; where after he has psittically learned to
sound some few Greek words, he will needs seem to be wise and literate: He
declineth (with a toade-like ^etirednes) the aspect and eye of the World, which
should range a learned man in his due place, and call him to wartantable seats
of Judicature. Let the Protestants procure for the Catholics of England, if
they desire their Soul's good, the like Handwriting or Warrant from the
Queen. We will not be affrighted with the misfortune of Huss. Let us once
enjoy but the word of the Prince, and we will in all haste even fly together
unto the Court.

But to recover myself, and to return from whence I have digressed; All
General Counsels plead my Cause; the First, the Last, the Middle. These are
my weapons, with these I will fight. Let the Adversary expect the encounter of
a looped and pearcing Iauelin, the which he shall be never able to draw out of
his wounded side. Let Satan become thereby vanquished; and CHRIST victorious.

The fifth Reason. THE FATHERS.
AT what time the Honorable Surname of Christians began in the City of
Antioch to get more and more on wing, and became more diuulged, Doctors, Act.
13 1. Co^. 12. and 14 Ephesians. 4.
that is, eminent Divines, and Prophets, to wit, remarkable Preachers, did
then flourish. Of this kind our Lord himself was most solicitous to provide
for his ensuing flock, Scribes and Wisemen, lea^ned in the Kingdom of God,
bringing forth things, New Mat. 13.
and Old; fully instructed in Christ and Moses. Now these men being bequeathed
to the Church for her larger opulencie, and being (as it were) her chief
retinue or Guarde, how great a mischief is perpetrated to explode and eliminate
them? And yet the Adversary has exploded them. Upon what inducement? Because
their standing is his falling. When I had diligently observed this exorbitancie
of carriadge, I did fervently demand the Combat; not that iocularie and
sportfull skirmi^h, which the vulgar perform in their public streets; but
that severe and grave conflict, by which we may encounter in the Schools of
your own Universities: Pede pes, densusque viro vir.

If at any time hereafter it may be thought lawful, to make our repair to the
Fathers, the war is ended. They are all as entirely ours, as Gregory the
Thirteenth is, that most living Father of the Sons of the Church. For to
omit all such sparsed and scattered passages (discerped by us) out of the
Father's Monuments, which most punctually and positiuely do fortify our Faith;
we do houlde and possess even whole volumes of theirs, whose peculiar Subject
is articulately and copiously to discourse and prove, and, as it were, to
dissect every nerve and finew of that Evangelical Religion, which we at this
present maintain. The double Diony^. Areop de quo vi^^ Syn^d 6 Act. 4 Adou
Treu in M^rtyr. Su^d. M^tap.
Hiera^chie of Dionysius the Martyr, what Ecclesiastical Orders, what sacred
Mysteries, what rites does it thoroughly teach and set down? This point so
gauled Luther, as that he reputed his Works to be, ^u^h. com^^. in 1 13 17
D^u^er. and in Captiui. Babyl
Sim llima somniis, nec non perniciossima; most l^ke to dreams; and most
pernicious. Caussaeus, some obscure Terrae filius in France (as borne of the
slime of that Country) following the obliquitie of Luther's paths, was not
afraid often to term this Dionysius (being the Apostle of a most famous
Nation) delirum Caussae dia^og. 5 and 11.
senem, an old doting man. Ignatius does mightily distaste the Centurists, he
also distasteth Calvin; C^nt. 2 c. 10.
so as these Refuse and scumme of men have (through their cold severity)
noted in his Epistles, Instit. l. 1 c. 13. number 29.
deformes naeuos, and pu^^das naemas, certain f^ule blemishes, and tr^fling
songs. In the judgment of these rigide Censours (whose Calenda^i^ and
prescribed ta^ke, was but vnworthiby to tax the Fathers) Irenaeus has
diuulged in his Writings, ^anaticum Cent. 2. c. 5.
quiddam, certain fanatical st^ff, and rapt or inspired conceits. Clemens (the
Author of the Book cal^ed Stromata) did vent forth, Cant. 2.
zizania and feces; darnell, and bas^ matter or dreggs. Upon the rest of the
Fathers of this Age (being indeed Apostolical Men) they even shower down
reproaches, daring to charge them, that Cent. 1. l. 2 c 10. and s^q.
blasph^mias and monst^a posteris reliquerunt, they have transmitted in their
Writings blasphemies, and monstrous opinions to their successors. Upon
Tertullian they make violent onsetts and incursions, for his maintayning of
that Error, which we Catholics first discovered to them in him: Yet in the
meane-time let them remember, that the Book, Tertul l de Praefer. contra
Haeres.
de Praescriptionibus, written by this Father (in which Book the Sectaries of
this time, even by a presaging pen, are dangerously wounded) was never
controuled by the Church of God. How clearly and exactly does Hyppol. Orat. de
Cons. secul.
Hyppolitus, (Bishop of Portua) premonstrate and point out the times of Luther;
the very strength of Antichrist, and for this peculiar reason they lowdly
mouth it, calling him, scriptorem Jewel.
infantissimum, and laruam, a most childish-Writer, and walking Spirit. Upon
Cyprian (who was the honor and pride of Afrike) that French C^ussae. dialog.
8. and 11.
Critic, and the Magdeburgians C^nt 33. c. 4.
have throwed this imputation, tearming him, stupidum, and destitutum Deo, and
deprauatorem Paenitentiae, a man stupid or blockish, and deprived of the grace
of God; and one, who has fowly corrupted the doctrine of Penance. What points
of Papistrie (as they in the foam of their impure language do speak) did this
Father maintain? He did write of the state of cloystred Virgins, of revolted
Apostataes, of the unity of the Church, such elaborate Treatises, as also such
Epistles to Cornelius, then Bishop of Rome; as that except we take away all
credit and authority from the words of this Martyr, Peter Martyr Vermilius and
all his Consociates therein, are to be accounted far worse, then Adulterers
and sacrilegious persons. But not to dwell ouerlong in particular Fathers, (who
are most basely trodden upon by these men) all the Fathers of this Age (without
exception) are insimulated within one and the same sentence of condemnation;
Cent. 3. c. 4.
quippe d^ctriuam de Paen^tentia mire deprauarint, because they wonderfully
d^praued the doctrine of Penance. From what fountain streameth the acerbitie
of this their accusation? Because the rigor of those Canons, Paenit veteres
Canon.
which were of force in that time, is incompatible with the softnes and
delicacie of Luther's Sect, which, as being more apt for banqueting-chambers
and bedds of down, then Temples and Churches, is accustomed to entertain with
vain discourse voluptuous ears, and Ezec. 13
puluillos omni cubito assuere, to spend the time in all pleasure,
Sardanapalisme, and luxury. To descend to the next Centurie: in what has it
sinned? Chrysostom (forsooth) and the Doctors thereof (as presumed to have in
their writings certain defects and blemishes, iustitian^ p^aefat. in C^nt. 5.
sidei saede obscurarunt, have fowly obliterated and obscu^ed the Justice of
Faith.

Nazianzene, whom (...) and for honour-sake the Ancients have graced with the
title of The Divine, in the judgment of Caussaeus, is Dialog. c. 7.8. Causs^.
vbi sup.
fabulator, quid affirma^et, n^sc^it, a lying writer, not knowing what he would
affirm. Ambrose, a cacodaemo^e fascinatus est, is bewitched by an evil
spirit. Hierome is by the Adversary censured to be, Beza. in A^t. Ap^st. c. 23.
aeque damnatus atque diabolus, as c^rtainly damned as the devil; B^z vbi
supra.
iniurio^us Apostolo, blasphaemus, sceleratus, impius: injurious to the
Apostle, blasphemous, and wicked. In the libration and balance of Gregorius
Massouius (a great Idolater of Calvin) test s^an^h. (...) de Trinit
pluris est vnus Caluinus, quam centum Augustini, One Calvin is of greater
authority, then a hundred Austins. Tush, a Hundred is here no number. Luther,
(who even belieueth in himself) nothing prizeth against his own authority
Luther. l. contra Hemir. vegem Angl.
mill Augustinos, mill Cyprianos, mill Ecclesia^, a thousand Austins, a
thousand Cy^rians, a thousand Churches. I hold it but needless to spinne out
this point to any further length. For who bear themselves with this insolency
to these former Fathers, (wronging their honors with such Phillippicks, or
Satyrous Pasquils) no wonder if they breath nothing but pride, contumacie, and
petulant procacitie against Optatus, A^hanasius, Hilarious, the Cyrills,
Epiphanius, Basil, Vincentius Fulgentius, Leo, and Gregory Bishop of Rome.
Nevertheless if there can be given any just pretext for iniust proceedings, I
deny not, but that there ever occurrs in the Father's Writings (upon what
book soever we shall but incidently fall) that at which our Adversaries (as
long as they remain unanimous among themselves) must needs stomach and rest
much discontented.

For who does hate set and appointed fasts (the wings of Prayer) must they not
rest disaffected toward Leo and Chrysostom; who have made most learned and
moning Sermons of the fa^t of Lent, and of other ordained fast, as of things
^^^^ally practiced in their days?

Who have prostituted their souls to open sale, for riches, lust, Epicurisme
(the Element of Lust) ambitious and vain sights or Spectacles, must not such
men be fully g^rged against Basil, Chrysostom, Hierome, Austin; whose
excellent Books of the Institutes, rules, and required virtues of Monks, are
in each man's hands?

Who have even enchayned and shackled Man's Will, by despoyling it of all
Liberty; Who have taken away all Rites and Ceremonies used at Christian
funerals; Who have burned and consumed the Relics of Saints; can they be in
charity with Austin; who has written, de libero arbitrio three Books; de
cura pro Mortuis, one; and of Miracles exhihited at Monuments or Tombs of
Martyrs, a large Austin. de Ciuit Dei l. 22 8.
Chapter^^^ that most worthy Work, de Ciuita^e Dei, besides some Sermons
Austin. sermon. de diverse. ^4. and seq.
of the same Subject?

Who measure their Faith by the false yard of impostures, deceits, and
calumnious sleights; how tetricall and sour must they be with Austin, who has
written a most famous Epistle against Manichaeus the Heretic, in the Austin.
contro. Epist. Man^ch. quam vocat. fundam. c. 4.
which he professes himself ever to cleave and stick fast to Antiquity,
Consent in doctrine, an uninterrupted Succession, and lastly to that Church,
which alone (among so many emergent Heresies) by long Tradition and custom,
challenges to itself the name Catholic? Optatus Bishop of Miletus (whose pen
did single out the Donatists) impugneth their Sect or party from the force of
Catholic Optat. l. 1. and 2 contr.
Consent and Communion, accuses them of wi^kednes from the decree of Pope
Melchisedech, l. 1. vbi supra.
refuteth their He^esie from the Order l. 2.
and succession of the Roman Bishops, displayeth their fury from their
contaminating l. 1.
and defyling of the B. Eucharist and Chrisme, conceaueth horror at their
sacrilege showed in breaking down l. 6.
of Altars, in quibus Christi membra portata sunt, upon which the members of
Christ are borne and in polluting the Chalices, l. 6.
qui Christi sanguinem tenuerunt, which contained the Blood of Christ. Now I
much desire to know, how our Adversaries bear themselves toward Optatus,
whose memory Austin Aust. l. 1. contr. Parm. and de Vnitat. Eccles. c. 16. and
l 3 de doctr. Christ. c. 40.
much celebrateth by accounting him a venerable and Catholic Bishop, equal to
Ambrose and Cyprian; Fulgen^. l. 2 ad Monim. Vide Epist. Synod. Alex.
and Fulgentius by styling him, a holy and faithful Interpreter of Paul,
resembling him to Austin and Ambrose.

The Adversaries do read the Creed of Athanasius in their Churches. Are they
(trow you) favorable and gracious to him? Who (being a grave Author) did even
with whole peales of Lauds and praises magnifye (in a choice book of his)
Antonie Vide Hi^ron. de scrip. Eccles.
the Hermit in Aegipt; And who with the Council of Alexandria did with all
prostration and humility appeal to the judgment of the Apostolical Sea of
S. Peter? How often does Prudentius in his Hymns pray unto the Martyrs, Vide
Epist. Synod. Alex. ad f^licem 1.
whose worth in Verse he so much records? How often before their Reliks and
bones does he worship the King of all Martyrs? stands not this divine Poet unto
them in the Aspect of a Diametricall Opposition?

Hierome sharpened his pen against Vigilantius, in defense of the Relics and
honor of Saints; against Iouinian, in patronizing the state of Virginity, do
they not read his Writings, with the Eye of sulliuation and malignitie?

Ambrose Vide ep. Amb. ad Italos t. 3. Su ij and eius^e^ Ambros. Epist. 85 Item
sermon. 91.
honored his two Tutours Geruasius and Protasius with a remarkable Celebritie,
and this to the great disgrace and ignominy of the Arian Heresy; to which Act
the most holy Fathers Aug. l. 22 de Ciuit. Dei c. 8. Gregor. Turr. l. de
gloria Martyr. c. 46. Metaphrast.
have ascribed their due Encomion and praise; and which God himself has
warranted not with one only prodigious event or miracle. Can they brook
Ambrose therefore? Gregory the Great, our Apostle, and in truth he is wholly
ours; and under this title the very sound of his Name iarres in the ears of
our Adversaries: This man (I say) the fury of Calvin Calvin. Iust^t l. 1 c.
11. nu^. 5.
denies to have been instructed in the School of the Holy Ghost, because he
called sacred Images (by which the Saints are to us absently present) the
Books of the illiterate and unlearned.

The day is too short, and indeed the Sun must run a greater circle of his
course to serve my turn, before I can number the Epistles, Sermons, Homilyes,
smaller Volumes, and Disputations of the Fathers; all being filled and stored
with unanswerable proofs in defense of the Sentences and Articles of our
Catholic Religion. As long as these their Monuments of Learning are to be
soulde in the Stationer's shopps, (in which the Enemy most unworthily
pretends, as you have seen, so many chains of Error and Superstition to have
been wouen) so long in vain are our Books forbidden to be read; in vain are
the Seaports so narrowly kept, for the preventing of their entrance in, in
vain are the houses of Catholics, their t^unks, boxes, and other private
receptacles violently broken open; in vain are so many minacious and
threatening Proclamations set upon the public Gates, and other chief places
in Cittyes; since neither Harding, nor Sanders, nor Allan, nor Stapleton* nor
Bristoll, do affect these supposed new dreams, more zealously, or with
greater fervor and sedulitie, then these Fathers (above by me mentioned) have
done.

When I ^eflected upon this point with a serious introuersion of mind, I
grant, it gave an edge to my desire, and my greedines of Combat was increased,
in the which what way soever the Adversary shall take (except he will yield to
God's honor) he runs himself upon the sands. If he allow of the Fathers;
he then loses the field: If he exclude them; he thus escapes; but by flight.

It so chanced (myself then being young) that John Jewel* the Antesignanus and
foreman of the Caluinists in England (who ever builded his state in the ruins
of men's Souls) did in his Sermon at Paul's Cross, provoke the Catholics with
incredible boasting; he through Hypocrisy, appealing to, and calling upon
those Fathers, who flourished within the first six hundred years of our
Redemption. Those worthy men, who then suffered exile at Louayne, in all haste
arrested his challenge with their penns, though they stood obnoxious to diverse
difficulties, in regard of the iniquity of the times. I dare be bold to
pronounce, that the calumny, ignorance, improbitie, and supercilious
impudency of this Jewel (who indeed wanted a foil to make his luster good)
then happily laid open by these Men's wrytings, did so much benefitt to our
general Cause, at that I can hardly remember any one thing more aduantageous
to the Catholic Church of England, then groaning under the Burden. Menacing
Edicts and scrowles were in all haste affixed upon the common Posts, that no
such books should be redd, or kept by any; though Iewell's vaunting
exclamation might justly seem to extort the writing of them. All Persons at
that time, which observed this passage, did by this means learn, that the
ancient Fathers were wholly Catholic; that is, wholly Ours.

Neither did D. Humfrey conceal this wound, given to himself and his Brethren;
who, though he daigned to become Iewell's Encomiast, in immoderatly extolling
him, and by seeking to embalme his Memory by writing de vita Iuelli.
his life; yet did cast this one aspersion of inco^sideration and inaduertencie
upon him; to wit, that Jewel proffered to stand inalterably to the judgments
of the Fathers; with which men this Doctor in peremptory and express words
disclaymeth from having the least entercours, commerce, or association: so
loath is the Enemy to keep any quarter with the Primitive Writers and
Fathers.

One time in familiar discourse, we thoroughly sownded Tobie Matthew (who now
domineres in the Pulpit, enchanting, much above others, by his often Sermoning,
the ear of Credulity, and whom for his good literature and sparks of
Morality we greatly affected) entreating him to answer ingenuously and
plainly; Whether that man, who spent himself in diligent reading the Fathers,
could possibly fluctuate touching the truth of the Roman Religion, or could
unfeignedly embrace that Faith, to the which himself so earnestly exhorts. He
freely vnbreasted himself, and thus replied: it was impossible, if so with the
reading ^f them he would give an indubious ass^nt and credi^t unto them. Which
Sentence is most true, and I am fully persuaded, that neither himself at this
present, nor Matthew Hutton (who is reputed by some, to be much traveled in
the Fathers) nor the rest of our Adversaries, who perform the like labor, can
be of any other judgment.

Hitherto therefore I may securely descend into these Lists, as prepared to
battle with those, who (as men houlding the wolf by the ears) are forced to
leave upon their Cause a perpetual and indelible scarre or blemish, w^ether
they reject, or admit the Fathers: Since in the One, they but provide for
their running away, in the Other they are suffocated and strangled.

The sixth Reason. THE GROUND of the Fathers.
IT is clear, that if ever that precept and command: John. 5.
Scrutamini Scripturas, Search the Scriptures, was (as in reason it has, and
ought to be to us) peculiarly incumbent upon any sort of Christians, that the
most holy Fathers did (with the greatest praise, and in the highest degree)
accomplish the same; since by these Men's diligence and charges, the Bibles
have been translated and transcribed into so many tongues, and transported
into so many discoasted Nations: By these Men's dangerous (yet successiue)
attempts, they were snatched out of the flames of the Enemy, and of all utter
deuastation and extinguishment; By these Men's indefatigable pains, each part
and passage of them was most painfully cut up, and (as it were) anatomized.
For both day and night those Fathers did even drink up the Holy Scriptures:
they were ever most ready from out their Chayres and Pulpitts, to discourse of
the Holy Scriptures; they always enriched their voluminous writings with
testimonies, borrowed from the Holy Scriptures; they have disclosed and
unfolded with their faithful Scholiaes and Commentaries, the most knottie
passages of the Holy Scripture: they have seasoned their Feasts and Fasts,
with studying the Holy S^riptures: To conclude, they have spent all their
days with a Sabbath l^sse and incessant labor ^euen to the end of their
feeble old age) in meditating upon the H^lie Scriptures. And although the said
Doctors were frequently accustomed, to draw their arguments (in patronage of
their Faith from the authority of their forefathers, from the practice of the
Church, from the Succession of Popes, from General Counsels, from
Apostolical Traditions, from the vn^aunted constancy of Martyrs, from the
Sentences and Decrees of the Pastors of the Church* and from stupendous and
astonishing Miracles, whereby the settled Course of Nature was, as I may say,
vnnatured and dissolved: Yet all these different sorts of proofs they ever
most willingly enleuened with stored testimonies of the written Law: This is
their fauorit-studie; this they press; in this they make their Station; this
mount (to ouertopp their Adversaries) they daily raise higher through a
continual coaceruation and heaping together of sacred Texts; To this Cant. 4.
armaturae fortium, these most valiant and spiritual Commanders, fortifying
the well-repayred edifice of the City of God (against all wicked assaults)
do yeald by all-right the first place and precedencie. And here now I have the
more reason to rest astonished at that proud and foolish Exception of the
Adversary, who, (as one still seeking for water in a flowing stream) never
cease to charge the Father's writings (being even loaded with infinite
passages of Scripture) with want and penury of Scripture. So long (says he)
he will give assent to the Fathers, as long as they inseparably adhere to the
divine Scriptures. Stand his words (think you) in conjunction with ^is
thoughts? Well then, go to. Let the most remarkable Authors, most ancient
Fathers, most holy and reverend Men, Dionysius, Cyprian, Athanasius, Basil,
Nazianzene, Ambrose, Hierome, Chrysostom, Austin, and the Latin Gregory,
marshall forth together, being armed and guarded on each side, with CHRIST,
with the Prophets, with the Apostles, and with all Biblicall furniture and
preparation. O that that Faith might at this present reign in England, the
which these Fathers, being wholly devoted to the Scriptures, did build upon the
Scriptures. What scriptures they do produce, the same we will produce; what
passag^s thereof together they do confer, the same we will confer: what
they do from thence infer, the same we will infer. Will this satisfye thee,
thou Bible-pretender? Spitt out, (man) deliver thy mind freely. N^, thou
replyest, except the Fathers (not diuorcing the letter from the intended
meaning of the Holy Ghost) do expound the Scripture in a true ^ense. What is
the sense of these thy words: in a true sense? forsooth according to thy own
silly weening; This is the circle, within which thy disputes are encompassed.
Blushest thou not at this thy maze and Labyrinth? Therefore, as being in good
hope, that I shall find assembled, in your most flourishing Universities,
man^e, who will look into these Controversies of Faith, not with a phlegmatic
and dull eye, but with an impartial, sharp, and dispassionate judgment,
fully ballancing the trifeling euasions of these men (by which euasions, their
Cause is wholly dismantelled and laid naked to the view of all) I will with all
cheerful readiness expect this hour of fight; at what time I shall be prepared
to draw forth into the field the vnvanquishable troops and forces of the
Church of CHRIST, against the small wild companies of certain poor and
unarmed fresh-water-souldiers.

The seventh R^ason. HISTORY.
THe ancient Histories do vnveyle and display the true eye and face of the
ancient Church. Hither I provoke the Enemy. Doubtlesly the Historiographers of
greatest Antiquity (and those, which our Adversaries usurp) are these:
General Historiographers
Eusebius, Damasus, Hierome, Ruffinus, Orosius, Socrates, Zozomene, Theodoret,
Cassiodorus, Gregorius Turonensis, Vsuardus, Rhegius, Marianus, Sigebertus,
Zonaras, Cedrenus, Nicephorus. What do these men record, whose peculiar labor
was to save and redeem the memory of the Church's Actions, from the deluge of
Time? They relate our prayers, our progresses in disseminating the Faith, our
vicissituds and R^turnes of seasons, our enemies. Yea (which ought to draw an
indifferent eye more obseruantly upon this point) even those Historiographers,
who profess implacable hat^ed to us, as Heretical Histo^iograph^rs
Philipp Melancthon, Pantaleon, Punctius, the Magdeburgians, when they do busy
themselves in writing the Chronology or History of the Church, except they
gather together the honorable Actions of our men, by desc^ibing the palmie
and victorious state of our Church, and do amasse with their pens the
treachery and facinorous c^imes of our Enemies, they should (as being deprived
of any Subject or Argument) have passed over in an eternal silence fifteen
hundred years.

To these we may adioyn^ the particular Historians Historiograph^^ c^rtain
Countries.
of certain Countries, who (through a most laboursome curiosity) have
registered the Acts of each such People. These men, as if they had gotten a
Spartae, the which they coueted by all means possible to cultiuate and
beautifye, and who concealed not in their Chronicles (so pre^ise they were to
hold intelligence with all times, by means of History) to relate any
extraordinary and chargeable feastings, or long-sle^ued gowns, or
new-fashioned hilts of daggers, or guilt spurs, or any other such trifles if
they but taisted of novelty; If they had heard, that Religion had suffered any
digression from its first Being, or had degenerated from the Primitive ages,
would certainly most of them have made special and punctual mention thereof;
if not most, yet at least some few; if not some few, yet some one or other
without all doubt. There is not one Historiographer either favorable or
maleuolent toward us, who ever recorded any such alteration, or but once
intimated in his writings so much.

For Example. Our Adversaries do freely acknowledge (a truth so evident, that
it lies out of the way of contradiction) that the Church of Rome was once
Holy, Catholic, and Apostolical. When? Then, when it deservedly had obtained
those high praises of Saint Paul; Your Romans 1.
faith (speaking to the Romans) is renowned in the whole world: Without Romans 1.
intermission I make memory of you: I know, Romans 15.
that coming to you (o Romans) I shall come in the abundance of the blessing of
Christ: Romans 16.
All the Churches of Christ salute you: Your obedience Romans 16
is published in every place: Then, when Paul Act ^8.
(being at Rome in liberty) dilated the Gospel to all: Then, when Peter 1.
Pet. 5.
governed the Church gathered together in that place, then being Babylon:
Then, when Clemens Ier^me in c. script. Eccl. and Eusebius. 2. histor. c. 14.
himself (greatly commended by the Apostle) swaighed that Sea: Then, when the
profane Emperors, as Nero, Domitian, Traian, Phil. c. 4
Antoninus did inhumanely butcher the Roman Bishops; Yea then, Ireneus. l. 3.
c. 3.
when (even by the confession Calu. Instit. l. 4. c. 1. nu^ 3. and^ in Epist.
ad Sadol.
of Calvin) Damasus, Siricius, Anastasius, and Innocentius did hold the
Apostolical stern. For during this Age (especially at Rome) Calvin (out of
his bounty) grants, that the foresaid Bishops did depart in nothing from
the Evangelical doctrine.

Hear now I demand: When did Rome loose this Faith so much above celebrated?
When did she cease to be that, which before she was? At what time, in what
Pope's days, by what means, by what force or stratagems, with what increases
and degrees did a strange Religion invade V^bem and Orbem, not only the
Mother-Cittie, but the whol^ world? What tears, what oppositions, what
disconsolate sighs and groans did this change begett? Were ^ll men upon the
face of the earth drowned in a dead sleep, or at least settled in the leese of
an incurious negligence, stupour, and dullness, when Rome (Rome, I say) did
stamp and dogmatize new Sacraments, a new Sacrifice, new Articles of Religion?
Was there not one Historian then to be found, neither of the Greek, nor of the
Latin Church, neither of any remote or near Nation, who would but casually
fall upon the least touch of insinuating so violent an irruption of a new
Faith, or give the smallest ouerture thereof in his writings?

Therefore I conclude, It is more then evident; if we believe those things to
be true, which History (in itself various and large) being the Ambassador of
Antiquity, the Soul of Memory, ever reflecting back the image of things
past, does affluently and abundantly testifye; that such a Change of Religion,
as our Adversaries seek to obtrude upon us, is a mere vapourous and imaginary
conceit, as not being warranted with the authority of any History, since the
Churches first beginning; and consequently, that all Historiographers are mine,
and that the effectlesse attempts herein, and incursions of our Adversaries are
most cold and feeble, as nothing preuayling; except it be first received for a
main Theoreme and Principle, that all Christians of all times did precipitatly
fall into gross misbeliefe, and into the lowest gulf of Hell, until Luther
Vide Coclaeus in anno 1523.
did constuprate, and lustfully pollute Catherin Bore.

The eight Reason. PARADOXES.
TRuly ( most accomplished Men) when I call to mind out of the abundance of
many Heresies certain strange and prodigious Fantasies of some opinionatiue
Writers, which will occur to be impugned by me; I should deservedly condemn
myself of supine negligence, sloth, and pusillanimitie, if I should fear the
shock and encounter of any enemy. Let him be acute, let him be eloquent, let
him be much practiced in this kind of war, let him be a Helluo of books,
and wholly absorpt in his studyes, briefly let him be All, or More, then he is;
yet of force must he bewray himself to be but dry, loose, and faultering, as
long as he shall sustentate or maintain these following (...), and
impossibilities. We ^ill dispute (if it chance our Adversaries give us leave)
of of God
God, of Christ, of Man, of Sin, of Justice, of the Sacraments Calu. Instit
1. cap. 18. l 2. c 4. l^ 3 c. 23. and 24. Peter Martyr. in 1. Samu^l 2.
of Manners. I will try, if they have the courage to iustifye that by dint of
argument, which they in their own souls believe, and which (as necessarily
resulting from their discourses) they diuulge in their pestilent Scripts and
pamphlets. I will cause them to own these their Axioms and Principles: God
Calu. Instit 1. cap. 18. l 2. c 4. l^ 3 c. 23. and 24. Peter Martyr in 1.
Samu^l 2.
is the author and cause of Sin, willing, suggesting, effecting, commanding,
working, and governing the flagitious counsels of the wicked: As the calling
of Paul, so the adultery Mela^ct. ann^tat. in cap. Romans 8. witt^mb. 152^.
of David, and the impiety of Judas the proditour, was the peculiar hand-worke
of God. o monstrous Assertion! of which after Philipp Melancthon was ashamed,
nevertheless Luther (from whom Melancthon had borrowed it) does extol with
infinite praise this Sentence, sic do^et Lutherus in Assert. 36. and in l^b. de
^^ruo arbitrio.
as a heavenly Oracle; and in this respect in part Luth. praef. in annotat.
Phil. in Epist. ad Romans
equals this his Scholar with Paul the Apostle.

I would further here demand, what was Luther's conceit (whom our English
Caluinists pronounce to be Apolog. Eccles. Angl.
virum diuinitus datum ad orbem illuminandum, A man even sent by God to
enlighten the World) when he did expunge this Verse out of the prayers of the
Church: Vide Euchir. precum, anno 1543. of Christ
Sancta Trinitas, vnus Deus, miserere nobis, Holy Trinity, one God, have
mercy of us?

I will next proceed to the Person of Christ. What is the meaning of these
unseasoned words? christ being the Son of God, is God of God; So Calu. l 1 c.
13. number. 23 and 24.
Calvin teaches: Christ is not begotten of ^he substance of the Father, So
Beza. Again, Two Hypostaticall Beza. contra S^hinel l. de Vnitat. Hypost. dua.
in Christ. n^tur.
Unions are constituted in Christ; the one of the soul with the flesh; the
other of the Divinity with the Humanity. B^za. in Hesh.
That passage in John: I and my Father are one; Calu. in Joan. 10
shows not, that Christ being God, is consubstantiall to God the Father. Yea
further, Luther Luther contra Lati^^r
thus pronounces: Anima mea^odit hoc ve^bum: Homousion, my very soul hates
th^s word: H^mousios, or Consubstantial^s. These (lo) are the beginnings and
conceptions of Arianisme, which after receive a more perfect shape. But let us
dog these men further. Christ Bucer. in Lu^. 2.
from his infancy was not consummate and full of grace, but (as other men)
increased in the faculties of the Soul: And he being daily become more
experienced by use, did (as little children) first Luther. Lo^. Him in Euang.
doctr.
labor wi^h ignorance. Which is potentially as much to say, as that Christ was
stained with the spott and blemish of Original Sin. But take notice of more
direful and horride Doctrines. Christ praying in the Garden, when he did
sw^ate drops of Water and Blood, Marlot. in Math. 20.
was afraid wi^h the sense and feeling of eternal damnation: He then uttered
words without reason, without spirit; words suddenly bu^sting out through force
of grief and pain, Calvin in ha^m. Euang.
and such as not being sufficiently premeditated, he instantly recalled and
corrected. Is there any more of this stuff yet behind? Observe. When Christ
being upon the Cross, cried out: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? He
was burned with flames Bre^tius. in Luc p^rt. 2. hom. 65
of fire, and uttered words of black despair; no otherwise, then if he should
have perished with eternal perdition. See how these Gospelers do even meditate
and study blasphemies, poysening the texts of holy Scripture with their
wicked constructions. They further thus comment that Sentence: Christ descended
into Hell; that is, He being dead, did no less tast^ S^midel. conc. de
possion. and ^aena Dom.
Hell, then the Souls of the damned; this only excepted, that he was after to
be restored to his former felicity. For since (say they) only by corporal
Calvin Instit. l. 2. c. 16. n. 10 11 and Bre^t. in Catec. ann. 1552.
death, he could profitt us nothing, his soul therefore ought to fight with
everlasting death, that by this means he might expiate our wickedness and
punishment; Thus do they detort the Written Word, to overthrow the dignity of
the Eternal Word. Now that no man shall surmize these speeches to fall from
Calvin through inaduertencie, the same Calvin takes such complacencie therein,
and so strong he is in this his blasphemy, as that he pronounces all them to
be perditos Calu. Insi. l 2. c. 16. nu. 12.
nebulones, lost and damned fellows, qui doctrinam istam solarij plenam
exagitant, who do call in question this most comfortable doctrine. O Times! o
portentious Times! what monster have you here nourrished? (...) delicate and
princely dropping ^loud, which streamed from the torn and pierced body of
the innocent Lamb, of which blood every small dropp (in regard of the
impreciable worth of the Sacrifice) was of force to redeem a thousand Worlds,
could it nothing profit Mankind, except the (x) Mediator of God and Man, the
Man CHRIST JESUS had suffered Apoc. 2.
mortem secundam, the second death, the death of the Soul, the death of all
grace, and such as is companion only to Sin and execrable blasphemy? In
regard of this man's lunacie, Bucer (though impudent) will needs seem to be of
a more pliable stern and modesty; who by the word Hell, in the Creed,
understands Bucer. in Mat 26.
the grave, by the figure Epexegesis, though most preposterously, or rather by
an unfit and idle Tautologie. Of our English Sectaries diverse are accustomed to
range themselves herein under Calvin, their Idol: diverse under Bucer, their
great Master, and half Arche of their Church; and diverse also (such
Heteroclits in Faith they are) do secretly murmr against this Article;
wishing (if without noise and tumult it could be effected) it were craded and
put out of the Creed. Which thing to have been once attempted in a
Conuenticle in London, one Richard Cheny (thereat present) did relate unto me:
a miserable old man, much afflicted by the thieves out of God's Church; yet had
not the grace before his death to implant himself therein. Hitherto of CHRIST.

Touching Man; of Man.
what do they dictate? The Illyricus in va^ijs libr. de Origin. peccat Sacer
de conu^. Ec^l^s. A^pn. de im. and per sanct. C^mpnit contra Cens. Col.
Image of God is wholly obliterated in M^n; All his fair impressions are
extin^t; All his Nature suffers such a dassipation and dissolution throughout
the powers of his Soul, and is so utterly overthrown, as that not even any
Regenerate and holy man is intrinsecally any other thing then meare
Corruption, and contagion, as being in league with all vice. Whither tend these
doctrinall Speculations? or why do they forge these grounds? To the end, that
themselves, who through only Faith seek to lay violent hands on the Kingdom
of God (which point is the very Soul of Protestancie) and who lie wallowing
in the mire of all turpitude, Calu. l. 4 Inst c. 15 n 10.11.
and engulfe themselves in all wickedness, may accuse Nature, despair of being
become Virtuous, and disburden themselves of God's Precepts.

of Sin.
And hence it is, that Illyricus Illyr. in varijs lib. de peecatori. vide
Ilechus. in ep. ad Illyr. an pe^cae^ti sit substantia.
(the standard bearer to the Magdeburgenses) has reueted this point more
firmly, by annexing his terrible sentence of Original Sin; Which he defines
to be (after the fall of Adam) the internal Substance of Souls, which the
Devil does work or cause, and which he transformeth into himself.

This also is obuious and frequent in their School. That Calu in Antid.
Council. Tri^ens Wicles. apud Wal^er l. de Sacram. c. 134.
all Sins are equal; yet with this cautionarie explication (least the
Stoics be brought again upon the Stage) if God, as Judge, do balance them.
As if God, who is a most just Judge, (and yet coueteth to ouerweigh more in
Mercy, then Justice) should rather by exagerating our offense, add a heap
then ease, to our burden. And thus in this trutination of Sins, it follows,
that that Cook does not commit a lesser sin against God most severely
judging, who should kill (when there is no need) gallum gallinaceum, a
dunghill cock, then that infamous Homicide did, wh^ (being full of Beza)
murdered with his pistol Gallum Heroa Guisit^m, the Noble French Guyse; a
Prince of vnmatcheable Virtue; then which facinorous act our part of
Christendom in this our Age has seen nothing more detestable, nothing more
deplorable.

Of Grace.
But it may be, that those men, who lie plunged in this unpleasant state of
Sin ( sin being the very life of death) do nevertheless speciously and
highly philosophize of Divine Grace, which (as a spiritual Electuarie) may
cure this disease. Indeed they ascribe very honorable and worthy privileges
to this Grace, which they cry out in their books and speeches, neither to be
infused in our hearts, nor powerful enough to check the malice of Sin by
resisting any flagitious crime; but which they place extrinsecally and out of
us only in the Luth in r^sp. contra Louan.
favor of God; Which favor does neither correct, nor purge, nor enlighten,
nor enrich the wicked, being become thral to all turpitude, nor even regulate
the sudden impetuosities of Nature; but only does conceal and dissemble (God
conniuing thereto) the old sink and channel of Sin (yet remaining and
stinking) that it appears not nauseous and loathsome. And with this plaster
our Adversaries are so much solaced, as that they are not afraid to pronounce,
that Christ himself can be said to be no otherwise full Bucer in Joan. 2. well.
in not.

Christi. Brent. hom. 12. in Joan. Cent l. 1. c. 4.


of Grace and Truth, then in that God the Father did in a wonderful and most
high degree extend his bowels of Love and favor toward him. Sweet JESUS,
what a blasphemous and h^rride doctrine even against thy Nature, Honor, and
Dignity, have these men created!

Of Iusti^e.
What thing then is Justice? a bare intentionall He^hut de Iustif. in resp ad
115 obi^ct. Illyr. ni Apolog. Cons. Autu. c. 6. de Iustific.
Relation. Since it is not wouen of the Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope, and
Charity; which do inuest the Soul with their splendor and gorgeousnes; but
it is only a palliating and hiding of the Offense; the which palliation who
apprehends by Faith (clearing by this means all accounts with God) is a^
secure of his Salvation, as if be did already Call l. 3 Inst c. 2 n. 28.42
enjoy the interminable felicity of Heaven.

But go too. Let the Adversary dream this. How can he be assured of his
future perseverance in Justice; for Mat 12 Luc. 11.
want whereof the poor believing Man, though for a time he lives piously, yet
in the end departs of the Theater of this world, in most calamitous and
vohappie state?

Here Calvin steps up, and Calu. l. ^. c. 2. nu. 40.
replies saying: except thou sit so close and inmoueable in thy Faith, as that
it does ascertayne thee of thy continuance in Virtue, and this in so strong a
manner, that thou stand not obnoxious to deceit therein, (being ever in thy
power to command over time and repentance) this thy floating and unstable faith
is to be contemned, as weak, faint, and improfitable. I here acknowledge the
disciple of Luther, Luth. lib. de captiuis. Babylon
who thus indoctrinateth his Proselyts: A Christian (though willing) cannot
loose his Salvation, except be forbear to believe. What liberty and
dissolution in manntrs does this doctrine inuolue?

I hasten to the Sacraments. Of the Sacram.
Not any, not any of tbem, not two, not one, (o Blessed Christ!) have they
left. For their bread is poison. Baeptisme (though as yet not adulterated) is
in their judgment of no force. It is not a health-full Water; It is not the
Conduyte of Grace, nor leaves behind it any tincture in us; It does not
derive to us the meritts of Christ; but it is only an empty sign Calu. Inst.
l 4 c. 15. n. 2. and 10.
or signification of Salvation. And therefore in respect of the nature of the
Sacrament itself, they prize the Baptism of Christ at no higher value, then
the Calu. l. 4^ Inst. c. 15. number. 7 Cent. 1. l. 1. c 10.
Ceremony of it performed by John. If thou have received Baptism (say they)
it is well; if thou want it, no loss; Believe, and thou art saved, before
thou Luth. l. de capt. Babylon.
be baptized. What then shall become of little suckling Babes, who, except they
be healped with the virtue of this Sacrament, can procure no benefit by their
Faith. But here the Magdeburgians Cent. ^. 5. c. 4.
put in, and, as willing to straighten this crooked point, say: Before we
ascribe any operation to the Sacrament of Baptism, we will maintain, that
those infants have Faith, by the which they are saved: Of which faith they do
observe in themselves certain secret and hidden motions, who yet observe not,
whether they live, or no. Harsh and strange! But if this be to be reputed
harsh, then mark the Antidot of Luther; who here, to extricate himself out of
the nett, says: It is Luth. aduers. co^hlaeu^ item, epist. ad M^lact. to. 2.
and in epist. a^ Wall.
better to omit the Baptising of an Infant, since his ablution, if so he do not
believe, is improfi^able. Thus the Adversaries speaking hereof with such a
fluctuation of judgment and mincing hesitation, know not how to deliver their
sent^nces herein Categorically and positiuely. Therefore let Baltasar
Pascimontanus digg through this stony difficulty, The Anabapt.
and decide the point; Who being the Parent of Anabaptists, and seeing, that not
with the least tecture of reason he could forge any Faith to be in Infants,
did allow the caution of Luther, and exiling all Pedobaptisme out of the
Church, did thereupon decree, that only Persons of ripe age should be washed in
the sacred Font. As touching the other Sacraments; Although that many headed
Beast Apocal. 1^.
does often please himself with the eiaculation and casting out of his throat
of most horrible contumelies against them; yet since they daily obtund the
ears with a fastidious iteration, I wholly pretermit and pass them over.

There yet remain behind certain most hurtful gobbetts of Heretical
doctrine, Of Ma^ners
touching life and Manners; the which Luther had vomited out in his papers,
that so from the impure belching of his stomach, he might inhale and breath
poison into his Readers. Hear o you Academians) with patience, but withal
blush (for I presume your cheeks cannot endure such unchaste words) and pardon
me, being the Relatour.

If the Luth. sermon de Matrim.
wife will not, nor can perform the due of marriadge, let the chamber-mayde
come, and stepp in her room. Certainly the art of Venerie is as necessary
^uth. in lib. de vita co^iugal.
to every one, (see what filth he disgorgeth) as meat, drink, or sleep.
Matrimony is much more excellen^, ^uth. in Ass. Act. 16.
then Virginity, since from this latter Luth de notis Euang.
Christ and Paul have dehorted all Christians. But what? Are these (perhaps)
individual or peculiar to Luther? They are not. Since they were lately
defended by my Antagonist, Chark, Chark. l. in ^e^s. suum.
but most miserably (God knows) and fearfully.

Will you have any more drawn out of this Vessel? Why not? By how much thou
art the more ^uth. sermon. de pisc. Pet.
wicked, by so much, says Luther, thou art more near to Grace. All good
Actions, ^uth. in Asser art 32.
God judging them, are Mortal Sins; God resting propitious, venial and more
pardonable. No man thinks ^uth. l. deseruo arbit.
evil, out of his own disposition. The Decalogue Luth. de Moyse
nothing belonged to Christians. God Luth l. de Capt. Bab.
respects not our Good Works. Only they rightly participate of the Supper
^u^h. de capt Bab c. de Euchar.
of our Lord, whose severed Consciences are attended on with sorrowful,
afflicted, troubled, confused, and erring th^ughts or cogitations. Our sins
are indeed to be confessed; but to any man, who if he do absolve th^e but in
Luth. in Ass. ar. 12.13
^east (so that thou belieuest) thou art fully absolved. To read prayers of
set Hours, belongs not to Priests, Luth. de capt. Babyl. c. de Ord.
but to the Lai^^e. Christians are free Luth. in capt. Bab. c. de Baptism.
from the S^a^uts and Ordinances of Men.

I am loath to foul my Paper any longer with such ordure; And I hope, I may be
thought to have already stirred enough in this unsavory puddle. I now end.
And here I am not to incur a^ie reprehension in your Censures, because I have
promiscuously insimulated the Lutherans and Zwinglians within the former Tenets
or Positions; Since both these, being mindful from whose loins they are first
proseminated, do much covet (through their proximitie of blood) to entertain
a mutual entercours and friendship; and therefore being thus Apol. Eccles.
Angl.
interlinked, do interpret it as no small injury to be dis-ioined, (one
thing only excepted) in dogmaticall Articles of ^a^th and Religion.

Truly I am not of that strength, as that I will vendicate to mys^lf but the
middle rank of those selected Deuines, who at this day have proclaimed open
War and Hostility against H^resies. But this I well know, how feeble and
weak soever I am, I cannot be endangered; whylest being supported with the
Grace of Christ, and s^conded both with Heaven and Earth, I shall fight against
Innouations so odious, so exec^able, so gross and brutish, even benighting and
wholly darkning the judgment of Man.

The ninth Reason. SOPHISMES.
IT i^ an out-worne saying; that a fellow having but one eye, is able to
gallant it among those, who be stone-blinde. A varnished an^ dissolute kind of
arguing hat^ oft^n a soueraignetie over the judgments of the unlearned, which
manner of dispute (at not being solid and substantive it itself) the School
of Philosophers does wholly exsibilate. The Adversary (who is poor and needy
in proufes) much offends herein. But his impostures (for the most part) are
wrought upon four Threads; the which rather in your Universities, then in the
common streets, I make choice to unweave.

S^^iama^hia.
The first, we may call a Schiamachia, by the which a man does diuerberate a
shadow or the air with an imp^tuous (but idle) endeavor. In this sort:
Against those, who vow perpetual Chastity, and who confess that Marriadge
is good, but withal believe, that Virginity is better, the Scriptures are
produced, s^eaking 1. Cor 7.
worthily and honorably of Marriadge. Whom do they wound? Against the
meritorious works, and feriall or paynfull labors of Christians, d^ed in the
blood of Christ (otherwise vnauayleable) many divine passages are alleged,
by the which we are commanded to confide, neither in Nature, nor in the Law,
but in the Blood of Christ. At whom do they roue? Against those, who worship
the Saints of Heaven, as most gracious servants in the eye of CHRIST, are
discharged whole volleys of shot out of the sacred Writ, prohibiting us to
adore many Gods. Where be those Gods? This kind of arguments, the which
familiarly drop from our Adversaries pen, can in no sort prove to us
dangerous; to you (perhaps) wearisome and disgustfull.

An other peccant humor of theirs, is called Logomachia; Logomachia.
Here one leaving the sense, does childishly and litigiously contend with the
naked Word. As thus: Find me, if thou can (say our Adversaries) the word
Mass, or Purgatory in the Scripture. What then must here be the inference?
Does not this open the sluice to the denial of the undivided Trinity? Is not
the doctrine of the T^initie, Con^ubstantialitie, and the Person in the
Scriptures, because these Words occur not in the Scriptures? Cousin german
to this Paralogisme, is a birding or captious taking hold of the very
letters; where the approved custom and mind of the Speaker being neglected
(which is the very life of the Word, or by which the Word through a continual
acceptance is, as it were, indenized) we idely fight against the very
syllables; after this manner: The Word, Presbyter in Greek, is nothing but a
Senior in Latin: Again, A Sacramen^, is every Mystery. But as in all, so in
this S. Thomas most pregnantly teac^eth; saying: ^. part. qu. 13. art. 2. ad
vrg. 2.
In words we are to observe, non tam a quo, quam ad quid; Lot so much from
whence they are derived, as to what (by a warrantable custom) they are applied.

A third Imposture is termed H^mon^mia; Homonymia.
which largely spreads itself, and by which a Word is even wrenched and
overmuch strayned. For Example: To what end should there be the Order of
Priests in the Church, since Apoc. 5.
John has styled you all priests? In like sort, John there adds: We shall
reign upon the earth; Why then should their be any peculiar Kings? Again,
The Prophet does much celebrate a spiritual Esaias. 58
fast; to wit, an abstinencie from inueterate and accustomed sins; Away
therefore withal superstitious choice of meats, popish fish, and prescript
times of fasting. But is this good Logike? Then mark, how it recoileth back.
For then have Moses, David, Elias, S. John Baptist, and the Apostles even
doted, who limited their fasting from usual meats, within two or three days,
or a weeke's compass; Whereas fasting from Sin ought to be perperuall and
vnintermitted. This sophistry you see, how sleightie and transparent it is.
But I haste forward.

Circulatio.
The fourth vicious form of their disputing I call a Circulation. Thus for
instance sake. Set down (I say) the Notes of the Church. The Adversary
replies; The Word of God, and the most pure Sacraments. But are these in your
possession and hands? Who doubts thereof? I do not so much doubt, as
absolutely deny it. Consult herein (says he) with the holy Scripture. I have
already consulted with it, and at this instant I stand less favorable to
your Cause, then before. Tush, it is most evident. Euict so much by proof. We
do not swerve a fingar's breadth from the Word of God. Where is thy Wit, thou
empty Scull? Will thou still take that for thy argument, which is
indifferently questioned on both sides? How often has this thy erroneous
dispute been inculcated and exprobrated to thee? Will thou not leave dreaming?
will thou have a torch to enlighten thy conceit? I auerre, that the Word of
God is wrongfully expounded by thee. I have for my witnesses hereof fifteen
hundred years. Stand irreuocably to the judgment, neither of me, nor of thy
self; but of the said fifteen hundred years. I will stand to the judgment of
God; Joan. 3.
Spiritus, vbi vult, spirat. Behold what Circles, what Meandrian turnings, the
Adversary here makes, and how vnsteadie he is in arguing! This trifter, being
the Architect of so many Words and Sophismes, (his Cause thus leaning upon the
feeble crutches of deceit, and calumny) cannot become formidable to any man;
troublesome he may be. With the trouble your patience (I hope) will dispense;
with the least touch of fear, the matter itself stands wholly incompatible.

The tenth Reason. ALL KINDS OF WITNESSES.
HAec Isay. 35.
erit vobis directa via, ita vt stulti non errent per eam. This shall be unto
you a direct way, so that fools shall not err by it; says the Prophet,
speaking of the Church. Now what man, though among the vulgar sort, is so
obtuse and dull, if he bear but an eye fixed upon his Salvation, who may not
easily discern, and withal impathe himself in the beaten way of the Church;
it being so notoriously made plain, eauen, and tracked; he by this mean^s
declining in his gate all unhaunted foote-wayes, or craggie stepps and
deuiations?

These points shall be made explorat and evident even to the ignorant and
illiterate; as Esaias has prophesied; to yourselues then (if so you be constant
to your own good) most explorate, and most evident.

Let us present to the eyes of our Imagination, the Theater or stage of this
Universal All; and let our thoughts lance forth into the main Ocean of every
thing created. The Saints in Heaven.
All things dispute in our behalf; all things even swear the truth of our
Religion. Let us ascend to Heaven: There we may contemplate Roses Austin sermon.
37. de Sanctis.
and Lillies, blessed Martyrs, I mean, who by sheading their blood, became
read; by their innocence white and candide. Such were the thirty three Damas.
in vita Roman. Pontif.
Popes successively slaughtered by the Heathen Enemy. Such were the Pastors
and Doctors in all Countries, who in that rugged and tempestuous state of the
Church, engaged their blood for the name of Christ: Such were the faithful
sheep, who (in the A^^me and purity of a good Conscience) insisted in the
stepps of their shepherds: Such were all the Saints now in Heaven, who through
sanctimonie and purity (like stars of the greatest magnitude) gloriously
shined in the eyes of the Multitude. Certain it is, that all these were Ours*
when they here conuersed on earth; that all these continued Ours, even to their
last gasp and dissolution. And but to retayle some Particulars out of diuer^
H^ndreds, since I will not be laui^h of time: On our side and Party stood
blessed Igna^ius (whose thirs^ only Martyrdom could quench) who did not
Ignat^us in ^pi^^ ad ^mi^n^ns.
paralelle any man (no not the King) with a Bishop in matters of the Church,
Jerome in Catal. s^riptor.
And who with his own pen (least otherwise they might perish) did record
certain ^u^eb. l 3. c. 30
Apostolical Traditions, of which himself was eye-witnes. On our side Damas.
in vita Tel^sph. tom. 1. c^n de (...) d. 4
stood Telesphorus (the Anacho^e^) who commanded, that the Fast of Lent (first
instituted by the Apostles) should be kept with a more rigorous care and
obse^uation. On our side was I^enaeus, who preached and confirmed the
Apostolical Faith, even from the Ir^na^us ^
Succession of the supreme Bishops, and the Sea of Rome. On our side Victo^
(the Pope) who by his Eusebius. l. 5. c, ^^
Edict or Bulle reduced all Asia unto Obedience: which Act though by many and
particularly by the former Irenaeus (though otherwise a most blessed man) was
censured over riged and severe; yet not one ever questioned his authority, or
traduced him, as assuming in that business any Exoticall or foreign
Soueraignetie. On our side was Polycarpus, who for the deciding the Eus^b. 4.
h^st. c. 13.
Question of keeping E^ster-day, made a peculiar journey to Rome; Whose relics
being burned, the Christians of Smyrna gathered together, celebrating, the
Memory of their Bishop with an Eusebius. 4. hist. c. 14.
Aniuersarie day, and most solemn Feast. On our side were C^^nel^us and
Cyprian (that goulden Pair of Martyrs) both great Prelates, but greater the
first, who sterning the Church of Rome, extinguis^ed the Af^ican Eusebius l. 7
h^st. 2.
Errors; And this other much ennobled himself through the great obseruancie,
he bore to his most dear and friendly Superior. On our side was Six^u^, upon
whom, celebrating at the Altar the most dreadful Sacrifice of the Mass,
seven Pru^e^t in hymn. de S. Laurent
Cleargie-men did reverently attend. On our side S. Laurence (Archdeacon vid.
Aug. sermon. 1. de S. Laurent Amb l. 1. off. c. 41 and l. 2. off. c. 28. Leo
sermon. in die S. Laur^nt
to the said Sixtus) who did even importune Martyrdom, and whom the
Adversaries (for their grace is to disgrace the good) have scourged out of
their Calendar, our Martyrologe; and yet to him above twelve hundred years
since, P^udentius (once Consul of Rome) in this manner directed his prayers:
Quae Prudent. in hymn. S. Laur.
sit potestas credita,
Et mune^is quantum datum,
P^obat Qui^itum gaudia,
Quibus ^^gatus annuis.
Hos inter, o Christi decus,
Audi etc.


In English thus: Servant of Christ, what power is g^u^n to thee,
The Roman joys at large do testifye,
By these great favors, which thou do a^f^rde
To them, who sue to thee in sweet accord.
Among which troop, a rustic Po^t, ^o hear,
His faults confessing with a trembling, fear:
O hea^e benignely poor Prudentius,
Guilty of Christ's blood through sins most impious.


On our side stand those most blessed Virgins; Metaph. Ambr. s^rm. 90 tom. 3.
and l. 1. de Virgin. (...) T^eu in Martyr.
Cecilia, Agatha, Barbara, Agnes, Lucia, Dorethea, Catherina, who (enjoying an
inward calm of their passions) defended their vowed Chastity, as most
incontaminate and intemerate, against all assaults and tyranny of men and
Devils. On our side was H^lena, to whom the finding Russin. l. 1. c 8.
of the Cross (upon which our Lord suffered) has given so great celebritie
and honor. Monica. e^ Aug l. 9. Confess. c. 7. ^sque ad 1^.
who (languishing and fainting away in devotion) in the agony of her last
sickness, most religiously and earnestly implored, that Prayers and Sacrifice
might be offered up for her at the Altar, after her death and departure. Paula,
Hi^ron. in Ep^st. Pauliae.
who even drunk with fervor and devotion, (a wine, which the lukewarm
Christian never tastes) did abandon her Palace and fruitful Demaynes, and
being a stranger, posted (with a most wearisome pilgrimage) to the Cave of
Bethleem, that so she might spend the remnant of her life (the poor weak
blast of breath) in spiritual retyres of the Soul, and in bewayling her
sins even in that place, where CHRIST in his infancy lay crying in his
Cradle, and swaddling clothes. On our side are Paulus, Hilarion, Hi^r^n. in
Catalog. Script.
Antonius, Ath^n in e^a S. Anto.
those good old solitary and religious Heremits; whose even speaking silence
in their daily and nightlie meditations, pierced the ears of God. On our side
was Satyrus, Ambr. in orat. su. de Sat^ro.
a brother-germaine to Ambrose, who (bearing about him the most dread-full
Heast) suffered shipp-wrack; and t^rough the strength of his Faith in that most
holy Sacrament, escaped the danger of the Sea. On our side Nicolau^ Joan. l.
^acon.
and Martinus, S^uer. Sulp. Metaph.
both reverend Bishops, being Men much exercised in watching, clothed with
haire-cloath, and even fead with extraordinary and unpracticed fasting. On our
side was Benedi^tus, Gr^gor. l. 2. D^a.
that Father of so many Monks. Ten years space is too short a time to call to
mind so many thousands, as have prof^ssed our Catholic Religion: And here I
forbear to repeat the Names of those, whom above I have marshalled among the
troops of the Doctors of the Church, since I am mindful (as I may term
it) of my slow speedines. He that more largely will enrich and fu^nish himself
with the knowledge thereof, let him euolue not only the Histories of ancient
Writers, but chiefly such grave Authors, of which number almost every
particular Vide S^xt. tom. Surij. de vit. Sanct.
Author did pick out a particular Saint, that so by their Pens, they might
record their glorious Memories. Which labor after this Man has performed,
then let him in the secret and inward reflex of his Soul sincerely relate to
me, whether he be persuaded, that those most ancient and blessed Christians
(whose sanctity the very Walls and streets did in those times Echo forth)
were, in Religion, Roman Catholics, or Lutherans. I here call to witness the
Throne of God, and that Tribunal of Justice, before which I shall be conuented to
give a reason of these my Reasons, and an account of this my attempted
Challenge, that eith^r there is no Heaven, or that Heaven is only Ours; the
first we wholly execrate; upon this other then we cast our ancker.

But now on the contrary side, if it please, The damned.
let us peep and look down into Hell. There lie broyling in a sempiternal
conflagration and flames of fire: Who? The Jews. To whar Church professed they
an implacable hatred and hostility? To our Church. Who more? The Heathens.
What Church have they most tyranniously persecuted? Ours. Who besides? Tbe
Turks. Whose Temples and Oratories have they demolished and beaten down? Ours.
Who yet? The Here^^ks. Against what Church have they made their traiterous
Insurrections and rebellious Assaults? Against our Church. For what other
Church, then Ours, (still breathing new Spirits of fervor) has laid battery
against Mat. 16.
all the gates of Hell?

When the Jews were expulsed Eus^b. 4 hist. 5.
Jerusalem, and the Christians began more fully to spread and plant their
Faith, o immortal God! what confluence of Multitudes was then to those holy
places, Ierom in Ep^st. Pau^. ad Marcel. and passim in Epist.
what religious respect was borne to that City, what reverence was given to
the Sepulcher of Christ, to the Manger, to the Cross; and to other his
monuments, with all which the Church (his Spouse) was delighted, as with the
worn and layd-asyde garments of the Bridegroom? Hence flowed the Jews
barbarous and irreconciliable hatred against us. Yea at this day and hour they
complain, that our Ancestors wrought their Ancestors ouer-throw; as from
Simon Magus and Luther they received not the hurt (so much as) of a fillipp or
flea-biting.

The Heathe^s
Among the Heathens (whilst their state was upon the ascent of the wheel)
there were many bloody Tyrants, who (swollen with liuour and malice against
Christian Religion) during their reign, and for the space of three hundred
years (by certain vicissitudes of times) only excogitated, how to punish
Christians with most exquisite and horrible torments. What Christians? The
Fathers, and the Sons of our Catholic Roman Faith, who then ever remained
eauen, in Fortune's vneauennesse. Weigh well the thundering fragours and
comminations of that inhumane Monster, who broyled S. Laurence upon the
gridiron: Hunc Prude^tius in hymno de S. Laure^^
esse vestris Orgijs
Moremque and artem proditum est:
Hanc disciplinam faederis,
Libent vt auro Antistites.
Argenteis scyphis etc.


In English thus: The manner of your sacred Rites is known,
Report whereof through every place is blown:
Your Bishops must perform their Sacrifice
In golden Plates; and sacred Blood likewise
Must smoke in silver Cupps in each man's sight,
And Tapers burn (besett in gould) all night.
And further yet by spreading fame't is said,
That thousands of Sester^ians are paid
By your own Brethren, tbrough their sale of lands
Unto your Churches use: And thus tbeir hands
To beggerie often bring their nearest heirs,
And so you free them of their father's cares.
These heaps of silver usually you hide
In s^cret corners of your Churches side.
You it repute a mark of Piety,
To disinherite your Posterity.
Therefore restore the treasure badly got,
Which now in darkesome holes does lie forgott.
The Commonwealth, the King, the Public Treasure
In Justice ought thereof to make due seasure.
And thus our Captains and our Men-of-warre
Of their just stipends you shall not debar.
A Principle you have, it is well known:
Restore to every one, what is his own.
Caesar (lo) here acknowledges Cesar's print
And stamp in silver, made first at the mint.
Render to Caesar, what is Cesar's due;
I ask, but what by right ought to accrue.
Your God his stamp in silver did not frame,
Nor stoared was with gould, when first he came:
In riches poor, his doctrine he first taught,
With empty purse his Precepts he inbrought.
Perform in deeds, what with his Words accords;
Restore your Gould; be only rich in Words.


Who seems this Tygar to be? Against whom does he thus foam, and lighten
forth his rage? Whose Churches, Sacrifices, lights, Rites, and ornaments
seeks he to abolish? What Church's goulden gobletts, and silver Chalices,
and sumptuous donaries, and plentiful treasure does he so much stomach? Verily
this Man even acts Luther. For under what other veyle have our Nemrods Gen 10
masked their latrocinies and robberies, when they prayed upon the Churches,
and dissipated the patrimony of CHRIST? But now to look on the other end of
the Balance; Constantine the Great (that terror or scourge of those, who were
scourges of Christians) what Church brought he to the haven or shore of
quietness? That very Church, of which Sylueste^ Damas. in Sylu. Ni^. l 7 c 33.
Zona^a^ Cedr^a.
was Pilot whom living (for fea^e of persecution) under the hatches in
Soractes, Constantine called forth, that from his hands he might receive our
Baptism. Under what banner fought this Emperor, that he became so victorious?
Under the sign of the Eus^^. l. 2 d^ (...). Constant. c 7 8.9. Soz^m. l 1. c
8.9.
Cross. By what Mother was he made so celebr^ous? By Helena. To what Fathers
of Christ's Church did he adioyne himself? To the Fathers of the Ny^ene
Council. Who were the Men? Syluester, Marcus, Julius, Athanasi^s, Nicolaus. To
whose prayers did he recommend himself? To the intercession of An^on^e. A^han,
in vita S. An^.
What seat^ did he affect in that Synod? Through an humble ambition, the
^h^od. l. 1 c. 7.
low^st. O how more regal and princely did he appear, being enthroned in the
Chair of Humility, then those do, who have unduly hunted after the Title of
a King? It is over tedious to relate all the particulars of this Passage. But
from the different comportments of these two Emperors (the one being most
maleuolent to us, the other most beneuolent) we may easily conjecture of all
other points. For as by the wickedness of the first, our Prologue became most
turbulent; so by the virtue of the lat^r, our Catastrophe and end was made most
divine and happy.

The Tu^ks.
Next, let us behold the Turkish proceedings. Mahomet and Sergius Zonaras
(the Apostata Monde) lie howling in the lowest and most darkesome nooke of
Hell, being loaded with their own and their Successour's flagitious crimes.
This portentious and fierce Beast (the Sa^acens and Turks, I mean) except he
had been vide Volater. Iou^um. Aemiliu^. l. 8. Blou^. l. 9.
calmed and repressed by the Order of Knights of our Holy Wa^fare, and by our
Catholic Princes and Forces (for as for Luther, Solomon the Turk is reported
to have given thanks to him by his letters; and for the Lutheran Party and
States (as if they had interleagued together, or at least had been but
Adue^sarie-friends) this progress of the Turks is to them accounted pleasing
and grateful) this furious Eryn^is, I say, being most exitial and dangerous to
all Christendom, had before this day made deuastation and spoil of all
Europe, breathing an utter euisceration thereof; and had been no less forward
and diligent in overthrowing Altars, and the Signs of the Cross, then Calvin
himself whose Ad, is heretical impiety has been. Since then by the labor
and industry of our men (whose invincible courage has been the stop or
partition wall between the Tu^ke and Europe) the Saraceus have been kept back
from the cutting of the throats of all Christians: It therefore cannot be
denied, but that they are to be ^eputed, as our designed and peculiar enem^es.

The Heretics.
Let us vouchsafe a look upon the Heretics, who are the dreggs, the bellows,
the fuel of Hellfire, there they lying in a death, which never dies. First
affronteth us Simon Magus: What did he perpetrate? He spoy^ed man ^f free will,
Cl^m^ns l. ^ recognit.
and first broached the doctrine of sole Faith. Next appears Nouat^anus. What
Gallant was this? This Man tumultuously making himself Antipope, did brave,
Cypr. epist. ad Iubaian and l. 4. epis. 2.
and shoulder out of his Seat, Cornelius the true Pope: He further was an
enemy of the two Theo^. de fab. Haeret.
Sacraments of Penance and Chr^sme. Then occurreth Manes Persa. This fellow's
Scene, was to dogmatize, that Baptism August. haer 46.
could not confer Salvation. After him, Aerius (the Arian) presents
himself: This man condemned all Prayers Epiph. haer. 75. and Aug. haer. 13.
for the dead; and equalled Priests with Bishops. Next follows Aetius, who
with open mouth maintained the Heresy of Only Faith who was surnamed, Aug.
h^er 34.
(...) Socrates l 2.28.
(an Atheist no less then Lucian. Then crept up Vigilantius, who could not
brook, that Saints Iero. in Vigil. and Aust. haer. 83.
should be prayed unto: And Iouinian, who (wh^ly immersed in flesh) placed
Virginity Ierom. in Iouinian
and Marriadge in one scale or balance. To conclude, in the end came that
universal Collunies, or mass of filth, Macedonius, Pelagius, N^storius,
Eutiches, the M^nothelits, the Iconomach^, and other Planetarie and wandering
Heretics, to whom Posterity shall adioyne Luther and ^aluin. Of what ayerie
we^e al these Birds? They were all bad Crows, hatched of one and the same eg;
Who rebelling and making head against the chief Doctors and Pastors of our
Church, were in the end by them confounded, and annihilated.

Let us leave Hell, and be testored to the Earth. The Earth.
What way so ever I convert my eye or thought, whether I behold and consider
the Patriarchall and Apostolical Seats; or the chief Prelates of other
Nations; or the most renowned Princes, Kings, and Emperors; or the first
plantation of Christianity throughout all Countries; or any Character of
Antiquity, or Light of Reason, or signature and print of Ve^tue and Morality;
They all most seruiceably give their voices and suffrages in behalf of our
Faith; yea they all even trumpett forth the indubitate infallibility thereof.

Witness of this point is the uninterrupted succession of the Roman Bishops;
Apostolical Seats.
In which Church (to speak in Austin's dialect) Aust n. Ep 19^.
Apostolicae Cathedrae semper viguit principatus, the principality and
pre-eminence of the Apostolical Chair ever flourished. Witnesses also are
other Apostolical Seats; to which this very name of Apostolical, was
peculiarly and remarkably ascribed; in that they were first vile Tertul. de
Praescript. Aug. l. 2. de doctrine. Christian c. 8. Most distant countries.
erected either by the Apostles, or by their Hearers and Scholars.

Witnesses again are the Pastors and Doctors dispersed through-out all
Nations; being much disterminated in place, but in our Religion most
concordant: as, Ierom. in Catal. scriptor. Eccles. and alij.
Ignatius and Chrysostom, at Antioch: Peter, Alexander, Athanasius,
Theophilus, at Alexandria: Macarius and Cyrill, at Jerusalem: Proclus, at
Constantinople: Gregory and Basil, in Cappadocia: Thaumaturgus, in Pontus:
Polycarpus, at Smyrna: Iustinu^, at Athens: Dionysius, at Corinth: Gregory, at
Nyssa: Methodius, at Tyrus: Ephremus, in Syria: Cyprian, Optatus, Austin, in
Afric: Epiphanius, in Cyprus: Andreas, at Creete: Ambrose, Paulinus,
Gaudentius, Prosper, Faustus, Vigilius, in Italy; Irenaeus, Martinus,
Hilarious, Eucherius, Gregory, Saluianus, in France: V^ncentius, Or^siu^,
Hildefonsus, Leander, Isodorus, in Spain: In Britannie, Fugatius, Damianus,
Iustus, Mellitus, Beda. To conclude (that I may not be thought ambitious in
recital of Names) what entire works, or but fragments, are yet extant of those
Writers, who living in most dis-ioyned parts of the Earth have sowed the Gospel
of Christ, they all corroborate and strenghten that one Faith, which we
Catholics at this day profess. O blessed Christ! with what color or pretext
of excuse can I plaster my cause, or how can I apologize for myself, why thou
should not exterminate me out of the number of thy Saints, if so I shall
advance before so many Lights of the Church, certain obscure hedgecreepers;
in number few, in learning weak, in doctrine and Faith divided, in
conversation profane and facinorous?

Witnesses in like manner are all ancient Princes, Princes.
Kings, Cesars, and their Commonwealths; The piety of which Princes and
People, and the Discipline both of Peace and War did originally take their
rooting, in this our Catholic doctrine. What Vide sex tom. Su^ij de Sanct.
Theodosij out of the East, what Charles'es out of the West, may I here recite?
What Edwards of England, Lodouicks of France, Hermingildi of Spain, Henryes of
Saxony, Wenceslaes of Bohemia, Leopolds of Austria, Steuens of Hungary,
Iosaphats of India; finally what other Dynastaes and Toparchaes, I mean,
Governors of Empires and particular places, throughout the whole world, may I
appeal unto? All which (being organized with secular power) by example, by
Arms, by Laws, by solicitous industry, by magnificent charges, have
maintained and supported our Church? Esaias. 49.
For so Esaias long-since foretold: Erunt Reges nutricij tui, and Reginae
nutrices tuae; Kings shall be thy foster-fathers, and queens thy nurces. Give
ear, o E^izabeth, most potent Queen; To thee so great a Prophet preaches,
thee he instructs in thy duty. I do confidently auerre, that one Heaven in
not wide enough, to contain Calvin and these Princes. With these Monarcks then
range thyself, run with them one and the same line of Action; To thee I
speak, who art worthy thy Progenitors, worthy the transcendencie of thy
wit, worthy the rarenes of thy learning, worthy the high praises and Elogies
passed upon thee, finally worthy thy present dignity and Regal
Soueraignetie. Only this thing I plott toward thee, and this I will plott,
whatsoever be the event: This is my dangerous machination, this is my
traiterous attempt* against whom, as against the designed enemy of thy life,
the Adversaries so often do threaten the gibbet. All hayle, o holy Cross! The
day will come ( o Queen Elizabeth) that very day, I mean, when the veyle of
each man's actions shall be drawn aside, and when it will evidently appear,
whether the Society of JESUS, or the brood of Luther did affect thee with
Christian Love and Charity. I hasten forward.

Count^yes ^onuerted to Christianity.
Witnesses furthermore of the certainty of our Religion, are all the Quarters
of the World, to the which (after the Incarnation and Birth of Christ) the
trumpet of the Gospel has sounded. Was it a work of small labor (think you)
to seal up for ever the mouths of the Idols, and to import and bring the
Kingdom of God unto the Gentiles? Luther preachet Christ; We Catholics preach
Christ, But is Christ divided? No. 1 C^r. 1.
Either we, or he, do preach a false CHRIST. How then stands the matter? I
will show. Let him be the true CHRIST, and let him be on their party, by whose
forces Dagon's 1. Reg. 5.
neck was shiuered in pieces. Our CHRIST vouchsafed to use our pains, when he
dis-enthralled and freed so many Souls from longer worshipping of those
Jupiters, Mercuries, Dianaes, Phaehades, and dissipated from their hearts that
horrible N^ght of Hellish darkness. The time will not suffer me to insist in
foreign presidents and examples; The disclosure (as I may say) and opening of
such Countries (in respect of Christi^n Religion) as are near at hand and
domestical, we will contemplate. The Irish Nation then first sucked either no
Religion, or ours, (that is, the Catholic Religion) from Patritiu^, the
Scottish from Palladius, the English from Austin; All these three men being
consecrated Bishops at Rome, sent from Rome, and ever with a dutiful
Obseruancie reuerencing Rome. The matter is most evident. I poaste.

A (...) of Witn^sses.
Witnesses in this last place of the irrefragable truth of our Faith, are the
Universities; witnesses are all written Laws; witnesses the common manners and
customs of People; witnesses the Election and Inauguration of Emperors;
witnesses are the Ceremonies and Anoylings of Kings; Witnesses the Orders of
Knights, and the very fashion of their Military Robes, Witnesses are the
Churches-windowes; witnesses the Stamps and Coins of Silver; witnesses the
Gates of Cities; and their public Towne-howses; witnesses the pious works and
virtuous lives of our Ancestors; To conclude, Witnesses are all things
whatsoever, Great or Small, contained within the Circumference of this vast
Universe, that no other Religion then ours, did ever take any deep root and
plantation.

All which former Reasons and Considerations (as so many sealing Arguments,
and even cloying my Judgment with satiety of Proofs) being fully and
deliberatly weighed, I did hold it no little insolency and madness for me, to
break with all Christians of precedent Times, giving them my last Adieu; and
to comparte and consociate myself with the very froath of men, and certain
outcasts or lost Companions. Wherefore I freely confess, I am much encouraged
and animated to this Conflict, in which except the Saints of God be detruded
and driven out of Heaven, and proud Lucifer recover Heaven, I cannot fall. In
regard whereof I do presume, that Charke, who so inhumanely does conuitiate
me, tearing asunder my good name and reputation, should in all equity be of a
more gentil flexure, and more supple-minded toward me, if I be resolved to
impathe my sinful and poor soul (the which CHRIST has bought at so high a
rate) rather in a safe way, in a certain way, in the King's highway, then to
hang it upon the rocks and bryas of Caluin's pestiferous doctrine and
Innouations.

The Conclusion.
Here now ( most celeb^ious Academians) you have this small gift (an earnest
of my much expected Congresse) composed at several stolen hours in time of my
daily iourneying. My project was, to absterge and wipe away with you my
supposed spott of arrogancy, to give some Reasons for the justifying of my
confidencie, and withal, whylest you are invited to the Schools with me, to
set before your judgments some considerable points, by way of taste and
delibation. If you hold it equal, if secure, if reasonable, to erect Luther
or Calvin, as the Square of the Scripture, the Oracle of the Holie-Ghost, the
rule of the Church, the Schoole-maister of all Counsels and Fathers, to be
short, a God, assuming a supreme soueraignetie over all Witnesses and Ages, I
am in despair of bettering your minds by my endeauours, whether you Read or
Hear: But if you be such, as I have Ideated and figured out to myself,
Philosophers, eagle-eyed, lovers of Truth, integrity, and modesty; enemies to
headlong rashness, illaqueations, and Sophismes; you then will easily see the
full day at Noone-tyde, who can epsy the first appearance or break of day,
through a small creuis or slifter. I will even power myself out unto you, and
will freely speak, what the immensenes of my Love toward you, your own
danger, and the greatness of the business may justly seem to require. The Devil
is not ignorant, but that you will most clearly discover this light, if once
you begin but to lift up your eyes. For what stupour and insensibilitie is
it, to advance above all Christian antiquity some obscure and unlearned
Hanmers and Charks? But there are certain pleasing Allectiues, by which the
devil much enlarges his kingdom, and by which (as by his netts) he has
already ensnared many of your quality. What be they? Gold, Glory, delicacie
of sare, Venerie. Spurn at them. O, buyld your minds of such an height, as
that the assaults of these low and fading delights may not reach thereto. What
other thing are th^se, then the entralls of the Earth, shrill and stridulous
Ay^e, a Kit^hin of worms, dunghill pleasures? Spitt at them. CHRIST is rich*
who will maintain you: He is a King who will honor you: Lauteous* who will
satiate you: Specious and beautiful, who will heap upon you all pleasure and
happiness. Under his Banner then marshall yourselues, to him give up your
names; that so you being become truly most learned, and spiritually most
valourous, and this without delay (for he is ignorant, who is ever learning;
and lives evil, who is ever beginning to live well) you may close up your
days with Trophies and Triumphs of Victory. Fare you well. From Cosmopolis, a
City in the World. 158^.

FINIS.
THE HEADS OF THE TEN Reasons.
1. The Sacred Scriptures, page 39. 2. The Sentence of Holy Sriptures. page
59. 3. The nature of Holy Church. page 63. 4. Councels. page 73. 5. The
Fathers. page 87. 6. They grounds of the Fathers. page 1^0. 7. History. page
117. 8. Paradoxes. page 125. 9. Sophismes. page 147. 10. All Kinds of
witnesse^. page 155.

