AN EXAMINATION OF THOSE PLAVSIble Appearances which seem most to commend the
Romish Church, and to prejudice the Reformed.

DISCOVERING THEM to be but mere shifts, purposely invented, to hinder an
exact trial of doctrine by the Scriptures.

By Mr JOHN CAMERON.

Englished out of French.

OXFORD, Printed by John Lichfield and William Turner, for Edward Forest. Ann.
Dom. 1626.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader: for preventing mistakes, give me leave to advertise thee,
that in many passages of this book beside the running title, J have used the
word Prejudice in a sense, not very usual in English, make it answer to the
French word Preiuge, which my Author uses, not for an ill preconceit, as we
commonly take it, but for such a plausible appearance, as before due
examination, man be a probable ground for any preconceit of a thing, either
good or bad. So Antiquity is a Prejudice for the Papists, and against us,
because that before a judicious examination, it is a probable ground for common
brains to conceive well of their Religion, and to mistrust ours. Secondly, I
have not been so superstitious in expressing my Authors word, as I have
observed some translators to be: I have not construed, but translated, keeping
(as near as I could) an even course between a Pedant and a Paraphrast: For
when the Original is not to be learned by the Translation, I tbink it not only
lawful, but also convenient to make use of that liberty. The neglect of it, I
take to be the reason, why commonly Translations are thought to taste flat in
respect of the Original. I shall not wonder if some slipps have escaped me,
seeing a man may be as absurdly over seen by too much animaduersion, as by
none, and (which is the misery of the most circumspect diligence) a man may
dote as much by gazing through a thing, as by staring beside it: yet I hope
there are none so gross as that they may abuse either my Author, or his Reader.

Farewell.
AN EXAMINATION of the Prejudices of those of the Romish Church, against those
of the Reformed Religion.
CHAP. I. That passion blinds the judgment of man, and hinders it from
assenting to the Truth.
It Is a matter worthy astonishment, that not only vulgar brains, but even the
most eminent wits, should suffer themselves to be so easily won, by the
outsides of lies, to bear arms against the truth. Albeit the spirit of man,
the more excellent a temper it is of, the more natural, and eager an appetite
it has after the knowledge of the trut^: by the same instinct loathing
ignorance, and especially disdaining to be cheated. So that even the most
artificial flatterers, instead of humoring it, would offend it, if it once
conceived it self to be but flattered: as on the contrary, if it once
completely apprehended the truth, it would stoop to it, how harsh and bitter
soever it were. So hard is it but that the complete representation, the inside
of a lie will offend us, and that of the truth affect us.

But the cause of our mischief is the perverseness of our passions, which
oftentimes so over-heat, and distemper the heart, that out of it, as it were
exhaling thick, and black vapors upon the understanding they either disturb
our judgments, or altogether dull our apprehensions. Neither deal they so
well with us as those piercing smoakes, which bereauing man of his bodily
sight, yet leave him still this uncomfortable privilege, that as he sees
nothing, so he cannot be gulled by any lying apparitions. Whereas when a heart
chafed with passion, has dimmed, yea extinguished the light of the
understanding, yet that takes not from it a presumptuous conceit of its own
clear sight, and real comprehension of the truth. Whence it comes to pass,
that man compassed about with thick darkness, confidently dreameth that he
walks in the Sun shine, and is strongly conceited that he has then fast
hold of the truth, when he huggeth an absurd, ridiculous fable. This corruption
is almost universal, and like to a general distemper of all the humors in
the body, it is dispersed into all the passages of man's life. In a word, it is
the Epidemicall disease of our souls which makes us easily induced to believe
all that for true which we desire should be so, as being more suitable to our
dispositions, and convenient for the accomplishment, and execution of our
desires, and designs. Upon this we invent unto our selves probabilities, and
readily entertain such as are presented unto us, to make us believe that
matters are so as passion wills us to conceive them: as on the contrary that
which we desire should be false, as thwarting our aims, crossing and
encumbring our enterprises by the like natural flattery of our selves, we
persuade our selves that it is false indeed, or suffer our selves to be easily
so persuaded by another.

The first vein of this corruption may be espied even in the infancy of man.
Children are cheered, and delighted, if one tell them that the tale which
pleases them is true, and they willingly believe it how strange, and fabulous
soever it otherwise seem unto them: contrariwise they are vexed and
discouraged, if one plainly tell the^ that it was fained only for pleasure; it
will be a hard matter to stick this impression into them. So naturally familiar
is the power which passion has, to darken, and blindfold the understanding.

After the same manner whosoever loves with a fit of passion, he will descry
many shows of arguments to encourage his affection, in the discourse of him
who extolleth that upon which he doteth. And as he desires that that which he
loves should be praiseworthy, beholding it through this clowd, he vieweth it
in a shape and color far different from the natural. Parents oft-times
curbed by civility from an outward expression of their indiscreet affection,
yet in themselves give the lie to those who freely tell them the truth of their
children: for it being a just cause of extreme grief unto us to be the
parents of untoward children, so is it hardly believed by us, so long as there
remains any probability of the better contrary. He who is desirous to enter
into a lawsuit will conceive a precious esteem of weak, and frivolous
counsel, which persuades him that his cause is good: contrariwise he will
disesteeme, and be much displeased with the solidereasons of a sage
Counselor, who out of the goodness both of his conscience, and skill,
certifieth him of the weakness of his cause, and disswadeth him from entering
into law. All this proceeds from this passion which entangleth his
understanding, and hinders it from a steedy view of those cozening semblances,
from an impartial examination of them, and from comparing of them with the
truth. Even so some one sick of an ignominious disease, against all other
Physicians he will willingly approve of him who shall judge him to be sick
indeed, but of an honest disease. Imprinting according to his desire this false
conceit into his mind, under the superscription of truth: for so a lie is
never approved of, but masked with the looks of its opposite. Yea our own
passions varnish it over, or at least hinder us from tearing of its veil, for
fear least we beholding it with a narrow eye, stripped of the borrowed face of
truth, should be affrighted by its ugliness.

CHAP. II. That this imperfection of judgment, proceeding from passion, is
discovered principally in the cause of Religion.
IT may be that in the civil part of man's life where (if the worst come to the
worst) it touches but the temporal good: this affected winking of the
understanding is not altogether hurtful. But in Religion it fares otherwise,
the danger here is dreadful, and the loss beyond recovery: when all here is
embarked, and carried away, the body and the soul, not to be no more, which
would be at least a forlorn kind of happiness, but to be everlastingly
miserable, which is the woeful complement of all unhappiness.

And yet for all that this mischievous quality has so encroached upon our
nature, and insinuated it self into such good footing, that it is never more
domineering, and peremptory, then when the question is concerning Religion, the
salvation of the soul, and the worship which God requires of us. Vid. epist.
de progress. Rel. Christian, ap. Jndos.
The poor Indians so long as they are showed brave ensign, or curious picture
(because the imbroderie, and painting ravish the sense, and man is naturally
idolatrous) run to them like birds to the fowlers cry, even to adore them,
as if they enshrined some Deity. But otherwise, let o^e tell them of their
errors, of the errors of their fore-fa^hers, they will demand ( Munsler in,
Cosm. descrip. F^is.
as did the Prince of Frisland) What is become of their progenitors, and
friends, formerly dead in their errors? And if one answer them, that they are
in hell, they will reply, that they will go thither also, secretly giving us
to understand, that there is no likelihood they should be there, The love which
they bear toward them makes them mistake this sad truth for a lie, because
it implies the condemnation of those whom nature, or acquaintance has most
indeared to them.

If by reasons so sensible, that mere sense might comprehend them, it be
strongly endeauored to make the folly of the Turkish Religion visible unto a
Turk, all this while the Sun is but showed to a beetle, the Turk sees not a
whit: not as if that had impaired his senses, but it being an irksome business
to acknowledge the horrid absurdities of his superstition, his passions grow
furious, and either besot his understanding, or divert it from a discontenting
speculation of such a truth, which being assented to, would force him to
pronounce sentence of condemnation upon his countrymen, his Sultan, his
friends, and kindred. This is so torturing a grief unto him, that nature will
not suffer him to believe it, and so it remains as incredible unto him, as it
is unpleasant, unless God work above nature.

Let us accuse the obstinate Jews of blasphemy, by testimonies of Scripture,
we shall stop their mouths, we shall convince them, but yet for all that not
convert them. Romans 1^.2.
An inconsiderate zeal without knowledge (as the Apostle has observed it)
Gal. 1.14.
a superstitious reverence of the traditions of their fathers, Romans 10.3.
a sottish doting upon their own righteousness, Ioh. 6.15. Act. 1.6.
a desire of the restoration of their state, of their restablishment in the
land of promise; 2. Cor. 3.16.
overspread their eyes, as it were, with a veil, so that they cannot behold
the glory of God in the face of Christ; Mat. 15.3 6. Marc. 7.8.9 and 13.
who nullifieth their traditions; Luc. 18.9.8.
teareth from them the false covert of righteousness; Ioh. 6.15. Act. 1.7.
who confounds their hope of an earthly kingdom, and prosperity; Ioh. 18.36.
who frustrateth their expectation of a King, a Messiah triumphing in secular
pomp: Mat. 11.29.
who binds them to the taking up of his Cross, 1. Cor. 1.23.
presenting himself to them crucified, Act. 2.23.
and in his Cross the shame, and horror of the rebellion of their Ancestors.

All this is thus, and more harsh to the natural apprehension of the Jew: and
therefore he is no less blockish, and backward to believe it. In as much as
he considers not, neither allows the true, and full poise to those means
whereby this truth should be proved unto him. It is then from his passion that
this his Ioh, 9.39. and 49.
affected, voluntary, and in consequence malicious ignorance proceeds.

CHAP. III. That the understanding troubled by the affections of the heart,
always finds pretenses, to make it self believe that which it desires
should be true.
IT is not so, for all this, that this ignorance wants color, which gives
it at least the aspect, and complexion of a true knowledge, insomuch that it
deceives him who has it, and oftentimes others also. 1 Cor. 1.23.
The Paynims puffe^ up with a conceit of their own wisdom, esteemed the
doctrines of Christian Religion to be mere dotages. Videsis Apolog. Ch^^stian.
(...) Ge^t^s viz: duas Ap^log. Iustini d^s^er: Tatiani ^heoph C^em. Alex.
Tertul. in Ap^log. Arnob. Minut. F^lic. Lactan. Joseph. cont. A^pion. Cyp^ian
cont, Dem^t. N^zi^n co^. ^ulian.
To this purpose they alleged all that which reason blinded with passion could
furnish them with, albeit that in their superstition they believed many things
much more repugnant to humane reason. They alle^ged Antiquity, and yet all the
Pagan superstition sprang up long after the truth. Had we but the ^earned
discourse of Josephus against Appion, it is enough to instruct us that that
wisdom so much vaunted of was of late birth in comparison to that of God, to
that of the Church. They alleged also their Minut. Fell. Arno^ lib 7. Te^tul
Apolog. cap 22^
miracles, their prodigious wonders, their oracles, the Arnob. lib. 1. Cyprian.
contr. Dem^t. Maxim. Im^er. in edict. ^useb Eccles. (...). ab. 9. c. 7.
disasters which befell the world after the publication of Christianity: as if
it had not been confir^ed by many, and most admirable miracles against the
contemners of it: as if it had not bin promised, and spoken of long before by
oracles far exceeding theirs in clearness, antiquity, and truth: as if whilst
the Pagan superstition flourished the world had not smarted under the same
evils, which it felt since the preaching of the Gospel, or as if it had felt
more tolerable plagues. And as i^ this multiplication of evils were not rather
to be attributed to the contempt of so excellent a gra^e t^ the butcherie, and
martyring of so many poor souls guilty of nothing but Christianity,
blameless in all other respects, living not so much like men, Symmach li 10.
epi^t. (...).
as Angels.

If you please but to read the relation of Symmachus to the Emperors
Theodosius, Valentinian, and Arcadius apologizing for Paganism, you shall find
there were never grosser untruths invented, nor yet more like unto truth: that
nothing could be spoken with more impiety, or more plausibility, the author
being as eloquent, as he was irreligious.

These poor Paynims little thought they maintained a bad cause; their
affection to it made them mistake it for good. Tertul Apol. cap. 49.
They excused that in Paganism, which in Christianity they esteemed a folly, a
crime, a sacriledge^ For Paganism they enslaved their understandings, and
busied them to search out reasons against reason, in it they swallowed even
Elephants. On the contrary in the Christian Religion they accuratly strained,
and sifted every circumstance: the propension of their affections swayed them
to an approofe of the Religion of their Sym. in rel^^
Ancestors, forbade them to condemn so many brave spirits of ignorance, to
remove the bounds which the renowned Ancients had fixed, to tumble into the
hazard of ruin, and confusion (so they imagined) their Empire, and Mecaen.
apud Dion. lib. 52.
Commonwealth which never receives such violent tosses, nor ever feels such
furious shaking-fits as when alterations in matter of Religion are stirring in
it. Having upon these considerations conceived a hatred against Christianity,
it was easy for them afterward to invent more prejudices against it.

Act. 3.17. 1. Cor. 2 6.
The Jews for the most part blindly condemned Christ, and his doctrine. Ioh.
7.17.
But if any one will do the will of my father (says the Lord unto them) he
shall judge of the doctrine: noting thereby, that the primary cause of their
malicious ignorance was the corruption of their hearts. Yet they were not to
seek for pretenses. They opposed against him Mark 7.5. Math. 15.2.
antiquity, Ioh 8 33.
succession, R^m 11.
the promises made unto them, Ma^k. 1.27.
the strangeness, and novelty of his doctrine, Ioh 6 42. Mat. 13.^5. Ioh 7 49.
the contemptible condition of himself, his disciples, and followers. But the
cause of this evil lay deeper, inveterated even with in their marrow, Act ^.5.
an invincible hardness of heart, Gal. 1.14.
an obstinate resolution not to let go their hold of the superstition of their
forefathers.

CHAP. IIII. That Passion in the cause of Religion produces at this day the
like effects, and covers it self with the like plausible pretenses.
WHo doubts but that at this day, the same passions cause us to conceive the
same prejudices against the same truths? Its a very harsh point to condemn our
forefathers for Heretics, this is to putrify their memories, it seems to
be an impious, and unnatural act toward them. The Pagans had this
consideration, the Jews had it, and have it at this day. We who are men as
they are, subject to the same passions with them, have the very same
inclination, willingly to believe that the Religion of our Grandfathers, was
the only holy, and divine Religion.

It^ insupportable to nature (because tempered with little sweetness) to incur^e
disgrace, to procure the displeasure of parents, kindred, neighbors,
countrymen, superiors. These respects are able to produce in us at least this
effect, to make us wish that the religion of those to whom nature, and the
civil laws have obliged us were the true. This desire afterward can it not
stagger the judgment: and this staggering can it not terminat it self in a
firm resolution to hold our selves fast unto it: and not to examine whether it
be as sound as it is favorable? Because that coming to discern its
imperfections, our conscience will not suffer us to be any longer at quiet,
until we change it for a better, even upon condition of running into
inconveniences so cumbersome, and unwelcome unto the sense of our nature.

So then, when the ambitious spirit of man perceives it self taken up already
on the one side, by a religion propitious to his ambition, and invited on the
other side by such a one as binds him to renounce the honor, and embrace the
infamy of the world, shall we doubt of his partiality in the choice? Is it not
easy to judge on which side he will turn the balance? Certainly man cannot
strip himself out of all affection of religion; in the same proportion he does
that, he vnmanneth himself, and is at best, but a monster of nature in humane
shape. Perforce then he is to make profession of some kind of religion, the
profession of irreligion being more infamous then that of a brutish, stupid
sensuality. But amongst so many religions when he comes to the choice of the
True his affections, his particular interests accompany him to the balance,
and there sway all. The truth how soundly soever propounded, how evidently
soever manifested, how powerfully soever urged is not able to make the
counterpoise. For this cause St. Paul recommending the Gospel, and wishing the
knowledge of it to King Agrippa, excepted his bonds: as knowing right well,
what a stumbling block the bonds, and cross of the Gospel are to Potentates.

We are wont to excuse at least, if not to defend a wicked person if
favorable, and beneficial unto us, and we think the carriage of a good man
to be peevish, froward, and cruel if he oppose our ends, and thwart our
purposes. Just so it is with our affection toward religion: if it favors
us, and apply it self to our humors we are curious in inventing tricks to
adorn it, and artificial colors to beautify it. If we do already, or are
like to make profession of it upon good advantageous hire, in this case
probabilities are unto us so many convincing, and irresistible demonstrations:
the grosser and more palpable heresies in it are but petty mistakes: the
horrible abuses, and enormities are but such slips as should be borne with in
the spirit of meekness. But toward the religion cross to his affections, and
which is is an enemy to his ambition man behaueth him self after another
fashion: he stretches, and straineth his wits to epsy some faults in it* in
it a small wrinkle, a wart, a superficial spot seems unto him an hideous
deformity. Often times he will not or dares not so much as look upon it, for
fear of being captiuated by its beauty. He willingly opens the ear to him
who is a deadly enemy of it, to him who slandereth it; he stops it against them
who only can represent it to him in its native purity, never considering but in
hasty, and prefunctory thoughts, the firmenes of its grounds, for fear least a
truth so evident, and powerful should come to master, and tame the rebellion
of his understanding.

CHAP: V: That to be thoroughly assured of the truth of a Religion, it is
necessary to examine the nature of the reasons, upon which it is grounded.
Seeing that such is the inclination of our nature, it concerns him who
desires to be thoroughly settled in the assurance of the truth of his Religion,
narrowly to consider, whether they are bare prejudices, plausible pretenses,
respects merely carnal which make it pleasing unto him, or whithe^ the truth
of it be so clear, and evident, that the conscience remains convinced with
it, the soul satisfied, the mind resolved and content. This disquisition,
this meditation will be of excellent use in making way for the discerning in
matter of Religion, of truth from error, superstition from piety, of the abuse
from that which is legitimate, custom from law. For it will furnish us with
proofs, not drawn from the circumstances of the accessory, and that which is
merely accidental: but such as are grounded upon the principal, and which
result from the nature, and essence of the thing it self. Proofs infallible,
and enforcing a necessary conclusion, whereas the other either conclude not at
all, or if they do, the most the conclusion can do, is to make the cause for
which the proofs were produced plausible, and g^acious, the contrary
suspected, and odious, being nothing else (if we esteem of them as they are)
but likely-hoods of truth, pretty conjectures. Now is it not well known that
the most plausible, and gracious causes, are not always of their rank, which
being not commended but by their own proper right, have that for the only
ground, and reason not of the favor, but of the justice they demand? And
those which by reason either of the ignorance, or partiality of men are
suspected, and hated, have they not oft-times the laws, and equity on their
side? Certes the most pure, and (as I may say) the most innocent innocence
would be punishable, were it enough to make one guilty, to be thought so.

But we may proceed farther, and affirm that the suspicion of falsity, is a
calamity ordinary to truth. Under an uncomely mask, their may be hid an
admirable beauty. Should the diamond lose it is invincible solidity, or the
inward fountain of its bright, and sparkling luster if sometimes it be found
so outwardly discolored, that at the first view, it can hardly be known for a
diamond?

In the Courts of Justice it is ordained that accusers should bring in their
indictment of the largest, that the court may be fully informed concerning the
accused parties: yet this is not called condemnation, but it only presupposes
a suspicion. Let then preiudices, exceptions, and pretenses be employed to the
uttermost, to make a religion suspected, so that upon them without more ado
the accusers ground not its condemnation, so that they tarry upon terms of
suspicion until they proceed orderly to a larger enquiry, and a stricter
examination, so that the question be not a whit spared, nor if it be possible,
the most vigorous proof. If a rich diamond suspected of bastardy had sense, it
would call for the touchstone, and desire to be admitted to a trial. Truth
also being suspected, reioiceth and presuming upon victory, triumphs already,
if she be put to a serious examination, and her last trial. The decree which
imposes this upon her, is not against her, but for her, this disgraceth her
not but helps her to the only means by which she may redeem her credit.
This is that she most earnestly desires as being a passage, and introduction
to her glory. It is her affliction to be suspected, but she makes not that her
complaint, this is not the subject of her grievances, custom has sweetened
this unto her, and made it tolerable. Her complaint and grief which she cannot
so easily digest is that she sees her self condemned upon surmises, her
cause not being sifted to the bottom, where lies the maine point of her
defense, and where she has reserved all her strength. For other wise by
reason of by matters in the form of proceeding, circumstances, appearances,
conjectures, she would be quite lost, and ofttimes borne down by a lie. Is it
not too well known that by such means the better causes are lost? That by
such tricks bad causes almost commonly in corrupt times seek and obtain the
victory? Excellently then to this purpose spoke Tertullian. Apolog cap. 1.
Truth entreats not to have her cause favored because she wondreth not at
her condition. She knows that she is a stranger upon earth, and that
amongst strangers she easily meets with enemies. But she has her kindred,
residence, hope, and dignity in the heaven. One thing yet she affectionatly
beggeth, that she may not be condemned unheard. What can the laws loose here
where they have absolute authority, if she be vouch safed a hearing? Shall not
their power be with more credit increased, if they condemn her even having
heard her. But if they condemn her without hearing her, beside the hatred of
manifest injustice, they will incur also the suspicion of a bad conscience,
in that they would not hear that which having heard they could not have
condemned.

CHAP: VI. That the cause of those of the Reformed Religion has been
condemned in the Romish Church, upon bare preiudices, without ev^r being
thoroughly examined.
THey of the Church of Rome have incurred this suspicion, in condemning the
Reformed Religion without considering it, and examining it to the bottom. They
avoid both the hearing of our sermons, and reading of our writings: they
neither read, nor meditate upon the holy scripture. The high esteem which
they have both of the learning, and honestly of their Doctors, has prevailed
thus far with them, that they have chosen them for Judges, in a cause wherein
themselves are parties. Parties accused not of a petty fault, but of a crime,
a sacrilege, an impiety in causing the revolt of Israel. If this accusation be
false it were an easy and effectual course to silence it, if they would but
lay open to the public view the weakness, and impertinencie of the reasons. Why
are they so afraid to hear it? why is it a kind of sacrilege amongst them to
be busied in so serious, and so holy a meditation? Why is it made a shriving
matter to have but thought of it? Who made these ordinances? Who instituted
this so wary a discipline? What was their plot in it? What benefit expect they
from it? If the Pope be innocent, why made he this prohibition? Is it the part
of innocence, or of guiltines to entreat, yea command that the accusation
should not be heard? This manner of proceeding tendes it to justify himself,
or rather to avoid, and escape judgment? doubtless he does as good as openly
confess that he is afraid of it. If we had used such a subtle method in
our proceedings, we should have afforded just matter of presumption against
our selves, that we went not that way to work honestly, bona fide, but driven
to it by an ill conscience.

It Is true indeed that in their schools, and writings they sometimes mention
our accusation, but for that they ought the more to be suspected of it. For he
who hinders his accuser from being understood, and taking the accusation out
of his mouth, will propose it himself, secretly gives us leave to presume,
tha^ he disguiseth it, that he may the more easily shift it off.

It Is also the common and continual complaint of those of the Reformed
Religion, that their accusation is never proposed but mangled, and counterfeit,
that their faith is represented by its enemies, out of its natural shape. That
their Adversaries in their disputations against them, do but quarrel with
their own fictions, and combat with puppets of their own making. That they
represent some prints, and lineaments of our doctrine, but not in their true
decency, and proportion, like certain looking-glasses which represe^ting the
visage misshapen, yet after a sort preserve something of the hue and complexion.
So they having under taken ^s they say to paint our deformities yet they will
not suffer any one to look us in the face. What may be thought of the cunning,
or ingenuity of that Painter which would have us judge of his picture without
comparing it to the original? They cite, and read our books in the chair,
as the false accusers of Christ, with their cavilling sophistry, alleged his
words to a contrary sense. But if they deal fairly, and say no more then what
is true, why give they not their people leave to look, and consider at their
leisure whether matters are so or no? Why is the mere curiosity of reading,
and hearing our works accounted a sinne^? What a wild contradiction, what a
strange confusion is this, to cite our books and forbid the reading of the^?
But the natural laziness of me^ makes this both excusable, and plausible.
For to refer the people to our writings seems unto them, a token of
assurance in their Doctor, this assurance, or rather boldness serves them
also for a note of conscionable dealing, and withal the prohibition of
troubling themselves about this matter, eases them of a labor. They are glad
to hear our books cited, that they may not seem so unreasonable, as to
condemn us upon other men's words; they are as glad to be forbid to examine the
citations, that they may be discharged of such a trouble. So the lazy merchant
relyeth upon his factour, and the unworthy Councellor upon his clarke, so long
as the one looks now and then to some accounts, the other to an extract of
the process, but carelessly, hand over head: and both of them say, the one of
his factour, the other of his clerk, that they are sufficient, and
conscionable men made both for their Masters profit, and ease, they willingly
persuade themselves so, that they may sleep the quietlier.

CHAP. VII. Upon what Preiudices we have been condemned in the Church of Rome.
WE could easily demonstrate that which we have said, particularly running
through all the points of the Reformed Religion, and manifesting the
disguisement put upon it, to expose it to hatred, and suspicion. But our aim
is to examine under what pretenses, it has been and is endeavored to hinder
those reasons from being at all, or duly considered which have made the
reformation of their abuses necessary.

Their masterpiece, or chief-trick of policy has been, to decline the will
and law of God speaking in the scriptures. And as wicked Magistrates, and the
corrupters of justice in a common-wea^th, make the authority of the laws to
depend upon theirs, under good and popular colors of a pretended obscurity,
and imperfection in them, that so there may be a gate opened to al liberty, in
substituting in the room of the laws, their own wills, and particular
passions. So in the Church wicked Pastors, not daring to accuse the Script^res
of falsehood, or to r^fuse subjection to their authority directly, have
contrived diverse means by which they may avoid their sentence and
determination, charging the^ with all those defects, which make a writing
mee^ly humane, defective, and imperfect in its own kind, denying the efficacy
and majesty of the Scripture while they call it Coster. En^hir. controu c. 1
a dead letter, Bordes de abus Missae.
of white, and black: its clearenesse, and simplicity, whilst they blame it
for Cens. Colon. p 9. And^ad. explis. orthodox lib: 2. p: 69 Eckius in Enchir
p^op: 4 page 69.
obscurity, and Pe^rus a so^^ in defe^s de vno praes. Iud. E^cles. p. 108.
co^: 2.

Pighius de Hiera: Ecel. 1. c 4.


ambiguitie: its Card. p^rro in t^^ct. de i^suffiScript.

Pistorius cont. disp. Mentz f. 27


sufficiency, while they dare to accuse it of insufficiency: its aucthority
in respect of us, when they make no scruple to teach that it has no more
authority, over us without the authority of the Church, then Herman. laudatus
a Card. Hosio. lib 3 de author scrip.
Aesops fables, Bellar. lib. 4. de verbo Dei cap. 4.
or Mahomets Alcoran.

But we suppose that we have by Gods assistance elsewhere suff^ciently showed
how false these censures, or (to speak more fully) these blasphemies are; we
have at least wise performed it in such a manner, that the adversaries of this
truth hitherto have not replied any thing. Only the vexation and desperate
rage, to see the vanity, and villainy of their ungodly policies exposed
starke-naked to the view of the world, has forced them instead of dissembling
their ex^reame grief, to vent it in injuries, and outrageous insolences
wo^thy indeed of their persons, and well befitting so desperate a cause, so
accursed both of God and men: but doubtless most unbeseeming a Christian, a
Doctor of Christians, unsuitable to the gravitie, the sweet demeanor, and
gracious mildness of truth.

This event sad in it self, has notwithstanding afforded us joy, in affording
us a new example of the prevailing force of truth, which fails not to
convince, even then when she persuades not, and if she cannot bend her
adversaries, yet she so trample^h them, and so sorely bruiseth them, that
albeit they submit not themselves unto her, they are nevertheless constrained
to testify the ulcer, and wound of their consciences by furious railings, like
those proceeding from a woman surprised in the shameful act of adultery. In
the mean time this joy has encouraged us to proceed farther, in discovering by
what devises they hinder an examination of the conformity of our Religion, with
the rule of faith, as Tertul de praescrip. advers. haeret c. 13. and alibi.
Tertullian calls it; whilst God enableth us in the means to show how they
have ma^e it an impossibility, to consider religion in its own natural guife,
representing it so counterfeit, and unlike it self, that as they pourtray it
for the most part, it is prodigiously misshapen.

Now to make our religion so obnoxious to hatred and suspicion, that none
should vouchsafe to consider its harmony, and concord with those maxims, and
principles which have been at all times, and are at this time unquestionable
amongst Christians: they have pronounced it an impossibility for any Christian
to discern the truth by the spirit of God dwelling in him. And having once
appropriated to themselves the title of the Church, ^nobled with so many
elogies, privileged by so many promises, that no man may presume to question
her authority, unless he forthwith profess himself a Jew, Turk, or Pagan:
it was easy for them afterward, to shuffle the doctrine contrary to their
abuses besides all examination.

But they, seeing that it was not enough to usurp a magnificent title, unless
it were after some sort justified; and that contrarily the presumptuous
rashness of such proceedings might pull upon them the general hatred, and
universal detestation of all Christians: they have found out (as they imagine)
notable pretenses to color this usurpation, and verefie their title.

All th^se pretenses may be reduced to ten heads, which they propound unto us
after this manner.

1 The magnificent state of their Church: opposed, to the contemptible
condition of th^se who call for a reformation of their abuses.

2 Her unity, and the division of her adversaries.

3 Her antiquity: and the noveltie of the Reformation.

4 They urge us to confess, that sometimes they have been the true Church, if
we yield that, then they cry out: that therefore they are so still, because the
Church perishes not, as certainly she cannot either perish, or change in that
which is essential.

5 They stand upon a quotation of times, places persons, when, where, by whom
this change was wrought, this defection begun?

6 They demand, where our Church soiourned so long time, in what city, yea
into what valley, what desert did she retire?

7 They except against the commission of the Authors of the Reformation as
false, and counte^feit.

8 They make great braggs of their succession continued without interruption.

9 They boast of having the substance of Christianity amongst them, even by our
own confession.

10 They dazell the eyes of the world with the show of a multitude of religious
persons, which they say have renounced the world, trampled under their feet the
delights, riches, and honors of earth that they may aspire unto heaven.

So in the vpshot they make their conclusion, that where these notes are, there
is the Church: and where they are not, she cannot be. And so presuming that
they may with good right take these notes unto themselves, and that we can
pretend nothing for them: albeit this truth received amongst us, dart her most
clear, and lively rays into the most passionate, and partial eyes, yet they
always condemn us upon these prejudices.

CHAP. VIII. A consideration of the outward glory of the Romish Church, and of
the mean estate of the true Church.
NOw albeit these considerations might make the world doubt, whether we were
the true Church or no, yet they should not have made them to condemn us. The
Lord Jesus was surnamed the Nazarene, this very surname made Nathanael to
doubt, whether he were the Messiah or no. Can any good come out of Nazareth?
(said he to Philip) but as soon as Philip answered him, come and see, he went
and saw him. What shall we loose by it, if we take a stricter view of these
appearances, that we may see whether there be no cosenage in them? The most
rigorous exam^nation will not make them false, contrarily their truth the more
its tried, it will become the more illustrious. But if they are but cheating
shows, what honest heart will not be content that the imposture should be
detected?

To this purpose we are now busied. And for as much as the matter we have in
hand is large, that our discourse may not roue, we will severally examine
these pretenses in the same order we propounded them.

Of all these appearances, the Magnificence of the Roman Church, is the first
with which she presents her self to the view of people being remarkable by
three principal circumstances. 1 Her outward glory. 2 Her ceremonies. 3 Her
policy.

But what will become of this maine point if al these circumstances ought to
make us the more suspect her: and if the Church which in this respect is
opposite unto her for the want of these shows deserves to be better esteemed
of by us?

Surely 1 The nature of the Church. 2 Her condition. 3 The dangerous
inconveniences which these circumstances draw along with them, forbid us to
admit them for characters, and badges of the true Church: for the glory and
luster of the Church is not outward, bodily, visible: but inward, spiritual,
invisible. All her beauty is within, Ps. 45. v. 54.
she is like unto the Tents of Cant. 1.5.
Kedar, as soon covered with dust, and well nigh burned with the heat of the
Sun: as soon be^t^n and shaken with storms, and tempests: but in the mean
time, inwardly all glittering in glory and magnificence. Like in this unto her
Ephesians. 1.21. and 4.15. and. 5.23 Colos. 1.18.
head the Lord Jesus, as being Rom 8.29.
predestined to be made conformable unto his image: who, during the time of
his conversation here below, had nothing without Esaias. 5^ 3.
him that could make him amiable; being Phil. 2.7.
contemptible in his own person, in Act. 4.13.
his Disciples, Ioh. 7.49.
and followers, in the judgment of him who saw but his outside. Who would have
compared him in this respect to Tiberius, or Pilate, or Caiphas the high
Priest? Luc 2.7.
Borne in a Cratch, not in a Palace: Math 2.5.
in a blind village, not at Jerusalem, not at Rome: Mat. 1. Luc 3
of the Royal stock indeed, but then when the glory of it was quite eclipsed;
Luc. 2.1.2.3.
amongst the Israelites, but at a time when they were slaves to the Romans:
Mat. 1.18.23.
of a Virgin, but so poor, that she was betrothed to a Mat 13 55. Marc. 6.3.
Carpenter: at his bi^th indeed adored by a company of Luc. 2.8. etc.
shepherds, but by a Mat. 2.
few wiseme^: persecuted by Mat. ^.12.13.
Herod, living in such a 14.^5. Ioh. 1.31.33.
retired obscurity, until the time of his Baptism, that John himself knew
him not. Mat. 4 1.
Then was he led by the spirit into the Wilderness, tempted by Satan, by him
carried up to a pinnacle of the Temple; and after all this having begun his
preaching Luc. 9.58.
continually, and unmercifully persecuted even to death: but by whom? Surely by
the Princes of the world, the Magistrates, the very same which pretended the
title of the Church, the authority, succession, and chair of Moses: oppressed
always with these prejudices, Have any of the governors, and Phar^ses
believed in him? Behold to what the pomp and state of Jesus Christ is brought,
to ignominy, and poverty. But in the mean time consider him inwardly, Colos.
2 3.
in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge: Colos. 2.9.
in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily: Act. 3.15. and 5.31.
he is the Prince of life: Apoc. 19 16.
the Lord of glory: Math. 3.17.
the Son of God: These. 1.14.18 and 3.18
his only son: Phil. 2.6.7.
who being in the form of God, but made himself of no reputation.

Should i^ then be seemly for the Church, Ephesians. 2.1^.
the workmanship of his hands, Esa. 64.8.
the clay which his fingers have fashioned, 1 Pet. 1.19.
the slave which he has ransomed by his blood, Ephesians. 5.17
the spouse which he has sanctified by his spirit, to we^re any other livery
then his own, to be handled more daintily, and after a more delicate manner
then himself? Is it possible that the body should not be made conformable to
its head, that the glory of the head being invisible, that of the body should
be visible: that the magnificence of the head being heavenly, and spiritual,
that of the Church, the mystical body of that head, should be earthly and
secular? Yea her condition is to Romans 8.17. 2. Tim. 2.11.
suffer with him, that she may reign with him. Moreover, statelines, and
gaietie in apparel does not commend, but prejudice chastity, which either is
of mean condition, or else as modest in her deportments as if she were.

This pomp which invites and feasts as it were, the eyes of the body, is but
carnal; and seeing it does so much humor the flesh, it should rather be taken
for a mark of pride, then of virtue. Luc. 16.19.
The rich glutton is clothed with purple and fine linen: he fares deliciously:
contrarily Lazarus is sick, vlcerous, exposed to the injuries of the weather,
and scorn of men, beholding to dogs only for relief. Yet Lazarus is an
Emblem of the Church; the glutton of the world.

Moreover, has not the Lord advertised Mat. 10.16.
his own, that he sent them abroad as sheep amongst Wolves, Luc, 21.17.
that they should be hated of all men for his names sake. That as the Ioh.
15.17.1^
world had hated him, so it would hate them. Ioh. 6.6.
That they should be cast out of the Synagogues: questionless out of those
Synagogues which had the succession, and pleaded antiquity. That they should be
Luc. 12.12.
haled before the Magistrates, Ioh. 16.2.
that they which put them to death, should think they did God good service, in
a word, that Ma. 10, 24.25
the Disciple being not above his Master, they should expect the same welcome
and entertainment in the world which he had formerly received. 1. Cor. 1.26.
You see, says the Apostle, your calling, not many wise according to the
flesh, not many noble, but God has chosen the weak things of this world, and
things which are not, to confound things that are, that no flesh might glory
before him. Mat. 11.25.
Agree^bly to the thanksgiving of our Savior, I thank thee O father, Lord of
heaven and earth, for that thou have hid th^se things from the wise, and
prud^nt and have revealed them unto babes, and to his exhortation Luc. 12.3^.
Fear not little flock, for it is your fathers will to give you the kingdom.

And indeed if that outward pomp were a note of the true Church, and its
contrary of the false: the true Church for the space of three hundred years,
and more, during the time of her persecu^ions, should have been the false.
After that, when Arrianisme had so ove^-runne the world, that it Hier. cont.
Lu^if^r.
groaned, and wonto see it self become an Arrian. When the Emper^ur Th^odor^t.
Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. c. 16.
Constantius tauntingly demanded of Liberius Bishop of Rome, How great a part
of the world he thought himself to be, that he alone should take the part of
one wicked fellow, (such a o^e was Athanasius in his esteem) that he should
so disturb the peace ^f the whole world. When Liberius was feign to con^e^se
indeed that he was alone, but replied withal, that his being alone could not
weaken the cause of the true faith. When he alleged an example from former
times, that once there were but three which resisted Nebuchadnezars decree,
commanding them to worship an Idol. Athanas. in (...) ad eos qui ^eg vit.
solit^r.
When the same Liberius was ca^ried down by the impetuous stream, and
subscribed to Arrianisme. Greg Naz. in orat. cont. A^^ian.
When Nazianzen was angry that the Church was measured by the mu^titude: and
when he said, speaking of the Arrians, they have the people, and we the faith;
they have the gold and silver, and we the doctrine; What? was the true Religion
all this while the bravest, and most illustrious? Was it amongst them which
bare the greatest sway in those times? Was it removed from obscurer places of
abode, to reside in more famous and imperial cities?

Let us remember the advertisement which Jn lib. cont. Arri. and Auxent
S. Hilary gave indeed to those of his own time, but which extend^th its use
also to ours. Of one thing I advise you, take heed of Antichrist. It is not
well that you are so taken with the love of walls, that you reverence the
Church of God in consecrated houses and goodly edifices, that under these you
settle the name of peace [and presume on it] Is it a matter to be questioned (a
remarkable speech) that Antichrist must sit in them? The mountains, woods,
lakes, prisons, caves, dungeons, seem safer to me, for the Prophets either
abiding in them, or being driven, and cast into them, have prophesied by the
spirit of God*

This outward glory then, is incompatible with the nature of the true Church,
and cannot possibly be taken for one of her marks: on the contrary, the want
of it being more natural to the Church, it does more distinctly set her forth
to the notice of intelligent beholders.

CHAP. IX. What kind of tranquillitiy belongs unto the true Church? How
Kings are her nursing fathers? And that Kings are not the noursing fathers of
the Romish Church.
But what then? Shall the Church never enjoy a quiet estate? And those promises
that Esa. 49.7.23.
Kings shall be her nursing fathers, that they shall lick up the dust of her
feet, shall they be frustrated? God forbid. True it is that God Ioh. 14.27. and
16.33.
gives peace to his Church: but it is such as Philip. 4 7.
passes all understanding. That Romans 5.1.
peace toward God, by which she glories in afflictions: being 2. Co^ 4.8.
pressed, but not oppressed: Romans 5.2.3.
in perplexity, but not comfortless: persecuted, but not forsaken: cast down,
but not destroyed. And these promises that Kings shall be her nursing fathers,
that they shall lick up the dust of her feet, are of the same nature with
those other promises; that she Esa. 60.16.
shall suck the milk of the nations, that Esa. 46.1^.
Kings shall walk before her in chains, as it were in triumph: nations
enemies, Kings enemies of the Church. Promises then of earthly things, for
types of heavenly: promises of fading and transitory commodities, to represent
those everlasting honors and pleasures. In this manner God has promised that
he would set her upon Carbuncles, Esa. 54.11.
and build her upon Saphires, pronouncing that there should be no mo^e tumults,
nor clattering in her gates. Because the Jewish nation at the time of these
prophecies, was most in love with such matters, therefore the holy Ghost used
them in the expression of the happy, but spiritual estate of the Church. In
the same kind the Lord promises, Esa. 43.2.
that when the Church should pass through waters, they shall not overflow her,
that being in the fire, she shall not be burnt. Promises according to the
letter, figurative; according to the sense, mystical, and real. Its true that
God sometimes gives to his Church Psalm. 125.3.
an outward prosperity, Prove. 30 8. 1. Tim. 4.8. and 6.6.
but in a mediocrity, Act. 14.22.
but for a time. It appertains not unto her, to enjoy a complete peace on
earth, being 2. Cor. 5.6.
a stranger in it, and a Heb. 11.13.
pilgrim, out Heb. 11.14.15.
of her element, and Heb. 13, 14. Apoc. 14.13.
heavenly country. Prove. 30.6.
A continual, and undisturbed peace, is vncompatible with her nature, and does
not cherish, but change it, and at length quite corrupt it. Even as the outward
heat of the air, continued without moderation, first slackes the vigor of the
inward, and natural heat, and makes it faint, at last stifles and quite
extinguisheth it.

Its true, also that kings are the foster-fathers of the Church, but this is
seldom. 2. Chron. 36.22.23 Esd. 1.11 Esa. 49.28. and 45.1.
Cyrus was a father to the Jewish Church, yet no part of it. So many Pagan
Emperors have suffered their kingdoms to be receptacles of Christians. Then
was it when the Church sucked the milk of the Gentiles: then, if ever, was
this prophecy, that Kings should be her sustainers, fulfilled liberally. Yet
we deny not but God raises up Princes in his Church. But when these Princes in
striving to show themselves Patrons of his Church, with more affection, then
discretion, have fostered her even with superfluity, they have procured her
ruin, by the same means they sought her advancement.

It was not a Poet only, from whom the pride and surly pomp of the Romish
Church, extorted this speech, Petrarch. in Sonnet. beginni^g Fontana.
Hor Constantin non torna, Let Us have no more Constantines. St Hierome In vit.
Malch. Monac. ad ini^i.
himself observed in his time, (mark Reader how long since it was) that the
Church attained to her full growth, became adultae by persecutions: but being
cherished by Christian Princes, she increased indeed in riches and power, but
decreased in virtues, and graces. What would he have s^id in our days?
Wherefore a too pompous magnificence in the Church, is at the first a presage
of a future alteration, and at last a certain note of a change to worse. But
the times are now otherwise, and matters are crept into another extreme. There
is not a Prince at this day, which, to speak truly, sustaineth the Romish
Church: she rather vpholdeth them, by whom she is said to be vpheld. So they
cannot properly be termed her Patrons. She domineers over them, even in
temporal matters: she holds their authorities and estates fastened to her
beckand pleasure. Its a small matter for her to vsurp the power of
excommunicating them, unless she also take upon her the authority to deprive
them of their sovera^gneties. When it pleases her, she plucks away the
scepter, and tramples the crowns under her feet: so that now (a strange
alteration) the nursing father trembles before his nursling, and the Guardian
stands in fear of his pupil^; not with such a fear, wherewith of^imes God
strikes his enemies, a fear proceeding from a secret cause, Psalm 10^.15.
when he has caused his uoice, Touch not mine anointed to give a startling
sound to the most inhumane and savage hearts; but with an affrighting
apprehension of conspiracies, poyniards, powder-plots, the ruin of their
estates, and revolt of their subjects. O barbarous, and unnatural pupil! o
unfortunate and ill-rewarded Protectors. What? shall the Church which usurps
this authority, practices this cruelty be the true Church? surely he hit the
point well, who was the first that said, that devotion begat wealth, but the
daughter devoured the mother. A prodigious child delivery that Religion should
send forth so unnatural a monster, so contrary to the disp^sition of its
mother. But it was the purpose of God. He had foretold that Kings, Apoc. 17.17.
should give their kingdoms to the Beast, that they should undergo its yoke.
This prediction was to be accomplished.

Now then let the Romish Church proceed, and pra^cke it lusti^y, let her
triu^ph in this imperial greatness, seeing it is the greatness of the Beast:
let her scorn at our homeliness, and scoff at our penury, seeing it is the
condition of the Church.

CHAP: X. That the Ceremonies of the Romish Church, do not Commend, but
disparage her.
But let us examine, whether the multitude of ceremonies in the Romish church,
can give her that title, which her pomp cannot, and whether the want of such a
troop amongst us, will procure us that disparagement, which the meanness of
our estate cannot. Certainly all alike, one as much as the other. So that we
still stand upon the same terms with them: their glory shameth, them our
ignominy honors us: their ceremonies make them superstitious: our
simplicity notifieth that we have the true Religion^

This will clearly be discerned, if we consider, that there was indeed Gal.
3.23.
time when the ceremonies, and the rudime^ts of the world had place, and were
useful in the Church of God: who then Cols. 2 17.
manifested himself in types, and shadows. But this time Colos 4.1.2 3.4.5.
lasted no longer, then whilst the Church was in her infancy, while the heir
was a child, he was to be governed as a child, his tenderness being not
capable of a full liberty, and of a manlike instruction. The Luc 1.78
day spring from on high, Malach. ^.2


.
the sun of righteousness was not yet risen. The body of the shadows, Col
2 7.
Ioh: 1.17.
the truth of the figures was not then exhibited. But the Gal. 4.1. et seq.
fulness of time being accomplished, the time of the Churches infancy being
expired, the heir being come to a perfect stature, the Sun of righteousness
being already risen, the Col^s. 2.17. Heb: 10.
body and rea;l truth being now represented; the Gal. 4 3.
rudiments of the world took their leave, the shadows vanished, the Gal
2.35.26
types gave place to truth, the carnal schoole-mastership yielded to a
spiritual liberty, Heb. 7.16.
obscurity and imperfection, to clearness and perfection.

For this cause, the Apostle said, Colos. 2.19.17.
Let no man condemn you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an Holy day,
or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath days, the reason was, because these
things were shadows of things to come, but the body (as he adds) is of
Christ^ Proceeding farther, he comes even to cut off a^l those ceremonies,
which were got into the Church by humane institution. If ye be dead (says he)
with Christ, from the rudiments of the world, why, a^ though living in the
world are ye subject to ordinances. (Touch not, taste not, handle not, which
are to perish with the using) after the commandments and doctrines of men,
which things have indeed a show of wisdom, in will worship and humility in
that they spare not the body, and have no regard to the satisfying of the flesh.

What could be more effectually and vrgently spoken, for the banishment of
ceremonies out of the Church? for by this we see that they are altogether
incompatible with the nature of the Church under the Gospel: 1 the Church is
dead with Christ, and so to live spiritually, 2 these ordinances are a burden,
the Lord has eased her of it, 3 they are perishable, true piety is permanent,
4 they are doctrines of men, the doctrine of Gods worship is divine, sent down
from heaven: 5 They have a flash of humane wisdom, some show of humility,
but they are indeed will-worshipsand Vainly then, and impertinently in this
case are the pretenses of a good meaning used, mere fig-leaue couerings. It is
for Princes to prescribe rules according to which they will be served, not for
subjects to invent them to themselves, he is a ^ebell who attempts it. How much
more rebellious shall the bole sacrilege of them be accounted, who either
bring in to, or keep in the church a service of God patched up merely of
humane institutions? The more these ceremonies increase, the more vnm^nnerly
presumption and sacrilege, there is in the Church, and shall they be the
marks of a true Church?

Let us consider the Primitive Church flourishing more in times of the Apostles
then ever it did afterward, who will not admire her great simplicity in all
points, and especially in ceremonies? For excepting the celebration of baptism
by washing of water; and of the holy supper, according to the lords
institution, in taking the bread and wine, and distributing them after thanks
giving: excepting also, the imposition of hands upon those which
extraordinarily received the holy Ghost, whether it wear in a Heb. 6.2.
general calling, or a 1 Timothy 4. d^e 5^ 22.
particular to a charge in the Church, mark. 6.13. Iam. 6, 14. Aug. ep. 118.
ad Ianuar.
and annealing for a miraculus effect of healing the fick, I say these
excepted, their will not be found any other ceremony in those primitive times,
so admirable was their simplicity. But the number of them was multiplied after
wards, not by divine but by humane institution. St. Auste^ entering in to
discourse about ceremonies with Ianuarius, s^yes well, that our Lord has
subjected us to a^ easy yoke and a light burden; and therefore has united his
new people, by the sacraments very few in number, v^ry easy to be o^serued,
very excellent in their signification, as is Baptism cons^crated in the name
of the Trin^ty, and the Communion of his body and b^ood* and if their be any
other thing commended in Scripture, not comprehending the ceremonies which are
to be read in the Pentateuch, which made the servitude of the ancient people
heavy and toil some. If he add that it is to be presupposed, that those
things which are observed by the whole world, Aug. Jbid.
although unwritten, have notwithstanding been ordained either by the
Apostles, or by the Counsels, this he restrains nevertheless to a small
number of feasts, of the passion, Resurrection, and ascension of our Lord, of
the coming of the Holy Ghost, yea in closing his discourse with this
supposition, and if their be any thing observed by the whole Church, he
plainly gives us to understand, that their were very few things, beside those
by him specified, and those to of very small moment. The doubting particle, If
their be any, imports that necessarily. And truly if the ceremonies had
amounted then as they do now, to an heavy burden by reason of their number,
the difficulty and trouble of observing them. If in obscurity of signification,
they had matched the Jewish ceremonies, yea if they had been taken from the
ceremonies of the law (as the Popish are all, excepting those which are
borrowed from Paganism) this good father should have contradicted himself, if
he had thought that either the Apostles would, or Councels could have imposed
them upon the Church. He had said that our Lord had subjected his Church to an
easy yoke, and a light burden, should he then say, that the Apostles and
Councels had been willing to make this yoke irksome, and burden heavy? Aug.
119. Epi. c. 9.
Elsewhere he complains of the excessive number, and intolerable multitude
of ceremonies admitted into particular Churches: bemoaning the condition of the
Church, by this means more slavish, then that of the Jews. But this number
was not so insupportable in respect of the servitude it brought upon the
Church, as dangerous in regard of the superstition it begat.

And certainly here is the venom incorporated into humane inventions, Aug. ib.
which under some well composed looks of piety and devotion, insinuating
themselves into the true service of God, they stifle that, and advance
themselves into its room. Our Lord marked ou^ this evil when his Disciples
being accused of transgressing the traditions of their fathers, he not only
justifies them but also condemns their accusers, for having made void the
commandment of God by their traditions. who is so blind that has not seen,
that sees not daily that the commandments, but falsely called the
commandments of the Church, are more religiously respected, and with more
scruple violated, then those, which all confess to be the commandments of
God? Notwithstanding the infinitenes of their number and variety, the
sottishest, and dullest amongst the^ have the^ at their fingers e^ds: the
spiritual service of God in the mean time, and the manner of its performance
is unknown unto them, the precepts which inioyne and teach it are strange to
the greatest part of them. A pregnant argument of the hypocrisy and corruption
of man's nature, which is delighted in that which is fleshly and outward:
neglecting that which is spiritual, and inward. This is that which gave
occasion to that ancient and grievous complaint of the Prophet, conceived in
the name of God. This people draws near unto me with their lips, but their
heart is far from me, Esa. 29.15.
for their fear and service is the commandment of men.

A man continuing without any exercise of religion, can hardly be at peace with
himself, and therefore he ventureth upon some kind of devotion, but the
mischief is, that he is not pleased, but in that which is outward and
sensual, carnal as he is in that which is carnal. the more then that a
religion is sensible, and mechanical (as we may term it) the more acceptable
it is unto him, the more intellettuall, and spiritual, the more uncouth and
harsh. For this cause even under the new testament, and under grace, Ioh:
4.21.23.
now when the Lord has advanced his Church to an estate merely spiritual, he
has left her nevertheless some ceremonies, by reason of her infirmity, but
few in number, and without bravery, accompanied with the preaching of the word
for fear of danger, namely, the Sacraments of Baptism and the holy supper.
Colos. 3.^.
For he would elevate our hearts unto a sublime pitch, and set them on high,
and fix them upon their Principal object, drawing them from sensible and
material objects, to more refined and purified affections and meditations.

Pondering these reasons, we make no more apologies for our selves to those who
cast in our teeth our penu^y of ceremonies. Nay we think this our glory,
seeing in this point we stand upon the same terms with the blessed Apostles,
we have the same defense which they had, the condemnation of our accusers, for
that by their trumperies, they have smothered the sincere simplicity of true
worship. We tell them that this multitude of rites, and traditions is more
suitable to the superstition of Turks, Jews, and infidels, amongst whom all
these vanities have been, and are still in re^uest. Christian religion is not
capable of them, they cannot stand either with the spiritual estate, or poor
condition of the Church. Superstition the mother of ceremonies is lavish, and
prodigal, Spiritual whordome as it is, it has this como^n with the bodily.
Both of them must have their paintings, their trinkets, their inveagleme^ts and
this cannot be without charges. The Church cannot afford such cost upon
ceremonies, and bables, her stock is so employed in succouring the living
images of Christ, that she cannot t^inke upon wooden babies: the world is so
hard with her, that she has nothing to cast away in the guilding of Alters,
in erecting proud edifices, in adorning walls with t^pe^lrie, in maiestick and
stately processions through the streets.

CHAP: XI. That the policy of the Roman Church, serves all for prejudice
against her.
WE have seen then, that neither the pomp, nor the ceremonies of the Church
^f Rome can do her any service, but only to make her the more suspected, the
more she stands upon them: even as the rioto^s luxury, a^fected postures of
countenance, and m^ltitude of compliments in a woman make her chastity more
questionable. But peradventure the policy, government, and authority which she
takes upon her, having a visible head, si^ting in a throne more then imperial,
in the city of Rome, heretofore the Queen and Empress of the universe: and
now by usurpation greater then ever she was, having succeeded the Empire, and
in this succession surmounted it in greatness of soveraigntie which she takes
upon her: exercising dominion over the body, and the soul, in this life and
after it, in this world, and without the circuit of it; without being
accountable to any, submitting all to her self, not only the outward man, but
the inward also, even the conscience. Peradventure, we say, this consideration
may make us both to reverence, and admire her. This doubtless may set her out
most amiably to carnal eyes: but the spirit judges otherwise, yea quite
contrary of it. When the protestation of Christ shall come into our memories,
Ioh. 18.36.
that his kingdom is not of this world: the exhortation of Christ, that Mat.
10.25.
his Disciples should not be like to the kings of the nations, the example of
Christ, who being himself Lord of Lords, King of Kings, during the time of his
abasement, became Mat. 17.16.
tributary to a Prince, a tyrant: The commandment of Christ, when he bid to
pay unto Caesar, that which is Caesar's, and unto God that which is Gods. The
Act. 23.10.
practice of this commandment in the Apostles, who acknowledged themselves
subjects to superior powers, subiecting to them every Romans 13.1. 1 Pet.
2.13.14.
soul by their e^hortations, when they protested that they 2. Cor. 4.5. 2.
Cor. 1 24. 2 These. 2.4.
were the servants of the faithful for Christ's sakee, that they had no power
over their faith. These considerations make that which ravished fleshly eyes,
misshapen, hideous, and terrible to a spiritual view; especially when it shall
be considered that this boundless power, and transcendent dignity is a
character of Antichrist, the true condition of his Antichristian kingdom,
directly contrary to that of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Certainly be it as it will, that there have been, are and will be many 1.
Ioh. 2.18.
Antichrists, and false teachers, which oppose themselves against Christ, yet
there is one of them to lb. and 2. These 2.4.
whom this title is, by an unhappy excellency, principally due. Inasmuch as
that beside the abominable impurity of his doctrine, which is common to him
with the others, he invades the royal prerogative of Christ; hoising himself
above 2. These. 2.4.
the Magistrate and the Angels themselves, and so above all that is called God
(for these are they to whom this name is allowed in Scripture), whilst
arrogating to himself a power over consciences, he pretends a supremacy over
all Christians: a supremacy of religion, and which is spiritual; and so fits
in the temple of God, behaving himself, as if he were God; taking upon him the
power of binding and loosing consciences; of making that sin which God has
not called sin; of giving dispensations where God gives none; of rating good
works and setting a price upon them, enhauncing, and moderating the market
according to his occasions. See Monsieur d^ Nevers his discourse of his
embassage to Rome.
When he has terrified the consciences of the greatest Monarchs, working this
impression into them by his deputies, that how serious soever their repentance
may be, yet they cannot enjoy peace either of soul, or body, unless his
absolution come between. Whilst he makes unclean the use of creatures whom
God has sanctified by his word, not commending a fast, but enforcing an
abstinence from certain creatures against the express word of God, which
pronounces this doctrine, a doctrine of Devils. Whilst he undertakes to make
Viz: that of the Clergy.
marriage unlawful, which the Scripture has called honorable amongst all
men, and the bed undefiled. When he dispenses with the Viz: Monastic vows^.
breaking of vows, when he allows for honest those Witness the King of
Polonia, who by a dispensation married his sister in law.
marriages, which the word of God has declared to be incestuous. When he
declares by his indulgentiall Bulls, that prayers had in a pl^ce by him
assigned, are more precious, then if they had been without his assignation.
Exercising this traffic, that with the sale of things spiritual, of souls
and consciences, he may stuff his treasures, which he imployeth, as the world
knows, either in maintaining war against Christian Princes, or in promoting
his kindred, or in making his proud, profane, Epicurean court swim in
superfluities of dissolute luxury. What shall we say more? When he undertakes
to shut and open at his pleasure the gates of Paradise, to prolong, or
abbreviate the torments of those that are departed. When arrogating to himself
this power, he uses such a partiality in the execution of i^; partiality, say
we? When he proceeds in such niggardliness, and avarice, yea such barbarous
inhumanity, saving only whom it pleases him to save, being able (if you will
believe himself) to save all. Is not this to arrogate a power proper, and
peculiar to God alone? But this power which in God, the Lord and Master of all,
is no whit tyrannical: in man, who is obliged to do for another all he can
possible, to love his neighbor as himself, more then tyrannical. Finally,
when Clem 5 in bu^^a indulg.
out of his authority, he employeth the Angels, in the pretended execution of
his commandments, v^urps not he an authority more then humane, altogether
divine? Yet notwithstanding, this so strangely usurped power, is the master
sinew of that policy, by which this unwieldy body subsisteth, the Colossus and
maine pil^ar of the Roman Church, a nerve which taking its original from the
head, straggles through the whole body, being distributed to every member
proportionably to its use: even as in the kingdoms of the world, the Monarchs
reserving with themselves, as it were, the springhead, and sun of
soveraignety, nevertheles communicate the streams of this spring, the beams
of this sun in proportion to their officers, according to each of their
functions.

CHAP. XII That although it has been foretold, that Antichrist should sit in
the Temple of God, yet that Church which acknowledges him, cannot be the true
Church.
But there remains yet this scruple, that how tyrannical and Antichristian
soever this policy be, yet the Church where it is practiced may not a whit the
less be the true Church. Yea rather seeing that Antichrist must sit in the
Temple of God, considering this power and dignity, we have just reason to
presume that the Church of Rome, wherein it bears sway, may be truly the
Temple of God.

This scruple cannot stagger, or stay him who shall examine whether this power
be to be exercised by the Church, or against her: to be approved, or de^ested
by her; who will consider that the followers of Antichrist at any time, now if
he be already come, as certainly he is: or for the future, if he be not yet
come, as a great part of the world dreameth, may oppose the church by the same
argument, alleging that they are the true church, because Antichrist is
amongst them. One August. civit. Dei lib. 10. c. 59
therefore, adventured to interpret these words, sitting in the Temple of God,
in a sense which runs, sitting against the Temple of God, grounding upon the
words in the (...).
original, which may denote as well, an opposition against the church, as a
residence in it. But let us take the words in the former sense, that Antichrist
must sit in the church of God; yet it will never follow that that church which
a^knowledgeth him for her head, obeys, and adoreth him has any thing of the
church but the bare name. Let him then be in the church, but as a canker is in
the body, a tyrant in the commonwealth. It may seem that for this cause the
Apostle used the word Temple, rather then Church, that he might express unto
us this mystery of iniquity, by allusion to the Temple of Jerusalem, called by
an excellency, the Temple of God; signifying unto us, that as the Temple of God
had been anciently the place which God had consecrated, to the outward
exercise of his service, but that men aft^rward transformed it into a den of
thieves: retaining for all that the title of the Temple of God, in regard of
it is primitive, and sanctified use: even so the church of Rome is styled the
Temple of God, as being primordially planted, and dressed by his hand:
consecrated to God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, (and is so still at this day
outwardly) by baptism, and profession of the Christian faith, although they
have degenerated from their original purity, and by their abominations
profaned their consecration, and belied their profession. Like unto rebels,
who notwithstanding their rebellion, retain the name still of kings subjects,
as usually he that is the ringleader of a conspiracy, obeyed by his
confederates, is said to usurp rule over the kings subjects. So the
adulteress keeps the name of a wife still. After this fashion, that may be
called the Temple of God, which is become a den of thieves, that wherein not
Antiochus, but Antichrist has set up the abomination of desolation. But
granting them that the Temple of God, wherein Antichrist must sit, should be
the true Church; it cannot thence be concluded that the Church of Rome should
be the true Church; this will imply no more, then that the Temple of God are
the faithful, both those which have been heretofore, and those which are still
as it were impledged in the Church of Rome, as anciently the Jews were in
Babylon, and all Israel in Egypt. Over them the Pope long since sat, and at
this day sits, and in this sense sits in the Temple of God in the rigor of its
signification. They in the mean time never were, and now are not of the Roman
church, as the grain is in the chafe, but not of it. As some upright Justices
may be in a Court of corrupt Judges, but not of their confederacy, a few
wholesome bodies may be with a multitude of infectious, but not of their
company. Finally to cut them off from all evasio^, we say that the Pope sits
in the church of God, in regard of the unlimited authority he vsurps over all
christians, even those which are separated from his slaves, undertaking as
their Judge, to proceed against them with his tyrannous censures, and
constraining Princes to persecute them.

It is then a certain truth, that this policy of the Roman church, being of
the same nature with that of the Antichristian church, it is a disgraceful and
scandalous badge of her corruption, and apostasy.

On the other side, let the government of the reformed churches be observed, in
them there is no supreme jurisdiction, but an authority which always
submits it self to the rule of Gods word, and Canons of a discipline
regulated by it. Every man being assubiected to the judgment, not of one
alone, but of many, and those many not undertaking to bind any man by their
authority, but only by the equity of their decrees, submitting themselves to
the control of any man, yea and yielding to it, if it be accompanied with
reason. The true church is of so ample a circumference that she cannnot be
governed by one alone, and of so Royal a descent, that in that which
concerns the conscience, she cannot be ruled by any but God himself. Any
other whosoever he be, employed in any function concerning her, must behave
himself as her servant, not as her Lord, not prescribing her any thing, but
bearing witness to what has been prescribed her, not advancing himself
above kings, but bowing unto them, not thinking, that his spiritual liberty,
exempts him from bodily loyalty, but giving to Caesar, that which is Caesar's,
to God that which is Gods, honor to whom honor, tribute to whom tribute
belongs.

This is the platform and ground of jurisdiction in the protestant churches,
very different from the Popes, who establishes a spiritual monarchy in the
church, who takes upon him to judge all, without being judged by any, who
requires a blind obedience, grounded not upon the reason and equity of his
injunctions, but upon the uncontrollable eminency of his place, making as much
of his ordinances, as if they were brought down immediately from God, as having
in the Plat. in vita Paul. 2.
registry of his breast, the fullness of infallible knowledge.

CHAP. XIII. Whether union and discord be marks, by which the true Church
should be discerned from the false.
ALL the advantage then that the Church of Rome gets by this clatter of
external pomp, of ceremonies, jurisdiction and authority, by which it is
endeavored to make her greatness more venerable, stands her but in this sorry
steed, to strengthen the suspicion of her falsehood into her conviction. On the
contrary, the innocent baseness, simplicity, and humility notable in the true
church, makes her more lovely, affording us sound matter of a pressing
conjecture, and a strong presumption that she is indeed, as well as in style,
The Reformed Church. This perceived, makes us presage that all the other
exceptions which the Church of Rome darteth against us will be of the same
making with this first: having more plausibility, then soundness, partiality,
then justice, color then strength, as we shall see, by Gods assistance, in the
progress of this examination. Let us consider then in the second place, what
weight there is in the pretended unity of the Church of Rome, opposed to the
discord surmised to be amongst us.

Now we say that it is not generally true, that unity should always be a note
of the true Church, or discord of the false. We s^y also that the unity of the
Roman Church is in show only, not in deed: that it is rather a conspiracy,
then a union; like unto that amongst those which were besieged in Jerusalem,
who Joseph. de bell. Judaec. l. 6. c 4.
disagreeing between them^elues, joined forces nevertheless against those
which besieged them, being divided at home, and united abroad. And on the other
side that our discord is only surmised, and that we are in truth united, not
only against the common en^my, but also between our selves.

That it is true that union is not a mark of the true Church, nor disunion, a
just presumption of the false, see we not that in the times of the Apostles,
there were great discords in the Church? Some of them were of one opinion, some
of another, one thought that the ceremonies of the law were to be retained,
another that they were not. And this divisio^ had made such an alienation of
hearts in the Church, that Gal. 2.11.
St Peter himself was compelled to be a timeserver, and diversely to apply
himself, according to places, and persons, until he met with a rough censure
from St Paul, who resisted him to his face, and sharply rebuked him, for not
walking uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel. I understand (says 1
Cor. 11.18.
the same Apostle, writing to the Corinthians) that there are dissentions among
you, and I partly believe it, for there must be heresies amongst you also, that
they which are approved may be made manifest.

Behold in the mean while Act. 23.
amongst the Jews, the Scribes, Pharisees, and Sadduces united together under
one head the high Priest. Could they then benefit themselves with this
pretense, and vpbraid the Christians with their discord? True it is, the
Sadduces agreed not with the Pharisees in all points of doctrine, but yet, all
of them acknowledged one chief Priest, all of them joined together in the same
form of diu^ne service, and which is more, the number of the Sadduces was so
small, commpared with the other; that it could nor furnish the Christians with
just matter of reto^tion; and if it could, what would this have been more then
reproach, and counter-reproach, crimination, and recrimination; equally true on
either side. Now seeing that one of the parties was the true Church, could it
be inferred from its division, that it was the false? Neither division then,
nor union can be essential characters either of the true or false Church. But
suppose these marks should be infallible, what would the Church of Rome get
by it? What should we judge of her during that long schism? What may afford
her an apology? perhaps a distinction, that the division at that time, was in
respect of charity, not of faith, and doctrine. But how will this distinction
of schism in faith, and schism in charity, heal up the wound, if both of
them be equally, pernicious, equally incompatible with the nature of the
Church? The Donatists were not divided from the Catholic Church in faith, at
the first, for all that, they were reputed of as members cut off from her.
Their schism, indeed, at the length begat heresy; as an inflamed ulcer
causes a fever. And may we not avouch, that during the last schism in the
Roman Church, the same case has happened, when the anti Popes were by one
another accounted the forerunners of Antichriste: the followers of both sides
reciprocally called by one another the members of Antichrist. What may here be
replied? perhaps, that in the Christian Church in the time of the Apostles, in
the Roman Church since, heretics and schismatickes were not of the true
Church, but mingled with it: as darnell amongst wheat, which makes no part of
the wheat: as mutiners in an army which are not of the army. But what? make not
they of the reformed religion the same reply when their discord is cast in
their dish? confess they not that their is indeed darnell in their wheat, but
yet not of it, that there are in their spiritual army turbulen-mutiners, but
not of their army? Now if so soon after the publication of the Gospel by the
Apostles, when that Iudaisme, and Paganism were assaulted by such strong
forces there sprang even then schisms, and heresies like fogs at the rising of
the sun. If in a time so privileged, so flourishing with the frequency, and
variety of gifts, and extraordinary graces, notwi^hstanding all this, Satan
striued with might and maine, to make the assault upon those, who gave it to
his kingdom confounded with distractions, that he might weaken the assailants,
by dividing them: who will think it strange that he has made the like assay,
with the same success in this last reformation? who will wonder, that he has
raised such an hurly burly of dissonant voices, that Christ's voice may not be
heard distinctly? Just as anciently the Jews making their children pass
through the fire, in honor of their Idol Moloch, for fear that their ruef^ll
scrietches should call to their hearts for natural affection, and amaze them
with the sound of their own cruelty, they took order, that voices so sensibly
lamentable, should be lost in a rude variety of more clattering, and
unpassionate noises Certes this device was effectual to the Jews, but it
succeeds not so well with Satan. The cries of infants were feeble, and might
easily be out-noised: but the voice of Christ, how soft and sweet soever it
be, to those who are his, yet it is a piercing, and a mighty voice. True
religion has had its course, all heresies are either dead, or dye one after
annother not by the fu^y of faggots, and gibbets, but by the sword of the
spirit, and by the power of the word of the living God.

CHAP. XIIII. That their is no true unity in the Church of Rome, and that in
the reformed Church, there is no discord of importance.
But to consider this point nearer hand, there is no discord of moment amongst
us; no sincere union amongst them: but a combination to ruin their common
adversaries; as some Princes, which otherwise bare mutual grudges one against
another, entertain nevertheless a league against a common enemy. So Herod and
Pilate agreed, in putting to death the Lord Jesus, the savior of the world.

Surely it cannot be denied, but that in former ages, the dissentions in the
Romish Church were very great. Their mutual hatred was deadly, witness their
schism, witness also the great variety of opinions amongst those doctors
which themselves style Catholic. who so will see proof of this, let him only
consult the writings of Cardinal Bellarmine, there he shall find diversities,
and contrarities of opinions amongst the Catholic doctors almost about every
point of religion.

But the Pope being then busied about the establishme^t of his Papal
omnipotence his spiritual authority over the temporalty, yea his temporal
authority over the temporalty, and spiritualty together, tormented not himself
with those disputes, not so much as to interpose his authority to appease them.
For those schoolebroiles at that time did not a whit prejudice his designs,
but rather helped them forward. So long as these doctors sharpened their
subtilties against themselves, they let him alone in peace, they outvied one
another in flattering of him, each side fearing lest he should incline to its
opposite. This indifferency was both acceptable to the disagreeing parties,
and beneficial to the Pope. There were as yet no strangers which might publish
the shame of these doings, and advantage themselves by these domesticke
quarrels of their enemies: they spoke therefore at that time freely, and
boldly vented their opinions between themselves. But since that, the world is
well changed, their affairs are no longer at this point. Now it was to be
feared, least the discord of the servants, should ruin the authority of the
Master. For this it is, that he has desired to ^ull it asleep, that he may
bend the entire forces of his supports, against the stranger, and common
adversary. He was now to look to it, that they without took no advantage of
this dissension, and to take away the scandal of it from those that are
within. This is that he has done, but after a sorry manner, as he could,
tyrannically, and by means altogether shameful. Not by a resolution of their
doubts, by stating of their questions, by a rational decision of their
controversies; but by his absolute authority imposing silence upon the parties,
by this trick^, smothering the evil, without meddling with the root.

He that will be better informed concerning this, let him observe that even at
this day (for example) the true followers of Thomas yield not to Bellarmine,
that their Angelical Doctor concluded amiss, affirming that the image of
Christ, and the true Cross are to be worshipped with the same adoration, that
Christ himself. That the Sorbonists will not consent to the Jesuits, that the
Pope should be above a Council, that he may as well depose as excommunicate
Kings, that a Tyrant may lawfully be put to death even by a private man. In the
mean while these points are of such consequence, that if any of them be true,
they vnavoidably damn the contrary. Bellar. de imag. l. 2. c. 20.21.
If the opinion of Bellarmine be true, touching the adoration of images, that
of Thomas is pure idolatry: if the tenet of the Jesuits concerning the
authority of the Pope be receiuable, that of the Sorbonists is schismatic
and heretical.

What will be answered us here? Doubtless that these opinions are but
problematicall, and may on both sides indifferently be maintained, so long as
the Church has not given her determination of them. This hole indeed they
usually start out at, when for the diversity of opinions which are amongst
them, they are pressed not to tax that fault in others, which is so notorious
in themselves, not to urge those laws upon others which they mean to shift
off themselves. Nevertheless their by-corner reaches not far, they cannot
run far, if one briefly tell them, that the sentence of the Church is not
effectiue, but declaratiue, that it makes not truth but directs to it, it
makes not heresy, but points it out. Even as the opinion of the Physician
makes the disease neither better, nor worse then it is, less does it make it
what it is. The diseased party then of who^ the Physitia^ has decreed nothing,
cease not to be sick and to dye, as well as those who by a true prognosticke
were judged to be in danger of death. Whether the judgment then of the church
be interposed or not, that which deserves to be condemned is condemnable of it
self, and in the sequel, makes him that believes it infallibly damnable.

But let any man tell me, whether there may be imagined a more complete and
formal schism, then that which we see in the protestation of the French
church against the council of Trent: Yes, they say, but this was but in
certain points. What matters that? Seeing that a Council is a body, and
expects either to be wholly received, or wholly rejected: not submitting it self
to judgment, Vid. Sledian. comment. l. 22.
that they to whom it speaks by authority, should go about to choose, and
pick out some of its determinations. But requiring of all an absolute and
universal obedience by reason of its authority, and the pretended presidence
and guidance of the holy Ghost.

After all this, who will not be more astonished, to see that the Pope
pronounces not definitive sentence upon these differences* dispatcheth not
these difficulties, determines not these questions. Is it because he takes
delight, to foster and cherish discord amongst his ad^erents? No, this is no
time for it. He is so nearly assaulted by those without, and so lustily
incountered with, that he had need have good intercourse, and keep good
correspondency with those that are within. Is it then because he favors all
sides equally? neither, this is more unlikely then the other. He loves his
greatness to well, he is to jealous of his authority, too zealous for the
adua^ceme^t of his Papal omnipote^cy to bear no more affection to those who
employ their spirits to his bent, for his sovereignty, the^ to those who cross
it, and skirmish with it. Is it not known, how these are esteemed of, in that
they are termed Politikes, and have not the name of Catholics allowed them,
but grudgingly. That which holds the Pope, from openly condemning some of
them, is a fear by alienateing them to diminish his forces. He knows, that
slippery things wrung to hard slide away the faster: that lines stretched too
much snap in sunder. He remembers the peremptory roughnes of Leo the tenth, he
has seen how much it has cost him (or to speak mo^e properly) the papal
Monarchy, to have prosecuted the affairs of the Sea so eagerly, to have been
so stiffely bent in the breaking of that, which (as he thinks) might have
been mollified and bended with time.

By this it is to be seen, that there is rather a conspiracy amongst them,
the^ a true union: as on the contrary, the difference amongst us is rather a
diversity, then a division, in the circumstances, then in the thing; in the
accessory, then in the principal; in the policy, then in the doctrine; amongst
some persons, then in the Corporation, and generality of our Churches. Witness
the harmony of our confessions, and Catechismes, a harmony grounded upon no
other plot, or design, then that of coming to the kingdom of heaven, to the
fruition of the heavenly inheritance, by that one and only way, the knowledge
of one true God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ. John. 17.
If some turbulent spirits strive to trouble our peace, to divide our unity,
we account them not ours, they are spots in our feasts, Iud. v. 12,
and scabs in our body, which spiritual vigor has chased out. Surely if any
one communicate not with us, in doctrine and charity, he is none of ours,
although he impugn the same adversary with us: no more, then he is of that
side which impugneth us, under color, that he opposes us with them. They are
not accounted members of the Roman Church, who oppose us with as much violence
as she does, no more ought the same men to be esteemed ours, under this
covert, that they fight with us against the Church of Rom^; but indeed with
much less valor and efficacy: and therefore they are much more supported by
her, and she by them reciprocally, then they support us.

CHAP. XV. That novelty is a reproach which is ordinarily cast upon truth, and
how she has been cleared of it from time to time.
LEt us come now to the prejudice strongest of all the rest, that Antiquity
they pretend, burdening on the contrary, the truth which we preach, as new,
with hatred and envy. Antiquity, they say, is divine and venerable, nouelty on
the other side, damnable and devilish. The truth of this we willingly
subscribed to, but we yield not, that this antiquity, which they so much
crack of, appertains unto them: that the shame of nouelty which they so much
taunt us with, is due unto us. Here stands the difference, if they can
justify that they are ancienter then we, let them gain the cause: if we are
convinced of nouelty, let sentence be pronounced against us, the condemnation
shall be just, we are all ready to give way to it, and to be the first that
shall set their hands to it.

But we earnestly request, that their pretenses may not be taken upon t^eir
words, that our reasons may be pondered ere we be condemned of nouelty upon a
bare accusation: yea although there were some likelihood of truth in it. So
long as the accuser speaks, it is hard if the defendant be not injured. But
the laws, but nature, but God wills, that both parties, the plaintiff and
defendant, be heard with equal attention and equity. Otherwise, where is the
innocent that could shroud himself from the fraud and violence of calu^ny:
always malicious, but then confident and peremptory, when she perceives
herself handsomely trimmed, and to be favored something like the truth.

To begin this point, we say that it is no new matter that truth should be
censured of nouelty, nor that falsehood should be invested with the venerable
and sacred mantle of antiquity. The Jews cast this aspersion upon our Savior
the Prophet of Prophets, and doctor of doctors: contrarily they took to
themselves this prerogative, that they were the Marc 7.5. Math. 13.2.
old friends, and retainers of truth. Sym. in relat.
The pagans made the primitive Christians odious to the world by the aspersion
of nouelty. Proud and lying braggers, they made brauadoes and trophies, with
the monuments of their antiquity. It is for us then to think our selves happy,
and to cheer up our selves in that we are partakers of the same slanders with
Christ: these are honorable skars, with which the primitive Christians were
marked: And they who go about to shame us by these aspersions, who boast and
brag of their antiquity, if they do it upon the same title which the Jews and
Pagans presumed on, are they not unhappy, and their proceeding is it not
really as ridiculous, as in appearance it was commendable? Now that it is so,
it appears by the nature of the answers we oppose to their exceptions,
conformable to those of Christ to the Jews, and of the Christians to the
pagans, to discover the impie^y, quell the earnestnes, and abate the insolency
of the like calumnies. Search the scriptures (says our Savior) for in them
ye think to have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me, ^oh.
5.39.
If y^u have believed in M^s^s ye believe also in me, (...) 5.4^.
for he wrote of me. This is our defense at this day. We are slandered as
innouators, we answer, search the Scriptures, if you believe Moses, the
Prophets and Apostles, you will bel^e^e also in Christ, preached in the midst
of us, we publish nothing, but what has bee^e written by them. It was
oblected to our Savior, Math 25.6.
that his d^sciples violated the traditions of the fathers, he replied unto
them, that by their traditions they had made void the word of God. We at t^is
time are molested with the same censure, we in our Saviors authority, retort
the same reproach, using his words, in the face of them that brocht it. We
offer to make it manifest, we do indeed make it a plain case, that they
nullify the word of God by their traditions, that our antiquity is the
antiquity of the Scripture, yea of the truth contained in it, which was
preached before ever it was written. So when the Pagans by this aspersion
(though false) of nouelty, made the cause of the Christians suspected, they
were confuted by Tertul. Apol. c. 19.
the antiquity of the scriptures, and by a proposal of these considerations,
that we are not so much to care when, Arnob. Contr. Gentes. lib. 2.
as upon what grounds we embrace religion, that as God almighty Jehovah, the
ancient of days is not of any new being, so his true worship cannot be new,
the form of which worship who can better prescribe, Ambros in r^spos. ad Sym.
celat.
then God himself? who (said they) is more to be believed in a matter
concerning God, then God himself? is man to be credited, who is ignorant of
himself, unless God assist him, and reveal him to himself? It is not the
antiquity of years, but of manners which is venerable. Its no disparagement to
be converted even in the doting age of the world, no age is superannuated for
repentance. It is rather a shame, not to be forward in a willing and
industrious amendment in old age. So the Primitive Christians defended
themselves; and so in these times, we frame our apologies. We rehearse the
same things to justify us. We request, that the antiquity not of persons,
but of doctrine may be respected. This is that which we expect, that to which
we have summoned, and do daily call our adversaries to. Hither our
adversaries dare not come, that they may not come hither, they find excuses to
run back. It is then, a base slander which is cast upon us; that we confess
our religion is new, that we deny, which we stiffly affirm, that antiquity
is allwaies on truths side. Christ in appearance, was but an vpstart in respect
of his adversaries; as being but newly come abroad; Christian religion, if one
would have judged of it, while he cast his eyes upon the heathenish monuments,
their temples and edifices, would have been thought a neotericke vanity. New
in outward show, but really Christ and his doctrine, in antiquity surpassed the
Pharisees, and their leaven; Christianity was by many ages ancienter then
Paganism. But is it not a kind of stupidity in man, more to look after towers
and steeples, then truth? never remembering that there was a time when these
devices were not; but truth was before them all^

Is it not reasonable here that we should be heard? will it not be thought,
that we speak with reason, when we affectionately both advise and entreat,
that it may be considered, that it is a fault, almost common to all men, to
call that new, which is not so but in respect of them, to bestow the honor of
antiquity upon nothing but what is ancient in their opinion; measuring both
antiquity and nouelty, by the ell of their memories. It fares with religion and
laws, which the corruption and ignorance of the times has obscured, and as it
were buried, as it does with Countries called newfound lands, because lately
discovered: yet who is there that has not his senses stolen from him, which
doubts but that they are of the same standing with the world? All reformation
is new, what matter is it if the model, and pattern of it be ancient? Let our
discovery be new, The land which we have discovered is ancient, h^th always
been, though unknown to the multitude^

CHAP. XVI. That the search of antiquity is not rightly ordered, and what the
direction is which Saint Cyprian gives us for it,
WE affirm then, that antiquity is always on the right hand of truth, we
believe it, and preach it, honoring true antiquity, not that which seems so
to our fancy ignorant of times past: but that which is true and real.
Otherwise, we should be like those, which sometimes thought, that beyond the
great Ocean, and Atlantique sea, there was no land, because there was never
known any Pilot, that went so far, until Columbus ventred upon it in the
time of our Grandfathers. We begin at our shore, with our time and so go
backward; but why at least pierce we not this Ocean of time, and so get
through to the other end? why loose we courage in the midst of our voyage, why
turn we sail so suddenly? If we have had neither the skill nor courage to
sail further, why affirm we so confidently, that their is nothing beyond our
computation? why dream we that it is impossible for us, to find that which
we never sufficiently looked after, fearing to find it, desirous not to find
it. We may then justly suffer this taunt, that we fainted in our
undertakings; that we were tired in our journey. When they go about to
calculate antiquity, now a days they begin not with that which is first, the
first epoche is, where were you within these hundred years! so in steed of
going fo^ward, they stop at a short period and retire homeward. In the mean
time this path were not to be neglected, nor this method to be refused, if they
would not stop in their search, until they came to the age of the Apostles;
for beateing this way so far, how many novelties would their be met with
between this and that, of fresher date; and which might be questioned, where
were you before? which are not then of that ancient original, nor graced with
the privileges of true antiquity, which yet are antiquities in respect of us,
and our times: but mere nouel^ies in respect of the age of the Apostles.

That which was in the age of the Apostles, is truly ancient, and nothing
ancient but that: they are the fathers whose bounds we must not remove: we
must inquire after the ways of these fathers, as for those degenerate
ancestors which came afterward, we have an express prohibi^ion. Walk not
according to the statutes of your fathers, Ezekiel. 2^.18.
and regard not their-ordina^ces, I am Jehovah your God, walk in my statutes,
keep my commandments, and do them. Antiquity then is not to be accounted of,
but as she is a witness of truth, according to Tertullian, that which was
first taught (says he) is of the Lord and true. Tertull. de praescent, (...)
That which is absolutely first then, is to be sought out, and from it the
calculation is to begun.

St. Cyprian gives us a direction for this calculation, Cypri. ad Pomp. cont.
epist. Seph Epis. epist. 74. ex edit Pamell.
(although he otherwise applies it) which is as pertinent, as it is familiar,
instructing us, that even as a conduit of water which formerly ran copiously,
and continually coming to fail upon a sudden, we have recourse to the
springhead, to know the cause of this defect: whether it be that the drying
of the fountain, depriueth the running water, both of an original and
nourishment: or whether the fountain being entire the water fails in its
course, the pipe being either broken or stopped, that it being me^ded the water
may be restored to the use of the city, in the same plenty and purity it
proceeds from the fountain: so, says he, the Priests of God ought to
repair to the original, and the tradition of the Gospel and Apostles, in
keeping his commandments, to the end, that the reason of our actions may be
deduced, from the same beginning, whence that deriueth its authority. That we
may not doubt, what is the tradition of which he speaks: Cypr. ibid.
let us he^re what he says a little before, to the same purpose. One alleged
to him tradition; whence is this tradition, replyeth he, is it from the Lord,
from the authority of the Evangelists or Apostles? For that those things which
are written, in the book of the law, are to be observed, God himself
testifies, telling Iosuah that the book of the Law, the scripture should not
depart out of his mouth. If then it be either commanded in the Gospel or
contained in the Apostolical writings, that they which come out of any
heresy, be it what it will should not be baptized, let this holy and divine
tradition be observed. St. Cyprian rejects not the baptism of heretics,
but only because he bel^eueth not that it was a holy and divine tradition, that
it should be admitted; he is ready to receive it, if it be proved unto him to
be such a one; giving us the rule to prove it, by the apostolical wri^ings.
He cal^eth then a divine and holy tradition, all that which may be justified
by them, as for other tradi^ions, he puts t^em aside with this sl^ghting
interrogato^y* whence is this tradition? Now therefore such traditions as
these, we are ready to accept, provided that the Papists, after the same
method, manifest their origin all unto us. When w^e demand whence is this
tradition? when began it? let them answer us, it is drawn from the
writings, it has been from the time of the Apostles.

CHAP: XVII. That the only means to pr^ue true antiquity, is to have recourse
to the beginning by the scripture.
NOw that we allege St. Cyprian, it is not to authorize the truth, by the
authority of men, only we borrow their words, and fancies to express it. We
wish that it may be considered, not who speaks, but what is spoken. But if
better authority here be called for, we will allege supreme authority; that of
the Lord prescribing us the rule It was not so from the beginning. Wisely then,
and fitly, Tertul. contr. Marcion. l^b. 4 ca. 5.
said Tertullian, that which is the first, is the truer, and that which is from
the beginning is first, and that which is of the Apostles, is from the
beginning. To which we add, only that which follows of it self, that which
is in the scripture, in the writings of the Apostles is of the Apostles.

So then, in respect of this antiquity, do we not submit our selves to
reason, when we yield that our doctrine should be rejected, if it be not of
the Apostles? Are not our proofs authe^tique to confirm ^he antiquity of our
religion, when they are gathered out of their writings, the writings of the
Prophe^s and Eua^gelists?

The course which is taken, to prove the antiquity so much talked of in the
Church of Rome, is a recourse to Fathers, and Counsels. The more ant^ent these
Fathers and Councels are, prove they not this antiquity the more evidently? But
what fa^hers, what Counsels a^e more ancient, then the scripture? what
antiquity then, is ancienter then the scriptures? what title more ancient then
that which is of the same date with the scriptures? certainly it is an excess
of open blasphemy, to equalize either fathers or counsels to Scripture, and
yet this is done. But though this be done, yet it will not be said, that the
Scripture is of a fresher original then the fathers, and Councels, Impudency
has not yet ventured so far. He then of whose side is the doctrine of the
scripture, has gaine^ the prerogative of antiquity, and by consequent of
truth. So then this question about anti^uity is brought to this issue, what we
are to examine which is the doctrine most consonant to Scripture, this being
cleared, the controversy of antiquity need to trouble us no longer.

It is impossible othe^wise to decide it: for let them allege fathers, and
Counsels, as long as they will, this scruple still remains, to know if the
Apostles have so ordained. Universal consent cannot be called to witness in
this case, for to show that, it would ^e requisite to ask all persons of all
ages, until the Apostles. If the name of universal consent, be attributed to
that which is believed by the greater part, to the most received opinion, yet
how shall we know and judge of this kind of universal agreement? Must it be
by Counsels? Provincial Counsels cannot give us sufficient assurance of it,
and for general let them show us that after that at Jerusalem which is
registered in the Scripture, there was any one held before that of Nice, which
was not celebrated until about the year 325. shall it be by the writings of
the fathers which lived before this Council? The Just. Mart. in dial. cont.
T^y. Iren. cont. Her. lib. 5. c. 33. Eusebius. Eccl hist. lib. 3 c. 36. Tertul de
spe fidel prout cita^ur a Hier. in Com. sup 36 c. Ez^ch Vict ap. Hier. ib. and
in Catal. script. Ec^les. in nom. Papius Lactan. lib. 7. c 25.
greatest part, yea and most ancient of them had this strange conceit, that we
are to expect after the resurrection, an earthly happiness here below, for the
space of 1000 years, during which the Lord also shall converse with us eating,
and drinking. A doctrine which those Fathers propose as received of all the
Church. The Fa^hers then are not sufficient witnesses, the consent of the
Church is not a sufficient testimony of true antiquity. Aug. lib. 1. de
merit. peccat. c. 20 and 24 and lib ad Bonif. cont 2. Epist. Pelag. c. 22. and
lib. ^ c. 4. and. l. cont. Iulia ^. c 2. and passim a ibi.
But what shall we say of their consent in receiving little children to the
Eucharist? Shall we therefore believe this opinion to be ancient? Ancient
indeed in respect of us, but not of truth, which being truly ancient and
Apostolical, has condemned it of error, which doubtless will be confessed by
the Church of Rome. They which came after these ancients, have corrected their
errors, concerning the thousand years habitation upon earth, the worldly
de^ights after the resurrection, the admission of children to the Communion.
Their coming afterward, has not prejudiced the priority of truth, which they
set up again in her ancient splendour and Majesty. The time which these fathers
lived before them, advantaged not their opinions younger then truth.

It is then a reasonable offer which we make, to verefie the antiqu^ty of our
religion by the Scripture. It is an easy, necessary, and certain discovery.
For how few are there to be found, which either are versed in antiquity, or can
be? Seeing the tedious succession of so many ages, the multitude of volumes
which must be read, and perused for this purpose. A multitude, if we have
regard to the truth of the history we search, defective; if to the leisure of
ability of the greater sort infinite. Let them which have been versed in these
enquiries speak, if they find not through every age changes, and alterations?
But the Scripture is exposed to the view of every one; it is but one book in
which that which is necessary to salvation is easy to him, who is not
preoccupated either with passion, or with a conceit of its obscurity. This we
have elsewhere demonstrated, here we will only recite as appertaining to the
matter we have in hand, that which the renowned father Chrysostom. (...) inacta tom.
4. edit. Sauil^
Chrysostom speaks concerning this. The Pagan says, I would make my self a
Christian, but I know not which side to fasten on. There are many contentions
among you, every one says, I speak the truth. I know not unto what, or whom
to refer my self: both sides pr^tend Scripture. But answer him, this makes
much for us: for if we should say that we believe reasons, there would be
something to trouble one, but seeing that we stand to the Scriptures se^ing
they are plain, and true, it is very easy to judge of the matter. If any one
consent unto them he is a Christian: if he oppose them, he is far from their
company.

These are the very words of that father, which in his mouth will find a great
deal more favor, and less envy then in ours. Words which advertise us, that
the Scripture is the most especial instrument to have recourse to, in the
search either of antiquity, or truth. Words also, which avouch that the Pagan
himself, ^ay judge who is he that believes, who speaks agreeably to
Script^re: a^though he cannot judge of the truth contained in it. For they are
very different things to judge of the truth of a writing, and of the conformity
of some discourse to it. The Pagans could not judge of the truth of the
Scripture, but according to Chrys^stome, they might discern, what tenet and
opinion was most confo^mable to it. Now this suffices in the question of
antiquity: for neither side doub^e^h, but that the Scripture is most ancient,
that si^e then which shall be found most conformable to it, shall be the most
ancient. The Pagans may judge of this conformity, says Chrysostom, how much
rather then may the Christians. The shortest cut then to the composing of this
difference, is to address our selves to the Scripture.

When one would know the antiquity of the privileges of a College, or a
soceity, he repaireth no whither, but to the Charter of the foundation. The
instrument of the foundation of the Church is the Scripture: if we offer to
verify our antiquity, if we do verify it by the date of this instrument: we
proceed ingeniously, and our conclusion is irresistible. Let the^ cease then to
reproach us, that we have brought in a new doctrine, unknown in the times of
the Apostles. Let them not for shame boast any longer of antiqu^ty, seeing they
refuse to be con^rolled by the Scripture, the most ancient monument of
antiquity. Certainly they make but an untoward enquiry into antiquity, who
measure it by a certain number of years: who dream that to have been
always extant, whose beginning they are ignorant of.

It is a safer course then, to prove antiquity by truth, then truth by
a^tiquity. Custom without truth, as St Cyprian well observed, is but antiquity
of error. Cypriari. Epist. 74.
The proportion, elaborate figure, the beauty of a medaile, statue, or an old
piece of building is not known by the antiquity, but the antiquity of them is
characterised by these conditions as by i^s infallible marks. So the glory and
use of the Sun, are not discerned by his a^tiquity, but by his glory and use,
he may be judged to be as old as heaven and earth. It is not with time in
respect of truth, as it is in respect of nobility, the antiquity of which
augmenteth its reverence, making it more illustrious. Time contributeth no
growth, nor luster to truth. She was as much herself, in her cradle, as she
is many centuries of years after. We must believe that the thing is, and
afterward examine since what time it began to be. Let us prove our religion
to be true: and afterward let us consider its antiquity: yea by this means we
shall have proved it; for virtue is ancienter then vice, truth then lies,
superstition is after religion as sickness after health. So we are ready to
verify both the antiquity of our religion, by its truth, and the truth of it
by its antiquity: beginning at the wellhead, the times of the Patriarchs,
Prophets and Apostles; that the process may be abridged, and speedily ended.

CHAP: XVIII. That upon the supposition, that the Church of Rome has sometimes
been a true Church, it cannot be concluded, that she is so at this day.
SO on their side those counterfeit flashes of antiquity vanish, which now with
a real brightness, shine more vigorously on our side. They who cracked so
much of their antiquity, are found to be but vpstarts; and we which were
flouted at as new comers, are found to have the strongest title to antiquity.
Yet here they will demand, whether we can deny but that the Church of Rome
has been a true Church: seeing there is extant an Epistle of St. Paul
addressed unto her, in which her Romans 1.^.
faith is commended, as being renowned through the whole world? Certes we
confess, that the Church of Rome has sometimes been not the true church, but
a true Church: that her faith has been commended, by the Apostle. We say
also, that if they can make her appear to us at this day, as she was then,
we will willingly shake hands with her. That nevertheless, this cannot serve
her for any prerogative; for if the Apostle directs one letter to her, he
wrote two to the Corinthians, if he extolled her faith, testifying of it that
it was renowned through the whole world, he has graced also the faith of the
Thessalonians with the same elogies. 1. These. 1.^.
These prerogatives benefit not any of those Churches, at this day, with any
privilege, why then does the Church of Rome extract advantages out of them?
The Churches of Constantinople, Antioch, Alexandria have sometimes been pu^e
and flourishing Churches: b^t now who condemns the^ not, as being fallen from
the piety an^ doctrine of their ancestors? But they add, that the Church of
God cannot fail or decay: a strange pertinacy! The Chu^ches which we have
named of Corinth, Thessalonica, Alexandria, and Constantinople since that they
are altered and changed: that they have failed, and fallen away, a^e not
perm^tted to have recourse to the privilege, and to the favor which God had
showed unto their predecessors, if they allege, that they have been sometimes
true Churches, yet this consequence will not be admitted, that therefore they
are so now. It will easily and clearly be manifested, that they are no longer
true churches; and that neuertheless^, the church of God has not been
conquered by the gates of hell, but has continued immoue^ble upon the rock,
upon which she was built by the supreme Architect, the Lord Jesus. It will be
answered these Churches, that their ancestors indee^e we^e of the true Church,
but tha^ also the gates of hell have not prevailed against them, that they have
overcome temptations, that they have vanquished death, and shall vanquish the
grave; that they which have succe^ded them, have succe^ded the^ in the name and
title of the Church: not in truth of doctrine, not in pu^ity of life, and that
t^^refore they are not of the true Church. That it is not therefore strange,
that the promises made unto the Church, should be true, and yet not appertain
unto them; seeing they are neither the true Church, nor ^rue Churches, but
barely succ^sso^s of some tha^ have been.

Let the Doctors of the Church of Rome here tell us in conscience, i^ such an
answer be not pertinent, and ^eyond reply to the Eastern Churches, which are
separated from the Roman, when they allege their Ancestors, when they s^y
the fathers were of them. Why should it not be permitted us then, to use the
same answer to them: that the^r predecessors mad^ a part of the tru^ Church,
that the gates of hell have not preuai^ed against them: but this honor and
especial favor of God advantageth not their poster^ty, unless they make it
evident, that they have not been Apostates from the doctrine of their fathers.
Good parents may have bad Children: and yet God fails not of his promise to
the Parents, although the child receive the stipend due unto his iniquity: the
piety of his parents serves but to increase his condemnation. A good father
cannot perish, a true Church c^nnot fall away. But as it is but too common,
that wicked children succeed good parents, which perish in their sin, except
they repent: so to a true Church an impure Church succeeds, and perishes in
her impurity, unless she be repurified and reformed. Math. 3.9.
Do ye works worthy of repentance, and presume not to say, that we are the
Children of Abraham (said John Baptist to the Jews) If John. 8.39.
ye were the Children of Abraham, ye would do the works of Abraham, (said
the Lord to them, then when they bragged, that they were of the race of
Abraham) They Romans 4.16. and 9.7.
then a^e the true Children of Abraham, which are his Child^^^ in the faith,
and they are truly the successors of the Primitive Churches, which have
succeeded them in the doctrine of the faith.

The ancestors of the twelve tribes which revolted, were of the true Church;
for all this, could it be said, after their revolt, because sometimes they had
been, that therefore they were so still, under pretense that the true Church
cannot revolt? doubtless no, for when it was said that the ten tribes at other
times had been of the true Church, that was always understood of their pious
and religious ancestors: of them, merely in respect of the outward profession,
and in regard of the opinion men might conceive of them, before their revolt.
So their revolt caused not that the Church should revolt, but discovered their
hypocrisy, Ierem. 3.11.
Moreover it so fell out that Judah, Be^iamin, and the half tribe of Manasseh
revolted also with a worse apostasy then they of Israel: Ezech. 16.51 and 23
11. 2. King 16 21.
and consequently the revolt was general in all Israel; yet notwithstanding it
could not be said, even then, Esa. 1.9.
that the Church of God was revolted, because that instead of the revolted
multitude, God always preserved his own. A small number of the election of
grace, Ezech. 9.4.
which groaned and sighed for all the abominations, which were committed in
Jerusalem.

CHAP: XIX. That notwithstanding the revolt of the Romish Church, the true
Church has continued whole and entire.
IN the Apostasy 2. These. 2.3.
which was to be in the Christian Church, and which at this day we see to be,
the same is come to pass. If the Jews in vain cried the Ierem. 7.4.
Temple, the Temple, in vain cry they now adays, the Church, the Church. If
there were nothing but the Temple, an empty name, a stately den of thieves. If
it were sometimes answered them which boasted of it Ierem. ib.
Trust not upon lying words, The temple of the Lord etc. May not we now make
the same answer upon the like occasion. They bragged, that the law should not
perish from the Priest, nor the council from the wise, nor the word from the
Prophet, because these promises were made to the Church.

At this day the Romanists say the same, make the same vauntes, but that which
was sometimes answered those vaineglorious hypocrites, Ezech 7.10.
the law shall perish from Priest, and counsel from the sage, is that which we
tell our adversaries, it is that which we desire to be admitted to verify,
that we may not be oppressed with these preiudices, wherewith the Jews
anciently endeauored to confute the Prophets and the Lord, the Prince of
Prophets himself, the supreme Prophet of his Church.

At the time when the Lord came into the world: when God was manifested in the
flesh, and many years before that time, what was the state, and outward face
of the Jewish Church? What was the high Priest? What were the successors of
Moses which pretended antiquity, succession and the title of guides, and
Pastors of Israel? Surely enemies of God under the honest title of being his
servants: seducers of the People, under the demure show of being their
teachers: Corrupters of the law, wearing the ornaments, and sitting in the
chair of interpreters; commending themselves to the people, and by them
commended under this magnificent title. Such was the Jewish Church to look
upon outwardly, as well in those which sat and ruled in their Synagogues, in
their great and little counsels which they called the Sanhedrin; as in the
route and multitude which followed approved, and adhered to those disorders. So
miserable was the face of the Jewish Church at that time, which yet had not
always been so. But nevertheless, in this so thick and black darkness God
caused his light to shine, reserved his wheat amongst this chafe, in that
infected multitude he preserved a small number from that ^pirituall pestilence:
small indeed, but so uses to be the number of things of worth, excellenci^s
are rarities. There is much stone, few diamonds: the^e are many dullards, few
sages. It is the little flock to whom it has pleased the father to give the
Kingdom.

So then the Church which has succeeded, which has occupied the ^oome of the
true Church, may become an harlot by being erroneous and apostaticall, and yet
the true Church erreth not, is not abandoned of her Lord and husband. The reply
also, which here is made unto us, is impertinent, not tolerable, That the
estate of the Church, was of another nature under the old Testament, before the
first coming of our Savior, while the Gal: 41.23
heir was a child, and the Church enjoyed not a full liberty; while she Heb.
11.13.39.
saluted the promises of the actual exhibition of the Messiah, and of the
abundance of Grace in him, a far off, without obtaining them as yet. All this
is true, but would they hence infer that the heavenly father has disinherited
his children, under the old Testament, which he does no longer under the new?
That he has prostituted his spouse, but now keeps her in his Cabinet? No,
our heavenly father has never been without Children, our bridegroom without
the Church his bride. It is true indeed that he maintained her more sparingly,
under the old, then under the new Testament, ^s the scripture teaches, and we
believe. But we deny that he forsook her any more then, then now, for, he
which Zach 2.8.
touches you says he, touches the apple of mine eye. The Church then which
revolted under the o^d Testament, the Church which followed that revolt was not
the Church, but in name and in respect of the revenues and dignities into which
it succeeded, masked howsoever with the outward profession of the true
religion. This was the Church which forsook God, this was the Church whom God
forsook.

If then any Church in these times after the like manner become apostaticall,
ought she to have any more priuile^ge under the n^w, then under the old
Testament? God detesteth hypocrisy equally in a^l ages, yea the greater it is,
the more abominable it is unto him. If then it be doubled in these latter
times, the indignation of God is proportionably incensed against it. The grace
offered, excuses not, but agrauateth the neglect of it, so that there is no
difference in that which concerns the perseverance and revolt of the Church,
under the law, or under grace.

This is our b^leife and our doctrine in this point. Not that we would affi^me,
that the true Church erreth or falls away finally in that which is
fundamental; although in some of her Gal 1. and 3.1.
members, sometimes she go away for a time. But we affirm, that they who by
most voices bear away the title of the Church, either have erred, or may err,
eu^n fundamentally and finally. So when we say that the Jewish Church has
erred, we understand not the true Jewish Church, but that which was so in
appearance, which took up its room, and bare the outward cognizance of it,
which had the external calling, and succession. After the same manner when we
teach, that the Christian Church may err, that it has erred, we understand
not the number of the faithful, the number of their successo^s in the faith,
we are cofident that they cannot err fundamentally, generally all together,
and finally. We say indeed, that the Church which erreth, is that Church,
which triumphing with the title of Christ's spouse, is indeed no better then a
strumpet.

CHAP: XX. That they of the Church of Rome use a perverse and ridiculous manner
of Argumentation, while they conclude from the promis^s made to the Church,
that they neither have erred, nor can err
IT is a frivolous trick then, that they insist so much upon the promi^es made
to the Church, and to b^ing us news that f^ee Math. 16.18
is built vp^n a rock, that the gates of he^l shall not prevail against her.
It is to no purpose, that they allege those privileges, that she is 1. Tim.
3.15.
the pillar and prop of truth, the spouse of Christ, Ephesians. 1.32.
his Cant. 2.16. and 6.3
only spouse, that he is, and will be always in the mi^dest of her, that his
John 16.
spirit guides her into all true^h. Math. 28.20.
The pith of our controversy lies not in all this. Let him which denies the
truth of these promises, or envieth the church these elogies be Anathema
Maranatha; let him be as a Jew, or a Turk. But as he is not truly a Jew which
is one outwardly, said the Apostle: so neither is she always the true church
which is so in the account of men; but she which Romans 2.28.29.
is so inwardly, whose glory and praise is of God, and not of men, Ib.
sealed by his spirit, 1. Cor. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.13.
known of him, and him only certainly and 2. Tim. 2.19.
distinctly. All the question is, whether she be the true church, whom the
world graceth with this title. If we should grant that the church of Rome is
the true church, doubtless we should confess too, that she never erred
fundamentally. Let it then be verified unto us that she is so, and we will
give way to all the rest, we will ingeniously confess our selves to have been
schismatiques, in separating our selves from her communion.

The principal question then between us and them is, whether they are the
true church or no. This being so, is not their proceeding perverse and
ridiculous, when they take that for granted, which is the maine point of our
controversy? For alleging that they are the Church, they thence infer,
that they neither have erred, nor can err. This argument should run
backward, they have not erred, therefore they are the true Church. If a woman
accused of adultery, of being taken even in the vile act of her unchastity,
instead of answering directly to her accusation, and of acquitting her self,
by this means to recover her good name now tainted, for all her defense,
should only make a bare protestation, that she were an honest, chaste woman,
might it not be presumed, that she were either mad as well as dishonest, or
else as impudent as unchaste? What should that Physician be thought of, which
being examined about a fact of impoisonment objected against him, instead of
justifying his prescriptions, and his application of them according to the
rules of Physic, would only cry out that he was a Physician of much skill,
experience, and fidelity? We accuse the church of Rome (she who will needs be
called so) of being the whore, and the Babylon in the Revelation. We accuse her
Doctors of impoisoning souls; she answers us that she is chaste, and that she
is the spouse of Christ: her Doctors tell us that they are the successors of
the Apostles, and the servants of God; contenting themselves with this poor
silly answer, without any other proof to justify themselves. Truly if we
should accord that the Papacy is the spo^se of Christ; and that its Doctors are
the heirs of the Apostles, they would have gained the ca^s^: but what man is
there so stripped of reason which sees not, that when we accuse the Church of
Rome for having erred, and played the Apostate, we accuse her of not being the
true Church: That when we accuse the teachers of the church of Rome for being
seducers, we deny them to be the successors of the Apostles. So then, when for
their complete defense, they only oppose against us these glittering titles,
they do no more then simply affi^me that, which was principally called in
question; a pretty defense for them who have none at all. True it is, that
their proceeding would have some equity in it, if our accusation consisted in
a naked assertion, and if we barely affirmed that, which we were not able to
prove: for to a simple yea, it is enough to oppose as simple a nay, You say it,
we deny it. Yet he that is innocent will not content himself with this easy
come off, courageous as he is, he will do more then acquit himself. But here
the question is not about a bare affirmation, but a rational proof, so
strongly backed, that there is no shift in sophistry, no wrangling devise which
they have not recourse to, that they may not be bound to answer directly. We
offer to lay open the whoredoms of the Church of Rome, and the impoisonments
of her teachers. We propound this accusation fortified with reasons and
proofs. Is not this on our part to proceed as we should? and on theirs by this
vaunting, as vain as it is bold, of the venerable title of the Church, the
Pastors and Teachers of the Church, which they oppose us with, to make
themselves rather more suspected, then any whit justified? Yet when they are
prosecuted and driven even into the uttermost corner of their evasions, their
last mine, as it were, by which they blow all up is, We are the Church of
Catholic Doctors. As if we disputed not with them about the truth of this
title, as if this were not the sum and substance of our accusation, that they
are not such as they would make us believe they are. In doing which, they are
like unto a company of unlearned Professors, who when they are puzzled and
nonplust by their auditors, for want of other reply, betake themselves to the
authority of the chair, and prerogative of the square cap.

CHAP: XXI. That it is an unjust proceeding, to deny the change happened in the
Church, under pretense that the Authors, time, and place of it cannot be
specified.
FOr all this they imagine, that they come over us again very shrewdly by a
demand which they urge us with, pressing us to tell, where, when, and by whom
the change in the Church was begun. For presuming that we cannot answer them
exactly concerning this, they promise to themselves in the sequel this
advantage, that we shall be forced to yield unto them, that since the times of
the apostles, matters have continued at that point which we see them to be at
at this day; never considering that it is the unhappy condition of time, and
the ordinary pace of the world to run on into wo^se, to loose and destroy
with time that good which deserved to have been perpetuated by it. Not as if
this corruption or contagion could at all endanger or hurt the true Church, the
number of the faithful and the elect, whom God sustaineth in the midst of the
greatest confusions, and enlightneth in the most fearful eclipses, as we
have formerly showed: but in as much as time shriueleth and wrinckleth, as it
were, the face, and outward hue of all things.

Under the old Testament, before the publication of the year of Gods good
pleasure, he always preserved his Church, viz. his own; yet no man denies,
but the outward face of the Church was the subject of many and great
alterations: all confess it, and he which should not, would deny the
Scripture. Under the new Testament the same is happened, the Church of God
never altered in that which is essential, much less has she utterly failed:
but if we consider her outwardly, in the multitude in which she lay hid as
the grain amidst the chafe, here the change is notorious, we offer to
manifest it to him who doubts of it. But we say, it is a tyrannous law to
compel us to particularise the persons, times, and places by whom, when, and
where the change, and revolt was begun.

When the concealer of stolen goods is attached for felony, the lawful owner
challenging his goods, and, verefying his title, gains his cause, and
overthrows the concealer, although he cannot show where, when, and by whom
the theft was committed. The Physician forbeareth not to judge of a disease,
and to apply convenient remedies unto it, although he be ignorant of the time,
place and occasion of it.

Surely it is a weak conclusion in all matters, especially in religion, to
infer that no alteration has been, under color, that the author, time, and
place of it cannot be punctually specified. Such an accurate inquiry,
aknowledge so exact in such circumstances depends of the histories of times
past; what then, if those histories be not known? what if they be not to be
found in the Records of Antiquity? What a multitude of alterations have all
along happend, the first authors, times, and places of which, it is impossible
to specify? But who is not acquainted with the ordinary dealings of
Innouatours? who knows not that they use to mislay or abolish such copies,
and evidences as might one day be produced against them? How many bastardly
books have been fathered upon ancient, and famous authors which they would
have rejected as monsters? This has been practiced in all faculties, in
Physic, in Law, and also in Divinity. It is then a hard and unjust proceeding
in Romanists, to bind those who accuse the^ for being Innouatours, to produce
against them fragments foisted into the Registrie by their own confederates
whereas they produce more authe^tique, and unquestionable evide^ces.

He that should undertake to convince the Jews of having adulterated, or
rather abolished the purity of the ancient doctrine of their fathers: since the
time of the Prophet Malachie, he would find himself hardly tasked, precisely
to specify the authors, times, and places of this so strange, and enormious an
alteration. Yet it is as clear as noone, that such a corruption, such a change
has been in the Religion of the Jews. By what then is this so undoubted a
truth made evident? doubtless by the Scriptures, by which we know what was
the ancient Religion of the Jews. The comparison of that samplar with the
religion of the Jews, as it was in our Saviors time, discovers what a great
diversity there is, between their new superstition and old religion: and
consequently marketh out the change, though not the circumstances of it.

And indeed, when the Lord the son of God accused the Scribes, and
Pharisees, the Doctors and interpreters of the law, and convinced them of
having corrupted the ancient and original purity, he troubled not himself to
quote unto them records and histories, and exquisitely to set down where, when
and by whom the innovation was begun. He contented himself with the
Scriptures, and went no farther then the comparison of doctrine. Yet who could
better have preformed such an enterprise then himself? who could number to the
smallest scruples of time, and was superlatiuely skilled both in Chronology,
and History. But he was willing in his own person, to teach us what method
we are to follow in discovering, and reforming abuses, to wit, that we are
not bound, scrupulously to specify all those circumstances, which are of no
importance to the maine point.

CHAP: XXII. That there are changes which creep on by little and little, and
that it is hard, yea imposible to specify always the times, places, and
authors of a change.
MOreover we must needs confess that which experience daily thrusts into our
senses, that there are alterations which cr^epe on and increase by little and
little, so that one cannot so distinctly perceive them, that it should be
possible for him precisely to quote the very instant of every degree, in this
almost insensible progress. Who could ever observe when, where, by whom, by
what degrees the French tongue has been changed? Yet must he needs be
accounted void of judgment, who from this difficulty, yea impossibility,
would conclude that there has been no change in it. What old man is there,
able precisely to observe the minute, hour, day, month, yea year, in which he
begins to be an old man, to change his complexion, to feel the decaying of
his strength and faculties? yet for all that, he must needs be senseless, who
in his old age should deny so sensible an alteration.

Now to apply these considerations to the estate of the Christian Church. Who
knows not that in the Primitive Church, the Vid. sup. c. 17.
error of the Millenaries prevailed? Yet who is he that can specify by whom,
where, when it began? Who can particularly tell when it ended, where, and by
whom it was first condemned? Upon this who will infer, that this error has
been alwa^es, that it is yet in the Church, or that it is not an error, but
an Apostolical doctrine? It was also (as no man doubts) an error anciently
received and approved by the Church, that the Sacrament of the Vid. iter. c. 17
supper was to be administered to little children. Who will tell us who was the
first father of it? Where, and when it was brought in. Who will produce the
records of an opposition made against it? Nay more, let any man tell when, and
in what Council such a doctrine was condemned? There is no man able to
perform this, and shall we therefore say its a doctrine of the Apostles.

It was an error of the Fathers of the Primitive Church, that Iren. cont.
haeres. lib. 5. ad fine^. Tertull. de an. cap. 5.

Ambros. de hon. Mort. c. 10. Aug. in Enchir. ad Laur. c. 109.


the souls of the Saints themselves entered not into the heavenly Paradise
immediately after their departure out of their bodies. Tertullian excepted only
the souls of Martyrs. But who is able to name the author, time, or place of
the nativity of this strange opinion? Yet it is most certain, that this
erroneous doctrine, had its birth, growth, and period. It was an erroneous
practice in the ancient church, to pray to God in the behalf of the
Patriarchs, Epipha nhaer. 75 co^t. Arr. lib. 3. t^m. 1. Cypr. Epist 34. ex
edit. Pamel.
Prophets and for the whole company of the just deceased, for the Martyrs
themselves. Who is so versed in the knowledge of antiquity, that can distinctly
set down the time, place, and first inventer of that so strange a devotion; or
the council in which it was condemned, when, where it was first condemned? The
difficulty, yea impossibility of rendering an exact account of such
particularities, shall it be a sufficient ground to maintain, that it always
was, and is still in the church.

There was a time when immediately after Baptism, Tertull. de coron. Mil. c. 4.
the baptized party was made to taste milk, and honey, when his whole body was
to be Dionys. Areop. de Eccles. Hierarch. c. 2.

Clem constable. Apost. lib. 7. c. 41. and 44.


anointed with oil when they were Tertull. ib.
to abstain a whole week after from washing themselves. When they made upon a
certain day in the year offerings for the nativity, that is, for the memory
of the day of the Martyrs sufferings. When they thought it an impiety to fast
between Easter and Whit^ontide, to worship kneeling. When Basil. de spi^ san.
c. 27.
they prayed not but toward the East.

When was it that these customs had their beginning? Or if they are
Apostolical, as it was sometimes thought when they were practiced, how have
htey been since altered? When began their change, by whom, in what place? If
we are not able to satisfy those, which should urge us with all these
queries, must we needs therefore be obstinate without reason, and peevi^hly
deny the change of those rites? And seeing the change of them was made with
reason, must we not confess that they were not of Apostolical, that is, of
divine institution?

It was an Apostolical constitution, but which was to last no longer then the
occasion of it, Act. 15.29.
that the faithful should abstain from victuals sacrificed to Idols, from
blood, and that which was strangled. We see that this constitution has
expired, but if we cannot assign the time when it gave up the Ghost, or the
Synod in which it was abrogated, shall we therefore affirm that it
continues until now? In the mean time, it is as absurd to deny the original
of a thing, under pretense that the author, time, and place of it are unknown,
as to deny the discontinuation and end of it, under color, that it cannot be
assigned by whom, where, and when it begun to be discontinued. As if one
should deny that he had ever been the month, year, or perhaps age, of whose
nativitie is uncertain: or as if one should deny that he were dead, the year,
or perhaps age, of whose decease is unknown unto him.

It is then an absurd cavil, to press us to show that no change has happened
in the Church, by quoting the time, by assigning the place, by naming the
Authors of it. But we argue rationally, when we prove by experience, that
there has been a change: when we compare the doctrine of the Apostles with
that which prevailed in the church afterward, and clearly manifest the
strange diversity, and repugnancy there is between them. When we compare the
state of the Romish Church, with that of the church in the first and purest
ages, and make the diversity between them visible and palpable? Although,
this kind of proof being not easy, but to those who have skill in the
languages, we stand not chiefly upon it. And although it should fail us, which
yet it does not, yet therefore there should not be any prescription, or
exception against Scripture. That which is come up since, is new in respect of
it, though ancient in respect of us. But here the question is not about the
Antiquity of persons. To which we add, that if there should be any thing
found as ancient as the Scripture, being not conformable unto it, if its
antiquity commend it, its falsity condemns it so much the more, as it is the
nature of evil to be the more pernicious, the more ancient it is.

CHAP: XXIII. That it is not ingenuous dealing, to urge us to answer where our
Church was, and what Pastors it had before the Reformation.
NOw the authors of these wrangling, cavilling proceedings, might cease their
captious quirkes, and take time to blush a while. But as the contentious spirit
of Sophistry is infinite in the invention of new tricks to perplexe a cause,
they give us here another knot to untie. God they say has always had a church
on earth, this we confess: and that church has from time to time had her
Pastors, here we agree with them too. But then, say they, Where was your Church
before Luther? What Pastors, what Doctors had it? See here again, how from
the ignorance of man, they conclude the not being of the thing. Presuming that
we cannot satisfy these demandes, and assuring themselves that we know not
where our Church has been, and by whom it was guided, they take it for a
matter already out of question, that therefore our Church was not at all. In
which inference there is discovered a notable piece of wrangling; for it being
presupposed (which yet is false, as it will appear by and by) that we knew
not where our church was, and who have been our Pastors, since the
alteration, and defection happened in the church of Rome, might it in conscience
hence be concluded, that it was not therefore at all? Would this consequence
be admitted, Thou know not such a thing, therefore it is not, or has not
been. Yet this is the manner of their argumentation against us. You know not,
say they, where your Church was, nor who were her Pastors, therefore she was
not at all. Upon this it is, that they triumph and insult over us, as if we
answering that we know not where our Church was, nor what Teachers it had, we
should implicitly yield in the same answer, that she was not all, or if she
were, that she was destitute of Pastors.

The like argument once deceaved the Prophet Elias when he knew not where the
church of the ten Tribes was, nor who were its Guides. 1 King. 19.10. Romans
11.4.
They have forsaken thy covenant (says he) they have broken down thy altars,
they have slain thy Prophets, and I am left alone, and they go about to take
away my life also. He thought himself to be alone, because his fellows were
unknown unto him. But the Lord made him see the imperfection of his untoward
Logic, advertising him that he had reserved seven thousand to himself,
which had not bowed the knee to Baal. If then the Church of Israel might
subsist so secretly, that Elias knew neither her abode, nor her Pastors, who
will think it strange, that the same case should happen in the time of our
Grandfathers: that then when the earth was overclovded with darkness, God had
a Church, albeit we are not able to specify the place of her residence, or
names of her Pastors. It may not here be replied, that at that time beside the
hidden company, God had a flourishing Church in Judah; in as much as it has
often fallen out, that the Church of Judah equalled, yea exceeded This has
been showed already. c. 18.
the church of Israel in corruption. So that then to behold the face of the
church, as it was obvious to humane view, it could not be said, but all lay in
desolation. But albeit that lamentable defection had not been universal in
^srael and Judah, yet the argument drawn from the estate of the Israelitish
church would still retain its force, seeing that if such a part of the Church
might exist indiscernable, why may not the other parts also, and all other
particular Churches subsist unknown?

It Is a necessary consequence, that that which hinders the whole Church from
lying hid, ought also to hinder any of her parts: and the same power which
preserves and sustaineth the parts of the Church, viz: particular Churches,
amongst the most tumultuous confusions and disorders, shall conserve likewise
the whole Church. If we are to think, that the Church is always visible, and
may be pointed at with the finger, because the Lord prescribing the means to
compose differences, Math. 18:17.
has said, Tell it to the Church, seeing they are particular Churches to whom
recourse in this case is to be had: this reason will prove as strongly, that
particular Churches should always be visible. If it hinder not but these may
be invisible, as it is agreed upon, neither will it hinder, that the Church
totally in her universality may sometimes be invisible. If the Church be
always Esa. 2.2.
set upon the tops of mountains, if in consequence, she be always visible,
the particular Churches shall be so too, seeing she cannot be taken notice of,
but in them and by them, and if she be not always glorious and conspicuous in
her parts, no more shall she be in the whole. If lastly, it be thought that
the Church ought always to be visible, always exposed to the eyes of men,
because her Pastors are Math. 5.15.1^.
the lights of the world, compared to candles which are not put under bushells,
but upon Candlestickes, seeing this appertains to the Ministers of particular
Churches, the Churches in which these Ministers are, by this argument shall
continue always visible to the eyes of carnal men, which is manifestly false.
But certain^ly. God has not promised, that his Church should be always
elevated upon mountains; he promised indeed, that she should be placed there,
and so no man doubts but that this promise from time to time has had its
accomplishment. But he never promised that she should be placed there always,
no more has it fallen out so. On the contrary, God has promised, that Apoc.
12.14.
there should be wings given to his Church, that she might fly unto her place,
before the pers^cuting Dragon. And whereas, the Lord has commanded us, to
empty our grieuances which we have against her brethren in to the bosom of
the Church, when private reconciliation is impossible: this commandment is of
the nature of those which always have this condition understood, when the
thing is possible. The Lord had regard to the time wherein he lived, and has
prescribed a law which ought to be observed, but always the possibility of
observance supposed, and an estate of the Church semblable to that in his time,
when the Church discipline was not as as yet corrupted in this point. This
Commandment then presupposes not, that the Church should always be obvious
to the eyes of men, but that in the case propounded recourse should be had unto
her, when she was so.

As for the Pastors of the Church, they are called the light of the world, not
always in relation to the effect, but to the duty; as they are called also in
this respect the Mat. 5.13.
salt of the earth, because they were ordained for this purpose, and are bound
to this duty. But then when they are in effect the light, it is a spiritual
light, not discernable but to the eyes of the soul, and minds of those which
are spiritual, of those which are in the house, as our Savior expresses it.
So that none of these considerations can yield a sufficient argument, for the
perpetual outward visibility of the Church, neither in the whole, nor in her
parts.

CHAP. XXIIII. That the Church of God was before the last Reformation, where
she was, and who were her Pastors.
But if they will needs press us further yet, and dema^d where our Church was
exta^t immediately before our separation, we tell the^ that she was in
Babylon, in captivity under the kingdom of Antichrist. a Come out of Babylon
my people, it is written in the Revelation: the people of God were then in
Babylon, albeit they served not the Gods of Babylon; and which is more, their
Teachers were the Teachers of Babylon. If this seem strange to any man, let
him call to mind the estate of the Jewish church before our Savior had
begun his preaching. Might it not at that time have been demanded, where the
Church of God had been before, and who were her Pastors? What could one
answer to this query? Might it have been said, that the Scribes and Pharisees,
and their adherents, the greater part of the people were the Church? alas they
were nothing less: they were enemies of Christ and ^his Church the true answer
then had been to say, that the Church was a small number of righteous persons,
which groaned under the burden of that spiritual tyranny, which lamented the
desolation come upon them by the corruption of the ancient doctrine and
discipline. That the Doctors of ^he Church were the Pharisees, of whom the Lord
testified, that they sat in Moses chair. Now we say the very same thing. That
God before the reformation begun in the days of our forefathers had a Church
in the midst of Babylon, in the midst of the Popish and Antichristian church:
but that this church howsoever, was not the multitude of those who had received
the Apoc. 14 9.
mark of the Beast, and worshipped it, but the small Apoc. 20.4.
company of those which misliked the Roman tyranny and corruption, of whom,
some from time to time being detected, have been banished, others cruelly put
to death, and slandered to have been guilty of horrible and heinous crimes, to
make their persons odious to the people, and their memories execrable to
posterity: had not God by his providence, maugre the subtlety and fury of
calumny, preserved the monuments of their faith and piety even unto this day.
Such were the poor Waldenses constrained to wander to and fro, such also were
the exiled Albigenses.

Concerning that which is further demanded of us, who were the Teachers of the
Church during that time so full of confusion then when Babel reigned: We answer
that questionless the holy Ghost always instructed his Church Ioh. 16.13.
inwardly, and that outwardly they were the very same which taught publicly,
namely the Doctors of the Romish Church. But some man may here say, that by
consequent they were true Teachers: to which we answer, that in some sort they
were true: as the Scribes and Pharisees were both true Teachers and seducers:
true when they sitting in Moses chair, teaching his doctrine, the people
received wholesome instruction by their Ministry: Seducers when they sitting in
their own chair, teaching their own traditions, their own inventions, they
1. Cor. 1.18. 2. Cor. 2.15.
who p^rished, the people whom Romans 11.17.
God had not chosen sucked in the poison which they tempered. Thus it was in
the Jewish church before the Lord had begun to manifest himself to the
world, otherwise God had not had a Church. This being true and evident, it
should not be necessary sollicitously to insist upon a farther answer to the
demand, How this could be? When there is an agreement about the thing, it is
curiosity to inquire after the manner of it.

Yet that we may leave no scruple behind, we will tell them after what manner
God uses false Teachers to instruct his people. The Scribes and Pharisees
propounded the word of God, and read it amongst the Jews before the coming of
our Savior, so much as was necessary to salvation: but they mingled their
leaven with it, they thrust in their expositions, glosses, and traditions; the
true Church sustained her self with the word, and rejected the leaven, the
false glutted her self with the leaven, and let pass the word. What strange
matter is there in all this? The sheep in their pasturage where there are some
venomous hea^bes, and others convenient for this nature, know well how to
choose that which is proper for them, and ^o let alone that which is hurtful:
and shall the sheep of Christ be unfurnished of this discretion? They of whom
it is said, Ioh. 10.4.5^
that they hear his voice, know it, follow it, and fly from the hand of a
stranger.

Who then will wonder any longer, that before the great Reformation which the
Lord has begun in these latter days, as it were in the decrepite age of the
world, the Church having truth propounded unto her mixed with lies, has
embraced the truth and rejected the lies. Surely this truth has sounded
always in the Church, it has been in the mouths of the Romish Doctors, as
the benediction was in the mouth of Balaam. This truth, that there is one God,
Creator, and preserver of all things, that the Father, Son, and Spirit,
distinguished, but not divided, are this God: that the universe being created
for man, and man after the image of God, he by his sin has drawn upon
himself anger and malediction. That the s^nne of God has taken our nature
upon him, and in it has expiated our offenses, that all th^se which believe in
him, which repent in syncerity obtain mercy. That therefore we ought to love
so merciful a God, to call upon him, to give him thanks. Thus far the
Scribes and Pharisees were in Moses chair, in the chair of the Prophets, of
Christ and his Apostles: thus far they were to be harkned to. Thus far the
Church did hear them: But whilst they added to this truth their lies, to this
spiritual bread their leaven: then they sat in their own chair, they were
to be heard no farther; then the true church stopped her ears against them, the
false she listened to them.

Thus we answer to this importunate questixon, How may this be?

By the same reason also, we are not perplexed for an answer, when they ask
us, what is become of our forefathers? This interrogatory proposed by the
Pagans to the first Christians, extorted from them an answer odious in the
mouths of children speaking of their parents, that God was mavelous in his
ways, but in all likelihood they were damned. Thanks be to God, we are not
driven to such straites. In Paganism there was nothing which might save, no
word of grace and mercy: in the doctrine published in the church of Rome, there
was something to be^ chosen, and they who picked it out carefully, and applied
it to their use were saved. Why should we doubt but that many thousands of our
fathers did it? God has known how to preserve a church to himself in the
midst of the most horrible Apostacies, confusions, and desolations, happening
under the old Testament since Malachie. Should his arm be shortened under the
new? No, but Mal. 3.6.
Eternal as he is, he is always like himself.

Now then let the importunate curiosity surcease those questions, framed only
to distract the simple: Where was your Church? Where were your Pastors? Our
church was in Babylon, and her Teachers for want of better, were the Teachers
of Babylon. Concerning that which they trouble us farther with; why therefore
we have not imitated our forefathers example, why we are come out of Babylon if
they were saved in it? We will give reasons for it hereafter In cap. 37.
in their proper place.

CHAP. XXV. Of the true succession of the Church, what it is, that it depends
not of succession, either natural, or Politic.
NOw because they mainely oppress us, with the prejudice, which they make
against us about Succession, which they say is of great moment and pretend
moreover, that they have it, and that we have it not; that they have continued
always, that we are lately come in by the by, crossing their line of
succession, let us consider what strength this pretense for them, and exception
against us may have.

Now that the ambiguitie of the word may not entangle us, we must know what
kind of succession they mean. If it be a natural succession, from father to
son, from generation to generation: we say that the succession of the Church
depends not of such a succession. It was, and is still the prerogative of the
obstinate Jews, that they are the successors of the Romans 9.^.
Patriarchs and Prophets, in respect of carnal and natural generation, yet
they are far enough from being the true Church. They have succeeded their
religious Ancestors in being men, this succession is natural. They have not
succeeded them in being faithful men, this succession is spiritual. If they
understand a politic succession, in respect of the place and auctority, one
succeeding another in order, and without out interruption, we affirm, that the
Church is not fastened to such a succession.

How often do the Prophets complain, that the people of Israel, their kings,
and Priests were all gone out of the way and quite disordered by idolatry?
albeit their kings were successors of good kings, and their Priests of good
Priests. The Scribes and Pharisees enjoyed not they this kind of succession,
which we call Politic? Were they for all that the true Church? yea were they
not Mat. 23.16.17.19.
seducers of the people, corruptors of the Law, sworn and deadly enemies of
the Lord and his doctrine. Now against this truth so evident, it is impossible
they should reply any thing, but it will be very frivolous. If it be said, that
Malachie prophesies, that Mal. 2.7.
the Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, that the people shall seek the law
at his mouth: we answer that in that place, there is not contained a
prediction of an after event, but a declaration of a duty. For indeed
presently after the Prophet accuses the Priest, for having gone out of the
way, for causing the people to stumble. A manifest proof that these words: the
lips of the Priest shall preserve knewledge, have no other emphasis the^ to
signify, that the lips of the Priest ought to preserve knowledge. There is
nothing more frequent in Scripture, the^ to propose a duty in the future tense.
Almost all the commandments of God run in this form. Thou shall have no
other Gods before me, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image: Thou
shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. etc. He that should
infer upon these forms of speech, that these Commandments shall never be
broken, would hardly prove himself a reasonable creature.

So the true succession of the Church, is not always joined to this politic
succession which of it self without the succession of piety, is like to the
succession of darkness to light, of sickness to health, of an infectious air
to a wholesome, of barrenness to frui^^ullnesse, of a Tyrant to a good Prince.
That ought to be accounted the true succession, which is the su^cession of
truth. To have the same mind and opinion, is to have succession of the same
seat; not to have the same opinion, is to be contrary in respect of the seat.
The succession of the seat has but the name of succession, the succession of
opinion has the truth of it, (...) Nazianzen orat. 21. in laud. Athan.
said Nazianzane, and in saying so, has taught us in what sense, the Lord
would have the Mat. 23.2.
Scribes and Pharisees to be heard as sitting in Moses chair, to wit, when they
tought like Moses, so far as they are the successors of Moses in doctrine.
But that hinders not but that he has commanded also, Mat. 16.6.
Psalm. 107. v. 33.34.35.
to take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees, when they sit not in his Chair,
but upon a stool of their own making.

But what has the Church of God then no certain succession on earth? Yea the
Lord has said, Esa. 6.13.
that as the substance of the oak and Teyletree is in that which they cast, so
the holy seed shall be her substance. But this succession is not tied either
to the natural, or to the politic succession, but it depends only of the
free disposition of him, who turns rivers into a wilderness: and the water
springs into dry ground A fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness
of them that dwell therein who turns the wilderness into a standing water:
and dry ground into water springs.

CHAP: XXVI. That the Popes authority, is not originally derived from the
Apostles.
But to come nearer to this matter, the Romish Church has no kind of lawful
succession; not that of government and policy, not that of rites and
ceremonies, no not the succession of persons, least of all that of doctrine.

She has not that of the policy of the ancient Church, for in the ancient
Church there were no Popes, no Cardinals, no Patriarchs, no not Archbishops
and Bishops after the Romish fashion. All the Apostles in respect of the power
of the keys, and authority of the Apostleship were equal. If there were any
difference between them, it was not in respect of their function. For it they
were all Ioh. 20.21.
joint tenants immediately to the supreme Apostle, the Prince of Apostles the
Lord Jesus. From him they all immediately received the same commission, to
teach all nations, the Ioh. 20.23.
same power to forgive sins. Their names were equally written upon the twelve
foundations of the high Jerusalem: Apoc. 21.14.
Mat. 19.28. Luc. 22.30.
they are placed upon twelve thrones, not subalternate, but coordinate, in the
same pitch and emine^cie, Gelas. Cyzicen A^t. Syn. Nic. lib. 2. c. ^.
of the same dignity, even as the twelve tribes. They are (said Constantine
the great in the Council of Nice) twelve pillars, not then underpropped by one
another, but which being joined together bare up the edifice of the Church. Be
it, that the Lord has promised the keys of the kingdom of heaven to St.
Peter, he Ioh. 20.23.
has bestowed the same power upon the other Apostles: be it, Luc. 22.32.
that he has prayed that his faith might not fail, he has Ioh. 17.20.
prayed also for all the faithful: be it, that he has exhorted him thrice,
Ioh. 21.15.16.17.
to feed his sheep, this was because he had denied him thrice, (...), Isid.
Pelus. l^b. 1. ep. 103. Timoth. Anag.
A triple denial wanted a threefold reestablishment: he which had stumbled
thrice, was to be lifted up thrice. Shall any extraordinary privilege be
allowed him because of this reestablishment? Must those servants which are most
frequently and earnestly put in mind of their duties, for this be supposed to
be in greater auctority? shall they be placed in a degree above the other? Nay
they themselves interpret it on the contrary, and take it for an angry dislike
their superiors have of them: they are vexed for it with St. Peter, and if
their Masters could see in to their hearts, as his could, they would say with
him, Ioh. 21.15.
Thou know that I love thee, thou know that I desire to serve thee,
Finally be it, that the Lord has said unto him, Mat. 16.18.
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church: Greg. Nyl. in
Test. and vet. Test. de T^in. cont* Jud.

Cyril. de. Trin. lib. 4.

Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 55. Hill. de Trin. l. 2. and 6. Aug. retract. l. 1. c. 21.
in Joan. tract. 124. and ali^i. saepe.

Hieron. in Abdiam c. 1.


The most ancient and most renowned amongst the fathers teach, that Christ
understood not the the person, but the confession of St. Peter; not Peter viz:
the rock which confessed, but the rock by him confessed, viz: Jesus Christ
our Lord. Howbeit, we willingly confess, that the Church has been built
upon St. Peter, but not upon him only. He is one of the foundations of the
Church, but not the only foundation of it, one of the twelve pillars, one of
the twelve Judges of the twelve tribes Israel, but not the foundation of these
foundations, the pillar of these pillars, the Judge of these Judges, but a
collateral foundation, a collateral pillar, a collateral Judge with the
other Apostles his companions. Furthermore St. Peter undertook not, to depose
Kings, or to usurp any such authority, contrarily he has joined these two
duties together: 1. Pet. 2.17.
Fear God, honor the king, how heathenish a tyrant soever, and Persecutor of
the Church, the Emperor at that time was. 1. Pet. 5.12.
He had no dominion likewise over the other guides of the Church, whom he
calls his companions in office.

Now albeit St. Peter should have had that authothority, which is attributed to
the Pope at this day, yet they are still to prove, that it died not with him.
And if his authority of Apostle-ship suruiued him not, how much less that of
being the Prince of the Apostles? If the other Apostles in regard of their
Apostle-ship, have not left themselves successors, how should he leave his
jurisdiction over them behind him? He had the gift of doing miracles, to whom
has he particularly bequeathed this faculty? Can the Pope do any miracles? He
was the Apostle of the circumcision: is the Pope the Apostle of the Jews?
These offices of the Apostles were extraordinary, like that of Moses, which was
extinguished in his person, and did not outliue him. As then the Bishop of
Ephesus should idely have challenged to himself the authority of John the
Evangelist, and the Bishop of Alexandria that of St. Mark, albeit that
tradition report, that these two Apostles had bishops for their successors, St.
John at Ephesus, St. Mark, at Alexandria: Even so the Popes unreasonably vsurp
the authority of St. Peter, under pretense that tradition makes them his
successors. So that, in this respect, the Papal Monarchy has no Apostolical
succession, seeing that not only, it has not had its original in the times of
the Apostles, but also this kind of soveraigntie was a long time after unknown
in the Church Cypr ep. 52. ad Anton edit. Pamel. and alibi passim.
St. Cyprian calls Cornelius Bishop of Rome, his colleague and Co-Bishop, and
the other Bishops coepiscopos, or the fellow Bishops of Cornelius; Epist 55. ad
Cornel.

S. Augusti. in Council. Africa. (...). edit. Ehi^g^ri.


he blames him for having received those, which the other Bishops (whom he
calls the fellow Bishops of Cornelius) had excommunicated; he sets before
him the statute of the discipline of those times, inioyning that the cause
should be judged, where the crime was committed; a statute, which he groundeth
upon justice and equity, upon the commission given to all Pastors, and the
power which every one of them has by virtue of his Commissiion, over that
portion of the flock which is assigned him, of which he is to give account
unto the Lord. Likewise he sharply reprehendeth Stephen also Bishop of Rome,
teaching that as there is but one Church through out the whole world divided
into many members viz: particular Churches: so there is but one Bishopric
divided into many particular Bishoprics. He attributes the same authority to
the other Apostles with St. Peter, Jdem de vnita. Eccles.
although to denote unity it was said to St. Peter, I will give thee the keys
of the kingdom of heaven. It is not then to the person of St Peter, but to
Peter as representing the unity of all the Apostles. Of which mind also are
Hieron. cont. Iovin. lib. 1 c. 14 August t^act. in Johan. 119 and ^24.
St. Hierome, and St. Austen: Gelas Cyzi. act. Council. Nic. p. 2. c. 28.
The synod of Alexandria addresseth their synodall epistle, not to the Bishop
of Rome in particular, but to him conioyntly with the other, without the
interposition of any distinction between them. Athanasius never calls him
otherwise, then his Co-bishop, and Comminister, his fellow Bishop, and fellow
Minister. Hosius subscribed first to the Canons of the Nicene Council, not as
representing the Bishop of Rome, but generally the Western Churches: after the
same manner as the Bishop of Alexandria those of Egypt, Lybia, Pentapolis, etc.
Hosius was not there then, to represent the universal Bishop of the Church,
but to represent the Churches of the West, as every of the other Bishops,
Churches of a particular circuit or jurisdiction, as it may more amply be seen
by their subscriptions. Lastly, that which happened unto the Pope in the sixth
Council of Carthage puts all out of doubt, Tom. ^. Council. Council. Carthag. 6.
an 420. Vi^. Cont. M^g^^. Cont. 5. cap. 9.
and admits of no reply. A certain lewd companion named Appiarius deposed
from his Ministerial function and preferment by the Bishops of Africa,
repaired to Zosimus then Bishop of Rome, who having reinstituted him, and
deeming this a fit occasion to enlarge the bounds of his dominion, graspeth it
fast, and posteth this Appiarius reconfirmed with his Ambassadors to the
Council of Carthage, giving them moreover in commission, to demand that the
universal authority of the Pope should be acknowledged by the Council,
alleging to that purpose a Canon of the Nycene Synod. Upon these passages
Zosimus dying, Eulalius is chosen in his place, by the greater part of the
Clergy and people: but he gave place to the violence of Boniface, who out of
his ambition prosecuted that which Zosimus had demanded, touching the
acknowledgement of his primacy. The Council flatly denied, that there was any
thing in the records of the Nicene Synod, which might favor his pretended
primacie, and in the mean time sent Commissaries to the Patriarchs of
Constantinople and Alexandria, to have a sight of the authenticke copies of the
acts of the Council which were kept by them. Upon this Pope Boniface died.
Celestine succeeded him, who also with the like heat, claimed the approbation
of his fained authority. But the Council having already discovered by the
report of their Commissaries, that the authenticke copies of the Nicene Synod
contained no such matter as the proud Bishops of Rome required, blamed their
fraud, checked their insolency, and adjured them to receive no more appeals,
adding this notable reason that the grace of the holy spirit would not be
wanting to any Province, In epist. Council. As^. ad Celest. Nisi forte quisquam
est. etc,
unless some man imagined that God could inspire justice to one only, and that
he would withhold it from an infinite number of Bishops.

Now, this history makes it appear unto us, that until that time, the
Churches of Africa had not acknowledged the Pope. So that if at this day, there
were any in those parts of the world, which did acknowledge him, they should
not be their successors in this. If the Pope has been from the beginning
universal Bishop, how happened it that at that time he was not universally
obeyed by the Church? But it is no less remarkable, that the Popes which
required this acknowledgement from the Council, sent not men to expostulate
with that assembly by authority, much less to excommunicate them upon their
refusal as schismatickes: as also, that they alleged no Scripture for the
primacie, but only the Canon of a Council. Yet they used a strange boldness,
in daring to falsify the Canons of the Nicene Synod: A fraud yet of which
their successors seem to have been ashamed. For in the decrees of the Nicene
council, as we have received them from them, there is nothing extant which
makes for the primacy: but in them, the other Patriarchs are rather equalized
to the Bishop of Rome. Lastly, the harsh censure, with which this council
entertained the Pope, which nevertheless was but provincial, witnesses it
not, that at that time his authority was new? This being so, seeing that
succession must draw its line from the first, and that the first Roman Bishop
had not that authority which he has that now reigns: it follows, that
there is no succession in the Pope-ship, and by consequent not in the whole
state of the Papacy.

CHAP. XXVII. That the Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests,
Deacons, Monks, and Nuns of the Romish Church, are not of Apostolical
institution.
AFter we have examined the succession of the supreme degree of authority in
the church of Rome, come we now to the inferior orders, and first to the
Cardinals. Who is so ignorant at this day, as to think, or so impudent as to
affirm, that their institution was in the times of the Apostles: or that their
office, such as it is at this day, was in the church a good while after the age
of the Apostles. The church increasing, there were created by the principal
churches Polyd. Virg. lib. 4. de inven. c. 19.
Presbyteri Cardinales, that is to say, principal, or chief Elders. Diaconi
Cardinales, principal or chief Deacons. Their office was limited within the
jurisdiction of the church where they were created; if at Rome, within the
jurisdiction of the church of Rome: if at Carthage, within the jurisdiction of
the church of Carthage. Their charge was a superintendency over the common
Elders, and common Deacons. The Cardinals at this day, have nothing of it but
the name, their charge is quite of another nature, their institution is
altogether different. They are now the electours of the Pope, which they were
not anciently, except those of the city of Rome as making a part of the
Clergy. Now they take care of the affairs of all those churches, which are
obedient to the Pope: anciently their charge was bounded within the circuit of
one church alone. Howsoever it is true indeed, that by hypocrisy, they bear
now adays certain titles, which seem to assign and to bind them to
certain parishes in Rome; to the end that they may retain, if not the truth,
yet the name of what they were anciently. Anciently their authority allowed
them not any degree above Bishops: now they are, as it were, Princes of the
blood in the church, next to the triple crown. So then the Cardinals have no
succession derived from the Apostles, and by consequence neither the church of
Rome, in respect of this part of her policy.

As for the Patriarchs, there were none of them also in the times of the
Apostles, nor a long time after. Only we read in the decrees of the Nicene
council, Can. 6.
that their jurisdiction is called an ancient custom, a term very different
from an Apostolical tradition. Moreover the Patriarchs were supreme, and
equal to the Bishop of Rome in jurisdiction: he was but their companion,
albeit he were first in order. All the other Patriarchs have long since
renounced the communion of the Roman church: the Pope also will no longer be
accounted a Patriarch. The Patriarchs which are at this day in the Romish
church, are elected by the Pope, who has no power to choose the^, seeing that
at their first institution (which howsoever was not Apostolical) they were his
fellows in authority. So the Patriarchs of the Romish church have no lawful
succession, their beginning being not not from the true beginning, the times of
the Apostles, yea not from the primitive institution of Patriarchs.

The Romish Archbishops and Bishops at this day are nothing like those ancient,
primitive ones, I say not only in respect of their manners, but also in
respect of their authority. Their authority at this day depends barely of the
Pope: anciently, it was not subjected but to the Company of Bishops; They
might not be deposed, but by the common consent. They were not bound, to run
to Rome for their election; But they gave their mutual advice, one to another,
both in the election and deposition of a Bishop. Anciently they had no such
authority over the magistrate, as they at this day usurp. It Is worth the
observation, to see how matters are changed. Their authority in respect of the
Pope, is become slavish: in respect of the magistrate, tyrannical This is
their comfort, that they have gotten on the one side, that which they have lost
on the other; so they would have it, choosing rather to be subject to one who
is far from them, and whose greatness depends of theirs, then to many which
are near them, and whose luster might obscure theirs. In regard of this order
therefore, there is no succession in the Church of Rome.

In the ancient Church there were Elders termed Presbyteri, from whence came
the name of Prebsters, Priests, But the Priests of the Romish Church retain
nothing of them, but the name. Their Principal office was to 1. Tim. 1.89.
teach and instruct, where as the Romish Priests for the most part, are
unlearned idiots, and by consequence are no otherwise successors of those
Primitive ones, then darkness, poverty, sickness, succeed light, wealth,
health. Now this default, cannot be excused, by alleging that it is the fault
of the persons; for so it is in Ecclesiastical functions, that were the
incapacity of the person is, the function cannot be. I call here the
incapacity, not simply the fault of the person, but the impossibility of
discharging the function. The woman which has no milk, cannot be a nurse, and
if she take the office of one who has upon her, this cannot be in the quality
of a nurse, she cannot be a nurse beyond the name. So he which has not in
some sort the abilities requisite for reaching, he cannot possibly be a
teacher; if he succeed one that could and did teach, he succeeds him not as
teacher, but only in his name. Moreover, the Principal part of the priests
office consists now a days in mumbling of mass, and in being sacrificers,
of which there is no mention in the Primitive ordination of Priests.

In the ancient Church there were Act. 6.2.3.
Deacons; now there are Deacons, Archdeacons, subdeacons. But what have these
people of the ancient Deacons, beside the name? Take they any care of the
poor? yea they suck their blood by a cruel and importunate exaction of their
revenues. Do they serve tables? yea themselves are sumptuously attended at
their own. In a word, seeing they do not the office of the ancient Deacons,
how shall they be their successiours?

Concerning Monks and Nuns, there will no^ be found a syllable in scripture,
to signify that there were any in the age of the Apostles. Hieron. in vit.
Paul. Erem
St. Hierome who has much extolled this profession, fetches its original
from Paul the Hermit; a fair time after the Apostles. If else where, he
refers its beginning to a time more ancient, he contradicts both himself
and the truth, in Catal. scrip Eccles. nom. Phil.
being carried away by the excessive affection he bare to this profession.
Howsoever the Monks of these times, cannot justly be accounted the successors
of these Monks which St. Hierome so much commends: What makes a monk ad
Paul. de instit. Mon.
said he, within cities? These not only abide in cities, but even in them
build cities. St. Austen has left a full treatise of this point, entitled.

De opere monachi. extat. 3. tem. Basil.


In St. Austens time it was theft for a Monk to beg: now it is an especial
point of their sanctify. Cypr. ep. 62. edit. Pamel.
In St. Cyprians time it was not unlawful for him who had vowed continency to
marry afterward: now it is a matter monstrously heretical; except when the
Pope dispenceth with it, who like a God upon earth can do whatsoever it
pleases him, and more also then God in heaven, for he can make vice virtue,
and virtue vice by his dispensations.

CHAP: XXVIII. That the Ceremonies of the Romish, Church are not of
Apostolical institution.
IF we consider the Ceremonies of the Romish Church, we shall quickly see, that
the ancient simplicity and Apostolical purity is not to be found in her: that
those decent customs of true antiquity, are either quite changed by her, or so
extremely abused, that they are made unprofitable. In the flourishing time of
the Apostles, there was nothing used in baptism but water: afterward there
was added Chrisme and since that, salt and spittle. What succession have these
additions, these new superfluities, seeing they had not their original, at the
first institution of that sacrament? The channel and pipe as it were of
succession here grew faulty, and received in this stinking water running
athwart. The disguisement which they have put upon the holy supper, is yet more
prodigious, they have miserably and unhappily mangled it: they have cleft the
seal of the King of heaven in the middle, and cast away the one half of it.
What is it that superstition dares not to venture upon? We have the
institution and cano^ of this holy sacrament recited by three Evangelists and
by St. Paul. Can there be any thing more pure, more simple, less stuffed with
superfluous and superstitious ceremonies? less accompanied with pomp and
compliments? Now compare with that purity, simplicity, that nakedness (as I
may say) of ceremonies, the histrionicall pomp, the apish gestures, and anticke
tricks of the Mass: can there be any thing imagined more unlike unto it, and
disproportionable? What succession then may be conceived, or acknowledged,
where the dissimilitude is so great, but a succession of evil to good, or
corruption to purity?

Moreover what shall we say of their superstitious consecration of chapels,
altars, pixes, fonts, Chalices, plates, vestiments, holy oil, holy bread, holy
water, of their Beads, Agnus Dei, Images, of their christning of Bells, of the
hallowing of ensigns and swords. From whence will they fetch the institution
of these trumperies? Had they a heart of lead, a face of iron, and a for^head
of brass, yet they would not dare to affirm that any of these fopperies were
in use in the age of the Apostles? What succession then of them can they
pretend? Lastly their processions, their stately pomp at funerals, so Proud
and magnificent that now they fondly live and die altogether: Came it from the
Apostles? Yea is it not a relic of the Paga^ superstition?

CHAP. XXIX. That there is no succession, in respect of doctrine, in the Romish
Church.
But the worst of all is, that they destitute of the succession of the truth,
which is the soul and life of the Church.

True antiquite believed, Apoc. 14.18.
that they which die in the Lord, rest from their labors: they believe, that
at their departure out of this life, they go to Purgatory, there to fry in as
scorching a fire as that in hell.

True antiquity believed, that Luc. 17.10.
when we shall have done all that which is commanded us, we are but
unprofitable servants, because we shall have done no more then was our duty
to do.

They teach that man already culpable before God, may merit eternal life, ex
condigno, by exact proportion of the work of the wages.

True antiquity believed Romans 8.18.
that the sufferings of this present life, are not sufficient to counterpoise
the glory which is eternal.

They believe, that they do counterpoise them in merits.

Antiquity believed, that we are saved freely. They believe, that we are saved
by the merit of our works.

Antiquity believed that we are saved Ephesians. 2.8.
by grace through faith, and that not of our selves, it is the gift of God, not
by works, to the end that no man might boast.

They believe, that we are saved, partly by grace through faith, partly by
merits and works, that faith is partly the gift of God, and partly an effect
of our freewill.

Antiquity believed, that we are not Tit 3 5.
saved by works of righteousness, which we have done.

They believe, that we are saved, ex congruo, by the works which we do before
our regeneration, and ex condigno, by those which follow it.

Antiquity prayed the Lord, Psalm. 143.2.
not to enter into judgment with his servants, because that before him no
flesh shall be justified.

They believe, that the Lord shall enter into judgment with them, for they
believe to be justified by the merit of their works.

Prim^tiue, and Apostolical antiquity believed, that ^^m. 11.6.
Gods election was every way free: that election is of grace, that if it be of
grace it is no more of works, otherwise grace were no more grace, but if it be
of works, it is no more of grace, otherwise works were no more works.

They believe, that it is of grace, and of works too.

Antiquity believed, Phil. 2.13.
that it is God which effectually produces in us to will, and to do,
according to his good pleasure.

They attribute both the one, and the other, in part, to their own free will.

Antiquity believed, 2. Cor. 3.5.
that we are not able to think any thing of our selves, but that our
sufficiency is from God.

They attribute our sufficiency in part to our own selves.

Antiquity believed, Ioh. 15 5.
that we can do nothing without Christ.

They believe, that we can without Christ, while we are not yet engraffed into
him, do works which merit eternal life ex congruo, as before our
regeneration, and that without the grace of God, a man may for a time be
without sinning.

Antiquity believed, that Ephesians. 2.3.
of our own nature we are the children of wrath: they believe, that by the
strength of our own nature, we are able to prepare, and to dispose our selves
for grace.

Antiquity believed, Ephesians. 2.1.
that before Christ has quickened us, we are dead in sins: They believe that
we have freewill to good.

Antiquity believed, that Gal. 5.17.
the spirit fights against the flesh, and the flesh against the spirit, and
that they are contrary things in us.

They believe, that we are able to fulfill the law of God perfectly, that is to
say, without sin.

Antiquity believed, that Romans 8 7.
the lusting of the flesh is enmity against God, and cannot be subject to the
law of God.

They acknowledge even in the flesh a freewill to good.

Antiquity believed, that Christ Ioh. 17.9.
prayed not for the world, but for those whom the Father has given him out of
the world.

They believe, that it is no certain number for which the Lord has prayed,
but that he prayed indifferently for all.

The Ancients believed, that all they who have Ioh. 6.44.
heard of the father, and have learned of him, come unto Christ, and that no
man comes unto him, unless the father draw him.

They believe, that they who come not to Christ, have heard of the father as
well as the other: and that there is no grace, nor particular election in the
calling and conversion of a Christian.

Antiquity believed, that it is Christ which Ioh. 15.5.
chooses us, and not we that choose him.

They on the contrary believe, that we choose Christ, for they make that grace
by which he calls us to him universal, and suppose it indifferently
proposed to all, so that in respect of Christ, there is no election, seeing he
promiscuously calls all, but that we choose of our selves to go unto him.
Whence that is always in their mouths, Fac vt praedestineris, si non es
praedestinatus, Make thy self predestined, if thou art not.

Antiquity believed, that God Romans 9.15^
has mercy upon whom he will have mercy, and compassion of whom he pleases to
have compassion, that he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he
will he hardneth.

They bereave God of this liberty, and accuse them of blasphemy who attribute
it unto him.

Antiquity believed, that they who fall away, who go 1. Ioh. 2.1^.
out from among the faithful, were never of the number of the faithful, for
if they had been of us (says S. John) they would have tarried with us.

They believe, that they who are truly faithful to day, may fall away to
morrow, and that no man can be assured of his perseverance.

Antiquity believed, that we have Romans 8.1^.
not received the spirit of bondage to be again in fear, but the spirit of
adoption which cries in our hearts, Abba Father.

They believe that the spirit of the faithful is a spirit of fear, that they
must always live in doubt, that to have a settled assurance is presumption.

Antiquity believed, that whosoever believes in Ioh. 3 38.
Christ has everlasting life.

They say, that he who believes in Christ cannot be certain of life, albeit
the Lord has said it, which is in effect, to believe that we must not believe
in Christ: for how shall he believe in Christ, who doubts whether Christ
loves him or not? Whether Christ will love him continually as they teach him
to doubt?

Antiquity believed, that there is no 1. Ioh. 4.28.
fear in love and that perfect love casts out fear.

They commend fear in those which ought to burn with love, not that fear of
offending God that filial fear, but a fear of being damned, a servile fear.

Antiquity believed, that there is but one natural body of Christ, and that
composed of the substance of the blessed Virgin.

They would seem indeed to believe so too, but by the infini^e multitude of
their hosties, or sacrifices, each of which they s^y is Christ's body,
attributing unto him also b^dies ma^e of bread, they betray their
dissimulation, and show themselves to believe the quite contrary.

Antiquity believed, that the Cor. 10*16
Sa^rament of the alt^r was broken bread: they believe that it is the body of
Christ which is not broken.

Antiquity believed, that the heavens must contain Christ until his second
coming. Act 3.^1.
They believe that the body of Christ is evey where, where their hostie^ a^e.

Antiquity be^eeved, that those were not to be believed which should say, Mat.
24 26.
Here is Christ, there is Christ, he is in the secret chambers.

They think, and say the contrary every day, when they have him about the
streets, when they carry him to the sick, when they shut him up in the Pixes.

Antiquity believed, that H^b. 10.^^.
Jesus Christ is offered but once: they believe that he is offered a
numberless number of times.

Antiquity believed, that it was H^Heb. 9 25.
impossible Christ should be offered often, unless he suffered often. They
believe, that he is offered every day without suffering.

Antiquity bele^ued, that we have but 1. Tim. 2.5^
one Mediator toward God. They believe, that we have many.

Antiquity believed, that Romans 10.14.
we ought to call upon none but him in whom we believe. They believe, that we
must call upon many in whom it is not lawful to believe, namely the Saints and
Saintesses of Paradise.

Antiquity believed, Heb. 4.16.
that we may with a sound heart in a full persuasion of faith, yea with
boldness go to the throne of grace that we may obtain mercy, and find grace
to help in time of need.

They teach, that it is presumption, and that we must use the mediation of the
Saints to God, as we do the intercession of Court favorites to the King.

Antiquity believed, 2. Chro. 6.30
that only God knows the heart. They believe, that the Saints know all our
secrets.

Antiquity allows not prayer for the dead (we say true Antiquity which is
the Scripture) for it teaches that Heb. 9.27.
after death comes judgment, which must be understood immediately after, for
otherwise one might say as well, that after our birth comes judgment.

On the contrary, they believe that judgment comes not immediately after
death, and upon this opinion they ground their prayers for the dead.

Antiquity believed, that that which enters in at the mouth of a man,
defiles not the man.

They believe, that eating of flesh in Lent defiles the man.

Antiquity believed, that to 1. Tim. 4.1, ^.
command abstinence from marriage, and certain meats is a doctrine of Devils.

The Romanists command, and practice both.

Antiquity believed, that Exodus 20.
images were not to be worshipped.

The Romish Church is full of such idolatry.

Antiquity believed that God is to be worshipped in spirit and truth. Ioh.
4.24.


The Romish Church thinks there can be no religion, where there is not a
multitude of ceremonies.

Antiquity believed, that he which 1. These. 3.10
labors not should not eat.

The greatest Saints amongst them abstain from l^bour and are most idle.

Antiquity believed, that it was Act. 20.35.
a more blessed thing to give then to receive.

They believe far otherwise, for the most holy amongst them place their
felicity in poverty.

Antiquity believed, that it was expedient to Prove. ^0.8.
pray to God against poverty.

They believe that its best to vow it.

CHAP. XXX. That there is not so much as the succession of persons in the
Church of Rome.
BUT how will this matter go, if it appear that they are destitute, not only
of the succession of Ecclesiastical policy, of the succession of ceremonies,
of the succession of doctrine, but also of the succession of persons? If it
has failed in the Popes themselves, shall it not by the same reason, have
failed in the whole body depending of them? Now he that would deny, that this
succession has not been interrupted amongst the Popes he must, impudently
venture to deny also the outrageous schisms made by the Antipopes, whilst
there were two, sometimes three, who claymed this succession. It cannot be
said, that only one of them had it, for what is then become of the Churches that
depended on the other Popes? Shall they be excused by the pretense of their
well-meaning, because every one of the^ believed, that they depended on the
true Pope. This good intention then shall excuse the Donatists, Aug. ep. 15.
for they thought they adhered to the succession of the Apostles: and why
should not the same excuse the Protestants also, seeing they believe verily,
that their Ministers are the successors of those Pastors, which the Apostles
planted in the Primitive Churches.

It is to no purpose to produce here the example of Barbarius Philippus, who
being a slave, his determinations which he gave during the time of his
judicature were current nevertheless, even after he was discovered to be a
slave. For there is not the same reason in the Ecclesiastical functions.
Civil functions depend of the approbation of men, these of God. The Popes the
being not true Popes, but usurpers before God, could have no authority,
whatsoever men esteemed of them. It is as idle to allege the example of Judas,
because that although he were a wicked man, yet he was a lawful Apostle, not
an intruder, but one lawfully called to the Apostleship, which cannot be
verified of those Popes, which were thrust out, because thrust into the ch^ire.
Gen^b. Chron. and 4. sect. 10.
Genebrard goes farther then all this, when he pronounces all those Popes
unlawful, in whose election the Emperor of Germany bare the sway, although
there were many of them succeeding one another, without ever being deposed.

The succession then having failed in the Popeship, (as I may so speak) seeing
the Pope is the head of the whole body of the Roman Church, it would be labor
in vain to show, that it has been personally interrupted in his members, who
have no other succession then what is derived from his.

CHAP. XXXI. That its mere wrangling to demand by what authority one requires
an holy Reformation.
But be it (say they) that we have in so many kinds degenerated from the
purity of our ancestors, who gave you authority to reform us? Who has
appointed you judges over us? See them again at their preiudices. So the
Pharisees anciently outbr^ved the Lord. In what authority do thou th^se
things? But what have we done, that they should press us so much, to show our
authority? We have espied the wolf in the fold, and we have cried ou^ the
enemy, not at the gates, but in ^he cittadell, and we have sounded alarm. We
have observed the Traitors, and fingered them out. To proceed thus far, there
needs no other authority, then the zeal of the honor of our Sovereign
Lord, of the peace of his Jerusalem, and prosperity of his house. If the Wolf
has made no spoil, if that man of sin has not taken possession of the
temple of God, if the watchmen of Israel are not become gluttonous, and drowsy
dogs, then our zeal has been without knowledge, yea not zeal, but madness.
We entreat them to give us leave to make it appear, that we cried not out, but
upon a just and necessary occasion, if we cannot verify this, let us be
condemned. But let us not be thrust back upon the simple prejudice of want of
authority in our persons; to give warning, and advise, it is instead of all
authority, to know how to give it seasonably. He that can show, that he has
given an opportune, and necessary advertisement, sufficiently purges himself
from the crime of rashness. Here then is the pith of the matter, to examine
whether we have so proceeded or no: This being cleared, the question touching
authority will be found to be but a wrangling quirke, craftily invented to make
us loose the principal: for who doubts, but if that the desolation of the
outward face of the Church, has been so lamentable as we pretend, that every
one ought rather to strive to succor it, with some timely remedy,
proportionably to the measure of his skill, then to make it worse by
dissembling it? In the common wealth, if any one arise against the ordinary
officers of the King, this is called sedition, rebellion, treason, but if this
insurrection be occasioned by a treason attempted by those officers against
the King, and state, if this be verified, it is no longer a crime, but an
heroicke exploit, and an example of loyalty, so much the more famous, by how
much less note, and authority he was of, who undertook, and achieved it.

It is as truly, as commonly held, that the divine power is evidently
manifested, where the strength of man, by reason of the meanness of the person,
could not come between. If a person not authorized by degree, and license,
should undertake to control the advice of Lawyers, and Physicians in their
own professions, he is not accounted rash, if he does it with reason,
especially if he do it according to the Canons, and rules of art: but he is
esteemed, and respected so much the more, as he has less commendation
elsewhere, then from his own deserts. How much more yet is he reverenced, if
he do it in time of need, in matter of great moment, when it stands upon
life, and death? should not such an one be advanced, and for his skill, and
fidelity worthily be promoted into their rooms, who are unworthy of them,
both for their ignorance, and unfaithfulness? If this be practiced, and that
profitably in the affai^es of the world, for the supreme law, is the service
of the King, and safety of the people; shall not the same be practiced in the
Church, in divine affairs, which concern the glory of the King of Kings, the
eternal safety of our souls, the importance of the gain, or loss being
infinite. It is a^ ordinary law of nature, that heavy bodies descend as it were
to their center, the place of their rest, and conservation; and yet this law is
subject to another more general law of nature, which commands, that there be
no vacuity against the ordinary law of nature; so that rather then there should
be any emptiness light bodies will sink down, and heavy bodies will mount
up. Just so it is in Ecclesiastical, and civil affairs. In the church it is
an ordinary law, that every man in it follow his calling, hold his rank, keep
the law prescribed him, to avoid confusion, which must needs arise from each
ones intermedling with another function. But this law is subject to another
more universal law, of more importance and necessity, which commands every
one to forget his ordinary condition, and to abandon his private rank, that he
may go against some extreme evil, and keep back some irreparable loss,
when it cannot otherwise be avoided, then by this seeming breach of his rank.
I say seeming, for indeed, he which upon a reasonable, and urgent occasion
quitteth his place, quitteth it not, but keeps it: he should abandon it, in
not abandoning in this case: even as heavy bodies should either move, or rest
against nature, if they forsook not their ordinary centers, to ascend aloft,
when by their ascent they should hinder a vacuity: So the soldier, who being
ascertained, that his captiane has traitorously delivered the gate to the
enemy, should superstitiously keep his rank, and not set upon his captain,
he would not in effect in this case keep his rank, but whilst he would do
the duty of a soldier, he would be found to have committed the act of a
traitor.

CHAP: XXXII. That they whom God employed in the reformation had an outward
calling, and that albeit they had not had it, if they were otherwise furnished
with the gifts requisite for such a business, this defect ought not to be
objected against them.
IF we justify our selves upon these terms, why should we be accused of
sedition in the Church? If being but private persons (as they make of us) we
have ventured upon the common officers, if being but common soldiers (as they
term us) we have performed the office of Captains, so far, as to deny
them our obedience, and to make war with them, as with the enemies of our
King, and disturbers of the peace of his spiritual Commonwealth, and finally,
as against traitors. Although in truth, the first repairers of the ruins of
the Church, in the time of our forefathers, were not Iackes out of office, or
common soldiers, but men employed in the principal functions of the Church.
In England all the Bishops, in Germany the most ren^wned Doctors of the Church,
as also in Switzerland, of whom others are descended: Here it is replied, that
if these men, had a true calling, then there is a true calling in their Church,
and consequently, they shall be the true Church. To this we answer, that if
there may be a true baptism without the true Church, why may there not be also
a true vocation? Is the vocation less compatible with the false Church then
Baptism, doubtless, where is baptism, there is a power to administer it, and
where this power is there is a calling. None can seal, unless he be a Keeper
of the seals, no man is so, unless he be called to it. The seals of the
Church are the sacraments, no man can seal in the Church, but he who has
commission for it. They acknowledge that our baptism is effectual, and
reiterate it not, what heretics soever they account us: we pay them the
like, when we make that calling sufficient, which our predecessors received
from the^, the right of which they have bequeathed to posterity. To allow then
our baptism, what is it, but to confess that we may baptize? and what is
this but to confess that we have an ordination, a calling to baptize?

But their reply furnishes us with a stronger argument against themselves,
when we press them either to confess, that they are not the true Church, or
to yield that the calling received amongst them was lawful. It cannot be
concluded, that there where there is a true calling, there is also the true
Church. Witness the ten tribes revolted, and the Church of Judah, in the time
of the Idolatrous Kings, in the time of our Savior Christ, in which the
Levites always had their calling, albeit they executed it amiss. But it will
be good logic to argue that where there is no calling, there is no true
Church; witness the multitude of Pagans and infidels, amongst whom ^here
being true calling, there can be no true Church. Here they are feign to take
sanctuary in another shift, that the calling of the first reformers was
nullified by the corruption, and alteration of that doctrine, for the preaching
of which it was conferred upon them. But see they not, that this reply gives
us as much as we desire? namely, that setting aside the question, touching
ordination, they accuse us for having altered, and corrupted the doctrine, of
which accusation if we purge our selves, why perplexe they us about outward
ordination; seeing they yield by their reply, that we have that, provided,
that we have not lost it, by corruption of doctrine: As also on our side, if
we justify not our doctrine, we will yield to the^ that we have no lawful
calling amongst us, and that our predecessors lost it, as soon as they brought
a change into the Church. If they reply here, that the question is not whether
our pastors at the beginning of the reformation, altered the doctrine of the
Gospel, but, whether they altered that of the Romish Church, for the preaching
of which they were sent. To this we answer, that the teachers in the Roman
Church, are called indeed to publish the doctrine of the same Church, but
under the title of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. This doctrine then
being not commended unto them, but as supposed for Evangelical, if they come
to discover that it is not so, they are no longer bound to teach it, but to
teach that doctrine which is correspondent to that title, under which the other
was falsely commended unto them.

Surely if our doctrine be true, albeit we had not the ward calling, yet we
were to be heard: if it be false though we had this external mission, (as we
have it) yet we were not to be hearkened to, but abhorred. Why then come they
not directly to this point? why begin they not with our doctrine? can there
be a better argument against a Physician, then to prove that he is unskillful,
or that he is an impoysoner? or against a Lawier, then that he is ignorant and
corrupt? or a better means to procure credit, to a Physician, or authority to
a Lawyer, then the proof of their ability and fidelity? what do degrees and
licenses, profit a a Physician or Lawyer, if they be both witless and
dishonest? what do their not taking of degrees in case of necessity
disadvantage them, if otherwise they are skillful and honest? So it is with the
teachers in the Church, if they are of sufficiency, they are to be received,
though they have no testimonial of their external ordination, and if they
have not this sufficiency be it, that they make it appear, that they were
outwardly sent, yet this would be but a humane mission, an authority bestowed
by ignorant man, which the Lord disalloweth, who sends no man whom he has
not endowed with gifts, necessary for the execution of the charge in which he
imployeth him. He is not like those hucksters of degrees, worthy to be banished
out of commonwealths, who for the most part license those, not whom desert, but
whom bribes and by respects commend. So then where this divine mission has
place, there is also suffciency: where sufciency is not found, we may conclude
that there is no divine mission. Now if this sufficiency be found in our
Teachers, if it be not found in the greater part of the Romish pastors; we
shall have on our side an argument and testimony of divine ordination, they
only of an humane; an uncertain institution, because he that conferreth it,
may be either so deceived by his ignorance, blinded by his affection, or
perverted by his malice and wickedness in such a manner, that he may call him
whom God calls not, and put by him whom God calls.

CHAP: XXXIII. That the example of the first Reformers opens no gap to
confusion, seeing they had the outward calling, and that albeit they should not
have had it, the misery of those times excuses, yea justifies that defect.
Nevertheless, here diverse difficulties throw themselves in our way. 1 That
it must necessarily breed confusion, to permit every man to exercise that
charge of which he is capable, without being orderly called unto to it. 2 That
the example of the Priests in the ancient law is contrary to it, who being
fallen from God, yet no man was permitted to substitute himself into their
rooms. 3 That the example of commonwealth is against it, in which no man is
suffered, to take upon him any office, of what worth soever he be, unless he
be legally deputed to it. 4 That there will be no danger in joining with a
schismatic Church, if to be true ministers of the Church, it suffices to
have the truth, and purity of doctrine. From these objections, they conclude
that outward mission and vocation are absolutely necessary, unless they are
supplied by some other circumstances, as the gift of miracles, or prophesying.

But we easily wind our selves out of these difficulties, by showing, that our
first reformers had the calling which was at that time ordinary: and that
therefore they gave no example of selfe-intrusion into the Priests office,
seeing themselves were priests; nor of undertaking the execution of a charge
without a patent, seeing they were privileged, and licenced to that function
which they undertook, having been called to be ministers; That no man may
take occasion by their example, to be schismatic, because schism is a
separation made without a lawful cause, and the separation made by them was
most just, 1 for the Apostasy, 2 heresy, 3 idolatry, 4 cruelty of the Romish
Church. To the verifying of which, we beg that we may be admitted, because the
manifestation of this, is the only proof of our innocence. If the Church of
Rome be not Apostaticall, heretical, idolatrous, cruel, if we make not this
accusation good, let us be condemned for schismatickes in separating from her;
for heretics, seeing that our separation, has been grounded upon the
co^trariety between our doctrine and theirs.

But because in the former Chapter, we have principally reckoned upon
sufficiency, and occasion to exercise this sufficiency, so far as to think
these two circumstances, the notes of divine calling and sending, Let us
suppose (that which was not) that the first which God employed in the work of
reformation, had not an humane, and outward ordination; let us consider if that
therefore, they indiscreetly undertook a business of such consequence, and
whether the reasons a^leaged to that purpose be of any weight. It is a
freq^ent saying in their mouths, How shall they preach unless they be s^nt?
But this hinders not, but that he who is sent by God, may ofttimes be thrust
back by men. Our Lord was not only rejected, but even persecuted to death, by
the Scribes and Pharisees; the Apostles, were entertained with the like
contempt, the like cruelty; and which of the prophets is it (said the Lord to
the Jews) which your fathers have not ki^led? In the mean time it is
certain, that no man may thrust himself into a charge in the Church without
mission. But the controversy is about the nature of this mission, whether it
be humane, having its approbation from men, or divine, having its approbation
from God? In a tolerable estate of the Church, God has established an order
which he would have to be kept; even as Kings and princes in their dominions,
who though they might by their authority install their officers immediately,
yet they will have them pass through certain formalities, which they have
ord^ined for orders sa^e, and for preventing hasty, and crafty surprisalls. But
when their state is disturbed, when their officers are combined against them,
when all order is perverted, and these formalities have no longer place, the
Prince immediately setleth his officers in their places, it suffices them for
all patents, to be authorized by his commandment. So it is in the Church, God
will have every thing done in order, so far as it may be observed, but when
confusion has turned all vpside down, he forbids not, to look to the maine
chance, though it be without a method, but commands, to solicit the
principal business, the more zealously, because there is less possibility
of compassing it the ordinary way. Method is commendable in all things, but
when exigences are so violent, that they make it impossible, nature, laws,
customs, instruct us to betake our selves unto that which is most necessary.

This then is not to give example to tumultuous persons, or to open a gap to
confusion: for he is truly tumultuous who contemns order, not he who cannot
find it: he who neglects it without any good motive, not he who is
constrained to pass over it. It supposes then, not introduces a confusion,
to permit the exercise of a function to one who is capable of it, destitute of
a humane calling, then when the calling is impossible, the exercise of the
function necessary. But whilst the ordinary formalities may be observed, and
the case is not so urgent, as to exact an extraordinary proceeding, it would be
truly to open a gate to disorder. So it makes no way for sedition in a city,
or mutiny in a camp, to permit that in case of treason, the citizen should
rise against the subordinate Magistrate, the Soldier against his Captain,
without any other commission, then his own private motion, if he cannot have
time for a more formal course. Confusion is only when without this case this
license is permitted. So the first objection drawn from the inconvenience,
which the liberty of not observing order and forms of law when it is possible,
draws after it, cannot disadvantage our predecessors, although they were not
furnished with an outward calling, seeing they were driven to such plunges, as
gave them not leave, safely, to follow the method of law.

For the affairs of the Church, being at that pass that heresy, and
idolatry bare the sway, that they which had the outward calling, not only
exercised it abusiuely, but which is worse, having the authority to confer
it, they bestowed it not upon those who would and could exercise it aright:
keeping back (as some times the Pharisees did) the key of knowledge, shutting
up heaven gates, neither entering in themselves, nor suffering any other to get
in: It was necessary then, albeit, they had no outward calling, in an
extraordinary case, to venture upon an extraordinary project. St Paul had
foretold, that there should come a falling away, so notable that by a kind of
singularity he calls it 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. (...).
Apostasy. Not then one heresy, one sect, a part by it self, for there had
been already in his time such fallings away, but a revolt which should
ouerspread the face of the Church, so that she might hardly be espied through
the thicknes of so horrid a cloud. Now who are those which were to oppose
themselves against this revolt? Doubtless not the Apostates themselves, not
they who persevered in this revolt: but they who separated themselves from it,
who protested against it, be it that they either had authority amongst the
fallen away, as the Levits amongst the ten revolted Tribes, or be it that
they had it not. But they will say, perhaps we our selves have made this
revolt? Let this then be our question, the prejudice laid aside, and then we
must come to the examination of doctrine, which is all that we desire.

CHAPTER. XXXIV. That the example of the Priests under the law, cannot be
drawn into argument to prove that a man may not sometimes exercise a function
in the Church without an outward calling.
THE second objection which they make against us, is that, as it was not
lawful, to occupy the rooms of the Priests in the ancient law even during
their revolt: so it is not lawful for any man, in the revolt of the Doctors of
the Christian Church, to take the place of a Doctor.

But there is not the same reason between the Pastors of the Christian
Church, and the Priests of the Jewish Church. Their function was typical, and
carnal, and therefore fastened to certain typical, and carnal circumstances
of times, places and persons: they were not to sacrifice but at a certain
time, it was not permitted but to a certain race, to exercise the Priests
office, and that in the Land of Judah only.

The administration of the Gospel is real, spiritual, free from all
circumstances. Preaching may be in all times, at all places, by all men of
ability, who both may and ought to preach, when it is requisite. Salvation
depended not upon the carnal and typical administration, the ceremonial
sacrificing in the law, the omission of which, the circumstances of times,
places, persons requisite for the business ceasing, as in the time of
captivity, of it self endangered not men's souls, as does that of the
pre^ching of the word, which the Lord even under the old Testament set free,
chaining it not to these conditions, to such a time, such a place, such a
person, because it is simply and absolutely necessary to salvation. Whence it
was that there were teachers out of all the Tribes of Israel, who although they
supplied not the defect of Priests, for so much as was typical and ceremonial
in their charge, as in offering of sacrifice; this part of their charge, being
especially, appropriat^d to their persons: nevertheless, in that which
concerned teaching and instruction, they were substituted for aid, and relief,
and were to make good those stations which the others had forsaken. Witness
the Prophets and the Sons of the Prophets, being indifferently of any Tribe,
witness the Pharisees whose calling our Savior allows, censuring only the
abuse of it, who were not only of the Tribe of Levi, but of all Tribes, of
which St Paul furnishes us with an example in his own person, being of the
stock of Benjamin, and yet a Pharisee, borne of a Pharisee. And indeed, if
here were fit place to allege the ancient law against this truth, as it was
not lawful but for one Tribe to execute the Priesthood of the old Testament,
and but at a certain time only, and in a certain place: we should by the same
reason, circumscribe the calling of Ministers under the Gospel with the same
limits, and girde in their liberty with the same fetters; making it requisite
that they should be of a certain family, and exercise their calling at a
definite time and place. Whence it is manifest, that the priesthood of the old
Testament cannot be brought for an example, when the controversy is about
preaching under the new, that being tied to certain circumstances, from which
this by the property of its nature is freed.

CHAP: XXXV. That the example of Judges in a Commonwealth is impertinent, to
prove, that outward ordination is always necessary in the Church.
IT is to as little purpose, to produce the example of a Judge in a
Commonwealth, where no man what necessity soever there be, what ability soever
he has, may presume to thrust himself into that office, without being called
to it.

For besides that we have formerly showed, that in the time of confusion, the
King installeth Judges himself, not binding them to pass through the usual
forms, there is moreover this difference to be considered. The exercising of
the office of a Judge, deriueth it is force and efficacy, from his authority,
whence it is that the determinations of Judges, are not executed because they
are just, but because they are sentences, and determinations, be it that they
are given justly, by the wisdom and equity of the judge, or unjustly by his
ignorance, or corruptnesse But the virtue, and power of the Ministerial
function depends not of the authority of him that practices it; For if he be
ignorant, or heretical, one who willingly slighteth his charge, and vilifieth
his own function, an hucster of Gods word (as the Apostle speaks) his
authority will not make, that when he has proclaimed peace, peace, there shall
be peace by and by, as well as the sentences of Judges how unjust or silly
soever they are, fail not for all that to be put in execution. On the other
side, if he who exercises the function be both of ability and fidelity, though
he want the formality of an outward mission, it being impossible for him to
obtain it, and that which he does without it being necessary, he fails not
effectually, to instruct, exhort, and comfort.

It fares with him as with a Physician whose authority gives not his doses
and recipes virtue to work* and in working to heal, but it is his skill and
honesty which direct him in choice of such prescriptions as are proper for the
cure, which is the fruit of his labor, and the end he proposes unto himself.
Otherwise, every graduated Physician would without any more ado cure the
sick, if it were the authority of the Doctor and not the virtue of his
physic, which did the cure, the choice and application of which depends of
his knowledge, and fidelity. Whence it comes to pass also, that if the
Physician be skillfull, and careful, the want of authority, in his person,
hinders not, the operation of his doses. From whence by comparison it may be
observed, why in a Judge outward authority seems to be absolutely, and simply
necessary, and why in a Pastor notwithstanding, that authority which depends
of humane authority is not simply necessary: namely because whatsoever a Judge
does, he does by that authority, which is lent him from a superior, his
abilities but enabling him to do that aright, which his derived authority,
makes him do effectually: but in a Pastor, if he be sound in knowledge and
conscience, the administration of his charge does always it is work, as
effectually and completely, as if it were backed and graced by humane
authority. It is the good physic which heals; the good milk which
nourishes, whether the Physician has taken his degrees or not, whether the
nurse were approved of by a Physician or no; these circumstances as they bring
nothing to the point, so they take nothing from it. Now the Gospel is a
medicine (says the prophet,) milk (says the Apostle,) the authority then of
him who applies this medicine, who gives this milk to suck, or drink, I say
the authority, the commendation of men, can neither augment nor diminish their
vertues^

But some will say, that although that authority which depends of outward
mission, be not always requisite in pastors, yet at least, this defect ought
to be supplied by miracles; and here they call upon us for our miracles. But we
ask them again, where are the miracles of John the Baptist, John. 10.41.
of whom it is written that he never did any miracles. As for that, after his
conception, he leaped in his mothers womb at the presence of the blessed
virgin Mary bearing in her womb the Lord of the world, this was not done to
authorize and confirm his office in to the execution of which he entered a
long time after. When Miracles are done to make some enterprise authentic,
they are done either immediately before it, or else they accompany it while it
self is in hand: they are done also publicly, exposed to the view of all,
that they may be the less suspected for impostures. But to answer precisely,
we say that when the Gospel was first to be planted, Miracles were very
necessary, but that being finished, their necessity ceased. The Miracles
wrought to authorize the Gospel anciently, retain still, at least amongst
Christians, their virtue for that effect. If then we prove that we propose
the same Gospel, those ancient miracles are ours. Let them admit us then to
this proof, in which if we fail we will confess then, that they have good
reason to call upon us for miracles, yea and more then this, that we were not
to be believed, though we should do very strange ones. For we read, that the
coming of Antechrist shall be with signs and wonders, but we read not that
they who oppose him shall work miracles: so that if we should make a trade of
doing miracles, or as it were stage-shewes of them, this would make us not more
justified, but suspected.

CHAP: XXXVI. That the example of the first reformers favors not
schismatiques.
THere remains yet the fourth objection, that it seems that this doctrine
touching the true marks of divine calling, to wit, sufficiency, and a
necessity to employ this sufficiency, favor and encourage schism. But we
tell them, that this cannot be. For seeing that he who makes a schism has
no necessity to make it, this note agrees not to a schismatic teacher who
in a tolerable estate of the Church, erecteth a Church apart, seeing that then
he emploieth his gifts, without necessity; for the beaten way lying open, what
need has he to betake himself to new cross-pathes? but this way being stopped
up to our predecessors, it follows that they were driven to a necessity,
which presses not schismatiques. Certainly there is no schism where their is
a just occasion of separation, and an impossibility of proceeding otherwise,
now we say, that such was the misery of the times of our predecessors, that
they had just reason to separate themselves, and thar albeit they had been
unprovided of that outward Vocation which they had, yet it had been impossible
for them to proceed otherwise then they did. If they offer to deny this truth,
we offer to make it good, hither we desire to be admitted, setting aside the
prejudice: if we fail in our proof, we refuse not to be accounted
schismatiques.

CHAP: XXXVII. In what sense we yield that the Church of Rome has the
substance of true religion, and how she cease not for all that to be a false
Chuch.
YEa; but at least we yield to them, that they have Baptism, that they have
the substance of Christian religion; from whence they conclude, that they
cannot perish, and that we who have separated our selves from them, have gone
schismatically to work. This argument they frame, from that confession which
they think they have extorted from us, let us see then what truth and
strength it may have. First concerning Baptism, they confess that we have
it, and that it may be amongst heretics: Antiquity believed it, and we
believe it with antiquity. They reiterate not the Baptism administered by us,
we reiterate not the Baptism administered by them: this privilege aduantageth
not us against them, why should it advantage them against us? The true
Circumcision was in the Church of the ten tribes, it was not for all that the
true Church: an heretical Church, shall have Baptism, and yet for all that
not cease to be a false Church; not in respect of the Baptism, but of her
heresy: not in regard of that which is pure in her and of the Lords
institution, but in regard of her rebellion against the Lord, and her own
impurity. That they have Baptism then we grant, but so we say have all
heretics, so the ten tribes after their apostasy received circumcision* this
exception then is frivolous, when they pretend, that we confess, that they
have the Baptism, and craftily dissemble that which we add, that they have
adulterated, and depraved it as much as in them lies. Concerning the substance
of Christian religion, we confess that it is also amongst them, but not pure,
nor separated, not only from chafe and straw, that is, from tolerable abuses,
but neither from the venom and poison of false doctrine. Now it is no schism
to forsake a Church wherein is the substance of religion, if it be accompanied
with superstition, impiety and sacrilege, as gold and silver in false coin
are mingled with copper aad tin. It is true that the Church of Rome teaches,
that there is one God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, that for the redemption
of mankind, the s^nne has taken to himself the nature of Man, and in it has
expiated our sins by his death, that he was buried, raised from the dead,
taken up into heaven, sitting at the right hand of God Almighty: That the holy
Ghost sanctifies us, that there is a Church, a communion of Saints, a
remission of sins, a resurrection of the flesh, and a life everlasting. That
by faith we must rely upon the mercy of God, that by hope we must expect the
accomplishment of his promises, by charity love him. This is indeed the
substance of Christian religion which continues so far as the doctrine, and
outward Profession of it in the Church of Rome, in this respect we have not
forsaken her, but these considerations make us leave her the title of a Church,
to which so far we will always be joined. But what is it that has not
been added to corrupt this truth? what strange doctrines have been invented
to obscure it? What heresies? what Idolatry? what gross sacrilege vent they
under the protection of this Truth which they profess. These are the causes of
our separation from them, if amongst them we could have enjoyed the substance
of true religion, without defiling us with their superstition, we had tarried
with them still. But in these later times, after the Lord had lifted up the
Standart of his Gospel, and sounded with his Trumpet, Come out of Babylon my
people, since the Angels have flowne in the midst of heaven, carrying the
everlasting Gospel, and crying with a loud voice, Blessed are they henceforth
who dye in the Lord for they rest from their labors, and their works follow
them: not to run to this standard, not to obey this summons, not to go
whither we hear this inuiting voice call us, in breife not to come out of
Babylon, to go up to Jerusalem, is a rebellion against the living God, and a
manifest contempt of his grace^ Before this, the faithful whom God had
reserved to himself in the Captivity of Babylon as a residue of the election
of grace, though they were not separated from the superstitious, yet they were
from their superstition, their groans, and sighs serving in steed of
protestations against it, because that the Lord had not yet opened them away by
which to come out, nor as yet prepared them a place into which they might
withdraw themselves. In a word the time preordained by God, to put an end to
that miserable captivity was not yet come. As then it was not a sin to tarry
in Egypt before the Lord had sent Moses, or in Babylon before the seauenty
years were expired; But God having sent Moses, having given liberty to his
people to come out of Egypt, to come out of Babylon, to tarry there still had
been manifestly to testify a consent to the superstition of Egypt, and
idolatry of Babylon: so before the Lord had sounded us a loud summons with his
trumpet, Come out of Babylon my people, he sustained and supported his people
in the midst of Babylon; it was not at that time a sin, but a Captivity to
abide in it. But for any to abide, or linger in it, after the publishing of
this summons, it is a sure testimony, that they live not in it unwillingly, but
with delight, and that, at least outwardly, they partake of her sins, and so
may justly partake of her plagues. Now to demand, why God caused not this
trumpet to be sounded sooner, is to dispute against him; it were to bring back
those ancient questions propounded to the primitive Christians, why the Lord
Jesus had not brought the light of the Gospel sooner into the Church, to which
St. Paul clearly answers, when he teaches, that the fulness of time was
not yet come. Why the Lord called not the Gentiles sooner unto his knowledge? to
which the same Apostle answers noe more, then that God having winked at the
time of Ignorance, now warns every man to repent. Act. 17.3^.
He has the times and seasons in his own disposing.

It often falls out, that they who cannot go out of an infectious city
tarry in it, and are safe, but for all that, they that have opportunity to go
out of it, will not take example from them to tarry in it. The shepherd will
lead his sheep into pastures where are noxious herbs, rather then he will
suffer them to be famished: but if he have the opportunity of leading them
elsewhere, where no danger is to be feared, the good luck that God gave him,
of preserving them in an unwholesome pasture, shall not dissuade him from taking
of them out of that, to put them into a better. That which the shepherd does
to his sheep, we are to do to our selves: so long as there was presented unto
us no other place of pasturage, then the Roman Church, for want of a better,
we were compelled to make use of that. But the Lord having graciously prov^ded
us a better, miserable are we if we leave not that, and betake our selves to
this. In the time of a famine men live pinchingly and wretchedly, but the
dearth being past, and plenty restored, he that will not take the benefit of
it, deserves to be starued to death. Let this consideration then serve for the
solution of the difficulty above proposed.

CHAP. XXXVIII. That there is nothing which deserves to be admired in the life
of the Monks of the Romish Church.
NOw it remains, that we examine their last prejudice. They have amongst
them a swarm of religious creatures of both sexes, who prefer poverty
before wealth, severity of discipline before the tender delicacy of pleasures,
humility and contempt of the world, before the greatness and pomp of it: who
being sequestered from the turmoiles, and tumults of secular affairs live here
on earth, like Angels in heaven. Who deny nature that which she exacteth of
them, macerate their flesh and tame it in such an austere manner, that it
serves the soul no longer but for a sheath, or case, Snatched up already to
heaven in affection and contemplation, and not tarrying here below, but after
the fashion of Angels during their soiournement on earth. Or if their be any
thing else which may set it forth more admirably, its all (say they) to be
found in the angelical, and heavenly life of Monks and Nuns.

So Mounte-bankes extol the virtue of their drugges, affirming them to be
nothing, but Elixers, balmes, and antidotes even against death itself. Now the
confident boldness, the smooth behavior, and eloquent prattling of the
Mountebanque, has this faculty to make the praises of his druggs pausible and
receiuable to the simple, and dim sighted Vulgar. But experience confuteth
them, discovering at last the impudent knavery of these cosening quacksaluers.
So the Turks vaunt of their religious folk, of the sanctity, austerity and
extraordinary devotion which seemingly shines in their whole conversation. Let
us hear not a Turk, but Septem castrem de morib. and r^lig. Turc. c. 14.
a Chris^ian, a Monk by profession, who had familia^ly resorted to them, and
observed their fashions, who has described their superstition, a witness, not
to be suspected in this point. Some of them (says he) show an exceeding great
patience, wear noe habit, go naked, not covering any thing but their
priuities: of so great perfection that they are impassible, testifying their
patience by brand marks made by burning, by scarres made by launcing; some of
the^ eat, and drink very seldom, others altogether forbear both; some are
so poor, that it is said, they think not at all on earthly matters: others
never speak, and purposely avoid the company of men, least they should be
urged to speak, one of which sort I saw, not without admiration. Others have
the gifts of vision, others of revelation: some have raptures and supernatural
ecstasies, or traunces. And by this means, there is no man amongst them which
acquireth not some spiritual skill and experience, and according to the
diversity of this skill which they profess they are distinguished by their
habits, and manner of being. If there be seen any amongst them wearing
feathers on their heads, this notes that they are given to meditations and
revelations. If any of them wear a patcht habit, this is a sign of their
poverty. They which were rings in their ears show by this that they are
submissiue in spirit for the frequency of their raptures. If they wear chains
about their necks and arms, this testifies the violence and vehemence of
their raptures: some of them live sequestered, others associated: some live
solitary inforrests and deserts, others in cities using hospitality. Where may
these be paraleld? who can produce any thing outwardly at least, and in show,
so holy and austere amongst the Christian Monks.

What could they answer here, if the Turks should go to outbraue them after
this fashion, using the same pretense against them, which they use agianst us?
will they say, that this sanctity is but hypocrisy, that this austerity is
but savage barbarousnesse? (as indeed it is no better.) But this is our
defense against them, when they go about to oppress us with the prejudice
drawn from the consideration of their Monkish holiness and austeritie. What
great matter have you (say we) in this respect, which those barbarous
miscreants the Turks have not? nay, which is more what have yea wherein you
are not by them exceeded? will they answer us here, that they have the
Christian faith and Religion? But so we shall have unmasked them of this
prejudice, so we shall force them to come to the trial of doctrine. The
monkish life shall not justify the religion of the Romish Church, but they
must go quite backward, and justify the Monkish life by that religion from
whence it borrows its worth and dignity. So we shall have fetched back the
disputation to its true point, to the examination of the truth; thrusting aside
that by-consideration, which advantageth the cause of the Turks, as much as it
disaduantageth ours.

But let us draw a little nearer, to this seeming sanctity and austerity: let
us look steadfastly upon it, and see whether it were not painting which deluded
our view, whilst we stood farther off? whether it be not a cunningly
contrived outside, adorning an ugly and prodigious inside. First of all, what
kind of poverty may we imagine this to be, where no man is in trouble or
anxiety to procure himself, wherewith to cloth himself against the cold,
cover himself against the heat, replenish himself against hunger, to refresh
himself against thirst, to physic himself against sickness? may this be
termed poverty without mocking both God and man? If this be poverty, what is
abundance? Nay (say they) but these goods are possessed without appropriation:
no man has any thing to himself; be it so, do they therefore enjoy the^ any
whit the less. Enjoy we not all the sun the glorious lamp of the world?
enjoy we not light in ^ommon, and without division? What? are we therefore
poor, destitute of light, or rich, abounding with it? what shall we say of
the air, and water? are we in penury of these elements, because we have not
them enclosed unto our selves, because we enjoy them in common? Monkish
poverty then is nominall poverty, but real abundance.

But their discipline is rigid and severe! here we call the world to witness,
yea we appeal unto themselves in this point. We will not rub up the ancient
reproaches of their gluttony, drunkenness, whoredom, adultery, sodomie. But
let the world judge, let them speak themselves, whether they observe this
austere discipline? whether those ruddie cheeks, those white fleshie hands,
those lively sparkling eyes, that spritefull vigor of the whole body, testify
a rigorous maceratio^ and taming of the flesh, or whether that iollie plight be
not rather an effect of ease, mirth, good cheer, and a complete entertainment
of nature? Yet (forsooth) we must believe, that they ( poor hearts) fast
extremely, that they lash themselves unmercifully, that they lie upon the
bare, cold, hard ground, that they grate their skins with sackcloth. And
questionless some few of them do that, which they all profess to do: But
what a great piece of work is it, if custom at first allaies, at length quite
steals away the sense of these miseries. There is an excellent discourse to
this purpose, and well worth the observation in the work which Chrysostom
has left de sacerdotio, Chrysostom. (...). edit sauill.
that is (in the language of our times) of the office of a Bishop. Where he
making a comparison between the real vexations in that office, and these
seeming tortures in the monkish life (which we deny not to have been in
respect, in his time, but many ways differing from this in our time) he
tells us, that it is to be seen by experience that there are many who
without any pain or discontent, make a shift with very poor fare and very
hard lodging; Principally such as being of a kind of rough course nature have
always been brought up so: but not only such, in as much as a good able
constitution of body, and custom, soften and sweeten the roughness and
harshnesse of these extremities, even to those who formerly have been more
daintily brought up.

Surely, so it is. Those who are of a more tender and crasie constitution,
faint under these austerities, and either lose their lives amongst them, or
else retire out of them by a dispensation: those of a stronger, and and more
solid, tough complexion, not only go through stitch with them, and make them
tolerable, but in the end find them not only easy, but which is more
delightsome. It Is a matter to be wondered at, that no man bestows an
admiration upon the patience of the galley slaves, which is so great that they
sing in the midst of their greuious toil, so voluntary that they oftimes
refuse their liberty, and choose to tarry in the galleys: whereas to see a lazy
fellow well covered, to show his naked feet upon condition of warming them
when he lists, all are amazed, as if this were some extraordinary exploit
quiet surpassing humane strength. We daily see poor, drudging laborours
toil, and sweat, and with painful sighs keep time as it were to their
work: we see them with a greedy, glad appetite devour course bread,
nourishing themselves with such victual's as we would hardly vouch safe to
touch: in a word, we see them in appearance even to kill themselves with
irksome labor; yet no man wonders at it, no man pitties them, because we all
know, that custom has dulled and blunted in them the sen^e and apprehension
of wearisomenesse and pain. What then do we wonder at? What extraordinary
matter is there to be observed, in the patience of the Monks, that they must
needs be so much admired? Is it because from their labor, their arises no
profit or commodity to their neighbor? Whereas by the pains of drudging
laborours, and toyling mariners, the life of man is comforted, the society of
men is vpheld and maintained? What then? shall we admire a labor in vain* an
unprofitable, fruitless toil, and disesteeme that, which is not only
profitable but also necessary. But by their austerity, they testify their
patience, very likely; why do they not till the earth then? why row they not
in the galleys? is not there an ample subject enough for the^ to show their
patience, and to do some service to the world beside into the bargain, were
it but in putting themselves into the place of many poor slaves whose natural
infirmities make their servitude insupportable? Or if that be too much, have
they not a fit opportunity to tame the flesh, in the Vineyards of the next
neighbors to their Couents, in the fields at harvest time, at the press in
time of vintage, by this means both to ease the poor day-laborers, and to
make some recompense for those alms which they get so easily by begging? This
would be both to subdue the flesh, and profit the world both together. That
other discipline so much talked of, may be justly suspected, because it has no
regard to the profit of another. He who may with the same pains, tame his
flesh, and serve his country is ungrateful, and uncharitable, if being able to
undertake this course, he neglects it. But the truth is, that they refuse not
this kind of exercise, but only because it is less pleasant then their own.

CHAP. XXXIX. A resolution of certain doubts, which may be framed concerning
some things in the precedent Chapter.
But it will be said, that the labor of secular men is not voluntary. Why so?
Why is it less voluntary then that of the Monks? Is it because they cannot
exempt themselves from it when they list? Why this (I trow) is the Monks case
to. Or is it because they are forced to follow that hard kind of life, whereas
the Monks bound themselves to it with vows voluntarily made. Surely there is
no difference between the^ yet, in this respect. Despairing discontents,
melancholicke dumps, the fear of parents, the hard dealing of kindred, the
simplicity of youth, the desire of avoiding some disgrace, or trouble which is
like to come upon us if we tarry abroad in the world, are usually the first
motives, and which give the first impressions to them who aspire to the Monkish
life. When these considerations have once staggered us, and set us a wavering,
it is an easy matter afterward to persuade our selves, that that course of
life to which we are now addicted (be it what it will) is the most compendious
path to perfection, and the ready way to Paradise. But after that men are once
entered into it, and have engaged themselves in it, then some come to discover
the unhappiness of their choice, they befoole themselves at leisure,
perceiving those places to be but uncouth prisons within, which while they
beheld them without, seemed princely palaces. But now it is too late; they are
fast enough in the stocks, and fetters, bolts, bars, double gates, the
Jailer and Keepers take away all hope of getting out. So the fishes which toss
and tumble within the nets, seem to play and sport to the others which behold
them without. But the desire of being partakes of that sport, having once
allured them in, they quickly perceive what is become of them.

But some man will say, if it be so, how comes it to pass, that we hear
none of them complain, that we perceive not any of these votaries, by sighs
and moanes, to discover their repentance and dislike of their profession.
Surely it is, because no man proclaims his own folly, but every one is most
careful to hide it, especially when it is remediless. He who has been
unfortunately married, will not discover the inconveniences which he finds in
his marriage, if he can possibly cover them, because it cannot be done
without some shame and disgrace. Discontents of this kind, do not evaporate
by exposing them to the wind. To this sort of unfortunate weights, there
remains no comfort, but only to procure their miseries a reputation of not
being. So merchants willingly dissemble their losses, especially those which
come from their own rashness and indiscretion. So the Devils who are
comforted, if they draw many to hell use not to tell how hot it is there.

CHAP. XL. That the profession of Monks is not a note of true humility, and
that their life has nothing Angelical in it.
WE see then, what kind of poverty the poverty of Monks is: what kind of
austerity their austeritie is, having nothing admirable in them, nothing which
may prejudice their opposites in a matter of so great importance as is
religion, seeing there is nothing extraordinary in them, nothing which is not
common in the ordinary course of life, nothing which may not be both
paralleled, and transcended in the most horrible superstitions.

But peradventure they are humble, contemning the world? But whence should that
be coniectured? Is it from their poverty, or from the meanness of their
apparel, or from their savage kind of life quite estranged from humane
civilitie? This conjecture indeed might have some color and probability, if
their poverty (such as it is,) their habit and their strange course of life
made them contemptible and despicable to the world. But poverty, baseness of
apparel, and stoicall incivilitie which make any other person co^temptible,
adorn a Monk, and make him honorable. Abundance of wealth, bravery in
apparel, fashionable carriage are not honorable in the world, but only
because they make him to be honored who has them. But if baseness procure
respect and applause, it is pride to seem cont^mptible, and ambition to affect
baseness. He spoke not like a fool, who told the Cynick Philosopher, that he
saw his pride through the holes of his cloak, because he was so poorly clad,
that he might be the more respected. There was not anciently any sort of men so
proud as that ^ect of Philosophers, with their long beards, course cloakes,
beggarly scrips, bare feet, like to our Capuchins now a days. The Gentry, and
common people of those times with a kind of emulation, outvyed one another in
a superstitious respect to that Idol of gravity, that deceitful outside of
humility, which inwrapped a prouder heart then the royal robe of Alexander.
True humilit^e is seated in the heart, and in the inmost closet of the soul:
she is not commended by any thing which may be counterfeited: she is
discerned as well under the robes of David, as under the rags of Lazarus. But
some will say, that the Monks would be more respected then they are, if they
were not Monks. Let us see how true this is; what should we think of those
heavy, blockish spirits thrust into a Monastery by their kindred, because of
their unfitness for any thing else, that they might not serve for a reproach
to the family of which they are descended: is it likely these creatures would
be more respected not being Monks? What should we think of those poor
fellows, which if they were out of the Covent, would hardly find wherewith to
sustain nature, unless they got it by their fingers ends at some base
occupation? Would these be more respected? Lastly, what should we think of
those more sublimated wits, and soaring spirits amongst them, to whom the
Monastery is instead of a Galerie through which they may walk to a
Bishopric, thence climb to a Cardinalship, and thence ofttimes iump into the
Papal throne? Would these have fared better out of the Monastery? Suppose all
them hit not this mark, could they have aimed better at it out of the Covent?
It was a Pope who before he came to this dignity, used out of his austerity a
net instead of a bed, and now seeing the world to wonder at the change which he
had made of his net bed into a fether bed, answered, that he had caught his
fish. The Monkish profession serves now adays to heighthen and adorn the
luster of learning, eloquence, and the like good parts, as shadows in a
picture grace the other colors. Mantuan amongst the Poets, was but the more
esteemed because he was a Monk. Has Onuphrius been any whit the less
admired by his own, or less esteemed of by the learned? Aquinas, and Scotus,
have they not been so much the more renowned because they were Monks?

The glory, and applause which Monsieur du Bouchage has gotten by his
Monasticke profession, have they not equalled all the honor which he could
expect from Martial feats? Those actions cannot be true notes of humility
wherein one sowes a small honor, for an assured harvest of a greater: but
those wherein a man debaseth and deiecteth himself, expecting no advancement
or preferment but in heaven. The praise also of this humility is not of men,
but from God, who sees it in secret and rewards it openly. Let it be proved
unto us then, that the Monks contemn honor, and we will believe that they
contemn the world. It is not to tread the world under foot, not to plead at
bar, not to sit in the chair of state, not to bear arms, not to serve ones
King and country, to live in idleness according to the precepts of Epicurus:
but not sollicitously to aim at, not to affe^t that honor which is wont to
accompany all these professions. The Monkish profession cannot bring a
testimonial of such a contempt of the world; yea on the contrary, it betrays
a great love of it, seeing it is the most certain and easy way to that honor
which other men purchase with so much sweat and anxiety. Finally they tell us,
that the Monkish life is Angelical, but I would willingly know wherefore: Do
the Angels use to be idle during their abode upon earth? Yea are they not all
ministering spirits sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of
salvation. Are they not busy for the preservation of men? But these
Angel-Monkes, what do they? It will be said, they spend much time in prayer;
yea, they devour widows houses, under the pretense of their long prayers, as
anciently did the Scribes and Pharisees. To pray to God, and to serve the world,
are these matters which cannot stand together? The Patriarchs, Prophets, and
Apostles did not they pray? And yet did they not labor day and night for the
setting forward of the salvation of men? Questionless, their charity is cold
and hypocritical who being able to do more, spend it only in prayers; justly
deserving, that their prayers should redescend upon their own heads turned
into curses.

CHAP. XLI. That the profession of Monks is contrary to true piety.
BEhold now what that so much admired poverty of Monks is come to, their
humility, their so highly esteemed imitation of Angels. But if we will but
take the pains to acquaint our selves a little better with the mysteries of
this profession, we shall perceive it to be quite contrary to true piety, that
it dishonors and turns it vpside down: and lastly, that the issue of it
is to make a man a thief, a whoremonger, a proud Pharisee.

First of all, theft is manifest and notorious in it. For the profession of
Monks binds them not to give any thing to another, it hinders the son
from succouring the father, the daughter from relieuing the necessities of the
mother, the rich from possessing that with which they might comfort the poor,
the wiseman from taking care of the weale-publike; the valiant man from
defending his country, the laws, and religion by his valor, yea it hinders
the Divine from preaching: for if some amongst them do preach, it is not as
they are Monks; That license was anciently granted them in the form of a
dispensation. In St Hieromes time the office of Monks was not to preach, but to
weep. To employ ones self in preaching is to bid the Monkish life farewell,
and to renounce it in this respect. And if every Monk should employ his gift
and talent, as do the small number of those amongst them which preach, the
Monasteries would remain empty, and these Monks would be no longer Monks, but
secular men conversing in the world and busying themselves for the common good
of it, every one according to his ability, every man in his rank and station,
one in pleading the cause of the Orphane: another in applying convenient
remedies for the prevention, or expulsion of diseases: another in distributing
alms out of his abundance: one in the exercise of one calling, another in
another. But the Monks by their vows quite disenable themselves for the
performance of these offices. Some ancient laws punished certain cowards,
which that they might not be pressed for the war, got their thumbs cut off,
not only for having used an inhumane cruelty toward them selves, but also for
having cosened the Commonwealth of its due. They then make themselves culpable
after the same manner, who wittingly deprive themselves of those means, by
which they might give a helping hand for the relief of the common necessities
of man's life. We are not placed in this life, neither abide we in this world
for our selves only, but for others also, every man for his neighbor. It is
the law of nature, it is the law of God, it is the precept of the Gospel, that
we should do good to all, and especially to those of the household of faith. He
then who purposely makes himself unprofitable, willingly violateth this law,
showing himself unnatural, rebellious against God, full of self-love,
seeking that which is his own, and not the Lord Jesus, any farther then the
lips and outward profession.

But which is yet more intolerable, they make themselves not only unprofitable,
but also burdensome; they live upon other men's labors, they deprive those who
are poor indeed of their relief, intercepting that which might and ought to
be given them. They think it a more blessed thing to receive, then to give
quite contrary to the judgment of our Savior. They labor not, and yet they
think themselves worthy to live and be maintained, notwithstanding the speech
of the Apostle, he which works not, let him not eat.

They say that their prayers are their taskes, and their oraisons their
business. But St Austin in his book de opere Monach: where he has taken upon
him to prove that every Monk which lives upon alms and gifts is guilty of
theft, has amply refuted these flim-flamms: showing that the spiritual
service of God, does not hinder us from, but encourage us to labor. The
Grecians account him not a true Monk, who is chargeable to others. The Abyssin
Monks follow the same law. And indeed though the Monkish profession be ancient
enough in the Church, yet the idleness of Monks, and their begging is but new.
In St Austens time some began in favor of them to allege the example of the
birds of the fields, of whom the Lord says that they neither sow nor reap.
Aug. de oper. Monach. c. 26.
But that good father answers them as they deserved, telling them that he
was of opinion that they might go as the birds do, to feed themselves in the
fields, without bringing any thing home with them, and that it would be good
if they had wings, that they might be affrighted away like stares [birds] and
not be apprehended as thieves.

Concerning the second point, the Monkish life does not quench, but nourish,
does not cast water but oil upon the fire of concupiscence. An honest liberty
of marrying, when one will, if a man be not altogether graceless, easily
spends and exhales this passion, and suffers it not to break out into
flames; whereas the constraint by vow, takes away all hopes of vent, and
shuts it up within us. There is no man less troubled with hunger, then he
who hopes that he may eat when he pleases, he who despaireth of it, betaketh
himself to his own flesh, and as the Prophet speaks, eats even his own
arm. Now this is not spoken with a purpose to discover the secrets of the
Covent, but only to give a secret glaunce at that which all the world knows
of it.

But what? Can their fastings, and scourgings afford them no remedy? Yes if
they would in due proportion fast continually, if they would fast simply and
absolutely; otherwise for him which has not the gift of continence to fast by
starts, and lash himself by fits, this is but to stir his disease instead of
removing it, and to anger his sore, instead of healing it? There are diseases
which are nourished by gentle, lenitiue remedies. The anodins (such medicines
as cast the sick into a sleep) take away the pain for a time: but they either
kill the person out right, or else the pain returns with the greater
violence, as if it had gone backward for a time, that it might come forward
with a doubled fury. Witness St Hierome himself, Hieron. ad Eust. de custod.
Virg. tom. 2.
my countenance (says he) was wan by reason of my fasting, and my flesh, was
dead before my self, and yet my spirit boiled within me with the heat of my
desires. Did so holy and devout a man out of I know not what humility
publicly divulge so base and scandalous a lie of himself? No, no. He spoke
the truth, and thereby (how highly soever he has extolled virginity)
unwittingly confesses, that for concupiscence which is not moderated by the
gift and particular grace of continence, there remains only that remedy set
down by the Apostle, that for avoiding fornication, every man should have his
own wife, and every woman her own husband.

True virginity is r^dically in the soul, if it be not ^^ere principally, it
cannot be in the body, and if it be there, it will transfuse it self thence
into the body, whether it be in wedlock, or in a single life. Imagine we that
St Peter married (as the most ancient testify of him) was less acceptable to
God, ^gnat. in epist. ad Philadelph. ^id exerc. 3. V^del. cap. 12.
then St Paul unmarried? God measures not men but by piety, where he finds
that equal, he is equally pleased with it, be it in married, or unmarried
persons.

What then? shall the single life have no prerogative? Yes questionless, if it
conduce more to piety, then marriage; but if it fail in this point it is much
inferior to marriage. Now it always fails of that in them who have not the
gift of it. There are some (says our Savior) which make themselves Eunuchs
for the kingdom of heaven; but all men cannot receive this saying, Mar.
19.10.11.12.

^. Cor. 7.7.


save they to whom it is given. Which is clearly expounded unto us by St Paul,
telling us that he could wish indeed, that all had the gift of continence as
well as he, but that every man has his proper gift, one in one kind, another
in another^ To him then, who has received this gift after the same manner as St
Paul had received it, his single life doubtless will be far more
advantageous then marriage, because that to him who is thus qualified,
virginity is a help for piety, marriage would be but an encumbrance. But to
him who has not received that gift in that manner, his single life would be
but a snare and a trap: for by reason of his single life he would burn, and
the Apostle tells us that it is better to marry, then to burn. As then
marriage serves but for an hindrance and disturbance to him, who has the gift
that St. Paul had, to wit, the gift of continence: so the single life serves
but for an encumbrance and temptation, the danger of which is unavoidable, and
deadly, to him who has not received the gift of containing himself. We
worthily esteem of the single life of those whom God calls to it, but we
say that no man is called unto it, who is forced to burn in it.

Wherefore then (say they) see we not this single life more common amongst
you? Here we could tell them, that they should dispute against our doctrine,
not against our manners; that faults in manners ought not to be thrust upon the
doctrine, if the doctrine condemns the^; that our doctrine approves not
their doeings, who being able to contain themselves are married, unless they
are driven unto it by some other urgent necessity. But we will answer
directly, that the gift continence being rare we are not to wonder if the
single life which presupposes this gift be less frequent, but rather to
admire the wisdom of the Apostle, who having set before us the conueniences of
a single life and the inconveniences of marriage, professes that it is not to
ensnare us. Now if we are not fitly qualified for a single life, it is
undoubtedly to ensnare our selves, if we choose rather to burn in a single
life, then to quench the fire by marriage. The thousands, and we dare say
millions of Martyrs both in the Primitive Church, and in our own times, give a
sufficient testimony that we entertain and embrace not marriage, but so
far as it fitteth us for our calling. In how base and dispitefull a mann^^
soever men calumniate it, which of our Martyrs was ever held back by the
consideration of the sweetness of his marriage, by the natural affection
toward hi^ children, by the cares of the world, from sealing the Gospel with
his blood? They might all have lived, and many of them might have lived in all
outward content, either for honors or pleasures, yet notwithstanding all this,
they preferred death before life, torments before pleasures, the ignominy and
shame, before the honor and applause of the world. Let our enemies be our
Judges, is not such a kind of death more admirable then the single life of
Monks? is it not a sure token of a more magnanimous spirit, of a more fervent
zeal, of a more fixed hope, of a more vehement love, of a more lively faith,
the^ the single life of these Votaries; unchaste for the most part, and chaste
only by constraint. But let us return to our purpose. As the Monkish life
tends to make him who addicteth himself to it, a thief and a whoremonger,
unless he has received the gift requisite for a single life: so in the third
place, it is a thing which puffs a man up with a wonderful presumption of
himself. I know the Monks make great profession of humility, but how can he
be humble who thinks himself able, who undertakes to merit, and believes
that he does merit? True humility is for a man to think himsel^e unworthy, to
so much as look up unto heaven: these Votaries presume to merit it.

Moreover true humility is for us to think that when we have done all, we
are but unprofitable servants; these Monkish Saints, believe that they do
works of supererogation, and that they merit for others also. What pride is
this, or what blasphemy? God himself commands us to love him with all our
heart, with all our mind, with all our strength: They make profession of doing
a great deal more then he commands us.

In what mood soever God speaks, it is imperative, after what fashion soever
he speaks, he cannot but command: see in the mean time the monstrous pride
of these Monks: There are (say they) some counsels which God gives, to obey
which man is not bound unless himself please, his own vow alone binds him
to obedience. Who can in conscience think thus of the Counsels of God without
a proud exaltation of himself against him? was this the aim of the Lord? is
this the fruit of his familiar mildness? when he commands in counselling, and
counsels in commanding, deals he so courteously with us to the end that man
should mistake him for his companion? that he should misconstrue his
commandments, and allow them only the faint emphasis of counsels which a
friend gives to a friend without any strongertie of observing the^. The
entreaties of our superiors are commandes, if we either speak, or think of
them otherwise, we cease in effect to acknowledge them for our Superiors, we
proudly exalt our selves against them. And what may we then think of these
professors of humility, who allow not God that in matter of religion, which
they owe to men in matter of ciuility. Questionless this proves them not
only proud, but also both sacrilegious and blasphemous persons.

These things being so, how comes it to pass, that such gross impiety
should serve for a pretense to justify that religion, of the which it makes
profession? Yea seeing that it is so far from being what it seemed to be at
the first view, that it is indeed the quite contrary, as we suppose we have
proved, let it serve rather to accuse, yea to condemn that religion, of which
it is said to be the excellency and perfection.

The Conclusion.
WE have at length examined in order, all those preiudices and pretenses which
they of the Romish Church have invented, to hinder our cause from being
thoroughly and exactly examined. It was the only scope of this treatise to show
that all those allegations 1 of the Magnificence 2 Unity, 3 Antiquity, 4
Stability, 5 Continuatio^ 6 Succession, 7 the substance of truth, 8 the
holiness pretended to be in the Church of Rome, are but frivolous pretenses,
devised to hinder an exquisite and solid inquiry of the truth. If we have
attained to this scope, its all we could desire: the indifferent Reader shall
judge of it. For my own part, it suffices me that my consc^ence bears me
witness, that I have proceeded in it without vainglory, without stomach, in
all sincerity, as speaking rather before God, then before men. This makes me
hope for his blessing upon my pains so much the more, as he is jealous of his
truth, at the clearing of which I have wholly aimed. Wherefore I humbly entreat
him, by his spirit, to supply all my defects, and notwithstanding my
infirmities, not to fail to accomplish his power by weak means, whether it
be in confirming those, whom he has already called to the communion of his
grace, or whether it be in awaking others out of their security, to the end
that they may seek his truth, and in seeking it may find it, and in it
everlasting life through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father, and
the Holy Spirit be honor and glory eternally, Amen.

FINIS
Faults escaped in some copies.
Page 5. lin. 18. for brave, read, some brave. Page 8. line 21. for
superstition, superstition flourished. P^ 11. lin. 29. for accompany, for the
most part accompany. 28.17. for won, wondered. 31.27. for liberally, literally.
132.1. for being true, being no true Page 108. refer the citation out of
Cyzicenus to that which follows about Hosius. and at u read Athanas. 2. Apol.
Diverse other petty faults there are, such as cannot wrong a^ intelligent Reader.


