ANNALS The True and Royal History of the famous Empress Elizabeth.

Queen of ENGLAND FRANCE and IRELAND etc. True faiths defendresse of Divine
renown and happy Memory.

Wherein all such memorable things as happened during her blessed reign, with
such acts and Treaties as past betwixt her Matie. and SCOTLAND, FRANCE, SPAIN,
ITALY, GERMANY, POLAND, SWEDEN, DENMARK, RUSSIA, and the NETHERLANDS, are
exactly described.

LONDON printed for Benjamin Fisher and are to be sold at the Talbott in Pater
Noster Row 1625



The explication of this Books FRONTISPICE.
The Pillars decked with Arms, Palms, Laurel bows,
Supporting the Rare PHOENIX, to you shows
The Nobles, on whose loyal prudent breast,
The Phoenix-Queene, ELIZA'S peace did rest:
Whose Wisdoms pillars did uphold her Crown,
As columns, on which rested her renown.
Their stable valor did support this land;
And all her proud insulting foes withstand:
For whose exploits it pleased her Majesty
To dub, some Knights of dreadlesse chiualry;
Whom she not only did to Knighthood raise,
But of this kingdom made them props and stays.
And those whose merits added to their worth
Renowned Glory, Honor to their birth.
In whose true worthy acts she most delighted,
She, with the Order of the Garter, knighted.
Some she restored in their Ancestors place*
Made viscount Bindon, one of Noble Ra^e^
Some Earls, some Barons, all she did restore,
Or did create as they had won before:
Other she summoned, by her wisedome's choice,
To Parliament as Peers to have there voice:
Whose prudence, and whose valors (under God)
Proved Englands peace, to Spain a heavy rod.
The fired towns, which on each side are placed,
Do memorize how Spain was once disgract:
When that brave Essex, Englands General,
With Nottingham, that famous Admiral,
Their City Cadiz did with force surprise
^o crown their country with their victories.
And Cumberland, whose fame no Age can blot
^ooke Por^arico with his Thundering shot
That Spanish town; yet his victorious force
^lew the resisting, pardn'd with remorse
Those that with bended knees did him entreat,
He would not them nor theirs of life defeat.
Now underneath DRAKES famous ship is show^
Whose bright renown swift Honors trump has blow
How he therein did circuit earth's whole frame*
And in his voyage added to his fame.
The glory of a prize won through his pain,
The CACAFOGVE, Royal Ship of Spain.
At the two corners, two great Spanish Fleets
Your gazing eyes with admiration greets.
One is consumed by vnquench't flames of fire,
The other is ore'whelm'd through NEPTVNE'S ir^
Which moralizeth, our good God does bend
His wrath, against those that Albions ill inten^
Which wrath did fall most merciless on Spain,
And ever will to their disgrace remain.
One thousand (does) five hundred eighty seven,
Their ambitions with infamy, make even.
The Port of Gilbaltars straights, sure can tell,
How that a Spanish Fleet (by DRAKE) there fe^
The very seas will witness, that with four
Of royal Ships, he burnt two hundred more.
If you enquire, from whence those Royals came;
From Englands shore, Spaines fury for to tame.
To end, the Fleet of Eighty-eight does show,
England was aided in that overthrow
Given to Spain, by God, whose potent hand
Preseru^d ELIZA'S glory, and her land.
Against those that owe true Religion spite,
Both seas and earth, for Albions cause will fight.
Not to the seas let us bend, but to that power
Which must preserve us, at the dreadful hour.
And as it is meet so let us prostrate fall
Unto our Hope, our Aid, our General.
IH^S

Here read the days,
when Britanns ground,
With blessings all,
was compast round.
PER TAL VARIAR SON QVY.
portrait of Queen Elizabeth I

TO THE MOST August, most Sacred, and most excellent Majesty of JAMES THE
FIRST, Emperor of Great Britanne, king of France, Ireland and Virginia,
defendor of the Faith.
The Translator of these ANNALLS wishes to His Imperial Majesty,
blessedness, perpetual health, with all happiness, prosperity, and
felicity, in both worlds.

THE FRENCH Epistle dedicatory to His sacred Majesty of Great Britanne.
EXcellent monarch; here is the firstborn of a Labor, as unhoped for as the
occasion is extraordinary, which prostrates it self, with all humility, at
the feet of your Majesty, to do you an Homage of his Birth, and in paying
unto you his first duty, craves leave to wander the World, and visit his
friends.

In these unhappy times, which lately made France (my country) the sad object
of pity, and the mournful subject of good peoples sorrows; on a day, sitting
upon the shores of Babylons gulf, aspecting with watty eyes the deplorable
estate of Christ's true Church, which in the throng of these miseries was sore
wounded with injuries, appearing as if she^ had attained the decrepit age of a
dying life, which breath's forth her last gasp: And as I expressed by my
tears the dolor of her afflictions, and by my sighs the desires of her
deliverance, my eyes imitating in their glances the wishes of my soul, sought
for the place where the great god Pan used to feed and keep his flocks at
noone day: I discovered a far off, some sparks of the Sun of Justice, which
in this happy country of Goshen shines perpetually, whilst an eternal night
couers Egypt with the gloomie clouds of darkness. Thither suddenly I directed
my Vows; which God prospered so happily by his providence, that (after many
dangers, tedious and toylsome iournies) I at length arrived here, where I found

A PEACEABLE KING, in whom is brightly discerned an harmonious unity of all
christian and roial virtues, the Empire of that great Empress of virtue, Piety,
from whence all others derive, and the admirable Economy of Charity, conducted
with Prudence, educated by Experience, and that experience drawn from diverse
examples of precedent ages, and proofs of this present; which produces in him
all kinds of actions both just and necessary, by which he freely gives
himself to the Church and Commonwealth for pledge and caution of their peace
and prosperity.

AN HAPPY NATION (which under the favorable Scepter of such a Prince, in whom
the sacred fountain of the most exquisite graces of heaven, abounding with all
sorts of prosperity, has above others the honor to settle the Church of
Christ, and with her, Piety and Justice her constant followers) whom the
benign aspect of heaven causes to flourish with joy and perfect peace,
whilst a cruel War spoils and ransackes both neighboring countries and
remoter parts, with unheard of torments and excessive sorrows.

God, who calls himself the Prince of Peace, styles himself also the King of
War; to show, that he rules all worldly affairs with his incomprehensible
eye of providence, as well as with his invincible hands of all-powerfulnesse.
But, to make plain to all men's understandings how far God is against Wars,
Strifes, and Contentions; and on the contrary, how much he loves Peace and
Unity, it is said, Blessed be the Peaceable, because they shall be thereby
known to be the elect of Christ, and heirs of heaven.

Your Majesty (great Monarch) on whose head God (as his Lieutenant here on
earth) has placed three Crowns; bears both the warlike Sword of Ma^s, and
the peaceable Olive branch of Minerua, as did that Pallas, whom the Athenians
took for their titulary goddess, because she presided in peace as well as in
war. But what is the expedition of War, to the subduing under his laws, by
the sweetness of Peace, the passions of men? to bring them to reason, and to
settle them in a firm and assured rest? what to vanquish by force a people, to
the conquering of whole nations hearts by love? to lose them, in stead of
gayning them? The multitude, wondering at the Son of God, who calmed the
greatest tempest, cried out, What is he whom both Seas and Winds do obey? Even
so (happy King) when I saw at my landing so many exquisite effects of your rare
wisdom, the peace and happiness of your subjects, with the tranquillity and
blessedness of your divine soul; I could not but likewise exclaim, Ah! what
is this JUST MASTER, and prudent King, whose admirable spirit works so many
wonders!

God gouernes, from the highest place of heaven, the earth; and from the lowest
place of it, the heavens: because his providence and almighty power, being
infinite, fills all places, yet unlimited. For though by his omni-presence he
be every where, yet he is included no where.

Your Majesty, who by the excellent and harmonious order of your wise
dispensation, do rule with a melodious and delightful harmony, with One of
your Kingdom, all the Three; and from the farthest place of Great Brittanne,
all Great Brittanne; presiding by your power in all places, disposing by your
wisdom all things near and far, and perfecting them by your justice: you
cause all the dependences of your essence to be found in all places, and all
things to be but one and the same thing, and each thing to be as all things.
And even as to the humane body, that excellent part of the brain, which the
Anatomists call the admirable lines or traces, by their serpentine courses and
turnings, exquisitely folded and united together, whose number is no less
infinite than the workmanship thereof most rare; does so excellently refine the
vital spirits, that they are sent thither from the heart, which makes them
moveable, and serve as instruments of Conception, of Judgment and Memory: Your
Majesty does in like manner receive in your Spirit, which is the most admirable
and exquisite piece of that great imperial body, of which your Majesty is the
head, the aduises and counsels, the requests and demonstrances, which from
the heart of your estate, as the vital spirits of it, are sent to you, for to
pass them through (that labyrinth of Rarity) your judgment, where you refine
them so with the diverse considerations of your prudency, that they prove
necessary instruments of peace, the tranquillity and prosperity of all your
subjects.

The entrance or beginning of a reign is most commonly thornie and difficulty,
yea dangerous and painful; not only full of cares, but also tedious and
troublesome: so that it had been better for some kings to have never reigned,
or else to have ended their days at their beginning. This moved the
Philosopher Solon to sing these verses to Mydas king of Phrygia, at the
entrance of his Cities:

Le puissant Dieu de tout Souuerain Maistre
Ne scauroit mieux les hommes secourir,
Qu'entre mortels ne les laisser point naistre,
Ouestans nez, les fair tossed mourir.
But your Majesty (great King) who by the special grace of God, and the
prudence wherewith he has endued you, far above all other Princes, have
found the entrance of your reign spacious, delightful and secure: and being
grounded upon the protection, environed with the blessings, and conducted by
the providence of that Sovereign dispenser of Scepters and Crowns; you have
hitherto reigned, to the admiration of all the world, PVISSANT AND MAGNIFICENT,
RICH AND CONTENT, HAPPY AND GLORIOUS; and in all, perfect and accomplished.

PVISSANT AND MAGNIFICENT indeed, since that (with full power and authority
you reign over so many puissant Nations, which God has subjected to your
Majesty, under the homage and duty which you daily pay unto him, as to the
only sovereign King of kings.

RICH AND CONTENT, in possessing them peaceably, without opposition; extracting
pleasure of all that can be contributed for the glory of God, which you seek
for your own contentment.

HAPPY AND GLORIOUS also, since that (by those testimonies of love which God
gives you, and the thanksgiving which your Majesty yields him) you have upon
all occasions free access to his incomprehensible Majesty, a familiar
entertainment with his infinite goodness; Heaven being always open to your
contemplations, and whatsoever your Majesty can think most exquisite, rare on
earth, favorable to your wishes, is all bent for your felicity. Oh how happy
is your sacred Majesty! what mortal can apprehend it? how glorious! and who
is he that can express it?

But behold, this is the chief point, over which my considerations cannot pass
without staying; and yet rest they never so little, they enter as it were into
a labyrinth for a while. Gods graces and blessings fall most commonly into
ungrateful hands, who dispense thereof the more niggardly, by how much they
receive them abundantly: and the most part of men err so far, that in stead
of worshipping in them the sovereign power and providence of God, they strive
to excel him; nay, it lies merely in their own vnpowerfulnesse, that they do
not overthrow his incomprehensible Empire and Throne of glory. By means
whereof, it falls out that it ofttimes chances to them, as to those subalternal
Deities, who for putting themselves in Jupiters bed, were by a boisterous
wind, suddenly metamorphosed into strange shapes.

But your Highness (mighty king) makes use of it, as fire of the perfume; you
return those blessings to heaven again through your praises and thanksgiving:
you disperse them about you by your royal liberality; for whosoever has the
honor to approach near your Divinity, is enlightened with the beams of your
divine virtues. And as Solomon did build and (with the stones of mountains,
and Cedars of Libanus) erect Altars to God: so you make thereof instruments, and
materials to prop the house of God.

Sovereign authority upon the people, meets oftentimes with violent hearts,
which makes him not unlike the daily motion of the Sun; so swift, that it is
terrible; and so terrible, that it would consume away if it should last long:
but your Majesty knows well how to temper your Authority by your Justice, and
likewise your will by your prudence; insomuch that this first course is
moderated by the second, which is yearly, and runs from West to East by the
oblique Zodiaque circle: by this sweet, temperate and moderate course you order
the seasons in your Monarchy: you cause a delightsome Spring, that produces
diversity of flowers in abundance; a rich and pleasant Summer, which yields
all kind of fruits plentifully, by which you reward pains and labors, you
reflect the desires, you content the hopes of every one, according to your wise
dispensation. And as God is not contented merely to bring forth his actions in
the highest heaven; but by his Spirits administration, descends from that
palace of glory, to the lowest deep, running and flying through all quarters of
this Hemisphere, to dispose all things by his almighty powerfulness: Your
Highness (prudent King) imitating the proceedings of that incomprehensible
Monarch of Heaven and earth, which alone is a pattern to your sovereign
Majesty, do not anchor your actions in that Imperial Haven of your glory, the
kingdom of England, which, governed by the Soueraign authority of your
Highness, as her primum mobile, carries those to others which are joined to
him, by the bands of one only power, Scotland and Ireland: but also the fame of
your rare virtues spreads all over beyond the seas, your admirable prudency;
and your immortal pen, the fruit of your deep learning, at which nations being
amazed, admire with reverence, so rare and accomplished a Majesty.

But what East wind drives my sails into so wide an Ocean, carrying away my
endeavors far beyond the reach of my power? Stay, my thoughts; whither run
ye? Rest contented. My curiosity, what seek thou? Silence, my tongue; what
do thou say? Oh! would my skill, which is so small, dare to aspire to so high
a task, so weak and rashly to think to penetrate through so bright a sun? so
short, and presume to sound his depth? Good King pardon these hardy glances of
my spirit, enlightened with a divine light, and animated by an extraordinary
virtue. Those which aspect the beams of the Sun, within the Sun, think a
long time after they behold still a Sun before their eyes; not being able, by
withdrawing the sense of the object, to draw the Idea of the spirit. Thus since
I have had the honor to see in so happy and glorious deeds your actions, in
your actions your virtues, in your virtues your Majesty, and your Majesty in it
self; these rare and exquisite objects, as so many Suns, have so ravished my
senses and eyes, that they seem to see them always present before them.
Moreover, the Idea which is remaining in my intellect, has brought them to
such extraordinary designs, that if my forces were correspondent to my
desires, and my unworthiness to the dignity of the subject which animates me,
I had already proclaimed your divine perfections from one end of the earth to
the other, yea from the earth to the heavens: and taking for my auditors so
many blessed souls, which there gloriously inhabit, I should have recited to
them, with the admirable actions of your incomparable virtues, these glorious
and blessed deeds which issue thereof, and the most excellent glory which your
Majesty thereby inherites; at least, how in these last fearful troubles of
my sad, afflicted, and sorely desolate country, which so far oppressed her,
that losing the sight of her own reason, she had almost lost her self in it
self; or, as I may well say, spoiled her self with her own strength and
defense. Your Piety (all-rare Prince) which is all-Iustice, cast her
compassionate eyes upon the deplorable and most lamentable condition of her
poor oppressed brood: your Justice, which is all-Charity, lent her ear to
their woeful and sorrowful complaints: your Charity, which is all-Prudence,
opened her heart to their needy miseries and extreme wants, and your Prudence
(which has always the eyes, the ears, and the heart open at all times to
such poor afflicted wretches, who do implore of your Majesty like pious
actions) making at that time a charitable distribution, ever bound both public
and particulars to vow their hearty prayers to heaven for your health; and
their true services to the world for the prosperity, greatness, pleasure and
contentment of your Majesty.

But the worthiness of the subject, and my insufficiency, having deterred me
from so high an enterprise; I have moderated my designs, which aspired so
high, and placing them in a mean region, I ruled my endeauours by my might,
doing my best to find out, as well for my own satisfaction, as for the good
of others, to whom I communicate as many consolations for miseries, and
instructions of this wicked ages experience; in which we see regenerated what
remained of workmen, instruments, materials and labors, to perfect the work
of this ages iniquity, the lees of ages past, which with his muddy wine
troubles the brains, corrupts the manners, and debaucheth the noblest
functions of many: I have destinated them for to seek out the growth,
beginning, and progress of this happy and magnificent reestablishment of
Evangelical truth and purity, the first and sovereign cause of your
Majesty's glory, the security of your estate, and prosperity of your people,
which in this flourishing Empire has three crowns, of which your Ma: is the
first Monarch, who receive from Gods favorable grace, by the hands of your
religious prudence, so great a perfection, that it makes the whole work most
wonderful: a prop so solid, that when the rain is fallen, the stormy streams
and impetuous floods come against it, and when the winds have raged strongly,
and blown furiously at it, it could not be shaken, but still remained firm,
strong, constant, and always a flourishing pillar of security.

And my designs have so happily, though unfortunately, succeeded, that when I
had collected my senses, and prepared my self for this Work, I found it ready
done by one of your Ma: subjects, in the Latin History, which he has digested
into years, describing such things as passed during the most glorious reign
of that heroic and invincible Princess, above her sex, full of magnanimity,
rare in Piety, admirable in her counsels, wonderful in her courage, and
blessed in all her enterprises, that incomparable Queen ELIZABETH, who in her
time undertook to build the royal work of this happy reestablishment, upon
the ground and ancient foundations laid by her ancestors, for a time slackt and
decayed; but after her Majesty had gloriously raised it to the last Story, she
left the rest unto your most sacred Majesty's care, to perfect, who has truly
brought it into that happy and magnificent estate now flourishing, having
utterly dissipated the many errors and abominations, which here (before her
reign) abounded; as he, who bearing Arms after Jonathan, slew the
Philistines, who fell dead before him.

Had I not regarded others, but my self only, I had sufficient matter to
content my curiosity (in enjoying, with rest and leisure, the sweet fruit of a
labor merely premeditated) without bringing it to this most tedious and no
less pennible, than difficult action. But as my natural disposition and
reason possess my inclinations, still to practice, study and labor for the
common good, though never so much prejudicial to my particular affairs; and as
this Piety, of which I carefully sought the mystery (directly opposite to the
mystery of iniquity risen in these later times) permits me not to bury my
talent in the earth, how small, and of little value soever it be; and likewise
the experience which I have purchased in the diverse voyages, foreign abodes,
access, frequentation, and knowledge of this my peregrination, taught and
assu^ed me, that this History cannot but be welcome, kindly received, dearly
cherished, and preciously valued of an infinite number, as well your Majesty's
subjects, as others, to whom their ignorance in the language, interdicted (...)
And as my self in the understanding of it, found that it was in its nakedness
and simplicity, adorned with the most rare draught, most lively and natural
colors, which can be found either in Art or Nature, and in the chiefest parts
thereof, filled with exquisite and solid instructions, which the best able can
give, the most curious wish, and the most subtle and ready wits apprehend;
judging, that the more it is known, the more glory comes thereby to God, the
more service to your sacred Majesty, the more prosperity to your blessed
reign, the more strength to your powerful state, and the more terror to all
your foes: I have done it in the French, my native language, which is now the
only tongue that entertains the commerce of conceptions, amongst the diversity
of nations, to show to the world, that among an infinity of memorable causes
and things, remarkable effects and success, at least this magnificent peace
and prosperity, which begun to bud forth under the reign of this most
prudent, pious, magnanimous, truly Catholic and Christian Empress (who can
never be by any duly praised, and to this day propagated and continued in this
your Majesty's most blessed and peaceable government, with so illustrious
splendour, that though it be envied of many, yet it is admired of all)
proceeds directly from the reestablishment of Christ's true and pure service;
and by so many, diverse, happy, glorious, and particular deeds most eminent,
arising to this triumphant nation, is plainly manifested, that truly the only
means well and happily to reign, is sincerely to serve God, who defends those
that defend his Faith, and honors them that honor him; For to such as first
seek the tranquillity and advancement of his reign, all things fall out
answerable to their wishes; also that the seeds of justice are sowed in the
fields of peace, to be reaped by the peacemakers; that piety has both the
promise of the present and the future life, and that indeed it is the original
source from whence spring all other virtues.

Your sacred Highness (pious Monarch) has already seen and perused the
manuscripts of this work, which I presented to your Majesty some months ago,
to receive from you, as from my Oracle, direction, whether I should publish it
or not. But since it has pleased your most sacred Ma: to honor these lines of
mine with your judicious approbation, I have caused them to be printed, and
upon this expressiue caution, as earnest of your gracious favor, I assure my
timorous desires, that your Ma: will be pleased to see the same now in its
perfect shape. Since your Highness daign'd to grace it with the benign beams
of your goodness at its birth, I prostrate it at your feet, as a praeludium
of my industry, and the premises of my most humble service. And if I may be so
happy, as to see this my labor once more approved, and my oblation graciously
received of your Ma: I hope that my courage, animated with so good fortune,
will perform a greater enterprise; and so great a favor, rousing up and
reviving my spirits, will make my labors so fruitful, that I may be able in
time to quit my self of my vows and duties, and pay unto your Ma: (with a
better labor) more agreeable services, and to the world fairer fruits of my
study.

I once thought to detain it captive under silence, fearing to adventure so
unpolished a piece of work among so many Worthies (who have already settled
their worth in the belief of others) lest they, by the shril sound of their
luster, might obscure this worthless work: neither would I have exposed (but
under your Majesty's protection) its fortune to the malignant malice of this
age, its honest meaning and simplicity, to the scoffs and wicked
interpretation of hellish slanderous tongues, and base worldlings, my
contentment to the despisings of the enemies of its original, my talent and
its gain, to the pillage and ransacking of those, who (being partially
interessed, having their eyes and judgments blinded with affected interest)
perhaps will discharge their passions herein, paying my labors with
ingratitude, and my holiest intentions with persecutions. But since it is in a
manner a translation which represents faithfully the authors conceptions (so
well approved, that it is a true proof of his ingenious industry; which will
sufficiently content the most curious, clear the Reader of doubt, and chiefly
those doubts conceived by this works ill-willers) the worst which can befall
me, is to be a caution of my deeds and faults, and in neither changing, adding,
or diminishing, free and absolve me from all blames: since Piety, which begot
it, expressly commands me; and Charity, which brought it forth, graciously
summons me to publish it, and to bestow the profit and pleasure thereof upon my
neighbors, to whom questionless it will be most delightful, pleasant, and
useful. And truly those which it most concerns, have had, of a long time,
that power upon my own proper benefits, since my contentment consists not in
the praise of Printing, but to please and profit thereby the virtuous and
gracious. The courses of this worlds affairs, and the diverse inclinations of
men, instruct me that it will be beneficial to diverse, yea to the enemies
hereof, who for not understanding truly the Latin hitherto, could not have a
true knowledge of its particularities. And for as much as your Majesty's
gracious approbation assures me of your royal protection, and God which has
preserved it heretofore, does warrant me from all misfortunes, I venture this
assay of my luck, and publish this commerce of my talent, both under his Divine
providence, and your Majesty's leave and authority, that it may therefore wander
the world with security, and yield contenting pleasures to those who shall
honor it with the gracious beams and favorable aspect of their eyes: I doubt
not but it may meet with peaceable minds, favorable spirits, pure hearts, and
sincere affections, who will read it without passion, censure it (with
meekness) without partiality, to draw thereby the good which I intend them.
May it therefore be acceptable to your most excellent, most August, and most
Imperial Majesty, to whom I dedicate and consecrate it, upon the Altar of my
sincerity, in testimony of my humble services, devotions, and to purchase to
my self the dignity to be entitled,

Your Majesty's most humble, and most obedient servant, P.D.B.

Illustrious, and Gracious:
As there is nothing in this world in every respect blessed, and in each
particular happy; so there is no constancy in humane things especially, and
according to Saint Jerome, of the felicity of this world, whilst we seem to,
possess it, we part from it.

We see, and daily experience proves unto us, what the condition and state of
this life, with the goods of it is, the motion of it being (as Saint Gregory
says) so swift, the possession so uncertain, as now we be fatted in the
fragrant posture of prosperity, now pined and languishing, and on the bare
commons of misery, so that neither in weal or woe, there is any constancy, but
all things are suddenly changed, and vary in a moment, so that we may repose
more trust in letters written in the wind or water, then in the happiness of
this humane life.

According to Herodotus, it is as a circle of humane things, which by her
turning suffers not a man to be always fortunate and prosperous.

Virgil exclaimes, Time alters all things: and Cicero tells us, The course of
this mutable life is unconstant, and all the fortunes of men are vain, voluble
and variable: a mere Euripus for ebbing and flowing of worldly goods: in a
moment our mirth being turned to mourning, and our sorrow into solace.

The Royal House of the STVARTS, and the illustrious Family of the SACKVILES,
not long since, had woeful experience. Of the Royal one, there being pulled
from the boughs of it, two beautiful Roses, to wit, the two Noble Dukes of
Lenox, LODOVVICKE, and ESME, two rare Brothers, of most virtuous and laudable
conversation. Of the other, a Noble branch was cut from that Tree of Honor;
RICHARD, the most good and most Noble Earl of Dorset, and Baron of Buckburst,
of happy and blessed memory: All which, in this year, within the space of five
months, piously and peaceably slept with Christ.


LEARNED CICERO, that King of ORATORIE, who tells us, that the course of this
mutable life is inconstant, and the worldly fortunes of mortals truly vain
and variable, does very eloquently commend History, calling it The witness of
times; intimating, that we could not attain to the knowledge of several
actions, done at sundry seasons, but by her help, and how much the science of
Histories profits, is proved, in regard they are the handmaids to Prudence and
VVisdome, the which may be easily and truly purchased out of the deeds and
examples of others, there written. How much it conduces to the good
government of Commonwealths to have the examples of Councels before our eyes,
it appears, in regard of the general respect the wisest men have had to them.
Neither are true Histories a little commodious for shunning of horrible
alterations and calamities: for they recite the examples of all times, for the
punishments of Seditions, Treasons, and such other abominable Crimes, the which
escape not unpunished, no not in this life: Out of which examples we may collect
most wholesome instructions, for the good using of our both private and public
Offices, that such Evils may be shunned in us, which were punished in others;
the which is true wisdom, according to that in the Proverb: Other men's
harms are wise-mens arms.

Plato says, that a certain Aeyptian Priest reprehended the Greeks, calling
them Children, because they had no knowledge in Antiquity, they had no skill in
the passages of former times, they were endued with no ancient and grave
Science: For even as children, through the imbecility of their capacity, and
slendernes of their intellect, cannot discern Vice from Virtue, good from bad:
so they, whose minds do comprehend no knowledge of former times, deserved not
to be called men, in regard they exceeded not children in understanding.

For which cause, learned men in all Ages, have not only read diligently, but
also written Histories carefully, by which kind of writing, they have purchased
unto themselves a living name.

The ANNALS of this Heroicke Empress, Queen ELIZABETH, I confess, I have
rashly undertaken to translate: for the Subject deserved a far better and
more skillful Penman, in regard I am a Stranger: Yet, to show the desire I
have to do this Noble Nation service, (as bound in duty) I have faithfully
the best I was able, finished my Enterprise, which I hope will be very
beneficial to all Honorable and impartial Readers, as most useful, and fit
for these present times.

And as therefore in my former Books, I have chosen Patrons Honorable and
beneficial, by whose authority, favor, and countenance they might more
happily be published, so I could find none more worthy the dedication of this
Royal and true History, then your Honors, whom I know, above all persons, to
tender most the blessed memory of this matchless Queen, who in her life time
so much honored and affected you, or your Noble Ancestors and illustrious
Predecessors, that they (for their deserts and virtues) were by her Majesty
graced with the most honorable Dignities, and highest places of Honor in this
Kingdom: And also, because your Honors be addicted to History, favorable to
humane arts, religiously devoted, and piously affected. Wherefore I, in most
submissiue manner, request your Honors to accept this worthy Oblation, with a
mild aspect, cheerful countenance, and usual Clemency, from him who
unfeignedly wishes to all your Honors in general, and to each of them in
particular, perfection of joy and happiness, as,

The true Admirer, and humble obseruer of your Graces, of your Honors, and of
your Virtues: Abraham Darcie.

TO THE NOBLE AND VVEL-DISPOSED READER, endued with either of these rare
Virtues, Justice, Valor, Honor, Temperance, Magnanimity, Clemency, Truth,
Liberality, Ciuility, and Courtesy; Health and happiness in JESUS CHRIST.
Of Justice.
JUSTICE is a constant and perpetual will, to give impartially every one their
just due: the one is general, divided in politic and oeconomicke: the other
special, divided in distributive and commutatiue; her subiectiue parts are to
do good acts, and fly from bad ones. It stands therefore much in need of
Religion, Piety, Observance, Obedience, Thanksgiving, of expulsions of
injuries, also of Truth, Affability, Amity, and Liberality.


ALl-Vertuous and impartial Reader, here is presented to thy judicious view,
the Translation of a Masterpiece of History, in its own original Language
truly most rare; which I (for the worthiness of the Subject) wish with my
soul, I could have Englished accordingly: But though my poor strain and
weak capacity would not permit me to equalize the eloquence and elegancie
thereof, yet I can assure you, Of Valor.
VALOVR, which moderates fear, and Hardiness, is a Virtue which encourages
one to blame or defend things justly: her mediocrity is betwixt cowardnesse and
temerity. To her belong Magnanimity, Magnificency, Patience, and Perseverance.


I have had a special care, to do it faithfully: And truly I must confess
ingenuously, doubting of my weakness in so important and laborious a Work,
(because I am a Stranger borne) I have sought the best help I could, Of True
Honor.
TRue HONOR, which belongs to Liberality and Justice, is a Divine Virtue,
subject neither to fortune nor force: it is that which all good and virtuous
men aim at, and level their actions.


from those that are holden good Scholars, for the perfecting of the English
phrase and style, but it has been amended so contrary to my expectation, that
I have been forced to peruse it again, best I was able, and as the time and
Press would give me leave. Of Temperance.
TEMPERANCE is a moral Virtue, which moderates sensual voluptuousness, and
the covetousness thereof, and the dolor or grief which is still, as it were,
linked with covetousness: she mediates, or is a mean between Intemperancy and
Stupidity: she is perfected and made whole by Bashfulnesse and Honesty: she
keeps under her, Abstine^cy, Continency, Sobriety, and Chastity: To her do
belong, Gentleness, Clemency, Humility, Meekness, and Moderation.


I beseech you therefore to bear with it, not doubting, but (as I have
observed the invention and meaning of my Author) it will afford you sufficient
content: and if I may be so happy, as to draw gently the gracious aspect of
your eyes upon these my worthless Lines, I will ever be bound to your Noble
favor, for a mild and courteous Censure, in respecting the affection and
desire I have, to employ my time about that which may tend to immortalize the
Honor and Glory of Englands dreaded, and undaunted Nation; Of Magnanimity.
MAGNANIMITY belonges to Force and Courage: it is a careful virtue, and as it
were a spur to purchase supreme honors; her mediocrity or mean is between
Saperba and ^^^^animity.


in striving to make vulgar the heroicke Acts, and Divine Virtues of Albions
best Queen, and the most Religious, learned and prudent Empress that ever
lived on earth: and Sovereign Head, or supreme Ruler, next God, Of Clemency.
CLEMENCY is a moral virtue, which moderating anger, quenches in us fre or
choler, to produce pious actions: she mediates, or is a mean between Cruelty,
and too great Indulgency.


over this flourishing Kingdom, aiming thereby more at the conservation of her
glorious memory, then at any thing else. I therefore doubt not but this work
will soon purchase your kind favor, and loving commendation: and so I commit
you to the Almighty, wishing you his blessings, Of Truth.
TRVTH, by which, in all our actions and humane society, we should make things
as they be: her mean or moderation is between Simulation and dissimulation.

Of Liberality.
LIBERALITY is a Virtue truly, Noble, and most Divine, appertayning to
Justice? This excellent Virtue moderating the desire to abound in riches, rules
the purchasing of goods, and orders expenses, to produce in us, and bring forth
to the world rare actions: it is a mean between Avarice and Prodigality.

Of Ciuility.
CIVILITY is also a moral virtue, which consists in uttering gracefully a
speech or discourse in Company: by this Virtue, both praise and a good opinion
is acquired: it is a mean between Mirth and Melancholy.

Of Courtesy.
COVRTESIE is a Virtue truly moral, by which we purchase love, in showing our
selves gracious and officious to those who stand in need of us: it is a mean
between submission and rudeness or harsh disposition.


and the perfection of happiness, I rest,

A true devoted to your Virtues, ABRAHAM DARCIE.

THE AVTHOR TO THE READER.
WILLIAM CECIL, Baron of Burghley, Lord High Treasurer of England, (about 16.
years past) opened unto me (far from my thought) first, some memorials of
State of his own: afterward, those of the Kingdom; and from them, willed me
to compile a History of Q. Elizabeth's Reign from the beginning. I know not to
what intent, unless whilst he providing for the propagation of the Queens
honor, meant to take a taste of my ability in this kind. I obeyed, and indeed
not unwillingly, lest I should be thought to have been wanting to the memory of
the best Princess, his expectation, and truth it self; which to me equals
them both. For she being escaped, and having hidden herself, my hope is to
find her there, or no where.

But in the first entry, a most intricate difficulty deterred me: I fell upon
whole masses of writings, and instruments of all kinds, well enough digested
for the computation of the times, but very confused for variety of argument;
in examining whereof, I was covered with dust and sweat. I diligently collected
together fit matter, harder to find out than I expected: but he dying, mine
industry slackt. And after that, that incomparable Princess had rendered her
divine soul to heaven, I waited a while with a greedy expectation, not only
who, but if some one, of so great a number of learned men, who by her bounty
abound in riches and leisure, would repay this due and deserved thanks. But
when I had certainly observed, that weightier affairs hindered some that were
best able to perform it; others, (I know not for what causes) with specious
excuses refused it: Afterward, I eftsoons betook myself to my interrupted
study, and embraced it more vehemently than before. I sought all manner of
helps on every side, I sedulous^^ volued and reuolued Characters of Kings and
Peers, Letters, Consultations held at the Councell-Table; I ran through the
instructions and letters of Ambassadors, and likewise the Records and Iournals
of Parliaments, Acts and Statuts, and read over al Proclamatio^s. For most of
which (as I ought) I hold my self chiefly bound to sir R: Cotton, knight. Baronet,
who with great expense, and happy labor, has gatherd together most choice
variety of Histories and Antiquity: for at his torch, he willingly sufferd me
to light my taper. So as (Reader) if in this I have don any thing pleasing unto
thee or profitable, thou owe him the merited thanks.

I have also made search throughout mine own Cabinets; and although I am an
admirer of venerable antiquity, I am not injurious to later things: I have
seen and observed much, and have from elder men than my self, worthy of
belief (who were present when these were acted, and studious on both sides, in
this division of Religion) received them, and have weighed the^ in the balance
of my Judgment, such as it is lest by a deceivable credulity I should incline
toward those which are false. For the study of TRVTH, as it has been the only
spur to prick me forward to this Work; so has it been mine only Scope. To
detract from History, is nothing else than to pluck out the eyes of a
beautiful creature, and for a medicinable potion, to offer poison to the
Readers understanding.

All those things which are wont to hinder the light of Truth, I purposely
avoided, and as much as in me lay, have uncased IGNORANCE and FALSEHOOD, by the
light of a Witness pure and neat, drawn from these VNSKILFVLNESSE and her
deriuatiues, DOUBT and FALSITY have I dispelled, as well as I could, by the
splendour of an incorrupt faith, out of those monuments above al exception; and
it may be, from them have gotten no less knowledge of those things, than they
which have had long and great employment in the Commonwealth. I have avoided
PREIVDICE, as an abuser of the Judgment, which so infects the mind in affairs
of Religion and the Reipublique; that like them that have sore eyes, they see
nothing clearly. I have not feared DANGER, no not from them, who by their
present power think the memory of the succeeding Age may be extinguished. And
let them remember, that as many as have been injurious to Writers, lovers of
the Truth, have procured to themselves dishonor; to them glory.

The hope of a LITTLE GAIN misse-led me not; To make the dignity of History
mercenarie, I (who have always contented my self with a mean fortune) have
held sordid and servile. I have left no place to the SVSPICION OF FAVOR OR
PRIVATE GRVDGES; for of these I am to write of Scarce two were known to me by
any benefit: by injury, not one; that I should be reckoned among the PARTIAL or
the OFFENDED. Those which are alive, I have scarce touched at. Inueighing
against the enemies of my Country, I have held it ridiculous, to hunt after
the name of a good Patriot, with the aspersion of an ill Historian. These
things have I been careful of, that (as POLYBIVS commands) I might SACRIFICE
ONLY TO TRVTH. Neither shall any man, I hope, find wanting in me, that
ingenious liberty (joined with modesty) of speech, worthy of an Historian:
That, which under a false disguise joined with the poison of obtrectation
personates liberty, and is so pleasing to every ear, I detest from my heart.
Things MANIFEST, I have not concealed, things DOVBTFVL I have tenderly
interpreted: the more ABSTRVSE, I have not been too inquisitiue of; The
unsearchable intents of Princes (says that Prince of History) and what they
out of reasons of State pretend, is not fit to inquire; and being doubtful,
not to be explored. And with HALYCARNASS AEVS, I am justly angry which the
ignorant critiques, who go about to know or find out more than is justly
permitted. As to the rest, although I know, that matters military and
politic are the proper subjects of an Historian, yet I neither could nor
ought to omit Ecclesiastical affairs (for betwixt Religion and policy there
can be no divorce. But seeing the Writer of the Ecclesiastical History, may
lawfully challenge these things, as proper to himself, I have not touched at
them otherwise than as it were with a light and cursory hand; whereas it is the
Law and dignity of an Historian, to run through the most eminent actions, and
not to dwell upon small ones: I have not therefore labored in them, yet there
are passages of less consequence, which may concern another professor, though
not him. I have not omitted any circumstances, by which, not only the events of
things, but their reasons also and causes may be known; That of POLYBIVS
pleases me exceedingly, If you take out of History, WHY, HOW, TO WHAT END,
and WHAT IS DONE* and whether the Actions answer the intents, that that
remains, is rather a mocking than an instruction; And for the present may
please, but will never profit Posterity; I have not betrayed my IVDGEMENT to
affection for writing with an impartial mind, I have rather desired to find
out the affections of other men. I have inserted little of mine own, treating
of matters in another kind, it being a controuerted point, whether or no it be
lawful for an Historian to do it. Let every one abound in his own sense: I
have thrust in no occasions, but such as were truly spoken; or those reduced to
fewer words: much less have I fained any. I have seldom used Sentences, nor
beautified my discourses with those obseruatio^s which the Greeks aptly call
(...), my intent being as it were insensibly to instruct the mind. I have
shunned digressions; I have used formal words; I have not neglected
discriptions of places, pedigrees, nor Chronologies, following, as near as is
possible, the order of the Times; beginning the year (as our Chronologers were
wont) from the first of IANVARY.

I have inscribed my discourses with the name of ANNALS, because I place every
passage in his own year; and because TACITUS directs us, that great and
illustrious Actions should be committed to Annals; whose principal office it
is to take care, that Virtue be not obscured, and by the relation of evil
words or deeds, to propose the fear of infamy, with posterity. And that
sterile and contracted kind of writing (such as mine is) is for Annals, of all
other, most fit.

With these beginnings I applied my mind to write, with this resolution I
proceeded, and intended to bestow the rest of my time and industry, in the
beautifying polishing, and exornation of these Annals: and then by my last
Will, to bequeath them to my honorable friend JAMES AUGUSTUS THVANVS, who has
begun a History of his own Times, with great truth and modesty; lest that,
as strangers are wont, he, a man most dear unto me, should like a traveler in
a foreign Country, be ignorant of our affairs. But this resolution I was
forced (I know not by what fate) to alter; for a great part being sent unto
him, some few years past, when they were like rough-drawn pictures scarcely
begun, deformed with blots and imperfect places, swarming with errors and
patches thrust in, as they fell from a hasty pen, and ill used by Transcribers:
Out of these he took and as it were inter-weaued some things into the eleventh
and twelfth Tomes of his History, having first polished them by adding,
altering, substracting, but all with good judgment (according to that order of
the work which he proposed to himself) (for he intended a universal History
of his own Time) selecting some few things concerning ENGLAND and IRELAND,
ommitting many things not only fit, but peradventure necessary for us to know,
and I had heard that beyond the Seas, the History of English affairs was much
(and not without reproach) desired; I therefore betook me to my intermitted
study, read all over again, corrected, added diverse things, refined the
eloquution, yet without affectation; for it suffices me, if I may place this
Book like a picture in water colors, unskillfully done, in a commodious light.

But when all was done, I was much perplexed and irresolute, whether I should
publish it or not. But CENSVRES, PREIVDICE, HATRED, OBTRECTATION, which I
foresaw to display their colors, and bid battle against me, have not so much
deterred me, as the desire of TRVTH, the love of MY COUNTRY, and the memory of
that PRINCESS, (which deserves to be dear and sacred amongst English men) did
excite me against those, who shaking off their allegiance toward their Prince
and Country, did not cease beyond the Seas, to wound as well the Honor of the
one, as the glory of the other, by scandalous libels, conceived by the malice
of their own hearts; and now, (which they stick not to confess) are about to
publish a Book to remain to posterity, as a monument of their wickedness. As
for me, I desire nothing more, than to be like my self, and they like
themselves. Succeeding ages will give to every one their deserved Honor. I
confess with sorrow, that I have not done so well, as the height of the
argument requires; but what I could, I have done willingly. To my self, as in
other writings, so neither in these, have I given satisfaction. But I shall
hold it more than sufficient, if out of an earnest desire to conserve the
memory of things, of truth in relating them, and instructing men's minds with
that which is wise and honest, I shall be ranked only amongst the lowest
writers of great things:

WHATSOEVER IT IS, AT THE ALTAR OF TRVTH, I Dedicate, and Consecrate it TO GOD,
TO THE TRVE MIRROR AND PATTERN OF PRINCES, THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY, CHARLES
PRINCE OF GREAT BRITAINNE, etc.
SIR,
I COVLD not but shelter this History under your most renowned Name: for to
whom can I commit the Story of Her, who whilst she lived, was the joy of
England, the terror and admiration of the World, but to your HIGHNESS, who is
the Fame and Honor of this spacious hemisphere and Great Britains both hope
and solace, by your princely valor and constant virtues, no less dreaded and
admired abroad than feared and beloved at home.

A true admirer and humble Obseruer of your divine worth A. Darcie.

To the Highly Borne Princess, Frances Duchess Dowager of Richmond and Lenox.
This Noble Princesse's Father was Thomas Lord Howard, created Viscount Bindon,
by Queen Elizabeth, the first year of her reign, second son to Thomas Duke of
Norfolk.

AND To the noble Prince, her Cousin, Thomas Earl of Arundell and Surrey, Earl
Marshall of England.
This Duke of Norfolk, the Duchess of Richmond and Lenox's Grandfather, had
two wives; the first, was the noble Princess Anne, Daughter to King Edward the
fourth; by which he had issue, a young Prince, who died young: The other was
the Lady Elizabeth, daughter to Edward Stafford, Duke of Buckingham, by whom he
had issue, the Lord Henry H^ward, whose son succeeded to the Dukedom of
Norfolk (which Dukes eldest son, Philip Howard was by Queen ELizabeth al^o
created, and summoned in Parliament where he sat as Earl of Arundel, being the
primary Earldom of England, in the right of his Mother, sole daughter and
heir to Henry Fitz-Allen, Earl of Arundell. He was this Noble Earls Father)
Thomas Viscont Bindon, and a Daughter, who was Duchess of Richmond and
Somerset, Countess of Nottingham, Aunt to the now Duchess of Richmond and
Lenox: This said Duke of Norfolk, after a long sickness, took his journey
peaceably to Heaven, at his Palace in Kinninghall in Norfolk, the first year
of Queen Mary.

AND To the Illustrious favorers of Virtue, true mirrors of Honor, and exact
patterns of Nobility
William Earl of Hartford, etc, AND To the Noble Lady, Frances his Princely
Countess.
This Earls grandfather Lord Edward Seimor, son to Edw. Duke of Somerset, was
restored to his honors and patrimony by Queen Elizabeth, who created him
Earl of Hartford, and Baron of Beauchamp, in the Tower of London, the second
year of her reign. This noble Countesse's grandfather, also was created Earl
of Essex, etc. by Qu. Elizabeth, the 14. of her reign, he died in Ireland,
1575. and was magnificently buried at Carmarden in Wales, where he was borne.

Edward Earl of Dorset, Baron of Buckhurst. AND To his noble sisters, the lady
Anne Beauchamp, And the Lady Cecilia Compton.
This illustrious Earl and honorable Ladies grandfather, was a most prudent
and learned man, for his heroic deserts and Princely descent from an ancient
and true noble blood, was created by Q. Elizabeth, Baron of Buckhurst, next by
her Majesty enstalled in the royal order of the Garter, one of her intimate
privy Counselors, and Lord High Treasurer of England, etc.

Chancellor of the University of Oxford. He died in White Hall 1608.

Theophilus, Lord CLINTON, Earl of LINCOLN.
Anno 1572. Edward Lord Clinton, Lord high Treasurer of England, was created
Earl of Lincoln, by Queen Elizabeth, for his Noble merits, and faithful
service to his Sovereign Lady. The same day her Majesty created Sir Walter
Deureux, Earl of Essex; He died the eighth day of January, Anno 1585. and was
with great solemnity buried at Windsor

To this right Honorable Lord, Theophilus Earl of Lincoln, he was great
Grandfather.

Thomas Earl of Suffolk, knight of the most honorable Order of the Garter.
This worthy Earl (second son to Thomas Howard, the last Duke of Norfolk)
by his martial valor, was Princely virtue, and by Queen Elizabeth created
Lord Howard of Walden, and took place in the high Court of Parliament, among
the Peers, as Baron of Walden. And Q. Elizabeth, partly to requite his warlike
exploits, (for she imployd him in sundry Sea-seruices, to his immortal honor
and commendation) made him Knight of the Garter.

Charles Earl of Notingham, Baron of Effingham.
Anno 1597, The 23. of October. the Lord Charles Howard, for his Princely desert,
and illustrious birth, was created by Q. Elizabeth, Earl of Nothingham:
Likewise for his worthy services done to his Prince and Country, in generously
repelling Spaines invincible Navy of 88, being Lord High Admiral; As also for
his Martial valiancy, in the sacking of Cadiz, with the Earl of Essex: her
Majesty honored him with the Gartet, the noblest order of Knighthood.

John Baron of Elsemere Viscont Brackley, Earl of Bridge-water.
This Noble Earls Father, Sir Thomas Egerton, Viscont Brackley Baron of
Elsemere, Lord high Chancellor of England, was a Noble man of admirable parts,
excellency well seen in the Laws of England, industrious in State affairs,
which moved Q. Elizabeth to choose him her Majesty Solicitor, Anno 1583. And
for his other deserts, Anno 1593, she Knighted him; Next she made him Master of
the Rolls; and finally, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, Anno 1594.

William, Earl of Salisbury, etc. And William Earl of Excester, etc.
Sir William Cecil, for his grave wisdom, and excellent virtues, was by Q.
Elizabeth created Baron of Burghley, he was also one of her Majesty's Privy
Council, Lord High Treasurer, and Chancellor of Cambridge's University. He
was these two Noble Earls gra^^ father: both issued of two of his Sons.

William Baron of Compton, Earl of Northampton.
This noble Earls grandfather, Sir William Compton, wa^ for his worthiness,
created Baron Compton by Queen Elizabeth.

To the no less Illustrious than Noble,
Henry Lord Carry, Baron of Hunsdon, Viscont Rochford. AND The Noble Lady,
Elizabeth Barkeley, now married to Sir Thomas Chamberlain.
HENRY CARRY, Lord Chamberlain to Queen Elizabeth. His cousin (for he was the
son of William Carry, Esquire to the body of King Henry the eight, by the
Lady Mary Bullen, his wife, sister to Queen Anne Bullen, the mother of Q^eene
Elizabeth); this Henry was by Queen Elizabeth, created Lord Carry, Baron of
Hunsdon: Also, by her Majesty, made Knight of the Garter; one of the Lords of
her Privy Council, and governor of Barwicke. To this Noble Lord Henry,
Viscont Rochford, he was Grandfather; and this Illustrious Lady Barkley, was
his only daughter and heir.

Rob. Lord Willoughby of Eresby, Baron of Perke. AND Henry West, Baron de la
War.
Peregrin^, the Father to this generous Lo: Willoughby, was restored in his
ancestors Honors by Qu. Elizabeth, who created him Baron Willoughby of Eres^y,
the 14. of her ra^gn 1582. (before thee sent him with the Garter to the King of
Denmark) being the son of the Duchess of Suffolk, sole daughter and heir to
the Lo: Willoughby of Eresby.

Also, Sir William West (This Lord de la Warr's grand Sire) was created Baron
de la War by Queen Elizabeth, being Nephew to Thomas West, Lord de la War,
and knight of the Garter, in King Henry the eight's days; who died without
issue, Anno 1570.

JOHN POVLET, Lord Saint John Baron of Basing, heir apparent to the Lord
Marquess of Winchester, etc.
Anno 1594. WILLIAM POVLET, this Noble Lord's Grandfather, was (in the time of
his Father, JOHN Lord Marquess of Winchester) by Queen ELIZABETH made a Petre
of England, and sat in that High Court of Parliament, among the Barons and
Peers of the Realm, as Baron Saint John of Basing. He died the first day of
January 1598. and was sumptuously buried by his predecessors, at Basing.

The truly Pious Lady Frances Wray, Countess dowager of Warwick. AND The Lady
Elizabeth, daughter, and sole heir to Francis, Lord Norice, late Earl of
Barkshire Viscount Them, and Baron of Ricot; wife to the right Noble and
worthy, Edward Wray, Esqu.
Sir Christopher Wray, for his great deserts, and the noble family, from whence
he was derived, was by Qu Elizabeth Knighted; and for his rare wisdom, being
expert in the Law, was advanced (to his great Praise, and immortal fame) to
diverse Honorable dignities in this Kingdom: First, he was made Lord Chief
Justice of England, and then Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal. He was one of her
Majesty's most prudent Counselors, and Father to this Religious Countess,
Dowager of Warwick: Also Grandfather to these Noble Brothers, Sir John Wray,
Knight; Edward Wray, and Nathanaell Wray, Esquires. Anno 1572. Sir Henry
Norrice, was for his Noble worth, created by Queen Elizabeth, Baron Norrice of
Ricot. He was this Noble Lady ELIZABETH WRAY her Grandfather.

DVDLEY, Lord North, Baron of Kirtling, AND To the virtuous Lady, his only
Sister, the Lady Mary. Conningsby.
Anno 1594. Roger Lord North, Baron of the ancient Baronry of Kirtling; for his
Virtues and Prudency, was in gracious favor near Q. Elizabeth, who respecting
him much, made use of his faithful services, in diverse honorable affairs of
importance. Anno 1574. he was, by her Majesty, sent Ambassador Extraordinary
into France, to give King Henry the third good Counsel, and to condole with
his Majesty, after the death of K. Charles the ninth. And although this
Nobleman, was not created Baron by Q. Elizabeth, yet I have erected these
lines to his noble and immortal memory, for his Virtues sake* and for the duty
and humble service which I must ever owe to his illustrious Grandchildren; The
Lord North, Sir John North, Captain Roger North, Gilbert North, and the noble
Lady Conningsby.

To the Honor of the right Worshipful Sir Arthur Capell, and his noble Sons*
AND The Nobly descended Ralph Sadleir, Esquire; of Standen in Hertfordshire:
This worthy Knight was the last which her Majesty Knighted.

Also, this noble Esquires Father, Sir Thomas Sadleir, son to Sir Ralph.
Sadleir, was the last knight banneret, of England, Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster, and Privy Counselor* to King Henry the eight, Edward the sixth,
Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth.

A PREPARATION AND INTRODVCTION TO THE HISTORY.
THE All-glorious, Qu. Elizabeth's extraction by the Fathers side.
All-vertuous, incomparable, inuict, and matchless Pattern of Princes, the
Glory, Honor, and mirror of Woman kind, the Admiration of our Age, ELIZABETH,
Queen of England, was by the Fathers side truly Royal, being Daughter to
HENRY the Eighth, Grandchild to HENRY the Seventh, and great Grand child to
EDWARD the Fourth: of the Mothers side indeed unequal, yet nobly descended,
and had many great Alliances spread through England and Ireland. Her
great-Grandfather was Iefferay of Bolene, descended from the famous House of
Norfolk, who, in the year 1457. was Mayor of London, and was then graced with
the Dignity of Knighthood: a man of much integrity, and of such reputation,
that Thomas, Baron of Hoo and Hastings, Knight of the Order of S. George, gave
him his daughter and heir to wife: he was of so great means, that he married
his Daughters into the famous houses of the Chenies, Heidons, and Fortescues:
he left a great Patrimony to his sons; and by Will gave a thousand pounds
sterling to the poor of London, and two hundred to the poor of Norfolk: He
had to Son, William Bolene, who was made one of the eighteen selected
Knights of the Bath, at the inauguration of Richard the Third. To whom, Tho.
Earl of Ormond (who was had in so great estimation with the Kings of England,
that he only of all the Peers of Ireland, had place and voice in the
Parliament, and before the Barons of England) gave him his Daughter and Coheire
to wife; he had by her (besides the Daughters which he married to Shelton,
Caltrop, Chair, and Sackuil, being very rich, and of renowned Race) Tho.
Bolene, who being but a Youth, Thomas Howard, then Earl of Surrey, and
afterward Duke of Norfolk, a famous Warrier, chose him to be his Son in
Law, and gave him his Daughter Elizabeth to wife. HENRY the Eighth employed
him in two honorable Embassies, after having made him Treasurour of his House,
Knight of the Order of Saint George, and Vicount Rochford, afterward Earl of
Wilton and Ormond, and Lord Privy Seal. He, The birth of the Lady Anne Bolene.
amongst other Children, had Anne Bolene, who being sent in her tender years
into France, was servant to Mary of England, Wife to Lewis the 12. afterward
to Claudia of Britain, wife to Francis the First; and after her death, to
Mary of Alanson, who from her cradle, was a special fauourour of the
Protestants Religion in France. Afterward, she being returned into England,
and entertained to be one of the Queens Maids of Honor, in the twentieth
year of her age, King HENRY being eight and thirty, fell vehemently in love
with her, for the modest behavior which accompanied her beauty, and the French
iollity which seasoned her modesty: but not being able to overcome her
chastity, he sought to have her to wife, in hope to have a Lineage by her.

Now before, (to take this matter a little more deeply) after he had lived
seventeen years with Katherine his wife, who was of a pious conversation, and
of the Spanish gravity, but subject to aborsements, that of all her Children,
she brought forth none living, but MARIE, he begun to distaste her, by the
cunning practice of Cardinal Wolsey, The King falls in love with Anne of Bolone.
who was then raised to the highest degree of power and authority about the
King, but in some fort over swayed by his own affections: For being displeased
with Charles, the fifth Emperor, Nephew to Katherine, because he had denied
him the Arch-bishopricke of Toledo, and then aspiring to the Papasie, his
hatred to him, and his love so affectionately carried toward the French King;
he so wrought, that he purposed a wife for Henry out of France. The King being
prone to his pleasures, prepared this scruple of conscience, The reason why he
puts away his wife.
That the marriage which he had contracted with Katherine, who before had been
wife to his brother Arthur, was forbidden by the Divine Law, although Pope
Julius the second had given a Dispensation for it. Afterward he did inculcate
into the Kings ears, how greatly he had offended God in marrying Katherine,
and how grievous a sin he should wallow in if he kept her: that he had
incurred the Sentence of Excommunication; that God had powered his wrath upon so
unlawful a Marriage, not suffering a Male to live, that was begotten of her,
and that if there were not a lawful Heir assigned to the Kingdom, no other
thing was to be expected, but that those mortal and cruel wars which had
been but lately lul'd asleep, should be awakened with new slaughters of his
people; and therefore that he ought, for the taking away of all scruple from
his conscience, to repudiate her, and that by assuring himself of a Successor
in a lawful line, he should provide for the safety of his soul (which and
likewise years had been polluted with incest) for so many of his Kingdom.

These reasons caused the King to entreat Pope Clement the Seventh, to depute
some to take knowdedge of this cause, and either to confirm the Dispensation
by authority of holy Scriptures, or absolve him of the Sentence of
Excommunication, and to declare this marriage to be of no force, and that it
might be lawful for him to marry any other woman whom he should think fit,
notwithstanding any Canon to the contrary. Hereupon the Pope delegates
Cardinal Wolsey, and the Cardinal of Campepe, to whom he secretly gave a Bull
to this effect, that he approved of the Kings vows, and granted his requests
so far as God would give him leave, if the marriage which he had contracted
with Katherine should be found unlawful, and so declared to be. But this Bull
was to be concealed or published according to the success of the Emperors
Affairs in Italy. Then these questions begun to be moved every where, whether
it were lawful for a man to take his brothers wife? or, it being prohibited
by the Divine Law, whether the Popes Dispensation could make it lawful, or no?
And when many Academies of Christendom, and the most learned men had given
their opinions, and resolved that such a Marriage was repugnant to the Laws
both of the Old and New Testament, howsoever the Popes Dispensation might
legitimate it. The King became more passionatly amorous of the Lady Anne of
Bolene then ever, and the Cardinal (repenting himself too late of what he
had begun) grew discontented, and wrought so under hand, The King entreats the
Pope for expedition.
that the Pope by his pontifical authority refused to confirm the opinions of
the Academies, and by delays after delays, the business was drawn into length,
both at Rome and in England. The Cardinal feared Bolene, who for the love that
she bore to the Evangelical Doctrine, hated his proud and insolent carriage;
and the Pope feared the Emperor, who at that time was powerful in Italy, who
maintained, to his utmost power, the cause of Katherine his Aunt: neither would
the Pope provoke HENRY, because he had lately employed both his pains and
pence, to redeem him from the Emperors men, who kept him prisoner. HENRY
boiling in choler for this refusal (yet dissembling it) both by Ambassadors
and Letters, continually solicited, The Prelates and Peers do the like.
and humbly prayed the Pope, (and after him the Prelates and Peers of England,
by request signed with their own hands, which they caused to be carried and
presented at his feet) to confirm by his Apostolical Authority, what the two
Academies of England, of Paris, and many others, and very learned and most
entire men, both within and without the Realm, had set down for a truth, and
were ready to mainiaine it, both by word and writing: representing unto him,
that it would be a remarkable unhappiness, if He should not obtain this favor
from the Apostolical Sea, He being the only man that had employed his Sword,
his Pen, his word and power, to defend the authority of the Pope, and resisting
many that strove against it, should be the only man to be denied the benefit
of it; and therefore they coniured him to grant it, for fear that intestine
wars should rise for the right of Succession.

Notwithstanding, the Clergy fearing lest the Pope should proscribe the
Kingdom, and excommunicate the King, by several Letters put him in mind of
the sad discord which had been between Pope Alexander the Third, and Henry the
second, King of England, and representing unto him many reasons of importance,
infinitely besought him, almost in the very same words that Gilbert, Bishop of
London did at the same time, ( viz.) We most humbly beseech you, to shut up
for a time your burning zeal within the bounds of modesty, lest by
interdicting the Kingdom, or cuting off the King from the communion of the
Catholic Church, you cause the ruin of many particular Churches, and
irreuokeably turn from your obedience both the King and infinite numbers with
him. Cutting off brings despair, whereas dressing the wound often cures. And
therefore, if there be a wound, it is more expedient, if it may be your
pleasure, to labor presently to cure it, lest by cutting off a most noble
member of the Church of God, you trouble beyond expression, as matters now
stand. The Blood-Royall cannot be overcome till it has overcome, and is not
ashamed to yield after it has conquered. He must be won with meekenes, and
ouer-ruled with admonitions and patience. What is it to have lost some
temporal things by patience, or by a continual patience to lose more, as the
times now are? Whether is Severity to be withdrawn, when ruin and slaughter
threaten a People? To cast many goods into the sea, when the provoked waves
with the confusion of hideous surges threaten a Shipwreck?

But the Pope and Cardinals could not endure that the Papal authority should
be questioned in matter of Dispensation, and all manner of contempt for the
space of five years little more or less, neglected to lend an ear thereto,
The King seeing himself contemned, renounceth the Pope.
but were of opinion that the King ought to be cited to Rome: Insomuch, that
this Prince, who was full of courage, being stirred up to wrath by the
arrogance which some Ecclesiastical persons had lately showed, thought that
for the justness of his cause, he was unjustly dealt with, most unworthily
for his Royal dignity, and most ingratefully considering how much good he had
done for the Church of Rome; that almost all at one time he divorced
Katharine, deprived Wolsey of his goods, and drew a great sum of money from
those Bishops who had acknowledged the authority of his Delegation, to the
prejudice of his Royal preeminence; accepted the title of Sovereign head,
next under Christ, of the Church of England, which was offered unto him by a
Synod, and by both the Universities of England; with the consent of the Peers
of his Kingdom, made Anne Bolene Marchioness of Pembrooke, for the nobleness
of her extraction, and the merit of her virtues, (so are the words;) having
apparelled her in Royal Robes, he married her, Marries Anne.
and commanded her to be sacred, Queen. Clement the Seventh was much
displeased, (but to little purpose) judged the former marriage to be of force
and Canonical, and pronounced that the King had incurred the penalty of the
great excommunication.

Of this Marriage was ELIZABETH borne at Greenwich, upon Thames, the seventh
day of September 1533. Shortly after, the marriage contracted with Katherine,
was judged by authority of Parliament, incestuous and void, and that with Anne,
lawful by the Divine Law, and ELIZABETH Heir of the Kingdom, if Issue-Male
of the Royal Line should fail. All swear fidelity to the King, and to the
Heirs which he had or should have by Anne. And as it was considered upon, that
Paulus the Third would again at Rome proclaim against this Marriage, and that
within the Realm certain Religious Women of Kent, A Nun of Kent suborned.
suborned by some religious men, cast out at random some indiscreete words
against Anne, ELIZABETH, and the King, as if they had been stricken with some
divine fury. Authority of Ecclesiastical given to the King.
The Title of the Sovereign head of the Church of England is given to the
King, with all manner of authority for the reforming of errors, heresies, and
abuses, and the oath of fidelity to the Heirs which he should have by Anne is
confirmed. Nevertheless three years scarce passed, but giving himself to new
Loves, to distrusts, to wrath, to murder, and to blood; to make way to his new
Love Jane Seymor, he accused Anne (who had miscarried of a Male-Childe) to have
defiled his Bed, and for a light suspicion put her into the hands of justice,
where being examined, she so resolved the objections which were made unto her,
that the whole multitude which were there present, judged her innocent, and
that she was circumuented. She notwithstanding is condemned by her Peers, and
being told of it, sent to the King, and pleasantly thanks him for many
benefits which she had received from him, viz. that she not being very noble
by extraction, he had vouchsafed to add to her condition, the dignity of
Marchioness, to make her his companion of honor, and to raise her unto Royal
Majesty: And which is more than all this, that not being able to advance her
to an higher on earth, he pleased to lift her up to heaven, where she should
enjoy eternal glory with innocent souls. Anne beheaded.
She took her punishment quietly and Christianly, wishing all happiness to the
King, and pardoning all her enemies.

The day following, he married Jane, and by authority of the Parliament,
declares the marriage with Anne to be no less unlawful and void, than the
marriage with Katherine, and that MARIE and ELIZABETH, their Daughters, were
illegitimate, and to be excluded from the Succession of the Kingdom. Jane,
being in labor of EDWARD, (who succeeded his Father in the Kingdom) dyed
before he was borne, and he cut out of her womb.

The King being but little grieved for the death of his Wife, forthwith applies
himself to new Loves both in Italy and France, to procure friends:
Nevertheless, as he was of an ambiguous mind, and fearful of every thing,
lest the Papists should rise in Rebellion, and the Nobles move sedition, or
join with his foreign enemies, he caused some to be beheaded for light and
trifling matters, and some before ever they were heard: and every hour he
punished the Papists, The King exercises his cruelty upon Papists and
Lutherans, and his avarice upon the Monasteries.
as Traitors which did persevere in defending the Popes authority; and being
transported with covetousness, he took occasion (and subject by the vices of
humane frailty, as of idle and free living) to demolish the great Monasteries,
as he had done the smaller, that were full of venerable antiquity and Majesty,
took all the riches which had been gathered of many years, and at the same
time burned Protestants alive for Heretics, by virtue of a Law called the Law
of the Six Articles, The Law of Six Articles.
made against those which did impugn the doctrine of the Church of Rome,
touching Transubstantiation, the celebration of the Eucharist under one kind,
the single life of Priests, Vows, private Masses, and auricular confession. In
so much, that at one time, and in the same place, he exercised his cruelty
against the Papists, causing them to be hanged and quartered: and against the
Protestants, causing them to be burned alive. By which acts, he made himself
terrible in his own Kingdom, and to be holden a Tyrant abroad: and first,
being rejected by Marie of Lorraine, daughter to the Duke of Guise, whom he
desired as rival to James King of Scotland his Nephew: afterward, of
Christian of Denmark, Duchess of Milan, Grandchild to Charles the Fifth. In
the end, seeking the friendship of the Protestants of Germany, He marries and
divorces Anne of Cleue.
with much ado he obtained Anne of Cleue for his wife. But being as ready to
distaste Women as to love them, turning his heart away from her as soon as he
had married her, put her away, as not beautiful enough for a Prince, grounding
himself upon this, that she had been betrothed before to the Duke of
Lorraine's Son, and that she had some womanish weakness that made her unfit
for marriage. But it was to take in her stead Katharine Howard, daughter to
Edmond Howard, and Niece to Thomas of Norfolk, whom he beheaded the year
following, accusing her to have violated her chastity before she was married,
and opens the Royall-Bed to Katharine Parre, a Knights daughter, Katharine
Parre.
and the second time Widow.

Now when through intemperancy of his youth, he perceived the vigor of his body
to decay; being angry with the French King for having aided the Scots against
the English, he reconciles himself, and makes alliance with the Emperor
Charles, against the French, who having quite forgot the divorce of Katharine
his Aunt, secretly gives him hope to reconcile him to the Church of Rome.
Reconciles himself with the Emperor Charles.
After, having resolved to set upon France, thereby so much the more to work
himself into the Emperors friendship, and quickly to cure the ulcers of his
conscience, Assures the succession to his Children.
propounded to the Parliament, which was then assembled, that when he should
happen to dye, and his Son EDWARD without issue, MARIE should first succeed
to the Crown, and afterward, she leaving none, ELIZABETH. That if neither
left any, the Crown of England should deuolue upon such as he would design
either by Letters Patents or by Will. Which passed for a Law, with the good
liking and consent of all, and that the penalty of Laesae Maiestatis should be
inflicted upon any that should go against it.

Take Bologne.
Being returned from France, after he had taken Bologne, and consumed much
treasure, and being sad and heavy to see England divided by new opinions which
daily sprang up, and England groaned for sorrow to see her self so exhausted
of her riches, her Money corrupted with Brass, her Monasteries, with the
Monuments of great antiquity, ruined, the blood of Nobles, Prelates, Papists,
and Protestants promiscuously spilt, and entangled in a Scottish war, Dyed.
he died with a perpetual flux of Grease flowing from him, caused by a
poisonous inflammation in the thigh: An. 1547. he breathed his last. A
magnanimous Prince, but I know not what confused temper of spirit he had: great
virtues he had; and no less vices.

EDWARD his son having scarce attained to the age of ten years, succeeded
him, King Edward the Sixth succeeds his Father.
and had for his Protector, Edw. Seymor Duke of Sommerset, his Uncle, under
whom the English having taken up arms, for to revenge the violated faith of
the match agreed upon between Edward and Marie Queen of Scotland; the English
obtained a notable victory over the Scots near Musselborough; this pernicious
Law of Six Articles, and others which had been established by King HENRY the
Eighth, against the Protestants, are suppressed, and those which tended to the
abolishing of the Popes authority confirmed; the Mass abrogated; The doctrine
of the Gospel is brought in.
the Images taken out of the Temples; the Books of the Old and New Testament
imprinted; the Divine Service celebrated in the vulgar Tongue; the Eucharist
distributed under both kinds: But nevertheless the auaritious sacrilege fell
rauenously upon pillaging the goods of the Church, Colleges, A miserable
reign under a King that is a Child.
Quiers, Hospitals, as things judged to be for superstitious uses: ambition
and envy among the great ones, audacitie and disobedience among the Commons, so
insolently exulted, that England seemed to be raging mad with rebellious
tumults, taking sides, deprauation of money, and withal, the evils that are
accustomed to be during the minority of a King, these wasted and consumed
within the Land: Also, damage was received abroad; as the loss of Forts which
the English had made in Scotland and in France, and the Town of Bologne, which
had cost so much, which, to the shame of the name of English, was delivered up
into the French Kings hands for money, with all the Fortresses of the Country
of Bologne which the English had built, the Cannons and Munitions of war;
when England was so disioynted by division, that it was not able to keep them;
and Charles the Emperor having no will to aid it, although he was entreated,
in consideration of the alliance with him, excusing himself for that it had
been conquered since; no, not to accept of it, being offered unto him gratis.
And to add an ouer-plus of infelicity, the Protector not being wary enough of
the subtilty and deceits of Dudley, Duke of Northumberland, The Protector is
sacrificed to death.
is by virtue of a new law condemned of Felony: for, entering into counsel how
to take away the lives of some of the Kings Counselors, to wit, of Dudley, and
some others, he lost his head, and his Son by a private Law bereaved of the
greatest part of his patrimony, and of his Fathers honors. The King being
unprovided of his faithful Guard, is snatched away (uncertain whether by
sickness or poison) before he was ripe, leaving an incredible grief with his
people for the great and excellent virtues which he had, far surpassing his
age.

At the same doleful and heavy time, Dudley having broken the fraternall amity
that was between the Protector and Tho. Seimor his brother, upon occasion of an
emulation of Women, which was between the Queen Dowager, wife to Thomas, and
the Duchess of Somerset, the Protectors wife, amongst other things, to convict
Thomas, of Crimen laesae Maiestatis, that he intended to reduce the King into
his own power, and to marry ELIZABETH the Kings Sister; she indeed ignorant
of the matter, grew up in years, Elizabeth in favor with her brother.
and was in singular favor with EDWARD her brother (who never saluted her, but
called her his sweet Sister;) as also with the Peers, and the Common People.
For she was full of grace and beauty, and worthy of Sovereign Authority, of
modest gravity, clear and quickwitted, of a happy memory, and indefatigable in
the studies of best letters, insomuch that before she attained to the Age of
17. years, Her studies.
she very well understood the Latin tongue, the French, the Italian, and the
Greek indifferently. Neither wanted she skill in Music that was beseeming a
Prince, and she sung and played cunningly and sweetly. With Roger Ascham, who
was to guide her in her Studies, she read the Common places of Melancthon, all
Cicero, a great part of the History of Titus Liuius, the choice Orations of
Isocrates (whereof she translated two into Latin) Sophocles Tragedies, and she
read the New Testament in Greek. By which means she adorned her tongue with
pure words, and instructed her mind with the best documents, and good learning,
not for pomp or ostentation, but to recreate her life, and frame her self to
virtue, that among the learned Princes of her time, she was held Miraculous.

But the death of EDWARD interrupted the studies of the Liberal Arts: For
scarce was he expired, but Dudley Duke of Northumberland (who earnestly coueted
the Kingdom for Jane Gray, to whom he had affianced his Son) used some
persons to persuade her to quit the right which she had to the Kingdom for a
certain sum of money, and great possessions in Land. She modestly answered,
that they ought first do well to agree with Mary her elder Sister, because
that during her life, she could pretend no right to it. Anon after, by the
public voice of a Crier, Jane Gray, HENRY the Eighth's Niece by his second
Sisters Daughter, was proclaimed Queen of England: the cause thereof being
sought out, was found to be, that in regard of a Law by Act of Parliament,
which had never been duly abrogated, MARIE and ELIZABETH had been declared
illegitimate, (although that by the same Law the King their Father had
declared, that after EDWARD the Sixth, if Issue failed, that they should
succeed him in order) and that by the Ciuill-Law of England, such Sisters
could not hereditarily succeed EDWARD, because they were not Cousin Germans,
but (as our learned in the Law say) of the half Blood. They add likewise,
that HENRY the Eighth had by his last will nominated Jane Gray. Moreover it was
showed, what danger there were, if MARIE and ELIZABETH should marry stranger
Princes, which would re-establish the Popes authority, which was rejected out
of the Kingdom. And to that purpose they produce Letters Patents that EDWARD
the Sixth a little before his death had perfected, and many of the Peers,
Bishops, Judges, and others, by their signs in writing had fortified;
nevertheless, the goodwill that the Lords and the Commons bore to the
Daughters of HENRY the Eighth, within twenty days had driven away this
storm, and MARY proclaimed Queen through all parts of England, Mary is
proclaimed. Elizabeth ioynes with her.
who coming toward the City of London with an Army, ELIZABETH (not to be
wanting, her Sisters cause and hers being yet disquieted) went accompanied with
five hundred Horse to meet her upon the way.

In the first Assembly of the Parliament that MARY caused to be holden, what
things soever had been decreed against the marriage between Qu. Katharine,
and HENRY the Eighth, were abrogated, and it was judged lawful by the Divine
Law, and at all times, and at all places available for these reasons, Because
it had bin contracted by the consent of both their Parents, of most Illustrious
Princes, of most grave Personages as well of England as Spain, and with a
grave and constant deliberation of the learnedest men of Christendom, and
consummated by the procreation of Children. The same religious Service, and
administration of the Sacraments which were in use at the decease of HENRY the
Eighth, are re-established; notwithstanding without any mention of
acknowledging the Popes authority, which thing put the Queen and Cardinal
Pole into great trouble and unquietness, who think that for matter of the
marriage, consent of Parents, and the judgment of the wise, did but only
depend upon the Dispensation of Pope Julius the second: and were very angry
that the use of the Sacraments were permitted to those who were not as yet well
and duly received into the Church, without the authority of the Pope. But the
States of the Kingdom (and MARY bethought her self of it) feared to receive
and acknowledge the Popes authority which they had already shaken off, neither
could they suffer that the Queen should quit the Title of Sovereign head of
the Church of England, to which the most part of them, Prelates, Peers, and
Common People, had sworn to HENRY the Eighth, his heirs and successors, and
there were many of them that had got their riches from those of the Church. The
English with much ado subject themselves to the power of the Pope.
But took it greatly to heart to forsake him, persuading herself that all the
right that she had to the Kingdom of England, was vpholden by no other means,
then by the power of the Pope, who gave sentence of her side, after her Father
had declared her illegitimate. Verily, many at that time had the Popes power in
such hatred, and a strangers yoke, that within ten days after that MARY was
married to Phillip King of Spain, Tho. Wyat, and many others of Kent, brake
out into rebellion, persuading themselves, that this marriage was made to no
other end, but the more rigorously to press them down under the Roman yoke,
by the strength of Spain, and dispatch ELIZABETH out of the way, who was next
heir to the Kingdom of England. Charles the fifth Emperor knowing what
spirits were in England, and that Cardinal Pole was going with power of Legate
from the Pope, cast a block in the way (not without the Queens counsel) lest
he should trouble business not as yet established, that he should not come
into England till fifteen months were expired, when the third Parliament was
ended, and the marriage of MARY and Philip should be celebrated by the
Dispensation of Pope Julius the third, because they were allied in the third
degree, and that the Emperor Charles himself had heretofore contracted to
marry her, being then under age, for time to come. At last, being dismissed
from the Emperor, he came into England, by demands and obtestations propounded
orders, that the laws against Heretics might be re-established, all Laws
published against the Sea of Rome, since the twentieth year of Henry the
eighth abolished, and the whole body of the Kingdom reconciled to the Church
of Rome. The which with great difficulty he obtained, yet not before the goods
taken from the Monasteries, Colleges, Bishops, etc. by Henry the eighth, Upon
what conditions they were reconciled to the Church of Rome.
and Edward the sixth, were confirmed upon like Covenant, to the Queen and the
possessors, lest the Kingdom should be disquieted. Forthwith hereupon, he
absolved both the Clergy and people, of the crime of Schism, and Pope Julius
the third, himself with great joy, celebrated a solemn Mass at Rome,
Rejoicing for it at Rome.
ordained Prayers, published a Iubile, and granted a plenarie Indulgence to all
who had given God thanks for the reunion of the Kingdom of England. Then is
sent unto him Anthony Viscount Montaigue, Thomas Thurlbe, Bishop of Ely, and
Edward Carne, to give thanks for the pardon which he had granted for the
Schisms, and in the name of the King, the Queen, and the Kingdom, and that
due submission and obedience should be performed to the Pope and See of Rome.
Julius then being deceased, Paulus 4. gave them audience and public conference
in the Apostolic Palace, and in the Hall of Kings, received their obedience,
approved the pardon and absolution granted by Cardinal Pole: And for the well
deserving of Mary and Philip, he, Ireland erected a Kingdom by the Pope.
out of the fullness of his power, erected for ever Ireland to be a Kingdom,
and adorned and marked it with dignities and Royal preheminences. The which
the States of Ireland had liberally offered to Henry the eighth, and the Queen
a little before used and enjoyed the same. But these things are not for this
place.

The Roman Religion seemed then to be well established in England: howbeit the
Ecclesiastical company seeing that Mary was now forty years old, grown dry
and sickly, scarce hoping for any offspring, The Papists fear Elizabeth.
began forthwith to be afraid of ELIZABETH: For they knew she was brought up in
the Protestant Religion, and observed that all men cast (as upon a rising
Sun) both heart and eye upon her. Therefore they seriously consult from the
very beginning of Mary's Reign, how to prevent that the Religion now called
back, should receive any detriment by her. The wiser and more conscientious
sort judged it to be an exceeding foul crime to destroy Royal Lineage, and
Mary herself, who was a godly Princess (though displeased with her Sister,
for the discord of their Mothers) yet certain sicke-braind fellows (who
neither durst undertake any thing, nor perform any thing by right or wrong to
establish the Catholic Religion) did think it fit. And it happened very
commodiously, for them, that Tho. Wyat, Peter Carew, James Crofts, and others
for the Protestants, seditiously endeavored to do rash and turbulent things,
laboring with all haste to mary ELIZABETH to Edward Courtney, Earl of
Deuon-shire. She, as being guilty hereof, They persecute her.
is thrust into prison: first of all uncertain rumors are dispersed, that she
was a partaker of sedition, thereupon many are brought in question for their
heads, and others brought to the Rack. Croft, with a religious asseueration
openly affirmed, that she was no way guilty, and out of all offense for
sedition. Wyat also, it was thought, (who was ready to undergo his last
punishment) would have accused her, and he openly professed the same:
Nevertheless she is put into the hands of Keepers, who hurry her this way and
that way, at length her Servants and Maids are laid in fetters; harder
dealing then her dignity deserved.

The Kings of France and Spain comfort her.
In the mean time, the French King, Henry the second, by private Letters, full
of love, comforts her, and by many and great promises seeks to draw her into
France; whether for love, or by deceit to beget her a greater danger, I will
not say, to make way to the Queen of Scots his Niece to the Crown of England,
after Queen MARY. In like manner, Christian the Third, King of Denmark, who
long before made profession of the Protestants Religion, endeavors all he can,
and treates underhand to marry her to Frederick his Son.

Which when the Papists of England perceived, they again threaten peril and
mischief, and fearing her, cry out, that all of the Roman Religion, Queen
and Kingdom, are in ieopardy while she subsists, therefore necessarily to
condemn her, either Laesae Maiestatis, or as a depraved Heretic: and during
that storm, whilst cruelty was rigorously exercised upon the meaner sort of
Protestants, I. Story, Doctor of the Law, and others, cunningly give it out in
all places, in several assemblies, that they understood it was practicing to
extirpate and rid out Heresy (aiming at her) without sparing the smallest
branches. Notwithstanding, moderating her self (imitating the Mariner when a
storm violently increases) heard divine Service, according to the rule of the
Romish Church, came often to Confession, She is for fear of death constrained
to follow the Romish Religion.
and verily being often rudely and churlishly disturbed by Cardinal Pole, the
terror of death made her confess her self to be a Roman Catholic.
Howbeit MARY hardly believed it, not forgetting that herself, being forced by
the same apprehension, had by Letters written to her Father with her own hand
(which I have seen) renounced for ever the authority that the Pope pretended
to have in England, and acknowledged her Father to be [ Sovereign Head of the
Church of England] and that the marriage betwixt him and her Mother was
incestuous and unlawful. Neither could the Cardinal, and other Prelates,
persuade themselves to it, who to assure the Roman Church, wished her to be
taken out of the way. But Philip, MARY'S Husband, and other Spaniards, being
more just on ELIZABETH'S behalf, would not hear of that; Not that the fortune
of an afflicted Princess moved them so much to mercy, as their own reason
circumspectly advised them. Because (foreseeing) if ELIZABETH were cut off,
that by Marie, Queen of Scots, (next Heir to the Kingdom of England, now
married to the Dolphin of France,) England, Ireland, and Scotland, might be
joined to the Scepter of France; then which, nothing could be more fearful to
the greatness of Spain, with whom they have continual wars.

They go about to send her out of the Kingdom, and exclude her from the
succession thereof.
When therefore without impiety they could not put ELIZABETH to death, many
thought it would be most advisedly done, to remove her far from England, and
marry her to Emanuel Philibert, Duke of Sauoy. Neither did this please Spain,
who before had purposed her for Charles his son. And Thomas Cornwallis, who
was of the Queens Council, likewise dissuaded it, telling Her, that the
people of England would hardly bear it, yea in no wise suffer it, that the
next Heir of the Kingdom should be carried away into a foreign Country: At
which time, MARY, for her inueterate hatred to ELIZABETH, and because she
refused to marry with Sauoy, grew to that heat of anger, that she ouer-charged
her with reproaches, and oftentimes would not stick to say, that Marie, Queen
of Scotland was the certain and undoubted Heir of the Kingdom of England,
next to her self. These consultations holden against ELIZABETH, were taken
away by a war which MARY denounced in the behalf of her Husband against
France, which although that was the prime and principal cause, she
nevertheless alleged others, and those most true, viz. That France, against
the Laws of covenant, had nourished and sustained by his Agents and ministers,
the Rebellions of the Duke of Northumberland, and Tho. Wyat, the machinations
and workings of Dudley and Ashton against her person, sent out Pirates against
the English Merchants, furnished Stafford with Ships and Arms to possess the
Castle of Scarborough, had attempted by wicked practices to surprise Callais,
permitted English money to be counterfeited and adulterated in France, and
invaded the Low Countries, which the English by covenant are bound to defend.
In this flaming war, and the Scots stirred up by the French inuading the
Frontiers of England, Calais lost.
Calais is lost, the Castles of Lisbanck, Newnambrig, Mere, Oyes, Hammes,
Sandgate, the Castle and Town of Guines, and amongst the frequent Funerals of
Prelates, which sad presage seemed to fore-shew the displeasure of the divine
power, MARY, neglected of her Husband, and with concocted grief for the loss
of Callais, (which had been Englands rightfully two hundred years) with a
Fever and the Dropsy, the seventeenth day of November 1558. Qu. Mary dies:
departed, having reigned five years and four months: A Princess of a holy
behauior to al, her piety to the poor, liberality to the Nobles, and Clergy,
can never enough be praised. But, the time was infamous, by the incredible
cruelty of Prelates, who polluted England through all parts, with a most sad
and dreadful spectacle, in burning the Protestants alive. For (as some have
observed) there were more consumed of all ranks, Bishops, Ministers, and
common people, by this vengible and direful way of death these five years,
than England saw in all the seven and thirty years of HENRY the Eighth.

In the reign of John, Christians against Christians with us, began to
tyrannize with flames. The same day that MARY dyed, within a few hours after,
Cardinal Pole, Archbishop of Canterbury, And Cardinal Pole.
tormented with a quartane Fever, expired. A man whom piety, learning, and
integrity, had made much more famous than the splendour of his Royal Race,
though he was Nephew to George, Duke of Clarence, Brother to Edward the
Fourth, King of England.

Book 1. 1558.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS of this matchless and famous HISTORY. The first Book.
Anno M.D.LVIII.
QVeene ELIZABETH is proclaimed Queen of England. Fol. 2. Choice of her Privy
Council. Fol. 3. Her care to re-establish the Catholic Christian Religion.
Fol. 4. Philip, King of Spain, Queen MARY's Widdower, is a Suitor to her
Sister. Fol. 5. Queen ELIZABETH refused him, and wherefore. Fol. 7.
Consultations about the safe re-establishment of true Religion. Fol. 9. Divine
Service allowed by the Queen in English. Fol. 11.
Anno M.D.LIX. Book 1^ 1559.

CReation and restoration of diverse Noblemen. Fol. 12. A Parliament summoned
and held at Westminster. Fol. 14. Proposition to reform Religion. Fol. 15.
Dispute established between Protestants and Papists. Fol. 17. Sir Edward
Crane, Ambassador for England, is detayned at Rome. Fol. 18. Disputes and
strifes for Callais. Fol. 19. A Treaty of peace with the French King in
Cambresis Castle. Fol. 22. The Articles of the said peace. Fol. 23. Peace
concluded between the Queens of England and Scotland. Fol. 24. The Baron of
Wentworth, and others, questioned about Calais. Fol. 25. The Parliament exhort
the Queen to marry. Fol. 26. Her Majesty's answer. Fol. 27. Laws and
Ordinances established by the Parliament. Fol. 29. The Nobles of the Land
re-established, and Papists deposed. Fol. 30. By what degrees Religion was
altered in England. Fol. 33. The profit proceeding by Religions alteration.
Fol. 34. Queen ELIZABETH's Poesy, or Motto. Fol. 35. Her Majesty's answer to
foreign Princes interceding for the Papists. ibid. The Emperor seeks Queen
ELIZABETH for his son. Fol. 36. The French King challenged the Kingdom of
England for the Queen of Scots. Fol. 37. The King of France his sudden death,
being killed at a tilting. ibid. Francis the Second, King of France, and Mary,
Queen of Scots, his Wife, take upon them the Title of King and Queen of
England and Ireland. Book 1. 1560.
Fol. 38. The original of the hidden hatred which has been between the
Queens of England and Scotland. Fol. 39. The Scots refuse to obey the
Queene-Regent, but seek help of Queen ELIZABETH. Fol. 40. They resolve to
drive the French out of Scotland. Fol. 42. The English are sent into Scotland
both by Land and Sea. Fol. 43. The death of Francis Talbot, the first Earl of
Shrewsbury. Fol. 44.
Anno M.D.LX.
A Treaty of peace in Barwicke. Fol. 45. Martigues brings Frenchmen into
Scotland, and the Marquess of Debeux is driven by a tempest. Fol. 47. Spaines
counsel to peace. Fol. 48. Spaniards detain from the English, munition. ibid.
The French call the English from Scotland, and do protest they are merely the
cause that peace is broken. Fol. 49. The Guizes are sworn and professed enemies
to Queen ELIZABETH. ibid. The French offer to render up Calais. Fol. 50.
Queen ELIZABETH answered them, and sends Viscount Montague into Spain. ibid.
Arthur Gray, son to the Lord Gray, wounded, and lies besieged. Fol. 51. The
English repulsed, Crofts is accused. Fol. 52. The Queene-Regent of Scotlands
death. Fol. 53. The Treaty of Edenborough. ibid. A peace is published. Fol.
54. Queen ELIZABETH is sought in marriage by diverse potent Princes. ibid.
Spain favored England against the French. Fol. 58. The King of Spain
delivered back the Order of the Garter. ibid. He is disdained to be refused
in things of small importance; and the Count of Feria whets his indignation.
Fol. 59. The Pope is incensed against Queen ELIZABETH. Fol. 60. Yet the Pope
writes, and sends his Nuncio over. Fol. 61. The King and Queen of France and
Scotland refuse to confirm the Treaty of Edenborough, with their reasons.
Fol. 63. Francis the Second, King of France, dyed. ibid. An Edict set forth by
Queen ELIZABETH against Anabaptists, and sacrilegious persons. Fol. 64. The
College of Westminster founded. ibid. The Coin brought to full value. ibid.
Good Coin stamped for Ireland, which we call Sterling. Fol. 65. The death of
the Earl of Huntingdon, the second of that Race. Fol. 66.
Anno M.D.LXI. 1561.

THe Queen Dowager of France, Queen of Scotland, deferred the confirmation of
Edenboroughs Treaty. Fol. 68. The Queen of England refused passage to the
Queen of Scotland from France over. Fol. 69. She complained to Throckmorton,
Ambassador for England. Fol. 71. Throckmortons answer to the said Queeene.
Fol. 72. Contestation between them two. Fol. 73. The Queen of Scotland
labored to content Queen ELIZABETH. Fol. 74. But in vain. ibid. The Queen
of Scotland takes her journey out of France into Scotland, where she well and
safely arrived. Fol. 75. She sends to Queen ELIZABETH, who answered her. Fol.
76. Queen ELIZABETH presses the confirmation of the treaty. Fol. 77. The
Guizes, and other French Noblemen, who had conveyed the Queen of Scots into
Scotland, returning home through England, are magnificently entertained with all
royal courtesies by Queen ELIZABETH. Fol. 77. That the right to assemble a
Council, belongs not to the Pope. Fol. 78. How far an Ambassador ought to
bear an offense. Fol. 79. Queen ELIZABETH prepares things necessary for the
war. ibid. She finds the Calamite stone. Fol. 80. And prepares a Fleet.
ibid. The English in emulation of their Queen, strive who can build the best
Ships. ibid. Tillage more used than ever. Fol. 81. An Edict in favor of the
King of Poland. ibid. S. Paul's famous Steeple in London is burnt. Fol. 82. The
Earl of Bathe dyed. ibid.
Anno M.D.LXII.
1562.
ARthur Pole, his Brother, and others, are examined. Fol. 84. The Lady
Katherine Gray is imprisoned. ibid. The Guizes practice against Queen
ELIZABETH. Fol. 85. Henry Sidney is sent into France, and presently after into
Scotland. Fol. 86. They deliberate the inter-uiew of the Queen of Scotland.
Fol. 87. The Cardinal of Lorraine propounds a marriage to the Queen of
Scotland, and Queen ELIZABETH endeavors to divert her from it. Fol. 88. She
excuses the French Fugitives. Fol. 89. The death of John de Vere, Earl of
Oxford. Fol. 90. Shan O-Neale comes into England to defend his cause. ibid.
Anno M.D.LXIII.
LAw established by Parliament. Fol. 92. 1563.
Fifteenes and Subsidies granted. Fol. 93. The Prince of Conde is taken in the
Battle of DREVX. Fol. 94. The King of Spaines answer. ibid. Hostages given for
the restitution of Calais. Fol. 95. Attempt to fly away. ibid. Peace made in
France. ibid. War proclaimed between France and England. ibid. The Queen
offers to give Haure de grace for Calais. Fol. 96. The English Soldiers are
afflicted with the plague. ibid. Haure de grace beleagred by the French. Fol.
97. Articles for Haure de grace's Restitution. Fol. 99. The Soldiers coming
over, infect London, and other places in England with the plague. ibid. Another
marriage propounded to the Queen of Scotland. Fol. 100. Queen ELIZABETH
recommends Robert Dudley unto her for a Husband. ibid. The French divert the
Queen from it. Fol. 101. The Baron of Gray dies, and the Bishop of Aquila.
ibid. The Spaniards against the English. Fol. 102. The Lord William Paget dies.
ibid. The supreme dignities of honor in England. Fol. 103. The death of Henry
Manners, Earl of Rutland. ibid. And also of the Lady Frances Brandon, Duchess
of Suffolk. ibid.
Anno M.D.LXIIII.
THe Articles of peace concluded between France and England. 1564.
Fol. 106. The French King enstalled in the Order of the Garter. Fol. 107. The
English and Hollanders ill used in Spain. ibid. A Mart established by the
English in Edenborough. Fol. 108. Robert Dudley created Baron of Denbigh, and
Earl of Leicester, who accused Sir Nicholas Bacon. Fol. 110. Cambridge
honored with Queen ELIZABETH'S presence. ibid. Diverse opinions about Englands
succession. Fol. 111. Lenox sent for by the Queen of Scotland. ibid. The true
descent and extraction of the Dukes of Lenox. ibid. Leicesters treaty of a
match with Scotlands Queen. Fol. 114.
1565.
Anno M.D.LXV.
THe Lord Darley's journey into Scotland, where he is beloved of the Queen.
Fol. 116. Queen ELIZABETH'S consent required about that marriage. Fol. 117.
Throckmorton sent to hinder it. Fol. 118. Lenox and Darley re-called out of
Scotland, who excuse themselves, and the Queen marries with the Lord Darley.
Fol. 119. Queen ELIZABETH endures it with moderation, but some Scots take
distaste about that marriage. Fol. 120. The Emperor is a suitor for his Brother
to Queen ELIZABETH. Fol. 121. As the Queen of Sheba came to see Solomon, so
the rare virtues of Queen ELIZABETH, brought Cecilia, Queen of Sueden, big
with Child, from the furthest part of the North, to see so complete a
Majesty. ibid. Creation of the Earl of Glencarne. ibid. Nicholas Arnold, sent
Deputy into Ireland. Fol. 124. The death of Sir Thomas Chaloner. Fol. 125.
Anno M.D.LXVI. 1566.

THomas, Duke of Norfolk, and Robert, Earl of Leicecester, are honored with
the chief order of Knighthood of France. Fol. 126. The Earl of Arundell in
voluntary exile. Fol. 127. The English carry both their arms and courage to
the Hungarian war. Fol. 127. The happy birth of King JAMES. ibid. Queen
ELIZABETH rejoices much thereby, visits Oxenford, and holds a Parliament. Fol.
128. The States solicit her to marry, and declare her Successor. Fol. 129.
The Great-Ones modestly, and the popular sort eagerly. Fol. 130. Queen
ELIZABETH is thereby angered. Fol. 131. The Queen of Scotlands right to England
apparent. Fol. 134. Bishops Ordinations confirmed. ibid. Bedfords Earl,
Ambassador from Queen ELIZABETH, to the christning of King JAMES in Scotland.
Fol. 135. The death of John Masson, and Sir Edward Sackuille. Fol. 136.
Anno M.D.LXVII. 1567.

THe murder of the Lord Darley, who was married to the Queen of Scots. Fol.
137. Buchanan condemned for falsehood by the States of Scotland. Fol. 138.
James, Prior of Saint Andrews, the Queens bastard-Brother, discontented for
want of greater advancement, returns into Scotland. ibid. He seeks to be
Regent of Scotland, whereof being frustrate, he opposes against the Queen,
and makes his ambition openly and evidently known. Fol. 139. He is created
Earl of Murray; he persecutes the great men of Scotland, and disswades the
Queen from marriage. Fol. 140. He takes arms against her, after she was
married; and flies into England. He seeks to sow discord between the Queen
and her Husband the Lord Darley. Fol. 141. The murder of David Rice, in the
Queen of Scots sight. Fol. 142. Murray is repealed. Fol. 142. Earl Morton
flies into England. Fol. 143. Dissension between the King and the Queen. Fol.
144. Earl Bothwell, and others, murder the Queens Husband. ibid. Earl
Bothwell commended to the Queen for her Husband. ibid. Testimony of the murder
of the Lord Darley. Fol. 145. Earl Bothwell is freed of the murder of the
King. Fol. 147. He marries the Queen. ibid. They conspire both against him
and the Queen. ibid. Earl Murray retyres into France. Fol. 148. Earl
Bothwell is expelled. ibid. The Queen is imprisoned. ibid. Queen ELIZABETH,
by Throckmorton, complaynes thereof to the Confederates. ibid. They consult
what is to be done with the Queene-prisoner. Fol. 149. Throckmorton defends the
Queens cause. ibid. The Scots maintain the contrary, out of Buchanans
reasons. Fol. 150. They extort from their Queen a resignation of the
government. Fol. 151. JAMES the Sixth, consecrated and inaugurated King. Fol.
152. Earl Murray returns into Scotland. ibid. He prescribes the Queen what
she should do. Fol. 153. He is established Regent or Viceroy. ibid. Some of
the Murderers of the King are put to death. ibid. They acquit the Queen of all
suspicion. Fol. 154. The Queen of England, and the King of France, labor to
procure her liberty. Fol. 154. Queen ELIZABETH demands the restitution of
Calais. ibid. The French maintain, how they ought not to do it. Fol. 155. Sir
Thomas Smith's answer to the French. Fol. 157.
Anno M.D.LXVII.
THe Earl of Sussex is sent to the Emperor. Fol. 160. The Earl of Leicester
hinders it representing to the Queen all the discommodities that might happen
if she married a stranger. ibid. Articles of the marriage propounded. Fol.
162. Ambassadors sent from the Emperor of Muscouia. Fol. 163. The English
open the way to go to Russia by sea. Fol. 164. The Company of Muscouy
Merchants instituted. ibid. A secret message from the Emperor of Muscouie.
Fol. 165. The death of Nicholas Wotton, and of the Duchess of Norfolk. ibid.
Shan O-Neale raises troubles, and rebelleth. Fol. 166. Sir Henry Sidney arms
against him, and discomfits him. Fol. 167. Shan re-assumes courage; he uses
cruelty to his men. Fol. 168. He means to yield. ibid. He is slain. Fol.
169. Turlogh-Leinich proclaimed O-Neale by the Queens permission. ibid. Hugon,
Nephew to Shan, who was afterward Baron of Dungannon, received to grace for an
opposite to Turlogh. ibid. Troubles in Munster. Fol. 170.
Anno M.D.LXVIII. 1568.

THe Papists absolve many. Fol. 171. The innouators show themselves, and
procure unto themselves thereby the odious style of Puritans. Fol. 172. The
second civil war in France. ibid. The Duke of Aniou commended to Queen
ELIZABETH for a Husband. Fol. 173. The English Ambassador used disgracefully
in Spain. ibid. Hawkins ill entreated by the Spaniard^ in America. ibid. The
Queen of Scots escapes out of prison. Fol. 174. She is vanquished. ibid. Her
Letter to Queen ELIZABETH. Fol. 175. She writes again. Fol. 177. Queen
ELIZABETH pitties her. Fol. 178. The Priuy-Councell consult of it. ibid. The
Council resolve she should be retained in England. Fol. 179. The Countess of
Lenox complains of her. ibid. The Baron of Heris intercede^ for her. Fol. 180.
Earl Murray is commanded to yield a reason of the Queens deposing. ibid.
Deputies for the King of Scots. Fol. 181. Others for the Queen of Scots. ibid.
Lidingtons declaration to the Scots. ibid. The protestation of the Queen of
Scots. Fol. 182. A declaration for the Queen of Scots. Fol. 183. The answer of
the Kings Deputies. Fol. 184. The Queen of Scots reply. 185. Murray refuses
to yield an account of the Queens deposing. Fol. 188. Authority of the
Commissioners revoked. Fol. 189. The Duke of Norfolk glad. ibid. New
Commissioners granted. ibid. The Queen of Scots will not submit her cause to
their hearing, but upon condition. Fol. 190. The proceedings dissolved. ibid.
Debate about the government of Scotland. Fol. 191. Murray offers to marry the
Duke of Norfolk to the Queen of Scots, yet disperseth rumors against her.
Fol. 192. The Duke of Norfolk is suspected. ibid. The third Civil War in
France. Fol. 193. The French and Flemmings make England their refuge, and were
the first that made Bays and Says, and other light Stuffes Linen and
Woollen. Fol. 194. The beginning of the Wars in the Low Countries. ibid.
Ferdinando Aluares, Duke of Alua, constituted supreme Governor. Fol. 195.
Moneys sent into the Low Countries deteyned in England. ibid. The English-mens
goods deteyned and seized upon in the Low Countries. Fol. 196. The like done to
the Flemmings in England. Fol. 197. The death of Roger Askam. ibid.
Anno M.D.LXIX.
A Proclamation touching goods detayned by the Duke of Alua. 1569.
Fol. 198. A Declaration against the said Proclamation. ibid. Practices against
Cecill. Fol. 199. The money formerly detayned in England, is demanded by the
Duke of Alua. Fol. 200. Free Traffic established at Hamborough for the
English. ibid. Doctor Story taken. ibid. The Duke of Alua enraged against the
English. ibid. Men of War called in. Fol. 201. Traffic of Russia hindered.
ibid. The liberties of the English in Russia. ibid. Their Traffic into
Russia. Fol. 202. And into Persia, by the Caspian Sea. ibid. A Russian
Ambassador comes into England. Fol. 202. Alliance with Russia. Fol. 203. The
Emperor of Muscouia and Russia is irritated and inflamed against the English.
ibid. Murray appeaseth the friends of the Queen of Scotland. Fol. 204. Rumor
spread throughout Scotland against Murray. ibid. Queen ELIZABETH is diligent,
and does endeavor to quench such false rumors. Fol. 205. She deals by letters
concerning her restoring. Fol. 206. A marriage intended between the Prince of
Scotland, and Margaret, the Duke of Norfolkes only Daughter. Fol. 207.
Murraies Proprsition to the Duke of Norfolk. ibid. Throckmortons Counsel.
Fol. 208. Propositions of the Match made by Leicester to the Duke. Fol. 209.
The Articles of marriage propounded to the Queen of Scotland. ibid. She agrees
to them in some manner. Fol. 210. A Design to free the Queen of Scotland. Fol.
211. Notice is given thereof to Queen ELIZABETH. ibid. The Earl of Leicester
reueales the whole business to the Queen at Tichfield. Fol. 212. She rebukes
the Duke of Norfolk. ibid. The Duke departs the Court without leave. ibid.
Cecill finds out the matter. Fol. 213. The Duke of Norfolk goes into Norfolk.
ibid. Fear caused in the Court through the Duke of Norfolk. Fol. 214. He
returns to the Court. ibid. Murray discouers the business. ibid. The Duke and
others are imprisoned. Fol. 215. Their Accomplices crave pardon. Fol. 216. Libels
against the marriage. ibid. Chapin Vittelli comes into England, and why. ibid.
Rebellion in the North by Northumberland and Westmerland. Fol. 217. The Rebels
Prteext. Fol. 219. Their declaration. ibid. They write to the Papists. Fol.
220. They rent and tread underfoot the Bible. ibid. Their Colors and number.
ibid. They returning, take Bernard Castle.: And fly. Fol. 221. Some are put to
death. Fol. 222. Some are banished. ibid. A new Rebellion. ibid. The Rebels are
defeated. Fol. 223. Queen ELIZABETH lends succor to the reformed Churches in
France. Fol. 224.
The end of the Table of the Contents of the First Book.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS of this matchless and famous HISTORY. The second
Book.
Anno M.D.LXX.
THe Earl of Murray demands that the Queen of Scotland might be put into his
hands. 1570.
Fol. 233. He pursues the English Rebels, and is suddenly slain. 234. Diverse
opinions are had of him. 235. The Scots and English Rebels make incursions upon
England. 236. The English take revenge thereof. 237. And succor those of the
Kings party in Scotland. ibid. They take the Castle of Hamilton. 238. The Earl
of Lenox is established Viceroy of Scotland. 239. The King of Spain gives
succors against those who were of the Kings side. ibid. The Lord Setone his
Embassage to the Duke of Alua. 239. The Answer of the Duke of Alua. 241. The
Bishop of Rosse is set at liberty, who labors the liberty of the Queen of
Scots. 242. They consult about the freedom of the Queen of Scots. 243. The
Sentence of Pope Pius the fifth against Queen ELIZABETH. 245. Rebellion in
Norfolk, as soon ended as begun. 249. Felton punished for sticking up the
Popes Bull. ibid. The Papists and greatest part contemn the Bull. ibid. Diverse
are imprisoned. 250. Sussex chosen a Privy Counselor. 251. Treaty with the
Queen of Scotland. ibid. The Queen of Scotlands answer to the Propositions of
the English. 253. They cannot agree. 254. The Bishop of Rosse requires help to
free the Queen of Scotland. 255. The death of the Earl of Cumberlend. ibid.
The death of Nicholas Throcmorton. 256. Rebellion in Ireland quenched before
they saw the day. ibid. Stukeley flies out of Ireland. 257.
Anno M.D.LXXI.
THe Royal Exchange named. Fol. 258. 1571.
The Creation of Baron Burghley. ibid. The manner of creating Barons. 259.
Letters from the Pope to the Queen of Scotland. ibid. Edict of the Scots
against the Authority Royal condemned by Queen ELIZABETH. 260. The demands of
the English for the freedom of the Queen of Scotland. 261. The English refuse
the offers of the Scots. 261. Alteration amongst the Scots. 262. Complaints of
the Scots against the English. ibid. A Remembrance sent from the Queen of
Scotland to the Duke of Norfolk. 263. The counsel of the Bishop of Rosse.
265. The attempts of others. 266. A great Earthquake. ibid. The Embassage of
Baron Buckhurst. 267. A Proposition of a Match between Queen ELIZABETH and
the Duke of Aniou. ibid. The hopes which they conceived, with the Articles of
Marriage. 268. The Answer. ibid. To what end this marriage was proposed. 270.
They haste the marriage of the Queen of Scotland. 271. The Bishop of Rosse and
others committed. 272. Money sent into Scotland. ibid. The Duke of Norfolk and
others committed to the Tower. 274. Propositions touching an Ambassador
answered. 276. The Bishop of Rosse questioned. 277. He declines from the
English Witnesses. ibid. Lenox, Viceroy of Scotland, is slain. 279. The Earl
of Mar is elected Viceroy. ibid. Laws against disturbers. ibid. Laws
against Papists. 280. John Story condemned to dye. 282. Differences appeased
between the English and the Portugals in Guienne. ibid. Marquis of Northampton
dies. 283. The death of Bishop Jewel. ibid. Affairs in Ireland. 284. William
Fitz-Williams, Deputy. ibid.
Anno M.D.LXXII.
Thomas Duke of Norfolk is presented before the Nobles and Peers, and
arraigned in Westminster Hall. 1572.
285. The manner of his Arraignement. 286. The chief points of his accusation.
287. The Duke demands an Advocate to plead his cause. ibid. The second
Article of his accusation. 290. The third Article. 292. His reply, and that he
was contrary to the Roman Religion. 293. The Letters of the Bishop of Rosse to
the Queen of Scots produced. ibid. The Dukes Letter to his servant. 294. The
Letters of Ridolph. ibid. Of the Pope. ibid. The testimony of Strangers. ibid.
The third Article of his accusation. 295. The Peers consult among themselves.
ibid. The sentence of death pronounced against the Duke. 296. Baray and Marter
are put to death. 297. Earls created. ibid. Barons elected. 298. Laws
established for the better security of the Queen and her Kingdom. ibid. The
Duke of Norfolk beheaded. ibid. His speech at his death. 299. Sundry censures
of him. 300. Catenes relation of the precedent matters. 301. Pope Pius the
fifth, incensed against Queen ELIZABETH, imployeth Robert Ridolph, a Gentleman
of Florence, into England. 301. He persuades the Kings of France and Spain
against her. ibid. The Queen of Scots accused. 304. Her answer. 305. Sedition
in Scotland. 306. The Queen of Elngand and the King of France endeavor to
accord them. ibid. They differ in opinion. ibid. Causes alleged, why the
French favor the Queen of Scotland. 307. The Queen of England contesteth
with the French. ibid. The rebellious Flemmings being commanded out of England,
take the Breele. 310. The Duke of Alua's carelessness. ibid. The English
repair into the Low Countries to war. ibid. The dissimulation of the King of
France. 311. The alliance of Blois. ibid. The Articles of the same. ibid. The
confirmation thereof. 313. Mont-morancy admitted to the Order of the Garter.
314. He intercedes to accord the differences of Scotland. ibid. Answer made
unto him. ibid. He also treats of a marriage with the Duke of Aniou. 315. The
Massacre of Paris. ibid. Marriage of the Duke of Alanzon propounded to Queen
ELIZABETH. 316. The Earl of Northumberland beheaded. ibid. Death of the
Marquis of Winchester, and of the Earl of Darbie. ibid. Cecill made Treasurer.
ibid. Death of Sir George Peter's. 317 Queen ELIZABETH sick. ibid. Her care of
the Public. ibid. She cuts off the superfluous number of followers attending
Noblemen, and curbeth Enquirers after conceald Lands of the Crown. 318.
Rebellion in Ireland: also the Omores rebellion there. 319. A strange Star.
319.
Anno M.D.LXXIII. 1573.

THe Spanish Fleet discomfited by the Hollanders. 321. Queen ELIZABETH
discharges her Fathers and Brothers debts. 322. The Papists trouble the
Commonwealth. 323. The Embassage of Gondy, Count of Rez. 324. Embassage of the
Earl of Worcester into France. 325. The French Protestants handle the French
Papists in England shrewdly; and the French Ledger Ambassador complains to
Queen ELIZABETH for ayding the Protestants besieged. ibid. She is earnestly
solicited to marry with the D. of Alanzon. 326 She grants him leave to come
into England. 327. Gondy returns into England, and Earl Morton is made Regent
of Scotland. 329. The English are sent to besiege Edenborrough. 332. The Castle
besieged, yielded. 333. Kircald and others hanged; and Lidington dies. 334.
Lodowick Zuniga succeedes Duke d'Alua. 335. Burche's Heresy, for which he is
hanged. 336. The Lord of Effingham, the Earl of Kent, and Caius the Physician,
dyed. ibid. Troubles in Ireland, and the Earl of Essex is sent thither. 338.
Anno M.D.LXXIIII. 1574.

ALanzon desires to visit Queen ELIZABETH, and has leave to come into
England. 342. He, suspected in France, has a Guard set over him. 343. Charles
the Ninth, King of France, dies, and the right Noble Roger, Lord North, is
sent Ambassador extraordinary to Henry of Valois, King of France and Poland.
344. The Earl of Huntington made President of the North. 345. An Edict against
pride. 346. London Ministers deceived. A Whale cast on shore: Thames ebbes and
flows twice in one hour. The Sky seems to burn. 347.
1575.
Anno M.D.LXXV.
THe League with France renewed. 349. The Prince of Orange intended to fly to
the protection of the King of France. 352. The Ambassie of Campigni, and de
Requisens dies. 354. The death of the Duke of Chastelraut. 357. The Earl of
Essex distressed in Ireland. ibid. Sidney's progress in Ireland, for the third
time Deputy there. 358. The death of Peter Carew. 359.
1576.
Anno M.D.LXXVI.
QVeene ELIZAB. is offered a match by the French. 361. A confusion in the
Netherlands: Antwerpe sacked by the Spanish mutiners. 362. The coming of John
d'Austria into Flanders. 363. Sir Martin Forbisher sent to discover the Straits
in the North part of America. 364. The death of the Emperor Maximilian, and of
the Elector Palatine, heavy to Queen ELIZABETH, who sends Sir Philip Sidney
Ambassador extraordinary to Rodulphus his Successor. 365. The death of Walter
Deuoreux, Earl of Essex, and of Sir Anthony Coke. 367. Tumults in Ireland, and
William Drury made President of Munster. 368. The Queen takes pity of the
Irish. 369.
Anno M.D.LXXVII. 1577.

Austria inclined to peace at Queen ELIZABETH'S persuasion. 370. The Prince of
Orange diuerts her from it. 371. Sir Thomas Copley made Baron in France. 372.
John of Austria's dissimulation. ibid. Why Queen ELIZABETH couenanted with the
Scots. 373. Spain is pleased with it. 375. England the Balance of Europe.
376. Priest Maine executed* Baron of Latimer, and Secretary Smith of Saffron
Walden dies. 377. Rebellion again in Ireland, and Rorio Oge is slain,
Harington and Cosby wounded. 378.
Anno M.D.LXXVIII. 1578.

QVeene ELIZABETH's care for the Low Countries. 380. Count Swartzeberg,
Bellieure, and Cobham Deputy for France, Germany, and England, and for the
treaty of peace, and Egremond Ratcliffe and his associate are put to death, and
Don Iuan de Austria dies. 381. Aniou's Duke pursues his intended marriage with
Qu. ELIZ. and Leicester murmurs at it. 383. The Countess of Lenox death. ibid.
King JAMES sends an Ambassador to Queen ELIZAB. 385. Morton, Regent, takes
upon him the administration of the Realm again. 386. The Peers are against
him. 387. How to invade England, consulted by Spain. 387. Thomas Stukeley, a
Traitor, takes Arms against his Country, and is slain with three Kings. 388.
William Drury made Lord Deputy of Ireland. 389.
1579.
Anno M.D.LXXIX.
CAssimiere, Palatin's Son, comes into England. 390. Queen ELIZABETH sends
money into Holland. 391. One is shot with a Pistol, who was in Queen
ELIZABETH's Barge with her Majesty, the French Ambassador, the Earl of
Lincoln, and Sir Christopher Hatton. 392. The Duke of Aniou comes into
England. ibid. Aim Stuart, Lord Aubigny, into Scotland. 393. Sir Nicholas
Bacon, Sir Thomas Bromley, Sir Thomas Gresham, dye one after another. 396.
Dauile murdered in his bed. 398. The death of the Lord Druty, Deputy. 401.
1580.
Anno M.D.LXXX.
ARthur, Lord Gray, made Deputy of Ireland. 405. The Spaniards and Italians
land in Ireland. 406. They are all slain, and the subjects hanged. 407. The
taking of Malines. And of an Earthquake. 409. The beginning of the English
Seminaries. 410. Persons and Campian, Jesuits, came into England. 413. Sir
Francis Drake returns into England. 417. John Oxenham sayleth into America.
419. Drakes voyage, and warlike exploits. 424. The Spaniards demand his riches.
428. The death of Fitz-Allen, Earl of Arundell. 430. The Earl of Lenox,
enuyed by the Scots, is accused by them to Queen ELIZABETH. 432. Alexander,
Earl of Homes, Baron of Dunglas, is sent from King JAMES to excuse it. 434.
Regent Morton is cast into prison. 435.
The end of the Contents of the Second Book.
THE CONTENTS Of this royal and famous HISTORY. THE THIRD BOOK.
RANDOLPHS intercession for Morton, against Lenox. Folio 1. The King of Scotts
answer. 2 Norris his victories in Freezland. 4 Albanois. 5 Drunkenness brought
out of the Low Countries. ibid. By what right the King of Spain possesses
Portugal. ibid. The Qu. of France her title to Portugal, rejected. 6 Antonio
banished Portugal. 7 Covenants of marriage between the Duke of Anjou and Q.
Elizabeth, concluded on. 8 The K. of France urges the marriage, and the Q. of
Engl. deferreth. 10 Qu. Elizabeth gives the Duke of Anjou a Ring. 12 The
queen much disquieted. 13 Reasons, dissuading her from marriage, and a book
set out against it. 14 The Queens declaration against this pernicious libell.
15 Champian the Jesuit, and other Priests put to death. 17 New laws against
Papists. 18 The Duke of Anjou sayleth into Flanders. 19 A Comet. 21 Qu.
Elizabeth bestows the Order of the Garter upon the King of Denmark. 21 The
treaty concerning the queen of Scotts is deferred. 22 Gowry and others tumult
in Scotland. 23 The Duke of Lenox driven out of Scotland. ibid. An Ambassie
from the French K. for the delivery of the king of Scots. 24 The qu. of
Scotland's letter to queen Eliz^beth. 25 The Duke of Lenox returns thorough
England. 33 Consultations about the delivery of the queen of Scotland. 34 The
K. of Scotland seeks the love of the queen of England. 36 The King of
Scotland sets himself at liberty. 37 Walsingham is sent into Scotland from
queen Elizabeth. ibid. The king of Scots answers him freely. 38 Walsinghams
remonstrations to his sacred Majesty. ibid. The King answers them. 39 His
Majesty reestabl^shed the reputation and honor of the Duke of Lenox, causing
likew^se his children to return into Scotland. 39 The Ministers of Scotland
are against their Kings authority. 40 A peace obtained for the King of Sweden.
ibid. The Emperor desires alliance with England, and is a suitor to her
Majesty to grant him an English Lady for his wife. ibid. The Emperors death.
41 A Polonian Nobleman comes into England to see queen Elizabeth. 42 A
wonderful earthquake in Dorset-shire. ibid. The death of Thomas Ratcliffe
Earl of Essex. 43 Sir Humfrey Gilbert drowned by shipwreck. 44 The death of E.
Grindall Archbish. of Canterbury. ibid. John Whitgift preferred to be
Archbishop of Canterbury. 45 The English betray Alost; and do deliver it into
the hands of the cruel Spaniard. 48 A miserable end of traitors. ibid. The
Earl of Desmond is slain. ibid. Nicholas Sanders an English Seminary Priest
famisht himself. 49 Viscount of Baltinglasse fled out of Ireland. 50 Laboring
men sent into Ireland. 51 The gestures and behavior of Sir John Perrot,
Viceroy of Ireland. ibid. Troubles in Scotland. 52 The Earl of Gowry is taken,
the conspirators are d^spersed, queen Elizabeth succoureth some of them, the
king demands them by the league; but in vain. 53 Walsingham favors the
fugitive Hunsdon against them. 54 The power of a Secretary argued. ibid. The
arraignement of Gowry. ibid. He is beheaded. 55 The treason of Fr. Throkmorton.
56 The Lo: Paget retyreth into France. ibid. The queens clemency toward
Papists. 57 The Priests are banished. 58 Spanish Ambassador sent out of
England. 59 Thokmortons confession. 61 A new treaty with the qu. of Scots. 63
She answers propositions made unto her. 64 She demands to be associated to
the kingdom with her son. 65 The queen of Scotts makes new propositions.
66 The Scotts, of the English faction, oppose them. 67 The insolency of the
Scottish Ministers. 68 Buchanans writings reproved. ibid. The Scottish and
English make incursions one upon another. 69 Patrick Grayes Embassage. ib. The
queen of Scotts committed to new guardians. 72 Council holden amongst the
Papists. 73 The death of the Earl of Westmerland ibid. The death of Plowden.
ib. Alancon dies, and the Prince of Orange is slain. 74 The French king
invested with the Order of the Garter. 75 Is accused of treason. 76 His
confession. 77 He consulteth with the Jesuits about the murdering of the
queen. ibid. He discloseth the matter to the queen. 78 Alans book adds
fresh courage to him. 79 Neuill offers him his help. ibid. Parry is
arraigned and executed. 80 Laws demanded in Parliament against Bishops, and
against Non-residents. 81 Laws against Jesuits and Priests. 82 The Earl of
Arundell resolves to fly out of England. 83 The Earl of Northumberland is
found dead. ibid. The causes of his imprisonment manifest. 85 Lamentation for
the Earl of Northumberland. 87 Queen Elizabeth labors to contract a league
with the Princes of Germany. ibid. The like with the king of Scotts. 88
Ar^at^on of the death of Russell and the manner thereof. ibid. The death of
Thomas Carre. 90 The fugitive Scots are sent out of England back into Scotland.
ibid. They are reconciled unto the King. 92 The rebellion of the Bourkes in
Ireland. 93 The Sccots of Hebrides called into Ireland. 94 The Governor
labors for a peace, but in vain. 95 He pursues the Scotts, and defeateth
them. 96 The States of the Netherlands consult of a Protector. 97 They are
ref^sed of the French, and the English consult about it. 98 The Dutch offer
themselves to the queen. 100 Antwerpe is yielded up: the queen deliberateth
with her self, and takes upon her the protection. 101 Under what conditions.
102 Queen Elizabeth publishes the causes, and sends to the West Indies, to
divert the Spaniard. 103 James town taken from the Spaniard. 104 Hispaniola, or
S. Dominick surprised. ibid. Spaniards motto, Avarice and Covetousness. 105
Carthagena assaulted. ibid. Saint Anthony and S. Helena fired by the English.
106 Booty of the English voyage and expedition. 107 A search made for a
discovery of a way to the East Indies. ibid. An Edict against Woad. 108 Death
of the Earl of L^ncolne, and of the Earl of Bedford. 109 Earl of Leister
sent into Holland. ibid. His instruction. 110 Absolute authority given to the
Earl of Leyster, by the States. 111 Queen Elizabeth offended thereat, she
expostulateth the matter. 112 The States excuse themselves. 113 Leister sends
succor to the city of Grave: it is yielded, and the Spaniard expelled. 114 An
aduentrous enterprise. ibid. Venolo is lost. 115 Axell is taken. ibid.
Graueline attempted. ibid. Ausborough beleagred. ibid. Sir Philip Sidney
slain. 116 States of Holland complain to Leyster. 117 He returns into
England. 118 Earl of Arundell questioned, and answers for himself. ibid.
King of Denmark intercedeth for a peace with the queen of England. ibid.
Queen Elizabeth answers. 119 She furnishes Henry king of Nauarr with money.
120 She desires a league with Scotland. ibid. Jesuits and Popish Priests
suggest diverse things to the queen of Scots. ibid. King of Scotland
propounds conditions, and is not a whit deterred by the French. 121 King
James answer to them. 122 A conspiracy against queen Elizab. 129 How
discovered. 130 Ballard returns into France. ibid. Ballard sent back into
England, meets with Babing^on. ibid. Babington receives letters from the
queen of Scots. 131 He writes back to her, and she answers him. 132 His
associates in the conspiracy. 133 Babington gives to every one his task. 134
They consult together. 135 Babington undertakes to bring in foreign aid, and
sends Ballard to work for him. 136 Gifford discovers all the conspiracy.
ibid. Sends the letters he received, to Walsingham. 137 Ballard is taken.
ibid. Babington solliciteth for Ballards liberty, and falls into the same
net. ibid. Gets himself out, lies in a wood, and is found. 138 All the
rest of the conspirators are discovered. 139 Queen of Scots kept with a guard,
and separated from her se^uants. ibid. Her coffer, with letters sent to the qu.
ibid. Giffard sent into France, dies miserably. 140 The traitors come to
judgment. ibid. Queen of Scots Secretary examined. 143 King of France
advertised. ibid. Sundry opinions how to dispose of the Sccottish queen. ibid.
By what law she should be judged. ^44 Commission granted to that end. (...).
Who met at Fotheringham Castle. ^46 Her sudden answer to the letters. ibid. She
refuses to be tried. 148 Exception against the new law. 149 Sir Christopher
Hatton persuades her to appear. 150 Her tergiuersation. 151 She yields at
last to appear and answer. 152 Manner of the sitting. ibid. Lord Chancellors
speech. 153 Her protestation, recorded. ibid. Proceeding. 154 She denies the
former allegation. ib. Copies of letters showed. 155 Extracts out of Babingtons
confession. ibid. She is urged with the confessions of Savage and Ballard. 156
Walsingham is blamed. ibid. Makes his Apology. 157 Pagets and Babingtons
letters produced. 158 Secretaries testimonies. ibid Their credites questioned.
ibid. Arguing about transferring the kingdom. 159 Giving of a pension to
Morgan excused. 160 Queen of Scots offers the Duke of Guise and her son
pledges. 161 Lord Burghley's answer. 162 She interrupteth him, but he
proceeds. 163 Letters showed again. 164 She interrupteth their reading.
ibid. Her Secretaries not to be credited. ib. She is accused again for
transferring the kingdom, and accuses her Secretaries of perjury. 165 Sir
Thomas Egertons demonstration. ibid. She craves a hearing in open Parliament.
ibid Sentence pronounced against her. 166 Declaration that the sentence against
the queen of Scotl. was not prejudicial to her son. 167 The States approve
the sentence. ibid. Queen Elizabeth's answer. 168 Some other remedy desired by
the qu. 172 Answer to her. ibid Her reply to them. 173 Queen of Scotland is
certified of her Judgment. 177 French Ambassador stays the publishing of
the sentence. 178 Courage of the queen of Scots. ibid. A request made to
queen Elizabeth. 179 Opinions of the queen of Scots cause. 180 Queen of
Scotlands son intercedeth for her. 18^ Some Scots against her. ibid. King of
Scots propounds some things considerable. 18^ Bellieures reasons for the
queen of Scotland. 18^ Answers to his reasons. 28^ French Ambassador
attempteth queen Elizabeth's life. 192 Stafford discovers it. 193 French
Ambassador rebuked. 194 Whether an Ambassador be bound to discover any attempt
against the Prince to whom he is sent. ibid. Business weighed. 196 Courtiers
persuade by reasons. 197 The queen perplexed with doubtful fears. 199 She
causes a Warrant to be drawn for the execution. ibid. Her Council send
secretly. 200 The queen of Scotland prepares her self for death. ibid. Her
speech. 201 She is brought to the scaffold. 202 Her speeches to Meluine her
steward, 203 Also to the Earls. ibid. In the behalf of her own servants.
ibid. Her attendance by officers to the scaffold. 204 Her prayers. ibid. Her
last words. ibid. Deane of Petherboroughs speech. 205 Her variety of fortunes
related. 206 Her Epitaph. 207 Gods providence plainly seen in her death. 208
Queen Elizabeth is much grieved at her death. ibid. Is angry with her
Council. ibid. Her letter to the King of Scotland. 209 Dauison brought into
the Star Chamber. 210 He is objected against. ibid. He answers for himself.
ibid. He is urged upon his own confession. 211 He is reproved by the queens
Sergeants. 212 Judges give their opinion. ibid He is chekt. 213 Lord Gray
defends him. ibid. Earls agree with him. 214 Sentence given against Dauison.
215 A request made to the Commissioners. ibid. Dauison his particular Apology.
ibid. Indignation of the Scots 217 Suggestions to the king. 218 Drake sent into
Spain. 221 Stanley and York traitors. 223 Leycester blamed. 228 Death of
Henry Neuill. 234 Baron of Abergauenny. 236 Of the Duchess of Somerset. 237 Of
Radolph Sadleir. 238 Of sir Thomas Bromley. 240 Of the Earl of Rutland. 241 Of
sir Christopher Hatton Lo. Chancellor. 242 William Fitz-William Deputy of
Ireland. 250 Great preparations in Spain to invade England, and by what
counsel. 252 The reason. 253 Consultation how to assault and subdue England.
254 Preparation in Flanders. 255 The Pope gives assistance. 256 Consultation
how to defend the kingdom. 257 King of Scotlands alacrity against the
Spaniard. 258 Commissioners sent into Flanders to treat of peace. 259
Propositions of the English answered. 260 Complaint made unto the Duke of
Parma. 262 Conference of peace breaks. 263 The Spanish Armado. 264 Sets forth,
and is dispersed. ibid. Sets out again. 266 The English Navy sets out. 267 The
first fight. 268 Ability of the English Elect. 269 Peter Valdes taken. 270 The
Ship of Oquenda taken. 271 Admiral of Englands providence. 273 The third
fight. 275 Knights created for their valor, by the Lord Admiral. 276 Diverse
Noblemen and Knights join with the English Fleet. 277 Spanish Fleet at anchor.
ibid. Duke of Parma sent for by the Spaniard, but he is unprepared. 278
Hollanders good service. ibid. Spaniards flight. 279 Hugh Moncada slain. 280
Fourth combat. 281 The Spaniards resolve to return home by the North Sea. 282
Queen Eliz. visites her Camp. 283 Conditions offered unto the King of Scotts.
284 Money coined in memory of this famous victory. ibid. Misery of the
Spaniards in Ireland. 285 Causes of the defeat. ibid Patience of the Spaniard
in this overthrow. 286 A general thanksgiving and public rejoicing in
England. ibid. Praise of those who were of the English Navy. ibid. Public joy
increased by good news out of Scotland. ibid. Leicesters goods are sold. 289
Bergen ap Zone besieged by the Duke of Parma. ibid. Who rayseth the siege.
ibid. Innou^tions in England. ibid. Martin Mar-Prelate, and other scandalous
books. 290
FINIS.
THE HISTORY OF THE MOST High, Mighty, and Invincible Princess, Book 1. 1558.
Queen ELIZABETH, of most happy and neuer-dying memory: OR ANNALLS Of all the
most remarkable things that happened during her blessed Reign over the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, etc.
The first year of her Reign, Anno 1558.
AFter that for certain hours, Queen Mary's death is known.
the decease of Queen MARY had been concealed, the Peers, Prelates and
Commons of England, being at that time assembled together in Parliament: First,
notice was given to them of the upper house, which were in a manner struck
silent with grief and astonishment for a while. But they presently after
rowzed up their spirits and amazed senses, moderating their mournings with joy,
either not to seem altogether sad, or sorrowful, that Queen ELIZABETH
succeeded the Crown; or else joyful, that by the death of Queen MARY, the
succession thereof fell to her Majesty: so they bent their cares to public
affairs, and with a common accord and firm resolution, concluded and agreed,
that by the law of succession in the 35. year of King HENRY the eighth,
ELIZABETH was, and ought to be declared true and legitimate Heir of the
Kingdom. Therefore at that instant Nicholas Heath, Lord Archbishop of York,
and Lord Chancellor of England, carried the first news to those of the
Lower House, giving them to understand, with much sorrow and sighs, that death
preventing the course of nature, had deprived them of a Queen, no less
favorable to the Roman Religion, then kind and loving to the Common wealth,
and that each member of the Vpper-house had received such extreme grief
thereby, that they seemed to be comfortless, without hope of consolation, if
God (through his special grace and favor toward the English Nation) had not
reserved for them ELIZABETH, another Daughter to King HENRY the ^. to succeed
her Sister, and that her right to the Crown was so evident and true, that no
man could, nor ought to make any doubt or question thereof, and that the Peers
and Prelates of this Realm had all, with one accord and voice determined, that
she should be forthwith published Queen, and proclaimed Sovereign, if they
were so pleased to condescend thereunto. Which words being scarce uttered, the
whole Assembly immediately, with a common acclamation cried aloud, Queen
Elizabeth is proclaimed Queen by the Kings and Heralds of Arms.
GOD SAVE QVEENE ELIZABETH, that her Reign may be long and happy. And
immediately, the whole Parliament rising, she was openly proclaimed Queen by
sound of Trumpets (first in Westminster Hall; and then soon after, through the
whole City of London) by the title of Queen of England, France and Ireland,
and Defendresse of the faith, with the happy applause and joyful shouting of
all the people (undoubted presages, truly most happy) for indeed no Prince was
ever cherisht of his people and Subjects with more ardent and constant love,
and zealous affection, then this Queen was, nor none received and welcomed
with more respect and joy, then she has been, nor blessed and prayed for with
more vows and prayers, so often iterated, as this happy Princess has been
all her life time: chiefly, when she showed her self in public, or openly
abroad.

Queen ELIZABETH was about five and twenty years of age when her Sister died.
But she was so rarely qualified by adversity, and so well accomplished and
accommodated by experience (which are most effectual Tutors) that she had
purchased Prudence and Judgment, far above the capacity of her age, and of
her pregnant wit and admirable wisdom: she gave sufficient proof and worthy
testimony in the election and choice that she made of her Privy Counselors;
for she took into her Privy Council, Her Majesty makes choice and election
of a privy Council.
the aforesaid Nicholas Heath, Archbishop of York, a Prelate no less prudent,
then modest and discreet, William Poulet, Marquess of Winchester, Lord high
Treasurer of England, Henry Fitz-Allen, Earl of Arundel, Francis Talbot, Earl
of Shrewsbury, Edward Stanley, Earl of Darby, William Herbert, Earl of
Pembrooke, Edward, Baron of Clynton, Lord high Admiral, The Lord Howard, Baron
of Effingham, Lord Chamberlain, Sir Thomas Cheney, Sir William Peter, Sir John
Mason, Sir Richard Sackuile, Knights, and Nicholas Wotton, Deane of Canterbury.
All which had been Privy Counselors to Queen MARY, and professing her own
Religion. She adjoined to them by temporizing (according to the time) these
vndernamed (who were all Protestants, and had had no office at all) nor charge
of government in Queen MARY'S Reign) William Parr, Marquess of Northampton,
Francis, Lord Russell, Earl of Bedford, Thomas Parr, Edward Rogers, Ambrose
Cave, Francis Knollys, and William Cicill, who before had been Secretary to
King EDWARD the sixth, a noble Gentleman, most wise, understanding and
judicious, whose learning and worth exceeded many others: and a little after
she brought in Sir Nicholas Bacon, whom she made Lord Keeper of the great Seal
of England. She so ordered and tempered them in place with all those which
succeeded since in such sort, that they were true, faithful, and affectionate
to her Majesty, and she always free, and not subject to any.

Her Majesty has a special care above all things to re-establish the true
Religion.
At these happy beginnings, her first and chiefest care was, to re-establish the
Protestant Religion: the which, as much by the instruction and knowledge that
she had received thereof from her infancy, as also by her own particular
judgment, she firmly held and maintained to be very true, and most
conformable to the holy Scripture, and to the sincerity of the primitive
Church, and so effectually resolving in her heart to settle and re-establish
the same, that she employed to that purpose some of her Counselors, being the
most intimate: and with the rest of the other Lords of her most honorable
Priuy-Councel, she took order that the Ports and Hauen-Townes should be fast
shut, secured, and fortified. The Tower of London, she committed to the care of
one, whose fidelity and loyalty had been fully approved; a new Commission she
sent to Thomas Earl of Sussex, She ordaines and settles states and domestical
affairs.
Lord Deputy of Ireland who with a Garrison of three hundred and twenty Horse,
and one thousand, three hundred and sixty foot, yielded in submission the whole
Country, which otherwise had not bin quiet nor peaceable. Also, the like
Commission she sent, with a clause or restraint, not to confer any office to
Judges and Magistrates, for to hinder the Convocation of the Assembly of the
jurisdiction by the authority there appointed. New Justices and Sheriffs she
likewise established in each County, and took order, that no money nor coin
should be transported by exchange out of the Realm to foreign Nations beyond
Sea; and that the Preachers should desist and abstain from treating of
questions, or disputing about Controversies in Religion, and withal,
concerning State-affaires out of the Kingdom, she gave order that Ambassadors
should be sent to all Christian Princes, Her Majesty takes a great care for
foreign affairs.
to let them understand Queen MARY's decease. She therefore appointed and sent
with all speed to the Emperor Ferdinando, Sir Thomas Chaloner, with letters of
her own handwriting, by which she gave him notice of her Sisters death; and
that first, by Gods special grace, next, by her hereditary right, and through
the general love and consent of all her Subjects, she succeeded these her
Crowns and dignities. And that now she desired nothing more than to maintain
the love, and to increase the ancient amity, which of long time had been
between the Houses of England and Austria. To the King of Spain, who at that
time was in the Low Countries, she also sent Ambassador the Lord Brook, Baron
of Cobham, with the like Embassage and Commission, by which she of new
employed and delegated the Earl of Arundell; Turlbey, Bishop of Ely, and L.
Wotton, who before had been delegated, and appointed by Queen MARY for the
treaty of peace in the City of Cambray: and adjoined to them W. Howard, Baron
of Effingham. She also secretly sent Sir Henry Killigrew Ambassador to the
Princes of Germany, to inflame them in the zeal of Gods pure Religion. To the
King of Denmark, D. B. was sent Ambassador: and to the Duke of Holsatia, also
Armigild Waade.

Philip King of Spain, hearing of the death of Queen MARY, Queen Elizabeth is
earnestly solicited to marriage with Philip King of Spain her Sisters Widdower.
fearing one way to lose the title of King of England, and the force of that
Realm, which were unto him most useful and profitable, and likewise that the
kingdoms of England, Ireland, and Scotland, should be united to the Crown of
France, by the means of the high and mighty Princess, the Queen of Scotland,
he therefore treats seriously of a match with Queen ELIZABETH, with promise
to obtain a special dispensation from the Pope. And to that effect employed
the Earl of Ferie, who had visited her MAJESTY, by the like means as he had
done Queen MARY in her sickness. This Suitor puts Queen ELIZABETH into great
anxiety and perplexity, considering how inconsiderate and ungrateful her
Majesty might seem to be in refusing a Christian Prince, who had already
obliged her in other things much, but yet more in this, as to seek her to his
wife, through his own free desire and motion.

The French King likewise was in an ecstasy, considering how important and
dangerous it was to France, if Spain her enemy should unite and adioyne to his
kingdoms, the Realms of England and Ireland: therefore he uses his best
endeavors at Rome, by the intermission of the Bishop of Angoulesme, to hinder
the grant of such dispensation, showing to that end, that Queen ELIZABETH was
held for Supportresse of the Protestant Religion, and (rather than fail) went
about to declare her illegitimate: But all this most secretly and closely, for
fear to irritate England, before that his affairs were thoroughly well
settled. The Earl of Ferie contrariwise, on the other side, labors as hard to
bring this marriage to pass, and to that end gives the English Papists to
understand, (who were dispersed throughout all parts of the Realm) that it was
the sole and only way left for them to preserve their Religion, and defend
their ancient dignities and honors: and that if they should contemn it, he
could not but deplore the misery and calamity of England, as being out of
money, unprovided of men trained up, and vnskild in the military discipline,
void of fortification, and lacking munition and garrisons for War, and her
Counselors of State deprived likewise of good advice. And indeed to speak
truly, Englands affairs were at that time in a most miserable case, and
lamentable state: for England had war on the one side with Scotland, and on
the other side with France; and was in a manner undone by those debts that King
HENRY the Eighth, and King EDWARD the Sixth had run into, and her treasury was
exhaust and empty, and the Town of Callais had been but newly lost, and the
whole Country of Oyes, with all the munition and furniture of war. The
people here were divided into contrarieties, through differency of religion,
and the Queen left without any powerful friend to assist her; having no
alliance at all abroad with foreign Princes.

But when as her Majesty had more seriously agitated her spirit, Her Majesty
refused to marry with the King of Spain.
and carefully considered in her mind the proposition of this match, she
finds the holy Scripture expressly inioyning, that no woman ought to join
with him who had been her sisters Husband, no more than it is lawful for a
man to marry his brothers widow; and therefore that such marriages were
directly illegitimate, and wholly forbidden by Gods Law; although the Pope
should never so much grant a Dispensation. And moreover, that if she should
contract it by virtue thereof, she should acknowledge and prove her self
illegitimate, since she was issued from the match that King HENRY her father
had contracted, after his diuorcing and putting away Katherine of Spain, The
reason why.
for having been his brothers wife, which nevertheless had been approved
just and lawful, according to the Divine Law by all the Academies of
Christendom, and likewise the Synod of London, as well as that of Katherine,
unjust and unlawful. Her Majesty therefore endeavors to stop, prevent, and
hinder by little and little the course of King Philips suite, by an honest
answer, truly modest, and well-beseeming the chaste integrity of her constant
virginity, and chiefly grounded upon scruple of her conscience. But he,
notwithstanding all this, surceased not his suite, but persisted therein,
urging her with fervent and frequent Letters: By which she observed the
manners and behauiours of so great a King, compounded with grace and grave
modesty, and truly worthy his Majesty, the said Letters being much by her
admired, in the often publishing of them; yea, her Majesty taking pleasure to
imitate them, until some Nobles of her Court began to defame and speak
against the matchless pride and practices of the Spaniards. Also, some of the
intimate Lords and favorites of her Majesty's Priuy-Councell, fearing lest the
tender and young spirit of a Maid, often moved, might easily condescend to
their desires, told to her MAJESTY secretly, that both her Majesty, and
friends, with the whole Realm of England, were undone, if in such
Dispensations, or in any thing else whatsoever, she should give any credit, or
make the least estimation of the Popes authority and power, since that two of
them had declared and published her Mother illegitimate, and unlawfully joined
in wedlock with King HENRY the Eighth. Also, that by virtue of such
Declaration, the most high and most mighty Princess the Queen of Scotland
should pretend right to the Crowns of England, etc. and that the Pope would
never retract nor go from that judgment, and that her Majesty should not
expect nor look for any thing good or just from the Popes hand, who had been
enemies, and showed themselves unjust both toward her Majesty, and her
Mother: And that the French King labored hard, using his utmost power and best
endeavors at the Popes Court in Rome for to cause the high and mighty Princess
Mary Queen of Scotland, to be acknowledged and declared Queen of England; yet
Queen ELIZABETH never intended nor meant in her heart to match with the King
of Spain, being quite contrary to her virtuous disposition; having a fervent
desire and settled resolution to ground and advance the true Protestant
Religion, to which she was most zealous. Therefore deeming that she could not
undertake or uphold a worthier thing, more agreeable to God, nor more
efficacious for to quench the flames of the pretended love of so importunate a
Suitor, then to labor to procure an alteration of Religion with all possible
means and speed which could be, not doubting in so doing to alter likewise
the will and intent of King Philip: Whereupon and forthwith her Majesty
consulted and took advice with her most intimate and sincere Privy
Counselors, Book 1. 1559.
how in abolishing the Roman Religion, she could conveniently settle, in stead
of it, the true Catholic and Christian Faith, and examining what dangers might
succeed and happen thereby, Her Majesty deliberates and labors for the
re-establishment of the Protestants Religion.
and how they could be prevented and avoided: who foresee and judge what
dangers could be procured either out of the Kingdom, or within the Realm:
without, either by the Pope, who surely would not miss (raging with his
excommunications) to expose the Realm as a prey to whosoever could invade it:
Or by the French King, who taking such opportunity at the occasion, by that
would slake and delay the Treatise of Peace, which was already begun in the
City of Cambray: or else, and rather in the behalf of the Royal Queen of
Scotland, would declare open war with England, under color of Enemies, and
Heretics, She considers what dangers might happen thereby.
and would possess thereunto Scotland to condescend to it, which at that time
was at his command and disposing: Or by the Irish, who were most addicted to
Papistry, and much apt and given to rebellion; or by the King of Spain, who
was then most mighty and powerful in the Netherlands, Englands neighboring
Countries.

Upon this, thoroughly and well considered, Without the Realm.
they first resolve: that for the Popes excommunication, her Majesty should
not fear, accounting it but as a brutish rage and fury, and that if a Peace
was offered by the French King, it was behoofefull and requisite to entertain
it; if not, to seek it by all means, because in it, it would comprehend the
love of Scotland, yet nevertheless not to forsake or disparage any kind of
ways, the Protestants of France and Scotland. Also, that it was requisite to
fortify and strengthen the Town and Garrison of Berwicke, with the rest of
the Frontires of Scotland, and Ireland, and by all means possible to increase
and maintain such formal Jove, and the ancient alliance with those of
Burgundy.

Within the Realm: first, Within the Kingdom.
by such Nobles who had bin dejected from the Queens Privy Council; Book 1.
1558.
next, by such Bishops and Churchmen, who should be degraded and put out of
their benefices and places; and after, by those Justices of the peace, that
were for each County: as also, by the common people, who under Queen MARY'S
reign were most affectionate to the Roman Church. Therefore they deemed and
thought good, first, to deprive such of their offices, and reprehend them by
the severity of Laws, as Queen MARY had formerly used the Protestants: and
therefore, to admit and institute, in each place and office of command, the
Protestants only, and to settle them in every College of both Universities,
and by the like means to discharge and turn out all Papists-Professors, and
Rectors there, and also such Schoolmasters and Tutors of Winchester, Aeton,
and other free Schools: and for those, who being possessed only of a desire of
Change, (though Protestants) had begun to invent a new Ecclesiastical Policy,
that it was likewise requisite to reprehend them in time: and to suffer and
tolerate but one and the selfsame Religion through the whole Realm, for
fear that diversities of Religion should kindle seditions betwixt and among
the people of England, being a warlike Nation, both courageous and generous.
Therefore special charge and care was given to Sir Thomas Smith, a worthy
Knight, truly judicious and wise, also to the noble Gentlemen, M. Parker,
Master Bill, Master Coxe, Master Grindall, Master Whitehead, and Master
Pilkinton, (who all were most learned and temperate) for the correcting of the
Liturgy, which had been before penned and published in English in King EDWARD
the Sixt's reign, without making any more privy thereunto, but the Lord
Marquis of Northampton, the Earl of Bedford, I. Gray of Pyrg, and Cecil.

The Queen rebukes, and reprehends
But certain Ministers, impatient of delay, by the length of time which ran
and past away in these things, desiring rather to run before good Laws, than
to expect them, in their fervent zeal began to preach the Gospel of Christ's
true Doctrine, first, privately in houses, and then, openly in Churches at
which, the Commons, the impatience of certain zealous Ministers of the Word of
God.
curious of novelties, ran thither, and whole flocks of people resorted to
their hearing, from all parts and places, in great multitudes, contesting so
earnestly one with another (the Protestants against the Papists) upon questions
of controversies in Religion, that, for to prevent tumults and seditions, and
also the occasions of further quarrels and strifes, the Queens most excellent
Majesty was, as it were, compelled of necessity to defend expressly by strict
Proclamation to all in general, not to dispute any more, nor enter into any
such questions: yet notwithstanding, giving full leave and authority to read
to her people the holy Gospel, and the Epistles and Commandments, Queen
Elizabeth allows divine Service to be read in the English Tongue.
(but not as yet to make any explication thereof) and to have the Lords Prayer,
the Apostolical Creed, and the Letanie in the vulgar tongue. And for the
rest, she ordained the Roman style to be observed, until that, by the
authority of a Parliament, the whole form of Gods Divine Service should be
settled, and of new instituted: and in the mean while, Her Majesty celebrates
her Sisters Funeral, and that of the Emperor Charles the Fifth.
her Majesty solemnized Qu. MARY'S Funeral; which glorious preparation made
then a most magnificent show, in Westminster: and shortly after, she paid to
Charles the Fifth his honors, who two years before (rare example of all
Caesar's, and more glorious than all his victories) in conquering himself, had
renounced his Empire, withdrawing himself from this mortal life, to live for
ever wholly with God.

Book 1. 1559.
THE SECOND YEAR OF HER REIGN. Anno Domini, 1559.
Queen Elibeth re-establisheth and creates diverse Noblemen.
AT the beginning of this year, Queen ELIZABETH re-established, and restored
of new, W. Parr to the dignity of Marquis of Northampton, who under Queen
MARY'S reign had been degraded of that honor.

Her Majesty also reconferred the Barony of Beauchamp, and Earldom of
Hartford, unto Edward Seymor, a noble Gentleman, who by the force of a private
Law, the malice and envy of his adversaries, had been deprived of the greatest
part of his Patrimony, and Ancestors honors. Her Majesty likewise honored
with the Title of Viscount Bindon, the Lord Thomas Howard, second son to
Thomas Duke of Norfolk, (who was father to the gracious Princess Frances
Duchess of Richmond and Lenox, now living.) Moreover, her Majesty created
Sir Henry Carry, Baron of Hunsdon, who was allied to her Majesty by the Lady M.
Bullen; and that Noble Gentleman, Oliver Saint John, she made Baron of Bletso,
who all were free from the Popish Religion. After this, her Majesty is conuayed
in pomp and Royal Magnificency, On Wednesday, the 23. day of Nouemb. Queen
Elizabeth removed from Hatfield unto the Charterhouse, to the Noble Lord NORTHS
House, where her Majesty lay five days, and rode in open Charet, from the Lord
NORTHS House, along Barbican, entering into the City at Criple-Gate. and so came
to the Tower, from thence to Westminster, where she was inaugurated.
from the Tower of London to Westminster, through the City of London, with
incredible applause, and general acclamations, (which, as her Majesty was
equally venerable, in sight and hearing, increased meruailously) and the next
morning, her Majesty was there inaugurated with the right of her Ancestors,
and anointed by Owen Oglethorpe, Bishop of Carlisle, when as the Archbishop of
York, and diverse other Prelates, had refused the performance of that duty,
through a suspicious fear of the Roman Religion; conceived partly, because her
Majesty had been brought up from the Cradle, in the Protestant Religion: and
partly also, that she had a little before, forbidden a Bishop (at the Divine
Service) from lifting up and adoring the Host* and likewise permitted to have
the Letany, Epistles and the Gospel in English, which they held as execrable:
Yet Queen ELIZABETH was truly godly, pious, and zealously devoted: for her
Majesty was not so soon out of her bed, but fell upon her knees in her
private Closet, praying to God devoutly: Certain hours were by her Majesty
reserved and vowed to the Lord. Moreover, her Majesty never failed any Lords
day and holy day to frequent the Chapel; neither was ever any Prince
conversant in Divine Service, with more devotion, then her sacred Majesty was.
She zealously heard all the Sermons in Lent, being attyred in black, and
very diligently gave attention thereunto, according to the ancient use and
custom, although she said and repeated oftentimes, that which she had read of
HENRY the third, her Predecessor, that her Majesty had rather in her Prayers
speak to God devoutly, then hear others speak of Him eloquently. And
concerning the Cross, our blessed Lady, and the Saints, she never conceived
irreuerently of them, Q. Elizabeth's opinion concerning sacred things.

She calls a Parliament, which is held the second year of her reign.


neither spoke her self, nor suffered any others to speak of them, without a
certain kind of Reverence.

Within few days after, there was a Parliament held, in which was enacted by a
general consent: First, that Queen ELIZABETH was and ought to be, both by the
Divine and Civil Law, and the Statutes of this Realm, (and as I may use their
proper terms and form) the lawful, undoubted, and direct Queen of England,
rightly and lawfully descending from the Royal Blood, according to the order
of succession; which was likewise formerly enacted by Parliament, in the five
and thirtieth year of King HENRY the Eighth; yet nevertheless, that Law was
not abolished, by which her Father excluded both her and her Sister MARY, from
succeeding him in the Crown: And therefore it was thought by some, that the
Lord Bacon, upon whom her Majesty relied, as an Oracle of the Law, had
forgotten himself, and was destitute in that particular of his wonted
Prudencie, in not foreseeing the event: and especially, because the Duke of
Northumberland had objected the same both against her Sister MARY, and her
self; and to that end Queen MARY had abolished it, in as much as concerned her
self. At which time, there were some that drew against her Majesty most
dangerous inuectiues and conclusions, in such manner as if she had not bin
lawful Queen, although the Laws of England many years ago determined, Que
la Couronne vnefois prinse often toute sort de defaults. That the Crown once
possessed, clears and purifies all manner of defaults or imperfections. But
many, on the other side, commended the wisdom of the Lord Bacon therein, as
unwilling, in regard of such confusion of the Laws and Acts, to open a wound
already clozed up with the Time: For, that which made for Queen ELIZABETH,
seemed to tend to the shame and disgrace of Queen MARY. And therefore she
held her self to the Law made in the five and thirtieth year of King HENRY
the Eighth, who restored and vpheld, in a certain manner, each of their
Honors.

Afterward, Propositions to reform Religion.
there was in the Parliament likewise propounded, that forasmuch as concerned
the Crown of England, and the ancient jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical matters,
should be re-established, with the Laws of King HENRY the Eighth, against the
Sea of Rome; and of EDWARD the Sixth, in the behalf of the Protestants, which
Queen MARY had utterly abolished; ordaining, That all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, and Spiritual Preheminences, which heretofore were in use, and
appointed by Authority, for to correct Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, and
other Enormities in Ecclesiastical Affairs, should for ever remain as united
to the Crown of England; and that the Queens Majesty with her successors,
should likewise have full power to appoint Officers by their Letters Patents,
to execute this Authority: nevertheless, upon this charge, that they should
not define any thing to be haereticall, but that which had been declared such
long ago, by the holy and Canonical Scriptures, or by the four first
Oecuminike Councels, or others, according to the true and natural sense of the
holy Scripture; or which should afterward in some Synod, by the authority of
the Parliament, and approbation of the Clergy of England, be declared, That
every Ecclesiastical Magistrate, and such as receive pension out of the
public Treasure, to advance and promote themselves in the Universities, to
emancipate Pupils, to inuest Domaines, or receive servants of the Royal House,
were obliged by Oath, to acknowledge her Royal Majesty, the sole and
sovereign Governor of the Realm (for as much as concerns the Title of
Sovereign Head of the Church of England, it pleased her not) in all things, or
causes as well spiritual as temporal, all foreign Princes and Potentates
excepted, entirely excluded, to inform of any causes within the Lands of her
obeisance.

The 18. of March.
But there were nine Bishops that sare the same day in the upper House of
Parliament, and opposed themselves, and were wilfully refractary against these
Laws (being then but fourteen alive) namely, the Archbishop of York, the
Bishops of London, of Winchester, of Worcester, of Landaff, of Couentrie, of
Exceter, of Chester, and of Carlil, with the Abbot of Westminster. And amongst
the Nobility, there were none that gave advice that England should be reduced
again to the unity of the Roman Church, and obedience of the Apostolic Sea,
except the Earl of Shropshire, and Anthony Brown, Vicount Montaigue; who, as
I said here before, was in Queen MARY'S Reign, sent in Embassage to Rome, by
the States of the Kingdom, with Thurbey, Bishop of Ely; who by a fervent zeal
of Religion, insisted sharply, that it were a great shame for England, if she
should retire so suddenly from the Apostolic Sea, unto which it was but lately
reconciled; and more danger, if by reason of such revolt, it should be exposed
(by the thunder of an Excommunication) to the rage of her enemies: That by
order and authority of the States, he had, in the name of the whole Kingdom
of England, offered obedience unto the Pope, and he could not but acquit
himself of this promise. And therefore he tried and endeavored to prevail so
much by Prayers, that they would not retire or draw back from the Sea of Rome,
of which they held the Christian Faith, which they had always kept. But when
these things were brought to the Lower House, there were many more than in the
upper House, that consented jointly to these Laws. Whereupon the Papist,
murmuring much, said, that of a deliberate purpose, they had elected the most
part of the Deputies amongst the Protestants, as well of the Shires, as of the
Cities and Corporations, and that the Duke of Norfolk, and the Earl of
Arundell, the most powerful and mightyest amongst the Peers, had
industriously bribed the suffrages for the profit which they drew, or hoped to
draw thereby.

Spirits then disagreeing for matters of Religion, by one and the same Edict,
all persons were forbidden to speak irreuerently of the Sacrament of the
Altar; and permitted to communicate under both species: And a Conference
appointed against the last of March, They establish a Dispute betwixt
Protestant and Papist.
betwixt the Protestants and the Papists, in which the States of the Land
should be present; and for the same, to keep and hold elect, for the
Protestants, Richard Coxe, Whitehead, Edmund Grindall, Robert Horn, Edward
Sands, Edward Guests, John Elmar, and John Jewel: For the Papists, John
White, Bishop of Winchester, Rad. Bain, of Couentrie and Lichfield, and Thomas
Watson of Lincoln; Doctor Cole, Deane of Saint Paul; Doctor Landgal,
Archdeacon of Lewis, Doctor Harpesfield of Canterbury, and Doctor Chatsie of
Middlesexe. The Questions propounded, were these following: Of the celebration
of the Divine Service in the Vulgar Tongue: of the authority of the Church, for
to establish or abolish Ceremonies, according as it is expedient, and of the
Sacrifice of the Mass. But all this Disputation came to nothing; The success
thereof.
for after some conference, and writings delivered from the one to the other
side, and not agreeing upon the form of the disputing, the Protestants began
to triumph, as obtaining the Victory, and the Papists to complain of their
hard usage, for not being advertised but a day or two before: and that Sir
Nicholas Bacon, the Lord Keeper (being a man little read in Theology) and
their great Enemy, sat as Judge, although he was but merely appointed for
Moderator. But the truth is, that having thought more seriously upon this
matter; they durst not, without express order from the Pope, call in question
such high points which are not argued in the Church of Rome. And they cried of
all sides, When is it, that one shall know, what he ought truly to believe,
if it be always permitted to dispute of Faith? Disputers of Religion always
return to the Scepters, and such like things. And the Bishops of Lincoln and
Winchester were so offended with it, that they were of opinion, that the Queen,
and those that had caused her to forsake the Church of Rome, should be
excommunicated, and punished with imprisonment for it: But the wiser sort, that
it must be left to the Judgment of the Pope, for fear that those which were
her Subjects, should not seem, in doing this, to shake off their obedience due
to their Princess, and to display the Ensign of Sedition. And that was not
hidden to the Pope, Sir Edward Carne is detayned at Rome.
who being also presently moved with Choler, commands Sir Edward Carne of
Wales, a Ciuill-Lawier, who had been Ambassador at Rome for HENRY the Eighth,
and MARY, and was then for Queen ELIZABETH, to quite this charge, and (to use
the same terms) by the vigor or force of the commandment that was made unto
him, by the Oracle of the lively voice of our most holy Lord the Pope, in
virtue of the most holy obedience, and upon pain of the greatest
Excommunication, and loss of all his goods, not to go out of the City, but
to take upon him the administration of the Hospital of the English: And did
it, to hinder, that he should not give notice of the secret trains of the
French, against Queen ELIZABETH, as he had done before, with a great care, for
the love he bore to his Country. Nevertheless, some thought that this old
man, voluntarily chose this exile, for the zeal he bore to the Roman Religion.

Disputes and strifes for the Town of Calais.
In the mean time, (I omit for a while the affairs of the Church and
Parliament, to observe the order of time) the Ambassadors of England and
Spain, which treated of Peace in the City of Cambray, were in debate with the
French about the restitution of Calais, but they could not in any manner
obtain it, although they should have propounded to quit the^ of three Millions
of Gold, which France ought by lawful obligation. The Spaniard, who otherwise
altogether different from Peace, held the English side, and surely with as much
truth as honor, because the Queen had lost this Town by his occasion; and
fore saw that it was expedient for Flanders, that it should be in their
obedience. The French interrupted him* saying, that she alone could not
recompense the damages which the English had done them, their Towns being
taken by the Spaniards by reason of their aid; and many Borroughs in base
Britain were sacked and burned; many Ships taken, and their Commerce or
Traffic, which is the sinews of War, broken: That they had disbursed
infinite sums of money, to hinder their firings; that Calais was the ancient
patrimony of France, and that if it had been lost by War long ago, it had
also then been recovered by Arms; therefore, that it ought not to be
restored, and that the States of France had so resolved. That surrendering it,
were, to put weapons into their Enemies hands, and withdraw for ever the Kings
Subjects from his obedience: and therefore that it was an unjust thing for the
English to demand it. The English, on the contrary, maintained, that they
demanded it with reason and Justice; because, say they, during one, yea, two
ages, he had took Englands part, and that they had not only conquered it by
War, but that it was also fallen unto them by hereditary succession, and by
cession made by virtue of the pactions and agreements, in exchanges of other
places, which the Kings of England had likewise granted to them of France. That
these damages ought not to be imputed to them, but to the Spaniards, who,
against their will, had drawn and associated them in this War; in which,
through the loss of well-fortified places, and the taking of many of their
Captains, they had received much more damage than the French, and had had no
profit thereby. That all that the States of France order or decree, is not
reasonable, because it is only profitable; and that Calais could not be
lawfully or justly detayned, seeing that by the Conditions already agreed upon,
all the places that were taken in the late Wars, were restored unto other
Princes.

To which, the French replied, that it was done in consideration of the
marriages which ought to be contracted with the other Princes, and hereupon
propounded to marry the first Daughter who should issue by the mighty Princess
Mary Queen of Scotland, and the Dolphin of France; with the first Son that
might be procreated by Queen ELIZABETH, to whom she should bring in dowry the
Town of Calais; and that for this cause, the Queen of Scotland should quit
her right which she had unto the Kingdom of England; or otherwise, to marry
the first Daughter which should be borne of Queen ELIZABETH, with the eldest
Son that should descend from the Queen of Scotland: and hereupon the English
should renounce the right which they pretend unto the Realm of France, and the
French should be discharged of all the debts they ought to England, and that
Calais should in the mean time remain in their hands. But these propositions
being uncertain for another time, they sought to win time, and increase the
delays, but were contemned by the English, who made as if they seemed not to
have heard them. As they stood upon these terms, the Spaniard having advice
that Queen ELIZABETH did not only break the marriage which he had offered
her, but likewise changed many things in Religion, began to give over the
desire which he seemed to have before the restitution of Calais; and his
Ambassadors almost losing their patience, were somewhat of accord with the
French: for the rest made account to continue the wars no longer for Calais,
unless the English would contribute more men and money as before, and would
advance it for six year. This raised the heart of the Cardinal of Lorraine,
who assured the Spaniards that the Queen of Scotland his Niece was truly and
undoubtedly Queen of England, and therefore that the King of Spain ought to
employ all his forces, if he made any account of justice, to cause Calais to be
delivered into the hands of his Niece, the direct Queen of England. But the
Spaniards, which suspected the power of France, not hearing that willingly,
tried secretly to draw out of England the Lady Katherine Gray, the younger Niece
of King HENRY the Eighth, for his Sisters sake, to oppose her to the Queen of
Scotland, and the French, if Queen ELIZABETH should happen to decease, and to
hinder thereby that France might not be augmented by the surcrease of England
and Ireland; And strongly insisted, that there should be a Truce betwixt
England, and France, until such time they should agree together, and that in
the mean time Calais should be sequestered in the hands of the King of Spain,
as an Arbitrator of honor. But that was refused as much by the French as the
English.

Queen ELIZABETH had well presaged that: for she could not hope for any good
from the Spaniards side, seeing that she had contemned and despised to marry
with their King, and changed Religion. She also had knowledge, that the treaty
of Cambray was not made for any other purpose, but to exterminate and root out
the Religion of the Protestants. And truly the consideration of her Sex, and
the scarsitie of treasure, made her Majesty find, that peace was more to be
wished for than war, though most just. Also, it was her ordinary saying, that
there was more glory in settling a peace by wisdom, than in taking up arms to
make war; neither did she think that it was beseeming either to her
dignity, or to the dignity of the name of the English, to rely upon the
defense of the Spaniard. And she thought therefore, that it was better for her
to make a peace aside and separably, and to go through and conclude for Calais
with the King of France, being solicited thereunto by continual Letters from
the Duke of Mont-morancy, Constable of France, and the Duke of Vandosme, A
treaty of peace with the French King.
as also by message of the Duke of Guise, who sent the Lord Gray (who had been
taken prisoner at Guienne, and released to that end. And for to conclude this
agreement, B. Caualcance, a Lord of Florence, was employed, who from his
infancy had been brought up in England, with whom the French King having
conferred in secret, did hold that it should be safer to treat thereof by new
Commissioners in such private Country-houses of the Kingdoms of England or
France, that were of no great note. But Queen ELIZABETH being moved, showed
her self to be of a manly courage, in declaring that she was a Princess
absolutely free, for to undergo her affairs either by her own self, or by
her Ministers: and although that during the reign of her Sister, nothing was
concluded, but according to the Spaniards advice, and that she would
nevertheless, without giving him the least notice, or taking his counsel,
dispatch these affairs between the Deputies of both sides, not in an obscure
and private place, The Castle in Cambresis.
but openly in the Castle of Cambresis, near Cambrai. This offended no less
the Spaniard, than the refusal and contempt of his marriage with her Majesty,
with the alteration of Religion, had done heretofore. Nevertheless, the
French, who was crafty and cunning enough, to discover how she was affected to
match with Spain, prayed her Majesty first of all to take away two scruples
from them, before the yielding of Calais; to wit, that they forsaking that
Town, before they were assured whom she should marry, it might easily fall
into the hands of the Spaniard, because that he would have her Majesty, if
possible, upon any condition, and that there is nothing so dear, but women
will part with it to their beloved husbands: the other, whether, as the
Spaniards boast, that the English have such near alliance with them, that they
ought to join in arms with them against all Nations whatsoever, to these it
was answered, that her Majesty bore such motherly affection toward the
Kingdom of England, that she would never part with Calais, for to favor a
husband, and that although her Matie should grant it, yet England would never
suffer it. Moreover, that betwixt her Majesty, and Spain, there was not any
such alliance, but a mere forced amity, and that her Majesty was most free
for any contract with any Prince which might be commodious and beneficial to
England. Upon this, it was thought good and expedient, that the Commissioners
of each part should equally use their utmost endeavors in the Castle of
Cambray, to agree all differences, and to conclude a peace. Therefore Queen
ELIZABETH sent for England, as Commissioners, Thurlbie Bishop of Elie, the Lord
Howard, Baron of Effingham, Lord high Chamberlain to her Majesty, and Doctor
Wotton Deane of the two Metropolitan Sees of Canterbury and York. For the
French King, Charles Cardinal of Lorraine, Archbishop and Duke of Rheims, the
chiefest Peer of France, Anne Duke of Mont-morancy, Peer, Constable, and
great master of France, Lord James Aulbon, Lord of Saint Andrews, Marquis of
Fronsac, and Lord Marshall of France, John of Moruillier, Bishop of Orliens,
and Claude Aubespine, Secretary of the Priuy-Councell of France. These jointly
agreed and concluded such Articles as are here set down almost in the same
words.

That none of these Sovereigns shall go about to invade each others
Countries, Articles of Peace, made and agreed upon 'twixt the Queens Majesty
and the French King, Henry the second.
nor give assistance to any that should intend any such design: if any of
their Subjects should attempt any thing tending to that effect, they should be
punished, and the peace thereby not infringed nor violated. The commerce should
be free; and that the Subjects of each Prince, who have ships of War, before
they go to Sea, shall give sufficient caution not to rob each others
subjects. The fortifications of Aymouth in Scotland shall be raised; that the
French King shall enjoy peaceably for the space of eight years, Calais, and
the appurtenances thereunto; as also, sixteen of the greatest pieces of
Ordnance; and that time being expired, he shall deliver it up into the hands
of Queen ELIZABETH; and that eight sufficient Merchants, such as are not
subjects to the French King, should enter into bond for the payment of five
hundred thousand crowns to be paid, if Calais were not restored,
notwithstanding the right of Queen ELIZABETH still to remain firm and whole;
and that five Hostages should be given to her Majesty, until such time as
these Cautions should be put in, if, during that time, something might be
attempted or altered by Queen ELIZABETH, or her Majesty's Subjects, of her
own authority, command and approbation, by Arms directly or indirectly,
against the most Christian French King, or the most mighty Queen of Scotland,
they shall be quitted, and discharged of all promise and faith plighted to that
purpose; the Hostages and the Merchants should be freeed: if either by the said
Christian King, the Queen of Scots, or the Dolphin, any thing should be
attempted against the Queen of England, they shall be bound to yield her the
Possession of Calais, without any further delay.

A Peace is concluded and agreed upon between the Queens Majesty and the
Queen of Scotland.
At the very same time and place, and by the same Deputies, there was also a
peace concluded between the Queen of England, and Francis and Mary, King and
Queen of the Scots: whereupon they brought unto the English and Scots,
certain Articles, concerning the grant of safe conduct for those who had
spoiled and robbed the Frontiers, and for the Fugitives of the Country: About
which, there being a meeting at Vpsaltington, between the Earl of
Northumberland, Cuthbert Tunstall, Bishop of Dunelme, Gu. Lord Dacre of
Grillesland, and Iac. Croft, Captain of the Town and Castle of Barwicke, all
Englishmen, on the one part: the Earl of Morton, the Lord of Home, and S.
Cler. Deane of Glasco, all Scottish-men, on the other part: They proclaimed
thorowout all England, the Peace concluded between the Queen of England, the
King of France, the Dolphin, and the Queen of Scots, which seemed very harsh
unto the people, and conceived to be much dishonorable, in regard that Calais
which they had lost, was not restored, the Protestants laying the fault upon
the Papists, The Lord Baron Wentworth, and others, are called in question, and
brought in compass of the Law, concerning the loss of Calais.
and they upon the Baron Wentworth, a Protestant, who having been under the
government of Queen MARY, accused in that behalf, and not brought to
public hearing, was again taxed, and brought to judgment, but upon hearing,
was freed by the sentence of the Peers. But Rad. Chamberlain, who had been
sometime Governor of the Castle of Calais, and John Hurleston of the Fort of
Risbanc, were adjudged to dye, as guilty de laesa Maiestate, for abandoning
their places; howsoever their censure was remitted. The Parliament being ready
to break up, those which were there, thought good to advise the Queen,
forthwith to marry, the great ones being unwilling to yield to that, The whole
Parliament do exhort Queen Elizabeth to marry.
for fear lest some of them might be thought to make this proposition out of
some hope which they might have for themselves. Having then appointed Th.
Gargraue, Deputy of the Lower House, to deliver this message, he addresses
himself to the Queen, with a few choice men: Having first by way of preamble
entreated admittance, and excusing himself with the graciousnesse of her
Majesty, and the importance of the affairs he had to deliver, by this means
procured audience, and in this manner spoke unto her MADAME:
There is nothing which we continually beg at the hands of God with more
ardent Prayers, Thomas Gargraue's Speech made to her Majesty to that purpose.
than the perpetuity of that happiness, which your just and vigilant
government has hitherto procured unto the English Nation. But we cannot
conceive how this should always continue, unless that (which we cannot hope
for) you should continually reign, or by disposing your self to marriage,
might leave Children, which might inherit both your virtues and Kingdom
together; the Almighty and good God so grant. This (MADAME) is the simple and
vnanime desire of all the English, which is the conceit of all others: Every
one ought to have a care of that place and estate he has, and Princes
especially, that sithence they are but mortal, the Commonwealth might be
perpetuis'd in immortality. Now, this eternity you may give unto the English,
if (as nature, age, and your beauty requires) you would espouse your self unto
a Husband, who might assist and comfort you, and, as a Companion, participate
both in your prosperities and adversities. For questionless, the only
assistance of an Husband, is more auayleable in the ordering of affairs, than
the help of a great many joined together, and nothing can be more repugnant to
the common good, than to see a Princess, who by marriage may preserve the
Commonwealth in peace, to lead a single life, like a Vestal Nun. Kings must
leave their Children their Kingdoms, which were left them by their Ancestors,
that by them they may be embellisht, and be settled; and the English have never
had greater care, than to preserve the Royal House from default of Issue.
Which is fresh in memory, when HENRY the Seventh, your Grandfather, provided
marriage for ARTHVR, and HENRY his Children, being yet of tender years; and
how your Father procured in marriage for EDWARD his son, having scarce
attained to eight years of age, Mary the Queen of Scots; and sithence, how
MARY your Sister, notwithstanding she was deeply stricken in years, married
Philip the King of Spain. So, as if the want of Issue be ordinarily given by
GOD as a curse unto private Families, how great an offense is it then in a
Princess, to be a voluntary author of it to her self, sithence so many
miseries ensue thereby; that they must needs pester the Commonwealth with a
multitude of calamities; which is fearful to imagine? But, MADAME, we, this
small number of your Subjects, who here humble our selves at your Majesty's
feet, and in our persons, all England in general, and every Englishman in
particular, do most humbly beseech, and with continual sighs conjure your
Majesty, to take such order, that that may not be.




This is the whole sum of what he spoke unto her, with a great deal of
eloquence, and more words.

To whom, in few words, she answered thus; IN a thing which is not much
pleasing unto me, Her Majesty's answer to them all.
the infallible testimony of your good will, and all the rest of my people, is
most acceptable. As concerning your instant persuasion of me to marriage, I
must tell you, I have been ever persuaded, that I was borne by God to
consider, and, above all things, do those which appertain unto his glory. And
therefore it is, that I have made choice of this kind of life, which is most
free, and agreeable for such humane affairs as may tend to his service only;
from which, if either the marriages which have been offered me by diverse
puissant Princes, or the danger of attempts made against my life, could no whit
divert me, it is long since I had any joy in the honor of a Husband; and this
is that I thought, then that I was a private person. But when the public
charge of governing the Kingdom came upon me, it seemed unto me an
inconsiderate folly, to draw upon my self the cares which might proceed of
marriage. To conclude, I am already bound unto an Husband, which is the
Kingdom of England, and that may suffice you: and this (quoth she) makes me
wonder, that you forget your selves, the pledge of this alliance which I have
made with my Kingdom. (And therwithall, stretching out her hand, she showed
them the Ring with which she was given in marriage, and inaugurated to her
Kingdom, in express and solemn terms.) And reproach me so no more, ( quoth
she) that I have no children: for every one of you, and as many as are
English, are my Children, and Kinsfolks, of whom, so long as I am not
deprived, (and God shall preserve me) you cannot charge me, without offense,
to be destitute. But in this I must commend you, that you have not appointed
me an Husband: for that were unworthy the Majesty of an absolute Princess,
and the discretion of you that are borne my Subjects. Nevertheless, if GOD
have ordained me to another course of life, I will promise you to do nothing
to the prejudice of the Commonwealth, but, as far as possible I may, will
marry such an Husband as shall be no less careful for the common good, than
my self. And if I persist in this which I have proposed unto my self, I
assure my self, that GOD will so direct my counsels and yours, that you shall
have no cause to doubt of a Successor: which may be more profitable for the
Commonwealth, than him which may proceed from me, sithence the posterity of
good Princes does oftentimes degenerate. Lastly, this may be sufficient, both
for my memory, and honor of my Name, if when I have expired my last breath,
this may be inscribed upon my Tomb:

Here lies interred ELIZABETH,
A Virgin pure until her Death.
And moreover then this, they instituted in this Assembly of State, certain
Orders, Other Laws and ordinances established by that Parliament.
to prevent any forcible attempt upon the person of the Queen; to restore
tenths, and first fruits to the Crown, and to establish in every Church an
uniformity of public Prayer, termed the Letany, and the form of administering
the Sacraments used under EDWARD the Sixth, with very little alteration; with
a penalty upon such as should deprave them, or usurp any other then that
form: to attend Divine Service, Sundays and other holy days, upon
twelue-pence damage, to be employed for the poor, for every such default
committed. As also concerning seditious broils against the Queen, the sale of
Deaneries, all maritime Causes, the traffic for Cloth and Iron, mutinous and
unlawful Assemblies: And (to omit the rest, sithence there is no order
imprinted) things concerning the possessions of the Archbishops, and Bishops;
intending, that they could neither give, or farm out the Church-Liuings, but
only for the space of one and twenty years, or for term of three lives, as
they say, to any other person but the Queen and her successors, the reuenews of
former Arrerages still reserved. So as this reservation of the Queen, which
only tended to the benefit of her Court, who abused her bounty; and the
Bishops, who were careful enough for their own profit, continued still in
force, until King James came to the Crown, who utterly cut it off for the good
of the Church. The Nobles of the Land reestablished.
But there was no Act for it; howbeit in the former Parliaments of Kings there
was often. Those who were restored to their goods and honor, were, Greg.
Finch, Baron Dacre, and Tho. his Brother, whose Father was put to death under
HENRY the Eighth; H. Howard, who was afterward Earl of Northampton, and his
three Sisters, the children of H. Howard, Earl of Surrey, who, about the death
of King HENRY the Eighth, had his head cut off for very small offenses: Ioh.
Gray of Pirg. brother to the Marquess of Dorset: James Croft, and H. Gates,
who were convicted of Treason, de laesa Maiestate, under Queen MAREIS Reign,
and diverse others.

The Lyturgie appointed in English.
The Parliament being dismissed, the Lyturgie conceived in the Vulgar tongue, was
forthwith sent unto all Churches; the Images, without any ado, taken from the
Temples, the Oath of Supremacy proposed unto the Bishops, to the Papists, and
other Ecclesiastical professors, who for the most part had formerly lent under
King HENRY the 8. and all that refused to lend, deprived of their Benefices,
Dignities, Papist Bishops deposed and discharged from their Benifices.
and Bishoprics. But, certes, as themselves have certified, in the whole
Kingdom, wherein are numbered 9400. Ecclesiastical Dignities, they could find
but 80. Pastors of the Church, 50. Prebends, 15. Rectors of the College, 12.
Archdeacons, and so many Deanes, 6. Abbots, and Abbesses, and all the Bishops
that were then in Seance, and were 14. in number, besides Anthony, Bishop of
Landaff (who was the calamity of his Sea.) Also N. Heath, Archbishop of York,
who, for nothing, had voluntarily left the Chancellorship, and lived many
years after in a little house of his own at Cobham in Surrey, serving God,
and studying good works, and so acceptable to the Queen, that she refused not
to visit him in that obscure place, with admirable courtesy. Edward Bonner,
Bishop of London, who was sent Ambassador to the Emperor, the Pope, and the
King of France; but such a one, as mixed his Authority with such a sharpnes of
nature, that he was noted of diverse for cruelty, and kept prisoner the most
part of his life. Cuthbert Tunstal of Durham, a man most expert in Learning,
possessed of many honors within the Kingdom, besides, employed as Ambassador
abroad, in diverse weighty Affairs; contested rudely (being yet very young)
against the primacy of the Pope, by a Letter written to Cardinal Pole: and
being a little elder, dyed at Lambeth; where dyed also, Th. Thurlbey, Bishop of
Ely, who had the honor to be accounted most discreet in an Embassage, sent to
Rome to offer obedience to the Pope, and about the Treaty at Cambray. Gilbert
Bourn of Bath and Wels, who had worthily deserved in his place. John
Christopherson of Chester, so understanding in the Greek Tongue, that he
translated diverse works of Eusebius and Philon, to the great benefit of the
Christian Commonwealth. Ioh. White, de Winton, generally learned, and
reasonably qualified in Poetry, according to the fashion of the time. Tho.
Watson of Lincoln, very pregnant in the acutest Divinity, but somewhat in an
austere grave manner. Rad. Bain of Couentrie and Lichfeild, who was one of the
restorers of the Hebrew tongue, and chief professor of the same in Paris,
under the Government of Francis the first, under whom Learning began to
flourish. Owen Oglethorp of Carlisle: Ia. Turberuile of Exceter: and D. Pole of
Peterborough: Fequenham the Abbot of Benedictins, a sage and good man, who
lived long, and by his public alms, won the heart of his Adversaries, but
was put by his place. All these were first imprisoned; but forthwith, for the
most part, left to the guard, either of their friends, or the Bishops: except
these two, more turbulent then the rest; the Bishop of Lincoln, and the Bishop
of Winchester, who threatened to excommunicate the Queen. But these three,
Cuthbert, a Scottish-man, Bishop of Chester: Richard Pat of Wigorne: and Tho.
Goldwell of Asaph, voluntarily forsook the Country: in like manner, some
religious, and afterward some Nobles, amongst who^, the most remarkable, were,
H. Baron of Morle, Inglefeild, and Pecckam, both whom were of the
Priuie-Councell to Queen MARY, Tho. Shelle, and Ioh. Gagd.

Other Protestants learned and zealous Divines, are instituted Bishops in their
places.
The learned Protestants that could be found, were preferred to the places of
Bishops deceased, and of Fugitives; and Mat. Parker, a godly, wise, and right
modest man, who was one of the Priuie-Councell to King HENRY the 8. and Deane
of the College Church of Stocclair, being solemnly chosen Archbishop of
Canterbury, after preaching of the Word, calling of the holy Ghost, and
celebration of the Eucharist, was consecrated by the imposition of hands of
three ancient Bishops; Gu. Barlo, Bishop of Bath, Ioh. Scor. of Chester, Miles
Couerdall of Exceter; Ioh. Suffragant de Bedford, de Lambeth: and afterward the
same Bishops consecrated Ed. Grindall, a rare Divine, Bishop of London: Richard
Coxe, who was Tutor to EDWARD the Sixth when he was a Child, of Ely: Edward
Sands, an eloquent Preacher, of Winchester: Rob. Merick, of Bangor: Tho. Young,
a deep professor in the Civil and Canonical Law, of Saint David's: N.
Bolingham, Counselor of the Law, of Lincoln: John Jewel, absolutely
judicious in all liberal Science, of Salisburie: Richard Dauis, of Asaph:
Edward Guests, of Rochester: Gilbert Barde, of Bath: Thomas Bentham, of
Couentrie and Lichfield: Gu. All, a pithy expounder of the holy Scripture, of
Exceter: John Parkhurst, a famous humanist, of Norwich: Robert Horn, of a
hardy and copious spirit, of Winchester: Richard Chesne, of Gloucester: and
Edw. Scamber, of Peterborough: but they placed Gu. Barlo, Bishop of Chester,
who, during the reign of HENRY the Eighth, was Bishop of Saint David's, and
afterward of Wells: and for B. of Hereford was appointed Ioh. Scori, a skillful
and judicial man, who was formerly Bishop of Chichester: in like manner in the
Province of York, Young being transferred from his place of Saint David's to
York, consecrated Ia. Pilkinton, a most godly and learned man, Bishop of
Dunelme: Io. Best, of Carlisle, and Gu. Downham, of Chester. I leave
Ecclesiastical Historians to relate what these men were, and what miseries
they suffered under the Government of Queen MARY, being either fugitives in
the Low Countries, or hidden close in England.

And forasmuch as Learned men were rare to be found, diverse Mechanicke
Shopkeepers, as simple as the Papists Priests, attained unto Ecclesiastical
Dignities, Prebends, and Benefices of good revenue; which diverse Priests
perceiving, and hoping above all things, to expulse the Protestants out of
their Churches, and by this means, to get something to relieve the necessities
of such amongst them as were deposed, thought it most expedient, both for the
advancement of themselves and their Religion, to swear obedience to their
Princess, in renouncing the Authority of the Pope, deeming this wisdom
meritorious, and were in some hope, to procure from his Holiness, according to
his Jurisdiction, a Dispensation for his Oath.

Thus was Religion changed in England, By what degrees Religigion was altered
here.
all Christendom being amazed, that it could so easily be effected without
Sedition: But the truth is, that this change was not so suddenly made: neither
can it (since it is so) be easily tolerated, but by little and little by
degrees: For, summarily to repeat what I have hereupon spoken: The Roman
Religion continued in the same state it was first, a full Month and more,
after the death of Queen MARY: The 27. of September, it was tolerated to have
the Epistles and Gospels, the ten Commandments, the Symbol, the Lettany, and
the Lords Prayer, in the Vulgar Tongue: The 22. of March, the Parliament being
assembled, the Order of EDWARD the Sixth was re-established, and by Act of the
same, the whole use of the Lords Supper granted under both kinds: The 24. of
June, by the authority of that which concerned the uniformity of public
Prayers, and administration of the Sacraments, the Sacrifice of the Mass was
abolished, and the Lyturgie in the English Tongue, more and more established.
In the Month of July, the Oath of Allegiance was proposed to the Bishops, and
other persons; and in August, Images were thrown out of the Temples and
Churches, and broken and burned. And because some malignant spirits, detracting
from the Queen, as if she had assumed unto her self the Title of Chief
Sovereign of the Church of England, and authority to celebrate sacred Rites in
the Church, she declared by Proclamation, That she attributed no more unto her
self, then what did of long time belong to the Crown of England; which was,
that next under God, she had supreme Soueraignetie and power over all States of
England, whether Ecclesiastical or Lay, and that no other Foreign Power,
had, or could have any Jurisdiction or authority over them.

The profit which proceeds from change of Religion.
By this alteration of Religion, (as Politicians have observed) England became
the freest Kingdom in all Christendom; because by this means, it had freed
the Scepter from foreign slavery of the Pope of Rome: and most rich, because
it prevented the great sums of money, which were daily transported to Rome,
for First-fruites, Indulgences, Appellations, Dispensations, and such other
like things; and thereby the Commonwealth was void and deprived, beyond all
imagination.

Her Majesty's diligent care to defend both the the true Religion and
Commonwealth.
The Protestants Religion being thus established by the authority of of the
Parliament, the first and principal care of Queen ELIZABETH was, to defend
and maintain it still sound and impregnable against all sort of machynation
whatsoever, in the very midst of her Enemies, which, through this occasion,
she had incurred against her; And she would never endure to hear the least
News at all. Her second care was, to maintain equity all her life time, and
in all her Actions: in token whereof, she took this device unto her self:

ALWAYS ONE: Qu. Elizabeth's Motto or Posey. SEMPER EADEM.
For her other designs, she concluded them to provide for the safety of her
Subiests: For, as she often said, that to the end the Commonwealth should be
in safety, her self never could be: And that, to make her Subjects love her,
her Enemies fear her, and all to praise her; knowing, that what was begun
with wisdom, and kept by care, was firm and lasting. Now, how by her
Masculine care and counsel, she surmounted her Sex, and what she did most
wisely, in preventing, diuerting, and powerfully resisting the attempts of her
Enemies, those that now live, and shall hereafter, will be able to judge of
what I shall draw out and set forth of things, if I may call them so, in the
Kingdoms own memory.

At that time, the Emperor, Her answer to foreign Princes, interceding for
the Papists.
and the Christian Princes interceding by continual Letters, that she would
use the Bishops which were retired out of her Realm, gently, and suffer the
Papists to have Churches in Towns by the Protestants: She answered, that
although the Bishops had, in the sight of all the world, against the Laws and
Peace of the Kingdom, and obstinately rejected the same Doctrine which the
most of them had, under the Reign of HENRY the Eighth, and EDWARD the Sixth,
propounded to others, voluntarily and by public writings, that she would use
them meekely, for those great Princes sakes; notwithstanding, she could not
do it without offending her Subjects: But to let them have Churches by the
others, she could not, with the safety of the Commonwealth, and without
wounding of her Honor and Conscience: neither had she reason to do it,
seeing that England embraced no new Religion, nor any other, then that which
Jesus Christ has commanded, that the Primitive and Catholic Church has
exercised, and the ancient Fathers have always, with one voice and one mind,
approved. And, to allow them to have diverse Churches, and diverse manners of
service, besides that it is directly oppugnant to the Laws established by the
authority of the Parliament, it were to breed one Religion out of another; and
draw the spirits of honest people into varieties; to nourish the designs of
the factious; to trouble Religion and Commonwealth, and to confound humane
things with Divine, which would be ill in effect, and worse in example;
pernicious to her Subjects, and not assured at all to those to who^ it should
be allowed; and above all, at their request, she was resolved to cure the
particular insolency of some, by winking at something; nevertheless, without
favoring in any sort, The Emperor seeks the Queen for his Son.
the obstinacy of their spirits.

The Spaniard having lost all hope to marry her, and being ready to marry the
Daughter of France, notwithstanding, thinks seriously of England, nothing
desirous that it should be joined to the Scepter of France, and to retain the
dignity of so great a Kingdom in his House; obtained of the Emperor
Ferdinand, his Uncle, that he would seek her to wife for his second Son:
which he as soon did by very loving Letters, and followed it very carefully by
Jasper Preimour, a resolute Baron of the Country of Stibing. The Spaniard
himself, to bring her to that, promised her special affection; and she of her
side, made him offer, by Thomas Chaloner, of her Ships, and commodity of her
Havens, for his Voyage for Spain, which he was about, with all remarkable
duties of Friendship.

The King of France challenges the Kingdom of England, for the Queen of
Scotland.
The French, on the other side, casting an eye upon England, left the French
Garrison in Scotland, in favor of the King, Dolphin his son, and Mary Queen
of Scotland, which he had promised to take from thence, upon the agreement
before mentioned, and sent thither underhand supplies, sollicites the Pope of
Rome more vehemently than ever, to declare Queen ELIZABETH an Heretic, and
illegitimate, and Queen Mary of Scotland legitimate of England; and although
the Spaniard, and the Emperor, hindered by their contrary and most strong
practices, (though secretly by the Agents which they had at Rome)
nevertheless, the Guizes carried their credulous ambition with such a
flattering hope, to join Englands Scepter to France, by the means of the
Queen of Scots their niece, that he came so far, as to challenge it for his
Son, and for his Daughter in Law, and commanded them in all their Royal
Letters, to take this Title, Francis and Mary, by the grace of God, King and
Queen of Scotland, England, and Ireland; and to let the Arms of England be
seen in all places, causing them to be painted and graven together with the
French Arms, in their moueables and vtensils, in the walls of their houses, in
their Heralds coats of Arms, notwithstanding any complaint that the English
Ambassador could make, that it was a notorious wrong to Queen ELIZABETH, with
whom he had newly contracted a friendship, being manifest that he had not
done it during the reign of Queen MARIE, though she denounced war against
him. He also levied horse and foot in France and Germany, to go to the
Territories of Scotland, nearest adjoining to England, insomuch that Queen
ELIZABETH had good cause to apprehend it, seeing that he breathed nothing, but
after the blood and slaughter of the Protestants. But these enterprises were
broken by his unlooked for death, happening at the Tilting, Is killed as he
prepared for the war.
which was for the recreation and solemnizing of the marrriages of his Daughter
with the King of Spain, and of his Sister with the Duke of Sauoy: And much to
the purpose it fell out for Queen ELIZABETH'S business, whom he resolved to
set upon with all his forces, as well for being an heretic, as also
illegitimate; on the one side by Scotland, and on the other side, by France.
Nevertheless, to give him royal honors after his death, she caused his
funeral solemnities to be performed, as to a King a friend, with the greatest
pomp, in Saint Paul's Church in London; and forthwith sent Chapter Howard,
Effinghams son, now great Admiral of England and Ireland, to condole with
him for the death of his Father, and to congratulate his succession to Francis
his Son and Successor, exhorting him to entertain inuiolably the friendship
which had lately been begun.

Francis the Second, and the Queen of Scotland, took the title of the Kings
of England.
But Francis, and the Queen of Scotland his wife, by the counsel of the
Guizes, who then had some power in France, behaved himself publicly, as King
of England, and Ireland, kept always the English Arms, which he had usurped,
and made show of them more than ever; and N. Throgmorton, ordinary Ambassador,
a wise, but a hot man, complained to them of this. They first answer him,
that the Queen of Scotland had right to carry those Arms with a bar, to
show the proximity of blood which she had with the royal Race of England.
After, when he had maintained, that by the Law, which they call the Law of
Arms, it is not permitted to any to take the Arms, and Marks of any House,
unless he be descended of some of the Heirs of it, observing to tell him,
that she carried them not, but to cause the Queen of England to leave those
of France. But, having upon that put them in mind how D. Wotton had afore-time
treated at Cambray, how twelve Kings of England had carried the Arms of
France; and, by a right so seldom called in question, that by any of the
treaties which were made between the English and the French, nothing had been
resolved to the contrary; he gained in the end, that they should forbear
absolutely to bear these Arms, by the intercession of M. Memorency, the
Guizes Emulator, who thought it not to be any honor for the King of France, to
take any other Title, or to grave in his Seals any other arms, than the Arms
of the Kings of France; and showed, that this Title alone was of more
importance than many others; and that the precedent Kings had no other, when
they sought their right in Naples and Milan. And truly, from these Titles, and
these Arms, which the King of France, at the instigation of the Guizes, has
taken from the Queen of Scotland, then under age, The original of the hidden
hatred which has been between the Queens of England and Scotland.
all the disasters which afterward happened unto her, have flowed from that:
for from thence came the enmities openly declared by Queen ELIZABETH against
the Guizes, and those which she practiced against her privately, which by the
subtle malice of men, who made use of the growing envy, and of the occasions
which sprung from day to day, have been so fomented on both sides, that
nothing could extinguish them but death; for, Sovereignty admits no Companion,
and Enmity against Majesty is grievous.

A few days after, The French deal unjustly with the English.
in stead of giving four Hostages for the Town of Calais, as they were bound
by the treaty of Cambray, they gave only three: the English Merchants are
injuriously dealt with, in France: one of the Ambassador Throgmortons servants
was sent to the galleys, which F. great Prior of France, had taken and carried
away by force from a public place: Some Pistols were shot at the Ambassador
himself, and in his own lodging; and to make him the more contemptible, he
was served at the Table, with no other Vessel, but such as the Arms of
England and France were jointly graven on. Finally, la Brosse was sent into
Scotland with a troop of choice men; Galleys were sent for from Marseilles,
and from the Mediterranean Sea.

Those in Scotland, Send men of war into Scotland.
which professed the Protestants Religion, and qualified themselves with the
title of the Assembly, persuaded by certain heady Ministers, and especially by
Knox, a most hot controller of the Royal authority, that it behooued the
Peers of the Realm, to take away Idolatry from their authority, and by force
to settle the Princes within the limits prescribed by the Laws, had already
refused to obey the Queene-Mother, The Scots refuse to obey the Queen Regent.
and Regent, though she was a modest and a prudent woman, changed Religion,
tumultuously ransacking and burning the sacred places, and drawn to their
party Hamilton Duke of Chastelraut, the most powerful of all the Kingdom,
much provoked by the wrongs done by the French, and many Nobles were bayted
with hope to have the Ecclesiastical Revenues: insomuch, as they seemed not to
think of Religion, but to plot in good earnest a revolt against the Queen
Regent, and against the French, which made war in Scotland: and accused
James, Prior of Saint Andrews, Bastard brother to the Queen, their Coriphea,
who since was Count of Mura, to have coueted the Kingdom from his Sister. But,
by the holy protestations which he made unto them, he took away all
suspicion of having any other aim but the glory of God, and the Countries
liberty; and that, seeing it oppressed by the Queen Regent, and the French, he
could not choose but lament most bitterly for it. They sent William Maitland of
Lidington Secretary, They seek help of Qu. Elizabeth.
to Queen ELIZABETH; and he, in a pitiful discourse complained to her, that
since the marriage of the Queen of Scotland with the Daulphin, the
administration of the Kingdom had been changed, strange Soldiers spoiled and
ruined all, the French were placed in the chiefest offices of the Kingdom, the
Castles and strong places put into their hands, the pure money corrupted for
their particular profit, and that by these devices and the like, they fortify
themselves, fraudulently to take away the Kingdom, as soon as the Queen
should be dead. Cecill, who was the principal minister that Queen ELIZABETH
used in this business, and in all other, for his singular wisdom, employeth
H. Percy, who afterward was Earl of Northumberland, to know what end the
Lords of that Assembly propounded to themselves, what means they had to
obtain that which they desired; and, if one should send them succor, upon
what conditions might Amity be maintained between the two Kingdoms. They
answered, that they propounded not to themselves any other end, but the
advancement of the glory of Jesus Christ, and the sincere preaching of Gods
Word, to extirpate superstition and idolatry, and to keep the liberty of their
Ancestors: which they knew not by what means it might be done, but they hoped
that God would give success to their designs, according to their desire, to
the confusion of their adversaries. And, as for the intertaining of amity
between the two Kingdoms; that that, was the abridgement of their wishes; and
thereunto vowed their goods, their faith, and their constancy.

They deliberate slowly of these things in England, They deliberate of these
things.
because the Scots were not well furnished with money and arms, nor very
faithful among themselves. But they considered that the Marquis D' Elbeuf,
Uncle to the Queen of Scotland, had levied men in Germany, by the means of
the Ringraue for the Scottish war; that they had brought down into the
Havens, pieces for battery; that the preparations which were made, were greater
than was necessary for the restraining, as was pretended, of a small number of
unarmed Scots; that the French, to draw to their league the King of Denmark,
promised him, that the Duke of Lorraine should quit the right which he
pretended to have to his Kingdom, and that likewise the censure of the Pope
against the Queen, was more importunately solicited, than ever, and a
sentence declaratory for the right of the Queen of Scots to England: there was
sent upon the frontiers of Scotland, one Sadler, a prudent man, and the
Counselor of the Duke of Northumberland, who guarded the South frontier, and
James Croft, Governor of Barwicke. For the Council of England could not see
what these things tended unto, except to invade England, and to pursue by
arms, that which they attributed to themselves by their Coats and Titles.

They resolve to drive the French out of Scotland.
Now do they in England seriously consult upon the business, and it seemed to
them to be a very bad example, that one Prince should lend aid and succor to
the subjects of another Prince, who raise up broils and tumults: but it seemed
also, that it were an impiety to abandon those who profess the same Religion,
a slow wisdom to permit the French (who were sworn enemies to the name of
English, challenged the Realm of England, and enjoyed at that time, in all
places, an assured peace) to remain armed in Scotland so near England, and so
opportunely for the inuading of that side, where Nobles and Commons of England
are most affectionate to the Romish Religion. That it were to deliver cowardly
into the Enemies hand, the safety of particulars, and the peace of the
general. For that cause, it behooued not to stand upon dreaming and slow
Counsels, but to dispatch and take arms. That the prudence of England had
always been accustomed to go meet their enemies, and not to wait for them;
and that it had ever been as well suffered to prevent dangers, as to expel
them; to defend themselves with the same weapons that they are assailed with.
That England was never assured, but when it was powerful and armed; that it
was more powerful when it had nothing to fear but the Scottish coast; and
that to take away this fear, it were meet to assist those which professed the
same Religion, and chase the French out of Scotland, against whom Arms are
very available, but not Counsels. That for having contemned them too much
heretofore, they had lost Calais with shame and hurt, and a little before, by
surprise, Ableville, and the forts near Bullen, whiles they fained to seek a
peace, which was the cause that Bullen afterward was constrained to render,
and that they should look for no less of Barwicke, and the frontier Towns,
if they took not arms the sooner, without staying to see what the French will
do, who look as if they meant to make peace in Scotland; Their design being
hidden, their ambition infinite, their reuennew exceeding great, insomuch that
it is grown a Proverb long ago in England, that France cannot be three
years both without war, and without means. Queen ELIZABETH also often
alleged this saying of the Emperor Valentinian, Have French for a friend, but
not for a neighbor. It was resolved then, that it was just necessary, and
profitable, to drive the French out of Scotland, as soon as could be possible.

In the end, a Navy was sent into Borrough, The English are sent into Scotland,
both by Land and Sea.
which is now called Enden-borrough Frith, co^ducted by W. Winter, master of
the Nauall Artillery, who, to the great terror of the French, set upon their
ships, which were there in the Road, and upon the Garrison that they kept in
the I Will of Inch-Keith. Likewise, presently, the Duke of Norfolk was
established* Lieutenant general in the Northern parts toward Scotland; the
frontiers of the East, and of the South, were committed to the Lord Baron Gray,
who, not long ago, had courageously, but unluckily, defended Guien against the
French; and Thomas Earl of Sussex, who, in the reign of Queen MARY, had
been Deputy of Ireland, is sent back thither, with title of Lieutenant,
together with special command, to ouer-looke this Irish Nation, being so much
the more superstitious, by how much less it was husbanded and tilled, should
not be stirred to rebellion, by the practices of the French, under pretext of
Religion: to furnish Ophalie, with some small Forts, to give to the old
Soldiers some lands, to be to them and their heirs males begotten of their
bodies; to receive Sulij-Boy Scotsh-Irish, to hold the possessions which he
had claimed by hereditary right in the Country of Vlster, to hold in fee, and
to do homage and service for the same: to increase moderately the revenues of
the Prince, and reduce the treasury to the form of that of England.

The death of Francis L. Talbot, Earl of Shrewsburie.
While these things passed thus, F. Talbot, the fifth Earl of the House of
Shrewsburie dyed, who was one of the chief Counselors of the Kingdom,
leaving for Heir, George his only Son, by Marie, Daughter to T. Dacre of
Gilsland.

THE THIRD YEAR OF HER REIGN. Book 1. 1560.
Anno Domini, 1560.
AS soon as the Duke of Norfolk was come to Barwicke, the Prior of Saint
Andrews, the Baron of Rethuen, and others, came to meet him, and in the name
of the Duke of Chastelraut and his Confederates, treated alliance with him for
the Queen of England, in these terms: Whereas, the French have striuen, by
right or wrong, A Treaty of peace in Barwicke.
to subdue Scotland, and to unite it to the Scepter of France: the Queen of
England will take into her Protection, the Duke of Chastelraut, the Heir
apparent to the Kingdom of Scotland, as long as the marriage of the King of
France, and Mary, Queen of Scots shall last, and one year more: He shall set
forth Armies by Land and Sea, with all sort of warlike Munition, to chase and
drive the French out of Scotland: He shall not make peace with them, but with
condition that Scotland shall enjoy its former liberty: The Forts which shall
be taken from them by the aid of the English, shall be also presently
demolished, or put into the hands of the Duke of Norfolk, according as he
shall think good. The English shall not fortify any place in Scotland, but by
the counsel of the Duke of Chastelraut, and the Peers of the Kingdom: The
Scots shall assist the English to their uttermost endeavors, they shall hold
their Enemies theirs, and shall not suffer that the Kingdom of Scotland shall
be joined to France, otherwise then by marriage, as now it is. If England be
set upon by the French, on this side Tine, the Scots shall send, at the Queens
charge, two thousand Horse, and a thousand Footmen: If on the other side, they
shall join themselves to succor the English, with all the strength they are
able to make, and at their own charge for thirty days, as they have been
accustomed to do for the defense of Scotland. The Earl of Argaehel, Judge of
Scotland, shall labor to reduce unto due obedience the Northern parts of
Ireland, under certain Conditions which shall be agreed upon between the
Viceroy of Ireland and himself. Finally, it is determined, what the one and
the other shall do, if James Maconel, or others, raise any commotion in the
Country of Hebride, in Scotland, or in Ireland. For establishing these things,
Hostages shall be sent into England, before the English Army enter into
Scotland; which shall be changed at the discretion of the Scots, from six
months to six months; or from four to four Months, so long as the
Marriage between the King of France and the Queen of Scotland shall last, and
a year over and above. That the Duke of Chastelraut, the Earls and Barons
Conferrates, shall ratify these Co^^entions under their Signs and Seals
within twenty days and shall declare, that in all things, which shall not tend
to the oppressing of their ancient Liberty, they shall yield obedience to the
Queen of Scotland, and to the King of France her Husband, forasmuch as the
Queen of England undertakes not these things, but by way of friendship and
neighborhood, and to free the Scots from Bondage.

It was already discovered by Messages from stranger Princes, and intercepted
Letters, that the French were resolved to set upon England: Seb. Martigues,
Martigues comes and brings Frenchmen into Scotland.
a young Gentleman of the House of Luxembourg, with a thousand old Soldiers,
and two wings of Horse, was come into Scotland; and Doisel a Frenchman,
assuring himself too much to be of the Council of the Queen Regent of
Scotland, had propounded to the chief of the Kingdom, at Aymouth, near
Barwicke, that joining their forces, they, at the very instant, would put the
King and Queen of Scotland in possession of England: but having considered the
difficulty of the thing, and not willing to violate the Peace newly agreed
upon, they refused it: Nevertheless, Martigues, being young and lively, did so
burn in desire to attempt England, that with much ado was he hindered by the
wholesome council of the Queen Regent: but this heat was quickly quenched,
D'Elbeuf driven by a Tempest.
when it was known that a storm had so beaten the Marquis D'elbeuf upon the
coasts of Holland, who sailed toward Scotland with greater Forces, that he was
constrained to return to Diepe, from whence he departed, with loss of some
Ships and of many Soldiers.

At that time, Ph. Stauel of Gl^ion, Knight of the Golden Fleece, and Master of
the Artillery, was sent into England, employed from Spain, to expose the
complaints that the French made against the Queen, touching the Affairs of
Scotland; The Spaniard counsels to Peace.
and to counsel, in the name of the King, to Peace and concord: yet
nevertheless, he secretly counseled the Queen to pursue with courage, what
she he had begun in Scotland, though contrariwise the Spaniard had openly
forbidden to transport into England, those munitions of War, The Spaniards
detain from the English their munition.
which she had couenanted for at Antwerp, insomuch as she was constrained to
make a new provision thereof in Germany. And the Proposition that Stauel made,
was not without suspicion, that some Companies of Spaniards should be sent into
Scotland, together with the French, to suppress the Scottish Rebels, and by
the same means, the French themselves, if they should attempt any thing upon
England. At the same time, M. Seuerin, ordinary Ambassador of the King of
France, instantly solicited the Queen, to call back her Armies both by Sea
and Land from Scotland; which she willingly accorded unto, provided, that the
French should be recalled: but by delays sought out of the one side and the
other, the business is drawn into length, till the coming of I. de Mouluc,
Bishop of Valence, who differed not much from the Protestants Religion; who,
upon his arrival from France, being carried unto the place, said, that he was
not furnished with any power for this business: and notwithstanding he was very
eloquent, The French do endeavor to call the English back from Scotland.
strained himself to his uttermost, that those Armies should be recalled from
Scotland; and maintained, that it was not to defraud the Queen of England,
that the King and Queen of Scots carried the Arms of England; but by that,
rather to honor the Royal House. But not being able to persuade the one, as
being absurd; nor the other, as dangerous; Seuerin desired Stauel, and the
Bishop of Aquile, Ambassador ordinary of Spain in England, to be present and
witnesses, when he should protest against the Queen of England, that she had
violated the Treaty of Peace; to which they refused him, because they had it
not in Commission: Nevertheless he made, The French protest againg the
English, that they are merely cause that the peace is broken.
by a discource prolixe enough, his protestation; to which the Queen made an
Answer, which was published, and set forth, by which she testified to all
the world, That the violating of the Treaties proceeded only from the French,
and that nothing could happen to her more vexing and odious, then this War,
and such like things, which might easily be drawn from what had been spoken
heretofore, and by a declaration in writing, which she had formerly caused to
be published.

Notwithstanding that although she had received many wrongs and injuries, An
Answer to them.
in that they had usurped the Title and Arms of her Kingdom, she could not
for all that believe, that it had been done with the consent of the King or
Queen of France, or the Princes of the Blood, but by the wicked devices of the
Guizes; who, abusing the King and riches of the French, were ready to wound
England through the sides of Scotland: That she could not abandon her safety,
nor her Subjects. And surely, it is not to be doubted, that the Guizes, for the
love which they bore to the Queen of Scotland, The Guizes are sworn and
professed enemies to Queen Elizabeth.
the hatred to Queen ELIZABETH, in regard of Religion; and the ambition to
oblige France, by adding new Kingdoms unto it, being assured of an English
party, of contrary Religion to the Protestants, linckt themselves together
obstinately, to ruin Queen ELIZABETH. But they were diuerted by means of
discontentments, and hidden hatreds, which grew upon the Subject of the
administration of the affairs which were put into their hands, after they had
taken them from the Princes of the Blood. And the QVEENE went so prudently to
work, and upon the nicke to meet the designs of her Enemies; that she has
been always had in admiration of her friends, and in terror to her Enemies.

The same day that Gray entered into Scotland with an Army, The French offer
to render up Calis.
Seuerin and Mouluc earnestly solicited Queen ELIZABETH to call it back,
giving her hope that Calais should be rendered, if she did it. But she
answered very plainly, Her Majesty's Answer to them.
That she made no account of Calais, a small Fisher-Towne, in comparison of the
safety of all Great Britain. And the same day, sent into Spain, Anthony
Brown, Vicount of Montaigue, a man very remarkable for his wisdom, She sends
the Lord Vicount Montaigue into Spain.
but very zealous in the Romish Religion, thinking, that for that
consideration, he would be more pleasing to the King of Spain; together with
Tho. Chamberlain, Ambassador Ordinary; to justify, upon how many just causes
she had sent an Army into Scotland, to wit, those that I have heretofore
declared; and to show, the Queen of Scotland had been married very young to a
sickly King, who was without hope to leave Issue; that Hamilton, Duke of
Chastelraut, having been by the authority of the Parliament, designed of the
Kingdom of Scotland, the Guizes had prepared Ambuscadoes for his Son, as he
should pass through France: their designs were bent, to join the Crown of
Scotland to the Crown of France, and to conserve it for the Queen. This
matter the King of Spain examined seriously, how dangerous it was to the
Provinces of the Low Countries, and of Spain: that it behooved not blast with
Rebellion, the assembly of the great ones in Scotland, which was made for no
other end, but to keep (as by duty they are bound) the Kingdom for the Queen
and her lawful successors; Who makes known to the Spaniard the cause of the
Wars of Scotland.
not enduring to permit, that by the wiles of the Guizes, it should be ruined,
or transferred to the French, without wronging them or theirs.

Upon the beginning of April, the English Army, composed of an hundred Horse,
and six thousand Foot, marches toward Lies, which is a place situated near
Bodir* where all the Seas of Great Britain do beat, and the River of Lies
spreading broader, discharges it self, and makes a commodious Rode for Ships,
scarce two miles distant from Edenborrough, the Capital Town of Scotland. The
French knowing this commodity, had fortified it, to retire thither, and there
receive the succor which might be sent unto them: and the English showing
themselves there, Martigues goes as speedily out upon them with some companies
of Foot, to hinder their approach to a Hill, upon which he supposed they
intended to Camp: but, after a Skirmish of four hours, where some were
slain, they drive them back into the Town: next after, he also excused the
Scots Confederates
they make Trenches, and raise Mounts, from which they battered no less the
Town then the Ships. The French make many Sallies out, with more courage than
strength, and show many proofs of Magnanimity. Amongst others, upon the
fifteenth day of April, they took the Trenches, nailed three of the greatest
Cannons, took and led away prisoner, M. Bercle: But I. Croft, and C. Vaghan
drive them back as fast into the Town; and it was not done without loss of
men. Arthur Gray, son to the Lord Baron Gray, Arthur Gray, son and heir to
the Lord Gray, is wounded.
who had the principal command in the Camp, was shot into the shoulder.

After that, they bring the Camp nearer to the Town, because the Battery was
so far off, that the Bullets, for the most part, fell without effect; and a
short time after, Lies is besieged.
part of the Town, and a great quantity of Corn, was burned by casual fire,
which was much increased by the English, who placed on that side their biggest
Ca^nons, and being in the mean time entered into the Ditch, took the height of
the Wall; and the sixth of May (while the English and the Scots were together
of accord) having placed the Ladders on all sides, gave three powerful
alssaults to gain the Wall, but because they were too short, and the waters
higher then ordinary, the Sluices being shut, they were repulsed with a shower
of Bullets, that overwhelmed them from above, and there were many slain, yet
more wounded. The English repulsed. Croft is accused.
This check was imputed to Croft's fault, because he had stayed in his Quarter
with his Arms foulded, as if he had reproved this expedition, seeing others
do, without putting himself in action to assist those who had need thereof:
and I cannot tell whether he did it out of judgment, or for affection which
he bore to the French, or for hatred to Gray. But so it is, that Norfolk and
Gray, accused by Letters which they writ to the Queen, to have had secret
consultations with the Queen of the Scots, and to have opposed this design;
and in having sequitiuely bin brought in justice, the government of Barwicke
was taken from him, and given to the Lord Baron Gray. But the Queen showing
him favor, conseru'd it for him; and for his merit, established him afterward
Controwler of her Majesty's House.

This first Mis-hap having abated the courage of the English and Scots, the
Duke of Norfolk raised them as quickly up again, by new Troops which he
brought to strengthen; and since that time, there were some light combats,
until that the King of France having advice that his men were so blockt up at
Lies, that all the Passages by Sea and Land were shut, also considering, that
they could not send him succor in time requisite, for the great distance of
places, and the seditions, which augmented from day to day in his Kingdom,
gave power to the Bishop of Valence, and De la Roche Faucaud, to accord the
Affairs with Qu. ELIZABETH'S Commissioners: esteeming, and the Queen of
Scotland with them, that it were a thing unworthy their Majesty, to enter into
equal dispute with their Subjects. And Queen ELIZABETH deputed as speedily
into Scotland, W. Cecill, and N. Wotton, Deane of Canterbury and York. At the
same time, the C. of Murray made some propositions. But Cecill thought that
they ought not to be made by Subjects, nor agreed on by Princes.

During these debatings, the decease of Queen Marie of Lorraine, mother to the
Queen, The Queen Regent of Scotland dies.
and Regent of the Kingdom of Scotland, happened: a pious and most prudent
Princess, who was nevertheless ignominiously and unworthily handled by
hotheaded Preachers (as it may appear even by the Ecclesiastical History of
Scotland, which Queen ELIZABETH caused to be suppressed under the Press) and
by the Lords of the Assembly, who, as being borne Counselors of State, had,
under the name of Queen of Scotland, and her Husband, suspended her from all
administration, as contrary to the glory of God, and the liberty of Scotland.

The Articles of which, the Commissioners, after the siege begun, agreed upon,
are these: THe treaty of peace, The treaty of Edenborrough.
made in the Castle of Cambray, betwixt Queen ELIZABETH and Henry the Second
the French King, shall be renewed and confirmed. They shall cease, both the one
side, and the other, to make preparation of war. The Fortress of Aymouth in
Scotland shall be demolisht. The said King and Queen Mary, shall quit the
title and arms of England and Ireland.

The strifes touching the recompense of the injury done to Queen ELIZABETH,
and the assurance of the first Article, are remitted to another Assembly, which
shall be holden at London: and if they cannot then be agreed of, it shall be
referred to the Catholic King. The King and the Queen shall reconcile
themselves, with the Nobles, amongst their Subjects of Scotland: the
Confederates shall be therein comprised, and above all, the Catholic King.
This Treaty shall be confirmed within sixty days: the intertayning of it
sworn on both sides.



A peace is published.
This Peace is published as well in the Camp as in the City, with a common
rejoicing of all: The English growing weary of the war, seeing their
neighboring Country utterly spoiled: The French, because they were deprived
of all traffic and commerce: and the Scots, for not having been paid their
wages. And indeed it was holden for the weal, good, and welfare of Great
Britain, since Scotland retained his ancient liberty, and England kept the
dignity and surety which it had gotten. And since that time, she has been
really exempt and freed from all subjects of fear from Scotland side. The
English have merrily acknowledged, that Queen ELIZABETH was the founder of the
surety; and the Protestants of Scotland, Restoresse of the liberty.

Queen Elizabeth is sought in marriage, by Charles, Archduke of Austria.
During all that time, Queen ELIZABETH, for the singular love which she bore
to the parties, was so attentive to the public good, that she razed from her
heart the love of powerful Princes who sought her in marriage; to wit,
CHARLES, Archduke of Austria, second Son of Ferdinando the Emperor, who
made this suit by the Count of Elpheston: Of James Earl of Arran, who was
recommended by the Protestants, the which propounded to themselves to unite, by
James Earl of Arran:
by his means, the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, which were divided;
which was also quickly rejected, and, by Erric, King of Sueden:
and nevertheless to her Majesty, praise: Of Erric King of Sueden, who, to the
same purpose, employed John his Brother, Duke of Finland, to this end sent into
England by Gustaue his Father, a little before his death, and grounding his
hopes upon this, that he was of the same Religion as Queen ELIZABETH was,
made himself so credulously importunate, that he thought of nothing but
England; notwithstanding that the King of Denmark his sworn enemy, had
resolved to take him in the way, thinking that it concerned him greatly, if
England and Sueden, between which Denmark lies, should be joined by the
means of a marriage. Queen ELIZABETH acknowledged and praised his singular
and Sovereign love, and made him answer, that his coming should be very
agreeable and pleasing to her: but she could not yet find in her heart to
marry, in changing her present condition, which was unto her much more
delightful, and prayed him to prove her good will in any other thing, assuring
him, that although he could not enjoy his desires, nevertheless he should
perceive that his love had not been ill placed; and admonished him not to
defer the time any longer, to make choice of a Wife which might be worthy of
him. With this answer, I. C. of Finland returns into his Country. After,
having employed all kind of means to make this marriage, in courting her
Majesty importunately, by bold demands, using of great liberality toward her
Courtiers, captiuating the good will of the inferior sort, amongst which he
often strowed pieces of Silver; telling them, that when his Brother should
come, he would distribute largely pieces of Gold to the common people in
general. Nevertheless, his Brother, suspecting that he had made this suit for
himself, received and entertained him ill at his return, and obstinating
himself in his design, ceased not to continue this suit two years after, and
made the condition of it to be propounded by Nicholas Guildenstain: but as he
was imprudent and light at the same time, he demanded the daughter of Philip,
Landgraue of Hessen, having been refused, at last married with a Lady of mean
condition.

But as for Charles Duke of Austria, he conceived such hope, that his House
already allied by marriages with great Princes, would be much more augmented by
the addition of the alliance with England, and that the ancient Religion should
be tolerated, if not altogether established: which he so expected, as a thing
which he could not fail of, and Qu. ELIZABETH took not at an instant this
hope from him. For, her Matie showed openly to every one, protested in the
presence of C. Elphinstain, and writ to the Emperor, that of all the
illustrious marriages which were propounded to her, there was not any more or
greater, than that of the Archduke: that nevertheless, neither the storm of
dangers had not power heretofore, nor the favorable wind of honor could yet,
for the present, divert her from that manner of life, in which she had settled
her self. Notwithstanding, without being come so far, as to renounce
altogether the state of marriage, and that she hoped that God, upon whose
goodness she wholly supported her self, would address his ends in that, and
in every other thing, to the safety both of her and her Subjects.

Adolphe, Duke of Holsatia.
Adolphe likewise, Duke of Holsatia, was stirred up by Frederic the Second,
King of Denmark, his Nephew, to hinder her from marrying with the King of
Sueden, and carried with hopes to be able to effect it, by the desire which her
self had by her Letters witnessed unto him, that he was possessed with the same
affection toward the English, as he had been long ago toward the Spaniards,
and by the promise that she had most lovingly made him, he came into England,
where she entertained him royally, honored him with the Order of the Garter,
gratified him with an annual pension, and (through her extraordinary
courtesy) professed unto him, her Majesty obliged for ever, a most illustrious
Prince, who had purchased the renown to be a most famous warrior, in a
conquest lately by him won against those of DITHMARS.

There were also in her Kingdom certain Lords, who, according to the custom
of Lovers, vainly prated concerning the marriage, Sir W. Pickering.
( viz.) Sir William Pickering, Knight of the Order, who had an indifferent
good estate, but honorably descended, he, through his rare study and
affability, had gotten much honor, and no less applause, by his Embassage in
France and Germany.

The Earl of Arundel, a man of a most ancient House, The Earl of Arundel.
no less great in means than illustrious by birth, but growing into years:
and Robert Dudley, Robert Dudley.
the youngest Son of the Duke of Northumberland, whom Queen MARY restored to
his right and honors, a noble young Lord, of most comely lineaments of body;
who was as far in favor with the Queen, as his Father and Grandfather were
generally hated of the people, out of a rare and royal clemency which she
professed toward him, in conferring and heaping honors upon him, whose Father
would have attempted her death. Whether this might proceed from some secret
instinct of those virtues apparent in him, or out of common respect, they both
being prisoners under Queen MARIE, or from their first procreation, by a
secret conjunction of the Planets at the hour of their birth, combining their
hearts in one, no man can easily conceive. Howsoever it were, it is most
certain, that only Destiny causes Princes to affect some, and reject
others. In token of honor, and for the testimony of her well-wishing toward
him, the first year of her reign, Whom she favored.
(after she had made him her Champion) she made him Knight of the Garter,
which amongst the English, is the most honorable dignity of all, with the
Duke of Norfolk, the Marquis of Northampton, and the Earl of Rutland, at
which every one wondered. In the mean time, Vicount Montaigu, Vicount
Montaigu, Ambassador to the King of Spain.
Ambassador for Spain, moved him of the necessity of the wars of Scotland,
and labored (what in him lay) to prevent the imputation of the Scots to be
Rebels, showed him, by the instructions wherein he was commanded, but coldly,
in regard he was a zealous professor of the Roman Religion, that that which
was established in England, was conformable and grounded upon the holy
Scripture, and the Aecunomicke Councels, and entreated him to renew the
alliance of the Burgundians, formerly contracted between the Kings of England
and their predecessors. The Spaniard, howsoever it was agreeable and usual
amongst Princes, to confirm such a renouation, in respect it gives as it were
life to their Alliances, and testifies to the world their mutual good will;
and howsoever himself and Charles his Father, in the treaty of marriage with
MARY Queen of England, in the year 1533. were bound to confirm this
alliance, answered (notwithstanding) that it was needless, lamented the
alteration of Religion happened in England, seemed to distaste the raising of
an army, and rooting out the Rebels in Scotland, and fained to be too late
aduertized thereof. He favored notwithstanding Elizabeth against the French.
But for all this, he still opposed the designs of the French, who labored
to excommunicate ELIZABETH, and brought it so to pass, that she could be no
way subject to excommunication without his consent, and to advertise her,
though it were too late, that they ought for her advantage, to insert in the
Articles concluded with the King of France, that if the French should return
into Scotland, it might be lawful for the English to expulse them, and, in
express terms, to condition for the certain assurance of the restitution of
Calais. The Earl (notwithstanding) perceived well, and so did the Queen, that
he was displeased, as well by the circumstances I have related, He re-deliuered
the order of the Garter.
as principally for that he re-deliuered into the said Vicounts hands, the
tokens and ensigns of the order of Saint George. For, he seemed hereby
utterly to break off all amity and friendship with England: but showed it much
more by the refusal which was made him afterward, how he practiced by his
Ambassador, (as he did intercede by Count of Feria, who had married the
Daughter of W. Dormer, which he had by the Lady Marie Sidney) for that the
Queen permitted certain men, women, and Children, to stay in Flanders, who
for Religion were retired without leave, ( viz.) to the Lady Jane Dormer,
Daughter of Thomas Newdigate, and Widow to Sir Robert Dormer, Knight, and to
the Lady Clarence, Grandmother to the Count of Feria, being very old, who had
been Favorite to Queen MARIE, and Almoner for the particular relief of
poor women; to Richard Shelley, Prior of the order of Saint John in England,
of which we will speak hereafter, and to Thomas Haruie: all which were
zealous professors of the Romish Religion, and well beloved of the Spaniard.

This refusal was grounded upon a restraint (by the ancient custom and Laws
of England) prohibiting any person (the Nobles and Peers of the Kingdom
excepted) upon pain of confiscation of their goods, He disdained to be refused
in things of small importance.
to depart out of their Country, without special license from the King, and
to reside in foreign parts beyond a certain time prefixed, and that, either
for the recovery of their health, under a more warm climate, or for the
advancement of their studies in the Academies, or for their practice in
military Discipline.

Whereof there was no president extant of any toleration granted to women, to
be continually absent from their Country: and that moreover, the thing in it
self seemed to be of no great importance. Nevertheless, in respect that those
who desired it, reaped not so much benefit thereby, applying it to their own
particular ends, as others were animated by their example, to the detriment of
the common good, it was unreasonable to condescend unto: as the Queen
signified to the King of Spain. The Earl, stomaking this as a particular
injury, The Count Ferie whets his indignation.
to revenge himself, caused to be apprehended (as an Heretic) one of the
servants of Chamberlain, being there then Ambassador ordinary for England,
and cast him into the Inquisition, and rather (as it were) envying the Queen,
and the English, than the King himself, added more fuel to his fire, He
incenses the Pope against the Queen.
notwithstanding all the means his Wife used to dissuade him. It was also
known, that he was employed to Pope Pius the Fourth, in the beginning of his
Papacy, to press the Excommunication of the Queen: yet nevertheless, the
Pope, (upon what good hope I know not) sent unto her Vincent Parpalia, Abbot of
Saint Saviors, with diverse secret aduertisements, with a kind Letter, The
Pope writes to Elizabeth.
all which I will here at large insert, howsoever I may seem to sin against
the Law of History.

TO OUR MOST DEAR DAVGHTER, The Pope Pius the fourth of that name, his Letter
sent unto Queen Elizabeth, by his Nuncio, Vincent Parpalia.
IN CHRIST, ELIZABETH, Queen of ENGLAND.
MOST dear Daughter in Christ, Salutation, and Apostolical Benediction. God,
the searcher of all hearts, knows, and you may perceive, by the advice that
we have given you, to behave your self toward this our eldest Son, Vincent
Parpalia, whom you know well, how much we tender, and desire, according to the
duty of our Office of Pastorship, to provide for your salvation and honor,
together with the establishment of your Reign, thereby exhorting and
admonishing your Greatness, (most dear Daughter) that in rejecting those lewd
Counselors, who love themselves better th^n you, and aim but at their private
ends: You implore the fear of God to your Council, and remembering the time of
your visitation, you observe our fatherly admonitions, and wholesome Counsels,
and we will promise you of our part, all the assistance you can desire, not
only for the comfort of your soul, but for th'establishment and confirmation
of your royal dignities, according to the authority, place, and charge
committed to us from God: And if (as we most fervently desire and hope) you
return into the bosom of the Church, We will receive you with the like
affectionate love, as the Father (of whom it is spoken in the Gospel) received
his Son when he returned to him: and our joy shall be far greater then the
joy of a Father for his son only. But you, in drawing after you the whole
people of England, shall heap with joys, not only to your own particular
salvation, but to your whole Nation: Us, and the University of our Brethren,
whom you shall shortly (God willing) hear to be assembled in an Aecumenique
and general Council, for th'extirpation of Heresies: and the whole Church
together. You shall also cause the Heavens to rejoice, and by such a memorable
act, purchase renowned glory to your name, and a far more glorious Crown then
that wherewith you are already crowned: But of that, the said Vincent shall
more amply certify you, and fully demonstrate our fatherly affection toward
you; whom we desire your Highness to receive courteously and graciously,
hearing him attentively, and give such credit to what he shall declare unto
you; as you would unto our self.

Given at Rome, at Saint Peter's Palace, the fifth day of May, 1560. and of our
Papacy the first.

I have not found what Propositions were made by Parpalia, for I cannot think
that he was put in writing, neither does it please me to suppose, as ordinarily
Historians do. All the world knows, Queen ELIZABETH lived like her self,
and, ALWAYS THE SAME: and that the business succeeded not to the Popes
expectation. The common fame also went for truth, that the Pope promised to cut
off, as a thing unjust, the sentence given against the marriage of Queen
ELIZABETH'S Mother, to confirm out of his own authority, the English Liturgy,
and to allow in England the use of the Sacrament under both kinds; provided,
that her Majesty should rank her self with the Roman Church, and to give some
thousands of Crowns to such as labored in these things.

The time of confirming the Treaty of marriage at Edenborrough was then come;
The King and Queen of France refuse to confirm the Treaty for Edenborrough.
Queen ELIZABETH having by solemn Oath, confirmed, and sent unto the King and
Queen of France also, to ratify the same on their part, as it was meet;
Throgmorton, Ordinary Ambassador in France, and Sir Peter Meute, Knight,
dispatched after him for the same purpose, labored to bring them to it: But
they prevailed not, notwithstanding they had in express words, upon the Faith,
and royal word of a King, by Commission from the Bishop of Valence, deputed
for passing this Treaty, promised to confirm it. The reasons they alleged to
exempt themselves, were, The reasons.
That the Scots had past through Barwicke with the English, not by Royal
License, but of themselves; which they ought not to do: that they past like
Rebels, and that under color of being Subjects, they falsely professed themselves
loyal, and had no way showed the obedience promised by it.

Whiles they were disputing hereupon, Francis the second dies.
Francis the second, (king of France) not being yet eighteen years of age,
left the most high and mighty Princess, Mary, Queen of Scotland, a Widow: at
which news, I cannot well say whether the Papists more lamented, or the
Protestants rejoiced.

Queen ELIZABETH, now perceiving her self more secure then ever before, to
the end that the Church might subsist, and increase in her party, and that the
Commonwealth might more and more flourish in honor and riches, proclaimed two
most wholesome Edicts; by the first whereof, she commanded all Anabaptists, and
such other like Heretics, The Edict of Qu. Elizabeth against the Anabaptists.
who, under pretense of shunning persecution, were come from Countries beyond
the Seas, to certain Port Towns upon the Coast of England, to depart the
Kingdom within twenty days, whether they were native or strangers, upon
pain of imprisonment, and forfeiture of their goods. Her Majesty's Edict
against sacreligious persons.
And by the second Edict, her Majesty suppressed a Sect of sacrilegious men, who,
under color of extirpating superstitions, had begun to demolish ancient
Sepulchers, Epitaphs, and Ensigns of Noble Families, and other Monuments of
reverend Antiquity; which had escaped the fury of the profane, under King
HENRY the Eighth, and King EDWARD the Sixth, and to pull off the Lead that
covered the Churches.

The College of Westminster founded.
And moreover, converted the Monastery of Westminster, a most famous place for
the sacring of the Kings of England, and the place where the Arms and Royal
Ensigns were always kept, into a Colledgiall Church, or (as I may better
term it) into a Seminary of the Church: And there instituted one Deane, twelve
Prebends, one Master, one Usher, forty Scholars, whom they call the Kings
Nurseries, out of which there be six every year, or more, chosen for the
Academies of Ministers, and Singers; twelve poor, etc. to the glory of God,
and the increase of true Religion, and good Learning: And certainly, there
comes out from thence, happily for Church and Commonwealth, a number of
Learned men.

The Coin brought to full value.
Took away by little and little (whereby she gained great Honor, and no less
Glory) the course of money mingled with Copper, and brought in use that which
was pure and fine silver, to restore the honor of the Kingdom, to prevent the
deceit of those, which both within and without this, had corrupted the kinds,
and changed things much available for the good of the Commonwealth, into
coins of false money, and transported the good silver into foreign Nations:
and to abate the prices of vendible commodities, which were extremely
inhaunc't, to the great prejudice of the Commonwealth, and above all, for
Stipendiars, Soldiers, Servants, and all such as are paid for their labors by
hyer: and brought it most happily to pass in a few months, without making any
stir; first, in forbidding all persons to melt, or transport out of the
Kingdom; as well the good and pure money, as that which was mingled with
Copper. Moreover, in bringing that which is so mingled, to his value, that is
to say, the Penny to a halfe-penny; the two-penny piece to threehalfe-pence;
the sixe-pence to a groat; and the rest to two and a farthing, because there
was no more money: and finally, buying them for good silver of all such as had
any of it, provided that they brought it within the time prefixed in the Table
of money; which could not be done without loss to her: insomuch that we ought
to acknowledge it to proceed from Queen ELIZABETH, that the silver was better
and more pure in England during her Reign, then in full two hundred years
before, and that it was not used in any other part of Europe.

She afterward caused good Coin to be stamped for Ireland, which we call
sterling; of which, the shilling is worth twelue-pence in Ireland, and in
England, nine: A matter (indeed) weighty, great, and most memorable, which
neither King EDWARD the Sixth could, nor Queen MARY durst enterprise, This
was corrupted by King Henry the Eighth. His lavish expense.
sithence King HENRY the Eighth was the first King that ever caused Copper to
be mingled with Silver, to the great shame of the Kingdom, damage of his
Successors and people, and notable token of his excessive expense, sithence his
Father had left him more wealth, then ever any other King left his Successor,
and likewise he had drawn abundance of money, by the means of Tributes, and
Imposts, (without grounding our selves upon that which Cardinal Poole had left
in writing: That he had drawn more then all the other Kings which had reigned
since the Victory of the Normanes) and heapt up an infinite deal; when, by the
power of a Parliament, he took unto himself all the Lordships which the
English, being absent, had held in Ireland; all the first Fruits of
Ecclesiastical Livings, and the Tenths, which were in England and Ireland; all
the reuennews, gifts, and goods belonging to Monasteries.

The Earl of Huntington dies.
This year dyed Francis, Lord Hastings, Earl of Huntington, the second of that
Race; who had by Katharine, the Daughter of Henry, Lord Montaigue, Brother to
Reinald Cardinal Poole, Issue, Henry, who succeeded him, and diverse other
Children, who agreed well in brotherly love, but not in Religion.

In Ireland, Shan, otherwise called O-Neale, a great and potent man in the
Country of Vlster, and lawful Heir to Coni O-Neale, who surnamed himself
Baco (which is as much to say, as Claude) and was created Earl of Tyr-Oene by
HENRY the Eighth, after he had put to death Matthew, Baron of Dungannon, his
bastard Brother, who was taken for legitimate, spoiled his Father of his rule
and domination, for which he quickly dyed with sorrow, took upon himself the
Title of O-Neale, covering his head, after a barbarous manner, with that he
wore upon his legs and feet, cast himself into Rebellion, for fear of
being pursued by the Law: so as fiue-hundred Foot were sent out of England,
to join with two Companies of Horse, levied in Ireland, Shan O-Neale stirs up
sedition in Ireland.
against him. But after, having made some light Skirmishes, perceiving himself
unable to resist the English, and to be hated of his own men, and that
Surly-Boy, Jacob Mac-Connell, and Odonnell were risen against him, he laid
down Arms at the persuasion of the Earl of Kildare, his Kinsman, and
promised to come into England to ask pardon, as we shall describe it in a
more ample manner in its proper place.

Book 1. 1561.
THE FOVRTH YEAR OF HER REIGN. Anno Domini, 1561.
AT the beginning of the year, Fr. Earl of Bedford (having been sent into
France, to end the mourning for the death of Francis the second) to
congratulate with King Charles for succeeding him; summoned often the Queen of
Scotland, sometimes himself alone, and sometimes accompanied with Throgmorton,
The Queen of Scotland puts off the confirmation of the Treaty.
to confirm the Treaty of Edenborrough, but all in vain: For he could draw
no other Answer of it, but, That it behooved and was requisite, not to resolve
upon so great a thing, without mature deliberations; and that she neither
would, nor could confirm it without the Peers of Scotland. Throgmorton
nevertheless ceased not to press her instantly, by all the means he could
devise. In like manner, the Cardinal of Lorraine, and all the other Guizes,
her Uncles, and James her bastard-brother, who was newly arrived in France. But
whiles they thus did nothing, but deferd it from day to day, by forged reasons,
Queen ELIZABETH, doubting lest they intended the ruin of England, resolved to
suppress them. She sent thereupon T. Randolph into Scotland, to persuade the
Peers to a mutual amity, grounded upon the unity of Religion, aduertising
them, that the Princes of Germany were united together against the Pope, and
that she desired nothing more, than that the English and Scottish were
combined in this accord; showed them, that the Queen of Scotland, being a
Widow, now was the only opportunity for the appeasing of all discords
betwixt England and Scotland, who had so many Ages the one fought against the
other, with so much bloodshed on either part, whether in contracting a
perpetual League with the English, or in razing out of the ancient league with
the French, those Covenants which were wont to breed discord between England
and Scotland. Lastly, she exhorted them to beware, that the Queen (who was
now a Widow) should not dispose her self in marriage to a stranger Prince, by
whose power she might revenge her self upon those, who had lately resisted
the French, and so expose their freedom to the hazard of servitude.

In the mean time, the Queen of Scotland, who thought to retire her self into
her Kingdom, having sent before Doysell, a Frenchman, entreating ELIZABETH,
by him, to give her Highness leave to pass by Sea, and to Doysell through
England, under the common faith: The Queen of England denies passage to the
Queen of Scotland.
ELIZABETH utterly denied her, in presence of a whole multitude of her
Assistants, alleging for excuse, that she had not yet ratified the Treaty of
Edenborrough, as she had promised to do, and assured her, that in case she
should perform all that she might expect from a Queen, being her Cousin and
Neighbor, she might freely pass either by Sea or Land into Scotland. The
Queen of Scots extremely stomaking this refusal, She complained to
Throgmorton Ambassador from England.
called for Throgmorton, and entertained a great deal of discourse with him
about this occasion, which I will briefly here insert, according to the
Contents of Throgmortons Letters collected by me, howsoever I must repeat
diverse things, of which I have formerly spoken, to the end that the original,
and degrees of the secret grudges and hatred between two of the prudentest,
and most puissant Princesses of our Age, might more evidently and clearly
appear. She being then withdrawn a little aside, and there being no more but
her self, and Throgmorton, she spoke in this manner unto him: ALthough I were
so weak, that I did not sufficiently know it, nor whither the heat of my
spirit might carry me, yet am I not so weak, that I should desire so many
witnesses of mine infirmity, as your Mistress not long sithence held
discourses with my Ambassador Doysell. Nothing vexes me so much, as to have
entreated her for that I could well have been without, and as I am come hither
against her will, and notwithstanding the hinderance by her Brother EDWARD, I
shall also be as well able, God willing, to return into my Country, without
asking her leave. And I want not friends, nor friends that are willing and
powerful to bring me back thither, as they were to bring me hither. But I
chose rather to try her friendship than any others. I have often heard you say,
that it was chiefly necessary to our two Kingdoms to intertaine amity, the one
with the other: and nevertheless it seems that she has another meaning,
otherwise she would not have refused me so small a courtesy. But
peradventure she loves those Scots better which are Rebels to me, who am Queen
of Scotland, of equal Majesty to her, her near Kinswoman, and the most
certain Heir. Do you think, that with so great a faith and love which is
between her and me, she should keep correspondency with the Scots which
rebel against me? Does she think that I shall be forsaken of my friends?
Truly, she has brought me to that pass, that I have reclaymed the aid of
those which otherwise I would not have employed, and I cannot marvel enough by
what counsel she has heretofore assisted my Subjects against me, and now
that I am a Widow, am hindered from returning into my Country. I stir not
up any business, nor meddle with those of England, although I be assured that
many English are not content with such as pass there at this present. She
reproaches me for my small experience. I confess, age brings that: yet
nevertheless I have so much as to know how to carry my self lovingly and
justly with my friends, I do not cast at random any word against her, which
may be unworthy of a Queen, and a Kinswoman; and, by her permission, I dare
say, that I am a Queen as well as she, and want no friends more than she
does, and can carry my courage as high as she knows how to do: insomuch as
it is fitting for us to measure our selves with some equality. But I leave
comparisons, which cannot be, but with debate and hatred. As for the Treaty of
Edenborrough, it was made in the lifetime of the King my Husband, to whom I
was bound by duty to obey in all things; and since he deferred the
confirmation of it, the fault ought to be his, and not mine. Since his death,
the Council of France has left me to be guided by mine own friends, and my
Uncles would not meddle with the affairs of Scotland, for offending in any
thing either Queen ELIZABETH, or the Scots. The Scots that I have near about
me, are private persons, and are not such as I would ask their counsel in
things of so great importance. As soon as I have consulted with the States of
my Kingdom, I will give you a reasonable answer, and to give it so much the
sooner, I go forward to return to my House. But she makes account to stop my
passage, insomuch that she her self is the cause that I cannot satisfy her;
and peradventure she does it to the end, that there may not be any end of our
discords. She often objects unto me, as to my shame, that I am young: and
truly she might rightly say it, both very young, and very ill-aduised, if I
would treat of a business of that importance, without the consent of my
States. A woman, as I have learned, is not bound either by honor or conscience
to her Husbands fact. But I will have no dispute upon that, and nevertheless I
will truly say, that I have done nothing to my most dear Sister, that I would
should not have been done unto my self. I have rendered her all duties of
friendship, but she either believes them not, or despises them. I would to
God that I were as dear to her, as I am near to her, for that would be a
precious kind of proximitie. God pardon those which sow discords between us,
if there be any. But you, who are her Ambassador, say, if you dare, wherefore
she is so much offended against me, who until this present never offended
her, neither in word, nor in effect.

Throgmorton's answer to the Qu. Mary of Scotland.
To which, Throgmorton told her: I Have no Commission to answer to that, but to
hear that which you have to answer, touching the confirmation of the Treaty of
Edenborrough. But if it please you to hear the cause of this offense, having
quitted the quality of an Ambassador, I will tell it you in few words. As
soon as the Queen my Mistress was sacred and inaugurated, you usurped the name
and arms of England, although you had not done it before in the reign of
Queen MARY. You shall judge in your own wisdom, if a greater offense can be
done to a Prince. Surely private persons themselves do not willingly digest
these offenses, much less Princes.

But (said She) my Husbands Father and my Husband would have it so, commanded
it. As soon as they were deceased, and that I was of my self, I presently
quitted both the Arms and the Title. And notwithstanding I know not, if this
be to defraud the Queen, that I, who likewise am one, and Grandchild to the
eldest Sister of HENRY the Eighth, carry these Arms, seeing that others have
borne them, which are further off of kin than I am.



Indeed Courtney, Marquis of Exceter, and the Duchess of Suffolk, Niece to
HENRY the Eighth, by his younger Sister, by a special favor carried the Arms
of England, in adding to them the Limbs for a mark of difference.

The Queen of Scotland, Contestation between the Queen of Scotland, and
Throgmorton, Queen Elizabeth's Ambassador into France.
not being able by these words to give Qu. ELIZABETH content, who steadfastly
believed that she sought but delays, to husband some new hope, seeing that at
the holding of the States of Scotland, who had assembled twice since the death
of Queen MARIE, she had not made any proposition which concerned the
confirmation of this Treaty: as she was already upon the way to come for
Scotland, she caused Throgmorton a second time to come to her to Ableville,
and asked him courteously, How she might either by word or deed, give
satisfaction to Queen ELIZABETH. The Queen endeavors to content Qu. Elizabeth.


In ratifying (says he) the Treaty of Edenborrough, as I have often told you.
Whereupon, she said unto him: HEarken then, to judge, if this which she
thinks to be delays, and vain excuses, are not most just reasons. The first
Article of this Treaty, which concerns the ratification of that which passed
in the Castle of Cambray, between England and France, touches me nothing at
all. The second, which concerns that of the Treaty passed in the same place
between England and Scotland, has been ratified by my Husband and me, and I
cannot ratify it more amply, if it be not concluded in my name alone, seeing
my Husband is there expressly named. The third, fourth, and fifth Articles are
already effected: for the preparatiues of War have ceased, the French
Garrisons are called back out of Scotland, the Fort which was near Aymouth,
is razed. Since the death of my Husband, I have refrained to carry the Arms
and the Title of England, and it is not in my power to raze them out of the
Vtensils, Edifices, and the Letters Royal which are dispersed through France,
no more than I can send back the Bishop of Valence, and of Raadan, since they
are not my Subjects, to contest upon the sixth Article. As to the last, I hope
that my seditious Subjects will not complain of my inclemencie. But, as I see,
she which thinks to hinder my return, will go about to hinder that they
shall not try my clemency. What remains now in this Treaty, which is
prejudicial to your Queen? Nevertheless, to heap her up with satisfactions,
I will write to her of it more amply, with mine own hand, though she
vouchsafes not to write to me, but by a Secretary. As for you, Ambassador, I
pray you to do the duty of an Ambassador, rather to sweeten businesses,
than make them sowrer.

But these Letters did not give Queen ELIZABETH any contentment, But in vain.
who had ever in her heart the injury which she had done her, in taking the
title and arms of England, and at that time feared much that she took them
yet, if by the confirmation of this Treaty, and the Religion of the oath, she
was not bound to forbear them.

In the mean time, She returns into Scotland.
the Queen of Scotland finding the time fit, goes to Calais, and gets into
Scotland, having the favor of Heaven which was cloudy and dark, got the wind
of the English Ships, that some thought had been sent to Sea in honor to
conuoy her, others to take Pirates, and others to take her: they grounding it
upon this, that James, her bastard-brother, a little before returning from
France, and passing through England, had counseled Queen ELIZABETH to do it,
if she would provide for Religion, and her own safety: The which, Lidington,
being joyful that Doysell was retained in England, persuaded, as his Letters
make mention.

Lest, being returned, she should stir up Tragedies, take away the commerce
of letters and messages with the English, ruin the faction which was at their
devotion, and exercise cruelty upon the Protestants of Scotland, not under
color of disloyalty, but of heresy, even as MARIE Queen of England had
lately done. Howbeit, her Majesty being returned into Scotland, showed all
gentleness to her Subjects, she changed nothing in Religion, although
tumultuously brought in; and begun to temper the Commonwealth by excellent
Laws and good Ordinances. Her Majesty sent Lidington to Queen ELIZABETH,
with Letters from her self, and from the Peers of Scotland, by which she
referred to her all the care to make and intertaine the peace between England
and Scotland, prayed her to seek some good dispatch thereof, and gave for her
advice, that she did not think of a better and more certain remedy, than
that Queen ELIZABETH, dying without issue, should declare her Heir, to
succeed her in the Kingdom of England, etc. by authority of Parliament.

This seemed strange to Queen ELIZABETH, who expected to receive the
Confirmation of the Treaty of Edenborrough, promised both by word and writing.
Notwithstanding, she answers him: Elizabeth answers him.
THat for concerning the matter of Succession, she hoped that the Queen of
Scotland would not violently take the Scepter from her, nor from her Children,
if she should have any. Promises not to derogate in any manner from the right
which she had to the Kingdom of England, howsoever by the precipitate and
ouer-hasted ambition of others, she had attributed to her self the Title and
the Arms of the same, for which it were just and requisite she should make
some satisfaction: And said, she feared that the Designation of a Successor,
would disioyne their friendship, rather than re-vnite it, by reason that those
which rule, have always those in suspicion which ought to succeed them: That
the inconstant people, vexing themselves at the present state of things, turn
away the eyes from the Sunne-setting, and look toward the Sunne-rising; and
that those which are once designed Successors, cannot contain themselves
within the limits of equity, nor can keep under the ill desires of their
own, and of others: insomuch that if she did confirm and assure the
succession, she should deprive her self of all security, she should in her
lifetime set her winding-sheete before her eyes, yea, she should likewise make
her own funeral, living, and seeing it.

Having made this answer, Qu. Elizabeth presses the confirmation of the
Treaty.
she sweetly admonishes her again by Letters, which were delivered her by
Peter Meutis, to confirm the Treaty; which she refused not directly; but gave
him to understand, that she could not commodiously do it, until the Affairs
of Scotland were well established. In the mean time, Queen ELIZABETH, with all
manner of courtesy, entertaines Monsieur le Duc D' Aumale, the Grand Prior, and
Monsieur le Duc D'elbeuf, Receives the Guizes courteously.
her Uncles, and other French Noblemen, which had conducted her into Scotland.

And yet notwithstanding, The Guizes use the English ill.
Monsieur de Guize behaved himself in that sort, that the English Ships are
taken upon the Coasts of Brittanie, and the Merchants unworthily handled, and
labors again closely at Rome, to procure Queen ELIZABETH to be
excommunicated. Howbeit the Pope, Pius the fourth, advised, that it behooved to
deal more gently with her Majesty; and as he had already sought by courteous
Letters, as I have said upon the last year, having then also, to appease the
discords which were for matter of Religion, assigned a day to the Council of
Trent, long sinnce begun, and broken off by continual Wars, and drawing
gently thither, all the Princes which had forsaken the Romish religion, he
deputed into England the Abbot of Martinegues, with Letters full of assurance
of love.

But because that by an ancient Law, it is most expressly forbidden the Popes
Nuncio's to go thither, before he had obtained leave from thence, and taken
Oath, not to work any thing by subtilty there, tending to the prejudice of the
King and Kingdom; The Abbot being upon the way, stayed in Flanders, and
demanded leave to come hither: But Englands Council of State judged, that it
was not safe to admit him hither, in regard that so many people from all parts,
nourished in the Romish religion, labored carefully, both within and without
the Realm, to trouble the affairs thereof.

The Abbot not being permitted to come into England, the Bishop of Wittenberg,
the Popes Nuncio, with the King of France, labors that Queen ELIZABETH should
send Ambassadors to the Council, and many Princes of Christendom, (viz.) the
Kings of France, of Spain, and of Portingall, Henry Cardinal of Portingall,
and above all, the Duke of Albe, who yet bore good will to her Majesty,
counseled her, that in matters of Religion, which is the only Anchor of
Christians, and stay of Kingdoms, she would rather asscent to the Oecumenique
Council of Trent, than to the particular opinions of a few men, although they
be learned.

She answers them, That the right to assemble a Council belongs not to the
Pope.
That she desired with all her heart, an Oecumenique Council, but that she
would not send to that of the Popes, with whom she had nothing to do, his
authority being utterly beaten down and rejected in England, with the consent
of the States of the Kingdom. That it is not for him, but for the Emperor, to
assign a Council, and that he has no greater authority then any other Bishop.

At the same time (that this Abbot was denied access into England, being the
last Nuncio that the Popes of Rome have sent hither) Sir Edward Carne,
aforementioned, being a most judicious and wise man, very well understood in
the right of Emperors, and by the Emperor Charles the fifth, honored with
the dignity of Knighthood, Carne dies.
he dyed at Rome, and was the last Ambassador sent from the Kings of England
to the Pope.

Chamberlain, Ambassador for England in Spain, perceiving that this answer
did more and more alienate the affection of Spain, who judged it to be
injurious to the Pope, and fearing no more, that England, Scotland, and Ireland
should fall into the hands of the Kings of France, since that King Francis was
dead, began to make no more account of the English, took leave of him, and
returned into England. Thomas Chaloner is sent in his place, who, as he was
impatient of injuries, and had been many times Ambassador in Germany, where
he had received all manner of courtesies, as soon as he was arrived in Spain,
instantly besought by Letters to be revoked, complaining, that according to the
custom of the Country, they had searched his Trunkes. But Queen ELIZABETH
admonished him, How far an Ambassador ought to bear an offense.
that an Ambassador must support all that which is of equity, provided that
the honor of his Prince were not wronged.

Queen ELIZABETH being then capable of good counsel, and very prudent and
provident, and Religion somewhat well established, to strengthen her self with
remedies against forces, prouides for the safety of her self and of her
Subjects; and to enjoy Peace more sweetly, although she found the Coffers empty
at her coming, began to establish a Magazin of all sorts of Instruments of
War, Qu. Elizabeth prepares things necessary for War.
and to that end, employed great sums of money in Germany, (The Spaniard
retained those Furnitures which she had agreed for at a price, at Antwerpe)
causes many Cannons of Brass and Iron to be cast, discouers in the Country of
Cumberland, near Keswicke, by a special favor from God (...) on what
occasion, how far, and at what time she should use her liberality, and
indeed, was prouidently bountiful to those that deserved it. For,
notwithstanding that King HENRY her Father, howsoever charged with three
Children, and EDWARD and MARIE, who had none, had been bountiful of the
Crown Land, she nevertheless, having none neither, Qu. Elizabeth's husbandry.
gave very little of it, and yet what she gave, was upon condition, that for
default of issue it should return to the Crown; for which, both the Realm
and their successors ought to remember her, and thank her, as a careful
fore-seer.

Whilst this good correspondencie was between the Queen and her people (the
Commonwealth seeming to take life and strength, to the common joy of all) fell
out a sad accident. S. Paul's Steeple burnt.
A most rare Piramide of the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, in London, which
was from the ground to the top of the square Tower, 525. foot, and from thence
260. and was covered with wood, and ouer-laid with Lead) was stricken at the
top with fire from heaven, which was so devouring, and burnt downward with
such violence, (to the great terror of all the Inhabitants) that in the space
of five hours, it reduced it to ashes, with the whole covering of the Church,
which was most ample and spacious, but the vaults, which were of solid stone,
remained entire. Notwithstanding, all this covering was new made by the Queens
liberality, and to the effecting of the same, gave great quantity of money and
materials, beside the collection of Ecclesiasticicall persons, and others: So
all was repaired, save the Piramide.

The death of Earl Bathon.
This year dyed John Bourchier, a man of ancient Nobility, Earl of Bath,
second of that name, and Baron of Fitzwarin, who, by Elenor, daughter of
George, Baron of Rosse, had a great Progeny, and left his Son William (yet
living) his Successor.

THE FIFTH YEAR OF HER REIGN. Book 1. 1562.
Anno Domini, 1562.
THe troubles of France begun then to wax hot, in the minority of Charles
the Ninth, the Princes which envied one another, pretending on both sides, the
specious name, the defense of Religion, and those of the reformed Religion
being grievously oppressed. And hereupon, the Papists of England, by I know
not what hope which they had conceived thereby, to oppress the Protestants;
many discourses of importance were whispered very secretly in private
assemblies, and all full of suspicion. Margaret, Countess of Lenox, who had a
secret intelligence with the Queen of Scotland, and the Earl of Lenox, her
husband, were for a time put and detayned under the custody of the Master of
the Rolls. Arthur Pole and his Brother, Nephews sons to George, Duke of
Clarence, Pole had under examination.
King Edwards Brother, Anthony Fortescue, who had married their Sister, and
others, were brought into examination, for having conspired to withdraw
themselves into France to the Guizes, and from thence to return with an Army
into Wales, and declare the Queen of Scotland Queen of England, and Arthur
Pole Duke of Clarence, as they at their Trial ingenuously confessed,
nevertheless protesting that they intended not to do it while Queen
ELIZABETH lived, and that they had been seduced by diuiners, to believe that
she should dye that year: for which they were condemned to dye;
notwithstanding, for the respect which was had unto their blood, they were
suffered to live. But (as many have thought) they used Katherine Gray very
severely, though she was much nearer of kin to the Queen, Katherine Gray
imprisoned.
being Daughter to the Duke of Suffolk: For, having been married to Henry,
eldest Son to the Earl of Pembrooke, by him lawfully repudiated, and left
long time in great contempt, finding her self with child, and near her lying
down, was put in the Tower of London, although she protested that she was
married to Edward Seimor, Earl of Hertford, and great by him. He himself
being returned from France, whither he went for his pleasure, by the Queens
permission, having made the like acknowledgement, was also imprisoned in the
same Tower; the Archbishop of Canterbury, and others, were appointed to
examine and decide the Cause, without appeal: and when he could not produce
witness of his marriage within the time prescribed him, the Archbishop, by a
definitive Sentence, pronounced, That the Carnal company which he had had with
her, was illegitimate and unlawful, and that for this offense, they ought both
to be punished. This Sentence was impugned as wicked and unjust, by John Hales,
a man very opinatiue, but otherwise very learned, who maintained, that their
sole consent did legitimate their conjunction; for which reason, he himself
was committed. She was delivered in prison of her firstborn, and afterward,
her Keepers being corrupted by the Earl of Hertfords device, Edward Warner,
Lieutenant of the Tower, was punished, as conscious of the fact, He is fined.
and displaced. Hertford is accused in the Star Chamber of three crimes, that
he had deflowred a Virgin of the Bloud-Royall, broken the Prison, and had
accompanied with her since. Whereupon, after having protested that he was
lawfully married to her, he confessed, that having found the doors of the
Prison open, he had visited her in the affliction which was caused by the
sentence pronounced against them, and had paid her the duty of wedlock. For
which cause, He is fined.
he was fined five thousand pound for every offense, and kept Prisoner nine
years. Yet nevertheless, by persuasion of Lawyers, he insisted against the
Archbishops sentence, by interiecting an appeal, and continued to visit her
privily. But in this time, he voluntarily, and publicly left it off: and
she, after some years, (to the end I may in the time of their separation
speak jointly of them) fell into a grievous sickness; after having in the
presence of Hopton Lieutenant of the Tower, demanded pardon of the Queen, in
regard she had married without her advice, and with Prayers re-commended her
Children to her trust, and Hertford his liberty; She dyed in Christ piously
and peaceably.

War renewing then in France between the Princes of the Blood, and the
Guizes, under a feigned pretense of Religion, as I have said, one sought for to
strengthen both parties; Queen ELIZABETH began to fear lest neighbour-warres
should entangle England therein: The Guizes practice against Elizabeth.
For she had learned, that the Guizes, to draw Anthony of Burbone to their
party, had boasted to put him in possession of Navarre, to marry him to the
Queen of Scotland, and to give him in dowry the Kingdom of England, at the
expense of the Spaniard, and by the authority of the Pope, who would break the
marriage, because his Wife was an Heretic, and by the same means, depose Qu.
ELIZABETH of her Kingdom, H. Sidney is sent into France.
as being so. Upon that, she sent H. Sidney, a man of great renown, that he
might inform himself more surely of these things, and to exhort unto peace,
the Conductors of these several parties. But, the business was come to such a
pass, that the ears of both parties were shut against peace. Sidney being
returned from France, After into Scotland.
is forthwith sent to the Queen of Scotland, that the Colloque which she
desired to be holden in England with Queen ELIZABETH, might be prorogued
until the year following, or until the Wars in France were abated.

They deliberate the inter-view of the Queen of Scotland.
Now it is consulted on, whether it were expedient or not, that these two
Princesses should speak together: in that the Queen of Scotland desired it
the first, it was not without suspicion she did it to serve her own ends, and
sought out stratagems in their season, or to affirm the right which she
pretended to have in England, or to give hope and increase of courage to the
Papists of England, and to the Guizes in France. Some thought the contrary,
that this would be a means to unite them with a firm friendship, to decay by
little and little the alliance with France, and to draw the Queen of Scotland
to the Protestants Religion. Others observed, that such communications might
rather sow seeds of emulation than of love, and that the show of riches and
power of the one, would ever excite the envy of the other, and that the
presence not answering to the opinion and reputation of the body, of the grace
in speaking, and of the gifts of the spirit, would leave both to the one and
the other, some thing of reprehension. Which puts her in doubt.
The Queen of Scotland did likewise judge, that it were not safe for her to
expose her self into the power of Queen ELIZABETH, with whom she had
contended for the right of the Kingdom, and as she had learned, that she had
openly declared her self for the Protestants of France: she was likewise in
doubt on what side to rank her self, considering how she her self had
written, that of the Father side she had drawn her extraction from England,
and of her Mother side from France: that she had been crowned Queen of
France, and was Dowager of it: that she was the most certain Heir of
England, and looked for the succession: that if she were obliged to her Uncles
of France, who brought her up, she would be no less to the love of her Sister
Queen ELIZABETH.

Notwithstanding, as she was subtle of spirit, she was afraid, if she
should tie her self with a stricter friendship to Queen ELIZABETH, to incur
the disgrace of the King of France, and to be abandoned of the Guizes her
Uncles, and lose the money which she drew from France for her dowry, while
she should prefer this friendship which was uncertain; and, as she said
her self, there is none but transgresses, and of the friendship of the French
she was assured. And that that was the cause, why the interuiew which had been
in deliberation many months, came to nothing, chiefly after she had declared
by Letters, that she altogether refused it, unless, that, for to ground a
certain peace, Unless it were upon certain conditions.
and the union of the two Kingdoms so much desired, she were by authority of
the Parliament designed Heir of the Kingdom of England, or adopted Queen
ELIZABETH'S Daughter: and that if these things were granted her, she promised to
be wholly at the devotion of Queen ELIZABETH, though she quitted all
consideration and respect to the Guizes her Uncles. Furthermore, she assured,
that she did not press these things, but upon advice which she had given her
of the secret practices of some, under pretense of religion, intended to
suborne some other Successor than her self, howbeit she tolerates the
Protestants Religion in Scotland.

The Cardinal of Lorraine propounds a marriage to the Queen of Scotland.
Queen Elizabeth endeavors to divert her from it.
But, as the Cardinal of Lorraine treated at the same time with the Emperor
Ferdinand, to marry her with Charles his Son, Archduke, who then sought to
have Queen ELIZABETH, ELIZABETH declares unto her, by Thomas Randolph, that
if she lent any ear to this marriage to the Cardinal, capital enemy to the
Engglish, she might dissolve the amity between England and Scotland, and
peradventure therewith to include the loss of the Kingdom of England:
admonishes her amiably, not to fall off, but to choose her a Husband in
England; first, to please her self, and afterward for the contentment of her
own Subjects, and of the English, and to intertaine the friendship which was
between them, and to prepare her self a way to a certain assurance of the
succession of England, of which, declaration could not be made, if it did not
first appear with whom she meant to marry.

All these cares held Queen ELIZABETH in great suspense, nevertheless she was
altogether attentive to the wars of France, to hinder that the flames of it
in Normandy should not be blown into England, and, after mature deliberation,
received into her protection the King of France his Subjects, which were in
Normandy, and implored her succor, by a Covenant which she passed with the
Princes of Conde, Rohan, Coligni, and others, to this effect, That she would
send them a hundred thousand crowns, and pass over six thousand Soldiers,
of which, three thousand should be employed for the defense of Deep and Rouan:
That they would put into her hands for assurance, Ville-Franche, which is
situated at the mouth of Seen, and was built by King Francis the First, (the
French calling it Haure de grace, and the English, New-Hauen) to be kept by a
Garrison of three thousand Engglish Soldiers, under the name of the King of
France, until Calais be rendered. The same day that this agreement past, to
give a reason of her design, she published a manifestation to this effect.

That she sent not an army into Normandy, Gives her reasons.
to recover this Province, an ancient patrimony of England, which had been
wrongfully usurped, but to conserve it for the King of France, being but yet a
Child, and to warrant it against the Guizes, who had begun cruelly to
overrun those who professed the pure Religion, and iniustly to rob her of
her right which she had to Calais, and to take possesssion of the Ports of
Normandy; from thence, they threaten next to fall upon England, which they have
by hope devoured already: insomuch, as she could not choose but meet their
attempts, unless she should seem to be failing to the young King her Brother
and Confederate, and his Subjects that are oppressed, to envy the quiet of
Christendom, and, which is more, cowardly betray her Religion, her security,
and her salvation. And as Paul de Foix, Ambassador of France in England,
summoned her by virtue of the Treaty of Cambray, to deliver into the Kings
hands, the Vidame of Chartres, of Hai, and others, who had signed the accord,
as Traitors to their Country: She excuses the French fugitives.
she excused her self of that by her Letter to the King, discharging them of
the crime, and charged the turbulent spirits of the Guizes for it, who had
wrapped in the tempest of war the Kings Father and Brother, and the King
himself.

In the month of September, one part of the English Army landed at New-Hauen,
under the conduct of Adrian Poining, who was appointed Marshall, where they
were with joy received by the inhabitants: the other part landed at Deep. The
Earl of Warwick, General of the Army, arrived there later, having been by
contrary winds twice driven back into England. Afterward, they made diverse
incursions into the Country near thereabout, but to hinder the same, the
Ringraue came and camped nearer. The English, and the French had
notwithstanding often light skirmishes, and those which were men of war, upon
the Sea, brought in rich spoils, taking and bringing in every day French
ships, from the neighboring harbors.

The death of the Earl of Oxford.
This year, John Vere, the Earl of Oxford, died, the sixteenth of that
illustrious House, who, by his first Wife, Daughter to Ralph Neuill Earl of
Westmerland, had Katherine, who was wife to Edward, Baron of Windsor: by his
second Wife Margaret Goulding, Edw. Earl of Oxford, who ouer-threw and wasted
his Patrimony, and Mary, who was married to Peregrine Bartie, Baron of
Willoughbie.

At the same time, Shan O-Neale came out of Ireland, to perform that which he
had promised the year before, having for his Guard, a troop of
Galloglassorum, who had their heads naked, and curled hair hanging on their
shoulders, yellow shirts, as if they had been died with Saffron, or steeped in
Urine, wide sleeves, short Cassockes, and rough hairy Clokes. The English
admired them no less, than they should do at this day to see those of China,
or America. Having been received with all courtesy, he cast himself at the
Queens feet, and with tears acknowledged his crime, asked pardon, and
obtained it. After, being graciously questioned, Wherefore he had excluded
Matthew his Brother from the succession of his great Grandfather, answered
fiercely, as he was used to do in Ireland, that it was his right, and being
the certain and lawful son and Heir of Cone, Defends his cause.
borne of a legitimate woman, he had taken his succession. That Matthew was the
issue of a Lock-Smith of Dundalke, married with a woman named Alison, after
this marriage: and notwithstanding, had been deceitfully supposed by his
Mother Cone, to be her son, to the end falsely to take away the dignity of
O-Neale. And although he should suffer it, some of the House of O-Neales would
not. The grant which his father had made to King HENRY the Eighth, and the
restitution that HENRY the Eighth had made unto him, were nothing considerable,
seeing that Cone had nothing in the things granted, but during her life, and
could not have made this grant, without the consent of the Peers, and of the
people, who had elected him to the honor of O-Neale. That such Letters also
could not be of any value, unless witnessed by the oaths of twelve men, that
he was the certain Heir of the House, which had not been done in this
matter. That by divine and humane right, he was undoubted Heir: moreover, the
eldest Son of his Father, begot in lawful marriage, and designed O-Neale
with a general consent of the Peers and people, by virtue of the Law of
Temster, which was his Country; by which, a man of ripe years ought to be
preferred before a Child, and an Uncle before a Nephew whose great Grandfather
out-liued the Father. To conclude, he had not usurped any authority over the
Lords of Vlster, though in times past his Ancestors, by a particular right, had
used it. But of this I have spoken elsewhere. Which when the Queen found
true, he was sent home with honor, where he behaved himself both faithfully
and industriously against the Irish Rebels.

Book 1. 1563.
THE SIXTH YEAR OF HER REIGN. Anno Domini, 1563.
IN the month of January, the States of the Kingdom assembled at Westminster,
and established Laws for the relief of the poor, for the increase of
traffic by Sea, and for husbandry, to repress South-sayers, Negromancers,
Sodomites, Coyners, and Perjury, and translated the Holy Bible and Liturgy into
the Welsh Tongue: And, to maintain the Majesty of the Queen and Realm, took
order, that the like inconveniences might not happen to them, which shamefully
fell out by the Popes usurped authority; and, to curb the violence of those
which vpheld it, declared them criminals laesae Maiestatis, whosoever, after
three admonitions, should maintain in print, in words, or in deeds, that any
Prince, Prelate, or stranger, should have any authority in Spiritual things,
in England, or any other Countries of the Queens Dominions; or whosoever
should refuse twice to take the Oath which should be offered to him, for
acknowledging of the Queens sovereign authority in Spiritual things, and over
Ecclesiastical persons; yet with this charge, without spilling of blood,
neither that it should be required of any Baron of this Kingdom, or of those
of more eminent dignity, the Queen not doubting their fidelity, nor any
others: Save those which were, which had been, or hereafter should be of some
Ecclesiastical Order; or those, who after having bin advertised of the form
of service of the English Church, will not observe it; or shall publicly in
words or actions deprave it; which shall celebrate or hear Mass, with like
things, which is seen in the Ordinance established for it.

Now, to witness the joy which they had to see the prosperity of the times, the
Clergy granted the Queen a Subsidy, and the Lay people another, together
with two Tenths, and two fifteenths, in acknowledgment of her reformation of
Religion, establishment of Peace, delivering England and Scotland from stranger
Enemies, to put down base money, repair the Fleet, make preparation for War
and Navigations beyond expectation, and of the laudable design which she had
for France, to assure England and the young King of France, and to recover
Calais. Fifteenths. Tenths.
Now this Tenth and Fifteenth (that I may make it remarkable in the behalf of
strangers) is a Tax, which long ago has bin imposed upon every City,
Borrough, and village, not by the pole, but by generalities, according to the
fifteenth part of the reuenew of the places. Subsidies.
A Subsidy is that which is imposed upon every particular, for goods and lands
which he possesses. But neither of these two Taxes are ever imposed, but by
the Parliament.

The Prence of Conde taken in the Battle of Dreux.
In the mean time, the Prince of Conde, who made haste to get into Normandy, to
the English succor, is taken in the famous Battle of Dreux and with him
Nicholas Throgmorton, who suffered himself voluntarily to be taken by the
Protestants, to communicate some secret designs unto them. And being
presently after set at liberty, he presented the money which was promised to
Coligni, who was marched forward with the Troops of auxiliary English to the
Castle of Cane which he then besieged, and easily compelled Cane, Bayeux,
Falexe, and the Temple of Saint Lo, to render.

While things were thus carried in France, Queen ELIZABETH made known to the
King of Spain, by Chaloner her Ambassador, that, to prevent the Guizes in
time, who insultingly, and with deadly intent raised up against her, pernicious
things and dangerous Treaties, that she had sent an Army into France, and
kept still in her hands Haure de grace, which was delivered up to her, till
she received full satisfaction for Calais. The Kings answer.
He answered her, That if she demanded only the restitution of Calais, it was
all she desired from the beginning, but if she undertook this war for
Religions sake, he could not likewise abandon that of his Grandfathers and
Predecessors. As for the Guizes, who are they, said he, for a most puissant
Queen of England to fear, they being of no alliance to the King of France,
as hereto fore they have been? Whereunto she made no other reply, but
conformable to that English Proverb; which says, Every one must look to
their own, when their neighbors House is on fire. And the King of Spain
understood well enough, how she politikely treated with the Protestant Princes
of Germany, by the solicitation of then Henry, but now, Lord Knowles, and
Christopher Hill, for the Prince of Conde's relief, and to defend the common
cause of Religion, whereat being more highly offended, he likewise secretly
sought means against her, under the color and pretext of Religion.

Withal, those French Hostages, Hostages given for the restitution of Calais,
attempt to fly away.
who were sent into England, for the security of the payment of ^ne hundred
thousand Crowns, promised, in case Calais were not restored, perceiving all
things enclining to a war, labored all they could to fly away: but being
ready to take Bark, they were taken and brought back again, together with
that famous Pylot, John Ribant, who came secretly into England, to convey them
over. In the mean while, Peace made in France.
peace was accorded in France, between the King, and the Prince of Conde,
allured thereunto, out of hope that he should have the general managing of
all affairs, and marry the Queen of Scots; the Protestants, and the Queens
Majesty of England being no ways therein comprehended; all men, with one
general voice, protested, that if the English withdrew not themselves
forthwith out of Haure de grace, the promise of surrendting Calais, intimated
by the Treaty of Cambray, should be frustrate, and take no effect: and by
public sound of Trumpet, the French were permitted in this case, to assail
the English, to take, and pillage them, while they yielded it up. War
proclaimed between the French and the English.
The Queens Majesty of England also, for her part, permitted the English to
repute of the Frenchmen as enemies, those only excepted, that did inhabit in
London, while they detayned Calais: and the English put to sea, with such a
powerful Navy, as was incredible, clozing it up from all French navigations,
as also from the Spaniards, making so many, and such insolent surprizals of
them both, as her Majesty was urged to excuse the same to the King of Spain,
and to divulge prohibitions, by public Proclamation, to the English.

The Earl of Warwick, Governor of Haure de grace, observing, how the
fidelity and loyalty of the French Inhabitants began to waver, and that upon
so weak a rumor of Peace, they held secret Councels amongst themselves, and
that the Ryngraue was in the adjacent parts, with his forces, to surprise the
Town, and expel the English: he in like manner drove out all the French
indifferently, both Papists and Protestants, out of the Town, and seized on
their shipping, which they took in grievous ill part; complaining, that the
English were not so careful to protect the afflicted Frenchmen, as to make
themselves absolute Masters of the place; and how they felt their oppression
more heavy, then that of the Enemy himself. And certainly, to speak but
truth, nothing ever so alienated the hearts of the Normanes, those of Guyenne,
the Poytouines, and all other Provinces living under the subjection of the
Kings of England, as because the English ever reputed, and entreated them like
mere strangers.

The Frenchmen had now studiously prepared all things to assail the Town:
The Qu. Majesty offers to surrender Haure de grace, for Calais.
The King, and the Prince of Conde at the same time labored hard, and very
earnestly in England, by Brickmore and D. for the surrender of the Town, and
her Majesty consented thereunto, upon these conditions: First, That the King
of Spain should join in Caution, for the restitution of Calais, within the
time prefixed: Then, the Treaty of Cambray was to be confirmed by the Kings
Oath, the Queen Mothers, and that of the Princes of the Blood, and ratified by
all the Parliaments of France, and Gentlemen of greatest note and quality,
given for Pledges.

The English Soldiers molested with the Pestilence.
In the mean while, the Plague reigned very hot in Haure de grace, amongst the
Soldiers of the Garrison; and two-hundred, sent for their relief and succor,
were lost by ship-wracke, with Sir Thomas Finch, their Conductor, and two
Brothers of the Lord Wentworth* Wherefore, there being no great likely hood of
maintayning and holding the Town, Sir Thomas Smith, ordinary Leager in France,
received express Commandment, to propound the restoring of it, for Calais,
and so in like manner, that the King of Spain should arbitrate this affair,
who had married the King of France his Sister. But the French would in no wise
give any ear unto it, alleging, that the King of France acknowledged none
for his Superior, neither would he commit his affairs to the arbitrament of
any Prince. They detayned Master Nicholas Throgmorton, sent to move these
Conditions, suspecting he was returned into France, for the disturbance of
proceedings (as he could play his part well) grounding their Action upon this,
that he had no public Commission, though he had about him Letters of Credit,
besides others he had from the French Ambassador Leager in England: and they
would in no wise hear him, verily believing, that Haure de grace would
presently be recovered by maine force, by reason the Pestilence caused there
such a fearful mortality. Monsieur Memorancie was already come thither, with
all the most remarkable Nobility in his company. Not long after, arrived the
Prince of Conde, with the whole Flower of the Protestant Cheualrie: and the
English wondering at this sudden alteration, answer was made them, that Peace
was now generally established, and the forces of both parties joined in one,
and now no motives were made of fighting for Religion, but for defense of their
Country.

A Trumpet was sent from Monsieur Memorancy, to the Earl of Warwick, to
summon him to surrender, and another returned from the said Earl, to the
Constable Memorancie, with a Gentleman, one Master Paulet, to certify him, how
the English were resolved to suffer all extremities, Haure de grace beleagred
and assailed by the French.
rather than to yield up the Place, without the Queens express Commandment.
Wherefore the Frenchmen having raised Mounts to make their Battery, ruined and
battered the Town for the space of many days, broke up all the Conduit-heads,
and diuerted the water out of its proper Channel, which was seated above the
Sea: they applied all their endeavors to take the Town by force: the English,
on the other side, with most loyal and courageous fidelity, opposed theirs,
daily losing more men by the Plague, than by the Arms of their Enemies.

When Queen ELIZABETH heard of the lamentable and unhappy estate of her people,
no longer to expose such valiant spirits to slaughter, and pestilentiall
Infection; after an approofe of her Captains and Soldiers valors, in a
public Proclamation, she sent to the Earl of Warwick, commanding him to
compound with the French, upon reasonable and equal Conditions. There were
also incontinently delegated from the Earl of Warwick, to Monsieur Memorancy,
Master Paulet, and Master Pelham, with whom in a short time they came to an
Accord, upon these Capitulations ensuing: Articles for the restitution of Haure
de grace.
That the Town, with all the warlike munition, should be surrendered to the
King of France, and his Subjects. That presently Monsieur Memorancie should
take possession of the greatest Tower within the Town. That the prisoners both
of the one and other side, should instantly be redeliuered. And that the
English might de part with all freedom and liberty, carrying whatsoever
belonged to their Queen or themselves, within the compass of six days, if
the Winds would permit.

For performance whereof, they delivered for Hostages, Mr. Oliver Manors,
Brother to the Earl of Rutland, Mr. Leighton, Mr. Pelham, and Mr. Horsie. The
last remaining, was, Mr. Edm. Randolph, Marshall of the Camp, who, with a
pity and commiseration, never ouer-highly to be extolled, ceased not to carry
upon his own shoulders, poor, miserable, and weak Soldiers into the Ships.

And thus, Haure de grace, being more violently assailed by the Plague, then
any enemy, was left to the French, having been formerly in the Englishmens
hands, about eleven Months; during which time, besides private Soldiers, there
dyed of the Pestilence, these famous Captains, Somerset, Zouch, Alb. Darcy,
Drurey, Entwessel, Ormesby, Vaughan, Crookes, Cocson, Proud, Saul, and Kemish:
and with the Sword, two Brothers of the Tremayns, Sanders, Bromfield, Master of
the Ordnance, Robinson, Baylife of the Town; Strangewaies, very expert in
Sea-seruice; and Good-all, marvelous understanding in casting of Mines.

For the so happy recovery of this little Town, France rejoices for recovery
of Haure de grace.
the King of France gave public thanksgiving unto God; the Papists all over
France, made Bonefires of joy, exulting and boasting, in that the Englishmen
were driven out by the aid and help of the Protestants, who first called them
in, and that by this means, some seeds of discord were sown between them and
the Protestants of France; and the Chancellor of the Hospital, in an ample
Discourse, expressing to them the present felicity they thereby enjoyed, and
the general contentment they ought to receive, and testify the same withal,
for the amplification of this subject; and, out of a false surmize, he reported
to them, that the day before the Towns surrender, there was seen within the
view thereof, an English Fleet, which came for aid and succor: and he openly
auerred, that by reason of this war, the English were wholly frustrate of
their right and demand, touching the restoring of Calais. The English Soldiers
bring the Plague into London, and other parts of England.
The infected Soldiers were transported into England, who so spread the face of
this sickness, through a contagious and infectiue poison, as all the Kingdom
was therewith grievously afflicted, and only in the City of London,
consisting of an hundred twenty and one Parishes, within the compass of one
year, an hundred and thirty thousand men, rather more then less, dyed.

Monsieur de Guize, Uncle to the Queen of Scots, dying while this Civil War
lasted, the Queens Majesty of Scotland not being paid her Dowry, Marquis
Hamilton deprived of the Duchy of Chastelraut, and the Scottish Guard being
excluded from the King of France, the Queen of Scots took it very much to
heart. But the Cardinal of Lorraine, Marriage again propounded to the Queen
of Scots.
her other Uncle, fearing that this would be a subject which might cause her
to reject the French, and become friend to the English, sends her word again
by Croc, to marry with Charles of Austria, and to offer for her Dowry, the
County of Tyrol. She aduertiseth Queen ELIZABETH thereof, who counseled her,
by Randoll (who I have spoken on before) to make choice of a Husband, as
heretofore I have said: and withal (more plainly then yet she had done)
recommended Robert Dudley (whose wife (being heir to Robsert) had lately
broke her neck) and promised her, The Queen of England recommends Dudley for
her husband.
in case that she would marry him, to declare her, Her Sister, or Daughter, and
Englands Heretrix, by Act of Parliament. Foix, the French Ambassador, made the
Queen Mother, and her Uncles acquainted with this, who presently disdained the
Party so much, as altogether unworthy of that Race and Royal Majesty, that
they promised not only to pay her Dowry, but also, that the Scots should have
their ancient immunities, yea, and more, if she would stand firm in amity
with France, and reject the marriage which was offered her: telling her, that
Queen ELIZABETH did not propound this marriage to her seriously, but with
dissimulation, as having destined Dudley for her own Husband: and that she
should not ground her hope upon the authority of the Parliament, because that
in England, The French divert her.
one Parliament abolisheth what another has established. Furthermore, that the
designs of the Council of England were no other, but to hinder her from
marrying at all.

She nevertheless referres it to the Colloque, being molested with troubles in
her Kingdom, to see that the Archbishop of Saint Andrews had been
imprisoned by the command of the Earl of Murray, for not desisting to
celebrate the Mass, who would scarce grant him pardon, though he asked it with
flowing tears: and that the fervent Ministers, supporting themselves by
Murrayes authority, did violence to the Priest who had celebrated Mass in her
Court (being allowed by the Law,) and were not punished. They insult over their
Queen.
And it was not possible for her to suppress those which troubled the
affairs, though all her care was wholly for the Commonwealth, granting a
perpetual forgetfulness of all that was past, increasing the stipend of
Judges, establishing wholesome Laws, inflicting capital punishment upon
Adulterers, and often her self hearing causes pleaded in the Seat of Justice,
so that by an equal Law, she governed both the great and the small.

In this unlucky year dyed William Gray, The Baron of Gray dies,
Baron of Wilton, Governor of Berwicke, who had in war purchased great
glory, and much diminished his patrimony for the ransom that he paid when he
was taken prisoner in France. The Protestants lamented much for him, and
Francis Earl of Bedford was substituted in his place.

Aluarus of Quadra, Bishop of Aquila, And the Bishop of Aquila,
Ambassador of Spain in England, likewise dies, who was no less lamented by
the Papists, whom he had fed with hope, that the Romish Religion should have
been re-established. The Poles, of whom I have spoken, were his intimates,
whereby he made himself suspected to have nothing else in his mind, but to
trouble and disorder the affairs of England, and to break the amity which
was between the Queen and the King of Spain: whereupon, the Queen entreated
the King to revoke him. But he excused it by his piety, and writ back, that
it would be a great incommoditie to Princes, if at the first coffeehouse
that is taken at their Ambassadors, they should be constrained to revoke them.
And to say truth, he was displeased, that without giving him notice, they had
shut him up in his House, subject to be questioned and publicly reprehended,
for no other cause, but that one Italian having shot another with a Pistol, he
admitted him into his House, and conveyed him privately away: whereupon, he was
more provoked against the English than ever tofore; The Spaniard against the
English.
taking occasion thereby to say, that the English Pirates molested the entries
of Spain, and prepared to go for the West Indies; and made it appear
manifestly, sending Richard Shelley, an English Fugitive for Religion, (who was
greatly bent against his Prince) upon an Embassy of honor to Maximilian the
designed King of the Romans, to congratulate with him, and seyzed upon some
English Merchants Ships, in the Ports of Beotia, because the English pursuing
the French, had intercepted some Spanish Ships.

Lord Paget dies.
William, Lord Paget, who for his virtue was exalted to three eminent
dignities, died. He was so learned, that HENRY the Eighth made him his
Secretary, sent him in an Embassy to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and to
Francis the First, King of France, and he nominated him to be one of the
Governors of the Kingdom, during the minority of his Son: Then Edward made
him Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, Controller of the Kings House,
honored him with the dignity of a Baron, gratified him with the Order of the
Garter, which was reprochfully taken from him, by Dudley Earl of
Northumberland, but restored again with honor by Queen MARIE, because, by
his prudence and sound advice, he had done good service to the Commonwealth:
and he conferred upon him the keeping of the Privy Seal, which is one of the
four highest dignities of civil honor. For, HENRY the Eighth, by Act of
Parliament, constituted the first in the Chancellor, the second in the
Treasurer, the third in the Lord President of the Privy Council, and the
fourth in the Keeper of the Privy Seal, above all Dukes; The supreme dignities
of honor in England.
and inferior only, to the Children, Brethren, Uncles, or Nephews to the
King. Queen ELIZABETH, perceiving that his old years exempted him from being
conversant in matters of State, as formerly he had been, remitted him of
whatsoever belonged to public administrations, and loved him affectionately,
though he stood zealously affected to the Roman Religion. He left behind
him, Henry and Thomas, his Children, who succeeded him one after another, in
his dignity of a Baron: Charles, who purchased renown to his name, and some
Daughters, who were married into honorable Families.

Henry Manors, or Manners, Earl of Rutland, died, Death of the Earl of
Rutland.
who was Son to Thomas the first Earl of that Family, Nephew to James, Baron
of Rosse, who came of the Daughter of Thomas S. Ledger, and Anne his wife, who,
by reason she was Sister to EDWARD the Fourth, gave wonderful luster and
splendour to that name; Cousin-germaine to Robert, who having married the
Daughter and Heir to the Baron of Rosse, an honorable and ancient Family,
augmented his own with mighty revenues, and the title of Baron of Rosse: and
he had by the Lady Neuill, Daughter to Ralph Earl of Westmerland, two Sons,
Edward and John, who were each of them, in their due times, Earls of Rutland:
and a Daughter, who was married to William Courtney of Powderham.

Frances, Duches of Suffolk, Duchess of Suffolk.
Daughter to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and Mary second Sister to HENRY
the Eighth, and Queen Dowager of France, died, who was afflicted with many
miseries during her life. She saw her eldest Daughter Ianes head cut off, after
she had been proclaimed Queen, and presently after, her Husbands: her second
Daughter, married to the Earl of Pembroke, to be diuorc'd and imprisoned: and
her third Daughter, meanly married to Key, who in his time was Master of the
Revels at Court: And then her self, forgetting from what degree she descended,
to her great dishonor, yet notwithstanding for her best security, married with
Andrew Stoakes, a mere private Gentleman.

THE SEVENTH YEAR OF HER REIGN. Book 1. 1564.
Anno Domini, 1564.
FRance then rejoiced for the peace she enjoyed, which in some manner was
maintained with the Queen of England, as being established, to shut up all
entry to the English, who began to fly out, in calling to mind the cruel
slaughters made by them in former ages, when the Duke of Burgundy called them
in, for revenge of his peculiar rancours and hatreds. But this peace having
rather slaked the fervent heat of war, than fastened any true concord or amity
between the English and the French; and the Queens Majesty perceiving how the
Protestants neglected and contemned her, ingratefully returning those pleasures
and favors she had done them, resolved to trouble her self no more in others
behalf, to the prejudice and hinderance of her own proceedings. Wherefore,
she bent all her care and thoughts to her own occasions, deliberated to make
peace, commended the ouerture thereof to Sir Thomas Smith, a wise and learned
man; and the French, lending a ready ear to the same, gave him Throgmorton for
his Assistant, who was then in France a prisoner at large, to the end they
might both together negotiate and procure the same. The French King for his
part, assigned a Commission to Moruillier, Bishop of Orleance, and to John
Bourdin, one of his Secretaries. You may hereunder see the Articles whereupon
they came to an accord, in the month of April, within the Town of Troyes in
Champaigne.

Articles of peace accorded on between the English and the French.
THat one should not violently assail the other, neither yield succors to any
other that made assault either upon the one or other, particulars only should
be liable to their peculiar insults and offenses. No Traitors nor Rebels of
either side were to be received. All former injuries were to be buried in
oblivion. Excepted all rights, actions, suites, and pretensions, which either
they have, or pretend to have respectively one against another, shall remain
forcible and entire, and so likewise all exceptions and prohibitions to the
contrary. These Articles concluded upon, the day following they annexed these
Covenants separately, and apart: That a certain sum of money should be paid
to the Queen of England, at days constituted and appointed: The Hostages in
England were to be delivered after the satisfaction of five hundred crowns.
And so this Treaty being ratified and confirmed, Throgmorton might freely
return into his Country. The King of France made Bone-fires of joy, according
to the custom, and after the Queen of England had ratified the same by oath
in the presence of Gunor, and Foix, himself likewise within a very small time
confirmed it, in the presence of the Lord of Hunsdon, who, having at the same
instant admitted his Majesty to the Order of S. George, The King of France
enstalled in the Order of the Garter.
he solemnly invested him with the Garter, the Robe of honor, a Collar of
Esses, whereat hung the picture of Saint George, and other ornaments belonging
to that Order.

In those days, there arrived in England, clad in the habit and gravity of a
Priest, to appear more venerable, Diego or Drilaco, Guzman de la Forresta, a
Canon of Toledo, sent in stead of the Bishop of Aquilar, deceased some months
before, during which internal, Roderic Gomez de la Forresta, out of an hatred
to Religion, had bin the procurer of some rude entreaties of the English in
Spain, who notwithstanding was much qualified by the Duke of Alua, The English
ill entreated in Spain,
no man being able truly to say, whether he did it out of any love he bare to
the English, or hatred to Gomez. The like ill entreaty they also found in the
Provinces of the Low Countries, that lived under the Spanish government, And
in the Low Countries.
at the instigation of the Cardinal of Granuella, who, to sow dissension
between them and the Flemmings, who held friendly and neighbourly commerce
together, in hatred to the said Religion, he so brought it to pass, that the
year before the Flemmings complained by Assonuil, that the customs of England
were enhaunst, (though this was performed during the reign of Philip and MARY)
and that by Act of Parliament, many of their handy-workes were there
interdicted. The English on the other side, The mutual complaints of the
English and Flemmish.
they exhibited also Bills of complaint, how for small and trifling occasions,
their goods were confiscated in Flanders, by virtue of new Edicts, which also
prohibited the bringing in of certain merchandises, or to go into Italy, and
Germany, by way of Flanders, with horse, Saltpeter, and Powder. That they
injuriously exacted of them greater Imposts than ever were so much as mentioned
in former times, and all this against that Treaty of Commerce heretofore
concluded on, which was called the Grand Intercourse.

English Merchants prohibited in the Low Countries.
In the mean while, the Princess of Parma, Regent of the Low Countries, caused
public prohibitions to be diuulged: first, that no forbidden merchandise
should be transported into England, and then presently after, for the importing
of any English clothes into Flanders, coloring it with the pretext of the
plague, which not long before had spread it self all England over. But the
naked truth is, all these things were managed, by the cautelous counsels and
stratagems of Cardinal Granuelle, to cause the Clothiers, and other workmen
depending on them, to rise, when they saw no clothes to be transported: and yet
the traffic of Clothes was established in Flanders, The English constitute a
Fair or Mart at Embden.
to the prejudice of the English, who provoked hereat, constituted a Fair of
English cloth and merchandises at Embden in East Frizeland, as if they feared
the Spanish Inquisition, which now was entered into the Low Countries, and
foresaw that troubles would presently ensue.

Against all this, the Regent published an Edict, importing an express
prohibition of all men, upon pain of confiscation, to entertain any traffic
with the English at Embden, or any where else, or to transport into the
Low Countries, any Merchandises bought of them.

Guzman labors to atone this difference.
Guzman blamed these proceedings, as being too strict and rigorous,
dammageable both to the one and other part: For this wise man conceived truly,
what wealth daily came into Flanders, by means of the English Taffique, ever
since Lewis Malan, Earl of Flanders, about the year 1338. by a Grant of great
immunities, had drawn the English, to settle a Mart, or Staple of English
Wools at Bruges: for ever since that time, in a manner all Nations flocking
into Flanders, to buy Clothes, and other English Merchandises, as also to sell
their own there, it is incredible, what Traffiques, Commerces, Nauigations,
and Fishings, have ever since flourisht among the Flemmings. So as this wool
was unto them a true Golden Fleece: and that Noble Order of the Golden Fleece,
forcheth from hence its original, and the Dukes of Burgundy, their great
wealth and Treasure. And questionless, in these very days wherein we live,
(I speak according to the papers of Account) the Commerce that is between the
English and the Flemmings, has amounted to above twelve Millions of gold each
year: And the Clothes transported every year to Antwerpe, (omitting to speak
of Lead, Tin, and other things) is estimated at five Millions of gold.
Wherefore, upon these considerations, Guzman employing all means possible, to
atone this difference, at last he obtained, that the Commerce lately broken
off between the two Nations, might be resettled in its former state, and that
whatsoever had been ordained and decreed, from the first day of the first
years reign of Queen ELIZABETH, both of the one side and on the other,
should surcease, till,: by Deputies both for the one and the other party, more
ample provision could be made. But the year following, when my Lord
Mountaigue, Nicholas Watton, and William Haddon, Master of the Requests,
Delegates for the English, Montigny, Assonuil, and Io. Egidius, for the
Flemmings, had begun twice to treat of these matters in the Town of Bruges,
the Flemmings falling into their precedent tumules, interrupted this Treaty,
after an Agreement made, that this Commerce and Traffic should be free, while
one of the Princes made an opposite denountiation to the other, the Merchants
of both parties being advertised forty days before, to provide and take some
order for their living commodities.

These things being thus ordained out of the Kingdom, the Queens Majesty
betook her self to the pleasure and recreations of the Country; and to this
end she visited the University of Cambridge, which is one of the two
resplendent Lamps of England, where being entertained of the Scholars,
Queen Elizabeth visits the University of Cambridge.
with all manner of honors, and taken contentment in beholding their Comedies,
Tragedies, and exercises of Arms, she personally visited all the Colleges,
and in a Latin Oration, gave them great thanks for their singular love and
affection, highly commended their profound and diverse E^uditions, exhorting
them to apply their hearts to the studies of piety and learning, and for their
virtuous stimulation, promising always to favor and cherish them.

Robert Dudley raised to honors.
When she returned, the more to honor Robert Dudley, Sarlatan, a special
Favorite of hers, who^, with a secret design, she made choice of for an
husband to the Q. of Scots, she created him Baron of Denbigh, giving him the
Castle of Denbigh in property, with all the appurtenances of soil, and
Demeanes; and the day after, Earl of Leicester, to himself, and the heirs
males of his body lawfully begotten: having likewise before, for his sake,
conferred upon Ambrose, his elder Brother, the dignities of Baron of Lisle, and
Earl of Warwick, to him, and his lawful heirs males, for ever. The Lord
Dudley, exalted by all these supereminent honors, and to currey favor with
the Queen of Scots, whom he affected, and studied by all manner of Offices to
deserve well of; presently, before Queen ELIZABETH, Dudley accuses Bacon.
he accused Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the great Seal, of discussing
the point of Succession, against the Queen of Scots, and that he was privy to
a Libell, wherein that same Hales, of whom before I spoke, labored to
intimate, that if the Queens Majesty of England, then living, dyed without
Issue, the right of the Crown came to the House of Suffolk. For which cause,
he was committed prisoner; and as for Sir Nicholas Bacon, though he absolutely
denied it, my Lord Cecill resolving to conceal what he thought, until the
Queen (whose Majesty he was assured, would never in this case impose on him
any demand) should command him to speak his mind: had much ado to recover
him her favor, and long time he was a compassing it; Diverse opinions about the
point of Succession.
for nothing could be more distasteful to her, then to hear any debatements
about this Title of Succession. But so the wiser and wealthier sort were more
careful and studious of nothing then of this, they observing how by reason of
the contrariety of Religion, the Protestants, transported with an ardent zeal,
held opinion, that the Queen of Scots, being of an opposite Religion, (though
otherwise her right was never so much as called in question) ought
nevertheless, by the subtle construction of the Laws, to be rejected from
succession: Some Papists again, and those who had reference to that which was
just and equal, maintained how she was to be received as the true, right, and
undoubted Inheritrix. Others there were, who preferred before her, MARGARET, her
Aunt by the Mothers side, and Wife to Matthew Stuart Earl of Lenox, and her
Children, of whom they conceived good hopes, because they were borne in
England. All this lay not hid from the Queen of Scots; who, to prevent it so
far as was possible, by the Countess of Lenox, her Aunt, sent for Matthew,
Earl of Lenox, to come into Scotland, The Queen of Scots cal^ home the Earl
of Lenox into Scotland.
under pretext to re-establish and settle him in the Inheritance of his
Predecessors. But this was to consult further with him, who, by his Wives
means, obtained leave, and Letters from Q. ELIZABETH, after he had bin banished
out of his native Country, for the space of 20. years.

This Earl of Lenox (to the end that relating the same from the essential
extraction of his eminent Nobility, The descent of the Earl of Lenox.
I may give the better light and luster to things) was descended from the very
same race of the Stuarts, as the Royal Progeny of the Scots came from; and
moreover lately by the Hamiltons, of the bloud-Royall: For Marie, daughter to
James 2. King of Scotland, had by James Hamilton, James, who was the first
Earl of Arraine, and Mary, who was wife to Matt. Stuart, first Earl of Lenox
of that name. James, Earl of Arraine, being divorced from his first Wife,
took in her place the Lady Ienet Beton, Aunt by the Mothers side, to the
Cardinal Beton, by whom he had Issue, James Hamilton Duke of Chastel-Heraut.
Marie, Sister to the Earl of Arraine, bore to Matthew, John, Earl of Lenox,
who being slain by the Hamiltons, when he attempted to set King JAMES the
fourth at liberty, left this Matthew, Earl of Lenox, whom King James the Fifth
loved most dearly in respect of his Father.

When the King was dead, and the Hamiltons in full authority, Matthew went
secretly into France; from whence, being sent back, by the French King Henry
the second, into Scotland, to prevent all detriment to the Scottish
Commonwealth, through the practices of the Regent Hamilton, he valiantly
carried himself in this employment. But being of an honest mild nature, and
very open-hearted, permitting himself to be outreached by Hamilton, and the
Cardinal Beton, in a small time he lost the amity of the French, and when he
could neither tarry in Scotland, nor return into France, he went into England,
and committed himself in trust to King Henry the Eighth, who very graciously
entertained him, as one that was powerful and well beloved in the Western
parts of Scotland: Whereupon, he acknowledged him for next Heir to the Crown
of Scotland, after Queen MARY, who was then exceeding young, (though
nevertheless the Hamiltons condemned him, and confiscated all his Lands) gave
him to Wife the Lady Margaret Douglasse, his Niece by the elder Sisters side,
with demeanes in England, which amounted in an annual reuennew, to the sum
of 1700. Marks, after he had made promise to surrender into his hands, the
Castle of Dunbritton, and the I Will of Buthe, with the Castle of Rothsay, which
is in England. The which he undertook with courage, but failed in the
success.

The Queen of Scots, being a wise and prudent Lady, Causes of the Repeal of
the Earl of Lenox.
all whose drifts aimed at England, she gave him her safe conduct, and
restored unto him his Fathers goods, both that he might oppose the designs of
James, his bastard brother, whom she had honored with the Earldom of
Murray, as also to cut off the hopes of others, by the means of Darley her
Son, which they might any ways foster and nourish, of succession to the
Diadem of England. For she feared, that being of the Blood Royal, borne in
England, and very well beloved of the English* if he were joined with any
puissant Family in England, relying on the English power and forces, he might
happily one day disturb her right of succession to the Kingdom of England;
many men reputing him for the second Heir apparent after her: and she
affected nothing more fervently, then by his means, to bring the Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, to fall into some Scottish Race, and Name, and so by him
to propagate them to posterity, in the name of the Stewards, his Ancestors.

Queen ELIZABETH well discerned all this, The Queen of England endeavors to
prevent the Qu. of Scots project.
and to prevent it, gave the Queen of Scots to understand by Randolph, that
this Marriage was so distasteful to all the English, as against the consent of
her Council, she was enforst to prorogue the conuentions of Parliament, to
some other fitter time, for fear, lest the States of the Kingdom therewith
provoked, should enact somewhat, to the prejudice of her right to the
succession. And therefore, to cut off all occasions of this Issue hereafter,
and to satisfy the English, she advised her to think of some other marriage;
and so by this means, she once again, and with great affection, commended
unto her the Earl of Leicester, for an Husband, who, for this special reason,
she had exalted to the Dignity of an Earl.

Another commendation of the Earl of Leicester. A Treaty of Marriage between
the Queen of Scots and the Earl of Leicester.
For prosecution of this, the Earls of Bedford, of Randolph, and of Lidington,
were deputed to treat of this marriage at Barwicke, in the Month of November.
The English promised unto her, a firm and constant Amity, a perpetual Peace,
and that undoubtedly she should succeed to the Crown of England, if she
married with the Earl of Leicester. The Scots on the other side contested;
alleging, That their Queens Dignity, who had been sued unto, by Charles,
Son to the Emperor Ferdinand, the King of France, the Prince of Conde, and
the Duke of Ferrara, could not permit her, so far to embase and vnder-valew
her self, as to match with a new-made Earl, a Subject of England, and who
propounded nothing but bare hopes, without any certain Dowry: neither stood
it with the honor of the Queen of England, to commend such a man for an
Husband to so great a Princess, her near Kinswoman; but rather, she should
give an infallible testimony of her great love and affection toward her, to
give her absolute liberty to make choice of such an husband, as might
entertain perpetual peace with England, to assign her a yearly Pension, and
with the authority of the Parliament, confirm the right which she had to
succeed. In all this business, the extreme desire of Queen ELIZABETH was
(although she made discreet haste) to assure, by such a marriage, the
succession of the Kingdom in an English Race. The Queen of Scotland seeing
that this business had been prolonged full two years, and making account to
marry Darley, doubted whether she was proceeded withal in good earnest, or no;
and that Queen ELIZABETH did not propound this marriage, but to make a
pre-election of the most worthy for herself, or to marry the more excusable
with Leicester, She being absolute Queen, after she should have really
consented to marry him. But the Commissioners of Scotland, weighing these
reasons, to maintain their power with the Queen, had resolved to hinder, by
all means, all kind of marriages. Queen ELIZABETH admonishes them to hinder
that with Darley; Leicester himself full of hope to enjoy Queen ELIZABETH, by
secret Letters, privily warnes the Earl of Bedford, not to press the thing,
and with this hope, it is credibly thought, that he secretly favored Darley.

Book 1. 1565.
THE EIGHTH YEAR OF HER REIGN. Anno Domini, 1565.
Darley goes into Scotland.
DARLEY in the mean time, by the intercession of his Mother, with Prayers and
diligence to Queen ELIZABETH, obtained (though with much difficulty) leave to
go into Scotland, and to stay there three Months, under pretext, to be
partaker of his Fathers establishment; and came to Edenborrough in the Month
of February, in the great winter, when the Thames was so frozen, that people
passed dry over on foot. He is beloved of the Queen of Scotland.
He was a Youth of a most worthy Carriage, fit to bear rule, of an excellent
composition of members, of a mild spirit, and of a most sweet behavior. As
soon as the Queen of Scotland had seen him, she fell in love with him; and
to the end to keep her love secret, in discoursing with Randolph the English
Ambassador in Scotland, she oftentimes intermixed her discourse with the
marriage of Leicester, and at the same time, seeks a dispensation from Rome
for Darley, she being so near in blood, that according to the Popes
Ordinance, they stood in need of one. This being come to every bodies
knowledge, Asks Qu. Elizabeth's consent.
she sends Lidington to Queen ELIZABETH, to have her consent to contract with
Darley, and not to be any longer detained with a vain hope of marriage.

Queen ELIZABETH propounds the matter to her most intimate Counselors; who,
Deliberation upon it.
by the secret suggestions of the Earl of Murray, easily believed that the
Queen of Scotland had no other design, but to strengthen her self by such a
marriage, to carry the right which she pretended for the Kingdom of England,
and at length, to establish it, and likewise the Romish Religion: that some did
adhere unto her, seeing that, by reason of her children, the succession was
ascertained to her House; and others, for the affection which they bare to the
Romish Religion, there being found more Eirenarch's in England devoted to the
Romish Religion, than to the Protestants. That to prevent these accidents, it
was chiefly requisite, first, to pray the Queen to marry speedily, to the end
that the affairs and hopes of England should not depend elsewhere, but of the
certainty of Succession, which should come of her, and of her Lineage: (for they
feared that if the Queen of Scotland did marry, and should have issue first,
many would incline toward her for the certainty and assuredness of
succession.) Secondly, to ruin (as much as may be) the Romish Religion in
England, and to advance and carefully establish the reformed: the one, by using
more moderately in things indifferent, such Protestants that are carried with a
fervent zeal: the other, in setting Guards again upon the deposed papisticall
Bishops, who were then dispersed through the Country by reason of the plague,
conferring upon the other Bishops greater authority to execute the
Ecclesiastical Ordinances then they had, contrary to the terrifying Praemunire
which the Lawyers do object, suppressing those Books which Harding, and the
fugitive Divines had sent out of the Low Countries into England, driving out
some Scottish Priests, who hid themselves in England, depriving the English
fugitives of the Ecclesiastical Benefices which they enjoyed until then, and
compelling the Judges of the Land, who were for the most part Papists, to
acknowledge the Queens Sovereign authority, and to swear unto it: And that
to hinder the marriage of Darley, it was fit to leuy Soldiers upon the
Frontiers of Scotland, to the end to raise a terror: to fortify the Garrison
of Berwicke: to set a guard upon the Countess of Lenox, Darley's Mother, and
on Charles her Son: and to re-call out of Scotland into England, the Earl of
Lenox and Darley his Son, upon pain of loss of their goods, before they
made any alliance with the French, or with Spain: and to assist those which
were bent against this match, and to receive the Earl of Hertford and
Katherine Gray somewhat into favor: which thing only was thought that the
Queen of Scotland very much apprehended; in regard that she likewise
pretended a right to the Kingdom, and it seemed none other could bring a
greater impediment to this marriage than she.

Throgmorton is sent to hinder.
From hence, Throgmorton is sent to the Queen of Scotland, to advise her, that
it behooued to deliberate long of a thing that can be but once determined on,
and that a precipitate marriage was followed with repentance: to re-commend
Leicester to her again, and again, and that it was altogether contrary to
Canon Law, to contract with the Son of her Aunt by the Father-side: For
Queen ELIZABETH desired above all, that some of the English Race should by her
means succeed to both the Kingdoms, albeit there failed not, who for matter
of Religion, and for the two Kingdoms, made account to succeed, if she dyed
without issue.

She answers, That it was now past reuoking, He is answered.
and that Queen ELIZABETH had no cause to be angry, seeing that by her
Council she had made choice of a Husband which was no stranger, but an English
man borne of the Royal blood of both the Kingdoms, and the most noble of all
Great Britain. Amongst these things, Lidington treats of affairs in
England, and dissembling with Leicester, often spoke unto him touching marriage
with the Queen of Scotland, as also to the Duke of Norfolk, (much more worthy
to marry a Queen) who then refused it with a modest excuse.

The Qu. of England, Lenox and Darley are re-called out of Scotland.
to interpose some hindrance to this so hastened marriage, calls back Lenox,
and his Son Darley, as being her Subjects, according to the form of the leave
which she had granted them. They excuse themselves.
The Father excuses himself modestly by Letters; the Son prays her not to
hinder his advancement, representing unto her, that he might be useful to
England his dearest Country, and openly declared unto her, that above all
things he loved and honored the Queen of Scotland: To answer which love,
she had adorned him forthwith, with the dignity Equitis Aurati, with the titles
of Baron of Ardmanock, Earl of Rosse, and Duke of Rothesie; The Queen of
Scotland marries the Lord Darley.
and five months after his coming into Scotland, marries him with the consent
of many Peers, and declares him King. The Earl of Murray, who embraced
nothing so affectionately as ambition, and under pretense of Religion, had
drawn to his faction the Duke of Chastelraut, a man without leaven, The Earl
of Murray and others murmr.
Murray murmuring exceedingly, and others storming and stirring up such like
questions: Whether a Papist might be admitted King or no? If the Queen of
Scotland might choose her self a Husband? If the States might not impose their
authority?

The Queen of England indures it with moderation.
The Queen of England bare this peaceably, knowing the sweet and tractable
nature of Darley, and the open heart of his Father, and taking pity to see a
kinsman and a Queen very young, to have to do with turbulent men, who having
been already more than twenty years loosed from Royal command, could not
endure Kings; and feared them not, seeing that the power of this Queen, who
envied her, was not increased by so mean a condition; having Darleyes Mother
in her power: and foreseeing that troubles in Scotland would spring out of
this marriage, as it happened quickly after: for some great ones of the
Kingdom, Some Scots take distaste about the marriage.
and the chief of them, Hamilton and Murray, disdaining this match; the one,
because it had been contracted without the consent of the Queen of England;
the other, for the envy which he bare to the House of Lenox: but both the one
and the other, pretending the conservation of Religion, to disturb the
marriage, brought their Ensigns into the field: insomuch as she was
constrained to raise forces to celebrate it in safety; and, with the help of
the King her Husband, pursued the Rebels so swiftly, They are put to flight.
that she constrained them to fly into England, before the English troops,
which were promised them for aid, were arrived: and the Queen of England,
conniuing with Murray, who was much addicted to the Engglish, assigned him a
convenient place to lie here in safety, and sent him money underhand by the
Earl of Bedford, until his return into Scotland, which was the morrow after
the murder of David Riz, as we shall speak of it in its own place. They are
maintained in England.
Now the reasons why she received the Scottish Rebels into England, were
these: Because the the Queen of Scotland had received into her protection,
Yaxley, Standon, and Walsh, English Fugitives, and the Irish Oneale, and that
she had held Councels with the Pope against the English, and had not done
justice upon Thieves and Pirates.

This marriage being accomplished, They counsel the Qu. of England to marry.
those which labored most for Religion and Englands safety, thought that
Queen ELIZABETH could not do better for that purpose, than to take away all
hope of the Succession to England from the Queen of Scotland. And it fell very
commodiously; for, at the same time, Maximilian the Second, Emperor, The
Emperor recommendeth his Brother.
sent word by Adam Smicorit his Ambassador, of very honorable conditions for
her to marry with his Brother Charles. But there arose instantly a most
vehement hatred in the Court, between Sussex and Leicester, I know not
whereupon, unless about this marriage, It causes hatred to grow in the Court.
which Sussex sought very eagerly to bring to pass, and Leicester underhand
hindered, hoping to have her for himself (verily great and insatiable hopes
do those conceive, who have obtained things beyond their hope.) Indeed Sussex
injuriously despised him as an vpstart, and, to detract him, would say, that
he could cite only two of his pedigree, that is to wit, his Father and
Grandfather, both being enemies to their Country, and attempters against the
State, that put the Court in division: Insomuch, as when the Earls went
abroad, they drew great troops after them, armed with Swords and piked
Targets, which were then in use, as if it were come to the extremity. But,
within few days, The Queen reconcileth them.
the Queen reconciled them, and rather smothered than took away their malice,
but endeavored what she could to extinguish it quite. For, she condemned
dissension among Peers, and that old proverb used by many, Divide and Impera,
and some, who were of opinion, that the force of command, is by the obeyers
consent. And she delighted her self, at the emulation and grudging of
inferior women, yet not without making special good use thereof.

Among these things, she is not unmindful of the affairs of Scotland. A
month after the solemnization of the marriage there, she sent one Tamworth, a
Gentleman of her Priuy-Chamber, to the Qu. of Scotland, to exhort her not to
break the peace, to expostulate about the marriage which she had so rashly
contracted without her consent, and withal, to send back Lenox, and Darley
his Son, according to the trans-action, and to receive Murray into grace.
Tamworth not admitted.
She, perceiving whereunto this tended, admitted not Tamworth, but by Articles
in writing, They answer by writing.
Promises, by the word of a Princess, that neither she nor her Husband would
enterprise any thing to the prejudice of the Queen of England, or to her
Children lawfully begotten of her body, or to the tranquillity of the
Kingdom, by admitting of Fugitives, or making alliance with strangers, or by
any other means; but, to the contrary, they would most freely contract such an
alliance with the Queen and Kingdom of England, as should be commodious and
honorable for both the Kingdoms, and innouate nothing in Religion, contrary
to the Laws and liberties of England, if they should happen to enjoy the same.
Notwithstanding, upon condition that Queen ELIZABETH, on her part, should
fully perform the same to her and her Husband, and, by authority of the
Parliament, should confirm the Crown of England upon her and her issue
lawfully begotten; and, for fault of such issue, upon Margaret Countess of
Lenox, her Husbands Mother, and of her Children lawfully begotten. Moreover, as
soon as she had resolved to marry, she had assured the Queen that it should
be with Darley, and had no answer from the Queen upon it. That she had
satisfied her demands, seeing she had married an English man, and no stranger,
whom she knew to be more nobly descended, and more worthy of her, than any in
Great-Brittaine. But it seemed strange that she might not retain Darley by
her, to whom she was bound in the sacred bond of marriage, or Lenox, who was
naturally Earl of Scotland. As for Murray, whom she had proved to be her
sworn enemy, she graciously entreated her to give her freedom over her
Subjects, seeing she meddled not with the affairs of England.

Tamworth returned with this answer, not having been entertained according to
his worth. And indeed being an impudent man, he had wronged the reputation of
the Queen of Scotland, and disdained to give her Husband title of King.

At the same time, Queen ELIZABETH had this augmentation of honor, that at
the report of her virtue, which was equally spread in all places, Cecillia,
Cecillia, Queen of Sueden, comes into England.
Henry the Second King of Suedens Sister, and Wife to Christopher, Marquis of
Baden, being then great with Child, came from the furthest part of the North,
and a great journey, through Germany, to visit her. She entertained her and
her Husband very magnificently, gave him a yearly pension, christened his
Son, and named him Edward the Fortunate. And Donald Mac Cartymore, one of the
greatest Peers of Ireland, humbly submitted himself and his large Territories
to the Queen, to hold them from her hereafter in fee for him and his heirs
males lawfully begotten, and for default of such issue, to the Crown of
England. This Princess, who was borne to draw the affections of men, according
to her humanity, most graciously received him, installed him solemnly, and
like himself, Earl of Glencar; and Tegue his Son, Creation of the Earl of
Glencar.
Baron of Valance; gave them gifts, paid the charge of their voyage, and all
this, to get a party against the Earl of Desmond, who was suspected to
renouate new things.

Vice-Royes and Justices of Ireland.
The same year, Nicholas Arnold, of the Country of Gloucester, Knight, was sent
to govern Ireland with the title of Iusticiary, and had for his Garrison,
only one thousand five hundred ninety six Soldiers. But, within a while
after, being called back, he gave up his place to Henry Sidney, who in the
reign of Queen MARY was Judge and Treasurer of Ireland, and presently after,
President of Wales. Now, to note this by the way, the chief Governors of
Ireland, which now in Latin are termed Proreges, Affairs of Ireland.
since the first entrance of the English, until the time of Edward the Third,
were called Justices of Ireland, and their Lieutenants, Deputies. Since,
according to the pleasure of the Prince, they are called one while Justices,
and another while Lieutenants, which is a most honorable title, but for the
most part of like authority. And without doubt, these chief Justices of
Ireland, as the Justices of England, which were called at that time, simply,
Justices, were ordained to keep the peace, and to do Justice to all and to
every particular, as, in times past, the Romans had their Pro-Pretors and
Pro-Consuls, which were sent into Provinces with Sovereign authority.

Sidney, being Governor of this Province, found the Country of Mounster,
which lies toward the South, in great confusion, Discord between the Earls of
Desmond and Ormond.
in regard of great and sharp troubles which were between Girauld, Earl of
Desmond (who had faithfully promised to perform all the duties of a loyal
Subject) and others, who were broken out into civil wars. To extinguish
these Controversies, Queen ELIZABETH calls Desmond into England, and makes him
Governor and Justice of that Province, Chief President of Mounster.
with an Assessor, two Lawyers and a Clerk, and nominated Warham S. Ledger
chief President, a man that had been long conversant in Irish affairs.

About the middle of October, the same year, dyed Thomas Chaloner, lately
returned Ambassador from Spain, a famous man, borne in London, brought up at
Cambridge, The death of Sir Thomas Chaloner.
who had addicted himself as well to Mars as to the Muses, and being but
young, got honor under Charles the fifth, in the expedition of Alger, who
having suffered shipwreck, and had swomme so long, that his strength and arms
failed him, saved himself, by taking hold of a Cable with his teeth, whereof
he lost some: Under EDWARD the Sixth, at Mussleborrough, where he behaved
himself so valiantly, that the Duke of Sommerset honored him with the
Dignity of Knighthood: And under Queen ELIZABETH, in an extraordinary
Ambassie to the Emperor Ferdinand; and four years ordinary Ambassador in
Spain, where he composed five Books in pure and learned Verse, of the
restoration of the English Commonwealth, which he called [ Hieme in fumo,
aestate in horreo.] He was honorably buried at Saint Paul's in London, Cecill
being chief mourner, when Thomas, his Son (who lived near HENRY, Prince of
Wales) was very young.

Book 1. 1566.
THE NINTH YEAR OF HER REIGN. Anno Domini, 1566.
IN the beginning of the year, Charles the 9. King of France, sent into
England to the Queen, Rambouillet, with the Robes of the order of S. Michael,
to be given to two of the Peers of England, whom she pleased. The Duke of
Norfolk, and the Earl of Leicester, Knights of the Order of France.
She made choice of the Duke of Norfolk, as being much more noble then any
other, and to the Earl of Leicester, loving him very well. Rambouillet having
been, for and in the Name of his King, placed honorably at Windsor, amongst
the Knights of the Order of Saint George, invested them solemnly in the Royal
House at Westminster. This she took for a great honor, remembering her self,
that no English was ever honored with this Order, save HENRY the Eighth,
EDWARD the Sixth, and Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk. But when she exactly
observed all things that belonged to the honor of it, she was at length much
displeased, to see it so vilified, that it was prostituted indifferently to
every man. And she busied her self, not only in things concerning honor,
but chiefly what was for the good of her Subjects: For, the Air being so
intemperate that year, that experienced men feared a want of Corn and other
victuals, Provision of Corn.
she did not only prohibit any Corn to be carried out of the Kingdom, but
took care that great quantity was brought in.

While these things past, Henry, Earl of Arundell, being great and powerful
among the Lords of the Realm, The Earl of Arundel goes out of the Kingdom.
after having consumed much wealth upon a vain hope to marry the Queen, and
the Earl of Leicester, who then was in great credit with her, and his friends,
which had failed in the trust which he reposed in them, taking away this hope
quite from him, took leave of her, and voluntarily went out of the Kingdom,
under color to recover his health, but in effect, to strengthen himself
against sorrow. But the other English, The English carry their Arms and their
courages to the Hungarian War.
who for their natural valor, thought themselves borne to live in Arms, and
not in idleness, seeing the Nobility of all parts, did rise at the report of the
war against the Turk, and carried their Arms and Courages into Hungary.
Amongst whom, the most remarkable were, John Smith, cousin german to EDWARD
the Sixth, by the Sister of I. Seimor, the Kings Mother; H. Champernon, P.
Butshid, R. Greuill, G. George, T. Cotton, etc.

In June following, the Queen of Scotland had a most auspicious and happy
Delivery, The birth of King James the sixth of Scotland.
for the eternal prosperity of Great Britain, JAMES her Son, who is now
Monarch thereof: whereof she gave present notice to Queen ELIZABETH, by John
Meluin. Queen ELIZABETH, howsoever angry to see her outstrip her in honor,
who envied her, as speedily sent H. Killigrewe, to congratulate her lying in,
The Queen of England rejoices.
and the birth of her Son: and to admonish her, not to favor any longer Shan
O-Neale, who rebelled in Ireland, nor to assist Roquerbay, an English Fugitive,
and to punish some thieves that robbed upon the Borders.

After, having vn-wearied her mind by a Progress, to show herself as
favorable to the Muses of Oxford, as well as of Cambridge, Visits the
University of Oxford.
between which there was then a sincere emulation, goes toward the University
of Oxford, where she was magnificently entertained, and staid there full seven
days, taking pleasure in the pleasant aspect of the place, at the beauty of
the Colleges, in the spirits and learning of most exquisit Scholars, which
passed the nights in Comedies, and the days in learned Disputations; for which
she gave them ample thanks, by a most sweet discourse in Latin, and a most
loving farewell.

Holds a Parliament.
As soon as she was returned to London, the States of the Kingdom assembled
there the first day of November, being the day assigned, and after having
established a Statute or two, they begun to dispute among themselves, of the
Succession of the Kingdom; seeing that the Queen having vowed Virginity, had
already reigned eight years, without thinking seriously of an Husband: that on
the one side, the Papists made account of the Queen of Scots, who had lately
had a Son: that on the other side, the Protestants being divided, some of
them made account of one, and some of another, and every particular providing
for their safety and Religion, presaged the storms of a most fearful time,
if she should dye, without assuring a Successor. And the keener sort of
spirits proceeded so far, as to blame her, as if she abandoned both her Country
and Posterity: and to tear, by reproachful and defaming Libels, wicked
Councellor therein: and to curse Huic, her Physician, because he dissuaded her
to marry, for I know not what womanish infirmity. The Earls of Pembroke and
Leicester were openly, and the Duke of Norfolk, covertly, of opinion, that a
necessity of marriage should be imposed upon her, or else publicly to appoint
a Successor by authority of the Parliament, whether she would or no: which
caused them to be forbidden to enter into the Privy Chamber, or come near
the Queen, who nevertheless granted them pardon, as soon as they demanded it.

They nevertheless being much troubled, The States solicit her to marry, and
to declare her Successor.
and all the rest of the upper House of Parliament, touching the Succession;
all with one mind, by the mouth of Bacon, Keeper of the great Scale, according
to the duty which they ought unto God, the fidelity to their Prince, and the
charity to their Country, so to do; that as by her means they then sweetly
enjoyed all the benefits of Peace, Justice, and Clemency, they and their
posterity might by her means likewise enjoy the same assuredly and
continually. But withal they showed her, that it could not be done, except
she married, or designed a certain Successor. For which cause, they desired,
and, above all things, besought her to be joined by the sacred bond of
Marriage, with whom she would, in what place she liked, and as soon as she
pleased, to the end to have Children, for helps to the Kingdom: withal, to
ordain with the States of the Realm, a Successor certain, in case that she,
or the Children which she might have, should dye without Children, which God
forbid. The modesty of the great Ones.
And for the obtaining of these things so much the more easily, being so
necessary, they represented unto her many reasons for the same: the fear,
which of fresh memory had seized upon them with such a sickness, of which they
had been but newly recovered; the opportunity of the time, the States of the
Kingdom being then assembled, which might maturely deliberate of so great
matters; the terror which she should give to her enemies by this means, and
the incredible joy which she should fill the hearts of her Subjects withal.
They praise the examples of her Ancestors, who in like cases provided for the
surety of their Posterity, condemning this saying of Pyrrhus, who would leave
his Kingdom to him that had the sharpest sword. And moreover showing her, with
what a storm England were threatened, if she should dye without designing a
certain Successor: there would follow impetuously upon it, seditions, and
intestine Wars, of which the Victory it self is most miserable: and that
Religion should be driven out, Justice overwhelmed, the Laws trodden
underfoot, there being no Prince (who is the soul of the Law) and the
Kingdom a prey to strangers. They numbered and exaggerated many other like
calamities, which would inuolue all sorts of Families, if she should dye
without Issue. And modestly they added counsels, Precepts, and examples, drawn
from the holy Scriptures.

The popular sort eagerly.
But those of the Lower House debated of these things more tumultuously; Bell,
and Monson, Lawiers of great renown, Dutton, P. Wentworth, and others, refuted
Royal Majesty too much; and among other things maintained, that Kings were
bound to design a Successor; that the love of Subjects was the most strong and
inexpugnable Rampart of Princes, their only stay and Support. That Princes
could not obtain this love, if they did not provide for the good of their
Subjects, not only while they lived, but after their death. That that could
not be done, if a Successor did not plainly appear. That the Queen, for
lack of designing one, provoked Gods wrath, and alienated the hearts of her
Subjects. That then, to gain the favor of God, and have Subjects most
affectionate and obliged, and to raise her up Statues in the hearts of men,
which would never perish, she should declare a Successor. Others, that she
should know, that they did hold her, not for a Mother and a Nurse, but for a
Stepdame and a murderesse of her Country, seeing she loved her self better
than England (which then breathed by her spirit) would expire with her, rather
then subsist alive. That there were never, but cowardly Princes, haters of
their Subjects, and fearful weak women, who conceived fear because of their
Successors; and that such as be environed with the love of their Subjects,
ought not to apprehend the danger which might be stirred up against them, by a
declared Successor.

These things she heard with a great deal of displeasure, The Queen is angry.
but she contemned them for a time, and for a time kept them hidden. For, as
use had instructed her, she well knew what danger there is to design a
Successor; insomuch that Queen MARIE reigning, many of the Nobility, and of
the people, had cast their eyes and hearts upon her, as being to succeed her:
that even as any thing had bin said or done in her most holy Cabinet, or secret
Council, they reported it to her; and that Wyat and others, misliking their
state, and desiring to innouate things, had conspired against her, to set her
upon the Royal Throne in her place. She knew that the hopes of Competitors
were better restrained, and they kept in their duty, while she suspended the
waiting of every one, and made no declaration of any. That by a precipitate
desire to reign, even Children have took Arms against their Fathers, and
that she could not look for less from her kindred. She had observed in
reading, and when she disputed of that, remembered incontinently, that it was
rarely found, that the Successors had bin declared in the collateral line.
That Lewis, Duke of Orleans, had never been declared Successor in the Kingdom
of France, to Charles the Eighth; nor Francis, Duke of Angoulesme, to Lewis,
yet nevertheless they succeeded without any noise. That such designation had
always in England been the ruin of the designed, and that Roger Mortimer,
Earl of March, designed Heir by King Richard, had not been so soon extinct,
and his son Edmond constituted and kept prisoner twenty years together, but
for this cause: That I. Polhem, Earl of Lincoln, declared Successor by
Richard the 3. and after the death of his son, by Henry the Seventy, was
always suspected, and finally killed in war, as he was weauing of
innouations, and his brother Edward beheaded under HENRY the Eighth. But these
things make us go from the purpose.

But as some ceased not with provoked spirits, and sharp contention, daily
more and more to cry aloud, these things which I come to tell, and other things
which had a greater sting, the Queen having commanded that choice should be
made of thirty of the Vpper-House of Parliament, and as many of the Lower, and
that they should appear before her; She sweetens the moved spirits.
She, with a light reproose, made them milder, and by force of her most worthy
Majesty, diuerted them from their design, promising them with many words, not
only the care of a Princess, but also the affection of a Mother. And the
States having offered her for Subsidies, more than they were accustomed to do,
upon condition, that she would design a Successor: She utterly refused it,
as being too much, received the ordinary, commending their affection, Gives
back part of the Subsidy.
and remitted the whole fourth payment of the granted Subsidy, saying, That
her Subjects money was as well in their own coffers, as in hers.

The last day of these Sessions, she spoke thus in few words, which I will shut
up in fewer.

Chides the States.
SEeing that the words of Princes do often penetrate deep into the hearts and
ears of men, hear these from me. As I have simply cherished truth, so have I
always thought that you would ingeniously have cherished her: but it has
been in vain. For I have discovered, that dissimulation thrusts her self
into these assemblies, under the mask of liberty, and of succession. There
are some of them among you, who are of opinion, that I ought presently to
grant, or utterly to refuse liberty to dispute of the Succession, and to
establish it. If I should have granted it, those would triumph over me, having
their wishes: If I refused, they had thought to have excited the hatred of mine
own, which my greatest enemies hitherto could never do. But their wisdom was
out of season, their designs too far advanced, and they have not regarded
the event. And I have easily discovered by these things, who have been just on
my behalf, and who have not, and do see well, that all your Assembly is
composed of four sorts of persons. For some have been Architects and Authors,
others Actors, who with sweet words have persuaded: who being persuaded, have
accorded to that which was propounded: others, who have marvelled at this
audacitie, kept silence; and those in truth are the more excusable. Think you
that I contemn your good and safety, that you ground upon a Successor? or
that I will infringe your liberty? So far am I from that, that I have not so
much as thought of it. For I have considered, that it behooued you to retire
from the pit into which you run headlong. Every thing has his season.
Peradventure you shall have after me a wiser Prince, but not that loves you
more than I do. I know not if I shall live to see such Assemblies once more:
but take heed of offending the patience of your Prince: and notwithstanding,
take it for a certain truth, that I have a good opinion of the most part of
you, and that I love you all with all my heart, as heretofore. Thus, the
wisdom of a Woman quieted these stirs, the time which became clearer, caused
such a calm, that, beside the seditious and timorous, few were since found, to
storm for a Successor. And certainly all men, what face soever they set upon
it, do not penetrate more deeply into public affairs, than they find it
necessary for their own particular. Yet that the Successor should more
plainly appear, Makes it plainly to appear, that the Queen of Scotland
had the right of Succession.
which she thought could not be doubted of, she imprisoned Thornton, Reader of
the Law at Lincolnes Inn in London, because the Queen of Scotland had
complained, that he called her right in question.

In these Assemblies of the States, besides other things, which were for the
good of the Commonwealth, it was declared with the general consent of all,
The ordination of Bishops is confirmed.
THat the election, consecration, and instalment of Archbishops and Bishops of
England, (which many, by calumniating them, had called in question) was
lawful, and well and duly consecrated, according to the Acts and Statutes of
the Realm: And ordained, that all these, and those which for the time to come,
should be consecrated as they had been, were and should be holden well and
duly consecrated, notwithstanding any Law or Canon.

For the Papists had detracted them as false Bishops, peradventure because the
Unction, the Ring, and the Crozier were not used with the Benedictions: and, as
if they had not been solemnly instituted to this Order, by three Bishops,
which could bring their ordination, rising from the Apostolic authority
received from Christ, although they most truly could, as appears by the
Registers, having been consecrated with godly prayers, devout invocation of
the holy Ghost, the imposition of hands of such Bishops, the preaching of the
Word, and celebration of the Lords Supper.

About that time (after they had restrained the insolency of some Ruffians, who
violated these delators, which the vulgar call Promoters, pursued them through
the streets with cries and clamours, Promoters suppressed.
and killed them) came the day appointed for the baptizing of the Prince of
Scotland. The Queen having been entreated to receive him at the sacred Font,
sent the Earl of Bedford with the Lauor made of massy Gold, for a Present of
State, The Earl of Bedford sent Ambassrdour to the Queen of Scotland, for the
baptizing of her Son.
and commanded him expressly, and all the English which accompany him, to take
heed that they honor Darley with the Title of KING.

The ceremony being ended, the Earl, according as he had been commanded,
treated with the Queen of Scotland, to have the Treaty of Edenborrough
ratified, and to accord the domesticke discords which were between her and her
Husband. For some ill-willers, both to the one and the other, had by craft
ruined this agreeable society of life and love which was between them. She
refused to make this ratification, alleging this reason, That there was in
that Treaty, some Articles that did derogate the right which she and her
Children had to England: nevertheless, promised to send Commissioners into
England, which should treat about it, for the altering of some things; to wit,
that she should leave off the Title and arms of England, as long as Queen
ELIZABETH, or any of hers should live, (as if the Treaty had imported, that she
should give it over altogether,) and they they should let her see what injuries
she had received by the wicked practices of those which too much abused the
ingenious credulity of her Husband. And, finding her self unhealthful, she
recommended her Son to the trust and Gardianship of Queen ELIZABETH, by
Letters bearing, That although she knew well, (I use her own terms) she was
by right the undoubted Heir of England, after the Queen, and that many at
their pleasure forged many things against this right;

She promised nevertheless, she would not press her any more to a declaration
of it, but that she would assist and adhere to her always, and against all,
with all her affection.

The death of I. Mason, and Sir R. Sackuile.
In the year 1566. there dyed two of the Lords of her Majesty's most honorable
Privy Council, (both in one day) I. Mason, Treasurer of Queen ELIZABETH'S
household, a most learned, judicious, and grave personage, most diligent and
careful to the preservation of benefits. In his place and office, was
preferred Sir Francis Knolles, who had married the Lady Katherine,
Cousin-Germane to her Majesty, by the Lady Mary of Bulleine, and Richard
Sackuile also, Cousin to her Majesty, by the Lady Anne Bulleine her Mother. Sir
Walter Mildmay, an vncorrupt and considerate man, succeeded in his place.

THE TENTH YEAR OF HER REIGN. Book 1. 1567.
Anno Domini 1567.
A Little before the Commissioners from the Queen of Scotland were arrived,
The murder of the Lord Darley, who was married to the Qu. of Scots.
a month or two after the christening of the Prince of Scotland, the King, at
the age of one and twenty years, was strangled in his bed, in the dead time of
the night: a dreadful and horrible wickedness, which was detested of all
honest men: afterward thrown into his Garden, the House being blown up with
Gunpowder. The report of it being spread through both the Kingdoms, the crime
was cast upon Morton, Murray, and their Confederates, who insulting over the
weaker Sex, laid it upon the Queen. Which by books, as also a Libell,
written by Buchanan, which was imprinted, none can be ignorant of: But being of
the party, and carried away by Murray's bounty, the books were condemned to
be false by the Council and State of Scotland, Buchanan condemned for falsehood
by the States of Scotland.
to which more credit is to be given: and, as I have heard, he himself to the
King, whose Schoolmaster he was, reprehended himself for it, that he had
used so poisonous a pen against the Queen, and being ready to dye, he wished
but to live so long, that he might take away the stain which he had spread
upon the Queen, or to cleanse it with his blood, unless (as he said himself)
his slanders might be accounted vain, by reason of his doting age. Give me
leave that the other side may be heard, by diverse that writ thereof, and at
that time published it in print: but such writings were soon called in, both in
favor of the Earl of Murray, and in hatred of the Queen, and likewise by
Ambassadors Letters worthy to be believed.

A digression from Scottish affairs.
In the year 1558. at the marriage of Francis the Dolphin of France, and Mary
Queen of Scotland, James, the Queens Bastard-Brother, commonly called the
Prior of Saint Andrews, (Metropolitan of the Order of Saint Andrews)
despising that title, James, Prior of Saint Andrews.
was ambitious after a more splendid one: but when the Queen, by the advice of
the Guizes, refused it him, he returned into Scotland discontented, wherein,
under a fair pretext of reforming Religion, and to establish the liberty of
Scotland, he begun to trouble the State, and effected it; and so brought it to
pass (without the knowledge of the Queen, in a Conuenticle of Confederates)
Religion was changed, and, by the calling in of aid from England, the French
were driven out of Scotland. Francis, King of France, being dead, he presently
went to his Sister into France, and having put away all suspicion tending to
her prejudice or dis-reputation for the affairs of Scotland, swore unto her,
(calling GOD to witness) to perform all duties that a Sister could expect
from a Brother, and upon the hope which he had, that she being brought up from
her tender age in the delicacies of France, would not return into Scotland,
He seeks to be Regent of Scotland.
works with the Guizes to appoint some Nobleman of Scotland to be Regent
there, and almost poynted at himself to be the fittest man of all. But, he
being sent back into Scotland, without any authority, but Letters of
Commission, by which the Queen gave power to the States to assemble, and
consult for the good of the Kingdom, and seeing himself dejected from his
hope, returned much vexed; and passing through England, made it there known,
that if they wished well to Religion in Scotland, to the peace of England, and
the security of Queen ELIZABETH, Being frustrated of it, underhand opposes
himself against the Queen.
they ought by all means to hinder the Queen of Scotland to pass into
Scotland. She nevertheless being safely arrived in Scotland, the English
Ships being disappointed by obscure weather, and being there, embraced her
Brother with all signs of favor and good will, and in a kind of manner,
committed unto him the general administration of affairs. Notwithstanding all
this, the branches of his ambition are not cut off, which grew daily, and
appeared both in words and deeds. For, he could not contain himself, but
often, among his friends, deplored that the warlike Scottish Nation was no
less subject to the command of a Woman, than the English was, and by the
instruction of Knox, whom he esteemed as a Patriarch, often debates, that
Kingdoms were due to merit, and not to lineage, and that Women should be
excluded from succeeding, and that their government were monstrous. He treated
likewise with the Queen, by his friends, Makes his ambition to be openly and
evidently known.
that she should substitute four of the Royal House of the Stewards, who, if
she dyed without issue, should succeed to the Crown one after another, without
regarding who were legitimate or no, thinking he should be one, seeing he was
the Kings Son, though unlawfully begotten.

But the Queen, wisely considering that such a substitution was contrary to
the Laws of the Kingdom, to defraud the right Heirs, a most pernicious
example, dangerous for her Subjects, and would be an hinderance to her self
for her second marriage, she mildely answered, That she would more advisedly
deliberate with the States of the Kingdom, about a matter of such weight and
consequence; and to testify her favor and bounty toward her Brother, she
honored him with the title of Earl of Mar, afterward, He is created Earl of
Murray.
with the Earldom of Murray, (for the dignity of Mar was then in
controversy,) being ignorant all this while, that he aimed at the Kingdom,
and affirmed himself to be the lawful Son of James the Fifth. To make the
easier way hereunto, by means of the extraordinary favor the Queen showed to
him, He persecutes the great men of Scotland.
he suppressed the most noble Family of the Gordons, powerful in vassalage and
command, whom he both feared in respect of themselves, as also by reason of the
reformed Religion, which adhered unto him: he expelled Hamilton, Duke of
Chastelraut, out of the Court, who was reputed next Heir to the Crown,
imprisoned the Earl of Arraine his Son, banished Count Bothwell, into
England; dismissed all opposites of their honorable offices, and places, and
retained the Queen under his power and survey, as a Guardian might do his
Ward: above all other things being careful, that She might not negotiate, nor
intend any marriage.

And when he saw, that of the one side, the Emperor solicited her, He
disswades the Queen from marrying.
for his Brother, and the Spaniard on the other part for his Son, he
absolutely dissuaded her both from the one and the other, alleging unto her,
how the ancient immunities of Scotland would not permit nor endure a strange
Prince, and whenever the Scepter fell into the hands of Women, they never
made choice of an Husband, but within their own Country of Scotland. But in
conclusion, he perceiving that all the Scots generally affected her marrying,
and discerning that by the persuasion and inducement of the Countess of Lenox,
she desired to marry with the Lord Darley, he himself likewise then commended
him unto her for an Husband; hoping, in respect of his youth, and for that he
was of a tractable nature and disposition, he would be ever at his direction
and dispose. Nevertheless, when he saw how dearly the Queen loved him, and
himself to fall by little and little out of her favor and grace, he repented
of the counsel and advice he had given, and admonished Queen ELIZABETH to
cross this marriage by all the means possible that she could.

Presently after the Nuptials were accomplished, and the Lord Darley proclaimed
KING, the King then presently revoked such gifts, as during his minority, the
Queen had conferred both upon him, and others: whereupon, being nigh
associated with them, He takes arms against her, after she was married.
he took up arms against the King and the Queen, pretending that this new
King was disaffected to the Protestant Religion, and how she contracted this
marriage without the consent of the Queen of England. But, having scarcely
made any trial of the fortunes of war, he fled, as I said, into England,
where, despayring of all succor, He flies into England.

He seeks to sow discord between the Husband and the Wife.


he labored by Letters to Morton, a man of great subtilty, and another like
himself, to effect, that seeing the marriage could not be broken off, yet that
the affection and love of the married couple might be abated, by some secret
practices: and a fit occasion offered it self: for after some domestical and
private grudgings, to quail the courage of this young King, which boiled a
little too hot, and to preserve entyre her own Royal prerogatives; in all
public acts, she began to set her Husbands Name after her own, and
altogether to leave out and omit it, in Moneys and Stampes.

Earl Morton, who was a notable Makebate, by his flatteries easily persuaded
this young King, to set the Crown of Scotland upon his own head: yea, though
the Queen would not give her consent thereunto, and to shake off the domination
and control of a Woman, because women were borne to obey, and men to command:
he hoping, that by means of this counsel, he should make the King, not only
to lose the Queens affection, but further, the love of all the great Men of
the Kingdom, and the people. To make him lose the Queens heart, first he
instigated him by diverse calumniations, to kill David Rice, a Pie-mountaine,
and by doing this, to prevent the crossing of their designs, by his reaching
and subtle spirit. By profession he was a Musician, and came the year before
into Scotland, with the Ambassador Moret, and then grew to be admitted into
the Queens House, and favor, in that he was industrious, and obseruant, and
in the Secretaries absence, he assisted, and dispatched Letters into France,
and managed secret consultations. Then, the more to exasperate this business,
he brought him to be present in person, at this Murder, in company with Raven,
and the other murderers, who entering with himself into the Queens Chambers,
their swords naked drawn, as she was sitting at the Table, with the Countess
of Arguile, and this man, standing by a Buffet-stoole, was eating somewhat taken
off from the Table, as ordinarily Wayters of the Dining-chamber will do,
bending also a Pistol against the Queens breast, who was then with Child, so
as upon the sudden affrightment she thought to have miscarried in the place,
The murder of David Rice in the Queen of Scots sight.
they laid hold of him in her presence, and drawing him into an outward
Chamber, most cruelly they murdered him, and shut up likewise the Queen
within the same Chamber.

Murray is repealed.
This Murder was committed, the day before that the Earl of Murray was assigned
to make his appearance before the Assembly, and in hearing of the States,
there, to answer an Accusation of Rebellion, which was informed and put in
against him. He appeared the day following, and no body sat, neither came any
witnesses against him, by reason of these great garboyles and troubles in the
State: that, (as it might seem) this murder was purposely undertaken for
Murrayes security and safety. Notwithstanding, the Queen, at the Kings
entreaty, received him into favor, and was confident in his brotherly love.
But when the King had more deliberately waighed the quality of his offense, and
the Queen began to take it deeply to heart, he repented himself much of this
rage and fury, and with many tears and sighs, humbly on his knee craved her
pardon, confessing freely, that he was excited to so bloody a crime by Murray
and Morton: from which time, ever after he conceived so mortal an hatred
against Murray, that he thought on nothing else, but how to be rid of him:
Earl Morton, and the other Homicides, by reason of this Murder, being fled
into England, Earl Morton flies into England.
with Letters of recommendation, which Murray had written in their behalf, to
the Earl of Bedford. But the passionate affection of his youth not being able
to reserve his most secret thoughts, and his high respect to the Queen,
curbing all boldness, for the executing of him, at last he was satisfied, to
let her understand thus much, that for public good, and the security of her
own house, she must remove him. The Queen in all sort detesting this course,
dissuaded him therefrom, yea even with threats, for having moved this unto
her, and putting him in hope to make a perfect reconciliation between them.
And yet notwithstanding, in that she could not but with great spleen digest
the authority this Bastard usurped over her, transported with wonderful
impatience, she opened this design to others: which, coming to Murrayes
understanding, to prevent her, he laid many secret ambushes in wait for her,
under color of showing himself to be very officious and diligent, using
herein Earl Mortons counsel and advice, though he were then absent.

Dissension set between the King and the Queen.
Their Resolution jointly was, that the Queen must be clean alienated from the
love and affection she bare to the King, while this affection was not yet well
knit, and reioynted. Then to draw into their society Earl Bothwell, who, not
long before had been reconciled to Murray, upon promises, that he should be
diuorc'd from his own Wife, and be married to the Queen, when she were a
Widow. For effectual performance whereof, and to warrant and defend him
against all others, they bound themselves in writing, subscribed and sealed,
persuading themselves, that at one blow, they could cut off the King, deprave
the reputation and good opinion which the Nobility and people held of her,
suppress afterward Bothwell, and so be possessed themselves of the whole and
absolute Administration of all affairs.

Lord Darley the Queens Husband, murdered.
Earl Bothwell, who was of himself a wicked man, and blinded with Ambition,
which made him bold and daring, readily entertained these hopes propounded to
him, and most trecherously performed this bloody Assassinate, having hardly
fifteen hours warning, to provide a sufficient number of Accomplices if need
had been, (for Earl Murray was gone far off, to prosecute his own
business) and to lay the whole suspicion and imputation upon the Queen. When
he was returned to the Court, both he, and all those of the Conspiracy,
commended Earl Bothwell to the Queen; Earl Bothwell commended to the Queen,
to marry him.
and, to persuade her to make choice of him for her Husband, they intimated by
all means unto her, how he was most worthy and deserving of her love, both in
respect of the eminency of his Family, his valiant Attempts against the
English, and the many infallible proofs and trials of his fidelity. Moreover,
they laid open unto her, that being alone, and without any help, or
assistance, she was not able to pacify those troubles and tumults that were
then raised, to discover the plots that might be proiected against her, and to
discharge the administration and government of the Kingdom. And therefore she
should do very well, to admit to the society of her bed, and counsel, such
an one, as had both will, power, and courage, to oppose them: So as, they
wrought thus far with her, that she yielded her consent, trembling for fear,
and danted with horror, for having beheld such direful occisions, and calling
to mind what fidelity Bothwell had ever showed both to her and her Mother,
and not knowing whither to have recourse, but to her Brothers faith and
loyalty. But nevertheless, with special prouiso, carefully to intend the
safety of her young and tender Son, that Bothwell should first clear
himself of the murder of the King, and be diuorc'd from his former Wife.

I am desirous here to set down, what the Earl of Huntley and Arguile, who
are the principal of all the great Nobility of Scotland, testified hereof, as
I coppied it out of a Writing sealed, and subscribed with their own hands,
which they sent to the Queen of England: BEcause Earl Murray, and others,
Testimony of the murder of the Lord Darley.
to cover their own Rebellion against the Queen, whose authority they
usurped, openly imputed her, as culpable and guilty of her Husbands death: we
publicly protest, and testify this which ensues. In the Month of December,
1556. the Queen being at Cragmill, the Earls of Murray and Lidington
acknowledged in our presence, that Morton, Lyndsay, and Raven, murdered Dauy
Rice, to no other end, but to preserve the Earl of Murray, who the same day
was to be proscribed. Wherefore, that they might shun the note of ingratitude,
their desire was, that Morton and others banished by reason of this murder,
might be repealed. But withal they employed, that this could not be done,
except the Queen by a Divorce were separated from her Husband, and they
promised to do it, if we would yield our consents. After that, Earl Murray
promised to me, of Huntley, that I should re-enter the inheritances of my
Ancestors, and have the perpetual love and affection of the banished, if I did
but further and procure this Divorce. Then they went likewise to Earl
Bothwell, to draw also from him his consent and liking: and lastly, they went
to the Queen, whom Lidington in the name of all the rest, instantly requested,
to release Morton, Lindsay, and Raven, of their banishment: in very outrageous
terms, he exaggerated the Kings faults, and the offenses he had committed
against the Queen, and the Realm, proving how the Queen, and the State, were
deeply interessed, in procuring speedily this Divorce: because the King and
Queen could not live securely together in Scotland. Her Majesty made answer:
That she had rather for a time return into France, while her Husband did more
truly descend into the errors and vnstaidnesse of his youth, not willing any
thing should be done to her Sons prejudice, or her own dishonor. Whereunto
Lidington replied: We of your Council will look to this well-enough. But in
any wise, (said She) I prohibit you to perform, any thing that may in the
least manner blemish my honor, or burden my conscience. Let things stand as
they do, till God from above vouchsafe some fitter remedy. I much fear,
lest, that you judge requisite for my good, may redound to my hurt. A few days
after, when the King was murdered, after a most execrable manner, we are
assured, out of the inward touch and testimony of our Consciences, that the E.
Murray and Lidington were the Authors, Proiectors, and Plotters of this
abominable Parricide, whosoever the other were, that put it in execution. This
is that which they affirmed in writing.

The Confederates aimed then at nothing else, Bothwell is freed of the murder
of the King.
but how to free Bothwell of this Parricide: Wherefore, a Session of Parliament
was ordained for this only cause, and apprehension of their bodies enjoined,
of whom the least suspicion was conceived, and the Earl of Lenox accusing
Bothwell, and fervently urging, that he might come to a trial before the
States were assembled, it was granted, and so command imposed upon the Earl,
to appear within twenty days. But within the compass of this time, having
received no instructions nor aduertisements from the Queens Majesty of
England, and in that he could not live without danger of his life, in a place
replenished with his enemies, Earl Bothwell made his appearance, and having
Morton for his Advocate, prevailed in the cause, and so was sent away absolu'd,
by the Sentence of all the Judges.

This business being thus contrived; He marries the Queen.
the other Accomplices so wrought, that diverse of the Nobility consented to the
marriage, whereof they made a Draft in Writing, subscribed and sealed, for
fear, that if it should ever be broken, Bothwell might have accused them to be
the Authors of all that villainy. This marriage thus solemnized with Earl
Bothwell, who was created Duke of the Orcades, caused every one to surmize that
the Queen was guilty of this murder, and the Conspirators strengthened the
same opinion, by Letters sent into all parts, as likewise they held assemblies
at Dundagh, They conspire both against him, and the Queen.
where they conspired to depose the Queen, and destroy Earl Bothwell.
Although Murray, because he would not appear to be one of this Combination,
obtained leave of the Queen to go into France, and for the removing of all
distrust, he re-commended to her Royal care, and Bothwell's fidelity, all
his proceedings and occasions whatsoever in Scotland.

Earl Murray retyres into France.
He was scarcely arrived in France, but they, who absolved Bothwell of that
crime, and gave consent to this marriage, took up arms, as if they would have
seyzed on his person. Earl Bothwell is expelled.
But in effect, underhand, they privily admonished him speedily to withdraw
himself, for fear lest being taken, he might have revealed the whole Complot,
and that from his flight, they might draw argument and subject whereof to
accuse the Queen, for the murder of the King, The Queen emprisoned.
they seyzed on her person, and entreated her so ignominiously and
disgracefully, that although she had nothing on, but a very homely
night-Gowne, yet they so clapped her up in prison at Lake-Leuin, under the
custody of Earl Murray's Mother, who was James the 5. his Concubine, who
further persecuted her with most shameless malice, during her restraint,
boasting how she was lawful Wife to James the 5. and her Son lawfully
descended from him.

Queen Elizabeth complains.
So soon as Queen ELIZABETH had certain notice of all these proceedings,
detesting in her heart this unbridled insolency of Subjects toward a
Princess, who was her Sister, and Neighbor, terming them perfidious,
rebellious, ungrateful, and cruel: She sent into Scotland, Nicho.
Throgmorton, to complain hereof unto the Confederates, and to consult of some
means how to restore the Queen to her former liberty and authority, for the
punishments of the Kings murderers, and that the young Prince, might be sent
into England, rather than into France for his more secure preservation, and
safety. For that which passed successively while Throgmorton lay in Scotland, I
will deliver it faithfully, even as I collected it out of his own Letters,
which questionless are very sincere, and well approved of.

Many in Scotland were very much incensed against the Queen, insomuch, as they
absolutely refused to behold her, as likewise Villeroy, and De Croc,
Ambassadors for France. Yet the Conspirators could not agree among themselves,
how to dispose of her. The Lord of Lidington, and some others, were of opinion,
to have her re-established in her authority upon these conditions: That the
Murderers of the KING should be punished according to the Laws; and the young
Prince his safety procured. They consult what is to be done with the Queen
prisoner.
That Bothwell should be separated from her by a firm Divorce; and Religion
established. Others persuaded a perpetual banishment of her, either into
France or England, so the Queen of England, or King of France, would be
content to be Cautions and Pledges, that she should transfer all the Regal
authority to her Son, and some other great and eminent persons of the
Kingdom. Again, some would have cited her to a peremptory trial, have had
her condemned, committed to perpetual prison, and her Son crowned KING.
Finally, there wanted not others, who for her summary chastisement, and
punishment, would have had her deprived both of her Royal Authority and life.
And this was usually preached and diuulged by Knox, and some other Ministers,
in the open Pulpit.

Throgmorton produced against this, Throgmorton defends the Queens cause.
many reasons and Arguments taken out of the holy Scriptures, touching due
obedience and submission to superior power, who retain the Sword of Authority
in their hands: arguing very strongly and constantly, How the Queen was under
no other Tribunal, but that of the heavenly IVDGE, neither could she
iuridically be constrained to appear and answer in the Court of any earthly
Judge. That in Scotland the same authority which the Queen had not delegated,
nor made over to any other, was nothing, and by her reuocable.

But the Scottish-men replying, alleged the peculiar rites and privileges of
Scotland, and that in extraordinary occurrents, they might extraordinarily
determine, even as they had collected out of Buchanans reasons, who, by the
Earl of Murrayes persuasion, The Scots maintain the contrary out of Buchanans
reasons.
then writ that Dialogue of the Right of Reigning or governing among the Scots,
who was condemned: wherein he maintained, against the Testimony of the Scottish
Histories, that the people were privileged, to create or depose their Kings.
Notwithstanding, Throgmorton ceased not importunately to solicit them, for
the Queens re-establishment, and that himself might visit her, though he no
sooner opened his mouth in this point, but they all replied, how this by no
means could be granted him, because herein they had denied the French, and
that by this means they would not distaste the King of France, to please and
satisfy the Queen of England, who (as often experience heretofore had taught
them) labored for nothing, but her own peculiar interests, when she was a
means to drive the French away out of Scotland, and lately showed her self
but niggardly, and sparing of her favors toward the Scottish Exiles.
Whereupon, he thought it fit to take heed, lest this importunity might urge
them, to embrace the amity of the French, and shake off that of the English;
when, according to the French Proverb, Qui quicte la party la perd, He that
leaves his party, loses it: advised and counseled the English to be careful
and jealous, how they forsook and lost the Scots.

After this, by a Writing vnseal'd, filled with variety of discourse, which
they committed to Throgmortons hands, they vowed and protested, that the Queen
was removed, and restrained to a close place, for no other end, but to disioyne
her from Earl Bothwell, whom she most entyrely loved, till this heat of
affection, and her wrath conceived against them, might somewhat slacken: and
therefore they requested him to be satisfied in this Answer, while some other
Nobles of the Kingdom were assembled: and yet nevertheless they restrained
the Queens liberty, every day more and more, though with tears she entreated
them to use her more favorably, if not as Queen, yet as she was a Kings
Daughter, and Mother to their Prince: and so he many times requested, that he
might go and visit her, but all in vain. Briefly, not to rip up in particular
all the injuries and disgraces offered her, at last they made trial, whether
by mild and fair means, they could induce her, freely to give over the
government, either by reason of her weakness and indisposition, or in
respect of the trouble and annoyance it brought her to, to reign and govern:
which indeed they devised for an excuse, or else as others counseled her, with
more drift and subtilty, to the end that being more weakly and gracelessely
guarded, she might the more safely and easily make her escape. But when all
this took no place, they threatened to bring her to a public trial, to
accuse her that she had led an incontinent life, murdered the King her former
Husband, and practiced tyranny in violating the Laws, and ancient privileges
of their Country, especially those which De R. and De Oisel had enacted in the
King of France his name, and her own. Finally, through fear of death, and
without ever hearing her answers, They extort from their Queen a Resignation
of the Government.
they forced her to seal three Patents: the first of which contained, that
she assigned the government over to her Son, who was scarcely thirteen
months old: the second comprehending, how she constituted Earl Murray to be
Viceroy, during her Sons minority: and the third employed, that in case
Murray refused this charge, she ordained for Rectors and Protectors of her
Son, the Duke of Chastelraut, and the Earls of Lenox, Arguile, Athol,
Morton, Glencarne, and Mar: But then she presently certified the Queen of
England by Throgmorton, how she had surrendered the government of the Kingdom
by compulsion, and against her will subscribed to the Patent thereof, by
Throgmortons persuasion, who informed her, that any Grant extorted from her
during imprisonment, which causes a just and true fear, was inualidious, and
of no effect. But I will relate these things more at large in the year
ensuing, according as they may be faithfully extracted out of the Accusations,
and Answers of parties, which were propounded at York before the
Commissioners, to whom the absolute determination of this business was
referred.

James the 6. consecrated and inaugurated King.
Five days after this Resignation or Grant, JAMES, Son to the Queen, was
consecrated and crowned King, John Knox then preaching publicly, after the
Hamiltons had protested, how it was without any manner of prejudice to the Duke
of Chastelraut, in the right of Succession, against the Family of Lenox. But
Queen ELIZABETH forbade Throgmorton to be present hereat, to the end that by
the presentiall assistance of her Ambassador, she might not seem to approve
this unjust deposition of the Queen.

Murray returns into Scotland.
Twenty days after, Murray returned out of France into Scotland, where having
remained only three days, he went to the Queen with certain of the
Conspirators in his company, he objected unto her many crimes, and like a
religious Confessor, laid open unto her many demonstrations, to move her to
convert unto God with true repentance, and to implore his mercy. She showed
her self penitent for the sins of her life past, confessed part of them
objected to her, extenuated some, and excused others, out of humane fragility
and weakness, but absolutely denied the greater part, entreated him, to
assume the mannaging of affairs under her Son, and coniured him to be tender
of her reputation and life. Whereunto he made answer, how this lay not in his
power, but she must sue for it, from the Estates of the Kingdom, persuading
her notwithstanding to observe these things, if she regarded either her life,
or honor. That she should not disturb either the peace of the King or
Kingdom: He prescribes the Queen what she should do.
not to attempt the breaking of her imprisonment: no ways to excite the King
of France, or Queen of England to any domestical or external War: no more
to affect Bothwell, and never to seek any revenge against them that were his
enemies.

So soon as he was proclaimed Viceroy or Regent, He is established Regent,
or Viceroy.
he obliged himself by Writings under hand and seal, to attempt nothing that
should concern either war or peace, the person and marriage of the King, or
the Queens liberty, without the consent of the other Accomplices: and he caused
the Lord of Lidington to inform Throgmorton, that he should no more intercede
for the Queen, and that both himself, and all others, made choice rather to
endure any thing else, than to permit that she enjoying liberty, should still
retain Bothwell about her, expose her Son to danger, the Country to
molestation, and themselves to banishment. We well know (said he) what you
English men can effect by a war, if you harrasse our frontiers and we yours:
and are well assured out of the ancient alliance they have always entertained,
will never forsake us. Nevertheless, he denied Ligneroll the French
Ambassador Leager, to see the Queen, while Bothwell were taken: and contrary
to that which he had promised to the King of France, he daily entreated this
miserable Queen most rigorously, for all the good she had formerly done him.
Hitherto, so much as I could collect out of Throgmortons Letters.

Presently after, Some of the murderers of the King, are put to death.
Earl Murray put to death John Hepborne, Paris, French Douglas, and some other
of Bothwels servants, who assisted in the murdering of the King. But when they
came to their excution, they protested before God, and his Angels, (whereunto
he gave no ear) that they heard Earl Bothwell say, how himself and Morton
were the original Authors, and discharged the Queen of all suspicion. They
acquit the Queen of all suspicion.
As also, Bothwell himself, when he was prisoner in Denmark, had often
protested, both during his life, and at his death, with a most sincere and
religious attestation, that she was innocent thereof: and fourteen years
after, when Morton came to undergo his last punishment, he confessed: that
Bothwell solicited him to consent thereunto, and he utterly refusing to
attempt the same, except he first saw an express command in writing from the
Queens own hand, he replied, that this in no manner could be compassed, but
excluded it must be without communicating of it formerly to her.

The Queen of England, and the King of France, labor to procure her liberty.
Queen ELIZABETH, and the King of France, being much incensed with such a
precipitant deposition, and the Conspirators obstinacy against the suit of
their Ambassadors, it turning as it were to the reproach of Royal Majesty,
they began to favor the Hamiltons, who still held the Queens party. Pasquier
also, Ambassador Leager for France, treated with Queen ELIZABETH, to procure
her re-establishment by force of Arms, who thought it most expedient, first to
prohibit the Scots all commerce with England and France, while she were
delivered: that so, some division might grow between the Nobility and the
people, which Nobility seemed to conspire against her. But for a while, to
pass over these affairs of Scotland.

Queen Elizabeth demands the restitution of Calais.
Question being then made of restoring the Town of Calais to the English,
according to the Treaty of Cambray, seeing the eight years therein specified
were now expired, Smith being sent into France, with G. Winter, Master of the
Nauall Artillery, after the sounding of a Trumpet before the gate of Calais,
which looks toward the Sea, with a loud voice, and in the French Tongue he
demanded, that, according to the Articles of that Treaty, the Town and
Territory, with some Canons, might be surrendered into his hands: he also at the
same time, drew an Act, by the hand of a public Notary, in the presence of
some Germane and Flemish Merchants, who were accidentally there at the same
time, and taken for witnesses, and then he went presently to the King of
France, at Castle de Fossat, where, with Norris, Ambassador Leager, he made
again the same demand. The King sent to his Counselors, amongst whom M. de
l'Hospitall, Lord Chancellor, Proloquutor for the rest, with a grave and well
compiled discourse, spoke to him in this manner: THat if the English had any
right to lay claim to Calais, The French maintain, how they ought not to do
it.
they might as well challenge and pretend title to Paris, for by the fortune of
War, they had conquered and lost both the one and the other. That the right
they pretended to Calais, was but new, whereas that of the French, took
beginning with the Kingdom it self. And though the English possessed it for
the space of three and twenty years more or less, yet the original title
ever remained to the King of France, as well as that of the Duchies of Guyenne,
and Normandy, which the English likewise detayned for a long time, by the force
of their Arms. That the French did not conquer, but rather recovered Calais,
with their Arms, even as they did their former Dukedomes. That the
prescription of times, alleged by the English, took no place between
Princes, but their right lay always in their force, and in the Law of the
twelve Tables: for one might eternally challenge his own properties out of the
hand of his enemy. That the English, though sufficiently instructed in
Treaties and contractations of affairs, were never mindful of Calais, in the
Treaty which passed not long since, at Troyes, though they enterprised a war
principally for the recovery thereof: so as hereby they manifested, that they
had given over all pretense to the same. That this Treaty of Troyes was a
Renouation, by means whereof that of Cambray was in some points reformed,
notwithstanding the clause of the Reservation of rights and claims, because
that touched only inferior and petty Privileges and claims, whereas that of
Calais was held for one of the most principal, and important. That,
notwithstanding any thing which Francis the Second attempted in Scotland, this
would not accrue to the prejudice of Charles the Ninth. That in some special
cases, the attempts of particular men, were subject to the Laws, but in the
proceedings of Kings and Princes it took quite otherwise. That, for whatsoever
was undertaken in the Kingdom of Scotland, made over in dowry to King Francis,
the English, who by surmizes aimed at his, and the Queen of Scots project,
they should rather complain unto her, seeing they entered Haure de grace, which
is in France, under a colorable pretext of the Kings preservation, where
placing a strong Garrison, and diverse warlike munitions, they held it by force
of Arms, and furnished the Prince of Conde with Moneys: for which cause, they
lost the claim which they had to Calais. That, GOD permitting the French to
recover the same, resolved in his heavenly providence, that it should be a
means, to end the wars that had been between them, in that they were
severed and separated by the Sea, which running betwixt both coasts, serves for
just borders and limits: as that Poet sings, And the English, who are certain
Nations, Seuer'd by Sea, from other Regions.

That the Queen of England should take a better course, in embracing Peace
with the King of France, then by seeking to recover Calais. Finally, that no
man should dare to move a word to the King, about surrendering it to the
English, but if any were so presumptuous, that he deserved extreme punishment,
yea, greater torments then those of hell fire.

Whereunto Smith made answer: Sir Thomas Smith's answer.
That it nothing concerned him, and to search out what right and title the
French had in former times to Calais, one must rip up wonderful ancient and
absolute Antiquities; but well he perceived at last, that what the French laid
hold of, either by right or wrong, they take it for their own, as if their
claims and titles lay in nothing but Arms, and little cared, whether they
possessed a good or bad conscience. That they resolved to hold Calais, by that
Law of Nations, which permits captives to release themselves from their
enemies, and recover former liberty, though the other held it by virtue of a
solemn Conuention and Accord. And that they called not to consideration, how
after the first, there was another, so as they determined in no wise to
perform their promise given touching the restitution of Calais. And yet
nevertheless, this was of more weight and consequence then the most important
reasons that could be alleged. That they ever took to themselves, and
denied the English, the glory and honor which then they willingly ascribed to
them, for being capable and apprehensiue in Contractations. That this
renouation of Contract, was but a mere Antistrophe, which might justly be
returned upon the French, because the reason why the Queen redemanded Calais,
was for nothing else, but in that the French attempting and innouating by their
Arms in Scotland, had lost the right they pretended thereunto: because the
Queen of England, upon this, surprised Haure de grace: As if in so doing, the
one Prince minded not to yield one jot to the other. We, said he, accorded a
Peace at Troyes; which, if it induced any nouation or change, this innovation
or change, cut off the right which the French had to Calais, and confirmed the
English Title, which the English could not as yet justly claim, because the
eight years were not then fully expired. Whereupon rising, and turning toward
the Council of France; I appeal, says he, to your faith and conscience,
seeing your selves were then present, when we insisted in making a
Reservation, by express terms, for our right to Calais, you laboring as much
to have it omitted, because the full time was not expired: Is it not true, that
the Accord was made between us, with this prouiso, and secret reservation,
expressed in this Clause, All other respective intentions and demands to remain
solid and entire, and so likewise, the exceptions and prohibitions both of the
one and the other side reserved. As for Haure de grace, the English entered it
without one blow struck, at the entreaty of the Inhabitants, and the Normane
Nobility, and after a solemn protestation, that it should be kept and held to
the King of France his behoof, so as herein they undertook nothing against
him by course of Arms, nor innouated not any thing to the infringement of the
former Treaty. As for the moneys lent to the Prince of Conde, and his
Confederates, this was done with no other drift or intention, then to satisfy
the Almaine Soldiers, who mutined for their pay, and to detain them from
forraging those Countries, that lived under the King's obedience, which the
King himself acknowledged to have been done to a good end, and for his own
special service.

And thus you see what Sir Thomas Smith uttered, with diverse such matters and
allegations.

Whereupon, Monsieur Memorancy, being Constable of France, holding up his
Sword on high, the Scabbard whereof was set with Flowers-de-Luce, for a mark
and emblem of his high Office, and using many words of the great warlike
preparations which the English brought before Haure de grace, as if they had
not only been able to defend a small Town, but further to have taken in all
Normandy.

No man (said Smith) need to wonder, because the Englishmen, being a maritime
Nation, understanding that they have no command over the Winds, who are Lords
of the Sea, they provide plentifully and in due season for time to come. Then
the Frenchmen complaining, that conformable to the Accord, the Protestants that
fled out of France, were refused to be delivered to the French Ambassador,
who had demanded them: this business was put off till another time, and so by
little and little, came to be buried in silence, the Civil Wars instantly
renewing in France. And certainly, the Frenchmen were resolved among
themselves, never to deliver up Calais again: For they no sooner took it, but
they razed all the old Fortifications, began to make new, let houses and
grounds for fifty years, and granted a perpetuity in others.

While these matters thus passed in France, the Count of Stolberg came into
England, from the Emperor Maximilian, to treat of a Marriage with the
Archduke, for which end likewise, the Queens Majesty not long before had
sent to the Emperor, the Earl of Sussex, with the Order of the Garter; who,
for the love he bare to his Country, and hatred to the Earl of Leicester,
employed all his best endeavors, to bring to pass, that the Queen might marry
with a strange Prince, and Leicester by this means to be frustrated of his
hopes; this always readily coming out of his mouth, The Earl of Sussex is
sent to the Emperor.
That whether in respect of honor, power, or means, a strange Prince was to
be preferred before the most noble Subject of the Kingdom of England. Which
made one of a contrary opinion, upon a certain time, utter ingeniously these
words in his presence: That in marriages, wherein respect is had to three
things, to honor, power, and riches, the Devil, and the World were the
Paranymphes and Solliciters. Notwithstanding, Leicester conceiving good hopes,
found means to suborne the Lord North, whom the Earl of Sussex had chosen to
accompany him in his voyage, that he should give an ear to what he spoke, cast
a vigilant eye over what he did, and underhand to pluck back the Marriage
of the Archduke, as fast as he advanced and set it forward: letting him
understand, that the Queen was far from it, whatsoever show she made of a
willing mind, and what face soever Sussex set on it. As also himself labored
incessantly in Court, to divert the Queen from any such resolution, he having
the command of her ear, and to this end, he representing unto her all the
discommodities which might accrue, Leicester hinders it.
by her marrying out of the Realm.

Representing to her all the discommodities that might happen if she married a
stranger
The Marriage of late memory that her Sister MARY contracted with the King of
Spain, whereby she cast her self into perpetual sorrow, and England into
danger of coming under the Spanish servitude. That it was impossible to
discover the manners, cogitations, and inward inclinations of strangers, though
these things ought to be looked into in the person of an Husband, who by an
inseparable band, is one and the same flesh. How it was an extreme misery and
grief, to be daily conversant with a man of strange manners and language. That
Children begotten in such marriages, took from their birth, I know not what
kind of extraordinary property and disposition. That frequent commerce with
strangers, brought into the Commonwealth strange manners and fashions of life;
and that Ladies Princesses, by these Marriages, in stead of augmenting their
own Kingdoms, added to those of their Husbands, submitted themselves and
their Subjects to their commands, and laid open to strangers the secrets of
their Kingdoms. That a strange Husband, out of the natural affection he bare
to his own Country, would prefer his own Subjects, before the Subjects of
England. That England had no need of the help of any stranger, being strong
enough of it self, to defend the Kingdom, and the riches thereof, and to
repel any foreign Force. That the annexing of another Kingdom, would breed
but charge, care, and trouble, and how Kingdoms, as well as humane bodies,
fell many times by their own weight. That some alleged in scorn of the
Nobility, That the Queen marrying within the Kingdom, should somewhat impair
her Royal dignity; whereas her Majesty, who by her virtue opened a way to
rise unto this Sovereignty, was extracted from Nobility, and that yet there
are some Nobles of the Royal Blood, who are like Sprigs of the same Royal
Branch or Arm, and hereupon, the Kings of England have ever in their Letters,
honored Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, and Vicounts, with this Title of Cousins.
In the mean while, the Earl of Sussex, taking his Journey by Antwerp, Cullen,
Magunce, Worms, Spire, Vlme, and Ausberg, came into Austria with a great and
magnificent Train: who being honorably entertained, he there remained five
months at the Emperors charge, having daily conference with him about serious
and weighty matters, and touching the Marriage of Charles; and on a day
appointed, he invested him with the Order of the Garter, at an Evening Prayer,
refusing, through scruple of conscience, Articles of the marriage propounded.
to be present at the celebration of Mass. In this affair, many difficulties
presented themselves about Religion, and the Arch-duke's mayntenance, the style
of King, and the succession to the Kingdom; and many points were argued both
of the one side and the other: For the Title and Style of King, it was accorded
he should have it. For the Succession, in that he could not enjoy it by the
Laws of the Kingdom, in that it was prejudicial to the Children, he should
have the tutelage and gardianship of them. And that nothing more was granted to
Philip, King of Spain, when he married Queen MARY. As for his maintenance, if
he would furnish them at his charge, whom he should bring with him and retain
in the Court, the Queen, out of her Royal Dignity, would abundantly
discharge the rest, yea, and that too, if he required it. But one scruple still
remained touching Religion: For the Emperor demanded, as also Charles
himself, that he might have a public Church granted him, whither he might
repair with his Court, to the celebration of divine Service according to the
Roman form. But this being refused, the Emperor was satisfied with an
indifferent motion, which was, That he might have a peculiar place ordained
within the Court for this purpose, where he might quietly perform his
Devotions, as ever it is permitted the Ambassadors of Roman Princes, with a
prouiso that the English should not be thereto admitted, and that neither he
nor his Followers did oppugn the Religion received in England, neither favor
any opposites. If any coffeehouse grew about Divine Service, he should for
a time forbear his ordinary exercise, and with the Queen repair to that
celebration performed according to the Church of England. When this Treaty had
been sagely discussed of in England, (that I may not relate any further of the
negotiation) the Queen made answer, That if she yielded to this, she should
offend her own Conscience, and openly violate the public Laws of the
Kingdom, to the extreme peril both of her dignity and safety: But if Charles
were pleased to come into England, to see her, he should reap fruits worthy
his travel and pains. And thus the Emperor dismissed the Earl of Sussex
with great honor: and the Earl of Sussex turning a little out of his way to
see Charles, took his leave of him at Gratz; and the Archduke Charles,
expecting to receive a more favorable Answer, found himself frustrated of
his intention. For this prosecution was given over by little and little, which
made a progression of seven whole years, with diverse intercourses of
honorable Embassies: it leaving notwithstanding a mutual love and amity
between the Princes, so cordial and inherent, that the Emperor always crossed
the Popes designs against Queen ELIZABETH. Not long after, the Archduke
married Mary, Daughter to Albert the fifth, Duke of Bauaria, by whom, amongst
other Children, he had two Daughters, whereof the one was Queen of Spain, the
other of Poland.

About this time, came into England, Ambassadors sent from the Emperor of
Muscouie.
from the mighty Emperor of Russia and Muscouie, Ioh. Basilius, E. Twerdico,
and T. Pogarella, with most Martlet, Sable, and Ermyne Skins, whereof at that
time, and in precedent ages, the English made great account, both for ornament
and health: and they promised to the Queen and the English Nation, continuance
of that affection which the Emperor had manifested, and what great study and
care he had taken for the English, ever since they frequented those parts,
whereof you shall hereunder see the beginning.

In the year 1553. certain Merchants of London, the principal of whom were
An. Iudd. G. Barnes, and A. Husay, shaping out a course for Cathay, by the
frozen or Hyperborean Sea, under the conduct of Sir Henry Willowbie, who was
frozen to death in the Journey, To. Chancelour, The English opened the way to
go to Russia by Sea.
his Lieutenant, happily opened the passage of Russia, before this time
unknown, running up with the River of Duina, till he came to sixty degrees of
the Pole Articke, where a little Monasteerie is seated, consecrated to Saint
Nicholas. When the Emperor heard of it, he sent for him to the Mosco, in
Caroches made after the manner of the Country: he entertained and dismissed him
with many graces and favors, promising the English great immunities, if they
would trade into his Empire, and rejoicing that he had met with a means to
transport by Sea into Russia, foreign merchandise, which the Russia^s could
not come by before, but with great difficulty, by the Narue, and the Kingdom
of Poland, enemies. When Robert Chancellor upon his return gave inforamtion
thereof, and of what high esteem the Clothes of England were in those parts,
the low rate of Hemp and Flax, whereof they made their Cables and cordage,
The Company of Muscouie Merchants.
and what rich Skins they affoorded, these Merchants raised a society or
company, by Queen MARY'S permission, in a fair Building appropriated to their
use, which at this day we call the Moscouie house; and Basilius granting them
many immunities, they have since that time, sent every year a Fleet of Ships,
and maintained traffic, the which likewise has been greatly augmented since
the year 1569. when out of his love to Queen ELIZABETH, he granted them, that
none but the English of this Company, might traffic into the North part of
Russia, and they only should sell their merchandises throughout the whole
extent of his Empire, which is large and spacious, as in fit place shall be
declared.

An. Ienkinson returned with these Ambassadors into England, who had
obseruantly run over all this Country: he described the same in a
Geographicall Map, and was the first man of the English, that crossed the
Caspian Sea, and landed in the Country of the Bactrians. The Emperor
committed unto him secret matters, which he would by no means communicate to
any of his own people, which was, A secret message from the Emperor of
Muscouy.
seriously to treat with Queen ELIZABETH in his name, that she would enter
into mutual league with him offensive, and defensive, against all the world,
and that she would send into Russia, Ship-wrights, Mariners, warlike Munitions,
and to oblige her self by solemn oath, courteously to receive him, with his
Wife, and Children, if he were driven out of his Empire, either by rebellious
Subjects, or open enemies. And thus this Tyrant, whom no man could trust,
seemed to be distrustful even of himself: and though he were somewhat moved
with the short and ambiguous answer that her Majesty returned, yet did he not
give over soliciting of her in these things, both by Letters and Ambassies, as
hereafter shall be expressed, requesting her continually, to send him back
that same Anthony Ienkinson, who, as he thought, had not been so faithful, as
in matters of so great weight was requisite.

The first Month of this year, dyed Nicholas Wotton, The death of N. Wotton:
a Doctor of the Civil Law, and Deane of the Churches of Canterbury and York:
a very honorable person, for his parentage, but much more for his prudence:
whereof he had given ample testimony both within and without the Realm. For,
he was one of the Priuy-Councell to the Kings, HENRY the Eighth, and EDWARD
the Sixth; as also, to Queen MARY, and Queen ELIZABETH. Nine times he went
Ambassador to the Emperor, the Kings of France and Spain, and other Princes.
Three times he was a Commissioner to make peace between the English, French,
and Scots; and one of the sixteen, whom HENRY the Eighth chose for Executors
of his last Will and Testament. And the Duchess of Norfolk.


There dyed also El. Leyborne, third Wife to Thomas, Duke of Norfolk, and
formerly Widow to the Lord Dacres, having brought him forth no Children. But
she had one by her first Husband, George the Baron: who dyed young, with a fall
off of a Vauting-Horse of wood, when he learned to vaut: and three Daughters,
who were all affianced by promises of performance to the Dukes three Sons.

I told you, how Shan O-Neale, lawful Son to Cone-Oneale, surnamed Bacon;
that is to say, Lame; the mightiest man in the North part of Ireland, which is
called Vlster, was come into England, and craved pardon for his offense, in the
year 1563. When he was returned into his Country, he valiantly defended
that part of Ireland against the Scots which landed there out of Cantria, and
Hebride: Shan O-neale raises troubles.
and he slew 10. Mac O-Neale, his father in Law, and Anny his Brother, who
conducted them. This victory causing him to be insolent, he began to exercise
tyranny upon other petty Lords of Vlster, not of so powerful a command as
himself: he burnt Armach, the Metropolitan City of Ireland, for hatred to
the Archbishop, drove Mac-Guire out of the inheritance of his Predecessors,
pilled and sacked Mac-Genisse, and others; and the English, receiving them into
their protection, he spread rebellious colors against Queen ELIZABETH. He
rebels.
But he presently wrapped them up again, at the instigation of Cusac, a Knight
of the Order, yielded up his Son in Hostage, and submitted himself. And
Queen ELIZABETH, to contain him within bounds, having rent and torn all
those Letters, by which HENRY the Eighth declared Matthew falsely reputed for
his Son, to be Heir to Cone, she resolved to confer upon him, the
honorable titles of Earl of Tyrone, and Baron of Dungannon, as being the
undoubted Son and Heir. But this man altogether impatient of repose, and
peace, perceiving that he was able to bring into the field a thousand Horse,
and four thousand foot of his Vassals, and Tenants, and he had already five
hundred of his Guard, with barbarous pride he rejected such titles of honor,
in comparison of the name of O-Neale, but caused himself, by his own people,
to be styled King of Vlster: He trained up the Peasants to War, offered the
Kingdom of Ireland to the Queen of Scots, and conceived such a mortal hatred
against the English, that having built a Castle upon the Lac Eaugh, he named it
Feognegall, which is to say, the Hatred of the English, and strangled some of
his people, because they ate the bread of the English, though he would never
speak otherwise than honorably of the Queen.

Sir Henry Sidney was commanded to arm against him, Sir Henry Sidney arms
against him.
and Randolph, a brave Conductor, sent by Sea, upon the Northern Frontiers of
Vlster, to Derry, which is a small Episcopal See, near to Loygh-foy, with a
troop of horse, and seven hundred foot, to assail him upon the back, when
the Viceroy would come up, and set upon him in his Van. Shan understanding
this, hotly beleaguerd Dundalk, but was repelled by the Garrison, with great
loss of men: as he was likewise from Wittscastell, where he met with no less
loss. Then being about with fire and sword to waste the Earldom of Louth,
with the overthrow of a number of men, he was rowted by a small troop of the
English: when, making toward Derry, he forraged all the Country round about,
He is discomfited.
and provoked the English Garrison to fight, who ranging themselves in battle,
fell on all sides upon this disordered multitude, disarrayed, overthrew, and
put them to open flight. But the victory proved but sorrowful, by reason of a
lamentable accident that light upon Randolph, who was slain fighting valiantly
among the thickest of his enemies: as brave a Gentleman questionless, as our
present times have seen, and none ever purchased greater respect, joined with
love, among Soldiers, than this man had done. S. Lo being constituted in his
place, he much endammaged the Rebels in that quarter, till on a day, when the
Fort by an unhappy accident, was set on fire, with all the Munition, and
Powder, which blew up many Soldiers. For then, embarking all his foot in
shipping, and with a wing of Horse, commanded by one Haruey, he past through
the midst of his enemies, who continually galled him, and, by a way of four
days journey, went to the Lord Deputy, who, to honor Randolphs virtue,
solemnized his Obsequies, and was himself in mourning.

And raising forces presently to go into Vlster, Shan retired with his men
into the Woods and Forests, re-amassing again together at several times,
here and there, the rest of his men, about Clogner, and Castle Salmon,
belonging to Turlogh-Leinich, who then had left it. But when the Lord Deputy
had constituted Garrisons, settled Odonel again in his State, and was returned
to appease the differences between the Earls of Ormond and Desmond, who in an
ill time bandied one against another, Shan re-assuming courage, Shan re-assumes
courage.
after he had spoiled and ranged far up into the Country, he again besieged
Dundalch, which he was presently constrained to give over with great loss, and
shame, many of his men being slain: insomuch, that enraged with fury and
madness, he practiced most barbarous cruelty against them: He uses cruelty to
his men.
for, many had forsaken him, and he perceiving that his number was greatly
diminished, (for besides those that left him, he lost a thousand in fight) and
how the passages were stopped, and all places of retreat seyzed upon by the
English, he resolved to prostitute himself at the Deputies feet, He means to
yield.
and to crave pardon with an Halter about his neck. But, being dissuaded by
his Secretary, and first to try the amity of the Scots of Hebrides, who were
returned into Clande-boy, from whence he had formerly driven them, and were
there re-entred into an hot war, under the conduct of A.Oge; which is to say,
the youngest, and M. Gillespic, whose Brethren, Anne, and Ioh. O-Neale,
himself had slain in fight: he first sent unto them, their Brother
Surley-boy, that is to say, Surley the Red, to recover their favor, and then
went to them himself, with the Wife of Odonel, whom he had stolen away. They,
boiling with choler, to be revenged for their brethren, and cousins, whom he
had slain, entertained him but with feigned courtesy, but presently leading
him into their Tent, in drinking they quarrelled with him, upon some obscene
speeches he used of their Mother, and so falling upon him with their naked
swords, He is slain.
slew both himself, and many others of his company.

And thus you may see, what a bloody end this Shan came to, in the midst of
June, after he had taken away all government from his Father, and life from
his bastard-Brother. A man wonderfully polluted with Homicides, and Adulteries,
a great gourmand, and an infamous drunkard, who, to refresh his body inflamed
with too-much Wine, and Vsquebagh, he was feign to bury himself oftentimes in
ground, up to the chin. He left behind him, Henry, and Shan, his Sons, that
he had by his Wife, and many others whom he begot on the Wife of Odonel, and
his other Concubines. His possessions and goods were confiscated by the
Parliament of the Kingdom of Ireland, and Turlogh-Leinich, the mightiest man
of the Family of O-Neale, and of a stayed spirit, proclaimed O-Neale, by the
Queens permission, and the peoples election. Nevertheless, the Queen, for an
opposite to him, if he should chance to exceed the bounds of his duty, Hugon,
who was afterward Baron of Dungannon.
received to grace Hugon, Nephew to Shan, by reason of Matthew his Brother, who
was commonly called the Baron of Dungannon, a young man then of small note, and
yet afterward he proved the Tempest, yea the very Plague and Pestilence of his
Country.

Thus peace was concluded upon Vlster. But in the mean while, new troubles
grew in Munster, through the debate and secret grudgings, about their several
limits and borders, Troubles in Munster.
which fell out between the Earls of Ormond and Desmond, so as they came to
hand-blowes near to Dromell, and were both summoned into England, to plead
their causes before the Qu. Priuy-Councell. But they, the matter much
encombred, sent them back to the Viceroy in Ireland, where they might have
both their titles and testimonies near at hand. Both of them being equal in
the number of warlike subjects, in courage, and friends at Court, contemning
the decision of Laws, they resolved to end their suite by the sword. The
Viceroy hindered it as much as he could, both by his authority and arms. But
Ormond, who would be thought to have the best cause, so wrought, that the
Viceroy was blamed for bearing too-much with Desmond, and commanded to seyze
his person, which he did, when he least thought of it, and together with
himself, he took Ioh. Desmond, his Uncle by the Fathers side, near to
Kilmalec, and so, he sent them both into England, where, they had a strong
Guard set about them.

THE ELEVENTH YEAR OF Her Reign. Book 1. 1568.
Anno Dom. 1568.
WHen Tho. Harding, N. Sanders, and T. P. The Papists absolve many.
Divines, and Fugitives out of England, boldly exercised the Episcopal
Authority they had lately received from the Pope: IN jurisdiction of
conscience, to absolve all those English that would return into the bosom of
the Roman Church, to dispense in cases of irregularity, except in points
proceeding from voluntary manslaughter, or grown to a contentious
jurisdiction, and of irregularitie, by reason of Heresy, so the absolved
abstain for three years, from ministering at the Altar:

On the other side, it happened, that Colman, Button, Hallingham, Benson, and
some others, who with ardent zeal professed the more pure Religion, The
Jnnouators show themselves.
reprehended whatsoever was performed without authority out of the holy
Scriptures, and, whether transported with a desire of purer doctrine, of
nouelty, or of dissentions, but, in the open view of all men, they questioned
the Discipline of the English Church, authorized and received the Liturgy, and
vocation of Bishops, expressly condemning them, as senting too strongly of the
Roman Church, with which to hold any thing in common, they daily preached to
be a singular impiety, using all means and endeavor that matters in the
English Church might be reformed, according to the form of Geneua. And,
although the Queen commanded them to be clapped up in prisons, yet they had an
incredible number of Followers, who were presently branded with that odious
style of Puritans: Puritans.
And in all places they increased, out of a wilful obstinacy, the imprudence
of the Bishops, and the secret favors of some of the Nobility, who barked at,
and maligned the riches of the Church.

Second civil war in France.
And, when some French likewise labored after reformation of Religion, and
fearing lest the Papists would enter into league against them, they repaired to
the King with arms in hand, by reason of the just fear they stood in, and in
this manner presented unto him a Supplication. A second civil war happened;
for cessation whereof, the Queen commanded her Ambassador Norris, to
solicit the King; and so, hereupon, a Peace was agreed upon, but,
questionless hollow, and full of deceit, and stratagem. At the same time, the
Queen, mother to the King of France, showing great affability and grace, both
to the Ambassador himself, and diverse of the English, covertly she used some
speech, as pretending to treat of other affairs, that she was desirous to
marry Henry, Duke of Anjou, her Son, to Queen ELIZABETH, who was hardly
seventeen years old, to divert her, as diverse supposed, from assisting the
Protestants of France, in the third Ciuill-Warre, which she plotted presently
to be set on foot. The Duke of Aniou, commended to Queen Elizabeth.

for an Husband.

The English Ambassador disgracefully used in Spain.




But then in Spain, Man, the English Ambassador, was disgracefully entreated:
For, it being imputed to him, that he had spoken irreverently of the Pope, he
was prohibited the Court, afterward banished from Madril, to a little Village
among boorish and rusticall people; he is forced to hear Mass, and the
exercise of his own Religion forbidden him. Wherein, I am not able to say
whether the Spaniards showed greater hatred to Queen ELIZABETH, or to
Religion, considering that at the same time, she used all manner of humanity to
Guzman, the Spanish Ambassador in England, permitting him the exercise of his
religion: Her Majesty was wonderfully moved with this Insult, esteeming it
offered to her own person, in that they used her Ambassador so, as likewise
for the injury which was done at the same instant to one John Hawkins. Hawkins
ill entreated by the Spaniards in America.
This man went to traffic at the Port of S. John de Vlua, within the Mexican
Gulf, having five Ships laden with merchandise, and some Negro slaves, of whom
the English then made ordinary sale, having learned it of the Spaniards: but I
know not with what honor they might so do. The day after his arrival, came
in also the King of Spaine's Fleet, which (because he would not violate the
Peace) he suffered peaceably to enter into the Port, though he might have
hindered it, obtaining first a firm promise of security for himself and his
people, upon certain prouisoes and conditions. The Spaniards thus entered,
scorning to have conditions imposed upon them in their own Proprieties,
observed a fit time, and falling upon the English, slew many of them, seized on
three of their Ships, and made pillage of the goods; a victory notwithstanding
that cost themselves much blood. This treacherous Action, caused the Soldiers
and Seamen of England to murmur, urging them to call out for war against the
Spaniard, and daily exclaiming, how they were breakers of Peace and Accord,
because it was agreed upon between the Emperor Charles the fifth, and HENRY
the Eighth, that commerce should be free between their Subjects, in all and
each of their Kingdoms and Dominions, as also in the Islands, not excepting so
much as America, which then appertayned to Charles.

The Queen of Scots escapes out of prison.
About the same time, the second day of May, the prisoner Queen at Lake-Leuin,
made an escape out of prison, and retired to Hamilton Castle, by means of
George Dowglasse, to whose Brother she was committed in guard; where, upon the
testimonies of R. Meluin and others, and with an unanimous consent of all the
Nobles, who flockt thither in great numbers, Sentence definitive was uttered,
That the Grant or Resignation, extorted by mere fear from the prisoner
Queen, was void from the beginning: and the Queen her self being present,
took a solemn Oath, that it was extorted and forced from her. By means
whereof, in two days such multitudes of men repaired to her out of all parts,
as she raised an Army of six thousand brave Soldiers, who notwithstanding,
when they came to join battle with Murray, She is vanquished.
and fighting rather hare-braindly, then with wit or discretion, they were
soon discomfited. This timorous Lady, being daunted with that hard success,
betook her self to flight, and rode the same day threescore miles; when
coming by night to Maxwel's house, Baron of Heris, she had rather expose
herself to the mercy of the Sea, and rely upon Queen ELIZABETH'S Protection,
than upon the fidelity of her Subjects: But yet before her embarking, she sent
unto her, John Beton, with a Diamond that Queen ELIZABETH had formerly given
her for a gage of their mutual love and amity, to the end to advertise her,
that she meant to come into England, and demand succor of her, if her own
Subjects any longer pursued her by course of War. Queen ELIZABETH promised
her all the kindness and love of a Royal Sister: but she not staying the
return of the Messenger, committed her self to a small Vessel, against the
advice and counsel of her friends, and so the seventeenth of May, with the
Barons, Heris and Flemming, and some few others, came to Werrington in
Cumberland, near to the mouth of the River Derwenton: and the same day she
wrote to Queen ELIZABETH a Letter in French, the principal heads whereof, I
think good to set down, even as I extracted them out of the original Copy
it self, which comprehend a Relation of that which passed against her in
Scotland, more at large then what before I have delivered.

MY most dear Sister, you very well understand, She writes to Qu. Elizab.
how some of my Subjects, whom I have raised to sovereign degrees of honor,
have conspired to suppress and imprison both me and my Husband: as also, that
when by force of Arms I had expelled them out of my Kingdom, I received them
again into grace, at your entreatie; notwithstanding all this, they violently
entered into my Chamber, and though I was great with Child, cruelly slew mine
own servant in my presence, and shut up my self under guard and close
keeping. When I pardoned them of this crime, then presently they perpetrate
another, the which, though it were plotted by them, and had obliged themselves
to the execution thereof, by sealed writings, subscribed with their own hands,
yet they imputed it to me, and were ready with armed power to seize upon me.
But being confident in mine own innocence, for the sparing of blood, I was
content to yield my self unto them: Forthwith they committed me to prison,
being deprived of all my servants, except two wayting-Maides, a Cook, and a
Phisician; enforcing me, by menacings and terrors of death, to resign over the
government of the Kingdom, refusing to hear either me or my Attourneys, in a
Conuention of the Estates, summoned by their own authority only, stripped off
all my goods, and denied the means to speak with any. After this, by Gods
direction, I used a course to escape this imprisonment, and being assisted
with the whole Flower of the Nobility, who cheerfully made recourse unto me
out of all parts, I put mine enemies in mind of their duty, and of the
fidelity they had sworn unto me, offered them pardon, took order that each
party might be heard in the Conuention of the Estates, to the end the
Commonwealth might no longer be rackt and tormented with intestine
mischiefs; and for this effect, I sent toward them two Messengers: But they
imprisoned both of them, proclaimed them Traitors that assisted me, and
ordained that they should presently forsake me. I entreated them under public
warrant and safety, to negotiate with the Baron of Boyd, for the according of
these differences: but in this motion they also refused me. Nevertheless, I
conceived some hope, that they might be brought under obedience by your
procurements: but when I saw that I must either dye, or undergo another
imprisonment, I thought to go to Dunbritton, and was onward in my way: They
opposed and waylaid me, beat and overthrew my people, my self being
constrained to fly. Then I retired to the Baron of Heris, and with him
repaired into your Kingdom, relying on your Princely and Royal affection,
that you will aid me in my need, and by your example inuit others thereunto.
Wherefore, I request you in all kind affection, that being so deeply plunged
in many distresses, as at this instant I am, you will cause me to be conducted
out of hand to your presence, and if you be pleased to commiserate my case, I
will at large inform you of all. God grant you a long and happy life, and me
the patience to attend that comfort I hope for from Him, by your gracious
means, and daily Prayer for, with all my heart. Queen ELIZABETH returning her
great comfort in Letters, and by the mouth of Francis Knowles, and others,
promised her assistance, according to the equity of her cause: but
nevertheless she refused her access, because she was commonly taxed with
many gross crimes, and commanded she should be conuayed to Carlisle, where she
might remain in greatest security, if her Adversaries attempted any thing
against her, by Louder, Lieutenant Governor of the place, and the Gentlemen of
the Country. Having received this answer and refusal, she once again made
her request by Letters, and by the mouth of Maxwell, Baron of Heris, to this
effect: THat she would admit her in her own presence, She writes again.
to report the injuries and indignities had been offered her, and to answer
those crimes laid to her charge: Intimating to her Majesty, how it was just
that Qu. ELIZABETH, who was so near unto her in blood, should give care to her
in her banishment, and to re-establish her in her Kingdom, against those, who
having been expelled for their offenses committed against her, by Queen
ELIZABETH'S intercession they were again restored, and to her own final
ruin, if the storm were not out of hand prevented. Wherefore she requested
her, that either she might be admitted to speak personally to her, and to
grant her some aid, or else to permit and be pleased that she might presently
depart out of England, to seek for succor some where else, and that she might
not be detained any longer time in the Castle of Carlisle, in that she came
voluntarily into England, upon the confidence she had in the love and
affection which had so many times been honorably promised her, by Messengers,
Letters, and Remembrances.

Queen Elizabeth pitties her.
These Letters, and Heris words, seemed (for who can diue into the secret
thoughts of Princes? and wise men lay them up in their hearts) to move Queen
ELIZABETH to compassion of a Princess, her near Kinswoman, and so deeply
distressed, who having been surprised by her own Subjects with force, and
Arms, committed to prison, brought to extreme danger of her life, condemned,
and deprived of her Kingdom, without being heard, (although no Judgment can
pass upon a private man without former hearing) she was retired into England
unto her, with infallible hopes of finding aid and succor. And the free offer
which this unfortunate Queen made, to plead her own cause in her presence;
the charge she took upon her, to convince her Adversaries of the same
malefacts whereof they accused her, (though most innocent) were to her hopeful
and encouraging motives thereunto.

The privy Counsel consult of it.
What pity and commiseration soever Queen ELIZABETH had of her, the Council of
England deliberated gravely and advisedly, what in this case was to be done.
They feared, that if she remained any longer in England, having a perswasiue
and moving tongue, she might draw many to her party, who favored the Title
which she pretended to the Crown of England, who might peradventure inflame
her ambition, and attempt all means to maintain her claim. That foreign
Ambassadors would be present at her Consultations, and the Scots would not in
this case forsake her, seeing so rich a booty to offer it self. Besides, they
considered, that the fidelity of her Guard might be doubtful; and, if she
chanced to dye in England, though it were of some infirmity or sickness, many
slanders might be raised, and so the QVEENE should be daily encumbred with new
cares. If she were sent into France, the Guizes, her Cousins, would again set
on foot the Title whereby she laid claim to the Crown of England. That, what
opinion soever was conceived of her, she might prevail greatly in England,
with some, for pretext of Religion, with others, for the probability of her
right, as before I told you, and with the most part of men, out of their
precipitate affection of Novelties. That the Amity between England and
Scotland, so behoofefull and beneficial, would be broken, and the ancient
Alliance between Scotland and France renewed, which would then be more
dangerous then heretofore, because the Burgundians, who had no infallible
friends but the Scots, should be linckt to the English by a firm Alliance. If
she were sent back into Scotland, those that took with the English party,
should thereupon be banished, and that of France raised to the public
administration of government of Affairs, the young Prince exposed to danger,
Religion changed, the French, and other strangers still retained in Scotland,
Ireland would be more grievously molested by the Scots of Hebrides, and her
self exposed to the peril of life within her own Kingdom. Wherefore the
greater part joined in opinion, that she was to be retained in England, The
Council resolves she should be retained in England.
as being taken by the Law of Arms, and not to be releast, till she had
given over her present claim to the Crown of England, which she took upon
her, and answered for the death of the Lord Darley her husband, who was a
natural Subject of England. For the Countess of Lenox, mother to the Lord
Darley, The Countess of Lenox complains of her.
blubbered all over with tears, had, not long before, preferred a Petition
about her and her husband, to the Queen of England, with supplication that she
might be brought to Judgment for the murder of her Son. But the Queen
graciously comforting her, admonisht her, that she would not accuse so great a
Princess, who was her very near Kinswoman, of a crime which could not be
proved by any evident testimonies: intimating unto her, how the times were bad
and wicked, and hatred blind, imputing offenses oftentimes to the Innocent.

The Baron of Heris interceds for her.
On the contrary, the Baron of Heris was a suitor to Qu. ELIZABETH, that she
would suddenly believe nothing to the prejudice of truth, and that Earl Murray
might not hurrie up Assemblies of Parliament in Scotland, to the injury and
wrong of the Queen, who was expelled, and the absolute ruin of her good
Subjects. But though the Queen of England much pressed this point, Earl
Murray, the Viceroy, summoned them still in the Kings name, banished some that
remained yet behind of her partiality, and vented the malice he bare to them,
upon their demeanes and houses. The Queen of England being herewith mightily
incensed, certified him in express terms by Mildemay, that she could not
endure, for a most pernicious President to Kings, that the Royal Authority of
sacred Majesty, should be esteemed vile and abject amongst the Subjects, and
trampled underfoot at the will and pleasure of men turbulent and factious.
That howsoever they forgot the duty and fidelity which Subjects owe to their
Prince, yet for her part, she could not be unmindful of that pity and
Commiseration, which obliged her to a Sister, Earl Murray is commanded to
yield a reason of the Queens deposition.
and a neighbor Qu. Wherefore she wished him either to come in person, or to
substitute understanding men, to answer those complaints which the Queen of
Scots would exhibit against him and his Confederates, and to yield some just
cause and reason of his deposing her. If not, that herself would presently set
her at liberty, and employ all her forces for her re-establishment. And so
likewise she admonished him, not to sell her precious habits and ornaments,
though the States of the Kingdom had permitted him.

Earl Murray obeyed: there being no other way, to call in question his
administration and government, but those that came out of England, and the
great Men of the Kingdom refusing any manner of deputation. Wherefore, he came
himself in person to the City of York, a place appointed for this proceeding,
with seven of his most inward friends, being Deputies for the Infant-King; that
is to say, the Earl of Morton, the Bishop of Orcades, Deputies for the King of
Scots:
the Governor of Dunfermlin, the Baron of Lindsay, 10. Macgill, and Henry
Barneuay, accompanied with the Earl of Lidington, whom Murray drew thither
with fair promises, in that he durst not leave him behind in the Kingdom,
and George Buchanan, who was wholly at his devotion and beck. And the very
same day came thither the Duke of Norfolk, and the Earl of Sussex, who not
long before was constituted President of the North, and Sir Ralph Sadler, a
Knight, and one of the Priuy-Councell, who were nominated, to hear, and
examine the cause, why the Queen of Scots was deposed. The Bishop of Rosse,
For the Qu. of Scots.
the Barons of Leuingstone, and of Boyd, the Governor of Kenivinin, John
Gordon, and John Corburne, appeared there for the Queen of Scots, who was
wonderfully wroth, that the Queen of England would neither see nor hear her,
having commanded that her own Subjects should stand up against her before the
Commissaries, in that being an absolute Princess, she stood not bound, except
she listed, to make answer to her Subjects accusations, and objections.

Being assembled on the seventh of October, and read the Commissions, both of
the one side, and the other, Lidington, who was there present, turning toward
the Scots, admonished them, with a marvelous free and plain discourse: That
seeing it seemed, Lidingtons declaration to the Scots.
the Queen of England pretended no other thing by the authority she had
conferred upon the Commissaries, but to stain the honor, and impair the
reputation of the Queen, the Kings Mother, and to interpose herein her own
censure, as an honorable Arbitratrix: but that they should weigh and well
consider, what a peril they exposed themselves unto, and how they were like to
purchase not only the hatred of the Scots, who continued devoted and affected
to the Queen, but further the ill will of other Christian Princes, and of such
affinity as she had in France, in criminally accusing and hazarding her
reputation, in such a public and iuridicall Trial before the English, sworn
enemies to the Scottish name; and what account could they give to the King of
such a presumptuous and insolent accusation, which could not but redound to the
prejudice of Scotland, when, being of riper years, he shall repute both
himself, his Mother, and country hereby dishonored? And therefore he
thought it very fitting, to let fall this odious accusation of so great a
Princess, except the Queen of England had contracted with them a mutual
League, offensive, and defensive, against those that should in case molest or
trouble them. And thus much (said he) out of his loyalty and duty, a
Scottish Secretary has advertised you of. Hereupon, looking upon one another,
they remained not uttering one word.

The protestation of the Queen of Scots Deputies.
The Queen of Scots Deputies, who had the honor to speak first, before the
taking of their Oath, protested, That though the Queen of Scots thought good,
to have the cause between her Majesty and her disloyal Subjects, handled
before the English, yet nevertheless they conceived not themselves herein to
be under the command of any but their own Princess, seeing She was free and
absolute, and ought neither faith nor homage to any other. The English, in like
manner, protested, How they accepted not of this protestation, to the prejudice
of any right or prerogative, which the Kings of England have heretofore
challenged, as Sovereign Lords of the Kingdom of Scotland.

The next day, the Queen of Scots Deputies put in their Declaration in
writing: A declaration for the Queen.
HOw the Earls of Morton, Mar, and Glencarne, the Barons of Hume, Lindsay,
Reuthen, and Sempil, and others, had raised an Army in the Kings name, against
the Queen her self, taken her, used her disgracefully, and clapped her up in
prison, at Lake-Leuin: They broke open the Mint, carried away all sorts of
Coin, Gold, and Silver, Money or no Money, crowned the King her Son, who was
yet but an Infant: and the Earl of Murray, under the title of Viceroy or
Regent, usurped his power and authority, and seyzed on all the wealth,
munition, and revenues of the Kingdom. Afterward, they alleged, that the
Queen being escaped out of Prison, after she had been there restrained for
the space of ten days, denounced publicly upon her oath, That whatsoever
she had yielded unto during her imprisonment, was extorted from her against
her will, by force, threats, and terror of death. Notwithstanding, to provide
for common tranquillity, she had given authority to the Earls of Argathel,
Eglenton, Cassil, and Rothsay, to accord all differences with her Adversaries,
who, for all this, forbear not with a strong and armed hand to seyze on her
person, as she retired by privy ways toward Dunbritton: they slew the most
of her loyal Subjects, and, for those remaining, some they carried away
prisoners, others they banished, and all this for nothing, but only in that
they had faithfully served their Princess: And that for these inhumane
outrages, she was constrained to repair into England, to implore of Queen
ELIZABETH that aid and succor, which she had oftentimes promised her, that so
she might be restored to her Country and former dignity.

A few days after, Earl Murray, Viceroy, and the Deputies for the
Infant-King, (for so they were nominated) put in their Answer: which was; The
anwer of the Kings Deputies.
THat Lord Darley, the Kings Father, being slain, Earl Bothwell, who was
reputed the author of this Murder, had so bewitched the Queens heart, as he
carried her away by force, removed her to Dunbar, and, after a separation from
his own Wife, married her. That the Nobles of the Kingdom, being moved
herewith, they thought they could not discharge a better office, than to punish
Bothwell, the author of this assassinate: for, all over the Country, it was
imputed to a general conspiracy among the principal of the Nobility, to
restore the Queen to her former liberty, to dissolve this unjust marriage,
and to provide for the young Kings safety, and the quiet and tranquillity of
the Kingdom. When the matter was so exasperated, as they were ready to come
to hand-blowes, the Queen caused Bothwell to retire out of the Realm; against
the Nobility she thundered out such threats, and threatened such revenge, as
they were enforced to commit her to a guard, while they could find out, and
execute Bothwell. But she, weary of reigning with so infinite many
disturbances, had willingly resigned, and transferred over the Kingdom to her
Son, constituting the Earl of Murray for Viceroy. That hereupon, her Son
was solemnly consecrated and crowned King, all confirmed and ratified in
Parliament, by the States of the Kingdom. That, by reason of Justice, which
was equally ministered, the Scottish Commonwealth had recovered some vigor,
and strength, while some particulars, who could not endure the public repose,
had, contrary to their oath, cautelously released the Queen out of safe
custody, and taken up Arms, violating herein the fidelity they owe to their
King, and though (thanks be to GOD) they obtained victory over them, yet
notwithstanding, with an hostile and disloyal heart, they presumptuously
enterprized against their Country and Prince: and therefore, the Royal
Authority must needs conformably have been suppressed by such tumultuous and
mutinous Subjects.

After a reiteration of the former protest, the Queen of Scots Deputies
replied in these words: THat what Earl Murray and his Accomplices alleged, The
Queens Reply.
for having taken up Arms against the Queen, in that Bothwell, whom they
accused of killing the KING, was in great grace and authority about her, could
not justly brand them with the mark of disloyal Subjects, seeing there was no
evident proof of his murdering the King; but contrariwise, by sentence of the
Peers, he was cleared thereof, and this absolution confirmed by Act of
Parliament, with their very approbation and consent, who at this time accuse
him, and that then persuaded the Queen to take him for her Husband, as being
more sufficient than all others, to sway and govern the Kingdom: they obliged
unto him their fidelity in Writing, and not so much as in words, disallowed of
this marriage, while they had drawn to their party the Captain or Governor
of the Castle, and the Mayor of Edenborrough. For, then in the night, which was
a very unfit season, in hostile manner they assailed the Castle of Bothwick,
where the Queen was, and she, retyring her self, by the favor of the night,
they presently raising an Army, under pretext of her defense, went themselves
into the field, way-layde her, as she went to Edenborrough, and aduertized
her, by Grange, whom they sent to her, that she should shake off Bothwell,
while he had appeared in judgment, and cleared himself: all which she
willingly did, to avoid effusion of blood. But Grange, underhand, admonished
Bothwell to withdraw himself, promising him with oath, that no body should
pursue him; so as he made away with their own consent, and (being minded)
they might easily have taken him afterward. But, when they had once gotten the
Queen into their hands, for the mannaging of their ambitious designs, they
made no great reckoning of him: and it is no great wonder, when they being the
Queens Subjects, and having vowed fidelity to her, she bitterly rebuked them,
having so basely and unworthily entreated her Royal Majesty. She freely
referred the matter to the whole Estates of the Kingdom, and made a
declaration thereof unto them, by Lidington her Secretary. But, they would not
so much as give any ear unto it, but conveyed her away secretly by night, and
emprisoned her at Lake-Leuin. In saying, that wearied with her Reign, she
resigned and gave over the Kingdom, is a most palpable invention, because she
is neither too-much broken with years, nor of such a feeble and weak
constitution, but equally vigorous both in body and mind, to manage weighty
and great affairs: but most certain it is, that the Earls of Athol,
Tubardine, and Lidington, who were also of her Council, aduized her to seal
the drafts of Resignation, to avoid death, wherewith she was daily threatened:
and this was not done with any prejudice either to her self, or her Heirs,
because she was then a prisoner, and imprisonment is a just fear; for,
according to the opinion of Ciuilians, a promise made by a prisoner, is of no
worth. Hereunto also she was persuaded by Throgmorton, who presented unto her a
draft written with his own hand; whom she entreated to inform the Queen of
England, that she did it constrained, and contrary to her will. That when
Lindsay presented to her the Patents, for her to subscribe unto, he terrified
her with fear and horror of death, and so by this means, enforced her to
seal with weeping eyes, not having so much as read the Contents. That the Lord
of the Castle of Lake-Leuin, understanding, and seeing apparently, that she
had subscribed and sealed against her will, he would not set to his hand, as
also this Resignation was most unjust, because she had nothing hereby assigned
her for her own behoof and entertainment, neither grant of liberty, nor
assurance of life. That whosoever will but equally balance things, he cannot
but judge this, to be a weak infringement of Royal Authority; because, when
the Queen was at liberty, in the presence of many Nobles of the Kingdom,
she declared how she had done it out of mere constraint. And what they boast
to have effected by Act of Parliament, can no ways prejudice her Royal
prerogative, because in this tumultuarie Parliament, there were present but
four Earls, one Bishop, two Abbots, and six Barons, though above an hundred,
between Earls, Bishops, and Barons, have a voice in the Parliament of
Scotland: and yet of so small a number, some protested, that what was done,
should not redound to the prejudice of the Queen or her Successors, because
she was a prisoner. That the Ambassadors of France and England, could never
be certified from her, though they had many times instantly urged it, whether
she voluntarily resigned over the Kingdom or no. And so far the
Commonwealth has been from being justly governed, under the usurping
Viceroy; that on the contrary, all manner of impieties never bare a greater
sway: for he has been seen to demolish sacred buildings, to ruin
illustrious Families, and to afflict and grind the faces of the miserable
poor. And therefore, they humbly entreated the Queens Majesty of England, to
be assisting with her best favor, counsel, and aid, to the Queen her near
Kinsewoman, so lamentably oppressed. Thus far I copied out of the proper
Writings of the Commissioners.

These matters thus heard, the Commissioners enioyning Murray to produce and
prove with more solid reasons, the occasion of so strange a rigor used to an
absolute Queen, because all formerly alleged, had no pregnant testimonies,
but only ambiguous and improbable Letters: and Lidington having privily made
known, that he himself had often counterfaited the Qu. Murray refuses to yield
an account of the Queens deposition.
hand: Murray would no further prosecute before strangers, the accusation he
had framed against his Sister, except the Queen of England promised of her
part, to take upon her the Protection of the Infant King, and wholly abandon
the Queen of Scots. But the Deputies, by virtue of their Delegation, having no
authority to promise any such matter, two on both parts were sent up to
London; to whom Queen ELIZABETH made known, that she could not yet discharge
the Subjects of Scotland of the offense they had committed against their
Princess, but notwithstanding, that she would request her in their behalf,
and also hear them, if they could allege any thing for their just excuse.
Earl Murray, who presently followed them, absolutely refused to insist by
Accusation against his Sister, Authority of the Commissioners reuokt.
but upon the conditions he had mentioned at York. The Commissioners were
presently called home, and their authority disanulled; whereof, the Duke, who
always favored the Queen of Scots, was very glad, and thought he had nothing
more then to effect, but only to brand her with an eternal infamy, The Duke of
Norfolk glad.
to exclude her, with her young Son, from all right of succession to the
Crown of England, and that he had avoided two dangers: for, in giving
sentence against her, he feared to ruin her, and violate his own conscience;
and denouncing Judgment on her side, to undergo the unplacable wrath of his
own Queen, and of all those, who, for Religions sake, and any other
consideration, were opposite to the Queen of Scots.

But when Earl Murray saw, that the friends she retained in Scotland,
disturbed all affairs, and that his presence was requisite, he framed his
Accusation in the presence of the Queen, Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of
the great Seal, the Earl of Leicester, Clynton, Lord Admiral, Cecill, and
Sadler, who by new letters were constituted new Commissioners; New
Commissioners granted.
and to prove the Queen of Scots culpable of her Husbands murder, he produced
some probable and coniecturall Articles, the Depositions of some Witnesses, the
Acts digested in the Assemblies of the States, but above all, certain
Loue-Letters and verses, written (as he affirmed) with the Queens own hand:
as also he brought forth Buchanan's Book, entitled, [ The Discouery] to be
openly read: but the greater number of the Commissioners gave not much credit
thereunto, it proceeding from a partial man, and one that had made sale of his
fidelity. As for the Verses and Letters, because they had no names,
subscriptions, nor dates, and so many Impostors there be, who can counterfeit
others hands so naturally, as the one can hardly be discerned from the other,
Queen ELIZABETH would in no wise afford them belief or credit, though she
were much instigated out of feminine emulation, wherewith that Sex is many
times violently transported: remaining satisfied, that these Accusations had
imposed upon the Queen of Scots some reproachful Aspersions.

Her Deputies hearing that she was daily accused by Murray, presented
themselves to make answer; but she had now revoked their authority, which was
but Delegatorie, as she had been secretly informed by certain English
Ciuilians; and this she might do by Law, seeing that of the Duke and others
had been so formerly revoked. Afterward she peremptorily refused the new
Commissioners, The Queen of Scots, will not submit her cause to their hearing.
two of whom she suspected, except the Ambassadors of France and Spain were
joined in commission with them, that she might be admitted to defend her own
innocence openly in the presence of the Queen of England and them, except
Murray were restrained, and called to a Trial: auerring how she could convince
him, and prove that he was the author of the Lord Darleys murder. The Duke of
Norfolk, But upon certain conditions.
the Earls of Arundel, Sussex, Leicester, and Lincoln, esteeming this to be
but just and equal, Qu. ELIZABETH grew into wonderful choler, and told them
openly, that the Queen of Scots could never want an Advocate, till the Duke of
Norfolk came short of his life; and she was contented to impart those crimes,
whereof Murray imputed her, to every one of her privy Council, and to the
Earls of Northumberland, Westmerland, Shrewsbury, Worcester, Huntington, and
Warwick, whom she conuocated to this end, under an oath of silence exhibited,
not to damnifie either of the parties. And because Murray was called back into
Scotland, and 'twas commonly bruted abroad, The Proceedings dissolved.
that Boyd attempted to release the Queen of Scots of her imprisonment, this
Proceeding was deferred to some other time, Queen ELIZABETH, so far as
seemed probable, sharply reprehending the insolency of the Scottish-men, in
deposing their Queen.

At that time, Hamilton, Duke of Chastelraut, Debate about the Government of
Scotland.
came out of France, sent underhand by the Guizes, to oppose Murray in the
government and administrations of the Kingdom during the young King's minority,
and maintained before Queen ELIZABETH, that being nearest of blood to the
King, he should be preferred before Murray, who was but a Bastard.
Contrariwise, Murray, and the Kings Ambassadors alleged, that the government
of the Kingdom was not to be assigned always to those nearest of blood, but
to such, who by a general consent of the States, were elected and chosen, as
most sufficient and capable of that Charge. That it were a most unjust course,
to put the King, who was young, into his hands, who by proximity of blood
aspiring to the Kingdom, might easily be tempted to violate right, out of a
desire to rule and reign* And how this was greatly to be feared, especially of
the Hamiltons, who had practiced many enmities against the Earls of Lenox, the
Kings Grandfathers, wickedly slain his great Grandfather by the Fathers side,
expelled Matthew, his Grandfather out of Scotland, after he had reduced him to
low poverty; and also of himself, who made this motion, who with bitter and
implacable hatred, wonderfully molested Henry, the Kings Father, and, the more
easily to enjoy the Kingdom, he married his Majesty's Mother with the King of
France. The which when Queen ELIZABETH understood, she made known to
Hamilton, how his demand was most unjust, and forbade him to depart out of
England, till Earl Murray were returned into Scotland.

Murray, a little before his departure, was so subtle, as that secretly by his
man Meluin, he offered the Duke of Norfolk to marry with the Queen of Scots,
and her he promised to re-establish in her Kingdom, as presently we will
declare. Notwithstanding, to conceal it from Queen ELIZABETH, he caused a
rumor to be spread, that she had made over her claim of the Kingdom of
England, to the Duke of Aniou, Murray offers to marry the Duke of Norfolk to
the Qu. of Scots.

He disperseth rumors against her.


and how this alienation was confirmed at Rome: he showed certain Letters she
had written to those of her party, wherein she blamed Queen ELIZABETH for
failing of her promise, and vaunted, that she expected succors otherwise then
from her. Whether these reports were true or fained, I am not able to say: But
certainly, Queen ELIZABETH was much moved herewith, who could not imagine
from whom she should attend these new reliefes, because civil war was so
hotly kindled in France, as the Bishop of Rhemes, sent by the King, entreated
her that she would not have any hand in those affairs, and the Duke of Alua,
who was come the year before into the Low Countries to supplant the Protestant
Religion, staid still there, by reason of the troubles.

But as afterward it proou'd apparent, and as H. Catene writ to Cardinal
Alexandrine, Pope Pius 5. not daring to send an open Nuncio, had suborned R.
Ridolpho, a Florentine, who had lain a long time Factor in London, underhand to
stir up the Papists against Queen ELIZABETH, as questionless he very
industriously performed, and with great secrecy. A slender, but marvelous
weak suspicion was raised of some privy conferences were held at York,
between the Earl of Lidington, The Duke of Norfolk suspected.
the Bishop of Rosse, and the Duke of Norfolk, who being solicited to employ
his advice and care for the safety of the afflicted Queen, by the Earl and the
Bishop, who promised to marry him to her; with a modest answer he made
refusal thereof, promising nevertheless, that he would not forsake her in
her adversities, so far as might safely stand with his honor, and the duty
and fidelity he ought to his Prince. This suspicion was greatly augmented by
means of Ligan, one of the Dukes servants, being a great Papist, by reason of
the daily goings and commings he made to Bolton Castle, which belonged to my
Lord Scroope, where the Queen of Scots was kept by Francis Knowles, under
color to visit and salute his wife, who was the Dukes Sister. And though
nothing was yet certainly known, nevertheless the Queen was removed from
Bolton, where a number of Papists dwelt near together on all sides, to be
conducted to Tudberry, situated in the heart of the Kingdom, and was committed
to the keeping of the Earl of Shrewsburie.

Queen ELIZABETH was then the more careful, both of her own, and of the
safety of Religion and the Commonwealth, because the Guizes in France, and the
Duke of Alua in the Low Countries, had begun to put in execution those
Dessignes they proiected formerly at Bayon, touching the utter extirpation of
the Protestants Religion. For the Propositions of Peace, set down in France
about the beginning of this year, came to nothing: For Edicts were published,
whereby the exercise of the Protestant Religion was absolutely prohibited; they
that made profession thereof, deprived of their public places; the Ministers
commanded to depart the Realm within a prefixed time; they were threatened with
war all over, run upon in every place, and cruelties practiced against
them: The third Ciuill-war in France.
though Queen ELIZABETH used many and importunate entreaties by her
Ambassador Seris, to bring them to a firm and solid Peace, persuading the
King not to excite men's stomachs by unseasonable courses, and that he should
take heed of them, who by removing from about him his faithful Subjects,
labored so to break and dis-vnite the Forces of France, that it might be
exposed as a prey to other Nations. When he made no account of her Entreaties
or Remonstrances, and forbear not to draw out of Italy, Germany, and Spain,
both money and men; to re-enforce Queen ELIZABETH also, not to abandon them
who joined with her in one and the same cause, she sent an hundred thousand
Crowns, in pieces of gold, called Angels, with great warlike preparations, to
the Protestants, who then professed religiously, that they took not up Arms
to make war upon the King, but only to defend themselves; and she with all
humanity entertained the French that made their refuge into England, as also
the Flemmings, who seeing that the Duke of Alua breathed nothing but blood and
slaughter, were in great multitudes retired thither, as to an Asyle, and
planted by permission, both at Norwich, Gloucester, Sandwich, Maidstone, and
Southhampton, to the singular benefit (certainly) of England: For they were
the first that brought in the Art and knowledge of making those light Stuffes
which are called Bays and Says, Who did good to England.
with other such like of linen and woolen.

But because I must often commemorate the wars of Flanders, as linkt and
combined with the interest and affairs of England, I shall not digress much
from my purpose, if I here relate how they took their beginning.

The beginning of the Wars in the Low countries.
When the Spaniard would by no prayers nor entreaties mitigate his bloody Edicts
against Religion, and those who made profession thereof in the Low Countries,
but in stead thereof exercised all manner of cruelty against men's consciences,
by the means of the Spanish Inquisition, prohibited all the Assemblies of the
States Provincial of the Low Countries, which is the only and most usual
remedy for the appeasing and according of their differences: but governed the
Commonwealth by Acts digested in Spain, and not by the Councels of the people
of the same Countries; it so happened, that a few of the very scumme of the
Vulgar sort, took certain Images in every place out of the Churches, and
tumultuously brake them in pieces, and though this Tumult was as soon appeased
as excited, yet following their counsel who desired to impose a yoke on this
Nation strongly bent to liberty, and taking occasion from the temerity of some
few particulars, he entoyled all the people with a public Delict of manifest
Rebellion; and as if they had then lost all their liberty; to invade the
Government, he sent Ferdinando Aluarez, Duke of Alua, The Duke of Alua.
a cruel and bloody man, who being constituted supreme Governor, contrary to
the ancient customs and immunities of the Country, though he was in no sort
a Prince of Blood, raised a long and fearful War, abridging the Authority
of former Jurisdictions, erecting new Tribunals, condemning the Nobility of the
Country, by the ministry and prosecution of such as were not their Judges,
putting them to death, placing Spanish Garrisons in the Borroughs and Towns,
building Citadels, and for each alienation and commotion, drawing by force out
of their purses, the tenth part of their immouables, and the twentieth part of
their mouable goods.

At the very selfsame time it happened, Moneys sent into the Low Countries
detained in England.
that certain Merchants of Genoa and other parts of Italy, sent out of Spain
into Flanders, a quantity of coin, to have it put out to use, in a great Ship
of Biscay, and four less, which the Spaniards term Zabres, which being
chased by Chasteler, a Frenchman, and defended by Winter, an Englishman, had
much ado to save themselves, in the Ports of Plymouth, Fawmouth, and
Southhampton in England. So soon as the Queen was advertised of it, she
commanded all the Magistrates of those Ports, to use the Spaniards very kindly,
and to defend their Shipping from the French: and G.D'espes, Knight of the
Order of Calatraua, Ambassador Leager of the King of Spain in England,
fearing the French, obtained of the Queen, who thought verily that this money
had belonged to the Spaniard, that new Mandates might be sent down, for the
defense of these ships against the French, who lay in wait for them: and
afterward he used the means to have this money brought into England, and
from thence to Antwerpe by Sea. But in the mean while the French had almost
taken away one of the Ships, which had bin performed, but that they were
repelled by the English: And therefore it was thought expedient to land it, for
better security, which was done out of hand. But notwithstanding it was not all
brought on shore: for D' Espes supposing the Queens intention to be other then
is was, gave the D. of Alua to understand, how she had seized upon it. While he
was in Consultation with him, Odet de Chastillon Cardinal; who was retired
into those parts by reason of the troubles in France, certified the Queen,
that this money belonged to certain Merchants of Gen^a, and not to the
Spaniard, and that he would seize on it against their wills, to employ it to
the ruin of the Protestants. And this was the reason the Council made a
question whether they should detain it or no; and the greatest of them that
sat in Council were of opinion, that it should be sent into the
Low Countries, for fear of provoking the Spaniard, who was a great Prince, and
stood already but hardly affected to England. But Queen ELIZABETH, being
assured by two of them to whom it belonged, that the Merchants were only
interessed in it, the King of Spain nothing at all, she resolved to take it up
of the Merchants by way of loan, and give them caution for it, as Princes many
times use to do with such goods as they find in their Ports, and the Spaniard,
not long before, had done the like. And when the Spanish Ambassador showed her
the Letters the Duke writ unto her, for the transportation of this money, she
told him, she had taken it by loan, and religiously protested to restore it
again, The English men's goods detained and seized upon in the Low Countries.
so soon as she should truly understand that it belonged to the King of
Spain. The very same day, which was the twenty ninth of December, the Duke,
in hot rage and fury, seized on the English-mens goods, all the Low Countries
over, where he found any, and taking their persons prisoners, committed them to
the guard of his Soldiers. So that every one may conceive, by comparing the
times, that he did this to terrify the English, what satisfaction soever the
Queen gave afterward for the money. But her Majesty, nothing at all daunted
with this, The like done to the Flemmings in England.
commanded likewise the Flemmings goods to be seyzed upon in England, their
merchandise and shipping, which was much more than those of the English, that
the Duke light upon in Flanders: so as he repented too late, that he had
unseasonably enlarged that wound, which in the beginning might easily have
been cured.

The last day but one of this present year, The death of Roger Askham.
(pardon me this short digression, for the memories sake of an honest and
virtuous man) who being borne in the County of York, and brought up at
Cambridge, was the first of our Nation that refined the Greek and Latin
Tongues, and the purity of the Style, with singular commendation for his
eloquence. He was sometimes a Reader to Queen ELIZABETH, and her Secretary
for the Latin Tongue. And yet notwithstanding, in that he was given to play,
and Cock-fighting, he both lived and dyed not very rich, leaving behind him
two elegant Books, as monuments of his rare wit and understanding, one of
which was styled, Toxophilus; the other, Scholarca. But let us return to our
History.

Book 1. 1569.
THE TWELFTH YEAR OF Her Reign. Anno Dom. 1569.
A Proclamation touching goods detained.
THe sixth of January, there was a Proclamation publicly read in London,
concerning goods detayned by the Duke of Alua, wherein most of the
circumstances I formerly mentioned were expressed, and the fault laid upon
D'espes; and another Writing diuulged by him to the contrary, in which he
alleged, Another declaration against the former Proclamation.
That this Proclamation came not out by the Queens Order, but from the
authority of some disaffected to the King of Spain, in the behalf of the
Flemmish Rebels: he highly commended the favor that the Queen had always
been ready to show to the Spaniards, grieved that she was alienated in her
affection for nothing, and much stomacked that no more credit was given to him
being Ambassador, and to the Duke of Aluae's Letters; as also, he wondered the
Money was detained, considering the Queen, (as he said) had more reason to
furnish the Spaniard with money against the Rebels, than to take any from him:
and finally, taxed her with offering the first wrong, excused both himself,
and the Duke of Alua's proceedings, and not resting there, he spread abroad
infamous Libels, wherein he offended the Queens reputation, under the title
of Amadis Oriana.

Some great men of England, Practices against Cecil.
among whom was the Marquis of Winchester, the Duke of Norfolk, and the Earls
of Arundell, Northumberland, Westmerland, Pembroke, Leycester, and others,
labored to lay the blame of this detention of the Money, upon Cecill, as
formerly they did that which was sent to the Protestants in France; and in
effect, they did so: for they could not digest the great power and authority he
had about the Queen: they suspected he favored the House of Suffolk for the
succession to the Crown, and feared he would oppose himself to their
designs. Wherefore, they consulted one with another to imprison him, at the
suggestion of Throgmorton, his emulator, who gave them to understand, that if
he were but once clapped up, he might easily be ruinated. But some one, whom I
cannot name, discovered this project to the Queen; and Cecill, by the favor
of this Princess, who bare a very great liking and affection to him, without
any difficulty, overcame those plots that were prepared for him, and at the
same instant, cut off another more secret intention they had, which was, to
proclaim the Queen of Scots, undoubted next Heir apparent to the Kingdom,
after Queen ELIZABETH'S death, against a certain Libell that was written, and
published, in the behalf and favor of the Earl of Suffolk.

D'Assonuil came at that time from the Duke of Alua, to demand the money which
was detained; The money detayned in England, is demanded.
but, having no Letters to that effect from the King of Spain, Queen
ELIZABETH referred him to her Council, to whom, at first he was not willing
to address himself. Wherefore he went presently to them: and when he was
heard, about a month after he returned, without doing any thing in the
business.

Free traffic established at Hamborrough for the English.
The English Merchants carry their Merchandises to Hamborrough in Germany, as
to a place lately ordained for free traffic. The Duke of Alua perceiving
this, prohibited absolutely all commerce with the English, and keeping all
things from being imported or transported out of the Low Countries, he
suborned certain Spies, amongst whom, Doctor Story taken.
one John Story, a Doctor of the Civil Law, was very subtly industrious,
who before, had practiced with Prinstal, an impostorous Magician, against the
life of his own Prince, and sent aduertisements to the Duke of Alua, for the
inuading of his own Country. But, being purposely brought into a Ship, which
was reported to have brought heretical commodities and books out of England,
the Mariners presently setting sail, he was thither conveyed, and afterward
executed, as shall be declared in proper place.

The Duke of Alua enraged against the English.
The Duke of Alua not satisfied with this, prohibited all shipping to go out of
Flanders, who were not armed, and he commanded them to seyze on the English,
wheresoever they met them: and gave directions that the like should be done in
Spain; where, the English Merchants and Saylors goods were confiscated,
themselves put into the Inquisition, and condemned to the Galleys. The Spaniard
also, by Letters written to the Count De Mont-Agond, Governor of Boetia,
forbade the transportation of Oil, Alum, Sucker, Aromatiques, and all other
such like things, into England, supposing, that if the English wanted these
things, they would readily rebel: and so upon this, he likewise treated with
the Duke of Norfolk, and the Earl of Ormond, by secret messengers, to the end
the latter might hold the Queen play in Ireland, and the former in England.
But they freely discovered his motions, out of the fidelity and loyalty they
bare to the Queen. When the inhabitants of the coasts of England heard of
these things, it is incredible to see with what joy they made our to Sea, and
how resolutely they put in execution their Letters of Mart against the
Spaniards: so that, to depresse them, Proclamations were feign to be published,
Men of war called in.
prohibiting the buying of any Merchandise of such as came by it by way of
reprizall.

As the English men were denied traffic in the Low Countries, Traffic of
Russia hindered.
so were they no less debarred the same in Russia, as well through the false
dealing of Factors, and bad intelligence that past between them, as out of the
envy of the Germans and Russians: the Russians complaining of fraudulent
commodities, and that the price of Merchandises was enhaunsed; and the
Germans, of their monopoly and society. To remedy these evils, Thomas
Randolph was sent thither the year before, who, (though with no liking to the
Emperor of Russia, because, whereas he should have treated of the amity he
desired to entertain with Queen ELIZABETH, whereof we spoke in the year
1567. he only employed himself carefully in the matter of traffic,)
nevertheless obtained so much by his solicitations, that the Emperor, for
the singular good will he bare to the Queen, and the English nation, granted
to the Company of English residing in Russia, immunities from customs, with
Commission to sell their commodities over all the Country where they would,
within the extent of his Empire, Liberties of the English in Russia.
which is ample and large, and to transport them into Persia and Media, by the
Caspian Sea, though Merchants of other Nations were permitted to go no further
than a mile beyond the City of Mosco: he allotted them houses to wind and
twist their Ship-tacklings, with Wood for their yron-workes: and he received
the English for OPPRISM^Y; that is to say, the elect seed, and choice of his
people.

Their traffic into Russia:
Wherefore, they began to travel more confidently over all those Countries, and
to transport their commodities to Vologda upon the Dwine, in Vessels made of
one entire piece, drawn by force of arm, against the current of the water, by
an handiworke governed with Oars, and long Piles: and from thence to
Yeraslaue, which is ten days journey by Land: afterward into Germany, for
30. days and nights travel, down the river of Volga, which is about a mile
in breadth, and runs along a clay soil, set with Oaks and Bouleaux: And
into Persia, by the Caspian Sea.
and when they had built Boats, they oftentimes crossed the Astracane, and the
Caspian Sea, that in many places may be waded over, and so by the Defarts of
Hercania, and Bactriana, they came to the Teueres and Casbine Cities of Persia,
out of an assured confidence they should at last open a way and passage to
Cathay. But, the wars that suddenly grew between the Turks and Persians,
and frequent robberies of the Barbarians, cut off this commendable design of
the London Merchants: and, as for the Emperor, he sent back Randolph with
gifts and presents, and with him An. Gregoritzki, an Ambassador, in very
honorable equipage certainly for the custom of that Country, who was
received of the Londoners with great festiuities, and of the Queens Majesty
with much honor.

A Russian Ambassador in England.
This Ambassador exhibited a formal Writing in the Russian Tongue, and
required, that the alliance and amity might be confirmed in his presence, in
the same terms, and a secret Letter which he propounded, translated into the
Russian Tongue, with all the Letters subscribed with the Queens Hand, and
sealed with her Seal; and that she should likewise send an Ambassador into
Russia, reciprocally to receive from the hand of the Emperor, privy Letters,
written in the same words, which in his presence should be sealed with his
Seal, and confirmed with a kissing of the Cross. The Queen agreed to this
Alliance, reserving only this Clause: So far as that formerly contracted
with other Princes, might permit.

That they might so aid one another against their common enemies, Alliance of
Russia.
that nothing be performed unjust or unlawful: and, by the word of a Christian
Princess, in the presence of the Ambassador, and the most honored of her
Priuy-Councell, she promised inuiolably, whereof likewise he had Letters
sealed with her own Priuy-Seale; that if accidentally either by his own
Subjects or strangers, he brought to such a point, as to forsake his Country,
she would receive and entertain both himself and his children, with all the
honor befitting so great a Prince; she would assign him a peculiar place for
his residence, permit him freely to exercise his Religion, and to depart at his
pleasure. For these things he earnestly required in his secret Letters. But
this was so far from satisfying this harsh-natur'd and savage man, who held for
all right and Law, merely his will and pleasure: that he, by numerating and
setting out at large, by Letters, the sundry benefits and good deeds which he
had done to the English Nation, The Emperor of Muscouia, and of Russia, is
irritated and inflamed against the English.
and reproaching them with such favors and friendships, grows angry, and is
irritated against Queen ELIZABETH, for not sending an Ambassador, with his,
to take the Oath; blames her Majesty, that she made no greater account of her
self; saying, she was overmuch given to Merchants affairs, (as much
unworthy to be so much respected of a Prince) and suspecting the Merchants to
be opposite to his design, as being ouer-base, vpbraided them in contemptible,
despitefull and injurious manner, as sordid people, who respect their own
profit and private gain, more then the Honor and credit of their Sovereigns,
threatening them in a most barbarous manner, to suppress and abolish all former
Privileges by him granted to them. Which nevertheless he effected not,
being moderated and appeased by the courteous and kind Letters that Qu.
ELIZABETH wrote unto him, which were sent by Ienkinson: he showed himself all
his life time most diligent and careful to please her Majesty, cherishing and
honoring her as a Sister, often urging her to confirm more straitely and
firmly that Alliance, and loved singularly the English, far above all other
Nations.

Murray had then procured a safe return into Scotland, propounding unto the
Queen herself and the Duke of Norfolk, and the rest of her friends in
England, her re-establishment in the Kingdom of Scotland, who to that end had
hindered and kept in awe the Scots who sought to kill him, Murray appeased the
friends of the Queen of Scotland.
by straitely charging and prohibiting, not to hinder his coming. Being first
arrived in Edenborough, he summoned all such Nobles as favored the Queen,
under pretense and color to consult with them about her re-establishment. But
the Lord Hamilton, Duke of Chastelraut, (then made Lieutenant of Scotland by
the Queen) and the Baron of Heris, were persuaded by the Letters of the
credulous Qu. But Murray, fearing to be deceived by them, circumuents them, and
claps them up in prison, not expecting the coming of others, Rumors spread
through-out Scotland against Murray.
and pursued grievously, in oppressing all the favorers of the Queen with all
the rigors of War.

This Act produces rumors through all Scotland, That Murray had agreed and
determined with Qu. ELIZABETH that the young King JAMES should be given her to
be brought up, and educated in England; and that the Castles of Edenborrough
and Sterling, were to be fortified with English Garrisons, Dunbriton also taken
by force for the use and profit of the English, and Murray be published and
declared true and lawful Successor of the Kingdom of Scotland, if the King
should happen to dye without Issue, and to hold the Kingdom, as Tenent to
Queen ELIZABETH. These rumors increased, ran, and were divulged in this
manner, and through a certain probability, struck in such fashion, the spirits
of men all over Great Britain, that Qu. ELIZABETH thought herself obliged to
take away and cleanse all such spots, both for her honor, Queen Elizabeth is
diligent, and endeavors to quench such false rumors.
and Murray's sake. To which end, her Majesty declared by a Royal Speech,
published and set forth in Print, That these things were far opposite to the
Truth, and merely forged and invented by such as enuyed the Peace and
tranquillity of both Kingdoms. That since the last departure of Murray from
England, there was not any such thing propounded, nor such Paction past, either
by word of mouth, or writing, between her Majesty, or any of her Officers and
him, that came to her knowledge. But that the Earl of Lenox, Grandfather to
the young King, had prayed her Majesty that he might be sent into England, if
he could not be secure in Scotland from the plots of the wicked. Likewise her
Majesty affirmed, that she held the Compact as false, which was reported to
be between Murray and the Earl of Hartford, to wit, that they had both
agreed and resolved together, mutually to help and give assistance one to
another, for to enjoy the Crown of both Kingdoms: and to conclude, that it
was not her fault, that the affairs and businesses were not ended between the
Queen of Scotland and her Son; but rather she still endeavored that it might
be finished: and though her Majesty was in a conflict, through fear and
inueterate emulation, which never dies between Femall Princesses, yet out of
the remembrance and recordation of the misery of Scotland, and the
commiseration of humane frailety, she sincerely labored to effect it.

The Queen of Scots made an addition to that her pious pity, and solicited
her with many kind Letters, in which she solemnly protested, that in regard of
the kindness she had found, and the propinquity of their affinity, she would
attempt nothing against her, neither be willing to owe restitution to any other
Prince for her re-establishment. This caused Queen ELIZABETH, by Letters sent
by Wood, to deal with Murray and other Scots, for her re-establishment to her
Royal Dignity; She deals by Letters concerning her restoring.
or if that could not be granted, that she might be permitted to lead a
private life, and spend her days at home freely and honorably; which
notwithstanding could not any ways move Murray, having brought his business to
perfection.

There was a rumor at this time, amongst those of better sort, that the Duke of
Norfolk should be linked in Hymen's bonds with the Queen of Scots, the which
was desired of many, the Papists expecting by it the advancement of their
religion, and others hoping by that means for the welfare of the
Commonwealth. Truly, many which saw the Queen remote and far from
marriage, and the foreign Princes, which were deadly professors to England,
did settle their eyes and hearts upon the Queen of Scots, as the true and
undoubted heir of England; they esteemed, (for to ground their rest and
tranquillity, and to keep thereby the Queen of Scotland within the bounds and
limits of her Kingdom) it was much more behoofefull and expedient that she
should be married with the Duke of Norfolk, who was the most Noble, and the
greatest Peer of England, beloved of the people, educated and brought up in
the Protestants Religion, then to a foreign Prince, by whose means both
Kingdoms should be in danger, and the hereditary succession by him
apprehended, which they had always and from the beginning wished to be
reunited in an English Prince of the blood, the young King of Scotland
happening to dye, whom they propounded to send into England, to the end, that
as he was the true apparent heir thereof, and being educated and brought up
there by the English, he should be to them dearer and more beloved, all scruple
of Religion taken away, and Queen ELIZABETH having him in her power, were free
from all fear and apprehension, both of the Duke of Norfolk, and the Queen
of Scots. Moreover, lest the Duke should attempt any thing against her, but
should more dearly affect her, they resolved, that Margaret, the only Daughter
of the Duke, should be married afterward to the young King of Scotland.
Amongst these were the Earls of Northumberland, Westmerland, Sussex, Pembroke,
Southampton, and many other Barons: and Leicester himself, (it being doubtful
whether aiming and intending the destruction of the Duke) thought it fit, first
to acquaint the Queen with it, and to commit it to her judgment and censure,
and that she should prescribe and make wholesome Laws, salutiferous to her
self, Religion, and the Kingdom. But this, if you please, you may have
written more at large, in the Dukes Confession, and the Commentaries of the
Bishop of Rosse, which was a great part of this business.

When as the Deputies and Arbitrators put in trust with those affairs, had met
at York, Lidington, The first mention of of this marriage.
and the Bishop of Rosse, in their Inquiry, acquainted the Duke with the
intended Contract, as Murray himself did also at Hampton Court: who in his
private conference with the Duke and some others, dissembled, Murray's
proposition to the Duke of Norfolk.
and did seem that he desired and wished for nothing more, then that all
differences being ended in Scotland, she might be restored to her former
Dignities, provided that she should truly and heartily affect her Subjects, as
she had done formerly, all injuries on both sides being forgotten, forgiven,
and buried in oblivion. Notwithstanding he feared, that if (as she desired)
she should marry a man out of France, Spain, or Austria, she would revenge
her former injuries, make an alteration of Religion in Scotland, and much
damnifie the State of England. To prevent all which, he promised his assistance
and best endeavors, that she, who formerly had been married to a Child, an
improuident young man, nay more, a furious young man, should now be contracted
to the Duke, a man of stayednesse and mature judgment, the which would conduce
(to the welfare of both Kingdoms) the peace of either Prince, and chiefly for
the advancement of Religion, since he, who was so great and worthy in Queen
ELIZABETH'S estimation, should make friendship between the Scots and the
English, and might more easily persuade the Queen of Scots to the true
Religion which he had embraced.

Murray also, by the means of Robert Meluin, imparted this closely to the
Queen of Scots, and officiously promised his assistance: but the Duke
answered, that he could not determine any thing of the marriage, till she could
clear her self from her suspected crimes, and wipe off those infamous
aspersions: but Rosse notwithstanding persisted in his persuasion, and ceast
not to draw him (though unwilling) to it.

Throgmortons counsel.
Not long after, Nicholas Throgmorton met the Duke in Westminster, who
professing himself as every way obliged and bound to perform all duties of
observance, said, that he understood that Leicester dealt with the Duke
concerning the match twixt him and the Scots: which seemed strange, and moved
admiration in him, since Leicester himself not long since had beaten the same
bush, and gone about it, and friendly advised the Duke, that he should put it
off to Leicester, who formerly had sought the honor of that marriage: but if
that could not be done, that he should refuse it, in regard the Scots accused
her of many crimes: but Throgmorton said, that he wished that she might be
joined to him in marriage, that it might be prosperous to Religion, and that
she might wholly and soly depend and rely upon Queen ELIZABETH. But I do
premonish you, that if you proceed in this matter, Leicester may precede and
go before you in counsel: for by your own means only you cannot procure the
assent and good will of the Queen.

Two days after, Propositions of the match, made by Leicester to the Duke.
the Earl of Leicester propounded the affair to the Duke, and received of him
the answer that Throgmorton had forged and invented aforehand, and when it
came to the crimes, he did moderate them according to the instructions and
assurance that he had received of R. Cauendish; of whom, though suspected yet
he recommended him to the Duke, to make use of his service. After this, he
acquaints therewith the Earl of Pembroke, who gives notice thereof to the
Earl of Arundell, and they all, with Throgmorton, do write to the Queen of
Scotland, recommending unto her Majesty the Duke of Norfolk for her Husband,
as likewise Murray had formerly done. The Duke himself also writes, and
witnesses his love unto her, offering her Majesty lovingly his humblest
service: and from that time he still communicated unto them all such Letters as
past betwixt them. As for them, they had ordinary and familiar discourses with
the Bishop of Rosse, concerning the means whereby they could effectuate and
bring this marriage to pass; and the twentieth of May, 1558. a Proposition was
made to the Queen of Scotland by Cauendish: These ensuing Articles were
written by the own hand of the Earl of Leicester: The Articles of marriage
propounded to the Queen of Scotland.
THat she should not undertake any thing in the succession of the Kingdom of
England, preiudicious to Queen ELIZABETH, or the issue her Majesty might that
have; she should pass an offensive and defensive League 'twixt their two
Crowns. That she should settle and firmly establish the true Protestants
Religion in Scotland. That she should receive to her mercy, all such Scots as
then were against her: she should revoke the assignation that she had given of
the Kingdom of England, to the Duke of Aniou, She agreed them in some manner.
and that she should take to her Husband some of the English Nobility, and
namely, the Duke of Norfolk.

And they promised her, that in case her Majesty should conclude and agree the
Articles, to re-establish her anew in her Kingdom, with all possible speed as
could be, and to confirm her in the succession of the Crown of England. The
Queen of Scots accorded them presently, except that concerning the Alliance,
she excused her self, as not able to answer to it, except she had first
consulted with the French King: and concerning the assignation of the Kingdom
of England, she protested that she had never made any, yet nevertheless she
would labor (if they should desire it) that the Duke of Aniou should renounce
it: Admonishing them, to procure above all things, the will and consent of
Queen ELIZABETH, for fear the affair should turn, and be prejudicial both
to herself and the Duke of Nolfolke, as she had formerly experimented in the
match with the Lord Darley, privately contracted without Queen ELIZABETH'S
consent. Yet they nevertheless esteemed fit, first to sound the will and
affection of many Noblemen, who for the most part gave their voice and
consent, provided, their Queen also to grant hers: and likewise the Kings of
France and Spain were not against it; but they only had an apprehension of
Murray: and forasmuch as he had been the first to propound this affair,
promising to employ himself therein with all his might, he should be the
first now to hinder it. They yet notwithstanding were all of a mind, that
Lidington, who then was looked for, should first sound the intention and
disposition of Queen ELIZABETH. In the mean while the Duke declares to the
Lord Baron of Lumley, all that was done and past in this business; and with
much ado could he obtain from the Earl of Leicester, leave to take further
consultation and advice of his other friends: he nevertheless made Cecill
acquainted with it, the Earl of Pembroke consenting thereunto.

At the same time, A dessigne to free the Qu. of Scotland.
the Lord Dacray resolved in himself to steal away the Queen of Scotland, who
at that time was prisoner at Winfield in the County of Derby, under the keeping
of the Earl of Shrewsburie. The Earl of Northumberland, who was of his
counsel, gave notice thereof to the Duke of Norfolk, who forbade to do it,
fearing they went about to marry her to the Spaniard, being then upon hope to
obtain the love and consent of Queen ELIZABETH.

The rumors and pretense of this match, Notice is given thereof to Queen
Elizabeth.
arrived presently to Queen ELIZABETH'S ear, being told her by some of those
crafty and curious courtizans, who smell and find out soonest the secrets of
Lovers. The Duke knowing it, labors with his utmost power, to make a
proposition thereof to the Queen, and to that end employed therein the Earl of
Leicester, the Earl of Pembroke, and Throgmorton, putting it off, and
deferring it from day to day, as if he expected a fitter time and opportunity.
But Cecill seeing the said Duke perplexed in his mind, counseled him himself
to declare the business to the Queen, for to take sooner away all scruple.
But the Earl of Leicester, contrary to that opinion, is against it, promising
him to propound the same to her Majesty, when she should walk abroad in the
fields. But whilst that he by such sweet courtesies deferred the affair
from time to time, Queen ELIZABETH being at Farnham, causes the Duke to
approach near unto her Table, and with a most grave and serious smile, warned
him, That he who was reposed, and rested himself upon a Cushion, should take
heed, and look to himself.

And finally, the Earl of Leicester being at Tichfield, found himself ill,
(or else he counterfaited the sick) and being visited and graciously comforted
by the Queen, The Earl of Leicester reueales the whole business to the Queen
at Tichfield.
he was seized with such fear, that her Majesty could easily discern it,
beholding his blood and vital senses to shrink in himself: which was the
cause, that after he had asked pardon, and implored forgiveness with sighs and
tears of the Queen, he declared unto her all the business from the beginning.

In that very same time, the Queen took the Duke aside into a Gallery, She
rebukes the Duke of Norfolk.
where she rebuked him sharply, for having sought the Queen of Scotland in
marriage without her leave and permission, commanding him to free himself of
it, for the fidelity and loyalty sake which he ought to bear unto his
Sovereign. The Duke most willingly promised the same, as if he had despised
the match; and feared not to assure, that his reuennues and commings in here
in England, were not whitlesse to those of the Kingdom of Scotland, then
miserably exhausted by the War; and that when he was in the Tenis-Court of
his Palace at Norwich, he seemed in some fashion to be equal, and not
inferior to some Kings. But in a short space, this courage begun to grow
weak and flexible, discerning by the aspect and speech of the Queen, that her
Majesty was irritated against him, and that her anger rather augmented then
diminished, The Duke parts from the Court without leave.
also that many Noblemen withdrew themselves by little and little from his
familiarity, saluting him but with much ado, and breaking off in haste their
discourses: At this, the Duke took his journey to London, without leave, and
upon the way, took his lodging at the Earl of Pembroke's house, who
counseled him to be cheerful, to hope well, and gave him solace and
consolation in his affliction. That very day, Queen ELIZABETH moved with
anger, refused to set at liberty the prisoned Queen, to the Scottish
Ambassador, who implored it of her Majesty, and commanded that she should
behave herself peaceably, or else she should see shortly, those upon whom she
most relied, cut off and beheaded.

Now, Cecill finds out the matter.
when as the rumor of the match had more increased, and the fame of it was
every where diuulged, and the Ambassador of the French King, (more by the
persuasion of some English than the command of his Prince, as it afterward
appeared) did earnestly labor, and vehemently urge, that the Queen of Scots
might have her liberty; new suspicions were generally raised, and Cecill, who
was always diligently careful, and studying for the welfare of Religion,
was desirous to find out the matter; he dealt therefore with Sussex by
Letters, who was then President of the North Countries, and a dear friend to
the Duke, that if so be he understood any thing concerning the Dukes marriage,
he should certify the Queen of it; what he answered, I am uncertain. And
when it appeared that the Duke had private conference at Hampton Court with
Murray, the Viceroy of Scotland, George Carry, the son of the Lord of
Hunsden, was sent to enquire if the Duke had imparted any thing to him
concerning the marriage.

In the mean time, The Duke of Norfolk goes into Norfolk.
the Duke affrighted with the false rumor of the rebellion and insurrection in
the North, and being certified of Leicester, that he should be committed to
prison, went into Norfolk, till his friends at Court (as they promised) had
stilled the storm, and he pacified the offended mind of the Queen with
submissiue supplicatiue Letters.

When he found no comfort amongst his own, and Heiden, Cornwallis, and other
of his train, persuaded him, that if he were guilty, should fly to the
Queens mercy, he was almost distracted with sorrow.

Fear caused in the Court through Norfolk.
In the mean time, the Court was solicited and possessed with fear, lest he
should have made Rebellion: which if he did, they report it was determined to
cut off the Queen of Scots.

But he, out of his innate goodness, and a most pious conscience, had not
offended against any Law of her Majesty (that Statute made in the Reign of
HENRY the Eighth, which prohibited the marrying any of the children of the
Kings Sister, Brother, or Aunt, without the consent and knowledge of the King,
being abolished and nullified by EDWARD the Sixth) and also out of a fear
that they should use the Queen of Scots more hardly, sends Letters to his
friends at Court; in which, he certified that he went into the Country for
fear of imprisonment, that through time and absence, he might find a remedy
against ill reports and defamations, which the Court was ready to intertaine:
he most submissiuely entreats pardon, and forthwith prepares to go to the
Court.

He returns to the Court.
In his return, he being at Saint Albons, Owen, the Earl of Arundels man, was
sent privately to him from Throgmorton and Lumley, who formerly had been in
custody, aduising him, that he should take all the blame on himself, and not
lay any fault on Leicester or others, lest he should turn them from being
friends, to enemies. There Edward Fitzgerald, brother to the Earl of Kildare,
Lieutenant of the Pensioners, went before, drew him from thence, and brought
him to Burnham, about three miles from Windsor, where the Queen was: to whom,
four days after, Murray discouers the business.
the Abbot of Dunfermline delivered Letters in the behalf of Murray,
importing, how the Duke had secretly treated with him in the Royal Manor of
Hampton Court, to procure his favor to this marriage; on the contrary, greatly
menacing him in case he did refuse. That to avoid the dangerous practice of one
Norton, who watched to kill him, at his return, he gave his promise to the
Duke; That the Duke assured him, neither Norton, nor any other, should attempt
any thing against his life: and a little while after, being solicited by
Letters written in Cipher, to give consent to this marriage, he gave him to
understand by Boyd, that he would never abandon the Queen of Scots: and
moreover, how her Majesty's own Officers had in some sort persuaded the
Viceroy, that Queen ELIZABETH gave also her liking and approbation to this
marriage, and putting the same Queen of Scots in hope, that she should
succeed to the Kingdom of England. Renowned Queen ELIZABETH perceiving also
very evidently, that to draw some great men of England to her party, she gave
them expressly to understand, how she was taking a course for the Queens
Majesty's security, and the infallible safety of the whole Kingdom.

The Duke, who subtly held correspondency by Letters with the Bishop of
Rosse, Leicester, and Throgmorton, causing them to be privily conveyed in
bottles of Beer, being at the same time strictly examined about the point of
this marriage, after his confession of the greatest part, and a bitter check
given him for departing the Court without leave, and being further accused of
Innovation, was sent to the Tower of London, The Duke is imprisoned.
under the guard of Neuill, a Knight of the Golden Order. Two days after, the
Bishop of Rosse was likewise examined, and Ridolph, that Florentine Councellor,
of whom, both he and others made familiar and common use, committed in keeping
to Sir Francis Walsingham: And others.
the Earl of Pembroke commanded to betake himself to his House, and reserved
to a private examination. But, by reason of his Nobility, and old age, it was
agreed, that by reason himself could not write, his Confession should not be
taken in writing. After this, some great men were prohibited the Court, as
Accomplices, who exhibited their petitions, and demanded pardon, when they had
acknowledged, Their Accomplices crave pardon.
that they were consenting with the Duke to this marriage, which Murray had
formerly propounded: yet after such a manner, as the Queen of Scots, the Duke,
and all the others were aduertized, how the matter was first imparted to the
Queens Majesty of England, before any treaty of it. The Earls of
Northumberland and Westmerland being Confederates in this dessigne, made in
like manner their submissions to the Earl of Sussex, then Governor in the
North parts, whom they entreated to solicit the Queen for them. Libels
against this marriage.
Many Libels were in like manner dispersed against this marriage, the Queen of
Scots, and the right and title, whereby she laid claim to the Crown of
England, as next heir apparent, with such shameless insolency, as the Queen
resolved to send out prohibitions, by a severe Proclamation to the contrary,
and playing at hood-winke with the Bishop of Rosse, she appointed him to
answer them, as he did by another Book, entitled, Morgan Philips, wherein
he maintained the honor of the Queen of Scots, her right of succession, and
that the Kingdom might be swayed and governed by women, as this point was also
called in question. But since, he ingeniously confessed in his Commentaries, that
his reasons he set down, about her right of succession, he drew out of Sir
Anthony Brownes books, chief Justice of the common Pleas, and of Carrell,
both very understanding Gentlemen in the common Laws of England.

Chapin Vitelli comes into England, and why?
In those days, there came from the Duke of Alua, Chapin Vitelli, Marquis of
Ceton, with Letters from the Spaniard, (who seemed to have clean loft his
writing) under pretext to accord some differences about commerce, but really to
observe the issue of this rebellion, which was presently to be raised, and to
command the Soldiers privily to march down into Flanders, according to the
Duke of Alua's promise, who likewise sent for his forerunner, Le Mot,
Governor of Dunkerke, apparelled like a Mariner, that he might the better
discover and found the Ports, as himself since has auerred. But when it
appeared, how this Marquis was only substituted by the Duke of Alua, who was
the principal party himself, wherein the other was but a mere Lieutenant, a
doubt was made whether they should treaty with him, as an Ambassador.
Notwithstanding all this, the Queens Majesty made known that she would
acknowledge him for the Ambassador of Spain. But when he made show of no
further Commission, than to re-demand some moneys detained, the Queen
affecting peace, advised him to procure a larger Commission for the ordering of
affairs: while he stayed, and attended the same, the rumor of that Rebellion
to be excited in the North Country, was daily augmented.

To relate the matter more originally, there ran a great fame and brute of this
Rebellion, Rebellion in the North.
about the beginning of Autumn, which at the first being contemned, it
presently strengthened and increased, by reason of the frequent meetings of the
Earls of Northumberland, Westmerland, and some others: so that the Earl of
Sussex, then Governor, and Deputy of the North, cited them before him, and
interrogated them precisely, about these reports and rumors. They could not
deny, but they had heard of it, marry so, they were in no wise guilty or
culpable, with many and deep protestations, offering to lose their lives in
the Queens service, against any Rebels whatsoever: and thus he sent them back
to their own houses, with authority to enquire and search out the authors of
this report, which nevertheless daily so augmented, as her Majesty,
conceiving that nothing was rashly to be credited of so great men, so
commanded them by the Lord of Sussex, to repair presently to London, for the
removing of all suspicion. Notwithstanding, my Lord of Sussex, I know not for
what drift or policy, enjoined them to come and meet him, as if he meant to
consult with them about some occasions of that Province. At the first they drew
back, but presently after, expressly refused to repair thither. This ministered
occasion to the Queens Majesty, to command them by peremptory Letters which
she writ, and caused to be conveyed with all expedition, that laying apart all
delays and excuses, they should incontinently appear in her Royal presence;
and this only to terrify and absolutely divert them from entering into this
Rebellion, or at least, that they might precipitantly undertake the same,
before they rallied their forces, or that the matter grew to any maturitie. For
they relied upon some secret succors, which the Scots Leaguers, and the Duke
of Alua were to land at the Port of Herripoole, within the Bishopric of
Dunelme, as afterward it was manifested.

So soon as the Earl of Northumberland had read these Letters, being of a
tractable nature, guilty in his own conscience, deeply affected to the
Roman Religion, and excited to choler, by reason that out of the prerogative
Royal in Mines, a rich Copper Mine found in his own grounds was taken from
him, wherein he thought himself to be wronged: but nevertheless, fed with
notable hopes of the Queens clemency, he was in a wonderful perplexity,
whether he should fly, or openly rebel. His Friends and servants being now
prepared for a revolt, and seeing him floating in these ambiguities, came upon
him a certain night on a sudden, and headlongly and continually beating into
his ears, how Oswell, Vlstrop, and Vaughan, his enemies, were arrived with a
troop of armed men, ready to take him prisoner, they urged, entreated, and
coniured him, that he would not forsake himself, his friends, and the Religion
of his forefathers, assuring him, how the Catholics were then in arms all
England over, to re-establish the Roman Religion: and to stir up the
multitude, they tumultuarily sounded a Larum bell in all the Country Towns
and Villages, though 'twas not yet time to attempt any such matter. Affrighted,
he presently start out of his Bed in the Chamber, retired to a Gallerie, which
looked into a Park near to Topcliffe, and the night following, he went to
Blanspeth, to the Earl of Westmerlands House, where many were assembled, who
knew not what the matter was.

For to amasse, and draw together an ignorant multitude, they commanded some to
take up arms for the Queens defense: others were made believe, that all the
great men of England conspired with them, to re-erect the Roman Religion:
othersome they told, Pretext of the Rebels.
how they were enforced to take up arms, for prevention that the ancient
Nobility of England might not be trampled under foot by late start-ups, and
their Country yielded as a prey to strangers. This carried them violently into
a manifest Rebellion, They run violently into a Rebellion.
and they were the first, who disturbed the public peace of this Kingdom,
which had continued unshaken for the term of eleven years, under the happy
Reign of Queen ELIZABETH, they being boldly and powerfully incited hereunto
by Nicholas Morton, a Priest, sent from the Pope, to denounce Queen ELIZABETH
for an Heretic, and therefore deprived of all power and government. Suddenly
likewise, they diuulge by a public Manifestation, That they took up arms to
no other end, Their declaration.
but to set up again the Religion of their Ancestors, to remove from about the
Queens bad Counselors, to restore the Duke and some other great Men, who were
dismissed of their places and dignities, to former liberty and grace. But as
for the Queens Majesty, they would attempt nothing against her, but vowed,
that both then, and at all times, they would persevere and continue her most
obedient Subjects. They writ also to the Papists, dispersed throughout the
whole Kingdom, to join their forces together. But, in stead of cohering to
them, the most part sent to the Queen, They write to the Papists.
both their Letters, and the Bearers: All the particular men of the Kingdom,
and the Duke of Norfolk himself, both their service and means, and to be
employed against them. So that, upon this occasion, she made a just trial of
her Subjects singular and unspotted fidelity, and of Gods rare clemency and
protection, for which she gave him great and unfeigned thanks.

They rent, and tread underfoot the Bible.
The Rebels went presently to Durham, the next Episcopal See, where they rent
and trampled under foot, the sacred Bibles, and Books of the Liturgy, written
in the English Tongue, as they light upon them in the Churches. Afterward,
they celebrated Mass, wheresoere they went; they levied and brought into the
field many men, under flying colors, Their Colors.
wherein were painted in some, the five wounds of our Lord; in others, the
Challice of the Eucharist; Robert Norton, a venerable and grave Gentleman, who
was old and bald, carried the Cross, with the Colonel ensign: they came by
small days marches, to Chiffordmore, which is not far from Wetherbie, where,
making a general muster of their Army, upon the two and twentieth day of their
Rebellion, they could make no more but six hundred Horse, Their number.
and four thousand foot: and when they heard that the Queen of Scots, (for
whose releasement out of imprisoment, they had principally taken up arms) was
conducted from Tudberie, to Couentrey, a strong City, and committed to the
guard and custody of the Earls of Shrewsburie, and Huntington: that the Earl
of Sussex of the one side of them, had raised a mighty Army, to set upon
them: that Sir George Bows lay at their backs, with chosen and maine troops,
and had fortified Bernard-Castell: and how the Earl of Cumberland and the Lord
Scrope had manned and secured Carlisle, and daily levied more forces, they
retired from those quarters, and returning speedily, in a manner the same way
they came, they came before Rabie, which is the principal house and seat of
the Earls of Westmerland; They return. They take Bernard Castle.
from whence departing, they straightly beleaguerd Bernard Castle, which in a
short time yielded to them for want of provision and victual, all, and Sir
George Bows, with Robert Bows his brother, and all the Soldiers of the
Garrison, issued out with their Arms.

They were formerly proclaimed Traitors, by sound of Trumpet. The same very
day, my Lord of Sussex, accompanied with the Earl of Rutland, and the Lords of
Hunsdon, Euers, and Willowbie of Parham, marched against them with seven
thousand men. When they saw they were come to Ackland, being terrified and
daunted, they fell to flight, and fell back toward Hexham, They fly.
which place also leaving speedily, they crossed along by unbeaten paths, that
so they might creep covertly under the hedges, and came to the Castle of
Naworth; where, understanding that the Earl of Warwick and the Lord Clynton
Vice Admiral, followed close at their heels, with twelve thousand men, drawn
out of the South parts of England; the two Earls fled into the nearest parts
of Scotland, with a few men, unknown to the rest, where the Earl of
Northumberland obscured himself for a while, about Harclaw, in the little
country Hamlets, amongst the Grymes, most notable Thieves, who delivered him
afterward into the Earl of Murray's hands. The Earl of Westmerland found
some means to hide himself about Carry Furnhurst, and Bucklie, and at last
escaped into Flanders, with some other English in his company, where he lived a
long, but a poor life, upon a small Pension which the King of Spain allowed
him. The rest saved themselves, some by flight, some by lurking in holes and
dens. For example and terror, six inferior Magistrates were hanged at
Durham, and others, among which, one Plumtree a Priest, was a man of greatest
note. There were formerly executed at York, Digbie, Falthrope, Some are put to
death.
Bishop, and Pouenham. And certain months after, Christopher and Thomas
Nortons, brethren, were put to death at London, and some others in other places.

The rest are banished.
After this, the most apparent and notable Rebels, were condemned of high
Treason, and banished, as namely, the Earls of North. and Westminster. the Countess
of North. the Daughter to the Earl of Wigorne, Edward Dacres of Morton, John
Neuill of Leuerserg, Io. Swineborne, Tho. Marquenfield, Egre. Ratcliffe,
brother to the Earl of Sussex, Char. Neuill, To. Norton of Nortonconniers,
Christ. Marmaduke, and Thomas of the Family of the Nortons, To. and Na.
Tempests, George Stafford, and about some forty others of Noble and worthy
Houses, whose conviction and banishment was confirmed by the whole house of
Parliament, and pardon granted to some, who had no Estates, nor ever went out
of the Kingdom. And thus the flame of this Rebellion was in a short time
quenched, Chiapine Vitelli, who was privy to it, as I told you before, openly
admiring the same in the presence of her Majesty, and many great men of the
Kingdom, but (no doubt) inwardly greeuing this Rebellion was so easily and
suddenly suppressed, and that so his own coming into England took so little
effect.

A new Rebellion.
From the combustions of this Rebellion, thus covered and extinguished, as out of
the ashes of that former fire, a little flame began to kindle at Naworth in
Cumberland, near to the Valley of Seuerus, which was raised by Lau. Dacres,
second son to Geor. Lord Dacres of Gilesland. This man, after the death of
the young Lord Dacres his Nephew, because he was the son of his elder
Brother, being angry that so large a Patrimony should by Law descend unto his
Neeces, whom the Duke of Norfolk their Father in law had betrothed to his
three sons, he commenced suite against them: but perceiving that it would
come to no prosperous issue on his side, he secretly combined with the Rebels,
and attempted to carry away the Queen of Scots, but all in vain. But the
Rebels being defeated sooner then he expected, and proclaimed Traitors openly,
whilst himself lay in Court, after he had obtained the favor to kiss the
Queens hands, he promised to employ himself with his whole power against
them; whereupon he was sent home to his own house. But when he was in the way
(as was discovered afterward) he imparted unto them his dessignes by
messengers, which renewed their spirit and courage, making them many promises
in the behalf of diverse Ambassadors to strange Princes; and amongst others,
persuading them, that with such men as he would raise in the Queens name, he
would kill the Lord Scroope, Governor of the West Borders, and the Bishop of
Carlisle. But not being able to effect it, he followed the Earls who were fled
with Letters reco^mendatorie to the Scots, surprised Gristock Castle, and other
houses belonging to the Dacres, fortifyed the Castle of Naworth, as if he had
some right and interest in it, and under pretext of defending his own goods,
and opposing the Rebels, he got together three thousand thieves of the
borders, and others, who stood best affected to the Dacres, much esteemed and
respected in those quarters.

The Lord of Hunsdon, with the most expert Soldiers of the Garrison of
Barwicke, went into the Field against them, who trusting to no fortifications,
went still forward, and with an Army ranged in Triangular form, and flanker'd
with Horse, they attended them, near to a little River called Gelt, where
(questionless) they had a sound fight, both for the one part and the other;
and Leonard, though he was lame, came short of nothing required in a valiant
and resolute Captain. The Rebels are defeated.
But when the greatest part of his men were slain, he left the Victory to my
Lord of Hunsdon, not greatly pleasing to him, and so retired into the nearest
places of Scotland, from whence, not long after, he crossed over into Flanders,
where he died poor at Louaine; so that the curses imposed upon him by his
dying Father, proved true. The Lord of Hunsdon commended the keeping of those
Castles taken from the Rebels, to the Duke of Norfolks men, and the Queens
Majesty by a public Proclamation, granted a general pardon to all the
multitude which he had excited to Rebellion.

Qu. Elizabeth lends succors to the reformed Churches in France.
Though this Rebellion raisd many tumults and disturbances within her Kingdom,
yet would not her Majesty neglect the Protestants in France, their State
being at that time wretched and deplorable: For the Princes of the same
Religion having much importuned her to defend the common cause, she furnished
the Queen of Navarre with money, upon some Jewels and other ornaments, and
permitted Hen. Champernoune, Brother by the Fathers side to Gawyn, who married
the Earl of Mountgomeries Daughter, to conduct into France a Company of an
hundred Noble voluntary Gentlemen, under one Guydon, who had written on it this
Motto, La virtue me done fin.

Among whom, were Phil. Butshed, Fr. Barkley, and Gualter Raleigh, who was but
young, and took his first say and taste of the wars. The K. of France
conceived, that either to draw up, or at least to divert to some other
employments, the great wealth of England, which was abundantly disburs'd in
aid and succor of the Protestants; he resolved to kindle a new war against
England, by assisting the Scots, who kept the Castle of Dunbriton for the
Queen of Scotland. In which Service, Monsieur de Martigues was employed, a
Soldier who then lived in the very prime of his Reputation; but he being
slain with an Harquebuzada at the siege of S. Iean d' Angeli, this Project
vanished, and took no effect.

Ireland in those times, was no more free from Rebellion: For Ed. and Phil.
Butler, brothers to the Earl of Ormond, who had injuriously entreated their
neighbors in Munster, refused to obey the Laws, molested true Subjects with
Pillories and wastel, and colleagued themselves with Ioh. Fitz-Morris of the
house of Desmond, Macartimore Fitz-Edmond, Steward of Imoquell, and others who
had negotiated with the Pope and the King of Spain, to re-establish the Roman
Religion in Ireland, and to suppress Queen ELIZABETH: For which cause they
were denounced Rebels against the State, and Sir Pe. Carne continually galled
them with light Skirmishes, wherein Fortune was variable. Nevertheless, having
made an head of many Galloglasses, they beleaguerd Kilkennie, and commanded the
Inhabitants to deliver into their hands the wife of Warham of Saint-Leiger: but
being repelled by the Garrison, who issued out upon them, they miserably
forraged and wasted the whole Country round about. The more to excite and
spread the flame of this sedition, John Mendoza came secretly in the behalf of
the Spaniard; and out of England, to extinguish it, the Earl of Ormond, who
persuaded his Brothers to submit themselves, who were nevertheless imprisoned.
But the Earl obtained of the Queen, through his continual and daily
intercession, that their Trial and Judgment might be desired, and not be
brought to the rigor of the Law, though their crimes and offenses had deserved
it: the which he took grievously, not being able to endure, that at their
occasion, such infamy should be upon their most Noble and illustrious house,
so near allied to Queen ELIZABETH, who rejoiced and glorified so often, that
the Nobility of that House had ever been pure, and their blood untainted. But
the Lord Deputy pursuing lively the remainder of that Rebellion, dissipated it
in a very short space of time.

Some Troubles were also moved and stirred up in Vlster by Turlogh-Leinich,
who, through inconstancy, embraced sometimes war, and sometimes peace;
according to the headstrong desire and rash pleasure of his Followers, Officers
and Servants. But he was kept in awe and within the bounds of duty, not so
much by the English Garrisons, as by the Hebrideans, who of those poor and
meagre Islands, seized upon his earthly possessions. Against whose incursions,
there was sent out of England a great deal of money, to fortify and
strengthen the Seacoast: but in vain, out of a misfortune, common as well to
England as Ireland, where, for the most part, men intrude themselves, and are
admitted into those public places, who basely respecting their own private
gain, do neglect the public weal, and general commodity of the Kingdom.

The end of the First Book of the Annals and History of that mighty Empress,
Queen ELIZABETH, of most happy and blessed memory.
THE HISTORY OF THE MOST HIGH, MIGHTY, AND Euer-glorious Empress, ELIZABETH,
Invincible Queen of England, Ireland, etc. True Defendresse of the Faith, of
immortal Renown, and neuer-dying Fame and Memory.

OR, ANNALLES OF ALL SVCH REMARKable things as happned during her blessed Reign
over her Kingdoms of England and Ireland; as also such Acts as past betwixt
her MAJESTY and Scotland, France, Spain, Italy, Germany, and the Netherlands.

The second Book.

Faithfully translated out of the French, and published in English, with the
KINGS leave and Authority, granted by his most Excellent Majesty to ABRAHAM
DARCIE.

To my Noble and wel-deseruing Friend,
Mr. ABRAHAM DARSSIE
Admire I would, but dare not, lest that I
Be thought to flatter, speaking VERITY.
Reason bids attribute to worth its due,
And he detracts, that spares to speak what is true:
How shall I shun (if shun the Truth to shame)
A Parasites, or a Detractors name?
Much care I not, yet this much dare I say,
DARSSIE, thou have done well, deseru'st thy pay,
A Guerdon due to thy laborious Pen,
Raising ELIZA's Royal Fame again:
Such as thy work, such honor as is due,
Shall to thy well-deseruing Pen accrue:
In making vulgar now this matchless Story,
England shall ever eternize thy glory.
THOMAS GASNALL.

To the worthy Patterns of true Nobility, and Noble Favorers of LEARNING.
Theophilus, Lord Howard, of Walden, Heir apparent to the Earldom of
Suffolk. This Noble Family was honored with the dignity of Lord Howard of
Walden, by Queen Eliz.
The Lady Elizabeth, Vicountesse of Walingford, his noble and virtuous Sister.
Oliver, Lord St. John, Baron of BLETSO. Lady Dorothy St. JOHN Countess of
BATH, his Right honorable sister. Their most ancient House was honored with
the title of Baron of Bleso, by Qu. Eliz. As also, this noble Countesses
Husbands Predecessor, was also graced with the Earldom of Bath, by her
MAJESTY.
George, This Noble Lord is most highly borne from a most Honorable blood,
being by his Father-side descended from the illustrious Lord William, Berkeley,
Earl of Nottingham, Vicount Berkeley, of Berkeley-Castell, and also Lord
Marquis of Berkeley, Earl Marshall of England.
Lord Berkeley, Baron of Berkeley-Castell. And the most learned Lady, An
illustrious Branch of the Noble House of the Caries, created Baron of Honsdon,
by Qu Elizabeth.
Elizabeth Berkley, his Most Noble Mother. The Lord Mount-ioy Blunt, Baron of
Mount-ioy. Descended from Charles Blunt Earl of Devonshire, Lord Deputy and
Lieutenant of Ireland, a brave valiant Nobleman, who expulsed the Spaniards
there, and compelled the Irish Rebels to submission: he was created Baron of
Mount-ioy by Queen Elizabeth.
SIR Fulke Knighted by Queeene Elizabeth at Killingworth.
Greuill Baron of Beauchams-Court, and Lord Brook.

ALthough a History, There is great differency and diversity, tending to the
manner of describing Stories: First, there is Chronology, Chronicles,
Ephemeride, Epitomies, Rhopsodies, Abridgment, History, and ANNALS. Chronology
has two conditions, both particular and necessary: called by the Greeks,
Alathea, and Apathia, which is the truth of things set forth without any
passion. The Chronicle aims at the original of matters, and to seek the
immemoriall Time, from the first antiquity and foundation of peoples and
Nations, as Herodole for Greece, Titus Liuius for the Latin, Lemaire in the
illustrations of the Gauls, Mr. Speed for England, and others.

The Ephemerides describes that which has been said or done betwixt two
persons.


(Right Noble and Illustrious) be most dangerous, and no less troublesome to
write, yet there is nothing more commodious, beneficial and salutiferous to
men, since it is the Testimony of Time, the light of Truth, and the preserver of
Life; suffering scarce no men's Names to dye, nor their renownes to be buried in
oblivion: for by the recordation of the deeds which they have inacted in Times
past, they are committed to future Times, eternized to the perpetual honor of
immortal fame, and neuer-dying glory: Nay more, they seem as Alexander,
Scipio, Pompey, Julius Caesar, Charles the Great, and diverse other whose memory
is fresh and everliving: nothing else, but the eternal monuments of Annalls
delivered Hercules, and freed other worthy men (who lived well and singularly
profitable to their Country) from fading and perishing, though dead and
forgotten: It was this therefore which caused Princes, and other great men to
desire nothing more, then that their worthy deeds and noble acts iudiciously
performed in time of Peace, Rhapsodis and Epittonnes are short observations of
History.

Annalls and History is different from all those, for they describe all the
memorable deeds and particular actions that happened yearly, and from time to
time: such as Xenophon was in Greece, Salust among the Latins, Froissard in
France, and Mr. William Cambden in England, and so diverse others.

The several and yearly acts must be described without any passion or
affections.


as well as generously in War, should be carefully written, and so propagated
to all posterities by some learned Historiographer: as appears by Alexander
the Great, who when a messenger came to him, exulting with joy, and running
with a cheerful countenance fully to relate the prosperous success of his
fortunate affairs, made him this answer, What greater and better news can
you participate and unfold unto me, unless by certifying me that Homer is
living? Intimating thereby, that all the glory of his Heroicke actions, were
like to wither and be forgotten, except some such a one as Homer was, should
revive, to sing worthily his Encomiums, and sound his Praises and Victories
with the shrill sounding Trumpet of Fame.

Nevertheless, confessing my self unable (though much desirous to do you
that service, I have undertook the translation of the Heroic Annals of that
ever blessed Queen Elizabeth of most happy memory, by which I aim at the
preservation of her glory, Such courtesy from your Honors will ingraue your
worth in the Temple of Eternity, making your names thereby immortal, since it
is only this or such like service, that can make you live again in your
grave, keep your noble fame fresh, and your happy memory from fading, since it
will cause your ashes to bring forth Laurel, and Palm flourish and spring out
of your Tombs, when the base ignorant contemners of learning, (which do
abound in this iron age) will wither and fade: they seem now only to live on
earth, but to war against Virtues; much like unto worms in Libraries, to
destroy and devour learning, which they should cherish.
and to the perpetual honor of your names, under whose honorable banner, I
have sought to shelter these my poor labors: To show as well the dutiful
service of a poor Stranger to these Kingdoms in general, as his humble and
sincere affection to all your Honors in particular. The worthiness of the
Subject, makes me not doubt of your noble acceptance, and inuites me to bring
my Oblation to the Temple of your Virtues; where, after unfeigned Prayers for
your Honors perpetual happiness, as well spiritual as temporal, I, with
the lowest step of duty, take my leave; vowing ever to remain

Your Honors humblest devoted obseruant, ABRAHAM DARCIE.

THE HISTORY OF THE MOST High, Mighty, Book 2. 1570.
and Invincible Princess, Queen ELIZABETH, of most happy and neuer-dying
memory: OR ANNALLES Of all the most remarkable things that happened during her
blessed Reign over the Kingdoms of England and Jreland, etc.
The 13. year of her Reign, Anno 1570.
REbellion being then extinct in England, the Earl of Murray, The Earl of
Murray demands that the Qu. of Scotland might be put into his hands.
Viceroy of Scotland, with much care and policy, persuaded and industriously
labored that the Queen of Scots might be resigned and delivered into his
hands; proffering to that effect hostages and pledges: withal, the better to
incite a condiscending to this his demand, he promised that the Earls of
Northumberland and Westmerland should be immediately delivered back. In the
mean time, he wrought with such diligence, that the Bishop of Rosse, as an
Author, Favorer, and Assister of the Rebels, was committed into the safe guard
and custody of the Bishop of London. And further to oblige Queen ELIZABETH by
some special service, he powerfully entered with an Army upon the frontier
Provinces of England, there to seek out the English Rebels; He pursues the
English Rebels.
but apprehending some few of small note, in the conclusion finds out the
Earl of Northumberland (whom he found hidden and disguised among a company of
Out-lawes and Fugitives) by the means of his Oast that discovered him: The
Viceroy much rejoicing in his Noble Prize, sent him as Prisoner to Lake-Leuin,
safely there to be kept in guard, whilst he persisting in his revenge, with
much rigor afflicted the inhabitants of those Frontier parts.

But unfortunately retyring himself to a Town called Limnuch (which vulgarly
passes by the name of Lithquo) there resolving with himself, after so many
wearisome trauails, and excessive iournies, to give a quiet repose to his
ouer-charged spirits; the neuer-changing doom of heaven had there set down
the period of his days* for, riding through the Streets, little suspecting
the disaster that attended him, The Earl of Murray is suddenly killed
he was suddenly slain by the stroke of a bullet under his navel, sent from
the fatal hand of the Lord Hamilton, who by present flight saved himself in
France, where he remained certain years, oftentimes protesting, that the
strength of his patience no longer able to hold out against the many insolent
injuries done him by the Earl, he made his own hands the author of his own
revenge: For the Viceroy knowing him to be one of the Queens partisans,
banished him, and afterward imprisoned him, and by many threats and menaces of
severe punishment, constrained him to release to one of his Tenants, a little
Country Farm, which befell to him by reason of his wife that became
lunaticke. These inforst him to such rage, that having by some strange means
broke his prison, he committed this murder.

After this exploit, living in France, he was there reputed to be a very fit
and ready instrument for such actions: yet could he never be persuaded or
procured to do the like to the Admiral Coligni; often answering, that he had
himself taken vengeance of his own just griefs and injuries (of which he
repented himself) yet neither reward nor entreaties should any way prevail so
much with him, as to be the instrument of another revenge.

The rumor of this murder being straight diuulged and spread over
Great-Britaine, there arose various opinions, Diverse opinions are had of him.
and diverse strange judgments upon the same; and among other surmizes, his
mothers dream was then recalled to memory, of a Lion and a Dragon combating in
her womb, after she had been privately known by James the Fifth. Diverse were
the opinions and censures of most men, but especially of those of sounder
judgment and apprehension, according to their diverse affections: of some he
was much commended, because he was very studious for the expelling of the
Romish Recusants out of Scotland, for so carefully preserving the King, being
yet an Infant, and likewise for his great and liberal bounty to men of
learning; and above all, to Bucchanan: on the contrary part, he was of
other-some greatly condemned, because he, under the color and couerture of
Religion, enricht himself and his friends with the spoils of the Church; and
with a most injurious ingratitude, insulted and tyrannized over the imbecility
of his Sisters weak Sex, having before obliged him to her by many benefits.
And of these, some would presage, through their suspicious conjectures,
grounded upon the mischievous inclination which is incident to most bastards;
That that man would not spare the Son, that had bereaved the Mother of her
Kingdom. The Queen of Scots expressed much sorrow for him, because such a
violent and unexpected death had snatched him away before (as she said) he had
by serious repentance expiated the multiplicity of the sins he had committed
against God, his Country, and his Prince. But forasmuch as he greatly
favored such English as were affected to the Duke of Norfolk, he was thought
and accused to be a feigned and dissembling Politician.

The Scots and Rebels make incursions upon England.
The next succeeding night to this murder, T. Carrey of Fernihurst, and Walter a
Scottish-man of Buchlui, two of the hardiest and valiantest of those Frontiers,
and so much affected to the Queen of Scots, that for their devout following of
her faction and party, they suffered banishment, with the confiscation of their
goods, breathing forth defiance and vengeance against the Queen of England,
because the Viceroy in her favor, had so cruelly afflicted the Frontier
inhabitants; they violated the peace, and by force entered into England with a
rout of Scottish and some English Rebels, consuming and deuasting with sword
and fire, the neighboring Countries, as though they would have made them
desolate like Deserts: whereupon T. Randolph was incontinently dispatched into
Scotland, there, in a public Assembly of the Lords of the Realm, to give
notice of this injurious outrage: And if by reason of the manifold troubles
wherewith Scotland was at that present encumbered, they could not repress the
disturbers of the Peace, the Queen would revenge and right herself by force
of Arms, of that insolent affront which she had received; without any way
indamaging others, save those that had deservedly incurred her vengeance. To
this was only answered, That as yet there was no Viceroy chosen or designed
amongst them: Nevertheless, that the injuries done to the Frontier inhabitants
might be redressed, a command was given to the Lord of Sussex, to leauie a
competent Army, and march against the Lords of Buchlui and of Fernihurst, to
pursue and chase with deserved rigor, only those that with the rebellious
English had ouer-run and pillaged those of the Frontiers. Now the Earls of
Huntley and Argathel, that had all this while labored in the behalf of the
Queen of Scots hearing of his approach, sent unto him one Trebon, to demand a
Truce, and that they might obtain so long respit, until they should acquaint
Queen ELIZABETH with their affairs. But they perceiving that they could by no
means wrest him from his dessignes, they began first to use threatenings,
thinking to deter him, but that not prevailing, they were enforst to use
submissiue entreaties, that he would become an arbitratour for the abolishing
of certain ordinances which had been created in Scotland, some two years
before.

Nevertheless, Sussex about the midst of April, The English take revenge
thereof.
entered into Scotland with the Baron of Hunsdon, Drury, Marshall of Barwicke,
and the English Army: where they burned through the whole Country of
Tiuisdale, the houses and villages of Buchlui and Carrey, overthrew and
destroyed their country, and utterly ruinated Fernihurst and Craling, two of
the principal Forts of T. Carrey. At the same instant, the Lord Scroope
likewise entered upon the East parts of Scotland, laying desolate on every side,
through the Earldom of Anaudale, the possessions of Ionston, and others that
had in like manner favored the English Rebels, such was his expedition at his
first coming, that there were 300. houses consumed by fire, and 50. Forts at
least laid level with the earth. They succored those in Scotland that were of
the Kings party.


A few days after, the Lord of Sussex entered further into Scotland, with the
Baron of Hunsdon, where they besieged the Castle of Hume, which was the chief
refuge of the English Rebels which yielded up as soon as the great Artillery,
were planted against it. But there were found in it but two of the Rebels,
which they caused presently to be hanged; and placing a Garrison in it, Drury
was forthwith commanded to batter down Fast-Castle, which was also a prime
Fortress of the Baron of Hume, which likewise without resistance was yielded
up.

The English Rebels then retired into the heart of Scotland, associated with
diverse other Rebels, there with fire and sword they threatened the Frontier
inhabitants of England, and those in like manner of Scotland, that were of the
Queens party: the Lord of Sussex again sent forth Drury, who returned within
seven days with 1200. foot, and 400. horse. Drury received from Collingham,
certain hostages for the Earls of Angus, of Morton, of Mar, of Glencarne, and
for the Barons of Reuuen, and of Lindsay, who with diverse others had recalled
the English. Then Sussex himself, accompanied with G. Carrey, P. Manours, R.
Constable, which he had honored with the order of Knighthood with Druray, A.
Bows, G. Knolles, T. Brichwell, R. Gam, Elrington, Carnill, with other
Captains and Commanders in the Army, marching toward Edenborrough, joined his
forces with those Earls, and the Duke of Lenox, then newly returned from
England, who before was suspected to be of the party with the Duke of Norfolk
and the Queen of Scots. Thus marching through Limnuch toward Glasco, where
the Lord of Hamilton, Duke of Chastelraut had retired himself, and from thence
toward the Castle Hamilton, They take the Castle of Hamilton.
which, after they had mightily battered with the Cannon, and almost beaten it
down, was yielded up in a small space. Then were the houses of the Hamiltons,
with their stately and magnificent buildings, defaced and consumed with
remorcelesse fire, ransacking their demaines of Cluisdale, and at their chief
Manor house, situated near Limnuch.

Thus the Hamiltons with the rest, that took part with the deposed Queen,
being extirpated and put to flight, the Lords of Scotland, and those of the
Kings part, being ready to assemble about the election of a new Viceroy, they
sent to demand counsel of Queen ELIZABETH, who sent them this answer: That
because she would not preiudicate against the Queen of Scots (her cause not as
yet being judged of) she would not intermeddle with that election. Upon which
answer, they chose Lenox first of all Inter-Roy, and presently after Viceroy,
The Earl of Lenox is established Viceroy of Scotland.
the Queen of England not any way gaine-saying it; because she knew well, that
he was naturally addicted to love the King his Nephew, and was also assured
that he was well affected to the English by reason of the many benefits
received from them, and would always be at her devotion, in respect that his
wife remained in her power.

In the mean time that the Queen thus favored the Kings party in Scotland,
The King of Spain gives succors against those who were of the Kings side.
the Spaniard failed not in any point toward the imprisoned Queen; but at the
motion of the Lord of Hamilton, Rector of the Church at Dunbar, sent under the
hands of the Governor of Flanders, certain provision for war, as a certain
quantity of powder, with seven Pieces of great Cannon, and some small sums
of money, to the Earl of Huntley, Governor for the Queen in the North parts
of Scotland. Whereupon the Earl of Huntley, the Duke of Chastelraut, and the
Earl of Argathell, by a common advice and consent, with the approbation of the
Queen of Scots, whose Lieutenants they were, did send this Ambasie to the Duke
of Alua, by the Baron of Setone, who thus in the Dukes presence proposed his
message in these terms: THat he was sent from a Realm, which, The Lord Setone
his Embassage to the Duke of Alua.
by the treacheries of rebellious Subjects, was deprived of its public peace,
and a most gracious Princess; and that the tenor of his Ambassie was, to
demand and entreat assistance and succors, to recover her from a miserable
Captivity, being detayned in a strange Land, and the Realm from the oppression
of strangers: That the Scottish Rebels might not be suffered to traffic in
the Spanish Confines, and that there might be delivered to the Queen the
ten thousand Crowns that were assigned unto her: showing also, that she did
wholly cast her self into the hands of the King of Spain, well knowing that
he did always harbor in his heart a sincere love to true honor, justice, and
piety; objects most worthy and sitting for a Catholic Prince; and employed for
Intercessor the Duke D' Alua, who she knew would endeavor himself to
accomplish his desires. That he propounded not to the King of Spain any profit
or commodity that might redound to him, being a thing unworthy of so great a
Majesty, but only offers to him from an unfeigned heart, the perpetual amity
and humble service of his most Illustrious Queen, and her most warlike
Contrymen, the Scots. That the Glory of Charles the Fifth, his Father, would
for ever live eternized, for re-establishing the Duke of Ferrara, and the
Mahumetan King in their first dignity. But if he should re-establish the
Queen, being a constant Professor of the true Catholic religion, and an
absolute Princess, of the consanguinity and alliance of the greatest Princes
of Christendom, and an undoubted Heir to two flourishing Kingdoms, it would
be to him an everliving glory, and an incomparable argument of most Christian
piety. That in so doing, he should not only bind France, Denmark,
Lorraine, the Guizes, S. Peter, and all Christendom to his love, but also make
his fame equally celebrated with his Fathers, nay, even surpass him far, in
relieuing and reestablishing by his example, Princesses that are iniustly and
treacherously deposed from their lawful Thrones: That being himself the
greatest Monarch in Christendom, and having under his command and obeisance
far distant Countries, which might give occasion with great ease of such and
so insolent arrogance, yet getting by this means interest in all Princes, they
may with more ease be suppressed; That this pernicious example of deposing Kings,
was never left unrevenged; That he should be a most excellent and fruitful
model of rare Justice, and that if he should re-establish her that flies and
sueth to him for succor, he should tie in most fast bands of Amity and
Alliance to himself, a Queen Dowager of France, absolute of Scotland, and
most certain Heir to England; with her the Scottish Nation, which since
Charles the Great, have manifested themselves to all the world most firm,
constant, and faithful in their Alliance with France. And furthermore, that
now occasion was offered him, to revenge the many injuries which he had
received from the Queen of England, that aideth and favors the Rebels of
the Netherlands, that has unjustly seized upon his Coin, and the goods of his
Subjects, and also euill-intreated and abused his Ambassadors. That to sit
still any longer, and see the Scottish Nation fall under the subjection of the
English, would be a lazy slumber, and absurd sottishnes. That through the
increase of power and domesticke strength which that Woman has acquired, she
will at last prove terrible to her neighbors, and as she is of a Masculine
courage, and of a sex covetous of command, she may easily find a means to
entangle the King of Spain in a long and troublesome war. But if she were
prevented in this, she might easily be kept under her proper fear. That there
are but a very few in Scotland that will oppose the imprisoned Queen. That all
the Catholics, and the greatest part of the Nobles, are favorers of her
cause. That she has all the Ports and Havens in her power, and that the Pope
would not spare the very goods of the Church, to maintain a war so just and
holy. And that it merely depended upon the Catholic King, who was to muster
his forces, and show his power in so just, pious and salutiferous a cause, and
that all the Catholics of Great Britain expected from him only, in this
occasion, either their comfort or utter ruin.

The answer of the Duke of Alua.
To this the Duke of Alua answered, that he was ready, and addressed himself to
the King of Spain for the advancement of this affair, but could not deny
traffic with the Scottish Rebels, because that might infringe the liberty of
Flanders; promised to supply them for the most part with money. In the mean
time, Setone, the deeper to oblige the King of Spain and the Duke of Alua,
passing over to the Flemmings Confederats in disguised manner, procured by
soothing flatteries, feastings, and other-like means of corruption, the
Scottish Companies under them, to revolt, and as he was ready to be questioned
about it, and in great danger of his life, saved himself with much ado, under
the Duke of Alua, who promised to furnish him with ten thousand Soldiers for
six months: but in vain, in regard they were so full of troubles in
Flanders, that they could not transport any Soldiers for Scotland.

The Bishop of Rosse is set at liberty.
Whiles these things were a doing, the Bishop of Rosse, who had meritoriously
labored the affairs of the Queen of Scotland, in England, and had been
committed to the custody of the Bishop of London, about a secret practice of
Rebellion, being now set at liberty, brought it so to pass, that the King of
France, by his Ambassador De Monluc, labored most earnestly with Queen
ELIZABETH for the re-establishment of the Queen of Scotland, Labored the
liberty of the Queen of Scots.
complaining that she was more strictly handled then formerly, under the
custody of the Earl of Huntington, her sworn enemy and emulator, who (as
well as she) had secret aims to the Kingdom of England. The Ambassador of
Spain also at the solicitation of the Bishop of Rosse, pressed that point very
hard, in the name and behalf of his King. But the Queen, after she had
seriously reuolued the cunning devices that they all practiced to free the
Queen of Scots, and had covertly given out, that she was joined with them in
the Rebellion lately appearing, answered him, THat it was an inconsiderate and
dangerous folly, to free one that so apparently aspired by ill practice to the
Crown of England. That she had need more straightly then ordinary to look
unto her, and discharge some of her Servants, whom she had (for the most part)
chosen for her own proper dessignes, and to give for an assistant to the Earl
of Shrewsbury, whom she had appointed for her Keeper, who began to suspect the
loyalty of these people, the Earl of Huntington, whom she never knew to have
any title to the Kingdom, but only out of some relation to her in affinity:
and that nevertheless, she had discharged him long sithence; promises to omit
no means of agreement with the Scots, and protests to prosecute no injuries
received by her. That she ever hoped, that the King of France, the King of
Spain, and the Queen of Scotland, would not take it in ill part, that she
only provided for the peace and safety of her self and her subjects, since
nature, reason, and the honor of her Royal Name, did of right require the
same at her hands: And that if any of them knew any way more expedient to
prevent that imminent menacing danger, she would not only hear, but most
willingly embrace it.

After this, They consult about the freedom of the Queen of Scotland.
they sat in Council often hereupon at the Court, whether it were best to
send the Queen of Scotland back into her Country, or retain her still in
England, and how they might best provide for the safeguard both of the Queen,
and their Religion. Whiles they were consulting hereabout, William Herbert,
Earl of Pembroke, happened to dye, being issue to Richard, son to R. Herbert
the eldest Earl of Pembroke, being in the Climactericall year of his age, as
if he had presaged what mischief should befall him, if he had longer lived:
leaving behind him three children, Henry, Edward, and Anne. He was buried in
S. Paul's Church, with stately and honorable Rites, and a most glorious Tomb
erected for him; a Noble person, who out of his own means raised a Fortune to
himself: For he so wrought into the favor of HENRY the Eighth, that he made
him one of the Gentlemen of his Chamber, and by his own prudence increased his
means, especially after the King had married Katherine Parre, his wives
Sister. And under EDWARD the Sixth, he procured (whiles the Court was
distracted in several factions) to be of the Order of Saint George, Knight of
the Garter, the honor to be the Kings Squire, the Title of Baron Herbert of
Cardiffe, and the dignity of the Earl of Pembroke. He was General, under
Queen MARY, of her Troops she sent against Wyat, and for the English Army at
S. Quintin, President of Wales, twice Governor of Calais: under Queen
ELIZABETH, he was constituted Steward of her household, whose favor he lost for
a time, in regard that he was the first moouer of the match between the Duke
of Norfolk and the Queen of Scotland, notwithstanding his intention and will
were no way ill affected therein, and failed narrowly a little before his
death, of being questioned upon certain evidences at large dilated, and
presumptions secretly found out.

Hitherto Pope Pius the Fifth had laid a foundation of abstruse and dark
conspiracies for Queen ELIZABETH, and the year before, she having no warning
thereof, nor cited by a Bull declaratorie, privily sends forth an Anathema, and
excites Rebellion, and causes the said Bull to be fixed to the Palace Gates of
the Bishop of London, in these words.

THE SENTENCE Declaratory of the Holy Father Pope Pius the Fifth, against
ELIZABETH the pretended Queen of England, and those Heretics adhering to
her: And finally, all such as obey her, to be ensnared in the same.
PIUS, Bishop, a servant of the servants of GOD, for the future memory of the
business.
He that rules in the Heavens above, and to whom all power is given both in
Heaven and Earth, gave unto one only upon Earth, viz. to Peter, the chiefest
amongst the Apostles, and to the Pope of Rome, Peter's Successor, a holy,
Catholic and Apostolic Church, (without which there is no Salvation) to
govern it in the fullness of power. And this he ordained as chief above all
Nations and Kingdoms, to pull down, destroy, disseuer, cast off, plant, and
erect: to combine in the unity of spirit, his faithful people, connext
together through mutual charity, and present them whole and sound to his
Savior. Which charge, We, who through the grace of GOD, are thereunto called,
submitting our selves to the government of the same Church, cease not with all
our best labors and endeavors, to preserve this unity and Catholic
Religion, which he, (who was the Author thereof) so suffered to be encumbered,
for the trial of the faith of his, and for our correction. But the number of
the ungodly is so great in power, that there is not a corner left upon the
whole Earth now untainted with their wicked Doctrines. Amongst which,
ELIZABETH, pretended Queen of England, is, above all, the shelter and refuge
of Error, and most noisome enemies. It is She, who after she had possessed the
Kingdom, usurping (monster-like) the place of the chief Sovereign of the
Church in England, and the principal jurisdiction and authority thereof, has
thrown into miserable ruin the whole Kingdom, when it was even brought to
the Catholic faith, and began to bring forth good fruits. For, she with a
powerful hand prohibiteth the exercise of the true Religion (which was
heretofore overthrown by HENRY the Eighth, the forsaker thereof, and afterward
repaired with the help of this See, by MARIE, lawful Queen of England, of
famous memory) and embraces the Heresies of obscure persons; the Royal
Council once composed of the English Nobility, she has broken off,
oppresses such as made profession of, and exercised the Catholic Religion,
re-established the wicked Ministers and Preachers of impiety, abolished the
sacrifice of the Mass, Prayers, Fastings, the dividing of the Meats, the
Celibate, and all Catholic Ceremonies, sent Books over her whole Kingdom,
containing manifest Heresies, commended to her Subjects the profane Mysteries
and Institutions which she had received, and observed from the decree of
Calvin, displaced the Bishops, Rectors, and Catholic Priests from their
Churches and Benefices, and disposed of them to Heretics, and is bold to take
upon her to judge and determine Ecclesiastical affairs; forbade the Prelates,
the Clergy, and people, to acknowledge the Roman Church, or observe her
Commandments, and canonical duties; enforced diverse to swear obedience to
her detestable Ordinances, to renounce the authority due to the Roman
dignity, and acknowledge her the only Sovereign over temporal and
spiritual things; imposed penalties and taxes upon such as were refractory to
her Injunctions; inflicted punishments upon those who persisted in the unity
of the faith and obedience, imprisoned the Prelates and Governors of the
Catholic Churches; where diverse being, with a tedious languishing and sorrow,
miserably finished their unhappy days. All which things being thus evident
and apparent to all Nations, and so manifestly proved by the grave testimony of
diverse, that there is no place left for any excuse, defense, or tergiuersation:
We, perceiving that these impieties and mischiefs do still multiply one by
another, and that the persecution of the faithful, and the affliction of the
Church does daily increase, and wax more heavy and grievous, and finding that
her heart is so obstinate and obdurate, that she has not only despised the
wholesome Prayers and admonitions which the Christian Princes have made for her
better health and conversion, but that she has denied passage to the
Nuncio's, who, for this end, were sent from this siege into England; and being
compelled to bear the arms of Justice against her, We cannot moderate the
punishment that We are bound to inflict upon her, whose Ancestors merited so
well of the Christian Commonwealth. Being then supported by His Authority,
who has placed Us upon this Sovereign Throne of Justice, howsoever incapable
of so great a charge, out of the fullness of our Apostolical power, do
pronounce and declare the said ELIZABETH an Heretic, and favorer of
Heretics, and those who adhere unto her in the foresaid things, have incurred
the Sentence of Anathema, and are cut off from the unity of the body of
Christ. That she is deprived of the right which she pretends to the foresaid
Kingdom, and of all and every Seigniorie, Royalty, and privilege thereof:
and the Peers, Subjects, and People of the said Kingdom, and all others upon
what terms soever sworn unto her, freed from their Oath, and from all manner
of duty, fidelity, and obedience: As We do free them by the authority of
these Presents, and exclude the said ELIZABETH from the right which she
pretends to the said Kingdom, and the rest before mentioned. Commanding
moreover, and enioyning all, and every the Nobles, as Subjects, people, and
others whatsoever, that they shall not once dare to obey her, or any her
directions, Laws, or Commandments, binding under the same Curse, those who
do any thing to the contrary. And forasmuch as it may seem difficult for them
to observe these Presents in every place where they have occasion for them, Our
will is, that Copies hereof being written by some public Notarie, and sealed
with the Seal of some Ecclesiastical Prelate, or of his Court, shall be of as
good effect through the whole World, as these Presents might do, if they were
exhibited and represented. Given at Rome, at S. Peter's, the 5. of March, in the
year of the Incarnation of our Savior 1569. and of our Pont. the 5.

Caesar Glorianus.


This caused new iealousies to increase, that some Monster was a breeding:
also, it manifested a new Rebellion presently begun in Norfolk, which
nevertheless was as soon extinct as kindled. Certain of the Nobles of
Norfolk, to free the Duke, whom all the World did with an especial love
affect, practiced a design of collecting a great number of people together, at
the instant as they were flocking to a Fair at Harleston, Rebellion in
Norfolk as soon ended as begun.
under color of expulsing the Flemmings out of England, who to escape the
tyranny of the Duke of Alua, were fled into this Country in great numbers. Some
of them being apprehended, were brought to judgment, and condemned of
High Treason: ELIZABETH, nevertheless, to testify her clemency, would suffer
but only three to be punished, amongst whom, I. Throgmorton was most
remarkable, who being examined by the Judge, would answer nothing, but being
brought to execution, cleared the rest, and acknowledged himself the
principal author and perswader thereof.

I. Felton, who stuck up the Popes Bull upon the Bishop of Londons Gate,
Felton punished for sticking up the Popes Bull.
making no great difficulty of retyring, and saving himself, was presently
taken, and brought to judgment, and confessing boldly the deed, howsoever no
way acknowledging it as a fault, was hanged hard by the place where he had
stuck up the Bull, affecting a vain kind of show of a glorious Martyr. For
the rest, the modester sort of Papists misliked this Bull, The Papists reprove
the Bull.
because no lawful admonition had preceded, and that She had formerly granted
to them free exercise of their Religion in their particular Houses with
security; or such as made no scruple of conscience to be present at the
Service in the English Church, foreseeing a huge weight of dangers thereby to
hang over their heads, continued ever after firm in their due obedience,
perceiving that the neighbor Princes, The greatest part contemn this Bull.
and Catholic Provinces, neglected not the Queen, notwithstanding this Bull,
but seemed to contemn it as a vain sound of words.

The same day that Felton was arraigned, the Duke acknowledging his error to
proceed from inconsideration, testified his repentance so far, that he did
not only seem to disclaim any thought of marriage with the Queen of Scotland,
but that his ears abhorred the remembrance of it, and promised under his hand,
never to think further of attayning it, was freed out of the Tower of London,
(where the plague was already begun) and sent to his own House, to the great
joy of every one, to be under the free custody of Henry Neuill. Neither truly
could they plead against him by right of her Majesty's Law, from the 25. year
of Edward the Third, Cecill advises him to marry.
as Cecill aduertiseth, who out of the affection he bare unto him, labored to
espouse him to another Wife, to the end to put by his thought of compassing the
other, and to provide for the public peace. But, after a few days, many
things that he suspected, discovered themselves: and their faith, who were of
his most secret counsel, either with hope, or by corruption, was broken.

Diverse are imprisoned.
The times then were full of suspicions and conspiracies. For T. and Ed.
Stanley, the two youngest sons of the Earl of Darbie, by the Duke of
Norfolkes Daughter, Gerrard, Rolston, Hall, and others of the County of
Darbie, conspired to free the Queen of Scotland out of prison; but Rolstons
Son, who was one of the company of the Gentlemen guarders, discovered the
conspiracy, and the rest were imprisoned, except Hall, who saved himself at
the I Will of Man, and from thence was sent over to Dunbritton, with
re-commendation to the Bishop of Rosse, where he was afterward taken at the
surprise of the Castle: and lastly, put to death at London. The Bishop of Rosse
himself, being lately in custody, and set at liberty, is again committed to
the custody of the Bishop of London, for intertaining clandestine conferences
with the Earl of Southampton, a most devoted man to the Romish Religion.

In the mean time, Sussex, accompanied with the Lord Scroope, with Companies
of Soldiers being gone again into Scotland, burned the Villages in the Valley
of Annandale, ruined the Castle of Annandale, which belonged to Heris, and the
Castle of Caer-Laueroc, belonging to Maxwell, who had made some pillaging
incursio^s into England, and brought them to such distress who continued on
the Queen of Scotlands side, that the Duke of Chastelraut, and the Earls of
Huntley and Argathell, send them a promise in writing sealed under their hands,
obliging themselves thereby no longer to maintain wars, and to abandon the
English Rebels. This being done, he forthwith returned, and for their valor
Knighted Hastings, Russell, Brown, Hilton, Stapleton, and Musgraue, and
himself afterward, for his approved wisdom and virtue, Sussex chosen a
Priuy-Councellor.
was admitted to be of the Queens Privy Council.

ELIZABETH, having her thoughts full of doubts, with various suspicions, by
reason of this Bull, and Norfolkes conspiracy, sent unto the Queen of
Scotland, Treaty with the Queen of Scotland.
being then at Chettesworth, in the County of Darbie, Cecil, and Walte^^
Mildmay, who, in regard the waters were risen above measure, it being in the
Month of October, came thither with much difficulty, to consult with her
about the most convenient means how to compound the variance in Scotland, for
the restoring of her to her former estate, to secure ELIZABETH, and provide for
the safety of her young Son. She could say nothing, but deplore her
afflicted condition, and complained of the fraudulent devices of Count Murray,
justified the Duke of Norfolk, and reposed all her hope on the courtesy of
ELIZABETH, understanding that she had the general government of the affairs
of Scotland, as well as of England. They propounded unto her, that to conclude
a certain peace between the two Kingdoms, she ought to oblige her self, to
confirm the Treaty of Edenborrough, and disclaim the title and right which
she pretended to England, so long as ELIZABETH, or any issue of her body
should live. Not to renew or entertain any alliance with any Prince
whatsoever, against England; Not to admit any foreign troops into Scotland,
nor hold any Council with the English or Irish, without notice first given to
ELIZABETH; To send back the English Fugitives and Rebels, to satisfy the
damages done upon the Frontiers; To make search, according to the Law, of the
Murder as well of Darley her Husband, as of Murray, and deliver her Son into
England for a pledge; Not to contract her self in marriage with any English
man, without acquainting the Queen of England, nor with any other, contrary to
the Ordinances of Scotland; That the Scots might not go for Ireland, without
leave of the Queen of England; That for the performance of these things, the
Queen, and the Commissioners appointed for the same, shall thereto set their
hands and Seals; Six Hostages, whom the Queen of England would nominate,
should be sent into England; That if the Queen of Scotland, or any other by
her procurement, attempted any thing against her, she should in that re^pect
alone, be cut off from all right which she might claim in England; That the
Castles of Hume, and Fast-Castle, were held from the English for three years
space; That she should deliver into their hands certain Forts in the Country
of Galloway, or Cantire, to the end that the Borderers on that coast might not
invade Ireland: And lastly, that the State of Scotland should confirm al these
things by Act of Parliament.

To these things, her self suddenly with great dexterity and wisdom, made
answer: nevertheless referred it to be answered more fully by the Bishop of
Rosse her Ambassador in England, Alexander Gorden, Bishop of Galloway, and to
the Baron Leuinstone, deputed by Her, lieutenants of Scotland; who afterward
allowing some of these Articles, and rejecting others, made answer, as here
follows: THat it was reasonable to confirm the Treaty of Edenborrough, The
Answer to the proposition of the English.
and renounce the title of England, during the life of ELIZABETH; but as
concerning the ancient alliance of France, it was to be considered, that if
they did not intertaine that still, the Queen should lose her dowry, the 100.
armed Men, and the 124. Soldiers of the Scottish Guard, being Archers, the
Merchants, Scholars, and many who are to have inheritance, their pensions and
immunities which they enjoy, shall be cast out, and deprived of them, and of
the love and assistance of a most puissant Nation: which things, if the English
did not amply satisfy, the Queen of Scotland could in no manner renounce this
alliance. But that she would not entertain any foreign soldiers, unless
such rebellion might happen, which could not be suppressed by the strength of
the Country. That she would have no intelligence, or keep correspondancie
with any of the English, to the prejudice of England, provided that the Q. of
England on the other side intertayned none with the Scots, to the prejudice of
Scotland. That if there were any English Rebels, and Fugitives in Scotland,
they might demand them of the Scottish Rebels who were for the more part near
as they, to examine by deputies the damages which they had received, and make
inquiry, according to the Laws of Scotland, of the death of Darley and Murray.
That she could not deliver the King in pledge, in regard he was in their
custody, who under his name colored the Rebellion against the Queen. That it
was a strange innovation, that a free Princess should receive Laws from a
stranger-Prince, or his Subjects, for her marriage. That the Scots should not
pass into Ireland, to any prejudice of the Queen of England, provided that
the Irish were by a reciprocal Law obliged not to pass into Scotland. Agreed
for confirmation of the security, to give such pledges as the Queen of
England should nominate, the Duke of Chastelraut, and the Earls of Huntley,
Argathell, and of Athole excepted. Furthermore, it shall be in their power to
exclude the Queen of Scots from all right of Succession in England, if she
should go about to do any thing contrary to the right and authority of the
Queen of England, so that the Queen of England would be bound in the like
penalty, if she should do any thing against the power and privilege of the
Queen of Scotland. They demand that restitution be made of Castle-Hume, and
Fast-Castle, to the Baron of Hume, being the Lord to whom by right they
appertain, and the English to hold them no longer. To deliver up the Forts in
Galloway and Cantire, were to no other end, but to minister a new occasion of
war.

They cannot agree.
When these things could in no wise be agreed upon, neither any Commissioners
came from the Viceroy of Scotland, in the mean while it was divulged all
abroad, that the Pope, the King of France, and the Duke D' Alua, was
importunately sought unto for aid, to set the Queen of Scotland at liberty;
and the English Rebels, the Earl of Westmerland, and the Countess of
Northumberland, and others (whom the Pope had supplied with 12. thousand
Crowns by the Bishop of Rosse) were come back out of Scotland; It is clear
that this Treaty brought forth nothing: but that ELIZABETH, (even as one chosen
by consent to sit at the Stern of all Great-Brittaine, commands by her own
authority, that the Assembly of the States of Scotland should be prorogued, and
Truce often talked of. The Commanders do grievously vex and torment all parts
of Scotland.

Rosse sends the Articles of this Treaty to the Pope, The Bishop of Rosse
requires help to free the Queen of Scots.
to France, and to Spain, and certified that the Queen must necessarily
consent unto them, unless their succor and counsel came in time to relieve
her, which he vehemently craved, but in vain. For indeed their heads were
possessed with other affairs; Spain was preparing to marry Anne of Austria,
daughter to Maximilian the Emperor, his Niece by the sister-side, who at the
same time departed from Zealand, to go for Spain. To whom, ELIZABETH, for a
chief testification of honor and love to the House of Austria, sent Charles
Howard with a warlike fleet, and choice Nobility, to conduct her thither
through the English Sea.

The twelfth year of ELIZABETH'S reign being now happily finished, in which
the Papists expected, according to the prediction of their Divines, the event
of a golden day, as they said; all good people were joyful, and happy, and
with a delightful joy began to celebrate the seventeenth day of November,
(being the day of her coming to the Crown) with Prayers and Thanksgiving,
which were performed in the Churches, vows were multiplied, ringing of Bells,
Carrolls, Turneyes, and public solemn joy euery-where. And this has
continued ever sithence she lived, in testimony of the love and obedience that
her Subjects did bear her.

In the midst of these things, dyed H. Clifford, The death of the Earl of
Cumberland.
Earl of Cumberland, the Second of the name, Henry's Son, whom HENRY the
Eighth had raised to the honor of an Earl, in the year 1525. being otherwise
of a very noble and ancient House, and having gotten a great increase of honor
by marriages, which he contracted with the heirs of Vesciores and Viponts or
Vieux-ponts, who had been anciently hereditary Vicounts of Westmerland, who by
his first Wife begot Eleanor, the second daughter of C. Brandon, Duke of
Suffolk, and of Mary, Sister to HENRY the Eighth, Margaret, who was married to
Henry the Earl of Darbies Son, of much hope, and with great pomp, being the
only heir of that House. But having by his second Wife, Anne Dacrey, two
Sons, who were successively heirs to their fathers honor, this hope
vanished.

The death of Throgmorton.
There dyed also N. Throgmorton, of whom I have often spoken, the fourth Son of
G. Throgmorton, the Golden Knight, and of Katherine, daughter of N. Baron of
Vaux; a man of great experience, of solid judgment, and of a singular
dexterity of spirit, who, stirring many things under the reign of MARY, with
great difficulty, by his prudence and eloquence, saved his life: afterward
under ELIZABETH, he was employed in many Ambassies, wherein he got much
honor, until, for the gaining of the Earl of Leicesters favor, he opposed
Cecill, who was his Emulator, for thereby he could attain but to very small
means, and triuiall preferments, as chief Butler of England, and Treasurer of
the Queens Chamber. Being at Supper in the Earl of Leicesters House, and
eating sallads, he was suddenly taken with an inflammation of the Liver, as
some have affirmed, or with a Catarre, as others say, and not without jealousy
of being poisoned, whereof he dyed in a good time, both for himself and his,
being then in great danger both of losing his life and goods, being a man of a
stirring and working spirit.

In Ireland, Connogher, O-Brien, Earl of Twomond, not able to endure Edward
Fitton, Governor of Connaught, who began to govern the Province something
more severely, Rebillion in Ireland quenched before they saw the day.
and to take away from the great Ones, and chief of the Country, all hope of
polling the Subjects of Ireland, had secretly plotted Rebellion with others,
but it was prevented by a happy chance. For, having appointed the day to take
arms, comes in Fitton, who knew nothing, and courteously advertised the Earl,
that he would lodge the morrow following with him, with certain of his
friends. The Earls conscience accusing him, and being possessed with a strange
fear, (an ill sign in doubtful things) thinking that he was now discovered,
and that the Governor came to him rather like an enemy then a guest, retired
himself forthwith into France, leaving them all in doubt what was become of
him. The Conspirators, fearing that he was gone into England to discover the
plot, continued in obedience, whereof he understanding, showed himself wise at
last, and having confessed all the business to Norris, then Ambassador in France,
employed him to mediate Queen ELIZABETH'S favor, with whom he found such
Grace, that he was restored again to his Estate.

But Stukeley, an Englishman, a riotous Prodigal, Stukeley flies out of
Ireland.
and vainglorious fellow, who after he had consumed all his estate, retired
into Ireland, having lost all hope of getting the Marshall-ship of Wexford, and
perceiving himself to be despised of every one, and being unable to raise any
commotion, after belching up most unworthy reproaches of his Princess, who had
done him many favors, slipped over into Italy, to Pope Pius the fifth, and by
his flattering tongue, insinuated beyond all credit into the favor of this
pernicious old man, who breathed out the ruin of Queen ELIZABETH, making
great blags, and promising that with three thousand Italians, he would drive
all the English out of Ireland, and burn the English Fleet; which he afterward
villainously attempted, but to his own ruin, as hereafter we will show.

Book 2. 1571.
THE FOVRETEENTH YEAR OF Her Reign. Anno Dom. 1571.
IN the first month of the year, Queen ELIZABETH entering into London in
Royal State, visited that fair Cloister called the Bourse, which T. Gresham,
Knight, a Citizen, and a Merchant Royal of London, had caused to be built for
the use of Merchants, and by the voice of a Crier, and with sound of Trumpets
in dedicating thereof, named it

The royal Exchange.
The Royal Exchange.
A few days after, howsoever She were very sparing in the disposing of
Honors, having made in twelve years space, The ereation of Baron Burghley.
not above four Barons, she solemnly graced William Cecill with the Title of
Baron of Burghley, having on Barons Robes, and with these formal words, AS
well in regard of the long service which he has done in the time of our
Progenitors, the Kings of England, The manner of creating Barons.
as also for the faithful and agreeable obedience, which he has always and
in diverse ways testified unto us from the beginning of our Reign, not ceasing
daily, not only in our great and weighty affairs to afford us counsel, but
generally in all dessignes concerning the Kingdom; as also in respect of his
vigilance, valor, prudence, dexterity, integrity of life, foreknowledge,
care, and fidelity: out of our special favor, certain testimony, and mere
motion, we have created, established, and raised him to the state, dignity, and
honor of Baron Burghley, and have imposed upon him, and given and granted unto
him the name, style, and title of Baron of Burghley, to have and to hold the
same forever, to him and the heirs males which shall be borne from his body.

Of whom I have already freely spoken, and will again make mention, as well as
of others whom she has raised to the state of Barons, because it is amongst
the most ample degrees of Honor. For the Barons of the Parliaments of England,
are borne Peers, and great Counselors of the Kingdom, and enjoy diverse
immunities and Privileges, which are not to be mentioned in this place, but I
have noted elsewhere.

A little after, Ridolph, a Florentine, who had used trading for fifteen
years space in London, delivered secretly unto the Queen of Scotland, Letters
from the Pope, Letters from the Pope to the Queen of Scotland.
importing promises to employ himself for the advancement of the Catholic
Religion, and Himself willed her to give credit in all things to Ridolph, and
to learn from him, who was then going for Italy, what means might be best for
the re-establishing of the Catholic Religion, and appeasing of the mischiefs
in England. Ridolph also solicited the Queen, by the several Letters which
he wrote unto her, to advise hereupon with the Duke of Norfolk and his
friends, and to recommend it to them. But she deferred the return of any
answer, until she might perceive how the Treaty which was already begun, would
take effect, notwithstanding the Kings of France and Spain, and the Duke of
Alua had written to her to the same purpose. For the Earl of Morton, Petcarne,
Abbot of Dunfermelin, and I. Macgill, were come to treat about the affairs of
Scotland, in the Kings name, and having received command from Queen ELIZABETH,
more clearly to unfold the causes of the Queens deposing, and to prove them
to be just, exhibited a prolix Co^mentarie, by which, with an insolent
freedom, Edict of the Scots against the authority Royal.
and vehemency of words, they strained themselves to prove by ancient and
modern examples, searched out of all places, that according to the ancient
right of Scotland, the people of Scotland were under the King, and that by the
authority of Calvin, the Magistrates were appointed to bridle their unruly
appetites, and had authority to punish wicked Kings by imprisonment, and depose
them from their Kingdoms; and vaine-gloriously boasted to have showed the
Queen courtesy, in permitting her to substitute her Son in her place, and
appoint him Tutors. That it was not in respect of her innocence, that she
subsisted, but out of the mercy of her people, with diverse other things, which
factious spirits are accustomed to allege against Royal Majesty. Condemned by
the Qu. of England.
Queen ELIZABETH not able with any patience to read this, secretly condemned
it, as injurious to Kings; and as for the Deputies, she answered them, that she
could not yet perceive any just cause why they should so vex and trouble their
Queen, and therefore wished that they would rather seek out some means to
quench the discord in Scotland.

In the prosecution whereof, it was propounded in the house of Bacon, Lord
Keeper of the great Seal, to the Bishops of Rosse and Galloway, and to Baron
Leuiston, Deputies for the Queen of Scotland, that for the safety of the
Kingdom and Queen of England, and the Nobles of Scotland who were of the
Kings part, that the Duke of Chastelraut, the Earls of Huntley and Argathell,
of Hume, of Seris, and another Baron ought to be given in pledge, and the
Castles of Dunbriton, and Hume delivered for three years unto the English,
before the Queen could be set at liberty. To which they answered, THat it need
not be doubted, The dema^ds of the English for the freedom of the Qu. of
Scotland.
that the Queen of Scotland, who had voluntarily put herself under the
Protection and guard of the Queen of England, would willingly give contentment
in any thing which might conveniently be done. But to deliver such great
persons in pledge, with such Forts, were nothing less then in depriving a
miserable Queen of the help of her faithfullest friends, and her strongest
places of defense, to be exposed as a prey unto her adversaries.

But they offered to give in pledge the two said Earls, and two Barons: And as
for the Forts, they said, that according to their Covenants with France, they
could not give them to the English, that they could not grant them also to the
French. But, said Bacon, The English refuse the offers of the Scots.
the whole Kingdom of Scotland, the Prince, the Peers, and the Forts, are not
sufficient security for the Queen, and the most flourishing Kingdom of
England: and therefore, what security soever the Scots might propose, the
Queen of Scotland ought not to be set at liberty.

Hereupon the Scots forthwith began to conjecture, and spoke openly, that now
they fully perceived, that the English had resolved to hold their Queen
perpetually in England, and by the same means interrupt the Treaty, sithence
they stood so stiffly in demanding such security, as Scotland could not any
manner of way perform. Howsoever, the other Councillors of England protested
to desire nothing more then the freedom of the Queen of Scotland, provided,
that they gave good and sufficient security; and in this nature they treated
hereupon, and to have the King, with Morton and his Companions. Who plainly
answered, that they had no power nor authority to treat, whether they ought to
receive the Queen into Scotland, or deliver the King. Alteration among the
Scots.
But her Deputies rejected such flying off, as frivolous, judging that those
who were the authors of deposing her, had power sufficient to free her, without
asking the other Conspirators, sithence the fault of one, equally polluteth all
the Confederates. As for the Prince, who was yet scarce five years of age, he
could give no power at all. And as for the Viceroy, that he had left all his
affairs to the pleasure of Queen ELIZABETH: They prayed them, either to bring
in the others who were sworn, into consultation, or to proceed without them
upon equal conditions.

But Queen ELIZABETH knowing well, that they could conclude of nothing for her
security, or for the King and Queen of Scotland, if the one and the other
consented not, thought it reasonable, that the States of Scotland, who ought
forthwith to assemble, should make choice of certain men, who might labor
the mediation of the peace. Whereupon the Bishop of Rosse and his Colleagues
openly complained, Complaints of the Scots against the English.
that certain Counselors of England had abused the understanding of their
Queen, and the patience of the Queen of Scotland, deceived the Stranger
Princes, and soothed the Scots with a prejudicial hope; the Queen of Scotland
her self being full of indignation and grief, to see such delays, called
home the Bishop of Galloway, and Count Leuiston, and notwithstanding that Qu.
ELIZABETH had commanded the Bishop of Rosse, to depart from London, she
countermanded him to continue still there, which was not without jealousy to
those who were of her part in Scotland, who determined to take up Arms, and
give no more credit to those hurtful truces, and assembles.

For whilst they treated of these things in England, they received great
damages in the punishments of many, and murdering of others, the taking of
Dunbritto^, situated near Glotte or Cluide, upon an arm of the sea, being
the strongest and best fortified Castle in all Scotland: I. Hamilton,
Archbishop of S. Andrews, brother to the Duke of Chastelraut, was hanged, as a
confederate of murdering the King, without being brought, according to the
custom of the Country, to Judgment, only upon the testimony of a priest,
who justified, that upon taking confession of the assassinates of the King, he
heard them say that he was of the confederacy.

The Queen being prisoner, could no longer harbor in her heart what she had
a long time concealed, perceiving herself out of all hope, plunged in a deep
sorrow, that of all her servants they had left her but only 10. and a priest,
to do her service, and that all means both for her health and liberty (being
ever most charitable) seemed to be taken away. She sent thereupon secretly
unto the Duke of Norfolk a form of her dessignes, A remembrance sent from the
Q. of Scotland to the Duke of Norfolk.
which she had written long before, and certain amorous Letters, written in a
particular Character only between them two, with other Letters, to persuade
him still to rely upon the Pope and the Spaniard, by Ridolph, whom she
recommended unto him, as one most affectionate to his service, and very
necessary to be employed in his Affairs.

But Higford, the Dukes Secretary, who copied out this remembrance, and those
Letters in the usual Character, being commanded to throw them into the fire,
hid them secretly under the mats in the Dukes Chamber, for some further
Dessigne as it seems This Ridolph being one day in the Dukes presence, spoke,
and made Barker often iterate the same.

THat he had observed, that there was as well among the Nobles as meaner sort
in England, three sorts who studied novelties; some were such as had flourished
under the authority of MARIE, and were then but few in number; others, who
being zealous of the Roman Religion, fretted that they were not permitted the
free exercise thereof: others, who being transported with a new hope, grieved
at their present fortune, who to enterprise any thing that would be propounded
unto them, wanted nothing but a Leader of some Noble Race, money, and foreign
assistance. That there could not be found one more illustrious, and capable in
such respect, then the Duke, who had the general favor of the people, and
that it stood with reason, that he should revenge the injuries done him, in
that they had so long kept him prisoner, against the Laws of the Country, and
that they had not called him to the Assembly of Parliament, sithence he had
his place and voice, as being chief amongst all the Peers, and Earl
Marshall of the Kingdom of England. And with the greater efficacy to persuade
him to these things, showed him a Catalogue of the Nobles, who had devoted both
themselves and their fortunes to his service, if he undertook this; assured
him, that for foreign help, the Pope would be at all the charges of the
War, provided that the Catholic Religion might be advanced, having to this
end disbursed the year before a hundred thousand Crowns, when the Bull was
published, of which he himself had distributed to the English Fugitives 12000.
promised, that the Spaniard (provoked by the injuries of the English) would
send him for aid 4000. horse, and 6000. foot, which might very conveniently be
brought in about the beginning of summer, at Harwich, a Port in Essex, at whose
approach, the Duke had a great number of strong ships; and without suspicion,
because about the same instant, the Duke Medinoe-Coeli was to come into
Flanders with a great Fleet. Concluded lastly, that this might be supposed to
be a means to free the Duke from all suspicion of attempting the Kingdom, and
to provide for the safety of the Queen of England; provided that she embraced,
or at leastwise tolerated the Roman religion, and consented that the Queen
of Scotland should marry the Duke.

The Duke conceiving these things somewhat probable, gave ear unto him, but
nevertheless refused to subscribe the Letters of Credit, which were offered
him by Ridolph being upon departure, and would not harken to the counsel which
the Bishop of Rosse suggested to him by Barker, after he had often reuolued it
in his mind; TO seize upon the Queen on the sudden, The counsel of the
Bishop of Rosse.
with a number of choice Gentlemen, and to disturb the Parliament being then
assembled. And that this might easily be done, considering the opportunity of
times, since this Assembly afforded him so many Gentlemen at his devotion,
which could not be conuented in any other place without suspicion. That he had
just cause to be moved hereunto, in regard they had kept him so long prisoner,
against the Laws of the Country, and that they would not admit him to the
Parliament, and that they had sought out most severe Laws against the Papists.
And by pregnant examples, sithence Castriot in Italy, and others in all
Countries, having inopinately enterprized weighty affairs, have happily
succeeded in them. And if not long since, five Gentlemen of Scotland were able
to break off the Parliament, by which Murray was to be banished, and bring the
Queen under their power; they might by the same means, and as easily, if they
would lay hold of the occasion offered unto them) seyze upon Qu. ELIZABETH,
accomplish the marriage of the Qu. of Scotland, and provide in England for the
Catholic Religion, without any great noise or need of foreign assistance.

The attempts of oothers.
The Duke, who of his natural good inclination was far from offending, rejected
this counsel from his heart, as most pernicious and dangerous. But now H.
Percy offered the Bishop to employ himself about the deliverance of the Queen
of Scotland from prison, provided that Grange, and Carre Farnihurst, should
receive him at his entrance into Scotland, and that the Earl of
Northumberland, (his Brother) who was prisoner, should be set free. Howsoever,
being suspected, because of his great familiarity with Baron Burghley, and for
that he so long deferred the enterprise, they gave as little credit to this
counsel, as to that of Powels of Stanford, one of the company of the Gentlemen
of the Guard, and to that of Owen, one of the vassals of the Earl of Arundell,
who should have undertaken this, but the Bishop of Rosse perceiving they were
unable to effect it, being men of no note, hindered them. As for other
businesses which were closely done in these passages, we will omit, until the
light discover them.

A great Earthquake.
Whiles all these things were secretly handled in London, there happened a most
fearful Earthquake in the Eastern parts about the County of Hereford, near
the Town of Kinaston. For, upon the twelfth of March, about six of the clock
in the evening, the Earth opened, and a Mountain with a Rock upon which it
was situated, after a hideous noise, and strange crash, that it was heard by
the Neighbors a great ways off, raised up it self, as if it had wakened out
of a profound sleep, and forsaking his deep bed below, mounted up into an
higher place, carrying with it the Trees which were rooted thereupon, the
Shepherds Tents, and the Flocks of Sheep feeding thereon. Some Trees were
almost quite covered with Earth, as if they had but newly taken root there. It
left in the place from whence it departed, an ouerture of forty foot wide, and
80. else long: the whole field was twenty Akers or thereabouts. It overthrew a
little Chapel near unto it, carried from the East into the West, an Yew-tree
which was planted in the Churchyard; and, with its violence, drove up before
it highways, with Shepherds Caves, with Plants and Trees which were thereon.
It made mountains level, and arable grounds mountainous, as if then they had
took their beginnings. And thus from Saturday at night, until Monday noone
next following, it rested not, till at last, as if it were then tired with the
long way, and wearied with its weighty burden.

A little before, there was celebrated in France at Mesires sur Meuse, the
marriage between Charles the Fourth King of France, and Elizabeth of Austrich,
the Daughter of Maximilian the Emperor, with great and royal pomp.
Elizabeth, to testify her joy with honor, according to the entyre affection
she bore unto the Emperor, whom she honored as her father, and to show her
love unto the King of France her Neighbor and Confederate, and for her own
honor, sent into France T. Sackuil, Baron of Buckhurst, who, according to his
own worth, The Embassage of Baron Buckhurst.
and his Princes dignity, was magnificently entertained. He was accompanied
with Guido Caulcancius, a Florentine, a man of great experience, with whom the
Queene-Mother of France, mannaging the affairs of her and her children, openly
treated of a match between ELIZABETH, A proposition of a match between
Elizabeth, and the Duke of Aniou.
and Henry the Duke of Aniou her Son, and gave him withal certain Articles
to present unto ELIZABETH: and after that, the King of France made earnest suit
for his Brother by Mauluoisie his Ambassador ordinary, La Motte, F. Archant,
and de Foix, who bestowed a whole year in soliciting ELIZABETH, sometimes all
together, and otherwhiles severally. This marriage did something fortify their
hope, that the Roman Religion had taken no firm root in the Dukes heart, as
well in respect of his tender years, The hopes which they conceived.
as being educated under Carualet, who was much inclining to the Protestants
Religion: the hopes which they had by little and little to win him to the
profession of it, and the suppositions of the benefits which this marriage
might bring to the reformed Religion: he being a young Prince, and of a
warlike disposition, might, by uniting the Forces of Germany and England, bring
the refractory Papists to obedience, establish a perpetual league of peace
between England and France, and interrupt the designs of the Queen of
Scotland, the King of Spain, the Pope, and the Irish Rebels, sithence he
might join unto the Crown of England, the Dukedomes of Aniou, Burbonnions,
and Auuergnia, yielding great Revenues: And it appeared that he might add
greater things hereunto. Lastly, if this match were refused, never would there
be a more honorable match offered.

Articles of marriage.
After diverse debatings, the French propounded three Articles: the first of
which concerned the crowning of the Duke: the second, the government of the
Kingdom jointly with Queen ELIZABETH: the third, the toleration of their
Religion: To which, answer was made; The Answer.
THat the Queen could not agree, without the consent of the State of the
Kingdom, that he should be crowned after the marriage was accomplished, but
that she would willingly consent (if the States thought good) that upon terms
of marriage, he should be graced with the matrimonial Crown, (so She termed
it) without doing any prejudice to her Majesty, nor to her Heirs and
Successors: And that she would not fail to make him discern a most ample
honor when he was once her Husband. As for the common government, she
thought it not unfit, to take for a Companion, and Coadiutor in a coniunct
administration, him whom she had honored with the title of a King, and her
Husband. And as for the toleration of the Religion which he professed, that she
could not give her consent thereto for certain causes, which (as I have
collected them out of the Letters of Queen ELIZABETH, were these:) That
howsoever the external reverence of Religion might be tolerated between the
Subjects of the same Kingdom under diverse manners and forms, nevertheless,
this strange form, most repugnant of all, which should be between the
Queen, the head of her People, and her husband, seemed not only dangerous,
but of all most auerse and disagreeing. That She desired the King of France,
and the Queen, his Mother, equally to weigh in even Balance, the peril which
she should undergo, and on the other side, the honor of the Duke of Anio^:
And that in tolerating his religion, she violated the Laws established in her
Kingdom, beget a distaste in her good Subjects, and lightened the heart of the
wicked, all which she verily should undergo for the honor of the Duke.

But the Frenchmen urged, that if she lived without exercise of Religion, she
seemed to have none at all, and that she would not for her Honor be accounted
an Atheist. She on the contrary replied: THat if she did but husbandize those
seeds of pure Religion which were in him, and receive increase thereof, he
should see within a short time, that it would redound greatly to his Honor.

In the end they came so far, that if the Duke would assist with the Queen
in the celebration of Divine Service, and not refuse to hear and learn the
Doctrine of the Protestants, She would condescend, that neither he nor his
people should be constrained to use the Ceremonies and Fashions accustomed in
the English Church, nor molested if they used other Ceremonies, not utterly
repugnant to the Word of God, provided that they used them in private places,
and that they ministered no occasion to the English of violating their Laws
established. De Foix, upon these words, To the Word of God, paused a little.
Queen ELIZABETH, to give them content, commanded that in stead of those words,
they should put in, To the Church of GOD; but the one pleasing no more then the
other, he desired that To the Catholic Church might be put in. Queen ELIZABETH
would no way assent thereunto: and hereupon this matter began to wax colder by
little and little.

To what end this marriage was proposed.
Some are persuaded, that this Match was not seriously undertook by the King of
France, and the Queen, his Mother, but only to the end that the remembrance
of a match contracted with a Protestant Princess, might be a testimony unto
the Protestants, of their sincere meaning unto them, and to prevent the match
which they suspected to be treated of with the King of Nauar, whom the King of
France would have married to his Sister. The like opinion was of Queen
ELIZABETH in England, and that she had not treated of this marriage, but to
cause the King of France, his Mother, and Brothers, to show themselves more
favorable to the Protestants in France, break off the hopes of the Queen of
Scotland, and the plots which the Spaniard and the Irish practiced against
England, by the negotiation of the Cardinal of Lorraine, and to avoid the
Thunderbolts of the Pope, by the interposition of the French: For about this
time, the Earl of Leicester, who saw more clearly into the deepest thoughts
of Queen ELIZABETH then any other, wrote unto Walsingham, Ambassador in
France, THat the Queen had a desire to marry, but that she was not very hot
upon it; and that she was of opinion, that it was more necessary then her
desire was to effect it: and moreover, that when the Duke of Aniou went from
the Article concerning the toleration of Religion, which Queen ELIZABETH would
with such caution have bound him to, that he no longer persisted in his suite.

As the French took care and pain to make up this Match, certain of the
English labored no less, They hasten the marriage of the Qu. of Scotland.
to advance that between the Queen of Scotland and the Duke of Norfolk,
which through their wicked counsels they had again revived, contrary to his
promise, which first of all was discovered by these means.

Ridolph the Florentine, who we told you was sent unto foreign Nations, about
the affairs of the Queen of Scotland, had declared unto Charles Bayliffe, a
Flemming, one of his household servants, all that he had labored with the Duke
of Alua, and put into his hands a packet of Letters, written in counterfeit
Characters to her, to the Ambassador of Spain, to the Duke of Norfolk, to
the Bishop of Rosse, and to Baron Lumley, which he carried with him,
notwithstanding the Bishop commanded him to leave it with the Governor of
Callais to keep. But he had no sooner landed at Dover, but he was
apprehended and imprisoned, and the Packet sent to the Lord Cobham, Governor
of the Cinque Ports: The Bishop, who first of all knew it, wrought so quickly
and craftily with Cobham, who was partly of counsel in the dessignes of the
Duke, that he delivered him this Packet, and another in stead thereof was sent
to the Queens Council, wherein were old-dated Letters, tending to small
purposes, and advertised Bayliffe thereof, who being brought into question,
nevertheless confessed something of what had past, and amongst the rest, that
this Packet had past through the Bishops hands, who being advertised thereof,
forthwith sent away Cutbert his Secretary, to disperse amongst his friends the
counterfeit Characters, and all that might do hurt; so as when Sussex,
Burghley, Mildmay, and Sadler came to search his house, they could find
nothing at all, nor get any thing out of him by examination, he standing upon
it, that an Ambassador ought not to give an account of his dealings to any but
his Prince. He was notwithstanding committed for two days after to the Bishop
of Ely, and a little while after that, carried to the Isle of Ely: Stanley and
Gerard, Knights, and Rolston, of whom I have spoken, The Bishop of Rosse and
others committed.
were clapped up in the Tower of London, and Howard, who aspired to the
Arch-bishoprike of York, was delivered upon suspicion to the custody of the
Archbishop of Canterbury.

Money sent into Scotland.
The Queen of Scots, having about this time sent a certain sum of money to
the Ambassador of France, to be conveyed to those that were of her party in
Scotland, the Ambassador delivered it to Barker and Higford, who aduising with
the Duke, put it into the hands of one Brown of the Town of Shrewsburie, a
servant to the Duke, to be delivered in Scotland to Baron Heris, by Banister
and Louder; Brown being a crafty fellow, perceiving by the weight, that in
stead of Silver they, had given him Gold, delivered it over to the Council of
State. Hereby the wiser sort began to observe, that the Duke had already begun
to trespass against her Majesty, in lending aid to Heris, and to the Scots
her professed enemies, who had for^aged the Frontier Inhabitants of England.
And hereupon Higford was committed to prison, who presently confessed all the
business concerning the money, and showed where the Letters and other writings
were, and the secret Characters, and the remembrances and instructions of the
Qu. of Scotland, of which I have spoken, hidden under Ma^^land Tiles,
importing, THat the French approved of the intended meeting with the Scots, but
that the Proposition of marriage of the Duke of Aniou with Queen ELIZABETH, was
to no other end, but only the better to color the assistance performed to the
Queen of Scotland, for her re-establishment. That they secretly prevented any
contract with John of Austria, but favored the other with the Duke of Norfolk
very much, for the hatred they bore to the Spaniard. That the Duke of Alua did
so far disprove the Design of sending the Queen back into Scotland, that
it would certainly be the ruin of her self, and of the Catholic Religion
through all Great Britain; because, she being returned, must of necessity,
either hazard the danger of being besieged, or try her fortune of the wars
against the Rebels, who by the aid of the English, might easily bring her
under their power, before such time that any Foreign forces could arrive.
That being then in no safety in Scotland, and no hope to be expected from
France, so pestred with intestine wars, he thought it more expedient to
procure aid from the Spaniard, who had made an offer of marriage with John of
Austria, which notwithstanding she never intended, sithence she had promised,
by means of the Duke of Norfolk, to re-establish the Roman Religion in Great
Britain: And moreover, to send her Son out of Scotland into Spain, where he
might be safely preserved, and instructed from his Infancy in the Roman
Religion, and by this means, all pretense taken from the Scots, who shaddowed
their rebellion under color of him: and lastly, for the effecting of these
businesses, presently to dispatch away Ridolph, with caution, first, to
conceal these things especially from the French.

The Council having received these instructions, the Letters whereof I spoke,
and other dispatches from the Pope: and Barker who was surprised, having
confessed all these particulars, they commanded Sadler, with a Company of armed
men, to go unto the Dukes house in London, which was then at Charter House.
Two days after, the Duke, who was altogether ignorant that those people had
confessed any thing, and confident that those Letters and Remembrances were
burned in the fire, being questioned, denied all that they had confessed: and
thereupon was brought back the seventeenth day of September, by Sadler, Smith,
Neuill, and Wilson, (to the great grief of the people) unto the Tower of
London, from whence he was but the year before delivered. Afterward they
imprisoned Banister, a Lawyer, whose counsel the Duke had taken and followed;
after that, the Earls of Arundell, and Southampton, Baron Lumley, and Cobham,
and Thomas his brother, Percy, Louder, Powell, and Godier, who all declared
what they knew, in hope of pardon.

As Soon as the Council had produced their Confessions in the Dukes presence,
the Queen of Scotland and the Bishop of Rosse's Letters, with the said
Remembrance, he was very much dejected, and considering this remembrance, and
those Letters, which through a weak credulity he supposed to be burned, he
sighed, and brake out into these words; I Have been betrayed and undone by
mine own people, in failing to distrust, which is the only sinnewe of
Wisdom.

But he humbly besought the Council to mediate the Queens favor in his
behalf, promising to conceal nothing of what he knew, and seriously
protested, that he never approved of any thing, which was to the prejudice of
the Qu. or Kingdom. But on the contrary, from the very bottom of his heart,
condemned the design of seizing upon the Queens person, or the Tower of
London, and the setting at liberty of the Queen of Scotland: and that he
never harbored a thought so much of bringing foreign Troops into Great
Britain, but only to suppress certain of the Scots, rebelling against the
Queen. Being this day examined upon 50. Articles or thereabouts, he answered
without dissimulation. After that, they penned the substance of the whole
business, in the Star Chamber, before a great Assembly of Noblemen, in
presence of the Lord Mayor and Shiriffes of the City of London, and from
thence, in the Palace of London, in view of all the inhabitants, by G.
Fleetwood, Recorder of the City.

And forasmuch as by all these confessions, especially by the Dukes, the Bishop
of Rosse was convicted as Author of these Plots: they seriously consulted what
was best to be done: For (as they do ordinarily that have such charges) he
conceived, that it was lawful for him to use any means for the advancement of
the affairs of his Princess; and that by the oath and inviolable right of an
Ambassador, he was not bound to acknowledge the authority of any other: and
relying hereupon, exposed himself to the liberty of diverse turbulent Actions,
kindling of seditions, and taking counsel in the night with the Earl of
Southampton, and afterward inclining to the English Fugitives in Flanders, the
Duke of Alua, the Spaniard, and the Pope, about the invasion of England. They
proposed hereupon unto Jews, Dale, Drury, Aubrey, and Jones, men of sound
judgment in the Ciuill-Lawes. In the first place, WHether an Ambassador
moving sedition against the Prince unto whom he is sent, may enjoy the
privilege of an Ambassador, or not? and whether he be not subject to
punishment as an Enemy?

To which they answered, that by the Common Law of Nations, and Ciuill-Law of
the Romans, such an Ambassador was fallen from all privilege, and was subject
to punishment, as an enemy.

WHether a Minister or Agent of a deposed Prince, another being crowned in his
place, ought to have the privilege of an Ambassador? They answered, that if
such a Prince be lawfully deposed, his Minister cannot challenge the privilege
of an Ambassador, forasmuch as none but absolute Princes, which have
sovereign power, can constitute Ambassadors. In the third place, WHether a
Prince being come into another Kingdom, and kept in hold, may have his Agent?
and if this Agent ought to be accounted an Ambassador, or not?

They answer, That a Prince may prohibit an Ambassador to enter into his
Kingdom, and command him out of his Kingdom, if he does not contain himself
within the limits prescribed to Ambassadors, but in the mean time he ought to
enjoy the privilege of an Ambassador, for the authority of his Ambassie.

Upon the answers of these Ciuill-Lawiers, the Bishop of Rosse being called
back from the Isle of Ely, and sharply reproved, the Council denounced him
not to be acknowledged an Ambassador, but to be punished as a pernicious
Malefactor. To which he answered; THat he being Ambassador to an absolute
Queen, unjustly deposed, had, according to his duty, labored for the liberty
of his Princess, and for the good of both the Kingdoms: that he was come
into England with ample authority, under public testimony, which he
exhibited, and that the sacred Rites of Ambassadors ought not by any means to
be violated.

Whereupon, Burghley gravely shows him, that neither the Rites of the
Ambassies, nor public Letters of Credit, are of validity for Ambassadors
which offend against the public faith, but are subject to penal actions, and
that otherwise it should be permitted to wicked Ambassadors to attempt against
the life of Princes, unpunished. He on the contrary, opinatiuely maintained,
that the authority of Ambassadors had never been violated by way of Rite, but
only by way of fact (to use his own words) and boldly admonishes them not to
deal with him more sharply then the English Ambassadors had been dealt
with, Throgmorton in France, Randolph and Tamworth in Scotland, who had
apparently excited and nourished rebellions, and were acquitted upon command to
depart within a certain time. They began to press him upon the witness of
some Englishmen: He declines from the English witnesses.
he gently entreated them not to do it, because (says he) that a received
custom does establish it self for a Law: An Englishman ought not to bear
witness against a Scottishman, nor a Scottishman against an Englishman.

After some arguings hereupon, whether such custom took place elsewhere then
upon the Frontiers of both the Kingdoms, and whether English Ambassadors had
stirred Rebellion or no; Rosse is carried to the Tower of London, where being
straightly kept, within a few days he briefly made answer to all the
interrogatories, with this caution, that his answers might not be preiudicious
to any. And first, he excused the Queen of Scots, (who being prisoner, and in
the prime of her age) seeking to escape by any means, ELIZABETH having
excluded all from seeing her, and barred her from all hope of liberty, and
openly supported all her adversaries: afterward excuses the Duke, that he
had not treated marriage with her, but by the advice of many that were of Queen
ELIZABETH'S Council, nor could he relinquish her, although he had under his
own handwriting promised to do it, forasmuch as before that promise, a
former promise of marriage had passed between them: And finally, excuses
himself, that being Ambassador and Minister, could not without blame leave
the duty of his charge, and be wanting to his Princess in her afflictions,
and that he had propounded the seyzing of the person of Queen ELIZABETH, to no
other end, but to try whether the Duke had a mind prepared to do a
mischievous act: and verily he craftily extenuated the offenses of the rest,
and would never discover the names of the Nobles which offered themselves to
the Dukes service, for the seyzing of the Queens person; only confessed, that
by the commandment of the Queen of Scots, he consulted with the Earls of
Arundel, Lumley, and Throgmorton, and by Lumley, and the Vicount of Mountague,
because that he was to deliver into the hands of the English, the Castles which
were in Scotland, the Hostages, and the King of Scots, to renounce the title to
England, and the English Rebels. But for this matter, enough is spoken of this
year; and the particularities of it, may be drawn from the Dukes confession,
and the memorial sent to the Queen of Scots, written by the Bishop of Rosse's
own hand.

At the same time, Matthew, Earl of Lenox, Viceroy of Scotland, and great
Grandfather to the King, having appointed the assembly of States at Sterlin,
and thinking to be safe there, was surprised by the Lords of the contrary
faction, which met together by the Queens authority at Edenborrough, and
having yielded himself to David Spencer, who labored very hard to protect
him, was slain with him by Bell and Cauder, Lenox Viceroy of Scotland is
slain.
after having with much trouble and pains ruled the Kingdom for the King his
Nephew, the space of fourteen months, more or less: at what time France
took the Queens side, and Queen ELIZABETH the Kings, not so much to get their
friends the victory, as to keep them from being overcome. Queen ELIZABETH
hoped that the young King should have been delivered into her hands, and the
French thought that Dunbriton and Edenborrough should be given them: whereupon
some Scottish Merchants were very much troubled, and traffic in France was
denied them, which drew a great party to the Queens side, in hope thereby to
have freedom of trade there again. In Lenox his place, The Earl of Mar is
elected Viceroy.
by the common consent of the people, John Areskin, Earl of Mar, was elected
Viceroy, a man of a calm spirit, and a great lover of his Country, who
being no less afflicted with the turbulent counsels of his friends, then by
the insultings of his adversaries, for very grief dyed, when he had governed
thirteen months.

The iniquity of these times, and the love which the people of England bore to
their Queen and Country, drew the States to Westminster, where they made a
Law to prevent the plots of the seditious, Laws against disturbers.
by which it was ordained by ancient authority: THat if any did attempt to
ruin or hurt the Queen, to make war, or excite others to do it in any part
of her dominions: or affirm that she had no right to the Kingdom, but that
it were more justly due to another; or said, that she was an Heretic, a
Schismatique, or Infidel; that she did usurp the right from another that was
living; or that the Laws and Statutes were not of power to define and tie the
right of Succession, It should be Crimen laesae Maiestatis. If any one during
the life of Queen ELIZABETH, should expressly affirm either by writing or
Book printed, that any one is or ought to be the Queens Heir or Successor,
except the natural Line which should proceed from her own body; or that
should publish, print, or sell Books written upon this Subject, he, and his
maintainers, for the first time should suffer a whole years imprisonment, and
lose half their goods, but returning to the same offense again, they incurred
the penalty of a Praemunire; which is, loss of all goods, and imprisonment
during life.

This seemed grievous unto some, which thought that the tranquillity of the
Kingdom ought to be strengthened by the designation of an Heir, but it was
beyond belief, what jests the maliciously-curious made of this clause, [
Naturally begotten of her body,] because the Civil Law calls those Children
natural, which are borne out of marriage, and that nature only, and not the
honesty of wedlock begot them: and the English Law, [ Legitimate,] those that
are lawfully begotten. And I remember being then young, to have heard it spoken
aloud, that this word was pressed into this Law by Leicester, that some
bastard-sonne of his should thrust in as one of nearest kin to Queen
ELIZABETH.

Laws against Papists.
It was also ordained, that those who had by any Bull or writing from the Pope,
reconciled any to the Church of Rome, should undergo the punishment of Crimen
laesae Maiestatis. Those who sustain the Reconcilers or bringers into England
of Agnus Dei's, Grains, Crucifixes, or any other things consecrated by the
Pope of Rome, should lose all their goods, and endure perpetual imprisonment:
and those that shall conceal and not detect these Reconcilers, were holden
guilty of Misprision of Treason. Furthermore, those goods and lands, which
were convicted for Rebellion in the North, being in the possession of James
Pilkinton, Bishop of Durham, who challenged Regal power between the Rivers of
Teise and Tyne, were adjudged to the Queen and her Successors, because she
had with great cost delivered both the Bishop and the Bishopric from Rebels,
yet so, as that in time to come it shall not be prejudicial to the Regal rite
of that Church of Durham. It was also ordained, that to meet with the
insolences of such as were devoted to the Pope, and despising the authority of
the Laws, and their obedience to their Princess, who day by day withdrew
themselves into foreign Countries, without the Queens license, (hoping in
time with a great number, and to innouate something) they should return within
a certain time, and make their submissions, and that the fraudulent
conueyances which they had made, should be burnt. So much for the Papists.

On the other side, by wholesome Laws they suppressed as well the covetousness
of certain of the Clergy, who, as if they had been borne only to
themselves, with a notorious malice to their Successors, wasted the goods of
the Church, and let out the Lands for many years, as the impudency of others,
who, with a desire to innouate, opposed themselves to Articles of the Synod of
London, for the abolishing of Schism, in the year 1562. It was likewise
again propounded, that if the Queen of Scots should again offend the Laws
of England, she might be proceeded against, as if she were a Peers Wife of the
Realm of England. But the Queen by her authority, hindered that from being
made a Law.

In the beginning of June, the Parliament being ready to be dismissed, they
sat upon John Story, a Doctor of Law, and Spy to the Duke of Alua, of whom I
have made mention in the year 1569. to know whether John Story being an
Englishman, should be found guilty Laesae Maiestatis, for having conferred
with a stranger-Prince in Brabant, for the inuading of his Country, and
showing the means to do it. The learned sort in the Law did affirm, that
he might be accused Laesae Maiestatis. Whereupon he was called unto
judgment, for having conspired against the life of his Princess with one
Prestoll, a man much addicted to magic, and in giving thanks at the Table,
always cursed her, and the King of Scotland, to the fiends of Hell, and
demonstrated to the Duke of Alua's Secretary the means to invade England, to
make Ireland revolt, and at the same time to bring the Scots into England. He
refused to submit himself to be judged by the Laws of England, maintayning,
that being a sworn Subject not to Queen ELIZABETH, but to the King of Spain,
John Story condemned to dye.
the Judges of England had no power over him. But he was condemned according
to the form of ( Nihil dicit) because no man can free himself from the Laws
of the Country where he is borne, nor renounce his natural Country nor his
Prince, and suffered as a Traitor.

Differences appeased between the English and the Portugals.

Guienne.


There was then for certain years, controversy between the Portugals and the
English, during the commerce between them and the Moors for pure Gold, from
the year 1552. in that part of Africa called Guienne, and others who had first
discovered those Coasts, hindered as much as they could by force of arms, so
as they fought sometimes by Sea, and detained Ships on both sides. But
Sebastian, King of Portugal, being newly come to age, to make a peace, sent
Francis Gerard into England, who made a Covenant with the Queen almost in
these very words: THat a perfect amity may be made, and free commerce had on
both sides, the one shall not attempt any thing to the prejudice of the other,
nor lend succor to their enemies, Rebels, or Traitors; the Merchandise,
Moneys, and Ships, which are under arrest, to be restored. And Queen
ELIZABETH, to gratify the King of Portugal, prohibiteth the English to use any
Navigations in the Seas, or to the Lands which the Portugals had conquered. And
that if they should do otherwise, it should be upon their own peril, if the
Portugals should deprive them both of goods and lives: The Kingdoms of
Portugal and Argarbe, also the Isles of Azores and Madera excepted, in which,
free Navigations was permitted.

This year, W. Parre, Marquis of Northampton, The Marquis of Northampton dies.
being very old, peaceably departed this life, a man much conversant and well
read in the delectable studies of Music, and intertainement of Lovers, and
other courtly iucundities, who was first raised to the dignity of Baron Parre
of Kendal, afterward he married Anne Bourchier, sole daughter and heir to the
Earl of Essex, at the same time when the King married his sister; and
afterward b^ EDWARD made Marquis of Northampton; under the reign of MARIE,
he was condemned of High Treason for taking arms on the behalf of Jane Gray,
who was brought in by subornation to be Queen, but was shortly after pardoned,
and restored to his inheritance, as he was afterward to his honors by Queen
ELIZABETH. He had no Children, but left to be his heir, Henry Herbert, Earl
of Pembroke, his other Sisters Son.

John Jewel, The death of Bishop Jewel.
a man of an excellent spirit and exquisit learning in Theology, and of great
piety, died the same year, being hardly fifty years of age, descended of
good Parents in Devonshire, and commendably brought up in Corpus Christi
College in the University of Oxford, who, in Queen MARY'S reign was
banished into Germany, and afterward by Queen ELIZABETH being made Bishop
of Salisburie, put forth, in the year 1562. an Apology for the English
Church, and most learnedly defended the Protestants Religion against Harding
who was fallen from it, in two Volumes in our own Tongue, which are now
translated into the Latin.

Affairs of Ireland.
Ireland at that time was quiet enough: for John Per^t, President of Mounster
had so ransacked John Fitz-Morris, who had pillaged Kilmalocke, that he was
constrained to hide himself in Caves, and in the end, as we shall relate
hereafter, brought to beg pardon with humble submission. William Fitz William
Deputy of Ireland.
Sidney, Deputy of Ireland, returning into England, Fitz-William, who had
married his Sister, succeeded in his place.

THE FIFTEENTH YEAR OF Her Reign. Book 2. 1572.
Anno Dom. 1572.
THe beginning of a new year, brought forth a new Tragical spectacle to the
Inhabitants of London; for in the Palace of Westminster a Scaffold was erected,
from the one end to the other, with a Tribunal upon it, and seats on either
side, the like had not bin seen for eighteen years before. Thomas, Duke of
Norfolk is presented before the Nobles and Peers, and arraigned in
Westminster Hall.
Thither, upon the sixteenth day of January, was Thomas Howard, Duke of
Norfolk, conducted between Owen Hopton, Lieutenant of the Tower of London,
and Peter Carew, Knight, before whom was borne the fatal Axe, with the edge
forward; upon the Tribunal was seated George Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury,
constituted Lord high Steward of England for that day; upon either side of him
were placed the Nobles appointed Commissioners, which we call Peers, to wit,
Reynold Gray, Earl of Kent, Tho. Ratcliffe, Earl of Sussex, Henry Hastings,
Earl of Huntington, Francis Russell, Earl of Bedford, Henry Herbert, Earl of
Pembroke, Edw. Seimor, Earl of Hartford, Ambrose Dudley, Earl of Warwick,
Peers of the Kingdom.
Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, Walt. Deu^reux, Vicount of Hereford, Edward
Lord Clinton, Admiral, William Lord Howard of Effingham, Chamberlain, William
Cecill, Lord Burghley, Secretary, Arthur Lord Gray, of Wilton, Iea. Blount,
Lord Mountioy, Will. Lord Sands, Tho. Lord Wentworth, William Lord Bourrowes,
Jews Lord Mordant, John Pawlet, Lord S. John of Basing, Robert Lord Rich,
Roger Lord North, Edm. Bruges, Lord Chandos, Oliver Lord S. John of Bletso,
Tho. Sackuill, Lord Buckhurst, and Will. West, Lord De-la-Ware.

The manner of his arraignement.
Silence being commanded, the Commission was read, importing the power given to
the Judge. Then Carter, chief King of Heralds, delivered into his hands a
white wand, which he presently after delivered to the Groom Porter, who
standing by, did hold it erected the whole time of the Court. Silence again
commanded, the Lieutenant of the Tower, was bidden to bring forth his charge,
and present the Duke before the Seat of Justice, who foorth-with appeared, on
either side were the Lieutenants of the Tower, and Peter Carew, next of all, he
that carried the Axe, the edge thereof turned from the Duke.

Silence the third time proclaimed, the Clerk appointed for the Acts of
Judgment, thus spoke to the Duke, Thomas, Duke of Norfolk, late of
Kenninghale, in the County of Norfolk, hold up thy hand.

When he had holden up his hand, the said Clerk read aloud the Crimes of which
he was accused, that is to say, That in the eleventh year of Queen ELIZABETH,
and afterward, the Duke has treacherously held counsel to depose the Queen
from her Kingdom, to take away her life, and to invade the Realm by raising
of war, and bringing in troops of Strangers. That notwithstanding he had
certain knowledge, that Mary, late Queen of Scots, had arrogated to herself
the Crown of England, The chief points of his accusation.
with the Title and Arms thereof, yet has he treated (unknown to the Queen)
of a marriage betwixt them, and contrary to the promise under his hand and
Seal, has lent unto her certain large sums of money. That he had assisted
and succored the Earls of Northumberland, Westmerland, Marquenfield, and
others, notwithstanding that he had good notice, that they had raised
Rebellion against the Queen, and were chased into Scotland. That in the
thirteenth year of the Queens Reign, by Letters, he demanded succors of the
Pope, Pius Quintus, sworn Enemy to the Queen, of the Spaniard, and Duke D'
Alua, to set the Queen of Scots at liberty, and re-establish the Roman
religion in England. Finally, that he had relieved and aided Heris a
Scottish-man, and others, enemies to her Majesty in Scotland. These Articles
being read, the Clerk demanded of the D. if he were guilty of these
accusations.

Whereupon the Duke desired (if the Law would permit it) that he might have an
Advocate to defend his cause: to which Catelin the Chief Justice answered,
that it might not be allowed.

THen it is meet, said he, The Duke demands an Advocate to plead his cause.
that I submit to the sentences of the Judges; but the matter is full of
ambiguities; neither did I know within these four and twenty hours, that I
was to come to Judgment, and so was unprepared of Books. I see now well that
I must enter into combat for my life without Arms. I have heard
nevertheless, that in the reign of HENRY the seventh, in a cause of Laesae
Maiestaris, Humphrey Stafford had an advocate assigned him. To which Dier
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, answered, that Stafford (indeed) had an
Advocate allowed him, to plead for him concerning the right of Azile, from
whence by force he was taken, but for the crime of Laesae Maiestatis, without
any assistance, he pleaded his cause himself.

THen, this day (replies the Duke) must I my self plead for my life, goods, my
Children, and for what counteruailes all these, mine Honor: but let that
Honor pass; if I innocently perish, GOD will not let it pass unrevenged. Yet
this one thing let me be permitted to question; whether that enumeration of
crimes will hold true in every point, and to what point I must make answer?
Catelin made reply, Since the causes are true, this enumeration also must be
esteemed true. I desire to be instructed (says the Duke) whether every of
these be crimes of Laesae Maiestatis? For I have heard related, that in the
cause of the Lord Scroope, under the Reign of Henry the 4. But as he would
have proceeded, the Clerk interrupted him, speaking with a loud voice,

THomas, Duke of Norfolk, art thou guilty of these crimes, or no? The Duke
denied. Then he was further demanded, How will thou be tried? He answered, I
commit my cause to God and to these Peers. The odiousness of these crimes
amazeth me, but the Royal clemency of her Majesty, from which (besides what
I have received, I can expect no more) much refreshes me. But of you (my Lord
Judge) let me request thus much, that I may be justly dealt withal, and that
my memory, which is indeed but weak, may not be too much oppressed with a
confused variety of matters. I confess my self happy, having you my Peers
for Judges, and with much willingness would commit my life to the integrity of
the most of you. I was assured in mine own innocence, and therefore sought no
way to fly. Yet I cannot but ingenuously confess, that I have been wanting in
my duty toward the Queen, but never did I any thing which might touch or
offend so Royal a Majesty. I beseech you then, that those higher matters may
not be commixt equally with those of Laesae Maiestatis.

Then Barham, the Queens Serieant at Law, began; Those Crimes (says he) of
Laesae Maiestatis, of which you thus expostulate, are these. You have
complotted to deprive the Queen both of Kingdom and life, you have consulted
of a marriage with the late Queen of Scotland, you have invited foreign
powers to invade the Realm, you have succored Rebels, and have sent aid to
those Scots which were the Queens Enemies. The Duke interposeth, saying;
BArham, do not (I pray you) exasperate the matter with words, in obiecting
against me the marriage, and other things which fall not amongst the offenses
of high Treason.

Barham, turning to the Peers, urges this: He (quoth he) that will marry a
wife that lays claim to a Kingdom, does likewise affect the same Kingdom.
For the Duke had enterprized the same, being amongst the Commissioners at
York, appointed for the hearing of the Queen of Scots Cause, being at that
time bound by his oath, equally to balance the accusations and defenses of
either part.

The Duke replyeth, There be diverse parts contained in that cause, which are
not crimes of Laesae Maiestatis.

But the Lord high Steward commanded the Duke not to stray so far from the
purpose by digressions: whereupon ( Barham clamorously insisting) he
acknowledged that the Queen of Scots had laid claim to the Crown of England,
but had long time since desisted. Barham on the contrary demonstrated, that
she had not as yet desisted, because she had not yet renounced the right which
she pretended: he furthermore grievously accused the Duke, that he instructed
the Deputies of the Queen of Scots what to answer, according as it appeared
in the Confession of the Bishop of Rosse. The Duke confessed, that Lidington
had made a motion to him of the marriage, but he refused the same, neither gave
he any instructions, but desired that Rosse might be produced in presence.

After this, Barham amply prosecuteth many things of the marriage, which have
been spoken of, with an intent to prove that the Duke had an affection to the
Kingdom, and insisteth with often-repeated Interrogatories. What other thing
could the Duke propound to himself, The second Article of his accusation.
whilst (without the Queens knowledge) he determined to marry the Queen of
Scots, being a woman without means or Kingdom (her Son being established in
the Kingdom) then that by her he hoped to enjoy the Crown of England, and so
consequently deprive the Queen both of rule and life?

You have (quoth the Duke) lowdly repeated these things, to convince me of
enterprizing the deposing and ruin of the Queen. To come to the point (says
Barham) it is sufficiently known, that you have consulted about the surprising
of the Tower of London, which is the strongest place in the Realm, whereby it
is necessarily manifest, that you had then plotted the ruin of the Queen,
seeing that Rule is impatient of competitors. The Duke denies not, hat one
Hopton suggested him to the surprising of the Tower of London, but he utterly
rejected it. Why then (quoth Barham) did you ask counsel of the Earl of
Pembroke concerning the same, who dissuaded you from it.

Barham proceeds, and urges, that when the Queen of England had demanded
that the young King of Scotland, certain Castles, and the rebellious English
which were in Scotland, should be delivered into her hands: The Duke had
underhand advised the Scots, not to consent thereunto. He likewise accused
him, that he endeavored to free the Queen of Scots out of prison; and that,
after he had religiously promised by his handwriting, not to meddle with her
in any kind of business.

One Candish was then produced for a witness, who deposed, that the Duke had
constantly resolved of the marriage, and had asked him, if (after the death of
Queen ELIZABETH, he might draw his Uncle to his party. These the Duke
altogether denied, rejecting his testimony, as of a poor and abject fellow.
After this it was demonstrated, that the Duke had secretly sent a Servant to
the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, to advertise them, not to stir in
the Rebellion, because he thought it would be very dangerous. Letters also were
brought in, which the Queen of Scots had written to the Duke, importing, that
she was much grieved that the Earl of Northumberland was apprehended before
he had taken up Arms in the Rebellion: (For whether she understood this by
report, or it was invented of purpose, I cannot say.)

To this the Duke answered: THat by these reasons it could not probably be
inferred, that he had labored the destruction of the Queen; neither was any
thing that has hitherto bin produced, of any moment against him, excepting the
testimony of the Bishop of Rosse; and that also of him being a forreiner (by
the authority of Bracton, a man most expert in our Laws) in no wise is to be
admitted. That he never had Northumberland or Westmerland in such esteem that
he would commit his life into their hands: and that his innocence was such a
sure rampire to him, that he never meditated of any escape for himself.

The third Article of his accusation.
Then Gerard, the Queens Attorney, spoke: It is more than sufficiently
apparent, that the Duke would have espoused the Queen of Scots, to destroy the
Queen of England. The Letters which he has written to the Pope, the King of
Spain, and Duke d'Alua, do justify that he had a determination to invade
England. That which he consulted of with Ridolfe, was now likewise openly
known by the obscure Characters which were found hidden under the tiles in the
house of the Howards, and by the Letters also (which he commanded to be burnt)
but were found at the entry of his Chamber under the Matte. And all these
things may easily be proved by the interrogatories and answers of them that
have not been affrighted with torments, nor condemned to have attempted ought
against the State.

To which, the Duke replied: I Have not (quoth he) been either author or
favorer of the counsels and deliberations holden with the Pope or Spaniard,
but to the contrary, I have always reproved and disallowed them. Those that
have offended, let them suffer, and not discharge them upon me.

Besides all this, Gerard accused the Duke, that he had consulted with Ridolfe
for the landing of ten thousand men out of Flanders at Harwich, a Port in
Essex: and this was justified out of the examination of Barker. That Letters
were written by Ridolfe to the King of Spain, and Duke d'Alua; to which,
although the Duke subscribed not, yet by the counsel of Rosse, he sent Barker
his Secretary as Ambassador, to auerre them to be the Dukes own Letters.

MY memory (replyeth the Duke) begins to falter, neither can it contain
such an intricate variety of matters: You other pleaders have your notes and
memorialls with you, but I must ex tempore answer to all mine accusers. The
Duke of Norfolk contrary to the Roman Religion.
But surely it is not probable, that I who have always been contrary to the
Roman Religion, should entertain a treaty with the Pope. I had a great deal
rather be torn in pieces with wild Horses, than to depart from the Religion
which I profess. Consider but the situation of Harwich, and it will easily
annihilate the accusation. Who sees not how difficult a thing it is, to lead
an Army through that part of the Country, which is round enclosed with hedges,
and most incommodious, by reason of the straight and narrow ways and passages?
Had I had a determination to raise an army against my Princess, without doubt
I would not have been unprovided of Arms: but I have not for these ten
years past, bought any more than eight Corslets; and for Gunpowder, not any at
all. I never committed any Letters to the trust of Barker, but rather of
Banister, that was to me more than many Barkers. Then were the intercepted
Letters of the Bishop of Rosse, The Letters of the Bishop of Rosse, to the Qu.
of Scots are produced.
which he writ in Prison to the Queen of Scots produced, by which, what things
were before spoken, were confirmed. The Duke requested to see them, for it
seemed that he suspected them to be supposed. But the Judge answered, You need
not call them in question, for they are written with the Bishops own hand.
Besides these, a little Letter was brought forth, which the Duke had written in
Okar to one of his Servants, The Dukes Letter to his servant.
wherein he commanded him to burn the packet which was hidden in a certain
place, and to turn the fault upon the Bishop, who by the privilege of an
Ambassador, might delude the Law. To which, the Duke replied in these words:
Being certified that it was diuulged abroad, that many had accused me, I
answered by this Letter, and seeing all things were so nearly searched into, I
commanded that packet should be burnt, because I would save others from danger.

The Letters of Ridolfe.
Bromley, the Queens Solicitor, presented the Letters of Ridolfe, wherein was
contained, that the Duke d'Alua had approved the design: Of the Pope.
likewise the Letters of the Pope to the Duke, dated the fourth of the Nones of
May. Then Wilbraham made a fair discourse, concerning what credit should be
given to the testimonies of the Bishop, and of the Dukes servants: whereto the
Duke made answer: CErtes, it falls not under the power of my faculties, to
frame a replication to such an elegant and polished Oration. Yet this Orator,
such and so great as he is, has omitted to speak how great the violence of
fear is, which oftentimes does remove a firm and wel-composed mind out of
its place and state. Again, he alleged Bracton, The testimony of Strangers.
against the credit given to foreign witnesses.

But Catelin answered, that in such causes as this, the testimonies of
Strangers were available, and that it was in the power of the Peers, either
to give or deny them credit.

Now was that matter come to be proved, that the Duke had succored the
rebellious Fugitives; which was found apparent by the Letters of the Countess
of Northumberland, The third Article of his accusation.
in which she gave the Duke great thanks for the money wherewith he furnished
her husband and her self. Finally, the last objection of the relieuing of
those Scots which were enemies to the Queen, was proved by the Letters of the
Duke to Banister, by Banisters confession, and by the Money which was delivered
to Brown of Shropshire. Hereupon the Duke demanded of the Judges, Whether the
Subjects of another Prince, confederate with the Queen, may be accounted
enemies to the Queen? Catelin answered, They might, and that the Queen of
England might make war with any Duke in France, and in the mean time,
observe a peace with the King of France.

But as the night began to approach, the Lord high Steward demanded of the Duke,
if he had any thing more to speak for himself. The Duke answered, In the
equity of the Laws, I repose my trust. Then he commanded the Lieutenant of
the Tower, to retire with the Duke awhile: after silence was proclaimed,
turning to the Peers, he thus spoke to them: YOu have heard, how Thomas, Duke
of Norfolk, being accused of Laesae Maiestatis, and not confessing himself
guilty, has committed his cause to GOD, and to you. It is your part then, to
consider amongst your selves, whether he is to be holden guilty or no, and to
give up your verdicts according to conscience and honor.

They likewise withdrawing themselves at his command, The Peers consult
amongst themselves.
consulted together: after a while, they returned to their places. Then the
Lord High Steward, beginning at the lowest, said, Lord De la Ware, Is Thomas,
Duke of Norfolk, guilty of the crimes of Laesae Maiestatis, for which he is
here arraigned at the Iudgement-Seate? De-la-Ware, rising up, and laying his
hand on his breast, he answered, Guilty; the like did every one in order, being
demanded. Then was the Duke again brought before the Tribunal, to whom the
Lord High-Steward in this manner spoke: THomas, Duke of Norfolk, you are here
arraigned for diverse crimes of Laesae Maiestatis, and have submitted your self
to God and these Peers, by every one of whom you are pronounced guilty. Is
there now any cause why Judgment should not be pronounced?

The Duke answered: The will of GOD be done, that will be judge between me
and my false accusers.

Then every man being silent, the edge of the Axe was turned toward the Duke,
and Barham in the Queens name required the Lord High-Steward to pronounce his
Judgment, which he, with tears in his eyes, according to the form,
pronounced in these words: The Sentence pronounced against the Duke.
FOrasmuch as you Thomas, Duke of Norfolk, being accused of the crimes of
Laesae Maiestatis, have pleaded Not guilty, and submitted your self to the
Judgment of these Peers, who declared you guilty: The whole Assembly
adjudged you to be committed back to the Tower, from thence to be drawn upon a
Sledde through the City, to the place of execution, there, to be hanged, and
cut down half dead, then to have your Bowels taken out, your Head cut off,
and your Body quartered into four parts: whose Head shall be at her Majesty's
disposing, and at the Queens pleasure: But GOD be merciful unto your Soul.

The Duke having heard this Sentence, with a mind full of courage, he said:
THis Sentence is pronounced against me as a Traitor: my confidence is in GOD
and the Queen, hoping that if I be deprived of your company, I shall rejoice
with them in Heaven, and so will prepare my self for my death. I desire no
other thing, but that the Queen would show her self propitious to my Children
and Servants, and be careful for the payment of my debts.

These, were the particulars that passed in these affairs, which I have here
declared, because it is expedient for our posterity, that in great matters the
less occurrences should be remembered.

A few days after, Barney and Marter are put to death.
Barney and Marter were put to death, for having conspired against the death of
certain of her Majesty's Council, and plotted the freedom and liberty of
the Duke. One Herle was privy thereunto, and of the same company: but he soon
revealed the same, and as he was brought face to face before Barney, Truly
(said Barney) thou have prevented me but of an hour: for if thou had not so
soon discovered it, I purposed to have done it, and so now should I be in thy
place to accuse thee, and thou in mine to be hanged. This conspiration and
other plots which were practiced to set the prisoners at liberty, was the cause
that a Parliament was forthwith summoned. At which time, the Queen created
Walter d' Eureux, Earls created.
Earl of Essex, for that by his great Grandmother he was descended from the
Bourchiers, sometimes Earls of Essex. And Edward, Lord Clinton, who had large
possessions in Lincolneshire, Earl of Lincoln. Her Majesty likewise made
John Pawlet of Basing, Son to the Lord Marquis of Winchester, Henry Compton,
Henry Cheyney, and Henry Norrice, Peers of England, summoned them into the
Vpper-House, there to have their voices, and after to bear the Title of
Barons. Barons elected.
Amongst other Acts, it was made Felony to intercept, ruinate, or burn any of
her Majesty's Ships, Laws established for the better security of the Queen
and her Kingdom.
Fortresses, or Harbors. Item, It was enacted, that whosoever should attempt
to set at liberty any person or persons committed by her Majesty's express
command, or which had trespassed against her Majesty, or was held suspected to
have offended; if the party were not indicted, he was to be punished with
only loss of goods in stead of life, and imprisonment during her Majesty's
pleasure; if indicted, with death; if condemned, to be held guilty of treason.
But as necessity brought in Decrees for the time, so the States thought good
they should be temporary, or during the Queens life. But as new practices were
daily discovered, so they served to hasten on the Dukes punishment, which
notwithstanding was yet deferred some five months more or less; nor before,
could either the Lower House of Parliament, the Lords of the Priuy-Councell, or
the importunacy of Preachers, (aggravating how great and eminent danger there
was) overcome her Majesty's merciful clemency.

The Duke of Norfolk beheaded.
The fourth day of June, by eight a clock in the forenoone, the Duke was
brought to a Scaffold, built upon the Tower Hill; whereupon being mounted, and
Alexander Nowell, Deane of Saint Paul's, (who was appointed his Comforter) had
requested the confused People to be silent, he said, among many other words
that I heard, these: IT is not strange to see some suffer death in this place,
although that since her Royal Majesty began to reign, I am the first, and I
pray God I may be the last; with that the People cried all aloud, Amen.

Then, continuing his Speech, he said; I know well (said he) the Peers of the
Realm have justly judged me worthy to dye, His speech at the hour of his
death.
nor have I purpose to excuse my self. I have treated, I freely confess, in
matters of great importance with the Queen of Scots, without the priuity of my
Sovereign, which I ought not to have done, and for that I was first committed;
and having had my liberty upon my humble submission, I past my faithful
promise that I would never more confer with her, yet I did, I confess, which
torments my Conscience, but I neither promised, nor swore (as they say) at the
Lords Table. I went, and but once, to Ridolfe, but with no intent of
conspiracy against her Majesty: For it is well known, that I had great
dealings with him upon my accounts and reckonings. I found he envied the
present peace of the Land, and was very subtle in plotting proiects of
mischief. Twice there came Letters to my hands from the Bishop of Rome, to
which I never gave consent, nor to the Rebellion in the North. I renounced
Papistrie, after I tasted the sweet of Religion, and rejecting the Popes
doctrine, I embraced the true Religion of Jesus Christ, believing wholly and
soly in his precious blood, my Savior and Redeemer: yet I cannot deny, but
many of my Family and familiars were addicted to the Romish Religion, wherein,
if I have offended GOD, the Church, and Protestants, I beseech him and them to
forgive me.

Then, after they had sung a Psalm or two, he said with a loud voice; Into thy
hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit. Then, embracing Henry Ley, he whispered
something in his Ear; and after, he spoke to the Deane of Paul's, who turning
him to the people, said; The Duke entreats you all to pray with him, that GOD
would be merciful to him; and that you would be silent, that his spirit be not
disturbed. He forgave his Executioner, asking him pardon, refusing to put the
Napkin over his face, The Duke of Norfolke's head is cut off.
which he offered him, saying, I fear not death. Then kneeling down, his
heart lift up to GOD on high, he prostrated himself on the Scaffold, the
Deane praying intentiuely with him; then, laying his neck over the Block, at
one stroke his head was cut off, which the Executioner showed: a lamentable
spectacle to the people, most mournfully then shedding tears and sighing.

Sundry sensures of him after his death.
It is almost incredible how dearly the People loved him, and how by his
natural benignity, and courteous actions, (qualities well becoming so great a
Prince) he had gained the hearts of the Multitude: Diverse of the wiser sort
(as they were affected) passed their censures diversely, some from an
apprehension they had of great fear and danger might have ensued, had he
suruiued; others, commiserating the case of one so nobly borne, so gentle by
nature, so comely of personage, of so manly an aspect, so complete in all
parts, to perish so pittyously one, who had not the subtle sleights of his
Adversaries, and the slippery hopes he had conceived, under a color of
benefitting his Country and Commonwealth, diuerted from the first-begun
course of his life, he had been the greatest honor and ornament of his
Country. They called also to memory the lucklesse death and destiny of his
late Father, who although universally admired for Arts and Arms, had some five
and twenty years before this, lost his head in the same place, upon slight
occasions, to wit, for having his Arms quartered with King Edward the
Confessor, which we read, the Mowbrayes, the Dukes of Norfolk, had borne,
being given them by King Richard the Second, from which Mowbrayes he drew his
petigree.

Whereupon, it shall not be impertinent to the purpose, briefly to add from
what shop these Conspiracies were first forged, as Hierome Catene in his
History of the life of Pius the fifth relates. An Author, for his credit,
Catenes relations of the precedent matters.
made free Denison of Rome, and admitted Secretary to Cardinal Alexandrine,
Nephew to Pius the fifth.

POpe Pius the 5. (says he) burning with a zealous desire to re-establish the
Roman Religion, and having no other so convenient a Messenger to be his
Nuncio Apostolic, Pope Pius the fifth incensed against Qu. Elizabeth.
employed Robert Ridolph, Gentleman, of Florence, who coming into England,
(under pretext of other business) endeavored himself to nothing more, then to
stir the hearts of the Queens Subjects, to her destruction: wherein he dealt
with such dexterity, that he brought not only Papists, but also some
Protestants to be of his faction: some, How he employed the English.
for a private malice they bore to those which aimed at the Kingdom; others,
out of a desire of innovation. As these matters were working underhand and
covertly, there happened a debate betwixt the Spaniard and the Queen, for
certain moneys that had been intercepted, now in her possession. Hereupon the
Pope took occasion to persuade the King of Spain, to lend his helping hand to
those which were combined Conspirators in England, The King of Spain.
against Qu. ELIZA. that so he might with the more facillity effect his
affairs in the Low Countries, and restore the Catholic Religion in England.
The King of France.
In like manner dealt he with France, as if he were bound to assist his
Kinswoman, the Queen of Scotland, and to pleasure the Scots, who to divert the
English from ayding the Protestants in France, had made incursions upon the
English: nor ought be any less to some great persons of the confederacy in
England, who by their policy had so prevented, as that the Queen should not
publicly send any aid to the Huguenots of France; by reason whereof, the King
of France promised his aid to set free the Qu. of Scots, but failed to
perform. In the mean time, Ridolph so wrought, that he brought Norfolk to
be chief of the conspiracy, promising him marriage with the Queen of Scots,
with her consent. The better also to effect this business, the Pope deposed
the Queen of her Crown and Kingdom, and absolved her Subjects of all Oath
and Allegiance, by a Bull which he caused to be published, whereof he sent
copies, printed, to Ridolph, to be dispersed through the Kingdom. Hereupon the
Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland raised Arms in the North of England
against the Queen; but money failing there, they speedily fled into Scotland,
and the Duke of Norfolk, with others, were committed to prison; amongst which,
Ridolph was one, who had received commandment from his Holiness, to deliver
to the Confederate League an hundred and fifty thousand Crowns, which he
could not do, being now prisoner. But her Majesty not looking so deeply (as
concerned her) into the plot of the Conspiracy, The King of Portugal.
set Ridolph and some others at liberty, and having distributed the foresaid
moneys amongst the Confederates, The Duke of Alua opposes.
was by them sent home again to the Pope, to advertise him, that now all
things were in a readiness for the dispatch of the Queen, and to procure with
all speed the best supplies he might from the Spaniard, out of the
Low Countries. The Pope commended well this purpose, although indeed the Duke
of Norfolk had formerly misliked the same, as a matter full of much
difficulty, Wherefore.
in a private conference he had with Ridolph once upon the way; and, under a
color of other matter, addressed himself to the Kings of Spain and Portugal,
to inform them thereof. He promises the Duke of Norfolk, by his Letters, to
send him succor, moves with the King of Spain to be assistant, and to
further the matter the more, offers to go himself in person, and if need
were, to spend the goods of his See-Apostolike, Challices, holy Vestiments, and
Crucifixes, assuring him, that he could and would easily effect the same, nor
was there any difficulty to be doubted, would he send over Chappin Vittel
with an Army out of Flanders into England, which thing the Spaniard with all
expedition commanded to be done, whilst the Pope provided money. But the Duke
D'Alua, envying that Vitel should have the honor of this service, sought to
prefer his Son thereunto, fearing that the French should fall from them
with their Forces, and doubting the Conquest of England might yield any profit
to Spain, or that the Pope was able to comply with them, for money sufficient
for so great a design. Notwithstanding, the King of Spain gave express
command that he should invade England, and to that end sent moneys by Ridolph
into Flanders. But it pleased God, the matter was discovered to the Queen of
England by some beyond seas, and the Duke of Norfolk apprehended, and judged
to death, which brought no less grief to the Pope then to the King of Spain,
A vain success,
who said in the presence of Cardinal Alexandrine, his Nephew, That never was
business more deliberately attempted, Wherewith the Pope and the King of
Spain are vexed and angry.
carried with more courage and constancy of the Confederates, nor lasted longer
time undiscovered by any of the coniurate-society, That their military
Companies might in four and twenty hours space, be put over out of Flanders
into England, the Queen, and the City of London suddenly surprised, Religion
restored, and the Queen of Scotland settled and crowned in her stead: All
which were like to have the better success, for that Thomas Stukeley, an
English Fugitive, was then in readiness with three thousand men, to bring
Ireland in subjection to the King of Spain, and with three Ships that were
Spies, set the English Fleet on fire. Thus H. Catene, of which much was
unknown till the year 1588. when he published a book, printed at Rome, and
privileged by Sixtus the Sixth. Now return we to the purpose, if we be
digrest.

Scarce ten days after the Dukes death, were sent to the Queen of Scots, then
all mournful and in sorrow, Will. Lord de-la-Warre, The Queen of Scots
accused.
Sir Ralph Sadler, Tho. Wilson, Doctor of the Civil Laws, and T. Bromley, the
Queens Attorney, who were so to expostulate with her, as to charge her for
usurping the Title and Arms of England, nor that she had renounced them,
according as it was conditioned at Edenborrough, and to assume them more
freely, had secretly contrived to marry with the Duke of Norfolk; which the
rather to bring to pass, she had left nothing unassayed by the ministry of
her Agents; by force and Arms to set the Duke at liberty, had raised Rebellion
in the North Country, had succored the convicted Rebels of Scotland and
Flanders; had, by Ridolph the Italian his soliciting, implored the aids of
the Pope, the King of Spain, and others, for inuading the Country of England;
they urged also, that she had received Letters from the Pope, who had promised
to keep her as safe under his wing, as the Hen does her Chickens, calling her
and her Accomplices, [ The true Children of the Church.] And finally, that she
had procured a Bull from the Pope against the Queen, and and had suffered
herself by her friends in foreign parts, to be called The Queen of England.

To all these, with a bold countenance, and constant resolution, (having first
protested herself to be a free Prince, and subject to none) she answered, THat
she had not usurped the Title or Arms of England, but that being yet young,
and under the power of her Husband; the King of France, Mary Qu. of Scotland
her answer to her accusation.
necessity imposed them upon her; but since her Husbands death, she never bore
them: wherefore it was not to be imputed to her as any fault of hers, neither
would she take them to her, so long as ELIZABETH lived, or any Child she
should bear. That in the matching with the Duke of Norfolk, she had no
thought of any ill might happen to the Commonwealth, but rather much good, and
if she should renounce the marriage, it was contrary to the matrimonial Vow
she had made, and that by duty thereof, she was bound to advertise the Duke of
his dangers, and to quit himself out of prison. That she had never raised, nor
consented to the raising of any tumults, but was always ready to discover what
plots she knew of, against the Queen or Country, if she had pleased by her
to be admonished of, or to have admitted her to her sight or hearing; nor at
any time had succored the English Rebels, but only by her Letters had
recommended the Countess of Northumberland to the Duke D'Alua. Of Ridolph she
was to have necessary use for her pensionary Annuities, and in some
money-matters; whom she knew to be a great Favorite of the Popes, but never
had received any Letters from him, had never dealt with any touching her
delivery, but indeed had not refused to give ear to such as had offered the
service in that kind, and for that cause had passed her privy Seal to
Rowlston and Hall. She had sometimes received Letters consolatory and full of
piety from the Pope, wherein was no mention of any such matter, nor had she
procured any Bull from Rome; only on a time a copy of one of them was showed
her, which, after she had read, she cast it into the fire. But if any out of
foreign Countries shall write or speak otherwise then they ought, they ought
to answer it, and to suffer the penalty of their faults. She never sought or
sent either to the Pope or K. of Spain, for the procuring any invasion upon
England, but had implored their helps for her restoring into her own Realm,
but not before her Majesty had preadmonition thereof. But if she were to be
called in question concerning these Letters, she requested (for that she was
issued from the Blood Royal of England) that she might answer for herself in
person in open Parliament.

In the mean time was Scotland all up in Arms, miserably troubled with Civil
Wars, whilst on the one side, Sedition in Scotland.
such as favored the Queen, relying upon aid from the French, and the other
party expecting the like from England, had daily encounters together,
notwithstanding both English and French showed themselves most desirous to
appease and accord their dissentions by the Ambassages which either country
sent into Scotland. The Queen of England, and the King of France endeavor to
accord them.
Of which France proposed, that their most commodious course would be, to
elect amongst them some persons of well-known worth and wisdom, to govern
the Kingdom for a time, not taking upon them supreme authority, or the names
of King or Queen: they were not willing to acknowledge for King the King of
Scotland; for that they held he had no right but by his mother, and that she
was unjustly deposed of her Subjects, and therefore she was justly to be
reputed their Queen, and the ancient League of Alliance betwixt her and France
to continue firm and inviolable. Those likewise from England, They differ in
opinions.
on the contrary, maintained by strong argument, that such an Administration or
popular government would be an Anarchy, and that the Commonwealth was not to
admit plurality of Governors, and that Scotland having always been commanded
by Kings, was not now to have an election of such Administrators. That the
States of the Realm had deposed the Queen, and lawfully crowned and inthroned
the King, and that the ancient recited Alliance, was a contract, not of
persons, but of the two Kingdoms of France and Scotland, alleging also, that
by an express Law, the most Christian King was bound to defend the King of
Scots in these terms.

If there happen at any time controversy about the Kingdom of Scotland, the
Kings of France shall support, aid, and defend him whom the States of Scotland
shall adiudge the Title of the Kingdom to. And as touching the causes of the
Queens deposing, it should be enquired of of those Scots who have deposed her.

The French notwithstanding, Causes alleged, why the French favor the Queen
of Scotland.
openly favoring the party of the Queen of Scotland, became serious
intercessours to her Majesty, for to set her at liberty, lest that as his
Ambassador did freely, he might be thought not to respect her who had been
wife to the King his brother, and now the Dowager of France; and to neglect the
now puissant Family of the Guizes in France, or to approve that pernicious
example of deposing of Kings. And which was the most capital point of all,
that she finding her self abandoned of the French in her adversity, might
seek Patronage from Spain, and that by her means, the three prepotent
Realms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, might colleague them in amity with
Spain, to the no small endamagement of the State of France.

To these Qu. ELIZABETH with mild alacrity answered.

THe King of France will be well advised, The Queen of England contesteth with
the French.
what or how he shall do with the Queen of Scotland, notwithstanding she was
their Queen, and now is their Dowager, howbeit for the dissoluing of the Duke
of Aniou's marriages she has held secret co^sultation with the Spaniard. He
will also consider, whether that ancient Law of Alliance be violable, and
whether he be bound thereby, or no, to defend the King in his nonage. He will
also bethink him how much France is beholden or obliged to the Family of the
Guizes, by whose practices the Country has been afflicted with long and
bloody wars, the French have been forced to lose the love of Scotland, and the
poor Queen brought into this calamitable case she is in. In very deed, the
example of deposing Kings, I hold a thing most pernicious, and well deserving
infernal punishment, but for that the Scots are to answer. And for mine own
part, I call to mind the things which grieve my heart to remember. But
notwithstanding I know not how the French in old times allowed of Pepin, when
he supplanted Childeric; and Hugo Capet, Charles of Lorraine; depriving them of
their ancient successions descended to them from a long-continued Race of
Ancestors, to transfer the Scepter to new-erected Families: As also Philip
(surnamed, the good) Duke of Burgundy, exiled Iaquette from his countries of
Hainault and Holland: or the Danes, when they expulst from his Kingdom,
Christianus the second, and his Daughters. Or the Spaniards, who imprisoned the
Queen Vraca, after they had put her from the Crown. It is no nouelty for
Sons to succeed their deposed Mothers. So Henry the Second was admitted King
of England; Alphonsus, the younger Son of Vraca, King of Castill; and of late
memory, Charles the fifth King of Spain and Sicily, their Mothers then
suruiuing. The world is full of examples of many Queens that have exchanged
their Diademes for prisons, which France does testify at large, having
imprisoned (not to say further) the wives of three of their Kings, one after
another, Jews Hutin, Philip the long, and Charles the fair: For my part, I
detain the Queen of Scots under a reasonable Guard, but I do it for the
preservation of England, and mine own safety, after the example of the French,
who for their better security of affairs, put Chilperic into a Monastery,
Charles of Lorraine into a safe and strait prison, and Lodowicke Sforza, Duke
of Mylan, into a Dungeon with Iron grates. Whereunto (as she was very
conversant in the Histories of all Nations) she annexed other examples of the
same nature, drawn out of the History of Spain, and finally concluded, that
true it was, such Presidents carried ever with them some semblance of
Injustice: but she required, that the King of France would undertake the
defense of the Queen of Scotland, even as he was bound by his Alliance;
intimating, that it would be an action of greater glory to the French, than
all those unhappy enterprises they assumed in the cause of that infamous woman,
Jane of Naples.

But when it was discovered, that at the same time the Queen of Scots
practiced secretly to confirm an alliance with the Spaniard, by the
negotiations of the Lord Seton, The love and affection which the King of France
and Queen of England bore once to the Queen Mary of Scotland, grows cold.
who arriving in Essex, disguised in the habit of a Mariner, and returning from
thence into Scotland, through England, he had promised succors in the Duke of
Aluaes name, to the Scottish partakers with the Queen, she was kept with a
straighter Guard, and the affection borne to her by the French, by little and
little waxed cold. And certainly, as the Duke of Alua omitted nothing, wherein
he might vent his hatred to Queen ELIZABETH, so was she no less cautelous to
prevent it, and frustrate his dissignes. For, in the first months of this
year, he complained by the Spanish Ambassador in England, that the Flemmish
Rebels, bought all their warlike munition there, and were received into all her
Ports and Havens: she presently, by a strict Proclamation, commanded, that all
Flemmings, any ways suspected of sedition, should depart out of England, and
that their ships of warlike equipage, should be seysed upon in her harbors.
The rebellious Flemmings commanded to go out of England. They take the Breele.
All which returned to the damage of the Duke of Alua. For Humes, Earl of
March, and other Flemmings, reduced as it were to a desperate point, whether
they were terrified by this Proclamation, or that they were underhand
admonished to retire, but they presently surprised the Breele, which is seated
upon the mouth of the Meuse, caused Flushing forthwith to revolt, and other
Towns, which expelled the Spaniards, as they were in hand to make cittadels,
to captiuate their liberty, in a short time, cut off the Duke of Alua by Sea,
and through the means they had to make it good for themselves, had a power to
molest and detain the Spaniard with a long and tedious war: wherein
Soldiers have observed, The Duke of Aluaes carelessness.
that he showed for his part such palpable carelessenesse, and negligence, as
was not beseeming so great a General, who, for the space of four whole
years, grossly ouer-slipt the maritime affairs and expeditions of Flanders.

At the same time, there was a famous general muster before the Queen at
Greenwich, with a pleasant trayning in Arms, by the Citizens of London, and
after their return from thence, martial men, who began to rust and corrupt in
their own houses, began to flow out of England into Flanders, and, according
as they stood affected, betook themselves, some to the Duke of Alua, and
others, the far greater number, to the Prince of Orange, who opposed his
proiects, The English repair into the Low Countries to the war.
for the defense of Religion, and his Countries liberty. Amongst whom, Sir
Thomas Morgan was the first, that brought three hundred men into Flushing, upon
the report whereof, the Duke, who intended the recovery of it, forbear and
retired. Further, he used such expedition and diligence, as he caused greater
troops to come: for, after himself, there landed nine Companies more of
English, conducted by Humfrey Gilbert, who, being consorted with the French,
first attempted to surprise Scluse and Bruges, then he set upon Tergow in
Suethebenelant. But their scaling-Ladders being too short, hollow
correspondancie between the French and the English, and Mondragon coming on
with fresh succors for the assieged, they retired to Flushing; of which, both
the one and the other, sought to make themselves masters, each to themselves.
But the Prince of Orange made good use of this envy among themselves, so as
neither of them obtained their end and purpose.

At that very time, a pleasing serenity seemed to shine upon the Protestants in
France, and Charles the Ninth pretending only a war in Flanders, which he
affirmed to be the preservation of France, and covering himself with this
mask, he feigned as though he meant to contract alliance and amity with the
Queen of England, and the Princes of Germany, to give some testimony herein
of his love to the Protestants, whose absolute ruin notwithstanding he
covertly intended. And, Dissimulation of the King of France.
as if he leaned to them of the one side, and the Spaniard on the other, he
substituted to this end the Duke de Mont-Morancy, Birag de Anbisine, the Bishop
of Limoges, and of Foix. The Queen of England, who truly apprehended the
secret plots and stratagems of the Duke of Alua, deputed Sir Thomas Smith* and
Sir Francis Walsingham: And Articles were drawn between them, whereof you
shall see an abridgement in the same express words and terms.

THis alliance shall not tie Princes allied, The Alliance of Blois. The
Articles of the same.
to leave other Treaties past between them, so they be not opposite and
contrary thereunto. There shall be a Confederation, League, and Union between
them, to defend themselves mutually against all, who, under some pretext, or
any other occasion whatsoever, shall invade, or attempt to invade their persons
or Territories, whereof they are now possessed. It shall remain firm between
them, not only while they live, but also between their Successors, so the
Heir of the first deceased give notice to the suruiuant within the space of a
year, by Ambassadors and Letters, that he accepts of the same conditions.
Otherwise, the suruiuant shall be reputed discharged of the observance of the
same. It shall be validious against all, yea, and even against those that are
joined in affinity to the one or other Prince, and against all other Alliances
contracted, or to contract. If the Queen of England be required to send
succors, by Letters sealed and subscribed with the King of France his own
hand, she shall be bound to pass over into France, within two months after,
a thousand foot armed, or five hundred Horse at her choice, whom the King must
pay, from the first day of their arrival in France. She was to send for the
war of Flanders eight Ships of equal greatness, wherein twelve hundred
Soldiers must be employed, with all things necessary, and there must be no
Mariners nor Soldiers but English, but yet they must be commanded by the
Admiral of France, paid and victualled by the King, from the first day they
enter into Service. She was also to victual her Ships for two Months, which
the King was also to pay within two months. And if the Queen be moved to any
war, the King having received Letters subscribed with her own hand, was to
send over into England, or Ireland, within two Months, six thousand foot, or
at her choice, five hundred Conductors, armed at all points, who should bring
fifteen hundred Horse, and about three thousand foot, with good Horse and
Arms, after the French manner, whom she must pray, from the time they set
foot in her Countries. And for the war by Sea, he was to furnish eight
Ships, with twelve hundred Soldiers, in manner and form above mentioned.
Order agreed upon for succors and pay, to be digest in writing, running in
this form, that the one shall be bound to sell unto the other Arms, and all
necessary things, to the Prince assailed. They shall innouate nothing in
Scotland, but defend it against Strangers, and permit them to enter, and
nourish the Scottish partialities. But the Queen of England was permitted to
pursue with Arms, those amongst them, who maintained or fostered the English
Rebels, who were at that present in Scotland. That this Alliance shall be so
taken and understood, as the only propriety and meaning of the words
imported. Each of the two Princes shall confirm every one of these Articles by
Patents, and faithfully and really to deliver them into the hands of
Ambassadors, for the one and other within three months. For ratification of
this Alliance on the behalf of the King of France, Confirmation thereof.
the Queen of England sent into France the Earl of Lincoln, Admiral, with a
great train of Gentlemen, among which were these Barons, the Lord Dacres, the
Lord Rich, the Lord Talbot, the Lord Sands, and others: And the King of France
sent into England, Anne Duke de Mont-Morancie, and Monsieur de Foix, with a
magnificent train, that in the presence of them, and Messieurs de Saligna, and
de la Mottef, his Ambassador ordinary, the Queen might reciprocally confirm
the same with oath: which was performed at Westminster the seventeenth of June:
and the day after, the Queens Majesty, with the consent of the French,
invested with the Order of Saint George, the Duke de Mont-Morancy, in grateful
commemoration of the love which Anne, Constable of France, manifested unto her,
Mont-Morancy admitted to the Order of the Garter.
to whom, HENRY the Eighth vouchsafed the same honor, out of the love he bare
to the House of Mont-Morancy, who carries the title of the first Christian of
France, and is there held for most Noble.

He intercedes to accord the differences of Scotland.
While Mont-Morancy remained in England, he moved certain propositions in the
King of France his name, that the Queen of Scots might there find favor, so
far as it might be performed without danger. That there might be a cessation
of Arms in Scotland, and that a Concord might be established by Act of
Parliament. And if a Parliament could not commodiously be summoned, that some
might be elected of the one and other part, among the Scots, to repair to
London, to settle affairs, with the Deputies of the King of France, and Queen
of England.

Answer made to him.
But answer was made him, That more favor had been showed to the Queen of
Scots than she deserved, and yet for the King of France, more should be showed
her, though the Estates of the Kingdom assembled had judged, how the Queen of
England could not live in security, except some rigor were used to her. That
the Queen had carefully employed her whole power, to establish Concord, and
procure a cessation of Arms, having for this end lately sent into Scotland,
Sir William Drewry, Governor of Berwicke, with de la Croce, the French
Ambassador. But they could by no means induce Grange to peace, nor the
Garrison of the Castle of Edenborrough, out of the hope they conceived, to be
succored from France and Flanders: though Huntley, and Hamilton Arbroth for
the Duke their Father had obliged themselves in writing to Queen ELIZABETH, to
enter it, and other of the Queens partakers had plighted their faith and
promise thereunto.

After these motives, he also propounded many other, touching the marriage of
the Duke of Aniou, but in that they could not agree about some circumstances
concerning Religion, the matter grew hopeless, and he returned into France,
when there was preparation of the Nuptials, He also treats of a marriage with
the Duke of Aniou.
between Henry King of Navarre, with Margarite, Sister to the King of France,
whereunto, with notable dissimulation, the King of Navarre, and the most noble
Protestants were drawn, by sweet promises, and probable hopes of perpetuating
the peace, and bringing themselves into grace: as also, the Earl of Leicester,
and the Lord Burleigh, were invited out of England, under an honorable color,
and out of Germany, the Sons of the Elector Palatine, to the end, that being
entangled in the nets, if those of the Evangelical Religion, together with
themselves, were not all denounced in an instant, yet they should receive a
mortal and irrecouerable wound. For, when the Nuptials were solemnized, this
so expected and wished serenitie, was presently ouer-cast with that terrible
and bloody tempest, the Parisian Butcherie, Massacre of Paris.
and through the cruel Massacres, that with execrable impiety were committed
in all the City of France, against Protestants of all estates and conditions:
the which notwithstanding they would feign have covered, with a pretext of
equity, yea, of pity, and to practice this impious fraud, under the cloak
and shelter of the Edicts, imputing to the Protestants, that they had wickedly
conspired against the King, the Queen his Mother, his Brethren, the King of
Navarre, and the Princes of the Blood. For, pieces of money were coined in
memorial of this act, which had of the one side the Kings effigies, with this
Inscription; Virtue contre les Rebels: Virtue against Rebels: and on the
other, La piete a esmen la justice, Pity has moved justice.

Not long before, the Queene-Mother of France, very subtle in counterfeiting
good will to the Protestants, being to understand the future events, and
credulous in Astrologicall predictions, which by the conjunction of the Royal
Planets at the birth of her Sons, prognosticated Kingdoms to each of them,
Marriage of the Duke of Alenzon, propounded to Queen Elizabeth.
commanded la Mottef, to break with Queen ELIZABETH about the marriage of her
with Francis her youngest Son, Duke of Alenzon, to purchase him, if she
could, the title of a King, or at least to divert Queen ELIZABETH from ayding
the Protestants in France. La Mottef propounded this matter at Kennelworth, two
days before the Massacre of Paris. But Queen ELIZABETH excused her self, by
reason of the difference in Religion, and disparity in years. For he was
hardly seventeen years old, and she above eight and thirty. Nevertheless,
she promised to deliberate of it, and the Duke of Alenzon forbear not to
solicit her, by the procurements of Fleri.

The Earl of Northumberland beheaded.
In the same month, Thomas Percie, Earl of Northumberland, who, because of his
Rebellion fled into Scotland, had his Head cut off at York, after he was
delivered into the hands of the Lord of Hunsdon, Governor of Berwicke, by the
treachery of one Morton, who stood much bound unto him for many benefits, when
he was banished into England, but was ever found grateful toward the
afflicted. And as this year, like a dreadful Axe, cut off the Duke of
Norfolk, and Earl of Northumberland, in the flower of their age, a mild and
gentle death, carried likewise out of the World two others, in their decrepit
years, who were of the most eminent Nobility, and of the Priuy-Councell.
Death of the Marquis of Winchester. Cecill is made Treasurer.

Death of the Earl of Darbie.




George Pawlet, Lord Treasurer of England, Marquis of Winchester, Earl of
Wilton, and Lord Saint John of Basing, who went through many great honors,
attained to the age of ninety seven years, and begot to the number of an
hundred and three children. Sir William Cecill, Baron of Burleigh, supplied his
place, in the dignity of Lord Treasurer. Edward, Earl of Darbie, and Baron of
le Strange of Knoking, departed this life, with whom, in some sort, dyed the
glory of English hospitality.

After his commendable discharge of many honorable Ambassies, there dyed also
Sir George Peter's, And of Sir George Peter's.
an honorable Knight, who was one of the privy Council, Secretary to King
HENRY the Eighth, King EDWARD the Sixth, Queen MARY, and Queen ELIZABETH, and
Chancellor of the order of the Garter, descended from the worthy Family of
Exceter: after that by his wisdom and learning, he had collected a great
Estate, out of his own goods, and the permission of Queen MARY, he augmented
with annual reuennues, Exceter College, in the University of Oxeford, where
he was a Student, and brought up.

The Queen her self, who had always lived in perfect health, (for she never
ate but when she had a stomach, The Queen sick.
neither drunk any Wine) felt some small grudging of infirmity at
Hampton Court: But she recovered her former health, before it was almost known
she was sick, and being vigilant over matters worthy of a Princes care and
forecast, she commanded that Portsmouth should be rampard with new
fortifications, and her Fleet increast with Ships of war, that at certain
constituted times, Soldiers might be inrold throughout the Shires, She has a
care of the public.
and Youth to be trained up in Arms, though she lived then in most secure
peace. She willingly and with much thanks, restored the money she had
borrowed of her Subjects; in doing of which, she gained no less love of her
people, then in sending forth two Proclamations, which she caused to be
published in the beginning of the year. In one of which, she ordained, that
those Noblemen should be taxed according to the ancient Laws, that took more
followers and retainers then was permitted them, because these their retainers
and followers were hereby exempted from public Offices, they maintained
Factions, and many ways offended against the Laws, relying on the Protection
of the Nobles, to whom they had proffered their service: And in the other she
curbed a ravenous kind of people, called Enquirers after conceald Lands, She
cut off the superfluous number of followers, which daily augmented. She curbeth
enquirers after concealed Lands of the Crown.

Rebellion in Ireland.


by reuoking their warrants, and constraining them to restore many things taken
away. For being appointed to seek out, whether particular men concealed not
some land that belonged to the Crown, with most sacrilegious avarice, they
began to seize on such as had heretofore been given by pious Ancestors, to
Parish Churches, and Hospitals; yea, to pluck down the Bells, and Lead,
wherewith the Churches were covered.

In Ireland, the burdensome authority of one Fitton, Governor of Connath,
produced some troubles: For the sons of Richard, Earl of Clanricard, brought
forth by diverse women, not being able to endure it, in that they were
headstrong and given to liberty, they raised a Rebellion, and passing over
Seen, made cruel Incursions upon the inhabitants of the western parts of
Mijs, which with many outrages committed, they pillaged and forraged. Their
Father, who was of the ancient Family of Bourgh in England, venerably bald, and
of a staid disposition, went to the Deputy, justified himself of this crime,
and required advice of the Councillors of Ireland, how he might depresse his
sons, that spoiled and wasted the Country in this manner. But her Majesty
thought fit, for public tranquillity, by little and little to draw Fitton out
of Connath, and to make him Treasurer of Ireland. A little while after, the
Earls sons, defeated by the Garrisons, which fell upon them, submitted
themselves to the Depruie.

The Omors.
The Enlagen Omors, a kind of seditious people, stird up also new troubles; but
they likewise being proclaimed Rebels, at the Earl of Kildares persuasion,
came under due obedience: and at the same time, Sir Thomas Smith, a learned and
prudent man, with pity entering into consideration, what small account was made
of Ireland, obtained of the Queen, that a Colonie might be sent thither, under
the conduct of his own only bastard son, into the half Island called Ardes,
at the East entry into Vlster, to instruct and ciuilize the Demibarbarous
inhabitants, and to make them humane, hoping the place might easily be
defended, if Garrisons were planted in the straight or Istmus, which ioynes it
to the rest of the Island. He gave to every Footman 120. acres, and to each
Horseman 240. ammounting to five hundred acres of English ground, paying every
year but a penny for an acre. But this business footed not according to his
desire: for Thomas his son having conducted thither the Colonie, was
surprised and slain by the treachery of Neel Brian Artho. Afterward, Malbie,
an English Governor of Lecale, a frontier Province, judging all means lawful
to kill a perfidious murderer, slew him likewise not long after, and so left
him to the Wolves jaws, to be devoured and eaten.

I know not whether it be material or no, here to make mention, as all the
Historiographers of our time have done, how in the month of November was seen
a strange Star, A strange Star.
except you had rather have me term it a Phinomene in the Chair of
Cassioperaes Constellation, which exceeded in relucencie, that (...) himself,
then, when he is in the Perigie of his E^ce^trick or Epicicle, as I observed my
self, and seated in the same Sphere of the heavens, as also moved by his
diurnall motion, remained there 16. months. Tho. Digsay, and Ioh. Dee, rare
Mathematicians among us, learnedly did demonstrate by the maxims of the
Paralels, that it remained not only in the elementall Region, but in the very
Celestial circle; and were of opinion, that daily mounting higher by little
and little, at last it vanished out of our sight. And certainly, their
Judgment was good and sound; for after the eighth month, it continually
diminished. Theodore Beza ingeniously compared this Star to that which
appeared at the birth of Christ, and at the massacre of Infants, which was
perpetrated under Herod: and in this short verse, Thou therefore, cruel Herod,
shake and fear. admonished Charles, new King of France, who confessed himself
to be the author of that which was executed at Paris, to tremble and fear: and
this was not out of a vain and credulous belief. For five months after the
disappearing of this Star, he dyed of a bloody flux, rackt with long and
terrible torments.

THE SIXTEENTH YEAR OF Her Reign. Book 2. 1573.
Anno Dom. 1573.
THe proceedings of Spain in the Low Countries, The Spanish Fleet discomfited.
being wonderfully crossed, by the taking of Flushing, the revolt of the Towns
of Holland, and the loss and discomfiture of the Spanish Fleet by the
Hollanders, with which the Duke de Medina coeli had a Commission with Chapin
Vitelli, to succor the Papists in England: The Duke of Alua was constrained in
despite of himself, to show himself more favorable to the English; and so
it happened, Commerce between the Flemmish and English restored.
that in the month of January, the commerce of the English with the Flemmings,
which in the same month of the year, 1568. was interdicted, at last came to
be opened for two years, and the Articles were agreed upon at Bristoll,
confirmed by the Spaniard, in the month of June, amongst which this clause was
inserted.

THat though this mutual correspondencie and amity had been obscured, yet was
i^ in no wise to be reputed dissol^ed and broken* and it was accorded, that if
the Deputies, within a (...) p^^^script time, could not arbitrate the
business, that then the said Intercourse should be expired, when the two
years came to an end. But when the troubles renewed in Flanders, it grew dead
by little and little: nay, and before the two years were fully accomplished,
and a new one was commenst, between the united States. And as for Queen
ELIZABETH, she recompensed all the damages of the English Merchants, with such
Flemmish goods as she retained in her hands, restored the rest to the Duke of
Alua, and amply contented the Genoa Merchants for the money of theirs she
seized upon and took up at loan, which was the first cause of the war,
although the Duke of Alua restored nor one shilling to the Flemmings of the
English-mens goods; which did accrue to the wonderful honor of Queen
ELIZABETH. And yet she performed a far more glorious Action then this, and
more pleasing to her Subjects, by discharging England of those debts which her
Father and Brother had taken upon credit of Strangers, She discharges her
Fathers and brothers debts.
which were greatly augmented, by reason of the long interests due: and, to the
inexplicable joy of the inhabitants of the City of London, calling in all the
City obligations, which had been so often renewed.

Nevertheless, both the Queen and the whole Clergy were wonderfully vexed
with certain Ecclesiastical persons, Innouators trouble the Church.
who boiling with zeal, and breathing nothing but Evangelical Purity,
reprehended not only the Ecclesiastical Government, as still defiled with
Roman corruptions, as well publicly as privately, both by Sermons and Books,
which were entitled [ An Advertisement to the Parliament] and [ An Appologie
of the Advertisement:] but refused also to be present at the received form of
Common Prayer, usurping and framing to themselves other courses of serving God.
So as the Queen condemning them for people impatient of Peace, greedy of
novelties, and apt to subvert things well established; to prevent Schism,
commanded, that throughout the Kingdom, they should, by rigor of Law, be
urged to observe a general form and manner of public Prayers, and that these
Libels might be delivered into the hands of the Bishops, or some one of the
Priuie-Councell, upon pain of imprisonment, although John Whitegift, who was
afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, had with learned soliditie refuted them.

There was also diuulged, by the English Rebels and Fugitives, a book full of
injury and calumniation, The Papists troble the Commonwealth.
whose title was [ A Treatise of Treason] which, to make Sir Nicholas Bacon
Keeper of the great Seal, and the Lord Burghley, Treasurer of England, odious
to their Prince, because they had often by their prudence and vigilancie, cut
off their wicked hopes and designs, they preferred an accusation against them,
of being Traitors to their Country. But the Queen was so far from giving
credit to such frivolous accusations, that by a public Proclamation she
declared them idle and frustrate, false, calumnious, and invented by sworn
Enemies to Religion and their Country, by their wicked and secret practices to
deprive the Queen of her faithful Councillors. And therefore she admonished
every one to give no credit to them, Their Libell is suppressed
to contemn and throw them into the fire, except themselves would be punished
as seditious persons, in stead of those that were the true Authors.
Notwithstanding, through a special vice, very incident to the natural
curiosity of men, they were frequently read, till (as it ordinarily falls out)
coming at last to be neglected and contemned, the use of them grew out of
request.

From the Month of November, in the precedent year, Charles the Ninth, King of
France, had a Daughter borne. The King, to make sure with Queen ELIZABETH, and
as well to render her favorable by all offices of humanity, and to take away
from the Protestants of France, all hope of succor from England, entreated her
to receive her at the sacred Font of Baptism; and to this end, as also to
obtain some certain Moneys from her, he sent into England, The Embassage of
Gondy. Count of Rez.
De Gondy, vulgarly called, the Count of Rez, who, by an elaborate discourse
endeavored to persuade her, that they had made the Massacre of Paris, (which
some could call by no other name than a great and capital wickedness; he, a
safe and wholesome remedy) not in hatred of the Protestant Religion, but to
dissipate the conspiracy of the Admiral Coligni, and others; and that the King
most inuiolably kept the Edicts touching Religion: That she would not give
ear to those fearful spirits, that did nothing but add to their own
affrightment, and causelessly complain; but that She would religiously
conserve the alliance of the new contract, and exhort them to obey the King,
assuring her that they should find him most merciful. To which, she promised
to be mindful of the Alliance, and that she would not fail the King in any
thing, that was fitting and agreeable for a most affectionate Ally; but for the
Money, she excused her self. Nor did he demand it, but as a design to give
impeachment to her ayding of the Protestants, in case they should require it,
after she had made denial of it to the King of France. And surely she took
occasion from hence to make refusal of it to them, calling to mind how euilly
they had requited her, for that which she had lent them in their first Civil
War. By this Embassage, the Count of Rez obtained, that from that time, the
Protestants found less favor with her, than they had done before.

A little after, the Lord Somerset, Earl of Worcester, was sent into France,
with a Baptistrey of Gold, for (in Qu. ELIZABETH'S name) to promise the duty
of a Godmother at the christening of the French Kings Daughter, Embassage of
the Earl of Worcester in France.
with the Lady Mary, the Emperors Wife, and the Deputies of the Duke of Sauoy.
This, arriving to the knowledge of the Protestants of France and Flanders, who,
at the same time were as Pirates upon the Sea, they suspecting the said Earl of
Worcester to be a Papist, mist him narrowly, for they robbed two of his Ships,
The Sea is purged of Pirates by Holstoc.
and slew diverse of his people: at which, Queen ELIZABETH being highly
offended, sent to Sea Sir William Holstoc, Controller of the Royall-Nauy, who
as much by his taking as chasing of them, recovered some Ships laden with
goods, and purged the Sea of such. And forasmuch as the most part of them had
vowed their service to the Count de-Mont-Gommery, who then was in England, for
help, The French Protestants handle shrewdly the French Papists in England.
to succor those of Rochell besieged, it hindered his dispatch, parting from
thence late, and with so little an Army, that he did no good at all to
Rochell. This occasioned the French Protestants, refuged in England, being much
moved, to use in injurious manner some other Allens, being French Papists, in
hatred of contrary Religion; yea, they assaulted them armed, and among others,
the servants of Monsieur Flery, The French Ledger Ambassador complained to
Queen Elizabeth concerning the help and assistance sent out of England to the
Protestants of Rochell besieged.
secretly sent into England from the Duke of Aniou, to treat of a match with
Queen ELIZABETH, whereof Monsieur le Vidame, de Chartres, not knowing his
coming, accused Flery before the Council of State, as to be come of purpose,
and hired to kill the said Earl of Mont-Gommery.

The ordinary Ambassador of France, contrariwise complained to the Queen,
that, against the Alliance, the Earl of Mont-Gommery had, through the help of
England, undertaken a voyage to Rochell, and the English Merchants furnished
the besieged Town with victuals and provisions. To this her Majesty answered:
Her Majesty excused her self.
THat she had always inuiolably kept, and would still, to future times, keep
her promise mentioned in the alliance. That this aid and Succor was
compounded of Pirates and Vagabonds, who could not tarry in their Countries, and
that they were parted out of England, without her command under false Flagges.
Ensign, and that she desired they should be punished. Moreover, that such
English Merchants, basely dealt withal in Bourdeaux, were gone to Rochell
without leave, and that men of their calling and kind, used to sail every
where, chiefly where their profit and gain was greater. She likewise required
that in stead of Rochell, they should appoint, in France, some Hauen-Towne more
commodious for Negotiations.

Queen Elizabeth is earnestly solicited to marry with the Duke of Alanzon.
Her Majesty hears of it willingly.
The French were much pleased with this answer, being assured that Qu. ELIZABETH
would still keep promise, and that she was so far from sending help to the
Protestants of France, (who expected none from her.) The King of France, and
his Mother, loved entirely more and more Queen ELIZABETH, seeing her Majesty
bore unto them a true amity and sincere affection: they made the Duke of
Alanzon write many amorous Letters unto her from the Royal Camp before
Rochell, endeavoring with much care, and no less pain, to bring that marriage
to pass, that whole year, by their Ledger Ambassador, Monsieur de
Chasteau-Neuf, extraordinarily sent to that effect. And truly her Majesty was
moved to consider it seriously, by a double apprehension she had, By a double
apprehension.
both for the want of a Husband and Children. The first was, that her Majesty
should perhaps be contemned by her own Subjects. The second, that forreiners
would plot wicked practices against her Scepter: her Majesty was persuaded, and
said often, that a Husband and Progeny are firm Fortresses against it: her
Courtiers contrariwise, aiming at their particular ends, maintained: THat true
Religion, and Equity, were assured Forts, and defensive Rocks against all
sorts of plots and designs: That her Majesty ought not to apprehend to be
despised or contemned by her subjects, for they had settled their fortunes,
ankered their hopes, and grounded their solace upon her Majesty only, as much
obliged unto her by a long race of Ancestors, affecting and taking pleasure
more and more in the contemplation and admiration of her splendant and lustrous
virtues. With such other discourses familiar to Courtiers. But as her Majesty
had often in her mouth, that the most part contemned the setting Sun, these
Flatterers alleged: WHat is he, that will contemn the salutiferous Beams of
a Sun brightly shining, for to aspect the fatal and confounded light of
little Stars, which rise all at once? So they often termed her Competitors.

Among these things, Queen Elizabeth gra^ts leave to the Duke of Alanzon to
come into England.
the Queene-Mother of France prayed her Majesty, to be so far pleased, as to
permit that the Duke of Alanzon, her Son, might pass into England to see
her: which request finally Queen ELIZABETH granted (wearied with the
multiplicity of Letters sent to her Majesty to that end) provided he should
not repute her leave fraudulous or injurious, if he should return back
again as he came. But so soon as her Majesty heard, how Henry, Duke of
Aniou, his Brother, had been elected King of Poland: Also, the French King to
be grievously sick, she sent word to the Duke of Alanzon, to take not as yet
his journey for England, alleging him these reasons: And her Majesty presently
sends him word not to come as yet.
THe Protestants Massacre, lately most cruelly acted on the Bloody Theater of
all France, and in hatred of their Religion, during the solemnizations and
recreations of a marriage: That he having already heretofore sought her to
Wife, the Protestants of England partly suspected fatal the Nuptials: and the
more, since himself, transported of a courage, enemy to the Protestants, had
gone in person to besiege Rochell; and had written of all parts, that he would
come to see her Majesty presently after the taking of the said City: insomuch,
that he seemed rather to hate the Protestants Religion, than to bear
affection or love to the Queens Majesty; and that this caused the best part
of England to suspect, that he would come into their Country, to marry the
Queen, with a Sword dyed in the blood of those poor Christians who professed
their own Religion.

Therefore, her Majesty friendly counseled him; FIrst, to procure and mediate
a Peace in France, to yield some worthy proof and noted testimony of his
affection to the Protestants of France, to be the better welcome in England,
and the more graciously received, according to his desire.

Since this, Peace was re-established in France, the exercise of Religion
granted in certain places to the Protestants. The King and the Queen desired
nothing more than the absence of the Duke of Alanzon, because he was of a harsh
and severe nature, inclined to trouble their States affairs* they did their
best, and used their vttmost endeuoures to effect the match, and by like means
prayed Qu. ELIZABETH, to permit to their other son, the Duke of Aniou (if he
should go by sea to Poland) Authority to sail under public assurance upon
Great-Brittaines Sea. This their request her Majesty granted, not only most
willingly, but more she offered him a Fleet of Ships to convey him; in the
mean while the Duke of Alanzon fell sick of the small pox, and the Queen
his mother giving advice thereof to Queen ELIZABETH, by the Earl of Rez,
excuses him, by reason of his sickness, for not coming into England. Gondy
returned into England.
Gondy met Queen ELIZABETH at Canterbury, where she entertained him with great
magnificence: and the same time, Matthew Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury,
celebrating the Queens birthday, which was the seventh of September, in the
Archbishops Hall, very spacious, and by him newly repaired, invited the Queen
thither, and Gondy, and la Motto, and feasted them with like number of Nobility
that Charles the fifth, and HENRY the Eighth had, being feasted in the same
Hall in the year 1519.

In Scotland, James Dowglasse, Earl of Morton, Earl of Morton Viceroy of
Scotland.
being elected Viceroy of Scotland in Murray's place, by the means of Queen
ELIZABETH, and his authority made sure by the Assembly of the States, in the
name of the King, established these Laws, for confirming Religion against
Papists and Heretics, and made sure Alexander Areskin, Earl of Mar, the
Kings Guardian by special right, (being as yet in his minority) upon these
Conditions: THat the Papists and Factious persons, should be excluded from
having access to his person; an Earl might be admitted to him with two
servants only, and a Baron with one; all others alone, and without weapons.

In the Interim, the French having sent Viriack, who endeavored what he could
to supplant the Viceroy, before he should be authorized, set to oppose him,
the Earls of Athole and Huntley, The King of France endeavors to destroy him.
Qu Elizabeth to defend him.
promising them a reward. Queen ELIZABETH, to counter-scarfe these designs,
let the Scots understand by H. Killigrewe, that this cruel Massacre of Paris
had bin put in execution by the conspiracy of the Pope, and the Kings of France
and Spain, to exterminate the Protestants: And therefore warned them to take
heed, lest being corrupted either with Pensions from France, or divided by
Factions, they open a way to Stranger Forces, which were thought should be
conducted by Strossie: To oppose themselves all vallianty and with equal
courage against it, for defense of Religion, which was the only bond of concord
between the English and the Scots: And to be very careful to preserve their
King, or to send him into England, to prevent his taking away and carrying into
France.

Nevertheless, some great Ones, partakers with the imprisoned Queen, would in
no sort acknowledge the Authority either of the King or his Viceroy, until
Queen ELIZABETH, by interposing her power, had by the Agencie of Killigrew,
brought the Duke of Chastelraut, and the Earl of Huntley, who were the
principals among them, to these Conditions, which were equal enough: THat they
should acknowledge the Religion established in Scotland, submit themselves to
the King, and to the Government of the Earl of Morton and his successors,
and renounce the authority of all others. That all those which should
enterprise any thing against the Religion, the King, and the Viceroy, should
be adjudged Traitors by Act of Parliament. The sentences given against the
Hamiltons and the Gordons, should be cut off and annihilated, except those
which concerned the murdering of the Earls of Murrey and Lenox, Vice-Royes,
which should stand according to the pleasure of Queen ELIZABETH:

Who nevertheless sent this business back to the King, and was of opinion
that this Clause ought to be added to it, [ Until that the King being come to
age, should take the Government of the Realm, according to the Law of the
Kingdom,] And that of all and every crime committed since the fifteenth of
June, 1567, the Murder of the Earl of Lenox excepted, pardon should be granted
to all that would ask it. Notwithstanding, it was thought good, for the safety
of the King, lest he should be exposed to murder, that the Queen of England
should promise by a public Instrument, that neither the Hamiltons nor any
other, should be adjudged for the murdering of the Vice-Royes, or fined without
her consent. And that was ordered in the Assembly of States, for the settling
of a public peace, in a turbulent season. Howbeit Kirckall, Lord of Grange,
Grange opposes.
who had been established Captain of Edenborrough Castle, after he had taken
oath in the Kings name, and the Baron of Hume, Lidington, the Bishop of
Dunkeld, and others, thinking that injustice was done to the Queen of
Scotland, would by no means admit of these Conditions: but with undaunted
Courage, contemned the authority both of the King and Viceroy, kept and
fortified the Castle in the Queens name, by the counsel of Lidington,
thinking themselves sure, in regard of the strength of the place, which is of a
most difficult access, and of the Munition which were in it, (for there all
Munition Royal is kept) and of the Succors promised by the Duke D'Alua, and
the King of France, who had underhand sent them some money, (the greater part
whereof had been intercepted at Blacknesh) and should have sent more, had not
the long Siege of Rochell hindered it. Not being able then to draw them to any
conditions of Peace, neither by money which the Viceroy promised them nor by
the persuasions of Queen ELIZABETH, but they defended the Castle against the
Viceroy, molested the Town of Edenborrough, being the Seat of Justice, with
Cannon-shot, by issuing violently out, and assaulting them every day; and would
call for the aid of France: Queen ELIZABETH, who by no means could endure
the French to be in Scotland, at length granted the requests of the Viceroy,
The English are sent to besiege it.
which were for Troops, Cannon, and other warlike Munitions, for the besieging
and battering of the Castle, upon these conditions: Upon what Conditions.
THe Viceroy shall not make any composition with the besieged, without the
advice of the General of the English, nor the English General without his,
and of those of the Kings Council. If the Castle fall into the hands of the
English, it shall be within 6. days after delivered to the King, with all the
Munitions of War, Vtensils, Memorials, Evidences, and Records belonging to
the King or Kingdom, the rest left to the besiegers. The English shall not
fortify any place in Scotland, but with the consent of the Viceroy and the
Peers. The Viceroy shall lend the English such assistance and safe conduct,
as he could possibly. The Castle being taken, the besieged shall be kept to
have justice executed upon them according to the Laws, the Queen of England
being thereupon consulted with before hand. If any English be killed, their
wives and Children shall have two years pay, If wounded, they shall have pay
till they be cured: If any English Cannons be lost, and the Powder and Shot
be wasted, they shall have Munition Royal in their stead, which shall be
found in the Castle, or else the Rebels goods. Ten Hostages shall be sent into
England, for assurance of the Troops and Ordnance, which are to be brought
back, except such as are lost by the hazard of War.

Upon these Conditions, William Drury, Governor of Barwicke, went into
Scotland, with some Pieces for battery, and fifteen hundred Soldiers, (among
which were G. Carey, Henry Carey, T. Cecill, Hen. Lea, W. Knollis, Sutton,
Cotton, Kelway, and other Gentlemen Voluntaries.) And being joined with the
auxiliary forces of Scotland, besieged the Castle, after having twice commanded
them in the Kings name, that they should render it up, but in vain. First they
raised up five Mounts, from whence, The Castle besieged by the English Forces.
for the space of four days together, they furiously beat against the Tower,
but especially upon David's Tower, which fell within a few days after. After
having given the assault, they took the Bastion or Spur, till those which at
the same made against them out of the Castle were repulsed, with loss of men.
The morrow after, the besieged having given the sign, asked to speak to
Drury, and after they had received for hostages into the Castle, Henry Lea, and
Fleck, a Scottish-man, they let down by cords, Kircald himself, and Meluin,
who demanded life and goods, that it might be permitted that Hume and Lidington
might depart for England, because of some particular enmities, and Kircald to
remain in Scotland, except he might depart with good license.

That not being granted them, but only the Soldiers permitted to go out with
their simple baggage, and without Arms; wanting men, disagreeing amongst
themselves, wounded, toyled, and wearied with watching and laboring, without
hope of succor, having no water, because one of the wells which were within
the Castle, had been filled up with the ruins of a dry wall, The Castle
yielded.
and the other was exposed to the shot of the Cannon, within three days after,
they yielded (which was the 33. day after the beginning of the Siege) to the
discretion of the Queen of England and Drury, who, after he had received
Letters out of England, delivered up the Castle to the Viceroy, for the use of
the King, with all that had yielded themselves to him; of which, Kircald, James
his brother, Mosman, and Cock, Kircald and others hanged.
goldsmiths, who had coined false money in the Castle, were hanged, although
to buy Kircalds life, an hundred of the House of the Kircalds had offered to be
bound to do perpetual homage to the Viceroy, and pay him three thousand
marks of annual rent, and the first day twenty thousand pounds Scottish
money, and to give sureties, that for the time to come, they should remain
faithful and obedient to the King.

Hume and others being dispersed into diverse Castles, obtained pardon of Queen
ELIZABETH, who got great praise by it for her clemency. Lidington, having been
sent to Lies, Lidington dies.
dyed of sickness, not without suspicion of being poisoned. He was a person
of great experience, and of a neat spirit, if he had bin less changeable, as
Buchanan, who hated him, painted him out in his life time, by a certain
Writing, which he entitled [ The Cameleon,] by which he represented him to be
more changeable then the Cameleon, and taxed him very sharply to be an enemy
of diverse colors to the Kings Grandmother, the Kings mother, to the Earl of
Murray, to the King himself, and to the Country. Since that time, Scotland
has been free from Ciuill-Warre, Peace made in Scotland.
and as well the Captains of that side, as the common-Souldiers, carrying their
courages to the wars of Sueden, France, and Flanders, brought back this great
commendation of Virtuous and valorous Warriors.

The Bishop of Rosse banished out of England.
To assure England from inbred enterprises, (in regard of the Queen of Scots)
John Lesley, Bishop of Rosse (a faithful servant to her, but not without the
undoing of many, and of bringing no few in danger) is commanded out of England,
and went into France, but not without fear of the Earl of Southampton, whose
life he had called in question, and likewise of Henry Howard, brother to the
Duke of Norfolk, whose anger to appease, he writ an Apology for himself. He
was scarce departed thence, until Henry Cockin, his Secretary, was
apprehended, and Morgan, who was exceeding desirous to serve the Queen of
Scots in her most secret affairs, was detected, and fled. Atslow, an
Arch-papist, Good, a Doctor of Physic, and Francis Berty, who privately
intelligenced her by Letters, were imprisoned for certain months, and for the
same cause Henry Goodyere, and Richard Louder were had in suspicion.

In the mean time Rosse failed not to employ all such dutiful endeavors for
the Queen of Scots, Absence innouates Enterprises.
as a faithful Subject was obliged to do, toward the Pope, the Emperor, the
King of France, the Papists Princes of Germany; all which gave him hope, but
did nothing. That this should fall out so ill he complained exceedingly,
especially, that the Duke of Alua, in whom his greatest trust was planted, was
to leave Flanders, having obtained leave, under color to recover his health.
For without doubt, he advanced his victories so fast, that he had reduced
almost all Holland into his power; Spain called him away, by the persuasion of
Cardinal Granuellan, The Duke of Alua is called out of the Low Countries.
and Roderico Gomezio de Silua, that his power grew too strong, and his name
above his Prince, and that by his violent and sharp command, he would cause
the Flemmings to revolt, yea, to grow to desperation: although some thought,
who were bloody-minded, that none was so fit by War to bring Holland into
subjection. Which kind of men thought their King too merciful, if he intended
by meekness to bring the Prince of Orange and his confederates, who had
resolved minds to retain their freedom, being confirmed thereto by their
riches, and strength of situation. Lodowicke Zuniga sucseedes him.
Lodowicke Zuniga of Requesen was appointed to take his charge. The great
Commander of Castile, a milder natured man, who by all offices of love, desired
to oblige Queen ELIZABETH, would by no means thrust himself into the
affairs either of England or Scotland.

Burches heresy.
I know not whether I should or no call to mind the opinion of Burchet, who
thought it lawful to kill those that were adversaries to the Evangelical
truth, who was so transported therewith, that he wounded with a poiniard,
Hawkins, that famous Seaman, thinking him to be Hatton, who was at that time
one of the Queens greatest Favorites, of her most intimate counsel, and an
enemy to Innouators. The Queen was so extraordinarily provoked herewith, that
she commanded him to be proceeded against according to the Marshall Law,
Marshall Law.
until she was advised by some of her prudent Councillors, that this Law had
no place but in Wars and turbulent times, but at home it ought to be done by
ordinary form of Justice. Being called to Justice, he maintained that what he
did was consonant to Scripture, and therefore lawful. Afterward, seeing
himself near condemnation for heresy, promised to renounce this opinion, yet
nevertheless, when he had a little more debated the case, he would not. In
the end, being committed to the Tower of London, he killed one of his Keepers
with a piece of wood, which he took out of a Chimney, and threw at his head,
and being condemned of murder, had his right hand cut off, and being at the
Gallows, obstinately maintained his opinion, and so was hanged. Burch is
hanged.


In the beginning of this year, dyed George Howard, Baron of Effingham,
Effingham dies.
Lord Privy Seal, son to Tho. Howard, Duke of Norfolk, the famous
Warrior, by Agnes Tilnie, his second wife, a man of remarkable fidelity, and
of an invincible courage, who first was Governor of Calais, afterward made a
Baron by Queen MARY, Admiral of England, and Lord Chamberlain, and likewise
by Queen ELIZABETH, until broken with age, he surrendered his Office to
Sussex, a few days before he dyed, and (as I have said before) was made Lord
Privy Seal, the fourth degree of Honor in England: he had to succeed him in
the honor of his Baronie, Charles his son, who was afterward Chamberlain to
the Queen, and high Admiral of England.

At the same time dyed likewise R. Gray, Earl of Kent, Gray, Earl of Kent
dies.
whom the Queen from a private man had called to this honor, when that Title
had been vacant 50. years, after the death of R. Gray, Earl of Kent (who had
consumed his Patrimony) elder brother to this man's great Grandfather, and
Henry his Son succeeded him.

It is not fit in silence to over pass I. Caius, Caius the Physician dies.
a famous Phisician, who dyed at the same time: he was borne at Norwich,
brought up at Cambridge and Padua, who gave himself wholly to the study of
Physic, translated, and commented upon the most part of Gallens and Celsus
works, and gave all his means to Scholars. Adding a new College to the old
of Gonuell Hall, and 25. fellow Commoners to be perpetually brought up, and of
both made but one College, called by the names of Gonuell and Caius, The
College of Gonuell and Caius.
in which he is intombed, with this Epitaph, Fui Caius.

In Ireland, the houses of O-Conom, and O-More, Troubles in Ireland.
impatient of peace, having gathered some bands of Thieves and Rebels, made
outrageous incursions, robbed and burned Atlone upon the River Siney, and
willing to join their forces with the Rebels of Mounster, they were hindered by
I. Perot, President of Mounster, who so ransackt James Fitz-Moris, and
Fitz-Edmonds, Seneschall of Imoquell, that rebelled, by continual ouer-running
them, and after he had killed many of their men, and taken the Castle of
Maine, and the French Garrison, he compelled them to crave pardon most
submissiuely for their faults, within the Temple of Kilmalock, called The holy
Cell of Malachie. At the same time, the Earl of Desmond, and John his Brother,
authors of this Rebellion, being brought back out of England into Ireland by
Fitton, were imprisoned by the said Fitton at Dublin, but after a while were
let go.

The Earl of Essex sent into Ireland.
In Vlster, Brian Mach-phelin, who had usurped the most part of Clandeboy,
burned the Town of Knoc-fergus, and some others began to trouble the Country.
George Deuereux, lately created Earl of Essex by Queen ELIZABETH, desired to
be employed against them, by the counsel of those who had a design to have
him far from the Court, under color of increasing his honor, to precipitate
him into dangers, which were not hidden from him. But as he was vigilant, and
from his youth addicted to the Wars, continuing constant in his design,
agreed with the Queen, that if he drove out the Rebels, he and his partners
should have the half of Clandeboy, upon certain conditions: and to maintain
it, he would entertain at his own charge, two hundred Horse, and four
hundred Foot. To this end he borrowed of the Queen a thousand pounds, The
Deputy enuies it.
for which, and for Munition, he engaged Lands that he had in Essex. G.
Fitz-William, Deputy of Ireland, fearing that the splendour of so great an
Earl should dim his in Ireland, counseled the Queen not to send him,
giving her to understand, that all the Country of Vlster would revolt at his
coming. Notwithstanding, he is sent, and to maintain the honor and authority
of the Deputy, was to take Letters from him to be Governor of Vlster, which he
obtained, though slowly, after many importunate solicitations.

After, having bin beaten with a terrible Tempest, he was driven to Knock
fergus, about the end of August, with the Lord Darcy, and Lord Rich, Henry
Knollis, and his four brothers, M. and I. Carey, and John Noris, with a
company of Soldiers levied in haste. Brian Mac-phelin understanding of his
coming, drove all his cattle (which were all his wealth) into the heart of the
Country, (for, without counting Sheep and Hogs, he had thirty thousand head
of Cattle) and seeing him ashore, saluted him, and congratulated his arrival,
and most courteously offered him all duty and service, and likewise
Mac-Gillespike, Mac-Gill, Hugh, Baron of Dungannon, and all of account near
thereabout. In consideration whereof, he promised him pardon for his rebellion,
and studied which way he might oblige him. But he revolted, and drew his men
presently to Turlough Leinich, and afterward made light Skirmishes continually
against the English. The Lord Riche's particular affairs called him into
England, and returned within a month. Henry Knollis in like manner, in regard
of his indisposition of body, and diverse others, daily taking some occasion or
other to excuse themselves, by little and little, secretly withdrew themselves
from that wild Country. Essex writ of it to the Queen, and to his friends,
and complained very much, that the most worthy of his company languished,
because the enterprise had bin begun too late, and victuals came not in time,
that they were corrupted, and that troops inconsiderately levied were many of
them lost. That Mac-phelin was revolted fraudulently, and others by the
perfidiousnes of Percy, an English Captain, who heretofore had commanded the
Irish in that Country. That he was not able to furnish the expense of War.
That the Deputy had not sent him his Commission, and that for want of it, he
could not use any authority against the Frontier Inhabitants: Therefore
beseeches her to take the business in her own name and special command, though
he underwent half of the charges.

Then he besought Sussex, Leicester, and Burghley, to intercede with the
Queen, that she would grant him, at her charge, a hundred Horse, 150. Foot,
and the Island of May. And as the Queen was ready to call him from Vlster,
Leicester and others seeing new troubles growing in Mounster, persuaded that he
should stay there. And the Deputy commanded him, whiles he was going against
Desmond, to go toward the Frontiers of Vlster, which, although it troubled
him, being fortifying Claudobie, obeys notwithstanding, and entering into
Mounster with Kildare, persuaded Desmond to embrace peace, who shortly after
submitted himself. Now Essex having received Letters of Authority, took a
long journey, and O-Donell joined with him. But Cone O-Donell, Turloghes Son
in Law, would not serve under him, therefore he took from him the Castle of
Liffer, and gave it to Hugh O-Donel: Turlogh in the mean space protracted the
business by parleyes, until it was time for Essex necessarily to depart. He,
after having wearied his body with labor, and broken his spirit with care all
the Summer, Winter being now at hand, began to reuolue more deeply in his
mind, by what means Vlster so long neglected, and grown wild and fierce,
might be reduced to civility: and having maturely deliberated upon it,
thought, that if three Towns were built at the Queens charge, and (by the
moneys that his associates would contribute) ten Forts, in those places which
he had found to be convenient, above seven thousand pounds of current English
money might be gathered every year, neither should there need within the
space of two years any Royal Garrison. Whilst these and the like things, and
for supply of victuals, took all their care and study, they had been almost
surprised by the Irish. For Brian Mac-phelin (who lately had by treachery
overthrown and slain Moore, a Captain of the English) having conspired his
ruin with Turlogh and the Scottish Hilanders, whereof as soon as he had
notice, he most wisely judged, that it were not best to stay and expect them,
but to set forward to assault them: which did he so courageously, that he slew
two hundred Irish, took Brian and Rory Oge, his brother by the mothers side,
and Brians wife. Mac-Phelim is taken. The unprofitable attempt and force of
Chaterton.
With those businesses in Ireland this year was spent, to the good of none,
but with much loss to Essex: and also to the notorious detriment of Chaterton,
an English Gentleman, who upon certain conditions between the Queen and him,
took to lead some Colonies of English into Fues, a neighboring Territory to
O-Hanlane.

Book 2. 1574.
THE SEVENTEENTH YEAR OF Her Reign. Anno Dom. 1574.
The Duke of Alanzon desires to visit Queen Elizabeth.
IN the first month of this year, the Duke of Alanzon labored more then ever,
as well by letters full of love, as by Mauuisser the French Ambassador, to
obtain leave to come into England under safe conduct, to see and salute Queen
ELIZABETH, to whom being absent, he testified all love and respect. Queen
ELIZABETH overcome with his continual prayers and solicitations, Queen
Elizabeth agrees to it.
granted him his request, although she gave him contrary advice, and under
assurance of safety gave him leave to come when he pleased, so it were by the
twentieth of May, with promise to use him with all offices of humanity, which
he could expect from a Princess which bore him great affection. And certainly,
after she had discovered that he was much irritated and greatly stirred up
against the Guizes, her Majesty's sworn enemies, she bare him more love and
good will then before. But before he had received this answer, Valentine Dale,
Doctor of the Law, Ambassador in France in Walsinghams place then Secretary,
gave advice, that he and the King of Navarre were suspected of innovation: For
the mother Queen (a woman of great Spirit) began to suspect that he covertly
plotted with the King of Navarre, He is suspected in France.
and the Duke of Mont-Morancy, to deprive her (the King being dead) of the
managing of State-affaires. The Guizes increased this opinion, giving her to
understand, that he had not long ago employed Coligni, Colonel of the
Protestants, his intimate friend: upon which being examined, he voluntarily
acknowledged amongst other things, that he had for a certain time sought the
marriage of the Queen of England, and judging the friendship of Admiral
Coligni, profitable in this design, had talked with him about it, and of the
prosecution of the wars in the Netherlands; He is as it were prisoner being
guarded.

Queen Elizabeth comforts him.


nevertheless over him and the King of Navarre was a Guard appointed to
prevent them. But Thomas Wilkes, Secretary to to the Ambassador Dale, went
privately to see them, and having in the Queens name comforted them, he
promised tha^ her Majesty would let slip no occasion to relieve and comfort
them. Whereof this subtle and crafty old Queen having soon notice, handled
Wilkes in such manner, that he was constrained to leave France, and return
into England, where she so far urged her complants by letters unto Queen
ELIZABETH, that he was sent back again to France to ask her pardon. Henry of
Bourbon, King of Navarre, buried not this friendly office: for he afterward
being King of France, and meeting with him 25. years after in Normandy, he
honored him with the dignity of Knighthood: After this, Queen ELIZABETH sent
T. Randoll into France to the Queen mother, to restore again into her favor
(if it were possible) the Duke of Alanzon, and the King of Navarre: but before
his arrival into France, Charles the ninth King of France died. The right
Honorable Lord, Roger Lord North Baron of Catelage, is sent Ambassador with a
noble train to Henry of Valois the third of that name, King of France and
Poland.
King Charles died, and his funeral Rites paid with great honor and
magnificency in S. Paul's Church in London.

As soon as Henry of Valois, the third of that name, King of France, his
successor, returned out of Poland, the right noble and virtuous Lord, Roger,
Lord North, Baron of Kirtling, was sent Ambassador extraordinary into France,
to congratulate his happy return and succession to the Crown of France, and
to condole with him the distracted and wretched estate of that Realm so
miserably rent and ruinated with civil war, to counsel him to make peace, and
entertain the Edicts, to take to favor the D. of Alanzon, to lessen the hate
he bore to the D. of Mont-Morancy and Delosse, to incite him to do good to the
religious Princess, the Lady Charlotte of Bourbon, daughter to the Duke
Mont-pensier, who fled for her Religion into Germany. But he obtained nothing,
for France, as it were pushed by fate, ran headlong into a direful war.
Nevertheless, the King and his mother the Queen, writ jointly into England,
and sent La Guard to prosecute the marriage of the Duke of Alanzon: The King of
France and mother Queen recommend the Duke of Alanzon to Queen Elizabeth.

They favor the Queen of Scots against the Viceroy Morton.


For seeing this young Prince grow choleric, to see himself so unworthily
handled by his mother on all sides, as if he had been a prisoner, and
understanding that he held secret Council with the Politicians of France, they
thought it safest to divert him from war, to send him into England.

In the interim, they employed all their cunning in Scotland, to get James the
young King over into France, and to displace Morton the Viceroy from his
charge, and for this purpose they sent thither the Kings Scottish guard. The
Queen of Scotland greatly desired this, persuading her self, that if her
son were in France out of danger, she and the Catholics should be more
gently handled in England, that the English faction which was in Scotland, and
always relying upon the Kings name, would quickly be ruinated; as he riper
increased in years, so the English should increase in fears, as well of the
French party, as of the Scots side. The French did no less desire it, fearing
that the Regent of Scotland (who was altogether at the devotion of the English)
would break the ancient Alliance which was between them and the Scots: and
nevertheless then, when he instantly required, that they would contract the
Alliance of mutual defense against strangers, between England and Scotland,
it was denied him, lest perhaps he should by the same means demand an annual
Pension to be assigned to him, and certain Scottish men. She gives credit to
those who make reports aginst the Queen of Scotland.
But ear was given to those, who upon a light suspicion accused the Queen of
Scotland, the Countess of Shrewsbury, and the Earl himself, to have (without
the Queens priuity) made the marriage between Charles, the Paternall uncle of
the King, (who had a little before confirmed unto him by Parliament the County
of Lenox) and the Lady Elizabeth Cauendish, the Countess of Shrewsburies
Daughter by her first Husband. Whereupon the mothers of either sides, and
others, for this cause being kept prisoners a little time, imputed and laid all
the fault upon the Queen of Scotland.

As it was unknown whither this marriage tended, The Earl of Huntington,
President of the North.
and that diverse suspicions had their birth by it, Henry Count of Lidington was
established President of the Assembly of the North, with new instructions and
secrets for this affair. This kind of Magistrate, which at this present is
very honorable, has in a little time, from weak beginnings, grown to this
greatness; and now what I have learned of it, by a free and short digresion, I
mean to leave to posterity. When, in the reign of HENRY the Eighth, the
rebellion of the inhabitants of that Country had stirred up, for the
destruction of Monasteries, was laid asleep, many made complaint of the
injuries which he had received during that Rebellion, unto the Duke of
Norfolk, who remained in those parts; some of which he determined, and left
the rest to be finished by persons which to this purpose he had established,
with Commissions sealed with his own Seal; but the King being advertised
hereof, sent him a particular Seal to serve in such causes, and having revoked
him, gave that Commission to Tunstall Bishop of Duresme, and appointed
Commissioners with power to hear and determine the complaints of the poor.
He was the first which bare the name of President, and since, the authority of
his Successors has bin of great value.

An Edict against the ri^tousnes of apparel.
In these times, the superfluity of Apparel so prevailed in England, (by a Vice
peculiar to the Nation, which pleases it self by imitating others) that the
ancient fashion fell in such disgrace, that the men, by a new fashion of habit
and too much bravery, made manifest the filthiness and insolency of their
spirits, swaggering every where, covered with silk, gold, and silver, pure and
mingled. The Queen marking that this superfluity drew every year out of the
Kingdom (to the damage of the public) great quantity of money, for the
buying of silk and other strange Merchandises, and that many Gentlemen, who
might do good service to the Public, and others, to seem to be He, did not
only consume their demeanes, to their particular damage, but also increased
their debts, used deceits, and by this means fell into the nets of the Law,
and after they had prodigally lauisht their goods, studied to make a change,
she endeavored to provide a fit remedy for it. And although by the Laws of
HENRY the Eighth and MARY, she could prevail against them, and draw from it
great sums of money, nevertheless she rather loved to prevent it by a simple
commandment. She commanded therefore, that within 14. days, every one should
form his apparel to the prescribed fashion, if he would not incur the
severity of the Law, and she herself began this reformation in her Court.
But by the malice of time, this Edict, and these Laws by little and little
gave place to this superfluity, which grew to a greater height of insolency,
and was immediately traced by the riotousnesse of Feasts, and splendour of
Buildings: for since that time, more magnificent, ample, England imbellished
with magnificent structures.

The English work treason in Holland.

They are defeated.


and fair Country houses of Noblemen and private men have been raised up in
England, then in any other Ages whereby (truly) the Kingdom was greatly
adorned, but the glory of Hospitality greatly decreased.

The English which were at war in Holland, under Chester and Gainsford,
failed this year, the one in virtue, the other in success: For those which
lay in Garrison at Valkenburgh, gave over the place, and yielded to the Enemy;
nevertheless they were pardoned, for fear lest Queen ELIZABETH should not
suffer the Spanish Fleet, which was sailing toward Flanders, upon the Sea of
Great-Brittaine, to enter into her Havens to victual themselves. The others
which were in the Channel of Sluice, after they had sustained a sharp Combat,
and courageously repulsed the Spaniards, being surprised by theit enemies, who
had trauersed the River, were overthrown and chased from the place, with the
loss of three hundred men, and three Ensigns.

I know not whether it be expedient to record these triuiall things: Ministers
deceived.
That this year the pious credulity of certain Preachers of London was
deceived by a young wench, who fained herself possessed with a Devil. A Whale
cast on shore.
That there was a great Whale found dry on the Shores of the I Will of Thanet,
whose length was twenty Else of our measure, An extraordinary flood in the
Thames.

The Sky seemed to be on fire.


the breadth, from her belly to her back bone, thirteen foot; the space
between her eyes, eleven foot. That the Thames did ebb and flow twice in
one hour. That in the month of November, from the North to the South, fuming
Clouds were gathered together in a round, the night following, the Sky seemed
to burn, the Flames running through all parts of the Horizon, met together in
the vertical point of Heaven. Nevertheless, let it not be imputed to me as a
crime, to have made mention of these things in a few words, and by a short
digression, since the grauest Historians have recorded them in many words.

THE EIGHTEENTH YEAR OF Her Reign. Book 2. 1575.
Anno Dom. 1575.
HENRY the third, King of France, The league with France renewed.
being returned from Poland, and already inaugurated in the City of Rhemes,
confirmed by his oath and sign of his own hand, before all things, the
Alliance passed in the City of Blois, in the year 1572. between Charles his
brother and Queen ELIZABETH, and having given it to the Ambassador ordinary of
England, Queen ELIZABETH also for her part ratified it at Saint James near
Westminster. Notwithstanding a while after, he inquired by letters, if the
words, mutual defense against all (mentioned in that alliance) comprehended
the cause of Religion? And after that Queen ELIZABETH had discreetly replied,
Yes, and that she was always ready pressed, and desirous to effect that mutual
defense, even in the cause of Religion, if it was required by virtue of the
alliance, he took arms against the Protestants: and the Duke of Alanzon being
drawn to the contrary part, the marriage slept in a long and profound silence.
Notwithstanding, Queen ELIZABETH in favor of the Duke of Alanzon, War
kindled in France.
furnished the Duke Casimier with a great sum of money, to carry into France
the Alman Rutters against the disturbers of the public peace.

As her mind was busied about the affairs of France, those of Flanders
happened: for De Requesens, successor to the Duke of Alua, was fully bent, and
endeavored nothing more then to recover (if it were possible) the Sea, which the
Duke of Alua by a remarkable error in so great a thief had despised, and by
this means had caused that long war of the Low Countries, which endured so
many years: but he being not well furnished with necessary things to set forth
a nauall Army, because the tempest had broken and lost the Ships, which for
this purpose had a little before been conducted from Spain to Flanders, by
the aid of the English; he sent Boischot into England, to leuy ships and
furniture of war with the Queens leave, who being unwilling to adventure her
ships and Seamen in another cause, The Queen of England denies ships to
Requesens.
denied it, and gave public charge to all persons, not to arm any Ships
without her license, and did forbid the English Seamen to enrole themselves
under other Princes. Upon this refusal, Boischot prayed her not to take it in
ill part, if the fugitive English in Flanders should serve in a nauall War
against the Hollanders, under the command of the Spaniard; and permit them to
touch freely in the ports of England to victual themselves. But she would not
approve, that the rebellious English (so she termed those whom he styled
Fugitives) should fight in the service of the Spaniard, not to persuade her
that Requesens would gratify them, prayed them not to do it, and namely, T.
Copely, whom the Spaniards had loaded with the titles of the great master of
the Muze, Lord of Gaten and Rouchtey, The entrance of the Ports.
and intended to set to Sea, to rob both English and Dutch. For the ports, she
esteemed it exceeding folly to open them to Rebels and sworn enemies. Yet
Boischot, to obtain more unjust things, required in the name of the Spaniard,
that the rebellious Dutch might be banished from England. But she refused that
also, To banish the Dutch fugitives.
knowing that those whom he called Rebels, were poor miserable people of no
note, and had never enterprized any thing against him, but being chased from
their Country, and spoiled of their goods during the war, had retired
themselves into England, thinking she should commit a great inhumanity, and
violate the laws of Hospitality, if she should deliver them into the hands of
a Cutthroat. She also remembered how far the affairs of Spain were interessed
in Flanders. Then when at the prayer of the Duke of Alua she commanded 1572.
the Dutch to leave England, and that having commanded the Count of March and
other Dutch to be gone, they had taken Brill, and suscitated that war;
nevertheless, not to seem altogether to depart from the ancient Alliance of
the Burguinions, She denies the confederate Dutch entrance into the English
ports.

Requisens chaseth the rebellious English from Flanders.

Dissolues their Seminary.

The Prince of Orange thinks to run to the protection of the King of France.


although the Spaniard had refused to confirm it with him, she forbad by
public writing the Dutch Ships prepared for war to go forth, and those
Dutch that had taken up arms against the Spaniard, to enter into England, and
expressly the Prince of Orange and his house: the Count of Culenberge, of Berg,
of March, and fifty others the most notable of that faction. And she performed
with more alacrity, in regard Requesens, at the intercession of Wilson, the
English Ambassador, had caused the Earl of Westmerland, and other English to
retire themselves out of the Country of Flanders, which was under the Spaniard,
and had dissipated the English Seminary which was at Doway, in whose stead the
Guizes, at the solicitation of Pope Cregory the 13. established another in the
City of Rhemes.

The Prince of Orange, finding his forces no way equal to those of the
Spaniard, and expecting no succor from England, consulted with his friends in
whom he might put his trust. Now when Queen ELIZABETH understood he had fixed
his eye and heart upon the King of France, she first sent Daniel Rogers to
dissuade him: but nothing being effected, The Queen of England disswades him.
in regard he had before created with the Admiral Coligni and the King of
France, she sent H. Cobham to the King of Spain, to let him understand how
great the danger were, if Holland and Zealand should revolt from him, and give
themselves to the King of France; and by the most important reasons she could
represent, she persuaded him to make change of war for peace, to which he
seemed to accord. She then gave advice to Requesens, by R. Corbet, and ceased
not by all means to turn the Prince of Orange from his design, by the
employment of I. Hasting, but she could not obtain her purpose, being
countermined by Villiers a French Churchman, who came poor into England, with
a scuruy Cloak all torn (I speak this because I knew him) but was enriched
by a collection which was given him to read Divinity Lessons, fearing lest the
Prince of Orange should cast his eye upon the English, maintained amongst other
things, nay by a public writing, that Queen ELIZABETH had no man of war to
whom she would trust an Army, but the Earl of Sussex, and that he bare no good
affection to the Protestants, and according as he had learned of Coligni, he
gave forth, that if the English did set foot in the Low Countries, they would
renew their ancient hate against the French.

Nevertheless, the intestine wars of France having taken away all hope of
succor from the Prince of Orange, and the Dutch, The confederat Dutch
deliberate what Protector they should choose.
they afresh consult to whom they may run, and rely upon for aid. They knew
that the Princes of Almany were against the Spaniards, and also they having no
good intelligence, did niggardly depart with their money, discorded with the
Dutch in certain points of Religion, and that the Emperor, a near Kinsman of
the Spaniards, would give impeachment to it. They also saw the French so
engaged in their own civil wars, that they could find no end; that there
was simulated and inueterate hate between the inhabitants of the Low Countries
and the French; that the Brabanders, Flemmish, and the neighboring people of
France, would oppose it with all their force; that the Commandment of the
French was rude and burdensome, as well as that of the Spanish; and that the
havens of France are not much commodious for the navigations of the Dutch. But
for the English that were almost under one parallel with the Dutch, who also
seemed to be of the same nature and Religion with them, that their language was
not much different; their Country near adjoining, furnished with Ports,
commodious for Navigations, and fruitful in Merchandise. That the Queen both by
Sea and Land was very powerful, a mild and gracious Princess, temperate in
her commands, one that would conserve their Liberties, and in no wise burden
them with exactions.

They forthwith sent into England, Phil. Marnix, They have recourse to the
Queen of England.
Lord of Saint Aldegonde, I. Douza of Nortwic, Paul Busy, and D. Melsen, which
with an honorable legacy, and learned oration, offered to the Queen, Holland
and Zeland, either to possess, or protect, as being a Princess issued from
the Princes of Holland, of the blood of Philip, Wife to Edward the Third,
Daughter to William Bauier, the third of that name, Earl of Hainaud, and of
Holland, by whose second Sister the Spaniard came to the inheritance of the
Provinces. She deliberateth thereupon.
The Queen gave a willing and an attentive hearing to these things. But first
of all, she weighed and considered in her mind the cause which they had
undertaken against their Lord and King, the enmities of the Spaniard, the envy
of the French, the great expenses and doubtful events of the war, and also
what offense might be taken by this insolent example. Then she doubted whether
by her descent from Bauier, she might make claim to Holland and Zeland, and
whether she might lawfully contract a league of protection with the Subjects
of another Prince, and whether they themselves could do this, without the
consent of the Emperor, who was Sovereign Lord of the Fee. Then further, she
scarce gave credit to what some whispered in her ears; that the Provinces fell
not to the Spaniard by hereditary right, but by the election of the Subjects.
She rejects their proffer.
Finally, having maturely deliberated upon these things, (after she had
respectively rendered thanks to the Prince of Orange and the rest, for their
great good will) she answered, that she had always had a special regard of
the honor and faith worthy a Prince, nor could she yet conceive, how she
could in honor and conscience receive the Provinces into her protection, much
less into her possession; but she would employ her best labors to mediate for
a happy peace between them.

The Ambassy of Champigni.
At the same time arrived at the Court, John Perenot of Champigni, from Lodwick
Zuniga of Requesens, who in his name modestly advised the Queen to entertain
the league between England and Burgundy, and not to entermeddle in the
affairs of the Netherlands: To whom, the Queen promised to observe the
league, notwithstanding the Spaniard had refused to confirm it. Yet would she
always provide for her own honor and safety, if she perceived the ancient
form of command amongst the Burgundians to be changed; and foreign Soldiers
in great numbers daily to be admitted into the adjacent Province.

Requesens dies.
Before Champigni was returned, Requesens yielded to death, and a strange
confusion had ouercast the Netherlands, the Soldiers deuasting all places with
Sword and Fire; And the Estates of Brabant, Flanders, etc. assuming their
former authority in the administration of the Commonwealth, which the Spaniard
by necessity was constrained to confirm to them, until the coming of John of
Austria, whom he had instituted Governor over the Provinces, Queen ELIZABETH
carefully labored that the Spaniard might receive no discommoditie, and
conserve, as much as she possible could, the Netherla^ds intyre to him, and
sent Dauison diligently to exhort them to a peace. The Queen studieth to bring
the affairs of the Netherlands to a composition.
But by reason of outragiousnesse of the Spanish Soldiers, nothing was
effected.

England, for this whole year, remained in a peaceable quiet, excepting, in
the month of July there happened upon the Southern borders of England,
toward Scotland, a conflict between the borderers of either part, A conflict
upon the borders of Scotland.
whereof the occasion was this, John Foster, Knight, Governor of the
Meridionall Frontiers, and at the same time of Barwicke also, entered into
parley upon the Mount Redsquire, with I. Carmichell, Warden of Liddisdale in
Scotland: notwithstanding it was a custom that none but Governors should
meet with Governors, and Wardens with Wardens, as equals in dignity, they
were of either side accompanied, besides certain Noblemen, with a multitude
of Fugitives, and Malefactors, all armed; of which, the most part quarrelled
with one another about inueterate and mortal hatreds between them. These sort
of fellows, according to their custom, having put their horses out here and
there to feed, round incircled the Governor and Warden; whom when they heard
break out into eager terms about the sending back of Fugitives, they, whose
Laws were only their weapons, knowing themselves guilty, were afraid lest
they should be delivered into the hands of justice; upon a squabble which fell
out about the taking away of a spur, they tumultuously ran to arms, and
every one, to revenge their private spleen, assailed his particular enemy, or
made prey of his Horse. Whether a Scot or an Englishman was the beginner, it
is uncertain. At the first encounter, the English repulsed the Scots, and
took Carmichell. But as they, being too confident in their own forces, ranged
about for booty and trifling pillage, a troop of Scottish succors sallying
out of Iedbourgh, Carmichell escaped, and the English were put to flight,
George Heron, Knight, Warden of Tyndale and Ridisdale, with others, was slain,
Heron is slain.
and the Governor Forster himself; Fran. Russell, son to the Earl of
Bedford, and sonne-in-law to Forster; Cuthbert Collinwood, The English led as
prisoners into Scotland.
James Ogle, Henry Fenwich, and many others, were taken and carried to Dalquith
in Scotland, where the Regent was resident, who courteously received them: but
fearing lest, if he should so soon permit them to depart, their blood yet
boiling for the murder, should inflame their courages to vengeance, and so
raise a war between the two Kingdoms, he for a time detained them, and
would not release them, before they had promised by writing, to appear at a
certain day in Scotland.

The Queen of England is much incensed.
When Queen ELIZABETH had certain notice of these matters, she was then (if
ever anger had prevailed with her) full of vexation and mightily incensed, that
the Scots, which were (as her self spoke) indebted to her for their rest and
liberty, should, violating the peace, assault and murder the English in
England, should surprise and lead into Scotland the Governor of the
Meridional frontier, and of Barwick, and others, and not release them before
they had promised in writing to return. She took all this as a great injury
and a disgrace done to the name of the English, and to her honor; And so much
the more, because the Regent had constituted, that inquisition should be made
upon the borders of Scotland, whether those which were of the Commission, did
come to the place armed. This proposition she judged to come from a heart puff^
up with enmity; but that other with ambition, that is to say, that the Regent
should prescribe a place of meeting to the Queen of England, notwithstanding
that she had not long before appointed a meeting place in the City of York to
the Regent Murrey. Neither could the affrighted Regent satisfy the Queen,
until he unarmed had met with Huntington, Deputy for England, at Bonderod, a
Town upon the Borders, and there promised with good offices to salve this
hurt; and for the reparation of the English name, he sent Carmichel his
indeered friend into England, who for a space was detayned there in free
imprisonment at York, and soon after was sent back with honor and rewards.
For the fault was found to be sprung from Forster, whilst he above measure
sustained the Cause of a notorious Malefactor. Thus was the Queen reconciled
to the Regent, who remained ever after constant in his friendship; chastising
the Fugitives of either side, to his great praise, and the good of both the
Kingdoms.

In this year dyed not any in England, The death of the Duke of
Castell-Herauld.
of any noble remarke or note: But in Scotland, the thrice-Noble James
Hamilton, Duke of Castell-Herauld, who being son to the Daughter of James the
second, King of Scotland, was given as a tutor to Mary Queen of Scots,
appointed Governor and Heir to the Kingdom, so long she was under age, and
when he had delivered her to the French, he was created Duke of
Castell-Herauld, in France; afterward was constituted the chief of the three
Governors of Scotland, during Queen Mary's imprisonment; whose Cause whilst
he constantly defended, being an open man, and of a nature peaceable, he was
much afflicted by the injuries and plots of some troublesome spirits.

The Earl of Essex perceiving himself much troubled, Essex reduced into
distress in Jreland.
as well by the Ambushes of Turlogh, and the Lord of Dungannon, as also by the
objected Difficulties in England: and learning that it was deliberated in
England concerning his repeal, he silently deplored the misreies whereinto by
extreme injury he was precipitated; he complained of the loss of his own and
his men's fortunes; he lamented Ireland, which he persuaded himself, that with
two thousand Soldiers, he could reduce into obedience, he instantly demanded,
that for his honor he might compound the matter with Turlogh: and having given
up to the Viceroy his command in Vlster, because that with that small Company
of men which he had assigned him, he was not of power sufficient to prosecute
what he had begun, he was presently commanded to resume the same. But he
had scarce resumed it, and began to march against Turlogh, but he received
Letters of Command, wholly to with-drawe himself from that war, and, in as
honorable terms as he could, to conclude a Peace. Which being presently
performed, he charged upon the Scots of Hebrides, which had seized upon
Clandeboy, and forced them to fly into Caves: and having with the aid of
Norris surprised the Island Rachlin, and slain 400. of the Islanders, he
forced the Castle to yield, and there placed a Garrison. And being now in the
middle course of victory, he was again commanded (beyond his expectation) to
resign his authority, and only as a private Captain, had command over three
hundred men. And sure nothing was omitted by the close and subtle dealings of
Leicester, with continual troubles to oppress the mild and peaceable spirit
of this Noble Worthy.

Sidney the third time Deputy, makes his progress in Ireland.
Henry Sidney was then sent the third time Viceroy into Ireland, when the
Plague made large hauock of the Isle: nevertheless, he passed to Vlster, where
many humbled themselves to him, and requested with Prayers their safeguard, to
wit, Mac-Mahon, Mac-Guir, Turlogh Leinich, and others; as many also in Lemster,
of the seditious Family of O-Conor, and O-Mor, who by force of Arms had holden
their ancient Possessions in Leise and Ophale, whereof by an Ordinance they had
been dispossessed. Being arrived at Mounster, he assisted as a mourner, to
honor the Funerals of Peter Carew, The death of Peter Carew.
a true Noble Knight, and of memorable virtues (who, as heir to Stephanide,
and Reymond Crasse, who were the first Conquerers of Ireland, and of the of
Ydorne, had conquered, by the Rites of War, part of his Patrimony.) Coming
to Corcagh, the Earl of Desmond visited him, and with great respect offered
unto him all willing and ready services. From thence being carried to Connach,
he received Homage of the sons of Clan-Richard, which were Rebels, and
pardoned all their offenses, after they had humbly implored the same in the
Church of Galloway: and so he governed the Province with great and worthy
applause.

Book 2. 1576.
THE NINETEENTH YEAR OF Her Reign. Anno Dom. 1576.
The French propound a marriage to Queen Elizabeth.
ANew year beginning, the two match-makers for the Duke of Alanzon, la
Mottefenelon, and la Port, began to charm the ears of Queen ELIZABETH, with
sweet and amorous discourses. To whom reply was made, She, peace to them.
That it was then no time for such talk, the Duke being so far engaged in
the Civil Wars, wherewith France was infested, that he could not readily
come into England. Nevertheless, two Ambassadors were sent into France, one
after another, She labors to divert them from the Netherlands.
to renew a fraternall friendship between the King and the Duke, and to
dehort them from the affairs of the Netherlands, lest the Spaniard should
kindle a new war in France; showing them how easy a thing it would be to him
(having then a puissant Army in Italy) to surprise Saluces, or being with his
forces possessed of Prouence, to command the entry of the Mediterranean Sea,
especially the treasury of France being so near exhausted: of other semblable
matters she admonished them, to deter them from the Low Countries.

For the Prince of Orange, for his own particular profit, and the hope of
retaining the Principality of Orange, which was situate in France, he ceased
not to inuit the French into the Netherlands; and promised to the Hollanders
and Zelanders, who as if they were borne to the Sea, The Zelanders molest the
English by Sea;
did infest the Sea, with their Vessels, purposely built for their Pyracies,
the pillaging of the shipping of the English Merchants, under a pretext framed,
that they relieved the Dunkirkes their enemies with victuals, and under
borrowed names, transported into Spain the merchandises of Antwerpe, and other
places, which themselves were accustomed to transport thither, and for their
own profit, but now durst not, by reason they knew themselves guilty of
revolt. Holstock was forthwith sent with Ships furnished for the wars to
repress them, are repressed.
who took above two hundred Pirates, and imprisoned them upon the seacoast;
And for the goods which were taken away, William Winter, Knight, and Robert
Beale, Counselor, and Secretary for the Queens Letters, were deputed into
Zeland, to accord the differences on either side, and upon equal conditions to
cause restitution to be made. But the Avarice of the English Merchants, and the
insolency of the Zelanders, broached new contentions, which were presently
brought to conclusion with little damage to either Nation.

Then there grew a great confusion throughout the Netherlands, A confusion in
the Netherlands.
the Spaniards imprisoning certain of the Councillors of the Estates, and
persecuting with all sorts of outrages and excess of injuries the inhabitants
of the Provinces in such manner, that the Estates were forced to take arms,
and send forth messengers to all parts to manifest their wrongs. They
dispatched toward Queen ELIZABETH, Aubigni, to demonstrate to her Majesty
the injuries and causes for which they took up arms. Queen ELIZABETH, by
Wilson, exhorted as much as was possible, both the Estates and the Spaniards to
lay aside their Arms; studiously inquiring the causes why the Counselors of
the Estates were so violently imprisoned. In the mean space, Antwerpe sacked
by the Spanish mutiners.
the City of Antwerpe being the Illuminary of other Cities, which scarce gives
place to the second of the most flourishing Marts in Europe, was miserably
sacked by the Spaniards, the House of the English Merchants there pillaged, and
themselves, although innocent, were constrained to pay large ransomes to the
Soldiers. Aubigni taking hold of this occasion, with much importunity
requested Queen ELIZABETH in the name of the Estates, to lend some notable
sum of money, to be employed for the repressing of the Spanish insolence. But
her Majesty knowing that they had before demanded assistance of the French,
made refusal, nevertheless she promised incontinently, and with all
diligence, to make intercession to the Spaniard in their behalf for a peace
and league; The Queen labors a peace for the Netherlands.
and to this end, she sent John Smith, Cousin-German to Edward the Sixth, a man
perfect in the Spanish behavior, and well known to the King of Spain, who
was graciously received of the King; and so wisely retorted upon Gasp.
Quirague, Archbishop of Toledo, and the Inquisitors, the contumelious injuries
which they spoke against the Queen, out of hate to the Religion, and willing
her not to add to her titles, the Defendresse of the Faith, that he received
many thanks from their King, who was much offended with the Archbishop,
requesting Smith to conceal from the Queen those passages, and commanded
severely that that attribute should be allowed of. The King knew well that the
Queens Council were sufficient and expedient for her affairs, yet would he
not consent thereto, the fate of the Netherlands (if I may so call it) carrying
him another way.

At the same time, John of Austria, natural Son to the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, arrived in Flanders with a sovereign command; to whom, the Queen in
like manner sent Edward Horsey, Governor of the I Will of Wight, The arrival of
John of Austria in Flanders.
to congratulate his arrival, and offer him her assistance, if the Estates
should call the French into Holland. Nevertheless, by the importunate
solicitation of Sweuingham, pleading for the Estates, she sent them 2000. The
Queen furnishes the Estates with money;
pounds of English money, with this condition, that they should not change
their Prince, nor admit the French into Holland, nor refuse the peace, if John
of Austria should descend to any equal conditions. But if he should accept of
a peace, then the moneys should be employed for the payment of the Spanish
Soldiers, which had for want of pay raised all these troubles. to continue the
Provinces in the King of Spaines obedience. The traffic re-established
between England and Portugal.
Such was her care and study to detain these wavering Provinces under the
obedience and allegiance of the Spaniard, never pretermitting any occasion of
well-deseruing, and for the conservation of peace.

In this instant, England triumphed in an agreeable tranquillity, and the
traffic of the English with the Portugals, which, by the private avarice of
some particular persons had been shut up, was then opened again, and the
English had permission to traffic in Portugal, Algarbia, the Isles of Medera,
and the Azores, the Portugals likewise in England and Ireland, for the space of
three years; during which time, all differences and contentions which had bin
about the deteining of goods or merchandise, were made void. And this was
publicly diuulged by the sound of a Trumpet.

Likewise certain learned Ingenies of the time, inflamed with an honest desire
of discovering the more distant Regions of the Earth, and the secrets of the
Ocean, incited certain well-monyed men, who were no less inflamed with the
desire of getting more, to make discovery, if in the North parts of America,
there were any way, by which men might sail to the rich Country of Cathay,
and so, by a mutual commerce, to join the Riches of the East and Occident
together.

With what probability.
Those learned men probably disputed, taking it for granted, that the shore lay
on that side; that the nearer we approach to the shore, the shallower the
waters be: and by experience, those which sail from the shore of the Western
Islands, meet with higher Seas, which seem to be all one with that Sea which
Nauigators call Del-Sur on the other part of America: Furthermore, that when
the Sea is carried by the diurnall motion of the primum mobile, it is driven
back by the opposition of America, and runs toward the Northern Countries
of Cabo Fredo, that is to say, the cold Promontory, there to unburden it self
through some Channel into the Del-Sur Sea, except it be by the like violence
repulsed into Lappia and Finmarch, in which Region of the Southern world, from
the Insulous strait of Magellan, being incapable of such a mass of waters by
reason of the narrowness of the Channels of those Islands, they are beaten back
to Cabo Fredo by the Eastern shores of America. Witness, Ienkinson an
Englishman.
And they add for Witnesses, Ienkenson, an Englishman, who better knew then
any other the Northern Climate of the world, (who showed that those huge and
massy heaps of waters of the Sea Cronio, do disimbogue themselves
necessarily into the Sea Del-Sur,) and Bernard le Tor, Bernard le Tor, a
Spaniard.
a Spaniard, who affirmed, that returning from the Moluccus, into America,
above the Equinoctial Line Northward, he was cast back again by force of
waters, coming from the North, violently rushing against his Ship, Furbisher
is sent to discover the Strait in the North part of America.
into Moluccus; and other Witnesses they produce to prove this: Whereupon,
monyed-men were persuaded to send Martin Furbisher with three Ships to discover
this Strait: who loosing from Harwich the 18. of June, entered the ninth of
August into the Gulf or Strait, under the latitude of sixty three degrees,
where he found men of black hair, broad faces, flat wry noses, of a swart
and tawny color, clothed with Sea-Calues skins, and the women were painted
about the eyes and the balls of the Cheek with a deep azure color, like the
ancient Britans: but all things being so bound up with Ice, in the Month of
August, it was not possible for them to hold on their course, so as he returned
for England, where he arrived the eighth of the Kalends of October, with the
loss only of five Mariners, which were taken by the Barbarians.
Notwithstanding to perform what he had begun, he sailed the next two years
about the same Shore, but was hindered from entering into the Gulf by the Ice
which was euery-where heaped up like Mountains. Being then beaten with
Tempests, Snow, and Winds that were ever and anon changing, having gathered a
great number of Stones (which he took to have been Minerals) he turns
sails: from which stones, when neither Gold, Silver, nor any other metal
could be drawn, we saw them thrown away to repair the highways. But these
things are publicly extant, described at large.

About the same time, Maximilian the Emperor dyed, The death of Maximilian the
Emperor.
a prudent and just Prince, profitable to the Empire, and well-deseruing both
of Queen ELIZABETH, and the English: whereof, as soon as she was certainly
informed, being afflicted with an exceeding grief, she sent Sir Philip
Sidney, Ambassador, to Rodulphus, King of the Romans, Queen Elizabeth mournes.
diligently to declare her sorrow for the death of his father, and to
congratulate his Succession. And also, in passing by, to condole with the
Sons of Frederick the Third, The Elector Palatine dies.
Elector Palatine, for the death of their Father; and by the way, to put
Casimere in mind of the Money which she spent in the French war; for by
that war, peace being restored to France, the Provinces of Aniou, of
Touraine, and of Berie assigned in Apennage, as they call it, A Franc is two
shillings English.
to the Duke of Alanzon, eleven millions of Franc's, promised to Casimere to
pay the German Horsemen, and three hundred thousand Crowns, for which the
French Queen had engaged her Jewels. But Queen ELIZABETH had none at all paid
again, and yet thought her self sufficiently recompensed in having it so well
spent in so good a cause. Casimere ingenuously and with a German sincerity
made answer, That the French had broke promise with him, and that it was not
his fault that the Money was not re-payd.

As in Germany the Emperor Maximilian, and the Prince Elector Palatine, for
their Christian virtues, and singular moderation, had left a great affection
and much grief: So no less did Walter Deureux, Earl of Essex, leave in
England and Ireland, though far inferior in place, verily a most excellent
man, in whom sweetness of manners contended with his Nobleness of Birth; all
which notwithstanding could not prevail against Envy: for indeed, he was
compelled afterward to leave that which he had laudably begun in Ireland, with
much diminishing his Patrimony: and being returned into England, he openly
threatened Leicester, whom he suspected had injured him: by the Court subtletie
of Leicester, who was afraid of him, and by the peculiar mysteries of the
Court, by striking, and overthrowing men with Honor, he was sent away again
into Ireland, with a vain Title of [ Earl Marshall of Ireland] where pining
away with grief, and being grievously tormented with a Dyssenterie, very
godlily rendered up his Soul to God, after he had willed those that were
with him, to admonish his Son, then scarce ten years old, that he should
alvvaies set before his Eyes the six and thirtieth year of his age, as the
longest measure of his life, which neither he nor his Father ouer-liued, and
truly he attained not unto it, as in his place we shall declare. Thus was the
death of this most Noble person, by the Vulgar (who always suspect those they
hold dear, to be made away by poison) suspected to be poisoned, though
Sydney, Lord Deputy of Ireland, having made diligent inquisition about it,
writ to the Council of England that the Earl often said at his first falling
sick, that as often as he was troubled in mind, he was pained with this flux,
Essex death suspected.
and that he never suspected poison, that he had the same color of body in
his sickness as he had in perfect health, no spot, no consumption, no blemish,
no losing of nails, no shedding of hair, nor inward putrifactio^ or
appearance of poison when he was dissected. That the Phisicons did not agree in
the cause of his sickness, neither ministered they any thing to him against
poison, but that he that waited of his cup was falsely accused of.....dipped in
water and mingled with wine: nevertheless we have seen the man pointed at
publicly for a poysoner. This suspicion increased, because Leicester so
quickly after abandoned Douglas Sheffield, by whom he had had a son (whether
she was his wife or paramour, I will not say) after he had given her a sum
of money and made her great promises; and openly professed love to the Lady
Lettice, Essex his widow, and married her twice. For though, it was said, that
he had married her privately, yet Henry Knollis her father knowing his
extrauagant affections, and fearing lest he should deceive his daughter, would
not believe it, unless he saw a contract himself, expressly in the presence
of a public Notarie and witnesses. But that was performed two years after.

At that time dyed in England Sir Anthony Coke at seventy years of age, a
Knight that kept the ancient Severity, The death of Sir Anthony Coke.
and very learned, Tutor to EDWARD the Sixth in his Childhood, happy in his
Daughters, who being skillful in the Greek and Latin tongues above the
expectation of their Sex, he had married to these famous men, William Cecill,
Lord Treasurer of England, Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the great Seal, to
Thomas Hoby, who dyed Ambassador in France, Raph Roulet, and Henry Killigrew.

That I may go back a little: Before Essex dyed, the Sons of the Earl of
Clan-Rickard, whom the Deputy of Ireland had pardoned for rebellion scarce two
years before, Tumults in Ireland.
had gathered together a Company of Scummes, Rogues, and Rebels, who robbed and
barbarously sacked Connach, burnt Athenrie, which the Inhabitants were about to
re-edifie, and with a barbarous hatred which they bore unto them, who began to
favor Laws and Humanity, killed the workmen. The Deputy makes haste thither,
dissipates these Troops of Robbers, and made them fly into their Dens,
according to their custom; and imprisoned the Earl of Clan-Rickard their
Father (as culpable of his Sons crimes) in the Castle of Dublin. But as soon
as the Deputy was returned, they came out again, and besieged the Castle
Balla-reogh, being their Fathers chief Seat (where there was a Garrison
commanded by T. Strange) but in vain and with loss of their men. Afterward
being assisted by the Ilander Scots, ransack't and spoiled whatsoever was upon
the Lands of Mac-Williams Eughter the younger: but the Deputy coming again,
they fled and hid themselves as they did before.

William Drury, President of Mounster.
William Drury, late Governor of Barwicke, now newly made President of
Mounster, by his wisdom and valor brought all the Province under command,
and in obedience to the Laws, except Kerria and the County Palatine, whither,
like to a Sincke, a great number of Malefactors, Thieves, men in debt, and such
as were suspected for Treason, by reason of the Immunity and privileges
belonging to the place, were gathered together, a certain impunitie
imboldening them. For EDWARD the third had granted to the Earl of Desmond,
all Regal Liberties, that the Kings of England had in that County; except for
Burnings, Rapes, Forestallings, and Treasure found. Notwithstanding, the
President (judging that these Liberties were granted rather for the exercise of
Justice, then for the protecting of Mischief) valiantly defeated the most
selected troops of the forlorn Rebels, which the Earl of Desmond had laid in
Ambuscado, and made search through all Kerria, and punished many of them
severely. The Earl of Desmond vexing at this, and grievously complaining to
the Lord Deputy, of Drury, Malefactors pursued and punished. Ceass, what it is.
as well of this, as of the Tax, which they call Ceass. This Tax is an
exaction of Victuals at a certain price (as the Glebe among the Ancients) for
Provision of the Deputies Family, and the Garrison Soldiers. Of this Tax, The
Irish complain of exactions.
he complained not alone, but in Lemster, the most civil part of the Isle, the
Viscount Bultinglas, Deluin, Hoth, and Trimleston Barons, and also other of the
Nobler sort, complaining, denied to pay it, as not to be exacted, but by
authority of Parliament; And thereupon sent Deputies into England, who, being
heard before the Council, were committed; and in like manner in Ireland were
those that sent them, until they submitted to pay it: It appearing by the
Records of the Kingdoms Exchequer to be instituted long ago, and is a
certain right of Majesty, called [ Royal Prerogatiue] which is not subject
to the Laws, The Queen has compassion.
nor yet repugnant as the Lawyers have judged it. But the Queen commanded the
Lord Deputy to use a moderation in such like exactions, and used the old
saying, [ While they may sheare her subjects, do not shave them:] and said
moreover, AH, how greatly I fear lest that which Bato in time past to Tiberius
upon the reuolting of Dalmatia, be objected against us by the Irish. You, you
are in fault, who commit not your flocks to Shepherds but to Wolves.

Book 2. 1577.
THE TWENTIETH YEAR OF Her Reign. Anno Dom. 1577.
Austria inclines to Peace.
DOn John of Austria perceiving himself too weak for the States of Holland,
strengthened by the amity of neighbor Princes, sent Gastel to Queen
ELIZABETH to thank her for the aid which she had offered him against the
French, and to declare his desire of Peace. Elizabeth persuades to it.
She by Edw. Horsey now sent the second time to him, commends his disposition
to Peace, and withal treates that the goods of the English detained in
Antwerpe, might be restored. Answer was made very slowly, he being much
distracted (as he pretended) with other affairs, wholly intending [ The
perpetual Edict for Peace] as they call it, which scarce lasted a year.
Queen ELIZABETH seriously desiring Peace, sends Sir Thomas Leighton to the
Prince of Orange, to persuade him, not to labor, or attempt any thing against
Peace, until John Smith, who was sent into Spain to procure a Peace, should
return. The Prince of Orange, Orange diuerts her.
who from his heart condemned this perpetual Edict, having opportunely
learned, that Don John of Austria did endeavor to marry the Queen of Scots,
which occasion he willingly caught, and by Famier forthwith aduertiseth Queen
ELIZABETH to auert her from Peace. She nevertheless as seeming to know
nothing, by Daniel Rogers congratulates with Don John for the perpetual Edict
of Peace, although she had discovered for certain, that by the persuasion of
the Earl of Westmerland, and the English Fugitives, and the inclination of the
Pope, and the favor of the Guizes, he had an assured hope to attain to this
marriage, and together with it, Austria seeks to marry the Queen of Scots.

And by her to get the Kingdom of England.


to swallow England and Scotland; and had already resolved to possess
himself of the Isle of Man, situate in the Irish Sea, as a fit place for the
inuading of England on Ireland side, and from the West Side of Scotland, where
the Queen of Scots had many people at her devotion, and in the opposite part
of England to make use of North Wales, and the Counties of Cumberland,
Lancaster, and Chester, where the most part of the Inhabitants are most
addicted to Popery.

And certainly (as we have learned by Perez the King of Spaines Secretary)
Austria, carried away with ambition, seeing himself fallen from all hope of the
Kingdom of Tunis, had dealt secretly with the Pope, to pull down ELIZABETH
from her Throne; to marry the Queen of Scotland; and to subdue England: and
unknown to Philip, wrought with the Pope to excite Philip for the public good
to the English War. Don John himself is ready to go for Flanders; this was
prosecuted in Spain; and anon after, Escouedo is sent from Flanders, to desire
that a Port in Biskye might be granted him, from whence with a Navy he might
invade England. But Philip not likeing these designs, begun to neglect him as
a man too ambitious. Neither did Queen ELIZABETH understand of these things,
till (as I have said) the Prince of Orange did inform her.

Copley made a Baron of France.
Notwithstanding, it wanted not suspicion, that Thomas Copley (a prime man among
the English Fugitives, being commended to the French King by Vaulx, Secretary
to Don John) had been made Knight and Baron. But Copley endeavoring to avoid
suspicion, protested obedience to his Prince, and that he had accepted this
Title out of no other reason but for the greater access of honor to his wife,
his companion in exile, and that his Pension from Spain would be the greater,
because a Gentleman of Title is of more esteem among Spaniards; and he thought
he was capable of the Title of a Baron, his Grandmother being the eldest
Daughter to the Baron of Hoo, and his great Grandmother the eldest Daughter of
the heirs of the Baron of Wells.

The dissimulation of Austria.
In the mean time, Don John (underhand) prosecutes this match, and withal, the
better to cloak the matter, sends the Viscount of Gaunt Ambassador to
ELIZABETH, who showed her the Articles of Peace, and to demand a longer term
for the payment of the Money which the States borrowed of her. This she
willingly grants; and after treates with him, by Wilson, that the damages
which the English Merchants received at the sacking of Antwerpe may be repared.
He takes up arms again.
He deludes her, and while he pretended to be busy about this perpetual Edict
of Peace, breaks out into War, and, by craft, surprises Castles, and Towns,
and writes to the King of Spain, that the wisest course is to take the Islands
of Zeland, before they lay siege to the interior Provinces; and being thus
transported with hope, strives to persuade him by Escouede his Secretary, that
it were easier for him to take England than Zeland*

At length, when all things tended to wars in the Low Countries, the States
send to Queen ELIZABETH the Marquis of Maure and Adoulfe Medkerke, to borrow
of her a hundred thousand pound sterling for eight months: She made them this
answer, Elizabeth couenanted with the Scots.
That if they could borrow it elsewhere, She, with the City of London, would
willingly give caution for it; provided, that such Towns of the Low Countries
as She shall nominate, would be bound by writing to repay it within a year,
and made alliance with them of mutual succor both by Land and Sea, under
these conditions: THe Queen shall send for succor to the States a thousand
Horse, and five thousand foot, to whom they shall pay three months after
their imbarking, their intertainement and expense in the City of London, and
the wars ended, shall defray their expense for their returning into England.
The General of these forces, who shall be an Englishman, shall be received
into the Council of the States, and nothing shall be ordered concerning war
or peace, without consulting thereupon either with the Queen, or him, nor make
league with any whosoever, without her approbation; and, if she please, to be
comprehended in the same. If any Prince do any hostile act against the Queen
or Kingdom of England, under any pretext whatsoever, the States shall resist
as much as in them lie, and shall send aid to the Queen in the same number,
and upon the like conditions. If any discord arise among the States, it shall
be referred to her arbitrament. If the Queen be to prepare a Navy against
enemies, the States shall furnish xl. Ships of a competent burden, with
Mariners, and every thing else necessary, which shall obey and follow the
Admiral of England, and shall be defrayed at the Queens cost. The States
shall in no wise admit into the Low Countries, such English as the Queen has
declared Rebels. If they conclude a peace with Spain, they must take heed
that the Articles, whether jointly or severally, be confirmed by the Queens
pleasure.

Immediately as this Treaty begun, the Queen, lest she should be calumniated
as a nourisher of Rebellion in the Low Countries, She declares the reason of it
to the Spaniard.
sent Thomas Wilkes to the Spaniard, to declare unto him as follows:
FOrasmuch as there never want malicious spirits, which study craft and
subtlety, to break friendship between those Princes, and by unjust
suggestion, to cast aspersions upon their honors, by supposall, as if she had
kindled this fire in the Low Countries: First, she prays the King, and the
Governors of the Low Countries, that they would call to mind, how often and
how earnestly, like a friend, she long-agoe forewarned of the evils hanging
over the Low Countries; And then, when they thought of reuolting, what studious
pains she took in often Missitations to the Prince of Orange, and the States,
that they should continue in duty and obedience to the King, yea even when
those most opulent Provinces were offered her in possession, what sincerity
showed she, not to take them into protection? Finally, when all things were
deplorable, how much money did she lately furnish to hinder (the States being
pressed by urgent necessity) not to subject themselves under another Prince,
and trouble the treaty of the late propounded peace. But when she had notice
that the Prince of Orange was unwilling to embrace the peace already begun,
she did not only admonish him to embrace it, but also (she most sacredly
protested) interposed threatenings, and in some sort commanded him. If these
things be unworthy of a Christian Prince, studious of peace, and most desirous
to deserve well of her good Confederate, the King of Spain; let the King
himself, and all the Princes of the Christian World judge. And that wars might
sleep on both sides, and that he might have the Hollanders obedient, advises
him to receive them, as an afflicted people, into his ancient favor, restore
their privileges, observe the last covenants of peace, and elect out of his
own Family some other Governor. Which could by no means be effected, unless
Don John were removed, whom the States distrusted, with more than a hostile and
implacable hatred; and, whom she certainly knew by his secret practices with
the Queen of Scots, to be her utter enemy. Insomuch, that she could expect
nothing from the Low Countries, but certain dangers while He governed there.
But now when she does perceive what great number of forces Don John enrolled,
and how many Troops of French there were in a readiness, she professed, that,
to keep the Low Countries to the King of Spain, and to repel danger from
England, she had promised aid to the States. Who reciprocally had promised to
persist in their obedience to the King, and to innouate nothing in Religion.
From which, if she shall perceive the King auerse, but to have determined
breaking the bars of their rights and privileges, to draw them into
servitude like miserable Provinces captiuated by conquest; she cannot, both
for the defense of her Neighbors, and her own security, be failing or
negligent: But also, if the States do break their faith with the King, or
enterprise any thing contrary to what they have promised, she would speedily
turn her Ensigns against them.

The Spaniard was not pleased to hear these things, The Spaniard did not
willingly hear these things.
nevertheless knowing that it lay much in Queen ELIZABETH'S power, to
establish or ruin his affairs in the Low Countries, and knowing for certain
that Don John laid Ambuscadoes for her, dissembled it, and prayed her to
prosecute the design which she had for establishing peace, and not rashly to
believe the false reports that run, or that be practiced unworthily against a
Prince that is his friend.

Whiles Wilkes exposes these things in Spain, Don John, who feared Queen
ELIZABETH, and withal wished her ruin, Don John complains to Queen
Elizabeth of the States.
sends Gastell to her, who blamed the States exceedingly, accuses them of many
foul crimes, and laid open at large the causes that moved Don John to take
arms again. Queen ELIZABETH, like an Heroicke Princess, stood Arbitratresse
between the Spaniard, the French, and the States, insomuch as she had power to
apply this saying of her Father, [ He shall carry it away, for whom I am;] and
that which he writ is found true, that France and Spain are the scoales of the
Balance, England the balance of Europe.
and England the beam.

At the very same time, the Judges holding the Assizes at Oxford, A pestilent
sickness caused by the stink of a prison.
and R. Ienke, Stationer, an impudent talker, was accused and brought to trial
for speaking injurious words against the Queen, the most part of the
assistants were so infected with his poisonous and pestilent breath, and by
reason of the stink, whether of the prisoners or the prison, that they almost
all dyed within forty days, besides women and children; and this contagion
extended no further. Amongst others, R. Bell, chief Baron of the Exchequer, a
grave man, and learned in the Law, R. Doyley, Sir G. Babington, Vicount Doyley
of Oxfordshire, Harcourt, Waineman, and Fetiplace, persons of great estimation
in that Country, and Barham, a famous Lawyer, being almost of one Jury, and
about three hundredth more died there.

Hitherto the Papists in England enjoyed a cheerful tranquillity, who, by a
kind of merciful conniuency, exercised their Religion in private houses in
some sort unpunished, although it was prohibited by the Law, upon pain of a
pecuniary mulct to be inflicted; neither did the Queen think it fit to force
the conscience. But after that thundering Bull of Excommunication against the
Queen, which came from Rome, was cast abroad; that serenitie by little and
little turned into clouds and tempests, and brought up that Law which was made
in the year 1571. against them which brought into the Kingdom such [ Bulls,
Agnos Dei, and Grana Benedicta] being tokens of Papal obedience, or, as we
have said, did reconcile any to the Church of Rome. Nevertheless, this Law was
not put in execution against any one in six years after, although it was
known to have been violated by many. The first against whom this Law was put
in practice, was Cuthbert Maine, Priest, Maine, a Priest, executed.
a stubborn defender of the Popes authority against the Queen, he was
executed at Saint Stephens, commonly called Launston in Cornwall, and Trugion
a Gentleman, that entertained him into his house, had all his lands and goods
confiscated, and he condemned to perpetual imprisonment: Of these, and such
like things, concerning the Church, I will but give a touch, in regard of
others that undertake to write the Ecclesiastical History of those times, who,
I hope (although it be scarcely to be hoped for, by reason of exasperated
minds in this division of Religion) will faithfully perform it.

This year, the title of Baron of Latimer, The death of the Lord Latimer.
after it had flourished in honor and riches from the time of Henry the Sixth,
is now extinct in John Neuill, who having no Issue male, left an ample
inheritance to four Daughters, the eldest of which, Henry Earl of
Northumberland married; the second, Thomas Cecill, who was afterward Earl of
Exceter; the third, Sir William Cornwallis; and the fourth, Sir John Dauers, of
which came a plentiful offspring.

Sir Th. Smith, one of the Secretaries of State, Secretary Smith dies.
likewise died of a consumption, this being his clymactericall year; a man
memorable for much learning, and wisdom, approved in many Ambassies. He was
descended of noble Parents at Saffron Walden in Essex, brought up at Queen
Margarets College in Cambridge, and being come to riper years, Saffron
Walden.
was chosen to be sent into Italy upon the Kings charge: (until our time many
of the most hopeful youths were chosen out of both the Universities, and
trained up in strange Countries, for the better adorning and inabling of their
minds.) From thence, he returned Doctor of the Civil Law, he was in favor
with the Duke of Sommerset, Protector of EDWARD the Sixth, and made the other
Secretary with Cecill, and Lord Warden of the Stanneries, Deane of Carlisle, and
Provost of Eaton. Queen MARIE coming to the Crown, took all these dignities
from him, assigned him a hundred pound a year to live on, with condition not
to go out of the Kingdom. As soon as Queen ELIZABETH inioyed the Scepter,
he was called again to the service of the Commonwealth, to be an assistant
with the Divines in correcting the English Liturgy; and afterward, as I have
said before, having with great applause performed his Ambassies, he dyed. In
the year 1571, being made second Secretary to the Queen, having but one only
Son, sent him to lead a Colony into the barbarous Pen-insale Ardes in
Ireland, where he was unfortunately slain. He took special care, and was
the first that procured an order for the dyets of Students in Colleges; and by
that means advanced learning more than he did by his writings, although he
left a work imperfect, de Reipublica Anglorum, a singular book de Linguae
Anglicae Orthographia; another, de Graecae pronunciatione; and an exact
Commentary, de re nummaria, most worthy to come to light. In his stead, to the
place of Secretary, came Thomas Wilson, Doctor of the Civil Law, Master of
Saint Katherines near London, who dyed within four years after.

Rebellion in Ireland.
In Ireland, the O-Mores, O-Conores, and others, whose ancestors the Earl of
Sussex, Lord Deputy (in the reign of Queen MARY, had, for wrongs and
offenses done by them) deprived of their inheritance, Leisa, and Ophalia,
neither had he assigned them any other place to live in, broke out into
Rebellion, under the conduct of Rorio Oge, Rorio Oge.
that is to say, Rodorick the Younger, burnt a little Town called Naasse; they
assaulted Lachliny, and were repulsed by Sir George Crew Governor, but they
took Henry Harrington, and Alexander Cosbie, in a deceitful parley which they
sought of purpose to surprise them, who^ when Captain Harpole went about to
recover, set upon a little Cottage by night where Rorio was, and they two tied
to a post; Rorio being awaked with the noise, gave Harrington and Cosbie many
wounds in the dark, and with a desperate boldness, rusheth into the midst
of the Soldiers which compassed him round, and by the benefit of the night
escaped. Afterward, having laid an Ambuscado for the Baron of Osser, was
taken, and being slain, Rorio slain.
his neighbors were delivered from much fear.

Book 2. 1578.
THE ONE AND TWENTIETH YEAR OF Her Reign. Anno Dom. 1578.
Queen Elizabeth is careful of the Low Countries.
ALthough Spain approved not of the propositions that Wilkes had made, and, as
I lately said, had dissembled, Queen ELIZABETH notwithstanding seriously
pitying the Flemmings, whose Provinces were so commodiously, and with a
mutual necessity situated to England, had for many ages adhered like Husband
and Wife; and therefore impatient to see the French, under color of taking
them into protection, should become Masters of them, sends Wilkes, at his
return from Spain, to Don John, to aduertize him, that the States had called
the Duke of Aniou, (now so, but before Duke of Alanzon) with an Army of
French, and that it would be more safe for him to make a Truce, lest he should
expose the Provinces to the present danger. But he being of a fiery and warlike
Spirit, and puffed up with the Battle against the States at Gemblacke,
answered in a word, that he neither thought of any Truce, nor feared the
French. She nevertheless, for her own behoof and the Flemmings, sends Sir
Edward Stafford into France, to watch if they should attempt any thing upon the
Frontiers of the Low Countries, and how many Soldiers they had levied.

Out of England are past over, I. North, English gone into the Low Countries.
eldest Son of Baron North; John Norris, second Son of Baron Norris; Henry
Cauendish, and Thomas Morgan, with many voluntaries, there to plant their first
rudiments of War. Casimire also, Son to the Prince Elector Palatine, drew a
great Army of Horse and Foot out of Germany, which cost the Queen very
much. Don John, burning to assault the Army of the States at Rimenant, before
all the auxiliarie Forces of the French and Germans should join with it,
flies upon them sooner then they were aware of, and forthwith made the
Cauallerie which were set to guard, retreat, runs in upon the Enemy as if
he had been sure of the victory: but they resuming their spirits, beat back
the Austrians, who being turned toward the Hedges and Bushes where the English
and Scottish voluntaries were placed, strove to break through them, but by no
means could: they were valiantly entertained by the English and Scots, who for
the fervent heat had cast off their Clothes, and with their Shirts, ^yed
between their Thighs, so fought. Norris the Leader of the English, eagerly
fighting, had three Horses killed under him, and brought away the glory of a
valorous Warrior, and so did Stuart a Scottishman, Burham Lieutenant to
Cauendish, and William Marckham.

That these Provinces of the Low Countries, afflicted and faint with these
intestine Wars, might be comforted, there came into Flanders from the
Emperor, Count Swart-Zenberg; from France, Pomponio Belieure; from Queen
ELIZABETH, the Lord Cobham, and Sir Francis Walsingham, The Embassy for the
Low Countries Peace is irritated.
to solicit a Peace* but the business was so poisoned, that they return
without doing any thing; Don John refusing to admit of reforming Religion, and
the Prince of Orange to return into Holland.

About that time, Egremond Radcliffe, Son to Henry Earl of Sussex by his
second Wife, a man of a turbulent Spirit, and one of the chief in the
Rebellion of the North, went to serve under Don John, Egremond Radcliffe and
his associate are put to death.
and is accused by some of the English Fugitives to be sent to kill him, is
apprehended in the Camp at Namurcke, with Gray an Englishman, as a partner in
the plot, and are both executed. The Spaniards give it out, that Radcliffe
(which were the last words he spoke before his death) of his own accord,
confessed that he was set at liberty out of the Tower of London, and excited
with great promises by Sir Francis Walsingham to perform this. Some English
that were present, denied that he confessed any such thing, although the
Fugitives wrought by all the means they could, to draw the like confession
from them; but difference in Religion does too much darken the light of the
mind, both of honesty and truth on both sides: and who knows not, that the
Fugitives for very hatred invent many things to deprave and slander?

Don John dies.
Within a little time after, Don John, in the flower of his age, whether of the
Plague, or as others will have it, with grief, being neglected of his Brother,
left his fond Ambition and life together, after he had gaped, first, after the
kingdom of Tunis, which caused the loss of Guleta in Africa: And secondly,
after England: And unknown to France or Spain, Aniou prosecutes the marriage
with the Queen.
contracted alliance with the Guizes, for the defense of both the Crowns.

In the mean while, the Duke of Aniou, howsouer, bent to the Wars of the
Low Countries, prosecutes the marriage which he had begun being Duke of Alanzon,
that he might show that he was able to give his mind to the wars and to his
Love together. First of all, Bucheruile for this purpose is sent to Queen
ELIZABETH: He finds her at the House of one Cordall in Suffolk, taking her
Country pleasures. By and by after, comes Rambouillet from the French King,
and a month after, Semier from the Duke of Aniou, a refined Courtier, who was
exquisite in the delights of Love, and skillful in the ways of Courtship,
accompanied with many French Gentlemen, whom Queen ELIZABETH received
forthwith very lovingly at Richmond. Then began Leicester to grow
discontented, Leicester murmures.
seeing himself fallen from the hope which he had so long conceived to marry
her, and that a little before she had been angry with Astley, a Lady of the
Queens Bedchamber, for commending him to her, and persuading her to marry
him.

WHat (says she) think thou me so unlike my self, and unmindful of the
Majesty of a Queen, that I will prefer a mean Servant, whom I have raised my
self, before the greatest Princes of the Christian world? Near the same time,
Margaret Douglas, The death of the Countess of Lenox.
Countess of Lenox, Daughter of the eldest Sister of King HENRY the eighth,
Widow of Matthew Earl of Lenox, and Grandmother to JAMES, King of Great
Britain, after she had outliued all her Children, which were eight in number,
dyed in the Clymacteriall year of her age, and was buried at Westminster,
being brought thither with a sumptuous Funeral, at Queen ELIZABETH's charge.
A woman of singular piety, patience, and chastity, who had been three times
cast into prison, as I have heard, not for any suspicion of crime against the
Queen, but for matters of Love. First, when Thomas Howard, Son of Thomas
Howard, first Duke of Norfolk of that Name, was fallen in love with her, and
dyed in the Tower of London. Secondly, for the love of Henry Darley, her Son,
and the Queen of Scots. Lastly, for the love between Charles, her younger
Son, and Elizab. Cauendish, the Lady Arbella's Mother, to whom the Queen of
Scots was accused to have been married, as I have said before.

The business of Scotland.
That we may lightly touch the affairs of Scotland; At the beginning of this
year, Thomas Randolph was sent from Queen ELIZABETH into Scotland, that he by
diligent search might feel in what estate the affairs stood there, and to
congratulate with the King, for his forward proceeding in good Letters (who
from his Childhood, having an exquisite and happy memory, had profited much
beyond his age) and to wish him to love the English, in regard of the many
benefits she had done to him, and motherly affection that she bare him, and
that he should deal with the Earl of Argathel, that the Hebridians might not
assist the Rebels of Ireland, and to persuade the Regent, Earl Morton, to
abandon in time the enmity between him and the Earls of Argathel, Athole,
and others, lest he incur the hatred of his Peers, and alienate altogether
the Queens mind from him.

Morton the Regent admonished.
He now was underhand accused to have stained the honor he had for wisdom
and valor, with filthy covetousness, and would shortly make himself so hated
of the common people, that the State with a general consent will translate the
administration of the affairs to the King, though for his age (having scarce
attained to twelve years) he be not capable of it; and that twelve of the
principal of the Nobility, be nominated; three of them for three months
together by course, to assist the King in Council; amongst whom, Morton to be
one, that he may seem rather to be brought from one place to another, then to
be put out.

The King having taken the government of his Kingdom, does most thankfully, by
Dunfermlin, acknowledge Queen ELIZABETH's favors toward him, as proceeding
not so much from the neerenesse of Blood, The King sends an Ambassador into
England.

The Sum of the Embassage.


as from the common profession of the true Religion: Prays her that the
Treaty of Edenborough contracted between the two Kingdoms, begun in the
year 1559, may be ratified, the more happily to restrain the robbers upon the
Borders, and prevent the enterprises of the Adversaries of true Religion; that
Justice might be equally ministered to the Inhabitants of both the Kingdoms;
the goods taken by Pirates fully restored; and his Ancestors patrimony in
England (viz. the possessions granted to Matthew his Grandfather, and Margaret
his Grandmother) he being the next Heir, may be delivered into his hands;
likewise, Moneys being clean exhausted out of Scotland, he wanted to
entertain his Family and a Guard about him as the dignity of a King required.

The first Demands the Queen readily promises; The answer of the Queen.
but to that, concerning the Patrimony, she carried her self more difficultly;
neither would she hear those, which would assure the Lady Arbella borne in
England, to be next to King Charles her Uncle to the Inheritance in England;
nor Ambassador which would make it appear by History, that the Kings of
Scotland, borne in Scotland, had in time past, by hereditarie right, succeeded
in the County of Huntington, and he instantly besought her, that she would not
deny a Prince her nearest Kinsman, that right of inhabitance, which she
vouchsafed to unknown Strangers. But she commanded, that the Revenues should
be sequestered in the hands of the Lord Burghley, Guardian of the Pupils, and
warns the King to satisfy Creditors out of the Earl of Lenox his goods in
Scotland. She took it impatiently, that it should be suggested, that the King
would revoke the infeoffement of the Earldom of Lenox, to the prejudice of
the Lady Arbella; although by the Regal right of Scotland, it always has
been lawful to revoke Donations hurtful to the Kingdom, and done in
minority.

The Counsel of England do not hold it convenient and fit, that the Treaty
of Edenborough should be confirmed, thinking it yet to stand firm. They
require that the Ambassador would propound something that might somewhat
recompense the favors and friendship that the Queen had manifested to the King
(who spared not the Blood of the English in his defense) and consolidate a
friendship. Whereupon he propounds according to his instructions, That a League
may be made, not [ Offensiue] but [ Defensive, and with mutual succours]
against the Pope, and his confederates, with certain Laws against those which
should attempt any thing against either Kingdom and Rebels, under pretense of
Religion. But besides these, the English think it Just, that seeing the Queen
had not omitted, nor would omit any thing for the defense of the King, and that
for this cause she had incurred the Indignation of many. That the States of the
Kingdom of Scotland should give caution, that so long as the King is under
age, he should not contract, nor renew covenants with any, neither to marry,
nor be sent out of Scotland without the Queens advice. But these things being
of such moment, require to be exactly and circumspectly considered, and are put
back to Scotland till another time.

Morton takes upon him the administration again.
In the mean time Morton, (who indeed was of a most eager and sharp
disposition) trusting in his long experience and multitude of his vassals,
thinking nothing well done but what he did himself, not being able to endure to
be less than he had been, contemning his Colleagues, and rejecting the manner
of administration prescribed, took again the managing of affairs, and
detained the King in his power in the Castle of Sterlin, admitting and denying
entrance to whom he pleased. The Peers provoked therewith, took the Earl of
Athole to be their General, and in the Kings name, summoned all that were
above fourteen years of age, and under sixty, to meet together with Arms
and Victuals to deliver the King: and true, The Peers rise up against him.
many came, and having displaid their Colors, marched toward Faukirk, where
Morton presented himself with his men. But Sir Robert Bows, the English
Ambassador, interceding, hindered them from coming to blows. Morton being
vexed to see how matters went, presently retires to his House. The Earl dyed as
quickly, and left a suspicion that he was poisoned. Which thing, those that
were moved against Morton, took that above all to increase their hatred,
until they brought him to his ruin, as we shall say hereafter.

This year nothing of note was done in Ireland. But the Spaniard, and Pope
Gregory the thirteenth, providing for their own profit, under shadow of
restoring Religion, held secret counsel how at one time to invade both Ireland
and England, and dispossess Queen ELIZABETH, The inuading of England
consulted upon.
who was the surest defense of the Protestants Religion. The Pope, he was to
conquer Ireland for his Son James Bon-Compagnon, whom he had created Marquis
of Vignoles. The Spaniard, secretly to succor the Irish Rebels, as Queen
ELIZABETH had done the Hollanders, while he entertained Parlies of friendship
with her, to enjoy if he could, the Kingdom of England by the Popes
authority, and then the States her confederates, he could easily reduce to a
course, which he despaired to do, unless he were Lord of the Sea, and this
he saw, could not be done, unless he were first Lord of England. And it is
not to be doubted, but that as he holds Naples, Sicilie, and Navarre, of the
Popes liberality, so most willingly would he hold England, as a Beneficiarie
ought to do. Those which know the principal strength of England consists in
the Navy Royal, and in Merchants Ships which are built for War, thought
it were good to fraught the Merchants Ships for some long voyage by Italians
and Flemmish Merchants, and whilst they are upon their voyage, this Royal
Fleet might be ouer-whelmed by a greater. At the same time, Thomas Stukeley,
Th. Stukeley takes Arms against his Country.
an English Fugitive, of whom I have spoken in the year 1570, joined to his
Forces, the Rebels of Ireland, by this notable subtlety, and his great
ostentation and show, and the promises which he made of the Kingdom of Ireland
to the Popes base Son, he had so won the favor of this ambitious old man,
that he honored him with the Titles of Marquis of Lemster, Earl of Wexford
and Caterlaughie, Viscount Mourough, and Baron of Rosse, all of them
remarkable Places in Ireland, and made him General of eight thousand
Italians, paid by the King of Spain, Ciuita Vecchia.
for the Wars of Ireland. With which Forces, having weighed Anchor from the [
Ciuita Vecchia] in the end he arrived in Portugal, at the entry of Tage, where
a greater power by the Divine Providence, puffed down these that threatened
England and Ireland.

For Sebastian, King of Portugal, to whom the whole expedition was committed,
because, in the heat of his youth, and ambition, he had promised the Pope to
go against the Turks and Protestants, and employ all his power, being drawn
into Africa by Mahomet, Son of Abdalla, King of Fesse, by great promises,
treates with Stukeley to go before with these Italians to Mauritania. And
Stukeley being easily won to that (knowing that the Spaniard disdaining that
the Son of a Pope should be designed King of Ireland) had consented to it,
hoisted sail with Sabastian, and by an honest Catastrophe there he ended a
dissolute life, He is slain in the African War.
in a memorable combat. Wherein dyed three Kings, Sebastian, Mahomet, and
Abdalemelech.

If this fate of Sebastians had not altered the King of Spaines mind from
inuading England, in hope of the Kingdom of Portugal, England had felt a
terrible storm of war, if credit may be given to English Fugitives. For,
they report, that the great forces which he had begun to raise in Italy, to
shower upon England, were stayed for the taking of Portugal. And being that his
mind was wholly bent upon that, he could not be made to think of England,
although the English Fugitives earnestly solicited him, and for that business
the Pope promised him a Croysado, as for a sacred war. Moreover, when
certain news came that Stukeley and those Italians were lost in Mauritania,
and that Spain thought on nothing else but Portugal, they called back the
English Fleet which attended for Stukeley upon the Irish coast; and Henry
Sidney delivered up the Country to William Drury, William Drury, Lord Deputy
of Ireland.
President of Mounster. When he had been xi. years at several times Lord
Deputy, and being ready to imbarke, he gave this farewell to Ireland, with a
Verse out of one of the Psalms of David, When Israel came out of Egypt,
Sidney's adieu to Jreland.
and the House of Jacob from a barbarous people.

This Lord Sidney, verily, was a singular good man, and one most laudable among
the best that had been Deputies of Ireland: and although Deputies are often
complained of, yet Ireland cannot but acknowledge to be much indebted to him
for his wisdom and valor.

Book 2. 1579.
THE TWO AND TWENTIETH YEAR OF Her Reign. Anno Dom. 1579.
Casimire comes into England.
John Casimere, Son to Frederick the Third, Prince Elector Palatine, who the
year before had brought a powerful army out of Germany into the
Low Countries, with great charge to the States, and to Queen ELIZABETH, and at
the latter end of the year without performing any thing, being drawn to
Gaunt, by the tumult of the people who were in division, came into England in
the month of January, in a sharp Winter full of Snowes, to excuse himself,
and lay the blame upon the French King, and after he had been sumptuously
received, and brought with a number of torches to the City of Londons
Senate House by the prime Nobility of the Court, he was intertayned with
Barriers, Combats, Bankets, honored with the order of Saint George, and the
Garter, which the Queen tied about his leg with her own hands, endued him
with an annual Pension, and being laden with many honorable gifts, about the
midst of February he passed into the Low Countries in one of the Queens
Ships, where he found this mercenary Army dispersed. For the Germans seeing
Alexander Fernesa, Prince of Parma, established Governor of Flanders by the
Spaniard, ready to thunder upon them, and they wanting their pay, and being
brought somewhat low, required money from him, that they might depart out of
the Low Countries. But he with an imperious fashion, nevertheless, which
carried a grace and gravity, replied, that he had spoke for them that they
might depart, their lives saved: they were contented, so they might have a sure
pass: they make haste home, but not without the loss of reputation, but with
greater detriment to the States. Queen ELIZABETH fayles them not for all that,
but furnishes them with great sums, The Queen lends the States money.
upon the old gage of the rich ornaments and vessels of the house of Burgundy,
which by Matthew, Duke of Austria, and them were delivered to Dauison, who
(being sent to appease the commotions in Gaunt, which had fallen upon the Church
and Churchmen) brought them into England.

During which time, Semier solicites the marriage for the Duke of Aniou.
Semier cease not lovingly to call upon the marriage for the Duke of Aniou:
and although she excellently put him off for a long time, yet he brought her
to this point, that Leicester being entirely against this Match, and others,
had raised a report, that he had charmed her, and made her in love with the
Duke with drinks, and unlawful arts: he, to the contrary, sues that
Leicester may be degraded, and put out of the Queens favor, telling that he
was married to the Earl of Essex his Widow; whereat she was so moved, that
she commanded him from the Court to Greene-wich Tower, and did purpose to have
put him into the Tower of London, which all his Enemies much desired. But
Sussex, who was his chief Emulator, and wholly bent to advance this marriage,
disswades her from it, being of a right noble mind, and inbred generositie,
was of opinion that it has always been accounted honest and honorable, and
that none ought to be troubled for lawful marriage, notwithstanding he was
glad, that it had made Leicester out of all hope to marry the Queen.
Nevertheless, Leicester was herewith so provoked, that he thought of nothing
but of means how to be revenged: Thinks on nothing but revenge.
and they were not wanting that would do what he would have them do. Tewdor,
one of the Queens guard, is suborned to kill Semier; which caused the Queen
by a public proclamation to forbid all persons to offend by word or deed,
him, his companions or servants. And there happened at the same time, she
going for her recreation in her Barge upon the River of Thames near to
Greenewich, and with her Semier, the Earl of Lincoln, and Sir Chr. One was
shot with a Pistolet, being in the Boat with the Queen.
Hatton, Vice Chamberlain, that a young fellow from a-board a Ship-boat with a
pistolet shot a water-man through the arm, that rowed in the Queens Barge, who
anon after, was taken and brought to the Gallows, to terrify him: but when he
had religiously affirmed not to have done it maliciously, he was let go.
Neither would the Queen believe, that he had been suborned of purpose either
against her or Semier. So far she was from giving place to suspicion against
her Subjects, that it was an usual saying with her; That she could believe
nothing of her Subjects, that Parents would not believe of their Children.

The Duke of Aniou came into England.
Within a few days after, the Duke of Aniou himself came privily into England,
accompanied with two men only, and went to the Queen to Greenewich, who
likewise knew nothing of it, where they had private conferences together, which
is not lawful to search after, (the secrets of Princes being an inextricable
Labyrinth) and afterward went away unknown, except to very few. But a month
or two after, she commanded Burghley the Treasurer, Sussex, Leicester, Hatton,
and Walsingham, that after they had seriously weighed the dangers and
commodities that might arise upon this marriage, they should confer with
Semier upon the Covenants of the marriage. There appeared some danger, The
dangers of the marriage.
lest the Duke of Aniou should attempt any thing against the received Religion,
or take possession of the Kingdom, as the Popes gift, or render it up into the
hands of the Queen of Scots; and, Queen ELIZABETH being dead, should marry
her; or, his Brother dying, should return into France, and place a Viceroy in
England, which the English would never endure. Furthermore, lest he should
inuolue the English in foreign wars, lest the Scots assuring themselves of
their ancient alliance with France, should take better courage against the
English, lest Spain being of so great power, should oppose it. Lastly, lest
the people, oppressed with taxations to maintain his magnificence, should
stir up sedition. The commodities may be seen; The commodities of it.
a firm confederation with the French might be established, the rebellions of
Papists, if any should be, the more easily suppressed, all the Queen of Scots
hope, and of all that seek her in marriage, and favoring her, are excluded.
Spain would be compelled to compound the business of the Low Countries, and
confirm the League of Burgundy, and England at length should enjoy a solid
and comfortable security by the Queens children so often times wished for.
The incommodities, if it be neglected.
But if these marriages be neglected, it was to be feared that the French would
be provoked, the Scots alienated, the Duke of Aniou marry the Daughter of
Spain, with whom he should have in Dowry the Low Country Provinces, draw the
King of Scotland to be of their party, procure him a Wife to bring him riches,
abolish the reformed Religion; and the English, when they should see no hope of
Children by the Queen, would adore the Rising-Sunne. Whereat she could not
choose but be much tormented in mind, and pine away to death.

As in these days very many English feared a change of Religion by the Duke of
Aniou, so were the Scots afraid it would be with them by another Frenchman,
Aim Stuart, Lord of Aubigni, came into Scotland.
Aim, or Esme Stuart, Lord of Aubigny, who at the same time was come into
Scotland to see the King his Cousin: for he was Son to John Stuart, Brother
to Matthew Stuart, Earl of Lenox, who was the Kings Grandfather, and took
his denomination Aubigni, From whence he took the name of Aubigni.
from a House situate in Berri, that is so called, which Charles the Seventh,
King of France, gave in time past to John Stuart, of the Family of Lenox, who
was Constable of the Scottish Army in France; defeated the English at Baugency,
afterward slain by them at the battle of Harrans; and ever since, that house
has descended upon the younger Sons. The King, embracing him with a singular
good affection, gave him rich demains, and admitted him into his most intimate
consultations, established him Lord high Chamberlain of Scotland, He is raised
to honors.
and Governor of Dunbriton, first created him Earl, and afterward Duke of
Lenox, after having directly revoked the Letters of honor, by which in his
nonage he had created Robert, Bishop of Cathanesse, Earl of the same place,
his Grandfathers third Brother, and had given him in recompense, the County of
March. This flourishing favor with the King, He is suspected of the
Protestants.
procured many to envy him, who murmured because he was devoted to the Guizes,
and the Roman Religion, and that he was sent to subvert the true Religion.
This suspicion increased, in regard he joined himself to Mortons adversaries,
and did intercede for the reuoking of Thomas Carr of Fernihurst, who was most,
if any were, addicted to the Queen of Scots; Morton, whose power was
apparently falling, strove in vain (although it might seem that he had
excellently well deserved in defeating the Hamiltons, and taking the Castle of
Hamilton, and Daffrane.) There were at that time, Hamiltons dejected.
who stirred up much hatred in the King against the Hamiltons, obiecting, and
urging their names as a thing of great terror, so as out of a necessity they
were for their own safety compelled to defend the Castle again the King, but
they were constrained to yield it up, Proscribed.
and by authority of Parliament proscribed for the murdering as well of
Murrey, as Lenox, Regents, as a thing by them performed. Many of those fled
together into England, Succored by Elizabeth.
for whom Queen ELIZABETH diligently interposeth by Erington, as well for
honor, as in reason of Justice, that she had obliged her faith in the year
1573. for the settling of peace, that they should not be called in question for
those matters without her consent.

She also at the same time was undertaking in another part of the World,
Amurathes Cham, or the Sultaine of the Turks, granted to William Harburne, an
Englishman, and to Mustapha Beg, Bassa to the TVRKE, that the English
Merchants, even as the French, Venecians, Pollanders, the King of the Germans,
and other neighboring Natitions, should trade freely through all his Empire:
whereupon they, by the Queens authority, made a Company, The Society of the
Turkey-Merchants.
which they call TVRKEY MERCHANTS, and since that time, they have used a most
gainefull Trade of Merchandise at Constantinople, Angoria, Chio, Petrazzo,
Alexandria, Egypt, Cyprus, and other places in Asia, for Drugges, Spices,
Cottons, Raw-Silke, Carpets, Indian-Dyes, Corinthian-Grapes, Soap, etc.

As for that execrable impiety of Hamont, Hamonts impiety.
brought forth at that time in Norwich, against GOD and his Christ, and as I
hope, is extinct with his ashes, or rather confounded in oblivion, then
remembered. Neither am I of opinion of those which think, that the public
has interest, that all sorts of vices, poisons, and impieties to be made
manifest: seeing that he differs little from teaching, which shows such
things.

N. Bacon dies.
This year was the last of Nicholas* Bacon, Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, who by decree of Parliament enjoyed under this name the honor and
dignity of Chancellor of England; a very fat man, of a quick subtle spirit,
singular wisdom, height of eloquence, steadfast memory, and the other pillar of
the sacred Council: whose place Thomas Bromley enjoyed, Thomas Bromley
succeedes.
with the title of Chancellor of England.

Bacon is followed by Thomas Gresham, Citizen of London, Gresham dies.
a Merchant-Royall, and of the order of Knighthood, (Son to Sir Richard
Gresham, Knight,) who built, for the ornament of his Country, and use of the
Merchants of London, that beautiful and goodly Walking-place, which Queen
ELIZABETH named, The Royall-Exchange. And the spacious Houses which he had in
the City, he dedicated to the profession of Learning, His College of London.
and constituted in the same, Lectures of sacred Divinity, of the Civil Law,
Physic, Astronomy, Geometry, and Rhetoric, with honest pensions.

Rebellion of James Fitz-Morris in Ireland,
In Mounster, a Province in Ireland, new rebellion was kindled by James
Fitz-Morris, who having before cast himself upon his knees at the feet of
Perot, President of Mounster, and with tears, sighs, and humble
supplications, asked pardon, made a holy vow of fidelity and obedience to the
Queen. He (I say, who found no rest but in troubles) withdrew himself into
France, promised the King, if he would lend aid, to join the whole Kingdom
of Ireland to the Scepter of France, and restore the Romish Religion. But
wearied with delays, and in the end derided, from France he goes to Spain,
and promises the like to the Catholic King, who sent him to the Pope, of whom
(by the solicitation of Sanders, an English Priest, and Allan, an Irish
Priest, Stirred up by the Pope, and the King of Spain;
both Doctors of Divinity) with much ado, having got a little money, and
Sanders the authority of Legate, a consecrated Ensign, and Letters
commendatorie to the King of Spain, returns to Spain; and from thence, with
those Divines, three Ships, and a few Soldiers, they came, and arrived about
the Calends of July, at the [ Village of Saint Marie] (which the Irish call, [
Smerwick]) in Kerrie, a-pen-Insule in Ireland: and, after that the Priests had
consecrated the place, raised a Fort, and brought the Ships near unto it;
those Ships, Thomas Courtney, an English Gentleman, made haste with a Ship of
war which lay in a Road near unto them, by and by to assault; and taking
them, carries them away, and bars the Spaniards from all benefit of the Sea.
John, and James, brethren to the Earl of Desmond, with great speed drew
together a few Irish, join with their Confederate: Fitz-Morris, and the Earl
himself, Favored by the Earl of Desmond.
who favored the cause exceedingly, feinedly calls all his friends together,
as though he meant to go against them; the Earl of Clanricard, with a
selected troop of Soldiers going against the Enemies and Rebels, met him, but
he deceitfully sends him away.

The Deputy, having received certain news by Henry Dauile, a valiant English
Gentleman, that the Enemy was landed, commanded the Earl of Desmond, and his
Brethren, jointly and forthwith to assail the Fort: but when they had talked
and considered upon it, and found it full of peril, refused. Dauile departing,
is followed by John Desmond, who ouertooke him in an Inn at Tralli, a little
Borough, and having corrupted the Oast, in the dead of the night, he, with
other Murderers, brake into the chamber, where Dauile, with Arthur Carter,
(Lieutenant to the Marshall of Mounster, a very valiant old Soldier) slept
securely, but being awaked with the noise, and beheld John Desmond with his
naked Sword in his Chamber, raising himself up: What is the matter (says he)
my son? (for so in familiarity he was used to call him.) Now I am no more
thy son, (says he) nor thou my Father, thou shall dye. Dauile murdered in
his bed.
And, at an instant, ran him, and Carter that lay with him, many times through
the Body; yea, after that Dauiles Footboy had thrown himself naked upon his
Master, to defend him as much as in him lay, and received many wounds. And
shortly after, he killed all Dauiles servants, as he found them dispersed here
and there; and returning to the Spaniard, all rayed with Blood, boasts of the
slaughter, and said thus, [ Let this be a pledge of my faith to you, Sanders
approues of the slaughter.
and to this cause.] And Sanders this, [That he extolled it as a sweet
sacrifice before God.] Fitz-Morris reproved the manner of it, wishing it rather
had been done upon the way, than in bed. The Earl, when he heard of it,
condemned it with all his heart, as detestable.

The Spaniards seeing themselves joined with a few Irish, and those unarmed and
miserable, contrary to what Fitz-Morris had promised, began to distrust, and to
cry, they were lost, and to deplore their misfortune, not seeing any means to
save themselves either by Land or Sea. Fitz-Morris exhorts them to patience,
and to wait: assures them, that great forces were coming to their succor: he
feinedly took a journey to [ the holy Cross of Triporarie] to pay the vow
which he had made in Spain; but in truth it was, to draw together all the
seditious of Connach and Vlster.

As he traveled, with a few horse, and twelve footmen, through the grounds of
William of Bourg his alliance, (who was with him at the League in the precedent
Rebellion) his Horses failing, took up the work-horses that he found in his
way: the Laborers crying out, assemble all the dwellers thereabout to recover
them, amongst which, were the sons of William of Bourg, young men, and
courageous, who being mounted on horseback, pursued him so swiftly, that they
ouertooke him. Fitz-Morris seeing Theobald of Bourg, and his Brethren, who were
with him in the former Rebellion, speaking friendly, said; [Kinsmen, let not us
fall out for a Horse or two, for when you shall know the cause why I am come
back into Ireland, I am assured that you will join with me.] Theobald
answers, [ Both I, and my Father, and likewise our friends, do greatly grieve
for the first Rebellion, and have sworn, and will perform our fidelity to
our most gracious Princess, who pardoned us, and gave us our lives; therefore,
restore the Horses, or I will make thee restore them; and withal, threw a Dart
at him, He fights with those of Bourg. Fitz-Morris is slain.
with a writhen Pike, and they fought a time. Theobald, and one of his
brothers, were slain, and some of their men. Fitz-Morris was run through the
Body with a Pike, and shot through the head with a Pistol; so he dyed, and
many of his men. They cut off his head, and hanged his quarters upon poles over
the Gates of Kilmalocke, where, (as we have said before) in the Church, in the
presence of Perot, he bound himself with great obtestations to be loyal to
his Prince. The Queen writes consolatory Letters to William of Bourg, William
of Bourg, made Baron. He dies for joy.
(full of love and sorrow) for the loss of his sons, creates him Baron of
Castell-Conell, and rewards him with an annual pension. Whereupon, the old man
(confounded with so unexpected joy) dyed shortly after.

Drury, Lord Deputy, was now come almost to Kilmalock, and sends for Desmond,
who came before him, promises faith and obedience to the Queen, and bound
himself by oath, that he and his would war against the Rebels. Whereupon, he
is dismissed, to collect his men, and return to the Deputy. John Desmond, the
Earls Brother, who was substituted in Fitz-Morris his place, John Desmond kills
the English.
by treachery intercepts and kills Herbert and Prisie, Englishmen, with the
Companies which they led, and he was wounded in the face. This loss was
supplied with six hundred Soldiers out of Devonshire: Perot is sent out of
England with six Ships of war, to defend the mouth of the Harbor.

The Lord Deputy sick.
At which time, the Deputy being vehemently sick, and growing daily worse and
worse, must of necessity go to Waterford to recover his health, and left his
place to Nicholas Malbey, President of Connach, and Governor of Mounster, an
old and a renowned Soldier.

Returning, the Wife of Desmond offers her only Son and Heir in hostage for
the Father. For, after he departed from Kilmalock, N. Malbey Governor of
Mounster,
he appeared not, although Malbey oftentimes, by Letters, admonished him of
his duty and promise, and not willing to delay, remoues toward the Rebels in
Conil, a woody and boggy Country: where John Desmond put his men in array, and
displayes the Popes consecrated Banner; he intertaines it, and signs given,
they join, Defeats the Rebels.
where both sides fought furiously; Fortune at length yielding to the virtue of
the English, John was the first that fled, and left his men to the slaughter;
amongst whom, Allan the Divine is found, who encouraged them to the battle, by
promising the victory.

The Earl of Desmond, who was a spectator from some Hill near to that place,
the same night writ dissemblingly Letters congratulatory to Malbey, and, under
a color of friendship, warnes him to remove his Camp from thence. Malbey
sends back the Messenger, with Letters, commanding the Earl to come to him,
and join his forces, whom when in vain he had expected four days, he
removed to Rekel, a little Town of the Earl of Desmonds. The Earl of Desmond
manifests himself a Rebel.
Now the Earl, who had so long both in countenance and words egregiously
maintained his dissimulation, leaves to be the same man, and plainly puts on a
Rebels mind, and the same night, it being dark, the Rebels invaded Malbey's
Camp, which they found so fortified, that they returned back, as from a thing
infected. The Governor, thinking this to be a fit place to disioyne the Rebels
forces, put a Garrison there, and from thence marched to Asketon, a Castle of
the Earls, standing upon a Hill, environed with the River Asketon, which was
guarded by Soldiers. But, before he would lay siege to it, he writ again to
the Earl, representing unto him the Queens mercy, the ancient dignity of the
House of Desmond, the glory of his Ancestors, and the infamy that he should
leave to his posterity, exhorts him, not to be tainted with the name of Rebel,
but return to his duty. He, to the contrary, arms his mind with obstinacy,
and his Castle, on all sides, with Spanish and Irish. At what time, Drury, the
Deputy, The death of Drury, Lord Deputy.
dyed at Waterford; a man of approved worth, who from his youth had been
trained up in the exercise of War in France, Scotland, and Ireland.

Together with the death of the Deputy, dyed Malbey's authority in Mounster,
who, when he had put his men in Garrison, went to Connach, the Province of his
government. The Rebels thereby encouraged.
The Rebels take heart by the death of the Deputy, and deliberate how they
might utterly draw themselves from under the English command, and are of
opinion to block up the Garrisons on all sides, and starve them by famine.
James Desmond then besieges Adare, where W. Stanley, and G. Carew, were in
Garrison. But the besieged, apprehending famine as the extremity of all evils,
so wearied the besiegers with often eruptions, that they raised the siege, and
gave them liberty to forage the Country near about them: which they did
lustily and valiantly; James himself was wounded there.

In the interim, the Council of England chose for chief Justice of Ireland,
William Pelham, William Pelham is Lord Chief Justice of Ireland.
with the authority of Lord Deputy, until they had chose one; and the Earl
of Ormond, President of Mounster, who sent the Earl of Desmonds son to
Dublin, there to be kept for hostage. Pelham goes toward Mounster, sends for
Desmond; but he excuses himself by Letters sent by his Wife. For that cause,
Admonishes the Earl of Desmond of his duty.
Ormond is sent, who warnes him to send Sanders the Divine, the Soldiers that
were strangers, and to deliver up into his hands, the Castles of Carigo-foyle,
and Asketen, to submit himself absolutely, and turn his forces against his
Brethren, and the other Rebels, assuring him grace if he did it; if not, to be
declared a Traitor, and an enemy of the Country: but by subterfuges and
flyings off, he dallies and plays with these things. In the beginning of
November, he was proclaimed Traitor, Proclaims him Traitor.
and guilty Laesae Maiestatis, because he had dealt with foreign Princes for
the subduing and overthrowing of the Country, and entertained Sanders and
Fitz-Morris, Rebels; cherished the Spaniards which were driven from the Fort,
caused faithful Subjects to be hanged, displayed against the Queen the
Ensign of the Pope, and brought strangers into the Kingdom. This declaration
being published, the Lord chief Justice gave Commission to Ormond to go on
with the wars. Desmond, turning his designs into another part of the
Country of Mounster, and sacketh Yoghall, surprizeth without resistance, The
Earl of Ormond pursues the Rebels.
a Sea-Towne, and strong enough. Ormond wastes all far and wide about Conile,
the only refuge of the Rebels, brings away their Flocks, and gives them in
prey to the Soldiers, hanged the Mayor of Yoghall before his own door, for
refusing to receive the English Garrison, fortified the Town, and after,
prepares himself to besiege the Spaniards in Strangicall. But they beforehand
withdrew themselves from that danger. Nevertheless, the English pursued them,
and left not one of them alive, The Earl of Desmond writes to the Lord
Chiefe-Justice.
and molested the Rebels in all parts of Mounster. Desmond, and his Brethren,
although they lay hid, writ long Letters to the Lord chief Justice, that they
had undertaken the protection of the Catholic faith in Ireland, by the Popes
authority, and the advice of the King of Spain; therefore they courteously
warn him, that in so pious and meritorious a cause, he would join with them,
for the salvation of his own soul.

Book 2. 1580.
THE THREE AND TWENTIETH YEAR OF Her Reign. Anno Dom. 1580.
THe Lord chief Justice pleasantly jesting at these things, returns to
Mounster, calls thither the Nobility, detaines them with him, not suffering any
to depart, without giving Hostages, and promise to employ all their power and
aid with him and Ormond, against the Rebels. Who speedily dividing their
forces, make diligent search for the Rebels, constrain the Baron of Lixnaw to
yield, besiege the Castle of Carigofoyle, (kept by Iules an Italian, with some
few Spaniards) and with their great Ordnance having made a breach in the Wall,
which was built but of dry stone, entered: killed part of the Garrison, hanged
the rest, and Iules himself. Then the Castles of Ballilogh and Asketen
perceiving the English to approach, sets them on fire, and leaves them. Peter
Carew, and George his brother, are made Governors of Asketen, with a new
Garrison of the English, they waste the Lands of Mac-Aule; from thence, the
chief Justice, by a watery Mountain, enters Shlewlougher in Kerrie, brings
away great quantities of cattle, and defeats many Rebele: James, James taken,
being wounded to death.
the Earl of Desmonds brother, having pillaged Muske-roy, appertaining to
Cormag-Mac-Teg, (whom the chief Justice by Law set at liberty, as well
deserving for his service against the Rebels) met with Donel, brother to
Cormag, who having slain many, and recovered the spoil, took him, being
wounded to death, and delivered him to Wararm S. Ledger, Marshall of Mounster,
and to Walter Raleigh, a new Commander: They proceed against him in justice,
and having convinced him, executed him for a Traitor, and set his head for a
spectacle upon the Gate of Corcage. Desmond miserably oppressed.
The Earl of Desmond himself being ouer-whelmed with misery, and no where
safe, remoues every hour, sends his Wife to the Lord chief Justice to ask
pardon, and imployes his friends to Winter, (who with a Nauall Army watched the
Spaniard in the mouth of the Haven) that he might be transported into England
to beg the Queens pardon.

The Lord chief Justice hearing that Arthur, Lord Gray, Arthur, Lord Gray,
Deputy of Ireland.
who was appointed Deputy of Ireland, was landed, leaves the command of the
Army to George Bourchier, second son to the Earl of Bath, and, by easy
iourneies, returns to Dublin, to deliver up the government of the Kingdom to
his Successor. As soon as the Lord Gray was arrived, being informed that some
Rebels, conducted by Fitz-Eustat, and Phoog-Mac-Hugh, the most renowned of the
famous House of the Obrins, who, after their spoils and robberies, made their
retreat to Glandilough, five and twenty mile Northward from Dublin, to win
reputation; and to breed terror at his beginning, he commanded the Captains,
He pursues the Rebels.
who were come from all parts, to salute him, to gather troops, and to go
with him, to set upon the Rebels, who were retired to Glandilough, a Vale full
of Grass, the most part of it fertile, and fit to feed Cattle, situated at
the foot of a steep Rock, full of Springs, and so environed with Trees and
thick bushes, that the Inhabitants of the Country knew not the ways in it.
When they were come to the place, Cosby, the Leader of the light-armed Irish,
(which they call, Kearnes,) who knew the situation well, aduertized the others
of the danger in entering into that Valley, being so fit a place for
ambuscadoes. Notwithstanding this advice, they must undertake it, and he
exhorts them to behave themselves courageously: and himself, being
threescore and ten years of age, marched in the Front, and the others followed
him. But they were no sooner gone down, but they were showred upon with
musket shot, like hayle driven by a tempest, from the bushes where the Rebels
were placed, and not a man of them to be discerned. They kill the English.
The most part of them were slain there, the rest retyring, and clyming up the
Rocks and ragged ways, with much ado came to the Deputy, who stood upon a
Hill expecting the event, with the Earl of Kildare, and Sir John Wingfield,
Master of the Ordnance, who knowing the danger, would not suffer George Carew,
one of his Nephews, to go thither, reserving him for greater honors. Peter
Carew the younger, G. More, Audeley, and Cosby himself, were slain there.

Italians and Spaniards land in Jreland.
Shortly after, seven hundred, or threabout, of Italians and Spaniards,
commanded by San-Ioseph an Italian, sent by the Pope and the King of Spain,
under pretext to establish the Roman Religion; but the end of it, was to
divide Queen ELIZABETH's forces, and to call home those which she had in the
Low Countries, landed at Smerwick, without any resistance, in regard that
Winter, who had waited for them in that place, seeing the Equinox of Autumn
past, was returned for England; fortified the place with Bulwarks, and named
it the Fort Del-Or. But as soon as they had knowledge that the Earl of
Ormond, Governor of Mounster, was coming toward them, they, by the advice of
the Irish, quitted the Fort, and went to the Valley of Grauingel, being of
difficult access, They raise a Fort.
by reason of the Mountains and Woods which environed it. The Governor took
some of them by the way, who being examined what number they were, and what
design they had, confessed, that they were seven hundred, that they had
brought arms for five thousand, and looked daily for greater numbers from
Spain: That the Pope and the King of Spain were resolved to drive the English
out of Ireland, and to effect the same, had sent store of treasure to Sanders,
the Popes Nuncio, to the Earl of Desmond, and to John his brother. The same
night, the Italians and Spaniards not knowing which way to turn themselves, in
regard they could not remain in Caves and Dens, which were retreats for
Cattle, They are besieged.
by the benefit of the dark night returned to the Fort, and Ormond was camped
before it; but wanting Cannon, and other things requisite for battery, was
constrained to attend the Lord Deputies coming, who was speedily there, and
with him, Zouchey, Raleigh, Deny, Mackworth, Achin, and other Captains. At the
same time, Winter, being reproved for his coming away, returned from England
with his Ships of War.

The Lord Deputy sent a Trumpet to the Fort, to ask those that kept it, Who
brought them into Ireland? They answer to the Deputies demands
By whom they were sent? and wherefore they had built a Fort in Queen
ELIZABETH's Kingdome^ and to command them presently to quit it. They answered,
that they were sent, some from the most holy Father the Pope of Rome; and the
rest, from the most Catholic King of Spain, to whom he had given Ireland,
Queen ELIZABETH being fallen from it, by reason of her Heresy: and therefore
would keep what they had gotten, and get more if they could. Whereupon the
Deputy, and Winter, having consulted of the manner how they should besiege it,
caused the Sea-Souldiers, by night, and without noise, to bring Culuerings from
the Ships, and, having made a Bulwark upon the shore, draws them easily
forward, and places them for battery. They disagree.
The Land-Souldiers bent their greatest Ordnance to the other side, and played
upon the Fort four days together. The Spaniards make many sallies out, but
ever to their loss; and the English lost but one man, who was Sir John Cheek,
a brave and valiant young Gentleman, son to Sir John Cheek, a noble Knight,
most learned and judicious.

Their General showed himself a Coward.
San-Ioseph, who commanded the Fort, a very Coward, and unfit for the wars,
being affrighted with this continual battery, thinks presently of rendering
it, and seeing Hercules Pisan and the other Captains striving to dissuade him
from it, (as an unworthy thing to be done by Soldiers, and insist, that by
their faint-heartednesse, they should not diminish the courage of the Irish,
who were coming to their succor, and prepared to sustain the assault) with a
remarkable cowardlinesse, sounds the intentions of the Soldiers, and
seditiously threatening the Captains, in the end brought them to condescend to
render it up. So, seeing no succor neither from Spain, nor from the Earl of
Desmond, They ask a parley.
the fifth day of the said siege, they put forth a white Flagge, and demanded a
Parley. But it was refused them, because they took part with Rebels, with whom
they were not to parley. After, they desired, that they might go out with
bag and baggage, which was also denied them. Also, that it might be permitted
to the General, and the chief Commanders: but that likewise was denied them,
though it was requested with much importunity; and the Deputy speaking
outragiously against the Pope, commands them to yield upon discretion.
Insomuch, as not being able to obtain any thing else, They yield upon
discretion.
they put out the white Flagge again, and all together cry aloud,
Misericordia, Misericordia. And give themselves up to the Deputies mercy: who
presently took counsel what course he should take with them. But, in regard
they equalled the number of the English, it was to be feared, seeing the Rebels
were above fifteen hundred; and that, lest the English (who were destitute of
Meat, and Apparel, if they should not be comforted and refreshed with the
spoils of the enemy,) might be moved to revolt; also, there being no shipping
to carry them into their own Country; it was resolved (against the Deputies
will,) who (full of mercy and compassion) wept for it, that all strangers, the
Commanders excepted, Strangers slain with the Sword, the Subjects hanged.
should be put to the Sword; and the Irish to be hanged, which was presently
executed. Nevertheless, the Queen, who from her heart detested to use cruelty
to those that yielded, wished that the slaughter had not been, and was with
much difficulty appeased and satisfied about it. This is all that which passed
in Ireland, which I was willing to follow, with a continued declaration; to the
end, that the order of the History might not be interrupted, though many things
passed amongst them, which I should have remembered before, if I had followed
the order of the time.

Upon the beginning of this year, Excess in apparel reformed.
the ornaments of the head, which exceeded in dressings, and Clokes which came
down almost to the heels, (no less seemly than of great expense) were
reformed by a Statute, and Swords reduced to three-foot length, Poniards to
twelve inches from the hilt, and Target-Pikes to two. And forasmuch as the City
and Suburbs of London were so increased in buildings, by reason of the
multitude of people which flowed thither from all parts, so as the other Cities
and Towns of the Kingdom were decayed; that if it had not been looked to in
time, the ordinary Magistrates would not have sufficed to have governed such a
multitude; nor the Countries near about, to have fed them; and if any
Epidemicke infection should have happened, it would have infected the
ioyning-houses that were filled with Lodgers and Inmates. The Queen made an
Edict, prohibiting any new dwelling house to be built within three thousand
paces of the Gates of London, upon pain of imprisonment, and loss of the
materials which should be brought to the place to build withal; and every one
forbidden to have more than one Family in a House.

The taking of Malines in Brabant.
In the Low Countries, General Norris, and Oliver Temple, with some companies
of Flemmings, joined to their English forces, at the break of the day, set
Ladders against the walls of Malines, a rich Town of Brabant, took it, killed
a great number of the inhabitants, and religious persons, the taking whereof
got them some commendations of valor, The sacrilege of the English.
but they polluted it with a vile pillage, and ravenous sacrilege. For they
did not only with great insolency take away the goods of the Inhabitants, but
set upon the Churches, and the holy things, to the violating even the dead. And
we have seen (I am ashamed to say it) many of their Tombe-Stones transported
into England, and exposed to sale; to set out public witnesses of this
impiety.

An Earthquake.
It will not be amiss to remember the great Earthquake, which is a thing that
very rarely happneth in England. The third of April, about six of the clock
in the evening, the sky being calm and clear, England shook in a moment
from beyond York, and the Low Countries as far as Collen; insomuch, that in
some places, Stones fell down from Houses, and Bells in Steeples were so
shaken, that they were heard to ring, and the Sea it self, it being a great
calm was exceedingly moved. And the night following, the Country of Kent
shook; and likewise the first of May, in the night. Whether this was caused by
the Winds which were entered into cliffes and hollow places of the earth, or by
waters flowing under the earth, or otherwise, I leave that to the judgment of
the Naturalists. After this, The Papists begin to be afflicted.
followed a commotion against Papists throughout England, but themselves were
authors of these beginnings.

The English Seminaries, who were fled into Flanders, at the persuasion and
instigation of William Allan, borne at Oxford, (accounted and esteemed by them
a very learned man) assembled themselves together at Douay, where they begun to
set up a School, The beginning of English Seminaries.
and the Pope appointed them an annual pension. Since, Flanders being moved
with troubles, the English Fugitives, banished by the command of Requesens, and
the Guizes, allied to the Queen of Scotland, did the like, in establishing
such other Schools for English youths in the City of Reims: and Pope Gregory
the Third, in Rome, who as fast as time deprived England of Priests and
Seminaries, he furnished the Land with new supplies of their young ones, who
sowed the seeds of the Roman Religion all over England, Their Doctrine is then
thought.
for which cause they were called, Seminaries. As well as those who were there
bred and borne.

As among other things, the Ecclesiastical and Political power, the zeal
borne to the Pope the Founder thereof, the hatred of Queen ELIZABETH, and the
hope conceived to reestablish the Roman Religion by the Q. of Scotlands means,
were debated and disputed of. Diverse so persuaded, verily believed, that the
Pope had by divine right, full power over all the Earth, as well in
Ecclesiastical as Political matters, and by this fullness of power, power to
excommunicate Kings, and free-Princes, to deprive them of their Crowns and
Scepters: after, the absoluing their subjects from all oath of fidelity and
obedience to them. This caused the grant of Pope Pius the Fifth's Bull
declaratory, published Anno 1569. the Bull of Rebellions kindled in the North
parts of England and Ireland (as I have already spoken of) also that many
desisted from Divine Service, The event proceeding thereof.
who before seemed to frequent the Church with much zeal and integrity, and
that Hans, Nelson, and Maine, Priests, and one Shrood, durst affirm and
maintain, that Queen ELIZABETH was a Shismatique, and that she therefore
ought to be deposed of Regal rule, and so degraded; for which they were soon
after justly put to death.

New Seminaries are sent into England.
Such Seminaries were sent in diverse places, both in England and Ireland; first,
some young men prematurely invested in that order, and instructed in the said
Doctrine; then after, as they increased, a greater number, for the
administrating the Sacrament of the Roman Church, and preaching, as they seemed
to make show of; but indeed, as Queen ELIZABETH her self, and the Lords of
her Majesty's most honorable Privy Council found out, it was merely to
seduce her subjects, To what end.
to withdraw them from all obedience and loyalty due to their Sovereign, to
oblige them, by reconciliation, to put in practice and truly execute the
Sentence of Pope Pius the Fifth, pronounced against her Majesty; and by this
means to make way to the Pope and Spanish design for the inuading of England.

And, as it was known, that to the infringing and contemning of the Laws
authority, diverse Children and young men of sundry Callings, were daily
underhand secretly sent beyond the Seas, in those Seminaries, where they
(having made a vow to return) were received, that from thence new supply of
others, unknown, came privately into England, and that still more were expected
to come with such Jesuits, Jesuits do steal privately into England.
who then made here their first entrance and abode; so, an Edict was proclaimed
in the month of June, expressly charging and commanding all such who had
children, Wards, kindred, or such others in the Regions beyond the Sea, A
Proclamation against Seminaries and Jesuits.
to exhibit and give up their names to the Ordinary within ten days after, to
send for them to come over within the prefixed time of four months; and
presently after the said return, every one ought to declare and give notice
thereof to the Ordinary; prohibiting likewise, to lay out or furnish with money
such as should stay or dwell out of England, either directly or indirectly;
neither to nourish, relieve, or lodge such Priest derived of those Emissaries,
nor Jesuits, upon pain (for them who should do otherwise) to be reputed and
held for fautors of Rebels, and supporters of seditious persons, to incur the
severity and rigor expressed in the Laws of the said Kingdom.

Before this Proclamation was published, the Papists feined to have too late
taken advice of the incommodities that this Bull produced; they made a show to
be extreme sorry that ever it was sent over; they suppressed Sanders Apology, and
prohibited to dispute any more such question concerning the Popes authority to
excommunicate and degrade Princes: But all this, Robert Persons and Edmond
Campian, English Jesuits, came into England.
most cautelously and cunningly, as the event made it evident; for this
disputation increased daily amongst them, (as naturally men are most addicted
to things prohibited) since Robert Persons and Edmond Campian (English Jesuits)
being ready to come into England, to set Romish affairs forward, obtained of
Pope Gregory the Thirteenth, power to moderate this severe and sharp Bull, in
these terms: Power granted to the Papists.
IF it be asked to our Sovereign Lord, the explication of Pope Pius the
Fifth's Bull against ELIZABETH and her adherents, the which the Catholics
desire to be thus understood; that it may oblige for ever Her and the
Heretics; but no ways the Catholics, so long as affairs and matters shall
thus stand, as they are at this present, but only when it is so as it may be
publicly executed and generally effected. These Graces have been granted to
Robert Person, and to Edmond Campian, upon their departure and journey for
England, the 14. of April, in presence of Father Oliuero Manarco.

Who and what have been these Jesuits.
This Robert Person was a Somersetshire man, of a vehement and savage nature, of
most uncivil manners and ill behauiours.

Edward Campian was a Londoner, of a contrary carriage, both were Oxford men,
and I knew them while I was in the same University. Campian, being out of Saint
John's College, professed the place of Attorney in the said University, in the
year 1568. and being established Archdeacon, made a show to affect the
Protestant faith, until that day he left England. Person, being out of Balioll
College, in which he openly made profession of the Protestant Religion, until
his wicked life, and base conversation, purchasing him a shameful exile from
thence, he retired himself to the Papists side. Since, both of them returning
into England, were disguized, sometimes in the habit of Soldiers, sometimes
like Gentlemen, and sometimes much like unto our Ministers; they secretly
traveled through England, from house to house, and places of Popish Nobility
and Gentry; valiantly executing by words and writings their Commission. Person,
who was establisheed chief and superior, being of a seditious nature and
turbulent spirit, armed with audacity, spoke so boldly to the Papists, to
deprive Queen ELIZABETH of her Scepter, that some of them were once determined
to accuse, and put him into the hands of justice. Campian, though something
more modest, presumed to challenge by a writing the Ministers of the Church of
England, to dispute with him touching the Romish belief, which he maintained;
he put forth a Latin Pamphlet, containing ten Reasons, indifferently well
penned: as did likewise Person, another seditious book in English, raging
against one Charcke, who before had ingeniously and mildely written against
Campians Challenge. But Whitaker answered home to the said Campians pretended
Reasons, who being taken and rackt a year after, was produced for the Dispute,
but he never had so much a do as to maintain them, neither answered he to
that expectation which himself had formerly given.

And the Popes faction (for Religion was then turned into faction) wanted not
other men, The English Fugitives do move and excite strangers to war against
their Prince and Country.
who vowed and bent their utmost power and endeavors at Rome, and elsewhere in
the Courts of foreign Princes, to move war, and excite trouble against their
native Country; nay, rather than fail, they published in Print Pamphlets,
showing, that the Pope, and the King of Spain, had conspired to subdue
England, and expose it as a prey; to no other purpose, than to increase the
affection and courage of their own people, to affright and terrify others;
and by this means, to seduce and withdraw them from that love and loyalty
which they ought to their Sovereign Princess and Country. Queen ELIZABETH
perceiving evidently how much she was offended and threatened by the Arms and
subtlety of the Pope and Spaniard, after having acknowledged the singular
goodness of God, declared by a Book printed; THat she had not attempted any
thing against any other Prince, but in defense and conservation of her own
Kingdom, neither had she invaded any others Country, although she had been
both by injuries sufficiently provoked, and by set opportunity invited
thereunto. That if any Princes should enterprise to invade her Realms, Queen
Elizabeth's declaration against them.
she doubted not, but to be (by the Divine assistance) well able to defend
them. That she had to that end taken a survey of her forces, both by Sea and
Land, and stood readily prepared against the attempts of her enemies, exhorted
her loyal Subjects, to persist with unremovable steadfastness in faith and
duty toward GOD, and her Ministers. Such as had renounced all love to their
Country, and obedience to their Prince, she commanded to carry themselves
moderately, and not provoke the seneritie of justice. Neither would she in
pardoning her evil Subjects, show her self cruel to her self and her good
people.

The several Sects of Holland.
And not only these perfidious Subjects, but Strangers likewise out of Holland,
(being a fertile Province in Heretics) began at that time not only to
disturb the peace of the Church, but also of the Commonwealth of England; by
insinuating themselves, under a color of singular integrity and sincerity,
into the opinions of the ignorant vulgar; and with a strange and new manner of
preaching, (which men rather wondered at than understood) they possessed the
minds of many with certain damnable Heresies, which were evidently contrary
to the Christian faith; they called themselves of the Family of love, or House
of Charity, and persuaded such as they had drawn to their Sect, that those
only were the Elect, and to be saved, which were of that Sect; all others were
Reprobates, and should be damned; and that it was lawful for them to deny by
oath what they pleased before any Magistrate, or any other, which were not of
that Family. And of this fantastic vanity they dispersed books abroad, which
were entitled, The Gospel of the Kingdom; The Sentences of Instruction; The
Prophecy of the spirit of love; The publication of the peace upon Earth, by H.
N. They could not be induced to manifest the name of the Author; The house of
LOVE.
but it was afterward found to be one H. Nicholay of Leyden in Holla^d; who
out of his blasphemous mouth preached, That he was partaker of Gods Divinity,
and God of his humanity. The Queen, A Proclamation against these Sects.
in good time, to repress these Heretics (knowing that all Princes ought
above all to have an especial care of Religion) by an Edict enjoined the
Civil Magistrates to assist the Ecclesiastical in burning of those Books.

About this time, Francis Drake returned into England, Francis Drake.
abounding with riches, but more illustrious and exceeding in glory, having
sailed about the terrestrial Globe with happy success, being (if not the
first that had aspired to this glory) yet the first next Magellan, who dyed in
the midst of his course. This Drake (that I may report no more than what I
have heard from himself) was borne of mean parentage in the County of
Devonshire; His original extraction.
at his Baptism, Francis Russell, afterward Earl of Bedford, was his
Godfather. Whilst he was but yet an Infant, his Father embracing the
Protestant Religion, was by virtue of the Law of Six Articles, made by King
HENRY the Eighth against the Protestants, called in question: whereupon he left
his native soil, and passed into Kent. King HENRY the Eighth being deceased,
he obtained a place amongst them of the Fleet-Royall, to read Prayer; a short
time after, he was chosen Deacon, and being made Vicar of Vpnore, upon the
River Medway, (where the Navy lay at Road) he was constrained by poverty to
place his son with a neighboring Pylote, who, by daily exercise, Francis
Drakes education.
hardened him to the Saylors labors in a little Bark, wherewith he sailed up
and down the Coast, guided Ships in and out of Harbors, and sometimes
transported Merchandise into France and Zeland. This young man, being diligent
and pliable, gave such testimony of his care and diligence to the old Pylote,
that he dying issuelesse, in his Will bequeathed, as a Legacy, the Bark to
him, wherewith Drake having gathered a pretty some of money, and receiving
intelligence that John Hawkins made preparation of certain Ships at Plymouth,
for the voyage of America, which was called the New-World, he made sale of his
Bark, and, accompanied with certain brave and able Mariners, he left Kent,
and joined his labors and fortunes with Hawkins, in the year 1567. but with
unfortunate success. For the English being (as is related) surprised by the
Spaniards, in the Port of Saint John de Vllua, he, with the loss of all his
means, hardly escaped. Five years after, (that is to say, in the year 1572.)
having gathered together a sufficient sum of money by his traffic and
Pyracy, with an intent to recover his losses which he had received by the
Spaniards, (which a Preacher of the Navy easily persuaded him to be lawful) he
made a voyage the second time into America, Drakes expedition in America.
with a Ship of War called the Dragon, with two other small Ships, without
the knowledge of any but his Companions, where he surprised a Town, called
Nombre de Dios, in the passage to the I Will Dariene, which he presently lost.
Then, receiving intelligence by the fugitive Negro's, (which are called
Cimarons) that certain Mule-driuers were to transport a great quantity of Gold
and Silver to Panama) he set upon them, and pillaged them upon the way,
carrying the Gold into his Ships, but the Silver, because he could not
commodiously transport it over the Mountains, he left it, and buried part
thereof in the ground: after that, he burned a large Storehouse of
Merchandise, called the CROSS, upon the River Chirague: And as he sometimes
made excursions upon the neighboring places, he discovered from the top of
high mountains, the South Sea; hereupon, he was so inflamed with a desire of
glory and wealth, that he burned with an earnest longing to sail into those
parts; and in the same place, falling upon his knees, he heartily implored the
Divine assistance to enable him, that he might one day arrive in those Seas,
and discover the secrets of them; and to this, he bound himself with a
religious vow. A Vow.
From that time forward, was his mind night and day troubled, and as it were
excited and pricked forward with goads, to perform and acquit himself of
this Vow.

Now, being abundantly rich, John Oxenham sayleth into America.
silently reuolued these thoughts in his mind; John Oxenham, who in the former
voyages had been a Soldier, Mariner, and Cook under him, having by his
valor obtained the name of Captain among the Saylors, to tread in the
footsteps of his Masters fortune, in taking the Mules laden with wealth, and
to sail the Australe, or Meridian-Sea, he, in the year 1563. begun to sail
in those places, with a Ship only and equipage of seventy men, where, being
arrived, he communicated his design to the Negro's, and learning out that
those Mule-driuers, who used to transport riches to Panama, were conveyed with
armed men, brought his Ship to Land, hiding her under thick bows in place
secure, causing likewise his greatest Cannons to be brought ashoare, with
victuals and provision; afterward, he and his people, with ten Negro's, who
were their Guides in that Country, came to a River which ends in the
Meridian-Sea, and there cut Trees wherewith they built a small Ship, with which
he traded in the Island called Margaret, Jsla de Perlas.
which abounds in Pearls, situated in the same Sea, and not far off: in
which having stayed ten days for the Ships coming from Perou, he took one
which carried sixty pound weight of Gold; and another, with an hundred pound
weight of Silver, and in those Ships he returned into the said River. This
Prize being soon diuulged by those Spaniards which John Oxenham had released,
and set on shore, Johan* Ortega, a Spaniard, forthwith pursued him with an
hundred men, and finding that there was three ways to enter the River, he
stayed a time, not knowing which to take, but at last he plainly discovered
Oxenhams trace, by reason of the number of feathers of such Fowls and Hens as
the English had eaten, which were swimming upon the water; and following them,
he found the Gold among the bushes and thickets, and the English in discord and
strife about the booty; who nevertheless providing to their common necessity,
fell upon the Spaniards, who were in greater number: for the most part of the
English were killed, and the rest were taken, among which, John Oxenham, who
was brought to LIMA, and there examined whether he were entered into the King of
Spaines Dominions, with Queen ELIZABETH's leave and permission, John Oxenham
deprived of life, falls from a great and famous enterprise.
or no? and not able to satisfy them with any answer, he was most lamentably
put to death, and cruelly executed as a Pyrat and common enemy of humane kind,
with the Pylot, and others: and thus his worthy enterprise was prevented, which
was both great and memorable.

Drakes second voyage.
Drake, not knowing what was become of Oxenham, that he might get into the
South Sea, which he still meditated upon, and try his fortune there, departs
from Plymouth the thirteenth of December 1577. with five ships, and one hundred
sixty three men, of which number there were scarce two who knew his design,
or whither they were bound, and arrived on the five and twentieth at Canten, a
Cape or Promontory in Barbary: then, having refreshed themselves at Maio, a
very pleasant Island, and abounding with sweet Grapes, at San-Iacobina, they
took a Portugal laden with Wine, and having set the Mariners a shore, carried
the vessel, with N. la Forest the Pylote, away with them, to serve them for a
watch and skout upon the Coasts of Brasil, which were well known unto him.
From thence he passed to the I Will of Folgo, which casts out sulphurous flames:
and from thence to la Brave, under which the Mariners assure us that the Sea is
very high. And as he came under the Equinoctial, providing for the health of
his people, causes every one of them to be let blood, and after having bin
long becalmed, and endured much Lightening and Thunder, he found he had made
very little or no way in three weeks, and been 55. days without seeing any
Land, until in the end he discovered the Country of Brasill.

The 26. of April, being entered the river of Plate, Doughtey beheaded.
they saw an infinite number of Sea-calues, and from thence being brought to
Saint Iulians, they found a Gibbet standing there, which (as it is thought)
Magellan set up, when he was forced thereabouts, to punish some sedicious
persons. Where Mr. John Doughtey, a wise and valiant Gentleman, and of chief
command under Drake, was condemned by the verdict of twelve men, according to
the English custom, and beheaded, after he had received the Communion with
Drake himself. The most impartial of all the Company, did judge, that he had
indeed carried himself a little sediciously, and that Drake, having an eye not
so much upon such as might surpass him in Seafaring renown, as upon those
which were like to equal him, did rid his hands of him as of a Competitor.
Others, presuming to have more knowledge of his intentions, affirm, that
Leicester had commanded him to make him away, under some pretext or other, in
revenge that he did auerre oftentimes, that he had made away my Lord of Essex
by his devices.

The 20. of August, having no more then three Ships, Passes the straightes
of Magellan.
(for he had cast off the other two at Sea, which were the lesser, after he
had taken in the men, and what else was ought worth) he came to the straight of
Magellan, which is a Sea full of Islands, and circled in with high Mountains,
the Element being full of Snow, and the wether very cold, past it, the sixth of
September, and entered into the South Sea, which is called Peacible, or Still,
which he found nevertheless much troubled, and his Fleet through the
vehemency of the Tempest, carried about an hundred Leagues into the Ocean and
separated: At the same time they saw an Eclipse of the Moon, Eclipse of the
Moon.
the fifteenth of September, at six of the Clock at night. I speak this in
favor of Mathematicians, against that which others do report. They saw also
that part of the heaven next the South Pole, adorned with very few stars,
South Stars.
and of far lesser magnitude then those in our Hemisphere, and not above the
third part of the greatness of ours. And that the two little Clouds, which
are of the color of the Milke-way, which we call the little Clouds of
Magellan, Little clouds of Magellan
are not far distant from the Pole.

Of these Ships which the wind had thus hurried away, the one, in which
Captain John Winter commanded, plying up the straights of Magellan again,
returned safely into England, and is the first that ever passed that way.
Drake, who was then driven alone by this tempest with his Ship, unto 55.
degrees to the West, and hardly could recover the breadth of the straights, ran
along the Coast, and, contrary to that which is figured in the Maps, he found
that these Lands fetch a great compass about, before they trend up into the
East.

Drake finds booty both by land and sea.
Being come the last of November to the I Will of Mouscha, he sent his Mariners
ashore for fresh water, two of which were taken and detayned by the
Inhabitants. Being departed from thence, he meets with an Indian, who was
fishing in his Canoe, who thinking that his men had bin Spaniards, told them,
that at Villa Parizo, in the Road, there was a great Spanish Ship laden, and
brought them thither. The Spanish Mariners, which were but eight, and two
Negroes, seeing the English ariue, and taking them for Spaniards, began to
beat up their Drums, and drawing of their Wines of Chillie, to inuit them
to drink. But the English boording them, put them all under hatches, rifle the
next Town, called Saint Iacobin, and the Chapel also, the spoil whereof was
for Mr. Fletcher, Minister to the Fleet: Afterward they put all the men of
their Prize on shore, except the Pilot, being a Grecian, and carrying both the
Ship and him away, they found therein four hundred weight of Gold of Baldiue,
so called by the name of the place, because it is truly refined.

After that, Francis Drake landed at Taurapaze, where he found a Spaniard fast
asleep upon the Sea side, Meets by chance with great wealth
and near unto him two great Bars of massy Silver, to the value of four
thousand Ducats, which he caused to be carried away, without so much as
awakening the man. Then being entered into the Haven of Aricae, he found there
three ships, without Master or Sailors; and within, 57. ingots of silver, each
of them weighing twenty pound weight, besides other merchandise. From thence
he sailed to Lima, and meets with twelve ships in the Road, whose Tackling
and Arms had been brought ashore: There was in them a great deal of Silk,
and a little coffer full of coined money, but there was not so much as a Boy
left to look to them, so great they accounted the security of that Coast, for
the distance of places, and also because the navigations was unknown, no fear
they had of Pirates. And indeed, no man from Magellan ever sailed those Seas
before Drake, but only the Spaniards, who have built there all such Ships and
Navy as are there. Drake, having committed those Ships to the Ocean, he made
haste with all sails spread, Sir Francis Drake takes a Spanish ship called
Shite-Fire, which he made shite Silver.
after another sumptuous Ship, very rich, called The Caco Fogue; whereof he had
notice, was departed from Lima, and bound for Panama; but he first meeting with
a small ship, from which he got 80. pound weight of Gold, a Crucifix of pure
gold, diverse Emeralds of the length of a finger, and some Munition: The first
day of March he ouertooke this Caco Fogue, and after he had beaten down with a
Cannon shot the Foremast, boords her, and takes it, finds therein, besides
many precious stones, 80. pound weight more of gold, 13. coffers full of coined
money, and his ballast was pure silver: all which he caused to be brought
ashore, and leaving the said Ship, the Pilot, who was within, gave Drake this
pleasant farewell: We will exchange names of our Ships: Call yours, Cacofogue;
and ours, Cacoplate: which is to say, yours shall be named Shite-fire, and
ours Shite-siluer. Since that time he met with no rich prize. So omitting the
relation of those ships of China, of the golden Eagle, of those fair Negroes
which the Spaniard gave him for sparing his ship, and the pillage of a little
Village called Aguatulcum; I will speak of his return.

He thinks of his return.
Drake esteemed himself abundantly rich, and indifferently well satisfied of
the particular wrong which he had received of the Spaniards in S. John of
Vllua, thinks now of his return, and because it seemed to him full of eminent
perils, to repasse through the straights of Magellan, as well by reason of the
raging Tempests usual there, as of diverse Shelfs and Rocks unknown, and
likewise fearing lest the Spaniards should there watch for his coming back,
as indeed Francis of Toledo, Viceroy of Peruia, had to that end sent thither
Peter Sermiente with two ships of War, as also to fortify the straights of
that Sea, if any were; Drake then took his way toward the North, at the
latitude of 42. Degrees, to discover in that part if there were any straight,
by which he might find a nearer way to return; But discerning nothing but
dark and thick clouds, extremity of cold and open Cliffes covered thick
with snow, he landed at the 38. Degree, and having found a commodious Rode,
remained there a certain time. The inhabitants of that Country were naked,
merry, lusty, iumping, leaping, and dancing perpetually, sacrificing, and
showing by sign and words, that they would elect Francis Drake for their King:
neither could it be coniectured that ever the Spaniard had bin there, or so
far in that Country: Drake discoueres a land, which he called the Nouam
Albion.
Drake named that very country, being fat and good, full of Deeres and Conies,
The new Albion; Causing a great Post to be there erected, upon which there was
engraven an Inscription, which showed the year of our Lord, the name of Queen
ELIZABETH, and their landing there, and underneath a piece of silver of Queen
ELIZABETH'S Coin was nailed to the said Post.

Afterward having weighed Anchor, in the month of November, he arrived in the
Islands of the Mollucques, He arrived at the Molucques.
where the King of the I Will of Ternata received him graciously, and from thence,
sailing upon that sea full of Rocks and Islands, his ship was, the ninth day of
January, driven to the top of a Rock covered with water, where it remained in
great danger seven and twenty hours, and was accounted no better then lost, by
all the men of the ship, who fell devoutly upon their knees, praying heartily
unto the Lord, Falls into a great danger
expecting hourly to perish, with all the abundance of riches heaped up
together with so much pain: But after they had hoysted their Sprit-Sayle, and
cast into the Sea 8. Pieces of Ordnance, and diverse marchandizes, a favorable
wind rose, (as sent of God) which bore the ship aside, and withdrew it from
above the Rock.

After this, he landed at Iaua major, greatly afflicted with the Pox, which
the Inhabitants do cure, sitting in the heat of the sun, He passes beyong
the Cape of Bona Esperance.
to dry up the poisonous and malignant humor. Where having tried the humanity
of the little King of the Country, he took his way toward the Cape of Bona
esperance, which was celebrated as very remarkable, by the Mariners, which had
formerly seen it. He landed upon that coast to take in water, but found no
fountain there: if he had not in time provided of water, when it rained, they
had all been in great distress for sweet water. At last, he took in some at
Riogrand, from whence he finished his journey into England, with a favorable
wind, which brought his Ship the ninth of November, 1580. safe into the Haven
of Plymouth, where he took shipping, after his being abroad about the space of
three years: during which time he worthily sailed round about the Earth,
Returns into England.
to the admiration and laudable applause of all people, and without purchasing
blame for any other things, than for his putting to death Doughty, and for
leaving at the mercy of the Spaniards, that Portugal Ship by him taken at the
mouth of Africa, near unto Aquatulqua, and for having most inhumanely exposed
in an Island, that Negro or Black-more-Maide, who had been gotten with Child in
his Ship.

Queen ELIZABETH received him graciously, with all clemency, caused his riches
to be sequestered and in readiness, whenever the Spaniard should re-claime
them: Her Majesty commanded likewise, that for a perpetual memory to have so
happily circuited round about the whole Earth, his Ship should be drawn from
the water, and put aside near Deptford upon Thames, where to this hour the
body thereof is seen; Drakes ship is consecrato perpetual memory.
and after the Queens feasting therein, she consecrated it with great
ceremony, pomp, and magnificence, eternally to be remembered; and her Majesty
forthwith honored Drake with the dignity of Knighthood. As these things were
performed, a slight Bridge, made of Boords, by which people went up into the
Ship, Francis Drake is knighted by Queen Elizabeth.
was broken down by the Multitude, and about a hundred persons fell with it;
they nevertheless received no harm at all: insomuch, that the Ship seemed to
have been built in a happy conjunction of the Planets. That very day, against
the great Mast of the said Ship, many verses, composed to the praise and honor
of Sir Francis Drake, were fastened, and fixed; among which, these in Latin were
written by a Scholar of the College of Winchester: PLUS VLTRA, Herculeis
inscribas, Drace, columnis,
Et magno, dicas, Hercule mayor ero.
Escri DRAC ces deux mots sur les piliers du Temple
Qui sut sacre iadis a Hercule guer^ier,
PLUS OVLTRE, and quelque grand qu'ait este son lau^ier
Di que le tien doibt estre and plus grand and plus ample.
DRAKE, on the Herculean columns these words write,
Thou farther wentst then any mortal wight.
Though Hercules for travel did excel,
From him and others thou did bear the bell.
DRACE, pererrati quem nouit terminus orbis,
Quemque simul mundi vidit vterque Polus.
Si taceant homines, faciunt te sydera notum.
Sol nescit comitis non memor esse sui.
DRAC qui as parcouru tous les quartiers du monde,
Et les Poles as v^u, Quand les gens manqueront
A chanter tes vertus, les Astres le feront,
Le Soleil n'oublira celuy qui le second.
Brave DRAKE, that round about the world did sail,
And viewedst all the Poles, when men shall fail
Thee to commend, the stars will do it* the Sun
Will not forget how with him thou did run.
Digna ratis quae stet radiantibus inclyta stellis,
Supremo coeli vertice digna ratis.
CE NAVIRE qui rend a tous homines notoire
La gloire d'vn grand Chef, merit que les Dieux
Mettent autour de luy des Astres radieux,
Et au plus hault du Ciel estre eclatant de gloire.
THAT SHIP whose good success did make thy name
To be resounded by the trump of Fame:
Merits to be beset with Stars divine,
Instead of waves, and the Sky to shine.


Nothing angered worse Sir Francis Drake, than to see the Nobles and the
chiefest of the Court, refuse that Gold and Silver which he presented them
withal, as if he had not lawfully come by it. The Commons nevertheless
applauded him with all praise and admiration, esteeming, he had purchased no
less glory in advancing the limits of the English, their honor and
reputation, than of their Empire.

The King of Spain by his Ambassador demands Drakes goods which he had
pirapirated.
Bernard Mendoze, then Ambassador for Spain, in England, murmuring at it,
and, as not well pleased, demands vehemently of the Queen the things taken.
But he was answered: THat the Spaniards had procured unto themselves that evil
through their injustice toward the English, in hindering, against the right of
Nations, He is answered.
their Negotiations; That Sir Francis Drake was always ready to answer the
Law, if by just inditements, and certain testimonies they could convict him,
to have committed any thing against equity. That to no end but to give
satisfaction to their King, the riches he brought in were sequestered, though
her Majesty had spent (against the Rebels which Spain had moned and instigated
in Ireland and England against her,) more money than Drake was worth. Moreover,
that her Majesty could find no reason w^y Spain should hinder her Subjects,
and those of other Princes, from sailing to the Indies* that she could not be
persuaded that they were his own, although the Pope had never so much given
them to him* that she acknowledged no such Prerogative in the Pope, much less
the least authority, as to oblige Princes, who owe him no obedience at all,
under his to power inuest and put the Spaniard, as in fee and possession of
that New-World; also, that she could not see how he could derive the least
right, but by those desconts and landing here and there of his Subjects, who
built there small cottages to inhabit, and named the Promontorie; Things
nevertheless that can purchase no propriety. So that by virtue of such
donation of other men's goods* which in equity is nothing worth, and of this
propriety that is merely imaginary, he cannot justly hinder other Princes to
negotiate in those Regions; but they, without infringing any ways the Laws of
Nations* may lawfully bring in Colonies in those parts that are not yet
inhabited by the King of Spaines Subjects, since Prescription without
possession, is of no validity even as to sail upon the main Ocean, that the
use of the Sea as of the Air is common to all, and that public necessity
permits not it should be possessed; that there is nor people, no particular,
that can challenge or pretend any other right therein.

Nevertheless, since this, The Spaniard has part of Drakes money delivered
back.
great sums of money were paid back to Piedro S^b^re, a Spaniard, who
styled himself Attorney, for the recovery of the Gold and Silver, though he
could show no such Letter of procuration or receipts. And it was discovered (but
too late) that he made no retribution at all to particulars, but spent it
against Queen ELIZABETH, upon the Spaniards, Iackman and Pets Navigations to
seek away to the East-Jndies.
who maintained the war of Flanders.

While Sir Francis Drake circuited so prosperously the World, Iacman and Pet,
renowned Pylots, sent by the Merchants of London with two Ships, did seek with
less happy success, a short way or passage, to sail into the East Indies, by
the Sea of Cronie, but having past some miles beyond the Isles Vaigats, they
found ebbing and flowing so uncertain, so many shelues, and so great store of
Ice, that they could not possible go any further, having much ado to return.

The death of the Earl of Arundell, who was the first that brought the use of
Coches into England.
At the beginning of this year, died Henry Fitz-Allen, Earl of Arundell, and
with him the name of that most noble House, which had flourished in honor
above three hundred years, son to Richard Fitz-Allen, sprung from the
Albaines ancient Earls of Arundel and Sussex (in the reign of EDWARD the
First*) which title they had without creation, in regard of the possession
which they had of the Castle and Lordship of Arundell: This man being heaped
with honor, had been a Priuy-Councellor to all the Kings under whom he lived,
and performed great offices unto his end. Under HENRY the Eighth, he was
Governor of Calice, Marshall of the Army at Bullen, and Lord Chamberlain: At
the inauguration of EDWARD the Sixth, he was Lord Marshall of England, in
which charge he continued at the Coronation of Queen MARIE; and was after made
Lord High-Constable, Lord Steward of her house, and President of her Council;
Under Queen ELIZABETH, he was made the second time Lord Steward. And when he
began to grow old, he sought to marry her, for which he lost much of her
favor; afterward, he intermeddled in the Duke of Norfolkes matters, and
openly withstood the marriage of the Duke of Aniou. He professed himself an
open-hearted man, and made it appear that he loved not the French; and would
often say, that his father dwelling in Sussex, neighbor unto France, would
teach him not to believe them. He had three Children by Katherine his Wife,
daughter to Thomas Gray, Marquis of Dorset, which children he suruiued; Henry,
being young and of great hope, dyed at B^axels; Jane, who was Wife to the Lord
Lumley; and Marie, who married Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, and bare unto
him Philip, Earl of Arundel, of whom we will speak in his own place.

Arthur, Lord Gray, Deputy of Ireland, The Lord Gray represseth the Rebels in
Ireland.
being gone against the O-Conores, who were stirring up new troubles in
Ophalia, by Law executes Hugh O-Moloy, a seditious man, and pacifies this
Country, and that of Magohiganores and Ocaroles, and in the very bud crushed a
great conspiracy that was a growing and beginning to spread. For some of the
chiefest Families in Lemster, and many others that were originally English,
driven partly by the affection they bore to the Romish Religion, and partly for
their hatred to the new-come English, (who since their coming had excluded
them, contrary to the Law, from all governments and Magistracy, as if they had
been natural Irish) had conspired to kill the Lord Deputy and his Family, to
surprise the Castle of Dublin, wherein was all the provision of war, and to
kill all the English that were in Ireland: and this conspiracy was so closely
carried, that it was never conferred upon with more than two in a company.
Nevertheless, among so many accomplices it came to light, and was extinct with
the death of a few men: and amongst them of chiefest note, was I. Nogent, Baron
of Fiske, a man singular in fame and life, who was (as the Irish report)
seduced by the craft of those that enuyed him, and his conscience assuring
himself of his innocence, chose rather, Innocence is an assured comfort.
(though the Deputy promised to give him his life, if he would confess
himself guilty) to dye an innocent by an infamous death, than to live in
infamy for betraying his innocence. And verily, howsoever the truth of this
business was in it self, the Queen was much offended with the Lord Gray, for
the death of those men, whom the Earl of Sussex, being more offended therewith
(for rarely is true love between great Ones) the more stirred up, by reason of
the cruelty which before he had used toward the Spaniards which yielded; and
now against Subjects, that he had diminished the glory of his Princess, and
augmented the number of her enemies. Howbeit, he forbear not to terrify
Turlough-Leinich, who began to raise tumults in Vlster, and drive him to
conditions of peace. Whereby he likewise brought the O-Brins, the O-Mores, and
the Cauanaghies, Rebels suppressed.
Rebels in Lemster, humbly to desire peace, and to offer Hostages. These
matters of Ireland, though time does much disioyne them, for the help of
memory, I have thought to put them together.

The Earl of Lenox is envied of the Scots.
In Scotland, some Ministers, and some of the great Ones, considering the Earl
of Lenox, of whom I have spoken, to be strong in the Kings favor, stirred up
James Stuart, of Ochiltrie, Captain of the Guard, (who carried the title of
Earl of Arran, I know not by what grant, from James Hamilton, Earl of Arran,
a man of an unable spirit, for which cause he was ordained his Tutor) to be his
Emulator. But the King quickly reconciled them. When this would not succeed,
they brought him, as much as in them lay, to be in hatred within the Kingdom,
and accused him to Qu. ELIZABETH, to be sent by the Guizes to overthrow
Religion, to procure the liberty of the captive Queen, and to disunite the
amity which was between the Kingdoms of England and Scotland. They accuse him
in England.
They are easily believed, and notwithstanding that he purged himself by
Letters to the Queen, and made profession of the Protestants Religion, serious
deliberation is hereupon taken in England.

Consultation holden against him.
The Council of England was afraid that he would oppress those Scots that
stood best affected to the English, and favor the incursions which were made
upon the Borders, and allure the King to marry in France, or elsewhere
unknown to the English; and that the King, now in his youth, would molest the
affairs of England; and being come to more maturitie of age, would assume the
title of King of England, as his Mother had done. Which if he did, the danger
would fall more heavily from him than from his Mother, in regard his birth gave
him an assured hope of two Kingdoms, and gain more friends to favor his
cause, and that the Scots trained up in the civil wars, and the wars of
the Low Countries, were more expert to learn warlike offices. Therefore from
hence it is thought good, by some means or other to infringe the favor and
authority that Lenox had with the King, or to drive him out of Scotland, and
that without delay; They raise false reports against him.
because rumors were given out, that Balfour was sent for out of France, (who
had found, I know not what. Writing of his own hand, to convince him of the
Murder of the Kings Father) to ruin Morton, and that he had for no other end
obtained the government of the Castle of Dunbriton, but to set in
stranger-forces into Britain, or to transport the King into France. It was
likewise said, that he had persuaded the King, to resign the Kingdom to his
Mother, who had been unjustly and by a most wicked example deposed by her
Subjects; after, having taken her faithful promise to resign it by and by
after unto him again by a lawful resignation, which would be a solid
confirmation to him, and a means to extinguish all factions, and make him
known to all, to be lawful King.

After this, Sir Robert Bows, Treasurer of Barwicke, The Scots will not admit
Bows to accuse him.
is sent into Scotland, to accuse Lenox of these things before the King and his
Council, and to advertise the King of the eminent dangers thereof. As soon as
he had been admitted, he demanded that Lenox might for a while be removed
from that place; but the Council would not agree unto it, as being a thing new
and unheard of, to cause one of the Kings Council to be put out from the
Council, without showing cause. Also, they made a doubt whether or no the
Queen had given him that in charge expressly, and therefore willed him to show
his instructions, which he refused to do, save to the King, and to one or two
others; And seeing that he could not be heard, he was presently called back,
and took leave of the King, when it was little thought on, complaining that
the wholesome admonitions of a well-deseruing Queen were rejected.

Hume excuses it.
Shortly after, Alexander Hume is sent from Scotland, to excuse these matters,
he had not admittance to the Queen, but was sent to the Lord Burghley,
Treasurer, who gravely and succinctly gave him to understand: Burghley's
admonitions to him.
THat it was not any contempt of his person, that was cause why the Queen would
not permit him to see her, knowing very well by experience that he was well
affected to Religion, to his Prince and Country, and most studious for the
peace of both the Kingdoms, but out of a just sense and sorrow for the
contempt which was showed toward her Majesty, and of the trust of her
Ambassador, who had contained himself within the prescribed bounds of his
Legation: Lays all the blame upon the new and ill-aduised Counselors:
excuses the King, as not being of age to have much experience, and wished him
to lend an ear to the holy and wholesome counsels of the Queen, who truly
bare him a maternall affection; and not to make less account of them, than of
those from a French kinsman, the King of France his subject, who labored to
marry him to a French woman of the Romish Religion, and peradventure goes about
(now the Hamiltons exulting) to be designed the Kings Lieutenant. Let the King
( says he) remember that no passion is more fervent than ambition; and let the
Scots remember what troubles the French had caused in Scotland, if the Queen by
her wisdom and power had not prevented it.

So Hume was sent back into Scotland, and all of purpose to strike terror
into the King, and to make him believe that the Earl of Lenox had some
pernicious design against him and the Kingdom. Nevertheless, within a while
after, Morton, Morton imprisoned.
who was most addicted to the English, was accused by Arran, Laesa Maiestatis,
and cast into prison.

The end of the second Book of the Annals and History of that mighty
Empress, Queen ELIZABETH, of most happy and blessed memory.
THE HISTORY OF THE MOST HIGH, MIGHTY, AND Euer-glorious Empress, ELIZABETH,
Invincible Queen of England, Ireland, etc. True Defendresse of the Faith, of
immortal Renown, and neuer-dying Fame and Memory.

OR, ANNALLES OF ALL SVCH REMARKable things as happened during her blessed Reign
over her Kingdoms of England and Ireland; as also, such Acts as past betwixt
her MAJESTY and Scotland, France, Spain, Italy, Germany, and the Netherlands.

The third Book.

F^^thfully translated out of the French, and ^^^^isht in English, with the
KINGS leave and Authority, granted by his most Excellent Majesty, to ABRAHAM
DARCIE.

These Noble Knights, for their worth and Virtues, were honored with the
dignity of Knighthood by Qu. Elizabeth; most of them in that Honorable and
euer-remembred Voyage of C. Howard, Earl of Notingha^, L. high Admiral, and
that renowned Soldier, the late Generous Earl of Essex, etc. in Spain,
before Cadiz, taken and ran^acked by the English, Iun. 26. Anno 1^96.
To the every way Noble, and accomplished with all virtues, Sir EDWARD CONVVAY,
the Kings Secretary of State. Sir WILLIAM HARVEY, Lord HARVEY, Baron of Rosse.
Sir ORACE VERE. Sir ARTHVR THROCKMORTON. Sir ROBERT MAVNCELL. Sir FRANCIS
POPHAM. Sir WILLIAM MOVNSON. Sir RICHARD WESTON.

The Right virtuous and generous, Sir THOMAS Their Honorable Predecessors
were for their deserts, advanced both to Honor and Dignity.
HATTON. AND CHRISTOPHER Sir Chapter Hatton was Lord Chancellor of England under Qu.
Elizabeth: he dyed in Hatton house, the 20. of November, 1590.
HATTON. Sir CARRY Sir Walter Rawleigh Knighted and employed about diverse
worthy affairs of weight and consequence by Queen Elizabeth.
RAVVLEIGH. EDWARD Wray Lord Keeper of the privy Seal.
WRAY, Esquire.

I Here presume to consecrate to your perpetual Honor, this Book, which
under the Honorable Shield of your Noble protections I have sought to shelter,
And wherefore?

It is that these Noble persons have by their worthy lives, purchased Honor to
their noble selves, or else their Prodecessors have by their Virtues, deserved
both Honor and Dignity from this vnparalel'd Empress; who as she was a true
aduancer of Virtue, and destroyer of Vice, did liberally bestow her Royal
gifts of Honor upon those and their Ancestors.


knowing the Fame of this Heroicke Empress to be no less dear unto you, then
your Illustrious Persons are careful to propagate to all Posterities, your
clear and untainted Names, which by your pious lives, and religious
conuersations, you have engraven in the Temple of Eternity: your virtues cannot
but cherish this History, which contains the life of so matchless a Queen,
whose Divine perfection the whole world admired, as one who was the perfect
Pattern of Princesses, and the true Mirour and Honor of Virgin-kinde. I
confess, many (far better able then I a Stranger) could have discharged this
Enterprise with far more skill, and both in smoother and more elegant terms,
if they had been willing to honor their Labors and Industries with so rare
and worthy a Subject. But howsoever, I was willing the best I was able, to pay
this my humble Duty to Her blessed Memory, and to your Honorable selves, by my
poor endeavors to make known the desire I have to entitle my self,

A true denoted to your resplendent virtues, ABRAHAM DARCIE.

THE HISTORY OF THAT EVER Most blessed and Glorious Empress, Book 3.
Queen ELIZABETH of happy renown and matchless Fame. OR ANNALLS Of all such
things of note as happened during her happy Reign, as well in England, France,
Ireland, as Scotland, Spain, Italy, Germany, and the Netherlands. The third
Book, and the four and twentieth year of her Reign, Anno MDLXXXI.
HEreupon, Randolphes intercession for Morton against Lenox.
in the beginning of January next, was Thomas Randolph Captain of the
Light Horse, sent into Scotland, with command that he should attempt nothing
that might any way be prejudicial to the present religion, or the peace of
the two Nations: he was also to solicit in the behalf of the Lord Morton,
that Lenox might be sent out of Scotland; and such of the Nobility as favored
the English faction might be encouraged. Randolph the better to effectuate his
message for the good of Morton, makes recital of his many great merits and
good services done to his Majesty, the inueterate malice of his adversaries,
the high respect and honor they ought to have of Queen ELIZABETH, who expected
nothing less then to have her suit now rejected in so honest a cause. The King
of Scots his answer.
The King answered, that by the duty of his royal charge he was to execute
judgment and justice upon a person so convicted in matter of Majesty, that he
ingeniously acknowledged the Queens manifold favors; nor would he act any
thing might any way be justly offensive to her Majesty.

Then after Randolph being admitted into the Assembly of the States of the
Kingdom, reckons up the well known benefits which both the King and Country
had erst received from the Queen, namely: Randolph complains to the Nobles
of Scotland.
HOW by the blood of the English their Country had been delivered from the
French; and of their King, his Kingdom and Religion she had ever been a chief
supporter: but for any way seducing the King (although some but most falsely did
intimate so much) or seeking to hold one foot of ground in Scotland, she never
entertained such a thought; yet were they not ignorant that she wanted not
opportunity, the King being in his cradle, the Queene-mother in Prison, and the
Nobles in combustion. But on the contrary, all her royal care was for the
conservation of their King, her near and dear kinsman, and allied to her in a
triple bond of neigborhood, religion and consanguinity: nor had she ever found
him or any of his Regents or Vice-Roies defective toward her in their loves
before this Aubigny of France came into Scotland: but since his ariuall he
wholly usurped the Regal authority, he had withdrawn all affection from the
English, to bestow it upon the French, who before his ariuall never so much as
acknowledged their King, had removed from his person his most trusty friends,
brought in strangers, had conferred with foraigners by letters (which he
showed) for inuading England, that he had brought the Scottish Presbytery into
contempt with the King, as a people altogether turbulent and seditious, had
perverted the administration of justice upon the borders. Nor could her Majesty
endure a Prince so virtuous, so nearly allied unto her, to be thus abused and
carried away by such sinister practices.

Notwithstanding this, for the present there was nothing done either for
Morton, or against Lenox, whom the Scots for the most part supposed no way
guilty of such aspersions or calumnies as had been objected.

Randolph seeing that, Endeauoreth to raise Rebellion.
thought he would try another conclusion, consorts himself with the friends
of Morton and Lenox adversaries, bewaileth the miserable estate of Scotland,
represents to them the imminent perils which hang over the heads of the
King, the Country and them all: complains that the Queens message by way of
intercession has been slieghtly respected, suggesteth with them secretly to
attempt to gain that by force of Arms, which they cannot get by fair means,
promising to further and furnish them out of England with men, money and
munition. This Oratory of his proved so perswasible with them, that thereupon
the Earls of Argathel, Mont-Rosse, Angus, Mortons Nephew by the brotherside,
Glencarne, Reuthen, Lindsey and others became all of his side. But soon after
they fell at discord amongst themselves, and seeing the King wholly carried away
with the favor of Lenox, nor no whit danted for the English forces which were
now upon the borders, and had already encountered theirs: generally respecting
the kings personal presence with them (though a child) were not afraid to
bend all the powers they could make upon Lenox, and thought it was enough to
have pity on Morton, notwithstanding the Earls of Angus and Mar practiced
covertly and cunningly with Randolph in the behalf of Morton, and against
Lenox; whereof Whittingham having advertised the King, Angus was commanded to
retire himself beyond the river Spea; and Mar to yield up the Castle of
Sterlin into the Kings hands: Gets him out of Scotland.
Randolph having an apprehension of fear, got him privately into Barwicke; and
seeing matters prove desperate, advises Angus and Mar to provide for
themselves either in submitting themselves to the King, or to seek the
protection of the Queen of England. The English forces were no sooner
withdrawn from the borders, Morton beheaded.
but Morton convicted of murdering the King had his head cut off: for he had
confessed (as the report went) that Bothwel, and Archebauld Douglas had
imparted their intent of making away the King, but in so tumultuous a time as
that was, he durst not reveal it. Nor could he deny but that since the Kings
death, he had been very inwardly conversant, and more familiar then before
with Douglas the Kings murderer, and had promised by his letters if Bothwel
should at any time be accused, to defend him the best he might. Instantly
Douglas and others the friends of Morton fled into England. His friends fled
for England.


In the Low Countries against the Grave Van Reneberg who had there valiantly
served the King of Spain, and now laid siege to Stenwicke in Friezland, the
States sent the English under the conduct of their General Norris, who with no
less courage then good success after he had twice relieved the besieged with
victuals, Norris victorious in Friezland.
caused the Enemy to raise his siege. But after that, coming to fight with
Verdugues the Spaniard, and having the victory in his hands, his enemies put to
flight, (suddenly fortune changing) he is beaten off the field, Is discomfited.
dangerously wounded, and many of his men slain, amongst which (not to
nominate the rest) were these men o^ note, Captain Cotton, Fitz-Williams and
Bishop. I know not well whether I should here recite a Combat which was
between Thomas Chieftaine of the Albanois.
Wallons, and General Norris; but Norris by the Law military being not
permitted to admit of, because he was General of the Army, his Lieutenant
Roger Fitz-Williams accepted the Challenge, A ridiculous combat.
which two after a while traversing their ground to and fro without one drop of
bloodshed, betook themselves to drink freely together, and so of enemies
became friends and parted. Yet here we must not omit to observe, Drunkenness
brought out of the Low Countries into England.
that our Englishmen who of all the Northern Nations have been most commended
for sobriety, have learned since these Low Country wars so well to fill
their cups, and to wash themselves with Wine, that whilst they at this day
drink others healths, they little regard their own. And that this vicious
practice of drunkenness has so ouerflowed the Land, that laws proscripts of
restraint, are usually made for the drying up of the same.

But whilst they were all this while contending in the Low Countries for
Dorppes and Villages, The King of Spain possesses Portugal.
the King of Spain gets into his hands the rich Kingdom of Portugal. For
Henry which was King, having paid Natures tribute the year before, left the
Realm to diverse Competitors, amongst whom Philip King of Spain, son of his
eldest Sister (puissant enough in force, though not in right) by reason of his
priority in blood and descent, coming of the elder line, By what right.
and being Male, thought with his friends himself worthiest to be preferred
to the succession of the said Kingdom, before the women, the younger sort, and
such as did less participate of the blood. The Duke of Sauoy rejected for that
he came of the younger Sister; Farnese son to the Prince of Parma, borne of
the eldest Daughter of EDWARD, brother King HENRY, and KATHERINE of Brabant,
second daughter to the said EDWARD, grounding themselves only upon the benefit
of Representation (a simple fiction) could not annihilate the true Title of
Inheritance, nor intercept the King of Spaines lawful succession, and this the
Spaniards stood to maintain.

And as touching Don Antonio Prior of Crates, son to Lewis the second brother
of King HENRY, he was ipso facto, rejected, for that he was illegitimate. The
King of Spain nevertheless propounded the matter twice to his Clergy and men
of Law to decide the cause, charging them in the name of God, and upon their
faith and salvation, to tell him freely whether he had rightful claim or no
to that Kingdom. They having with unanimous voice assured him that it was
proper to him, he quickly (putting forth first the Duke of Alua) put to flight
Antonio elected of the people, and within 70 days brought all Portugal under
his jurisdiction.

The Queen of France her title to Portugal fetched far and rejected.
But touching the Right of Katherin de Medicis the Queen of France, who claimed
it from Alphonsus, and the Earls of Boulogne for 320 years agone, that the
Spaniards laughed at, as a Title out of date, and fetched from the old
Prophetess the Mother of Euander, a thing injurious to so many of the Kings of
Portugal, which had lawfully and lineally succeeded one another, and therefore
ridiculous to both Spaniards and Portugals. Whereat the Queen incensed with
anger, and considering how mightily the Spaniard (now in his ascendant)
enriched himself far and near by the accession or surcrease of this new-got
Kingdom, his Islands, and the East Indies, breeding a fear within her, to her
self, and the Princes her neighboring friends, advised them, and amongst the
rest the Queen of England, Inciteth the Q. of England secretly against the
Spaniard.
that it was already high time to stay the Spaniards in his mounting, and to
stop him up within his own bounds, before his ambition should extend any
further.

Queen ELIZABETH who was not to learn what she had to do in that nature for
her self and her friends; and foreseeing how dangerous the growing greater of
the neighbor Princes would be, lent ear thereto with no light attention: but
with great and Royal kindness entertained Antonio banished out of Portugal,
Antonio banished Portugal, comes into England.
and recommended to her from France, thinking that Spain could not take
exception thereat, because he was of her Alliance, issued from the Blood
Royal of England, and of the House of Lancaster, as she well knew, nor in any
Treaties that ever had past betwixt Spain and England, was any caveat at all
inferred, forbidding England to receive or to have commerce with the Portugals.

At the same time, Delegates sent into England from France about the Duke of
Anjous marriage.
for the more confirmation of assured amity, the Queen of France and the King
her son, prosecuting the marriage of the Duke d' Anjou, addressed an honorable
embassage into England: for the consummation thereof came over Francois de
Bourbon Prince of Daulphine, Arthur de Cosse, Cont de Secondigny, Marshal of
France, Louis de Lusignan, M. de S. Gelais, Lansac, Salignac, Mauuisser, and
Bernarde Brisson, President of the Parliament of Paris, and one of the
learnedest men of France: and others, who as they they were of Honorable rank,
were very nobly received, and banqueted in a Banqueting House built on purpose
near Westminster, richly adorned with rare and sumptuous furniture; and Titls
and Tournaments proclaimed, which were presented in a most princely manner by
Philip Earl of Arundell, Fred: Lord Winsor, Philip Sidney, and Fulk Greuill,
Knights, against all comers, with sundry other courtly sports, and Princely
recreations, not necessarily coincident to our History.

To confer with them concerning these Nuptials, were appointed the Baron of
Burghley, Lord high Treasurer of England; the Earls of Sussex, Lincoln,
Bedford and Leicester, together with Sir Christopher Hatton, and Secretary
Walsingham: Amongst whom these matrimonial Contracts following were concluded
upon.

Covenants of marriage concluded upon.
THe Duke d' Anjou, and the Queen of England, within six weeks after the
ratification of these Articles shall personally contract marriage here in
England. The Duke and his associates, servants, and friends, being no English
subjects, shall have liberty to use their own Religion, in a certain place,
in their houses, without molestation or impeachment.

He shall not alter any part of the Religion now received in England. He shall
enjoy and have the Title and Dignity of King, after the marriage shall be
consummate; but notwithstanding shall leave entirely to the Queen the managing
of affairs. And whereas his demand was, that immediately after the celebration
of the marriage, he should be crowned King instantly to enjoy the title and
dignity during the government of the Kingdom, in the minority of their
children: The Queen answered, she would propound and further it at the next
high Court of Parliament, to be holden within fifteen days after the
ratification. Letters Patents and other things shall be passed in both their
names, as in the time of Philip and MARIE. The Queen by Act of Parliament
shall ordain an Annual pension for the Duke, but the valuation thereof shall
be left to her pleasure; she will also ordain the said Pension to continue if
he shall surviue her. The Duke in Dowry shall bestow on the Queen to the value
of forty thousand Crowns per annum out of his Duchy of Berry, and shall
forthwith infeofe her therein. As touching their Issue, it shall likewise be
enacted by Parliament in England, and registered in the Annals of France as
follows; That the Heirs of them as well Males as Females by maternall right
of Inheritance should succeed to the Crown of England. And if there be two
males, the elder shall succeed to the Crown of France, and the younger shall have
the hereditary Right of his Mother. And if one sole male, he shall come to both
the Crowns, and shall resyde in England every two years, eight months. And
if the Duke shall not attain the Kingdom of France, the children shall
succeed in Appanage. If he survive the Queen, he shall have the tuition of his
children till the sons shall accomplish the age of eighteen years, and the
daughters fifteen: But if he die before, the tuition shall be left to the
Authority of the Parliament. He shall not promote any stranger to any Office
in England, nor shall he change any ancient Rite or Custom. He shall at no
time carry the Queen or her Children out of the Realm, without consent of the
Nobility. If she dye issuelesse, he shall no longer challenge any right in
England, nor carry or convey any of her Jewels out of the Land: he shall suffer
every one, and all places of the Kingdoms to be guarded and kept by the
native English; and shall not take or cause to be taken away any munition of
War. He shall not engage England into any foraine wars. He shall to his
power procure the Land peace with other Nations. The Queen shall only enjoy
the Supremacy, nor shall assume any Title which may happen to fall upon the
Duke, as it were holding by the custom of England. The Duke by this match
intends not to prejudice the Right of his succession to the Kingdom of
France. The present Contract shall be read, published, and kept under Record
in all the Courts of France and England, within six months after the
Espousals, with the Authority of the most Christian King, for the ratification
of these Articles.

There shall be made a Treatise, Confederation, and League betwixt England and
France. These things shall be confirmed de bona side, with an Oath on the part
of the King of France, as well for him as for his Heirs, who shall deliver
Letters of the confirmation thereof with all possible expedition he may,
carrying assurance that the Articles in the present Treaty contained, shall be
kept inuiolably also.

A reservation added.
A reservation apart was added under the hands and seals of all the
Commissioners, implying thus much: That ELIZABETH was not bound to the
consummation of the marriage, till the Duke and she should have commutually
satisfied and reciprocally settled each other in certain things betwixt
themselves; and concerning these points, they were within six weeks by writing
to certify the King of France.

Before the six weeks were expired, Secretary Somer was sent into France
about this business. But the King refuses to give him audience, The King of
France urges the marriage.
urging the instant celebration of the marriage already concluded; as if there
had been nothing else remaining to be done. Somer showing under sign and
seal that there was first a defensive league and offensive to be performed,
maintains the contrary. To moderate the matter, there was sent over Sir Fran:
Walsingham, with Sir Henry Cobham Leiger Ambassador in France, and Somer, who
delivered this or the like speech.

ALthough the vulgar sort does censure hardly of the procrastinating of this
contracted marriage, Queen ELIZABETH intends nothing more, then to content
her people, who are instant to have her marry, that they may be secured of a
succession in her children. Her Majesty being sought to by the Duke of Anjou,
by good right has his love preferred before all other Princes, by reason of
his virtues and resplendent race, The Queen of England deferreth.
and she protesting to bear unto him most sovereign love, holding off from
the consummation of marriage, only until she could have knowledge from her
people, how they stand affected thereunto, holding it a point of wisdom in the
mean time rather to foresee, then to repent too late, Wherefore.
seeming in these respects to demurre the more, by reason of the civil wars
in France, the unfortunate Duke of Anjous undeservedly falling out of the Kings
favor, and in England an auersion of heart in most of the best of her
Subjects, since the first motion of the marriage, yet all this breeds nor brings
no diminution of true loyal love in her Majesty toward the said Duke. Also it
was at this time out of season for the French King, to urge a present
consummation, knowing the Duke was newly entered into war against the King of
Spain, the which he might not suddenly abandon, or relinquish, without great
dishonor to himself, discommoditie to the Kingdom of France and England; as
also the ruin of Flanders, the Spaniard there growing daily greater and
greater. Moreover, in stead of continuing peace at home, (for which the people
prays) they must of necessity be brought to bloody wars, the Queens
husband being so deeply engaged thereinto. For these reasons, from henceforth
that Treaty of sudden marriage is to surcease, until the Duke of Anjou were
dis-intangled out of these wars, and that interchangeable conditions of
Offensive and Defensive Alliance be passed betwixt the two Kingdoms of France
and England. And assuredly the Queen desired it above all things. But the
French would promise no other thing but to pass to covenants of mutual
defensive, and as for the offensive, Duke d' Anjou returns again into
England.
would hear it no further spoken of, until the Nuptials were celebrated.

Within a short space after, the Duke (whom the States had elected Governor of
Flanders) comes into England, after he had happily raised the siege of Cambray,
at the charge and cost of Queen ELIZABETH, who had supplied him with great
sums of money by the hands of Henry Seimor, Palauicine an Italian, and Bex a
Frenchman. The hope he relied upon was this; that if he should not presently
dispatch the marriage, yet should he so effect, that by the favor of the
Queen (whom the Dutch honored as an earthly Goddess) he should be the
better welcome to the Low-Countri-men at his return.

He arrived safe in England, and was magnificently entertained, and received
with all royal courtesies could be expected, evident testimonies of honor and
love, which her Majesty showed apparently, Queen Elizabeth gives a Ring unto
the D. of Anjou.
insomuch that on a time on the day of the solemnization of her Coronation (he
being entered into amorous Discourse with her Majesty) the great love which
she bore him, drew a Ring from her finger, which she gave him upon certain
cond^tions meant and agreed upon betwixt them. The assistants took that for an
argument and assurance that a marriage was by reciprocal promise contracted
between them. Amongst others, Aldegondy Governor of the City of Antwerpe,
dispatched messengers suddenly over, into the Low Countries; where for great
joy at the hearing thereof, both in Antwerpe, and all over Flanders were made
bonefires, and their great Artillery shot off. But this bred sundry opinions
among the Courtiers: A motion of sundry conceits in Court.
For as some rejoiced exceedingly, others were astonished at it, and some quite
struck down with sadness. The Earl of Leicester who had laid a secret plot
to prevent the marriage, the Vice-Chamberlaine Hatton, and Walsingham, were most
of all malecontented, as if the Queen, Religion and Kingdom had been undone.
Her women which were about her fell all in sorrow and sadness, and the terror
they put her into, The Queen greatly disquieted.
so troubled her mind, that she passed all that night without sleep amongst
her household servants, who made a consort of weeping, and sighing. The next
morning finding the Duke, and taking him aside, had serious discourse with him.
The Duke retiring himself, after he left her, into his Chamber, plucketh off
the Ring, casts it on the ground, takes it up again, rayleth on the
lightness of women, and inconstancy of Ilanders.

As she was perplexed with these passions, Her Majesty thinks what
inconueniencies might ensue in contemning and despising the Match with the Duke
of Anjou.
, she called to mind what once the Lord Burley, and the Earl of Sussex had
told her, that there was no Alliance offensive to be hoped for, without
marying with the Duke; nor being alone and without assistancy, was able to
withstand the greatness of the Spaniard. That the Spaniard offering his
daughter in marriage to the King of Scots, he would easily draw the Papists in
England to be his adherents; and all the Fugitives, Rebels, discontented
persons, and such as were sine spe, and sine re (whereof the number was great)
to be on his side. that al good people were now out of hope ever to have issue
of her body of the Blood Royal by this marriage; and now having their hearts
alienated from her, hereby would cast their eyes and affections upon some other
of her Competitors. That also she could not but highly displease the King of
France, and the Duke his Brother, who after the imploiment of so much time, the
holding of so many Counsels, the sending of such honorable Ambassadors, and the
expenses of so much money, could hardly endure to find himself in fine
derided, what color so ever should be cast over the matter: And to raise money
for the Duke of Anjou, to employ him in the wars of Flanders, assigning him
an annual Pension for the time to come. There remained also a scruple upon her
conscience, that he so deluded of her, might match himself in Spain, and then
she should be in danger on both sides, as well from France, as from Flanders,
as every one could breathe into her ears, and her self presage.

Some thought, that amidst this anxiety of doubtful thoughts which troubled
her mind about this marriage, the necessity of the time and matter, made her
put on a resolution that it would stand more with her honor, and the good of
her Commonweal to live single, then to be married; Reasons dissuading her from
marying.
foreseeing that if she should marry with a subject from such disparitie would
grow disgrace to her self, and kindle heart-burnings, secret displeasures, and
domestique troubles and hatred. If with a stranger, she should bring her self
and subjects under a foraine yoke, and Religion in hazard; remembering withal
how unfortunate that match of her Sister MARY'S with King Philip was, and that
of her great grandfather EDWARD the fourth, who was the first English King,
since the Norman conquest, which took a subject to wife. She feared also to
transfer upon a husband that glory, which whilst she lived unmarried remained
with her entire: withal, she was diuerted in mind from marriage, by reason of
the great perils she should be subject to, by conception, and childbearing, as
diverse women and Physicians bore her in hand.

A book published in print against the marriage.
Her Majesty likewise burned with choler that there was a book published in
print, inueighing sharply against the marriage, as fearing the alteration of
Religion, which was entitled, A gaping gulf to swallow up England by a French
marriage. In this Pamphlet the Privy Counselors which favored the Match were
taxed of ingratitude to their Prince and Country: the Queen as not
understanding well her self, by the way of flattery is tauntingly touched: the
Duke d' Anjou and his country of France in contumelious terms shamefully
reviled: the marriage condemned, for the diversity of Religions, by poisonous
words and passages of Scripture, miserably wrested, would seem to prove that
the Daughter of God, being to match with the son of Antichrist, it must needs
be the ruin of the Church, and pernicious to the State; neither would Queen
ELIZABETH be persuaded that the Author of this book had any other purpose,
but to bring her into hatred with her subjects, and to open a gap to some
prodigious innovation: it being so that she never had respected so much the
power she had over her people as the love they bore to her, and (as Princes
are accustomed) was never more careful then of her royal reputation:
notwithstanding the writer of that book never once made mention of means to
establish in future security her self or Realm, or for avoiding danger, or
how the States of the Land had in former times most importunately persuaded her
Majesty to marriage, to give an assured remedy against imminent evils. And this
she published in writing, The Queens Declaration against this pernicious Libell.
condemning the Author of the Libell, made known the Dukes propensitie of
mind toward her self, and to the Protestants Religion, grieuing to offer
injury to so worthy a Prince, who never had once motioned to have any change in
State, Commonwealth, or Religion. She also commended Sir H. Simier, the
Duke's Agent for his modesty, and wisdom, whom some had before in malignant
speeches calumniated: intimating to the people also that this Libell was a
device of Traitors to stir up hatred abroad, and seditions at home, commanding
it should be burnt in the presence of Magistrates.

Since that, she begun to be the more displeased with Puritans then she had
been before-time, The Author discovered and he that had dispersed the books.
persuading her self that such a thing had not passed without their priuitie:
and within a few days after, John Stubbes of Lincolnes Inn, a zealous
professor of Religion, the Author of this Ralatiue Pamphlet (whose Sister
Thomas Cartwright the Arch-Puritan had married) William Page the disperser of
the Copies, and Singleton the Printer were apprehended: against whom sentence
was given that their right hands should be cut off by a law in the time of
Philip and MARIE, against the Authors of Seditious Writings, and those that
disperse them: Some Lawyers storming hereat, said the judgment was erroneous,
and fetched from a false observation of the time, wherein the Statute was made,
that it was only temporary, and that (Queen MARIE dying) it dyed with her.
Of the which Lawyers, one Dalton for his clamorous speeches was committed to
prison, and Mouson a Judge of the Common Pleas, was sharply rebuked, and his
place taken from him, after that Sir Chr. Wray chief Justice of England had
made it manifest by Law, that in that Statute there was no error of time, but
the Act was made against such as should put forth, or divulge any seditious
writing against the King; and that the King of England never dyed; yea, that
Statute likewise in the first year of Queen ELIZABETH was revived again to
the Queen and her Heirs for ever. Not long after upon a Stage set up in the
Marketplace at Westminster, Right hands cut off.
Stubbes and Page had their right hands cut off by the blow of a Butchers
knife, with a Mallet struck through their wrests. The Printer had his Pardon.
I can remember that standing by John Stubbes, so soon as his right hand was
off, put off his hat with the left, and cried aloud, God save the Queen. The
people round about him stood mute, whether stricken with fear at the first
sight of this strange kind of punishment, or for commiseration of the man whom
they reputed honest, or out of a secret inward repining they had at this
marriage, which they suspected would be dangerous to Religion. These things
passed within a little after the Dukes ariuall in England: and whilst he
stayed here, the Queen to take away the fear conceived by many, that Religion
should change, and Papists should be tolerated by the importunity of Campian
the Jesuit (of whom I have spoken) Ralph Sherwing, Luke Kirby, and Alexander
Brian, who were indicted by an Act made in the 25 of Edward the third, for
attempting the ruin of the Queen and Kingdom: for adhering to the Bishop of
Rome the Queens Adversary; for raising sedition in her Realm, and gathering
forces together, to the utter subversion of her Dominions, of which they were
found guilty and so condemned: for that they obstinately defended the Papal
Authority against the Queen, they were put to death. For Campian then
condemned, being demanded whether Queen ELIZABETH were right or lawful heir?
The Jesuit Edm. Campian with other Priests are put to death.
answered nothing; and again, If the Pope should invade the Land whether he
would take his part or the Queens? he openly said, the Popes, which he
testified under his handwriting* After these, some others were executed for
the like matters, and for ten whole years space together since the Rebellion
but five Papists. But I leave the handling hereof to the Ecclesiastical
History; nevertheless with permission, I will briefly here observe and note
some such occurrences, as are adjoining with those of States. These times were
such, as that the Queen (who was never of opinion that men's consciences should
be constrained) often complained to have been of necessity forced to these
punishments, lest under a pretext of conscience, and Catholic Religion, The
punishing of Catholics needful.
she should endanger her self, and her loving subjects: nevertheless her
Majesty believed not that the most part of these poor and miserable Priests
had plotted the destruction of her country; but that their Superiors made use
of them as instruments of their mischief: for as much as they which were sent,
were wholly subject to the power and authority of them which had sent them.
For when as such as were now and afterward apprehended, were demanded,
Suspicion of them increased.
whether by the Authority of the Bull of Pius the fifth, the Queen of Englands
subjects were so freed of their Oath of Allegiance that they might take Arms
against her? whether they esteemed her a lawful Queen? whether they approved
the opinions of Sanders and Bristow, touching the Authority of this Bull? to
which party they would incline, if the Pope should war against the Queen?
Some of them answered so doubtfully; others with such pertinacy; and some with
such preuarication, By their tergiuersation.
or keeping silence, so mocked the questions propounded to them, that diverse
Papists begun to suspect that they nourished some falsehood: and Bishop
although ingenious, most zealous for the Roman Religion writ against them,
showing that this Cannon which had passed under the name of the Lateran
Council, upon which was absolutely grounded the oath of absoluing subjects
from their Obedience and fealty to their Princes, and for the deposing of them,
was nothing else, but a Decree of Pope Innocent the 3, which never was received
in England, as also that that Counsel was repealed and annihilated, wherein
nothing was done by the Fathers of the same at that time.

The more the number of the Priests coming by stealth into England increased,
the more increased suspicions of them, who secretly practiced to grope the
hearts of men, preached that it was lawful to depose Princes excommunicated,
muttered and murmured, that such as were not of the Roman religion, were to be
deprived of all regal power and Dignity, and that such as had taken religious
Orders were exempt from all obedience to Princes, nor were any such held to be
subject either to them, or their laws. That the Pope had supreme power over
the whole world, yea even in politic affairs. That the Magistrates of England
had no lawful institution, and therefore were not to be obeyed as
Magistrates. False positions spread abroad.
And that whatsoever Queen ELIZABETH had done since the publication of the
Bull Declaratory of Pius the 5, was by the Laws of God and Man disanull'd and
to be held for naught. And some of them denied not in public hearing, that
they were sent for no other causes into England, then to absolve every one
severally and apart, of all oath of fidelity and obedience toward the Queen,
as the Bull had absolved all in general, which they did in taking confessions
of their reconciliation. And this they seemed to do with more ease, in
promising Absolution from all mortal sin; and with more security, because
it was done privately, and under the Seal of Confession.

THE FIVE AND TWENTIETH YEAR of Her Reign. Book 3.
Anno Dom. M.D.LXXXII.
THese and the like things brought upon Papists new and sharper laws, New
Laws against Papists.
made by Act of Parliament at Westminster in the month of January, where all
such were declared guilty of high Treason, which dissuaded any of her Majesty's
subjects from their obedience to their Prince, or from the Religion now professed
in England, or that should reconcile any to the Church of Rome; or which should
have been so persuaded, turned, or reconciled. Two hundred marks fine, and a
years imprisonment inflicted upon those which should celebrate Mass so long
till they had paid. And such as had willingly been at any of their Masses, one
hundred marks, and one years imprisonment: and such as were not found to
resort to their own Parish Churches to divine service, for every months
omission ten pounds. Which was maliciously understood, and interpreted by the
Papists of Lunarie months, who before had paid but one shilling to the poor
for every Sunday or Holidayes absence. But I refer it to the Ecclesiastical
History, to entreat of these things more at large.

The Duke d' Anjou sayleth into Flanders.
The Duke d' Anjou after some three months abode in England, took his way
toward Flanders in the month of February. Queen ELIZABETH in person
accompanied him to Canterbury: and commanded the Earl of Leicester, the Lord
Charles Howard, the Barons of Hunsdon, Willoughby, Winsor, and Sheffeild; Sir
Philip Sidney, Sir Francis Russel, Sir George Bourchier Knights, and diverse
other noble Gentlemen, He is made there Duke of Brabant, etc.
to accompany him to Antwerpe; where he was created Duke of Brabant, of
Lymbourg, Lotharing, etc. For the confederated States of Flanders had from
thence proclaimed the King of Spain fallen from his Principality for infringing
their Laws; broken his Seals, cast down his Arms, and so absolved the
people from all oath of Fealty, so that it was lawful and free for them to
elect another Prince. The Duke permitted all those the use of the Romish
Religion, which would swear Allegiance to him, and abjure the Spaniard. After
this he betook himself to the field, where he lost Aldenard, and took in
Alost. But six hundred English soldiers exclaiming of General Norris his
imperious severity over them, Certain English revolt from him.
forsaking him, fled to the Spaniard, under the leading of Captain T. Norris,
Barney, Cornish, and Gypson, who exposing themselves to all perils, and being
basely respected, were paid with slow and late repentance and infinite
miseries, the pain of their perfidiousnesse. General Norris carries himself
generously, and behaueth himself valorously.


But notwithstanding, General Norris with three hundred horse, and the rest of
his foot-companies, got the renown of a valorous and most judicious Warrior,
for his courageous encountering the Duke of Parma, who fell upon him with a
far greater power, the whilst he warily and wisely made his retreat into the
City of Gand, in sight of the two Dukes of Anjou and Orleans, admiring his
martial valor from off the Ramparts, where they stood to behold him. But why
insist I upon these matters? The Duke d' Anjou having now without success
spent huge sums of money sent him out of England, weighing with himself that
only apparent Titles were bestowed upon him; and considering that all the
managing of these matters were in the power of the States, assayed by a
precipitate counsel, The Duke d'Anjou departed from Flanders with shame.
with his Army to enter by force Antwerpe, and some other towns; but all in
vain, and with the loss of many of his men; and shortly after was constrained
shamefully to quit and leave Flanders.

It shall suffice to note in a word, in passing, that nere unto CHAPELLE in the
month of May, in the 12 degree of Gemini appeared a Comet or blazing star, A
Comet.
with bright shining beams, streaming over the right sholder of the Dragon.
About that time happened a horrible tempest in Norfolk, with fearful flashes
of lightning and thunder of long continuance, with violent furious winds, and
hailstones of three inches about.

Queen ELIZABETH for better security, and to fortify her self the more
abroad against the Spaniard, Queen Elizabeth bestows the Order of the Garter
upon the King of Denmark.
whom she knew to be infest against her, for that she had furnished the Duke
d'Anjou with moneys, admitted into the fraternity of the order of Saint
George, Frederick the second, King of Denmark, who had always showed himself
most affectionate toward her Majesty; and to inuest him therewith, sent over
Sir Peregrin Bertie, whom she (as her Majesty was ever nice in conferring
honors) had with some difficulty, honored with the title of Lord Willoughbey
of Eresby, before he had given any proof of his martial virtue; howsoever the
Duchess of Suffolk his mother was daughter, and sole inheritrix to the
ancient Baronry of Willoughby of Eresby.

The King of Denmark with ioyfulnesse put the Or, the Collar of Esses.
chain of Roses about his neck, and the Garter about his leg, the other
Robes he locked up in his Chest, but refused to put them on, because they were
exotic, or to take the oath; for that he had taken one before, when by the
French King he was installed Knight of the Order of Saint Michael. The whilst
the Lord Willoughby was in Denmark, he propounded to the King a complaint from
the English Merchants, concerning the raising of Imposts and customs, for that
in times past for passing the Oresunde, or straits of Denmark, they used to
give for every ship but a Rose-Noble, which made the fourth part of an ounce of
gold, and as much for the fraught, with some small pieces of silver for the
fire-beacons giving light by night, which were to direct them by their
Sea-markes over the Shallowes, and by the Shelues, banks, and Rocks. The
Merchants complaint not regarded.
He treated also for the Merchants, that the tribute which they call their
LAST GELT might be remitted, by the which they begun (when the Wars were
so hot betwixt the Kings of Denmark and Sueden) to exact, by way of
borrowing, the thirtieth part of all manner of Merchandises, with promise to
repay them, or the value of them again, the war once ended. But these as
matters of importance were referred till another time. For Princes do seldom
or never abate of their Custom, Taxes, or Imposts, esteeming that such things
as these (which they call Royalties) belonging to the rightful liberty of
every Kingdom, are not things subject to be moderated, or abrogated by any
strangers.

The Treaty with the Queen of Scots is deferred.
Queen ELIZABETH the better to secure her state at home, employed Sir Walter
Mildmay to comprimise business with the Queen of Scots. But finding that the
Guises had consulted with certain English Fugitives, about the setting her at
liberty, and gathering forces together, under the pretext of sending supplies
to the Duke of Anjou in Flanders, which in very deed were to have been past
over from the Havens of Aux, or Ew, (obscure harbors of Normandy) into
England, which the French King having notice of, out of his love to Queen
ELIZABETH certifieth her thereof, and stayed them: hereupon the matter was
intermitted, and the Queen of Scots affairs deferred.

But by the way to meet with the Guises attempts in Scotland, Gowry and others
begin tumults in Scotland.
whither it is supposed he employed the Earl of Lennox, to dissolve the League
between the King of Scots, and the English, whilst Will: Ruthen (lately
created by the K. Earl of Gowry) begun to be mutinous. He (for that he
would not degenerate from his Father) bearing a mortal malice to the Kings
Mother, together with others of his confederacy were to put in practice the
best wits they had for the vvorking of the Duke of Lennox and the Earl Arran
both out of the Kings favor and company, under a color of Religion, the Kings
security, and the league of amity with England. Now behold their subtilty and
crafty proiects. They begin to persuade Lennox who had been established L.
High Chamberlain of Scotland, to exercise the rigor of his jurisdiction, though
then out of use, for no other purpose but to purchase his own disgrace with
the people, vvhilest the Presbytery out of their Pulpits should declaime
against him as a Papist of the faction of the Guizes, and a rude and severe
Executioner of the Law; and should publicly foretell and denounce his ruin
and destruction. When as therefore Lennox was departed from Perth where the
King remained, Gowries conspiracy. They intercept the King.
to execute his office at Edinburgh, and the Earl Arran absent from the Court,
Gowrey, Mar, Lindsey, and others, taking their opportunity, invited the King
to the Castle of Ruthen, being there, they held him in such fear that he
durst not walk abroad: such of his servants as he thought best of, they sent
away: the E. of Arran they arrested and cast into prison, The Duke of Lennox
driven out of Scotland
and compelled the King by the intercession of Queen ELIZABETH, to recall the
Earl of Angus out of exile, and to sends the Duke of Lenox into France, who as
he was a Noble man of mild disposition, and altogether inclined to the public
peace and good of the Land, by the Kings persuasion, but their impulsion,
although he might easily have stood upon his guard, and withstood them,
departed quietly from Dunbriton, where he took shipping for France. Not
content with this, they forced the King by his Letters to signify to Queen
ELIZABETH this his interception, and that it was a meeting made by his willing
consent with some of his Lords, concerning special businesses. But Buchanan
they could not possibly persuade to approve this Act, or by composing any book
of this subject, nor by persuasions of a messenger; but he wept bitterly and
sorrowed grievously, that he had to-fore taken the Rebels part against the
Prince, and soon after dyed. A man (as himself sings in his Poems) though
borne in a country barren for learning, yet he attained to the sovereign
degree of Poesy; so as by right he ought to be accounted the Prince of Poets
of our age.

An Embassy from the French King, sent to deliver the King of Scots.
The French King having had certain intelligence of the passages in Scotland,
sends both with one message Mons: de la Moteff through England, and Mons: de
Manninguille by Sea into Scotland, by all possible means to have the King set
at liberty, to confirm the French faction, to draw the King into love and
amity with France, and to let him understand, that his mother to make him be
known true and legitimate King by Christian Princes, and all Scotland, setting
aside all partiality, out of her motherly piety and indulgence yielded him
freely the title of the Kingdom; and admitted him into the society freely to
Reign. She (distressed Queen) in the mean time, afflicted with many
miseries, the calamities of a prison, and in indurance, without hope of
delivery, bewailed the dismal fortunes of the King her son with her own, in
a large Letter written in French to Queen ELIZABETH, which the tender love of
a mother, and the disquietnesse of her Spirit, extorted from her, the which out
of the original Copy of her own handwriting, I have more briefly
recollected, as followed.

AFter I was certainly informed, Mary Q. of Scotland, her Letter to Queen
Elizabeth.
that my son was intercepted and detained in captivity (as my self have
been for some years) a sudden fear suggested into my mind, that he, and I
were to drink of one cup of sorrow: I cannot therefore in opening my sad
afflicted heart, but utter my anguish, to imprint them if it may be upon yours,
offer the same to your conscionable commiseration, that the ages to come may
know my innocence, and their tyranny, by whose means I endure these
intolerable indignities. But for that, their subtle plots and mischievous
practices have all this while been preferred with you before my just complaint,
it being in your gracious power to do equity and justice, where violence
treads down virtue, and might suppresseth right: I do appeal unto God
immortal, whom alone I know to have power over us; Princes coequall in right
and honor, and him (in whom there is no place for fraud, or falsehood) I will
inuoke, that at the last day he will recompense us according to our demerits,
howsoever my Adversaries the whilst have cautelously cloaked their treacheries
from men (and perhaps from you. The Q. of Scots deploreth her sons
intercepting, and her own desolation.
) I beseech you now then in the name of God, and by his all-powerfull Majesty
I adjure you, to call to mind, how cunningly some sent forth in your name to
me, could stir up the Scots my subjects, whilst I lived with them, into open
rebellion against me, and have been the first mouers of all the mischief,
which ever since has happened in that country, as evidently appears by sundry
plain testimonies thereof, and Mortons confession from his own mouth, who for
such matters gr^w up to great honors, whom if I could have prosecuted,
according to his desert; and if your assisting the Rebels had not been they
could never have stood up so long against me, and my friends, as they did.

When I was detained Prisoner in Lake-Leuin, Sir Nich. Throckmorton, was the
first that came to me in your name, who persuaded me to quit the Kingdom under
Letters Patents, signed with my hand (which he assured me should be of no
effect, as all the world knows them so to be) until that you had assisted
the Authors of these Letters, with your favor and Arms. But say in good
sooth, would you acknowledge that your subjects should have such power over
you? The regal power I had in the mean time, by your aid and advice, was
taken from me, to be conferred on my son, a young child, by reason of his
Infant-age unfit to manage the administration of a Kingdom. And when as of
late, I determined to make him a lawful resignation, for the certain
establishing of him in the Kingdom, he was by force of Arms carried violently
away by Traitors; who, doubtless had no other intent, then to deprive him (as
they did me) of the Crown, and perhaps of his life. After I got out of
Lake-Leuin, and was to raise Arms for the suppressing of the Rebels, I sent
you then the Diamond, which formerly you had given me, as a pledge of mutual
love betwixt us, when you made me many large promises, and faithful
protestations to succor and support me against the Rebels, when also you
promised, that if I should come toward you, you would meet me in person upon
the frontiers, and would assist me. I relying upon these promises so often and
so seriously iterated (although your messengers had many times before deluded
me) resolved to resort to you, as to a Sanctuary. And assuredly, I had come,
had I but found the way as open to me, and as easy to pass, as it was for
those who revolted against me. But before I could come at you, I was arrested
upon the way, guarded with troops of men, shut up in strong places, and since
that time have endured things worse then death.

I know you will object some intercourses of business have past betwixt the
Duke of Norfolk and me; but I assure you there has never any thing past,
prejudicial to you or your Kingdom, as also your chief Counselors have
given approbation thereto, as I can prove, who likewise promised me by the way
of attestation to procure your consent. And how I pray you should these so
great persons promise your consent to a thing which might despoile you of
honor, life, and Diadem? And notwithstanding, you would that every one should
be so persuaded.

Besides, as diverse of the Rebels, by a tardy repentance re-aduising
themselves, and by a Commission held betwixt our Deputies at York, understood
how wickedly they had dealt with me, they being besieged with your Soldiers in
Edenburgh-Castle, Lidington and de Grange.
two of the principal dyed miserably; the one by poison, the other in a
halter. And that came to pass, for that twice I had dismissed the Armies at your
request, in hope of peace, which God knows, whether ever my Adversaries once
have thought on.

Since that, I had resolved to try whether patience can have power to conquer
cruelty, in suffering all extremities that can be imposed on a poor Prisoner.
All conference with my son by Letters or Messengers, for this year, has
been denied me, renting if it were possible the son from the mother by a sad
separation of spirits.

I have often propounded Articles of peace and concord to be confirmed betwixt
us at Chatesworth by the most Christian Kings Ambassadors eleven years agone,
both to your Deputies, and to your self, and by my own the last year, I
dealt sincerely with Beal. But these profers were still rejected, delays
interposed, my best meaning ever suspected, and the affection of my
true-intending heart continually condemned. Nor have I reaped any other fruit
by my long suffering, but that by a Prescription, I am daily handled worse and
worse, not indeed as a Prisoner, but as some abject servant of base condition.
But truly I cannot longer endure these indignities, howsoever the matter shall
fall out, if I die, I will manifest the Authors of my death; if I live, I shall
so effect (I hope) that the malicious practices of my Adversaries shall dye,
and pass the remainder of my days in more tranquillity.

Wherefore, to take away all occasions of scandal betwixt us, let the
testimonies of the Spaniards, which were lately taken in Ireland, and all the
examinations of the Jesuits be produced against me. Let me be arraigned
openly, come in who can to accuse me, provided withal I may have the liberty
to defend my self, and not be condemned before I be heard. The malefactors and
vilest Prisoners are permitted to defend themselves and to confront their
accusers. Why then am I denied this lawful liberty, being an anointed Queen,
your nearest Kinswoman, and the next lawful heir to your Kingdom? But this
last is that excruciates my Adversaries, whose chiefest studies are bent to
breed debate betwixt us. Alas, alas! and why should this vex or afflict my
enemies, when as I protest before God, and on my honor, I have not thought
this long time of any Kingdom but that of heaven. Nevertheless, you are bound
by oath, royal duty, and Justice, not to disturb or impeach, after my death,
my sons most certain Right, nor to abett, or aid those which seriously and
secretly labor his ruin, both in England and Scotland, as is too-too well
known by the dealings of your Ambassadors in Scotland, who have dealt (no
doubt without your priuity) most treacherously with me, and all by the Earl of
Huntingdons setting on.

Is there any just dealing in this, that a Mother should not be suffered to
succor her son in distress? nay, not so much as to be let understand how he
does? If such as you sent for my sons good, had taken my advice by the way,
they would have been the welcomer to him, and I the more obliged to you; nor
was there any reason you should so long conceal their goings thither, nor then
keep me so straightly shut up: but to speak freely, I beseech you let no
more such be employed for Scotland. Thus much I dare promise my self, that
Hunsdon will do nothing but that stands with his honor, nor Huntingdon any
thing may tend to my good, for that which he has already practiced against me.

I entreat you therefore by the bond of that consanguinitie which is betwixt
us, to be circumspect for the safety of my son, not to intermeddle your
self with the businesses of Scotland, before you have consulted with me and
the King of France, and hold all those for Traitors which keep my son in
hold, not suffering him to go any where, but at their pleasure. In fine, I
conjure you by the Cross and Passion of Christ our Redeemer, that after so
many years of desolation, I having liberty, may upon just terms, be
suffered to retire my poor weak body into some quiet place out of England,
there to refresh me before my death, after the long and loathsome time of my
imprisonment. This doing, you shall eternally oblige unto you me and mine, but
above all my son. Nor will I ever cease to crave this, till you have granted
it me, my indisposition enforcing this importunity. Let me be used hereafter a
little more gently, otherwise I shall not be able to endure; nor put me off,
to the disposing of any, but of your self. What good or evil hereafter shall
betyde me, I will impute all to you, vouchsafe me this favor, to let me know
your pleasure, either by your letter, or by the French Ambassador. I can repose
no confidence in those things, which the Earl of Shrewsbury has imparted unto
me, they are so mutable. I writ of late to your Council, but you sent me word,
to acquaint none but your self with my business: for there was no equity in
it, in giving them so much power to afflict me. And I cannot apprehend it
otherwise, but that some ill-willers of mine, were the occasioners of it, for
fear that others, duly considering my just complaints, in regard of your
honor, and their duties, should have opposed themselves. And now the last thing
I am to desire, is, that I may have some reverend Catholic Priest to instruct
me in Religion, for the salvation of my soul. This is a last duty not to be
denied to wretches of meanest rank. You suffer the Ambassadors of foraigne
Princes to use their Religion, and my self sometimes have granted toleration
of several professions to my subjects: If this be denied me, I hope to be
excused before God, and I fear mine Adversaries shall not pass unpunished.
Assuredly it will be a president to other Christian Princes to exercise the
like severity amongst their subjects of different Religions, if this be
offered me, an absolute Princess, and of your nearest alliance. As I am, I
will ever be affected to you, in despite of my Adversaries; and stomach they
me never so much. I desire not to have my family increased, but I upon
necessity entreat to retain two of my maid-seruants to attend me in my
sickness: let not mine enemies assuage their cruelty upon me, in causing me to
be denied so small an office of humanity. Whereas I am taxed by the Earl of
Shrewsbury, to have dealt otherwise (then I promised Beal) in surrendering my
title in Scotland to my son, without your priuity: Believe not Beals
suggestions, for I past no promise, but upon certain conditions, which I am
not bound to perform on my part, unless they be performed on yours: I have
yet received no answer thereof, and they have been long time silent; but for
all that, in Scotland they have not ceased their treacherous practizes to the
ruin both of me, and my son; I cannot take this long silence, but for a
denial, and so I have certified your Council by Letters. That which the King
of France, and the Queen his mother have communicated to me, have I sincerely
communicated to you, and required your advice, but you have not vouchsafed me
one word in writing, or by word of mouth: I cannot before I shall know what it
is, submit my self to your Council, concerning my affairs and Country; for
that were extreme indiscretion. You know how my Adversaries triumph in
Scotland both over me, and my imprisoned son: I have attempted nothing in
Scotland to your prejudice, but to stablish a solid peace in the Realm,
having by so much the more a greater care then your Counselors, by how much my
interest there, is more then theirs. I have desired to gratify my son with the
title of King, to confirm him, and to bury all discords. Is that to take the
Diadem from him? But the enemies of me, and my family, will not have it
confirmed: It is that that they dread, whilst they carry in their heart a
witness against themselves, and finding themselves culpable of evils
apprehend they should be dealt with accordingly.

Let not these, and others my adversaries so blind your eyes, that during your
life, and in your sight, they shall bear down your nearest kindred, and
ruinate both the Crowns: as to that end they are plotting villainies against
me, against my son, and perhaps against you also. Can it be any pleasure, or
honor to you, that I and my son, that you and we are by their means so long
seeluded, and kept asunder? Resume your natural goodness and meekness,
oblige your self to your self, and seeing you are a Princess, be tender
hearted to me a Princess, the nearest of your consanguinity, that all things
being set in quiet betwixt us, I may pass the more peacefully out of this
life, and that the sighs and sobbes of my afflicted soul ascend not to God on
high. To whose divine power I present my daily prayers, that these my just
complaints, and sorrowful laments my take place with you.

From Sheffield, 8. Nouemb. 1582. Vostre tres-desolee plus proche parente, and
affectionnee soeur MARIE R:


THE SIX AND TWENTIETH YEAR of Her Reign. Book 3.
Anno Dom. M.D.LXXXIII.
ELIZABETH Queen of England being sundry ways moved with these Letters (after
she had given permission to the French Ambassador La Mottef, together with
Dauison her own Ambassador, to go into Scotland; and had chosen out a time,
wherein he might opportunely meet with the Duke of Lenox unawares, then
returning out of Scotland) she her self kindly received Lenox, The Duke of
Lenox's return through England.
yet gently blaming him for being somewhat slack in the Scottish affairs; and
forthwith sent Beale Clerk of her Privy Council, for the dispatch of her
Letters, (being indeed a man very austere and sharp) to the Queen of Scots,
to manifest the discontent of Queen ELIZABETH at the sight of her complaining
Letters, and by the same means to treat with the Earl of Shrewsbury
concerning her enlargement, because she oftentimes before, with sundry Letters
had solicited for it, and entreated that she might yet at last (her security
being established to her) enjoy her liberty, and be an associate with her
son, in the administration of Scotland.

Upon these things was the Privy Council of England assembled: where after
serious debating, and deliberate consultations, it was at length agreed that
the Queen of Scots should be set at liberty under these following conditions:
It is consulted about the delivery of the Q. of Scots.
THat if she and her son would promise, not to enterprise any thing to the
prejudice of Queen ELIZABETH, or the Realm of England. That she would
confess, that whatsoever Francis the second, King of France her husband, had
undertaken and performed, was altogether against her will and liking; and that
she would disprove and disanull it as unjust. That she would confirm the
Treaty holden at Edenbourgh. That she would freely and ingenuously confess
and discover all other complots and intendments which were since that time
forged; and would utterly condemn the same. That if she would enter into
obligation not to plot or do any thing, directly or indirectly, to the
impeachment of the government, or administration of the Kingdom of England,
either in things Ecclesiastical or Civil; but to resist and hinder all those
that should undertake (in what manner so ever any thing to the contrary, and to
withstand them as enemies. That she would not during the life of Queen
ELIZABETH claim any Right or Title to the Kingdom of England, and after her
death to submit and refer the right of succession to the judgment of the
Estates. If she also, to cut off all equivocations, and mental reseruations,
and to forestall all pretended excuses, (that she as a Prisoner accorded and
condiscended to these conditions, or being in a manner constrained) would
confirm all these by her aoth, and the public authority of the States of
Scotland. If the King likewise would ratify the self-same conditions both by
oath and writing, and for the more assurance would deliver hostages for the
performance.

As concerning the association which the Queen of Scots demanded to have with
her son in the government of the Kingdom, it was holden expedient by the
Council, that the Queen of England should not intermeddle therewith. But if
they could agree upon the association between themselves, then should the
League be jointly treated of with them both; but if otherwise, then apart with
either severally.

Thus these things were debated on; The Scots of the English faction are
against it.
yet without any success. For the Scots which were of the English faction,
altogether rejected them, crying out aloud, that certain Scots sworn enemies
to England, by the Council of the Queen of Scots, were recalled out of
France, and that Holt an English Jesuit was secretly sent into Scotland, there
to attend a fit opportunity to invade England. The English and French in
emulation, strive to obtain the favor of the King of Scotland.
Then there arose strife between Monsieur de La Mottef, and Monsieur de
Maninguill Ambassadors of France of the one part, and Bows and Dauison
Ambassadors for England on the other side, which of them by insinuating should
induce the King to the greater affectation of their Nation, or purchase the
greater number to their party, until at length that with oblique designs they
ingenuously became Counselors either to other. The King himself became as it
were Mediator, and knowing how to temper things honest with things profitable,
without proving any way deficient either to the Church or the Commonwealth,
he wisely endeavored rather to calm the raging storms of these factions then
intermeddle with them. But the Ministers of Scotland, being by a certain zeal
provoked against the French; upon the same day that La Mottef was by the
Citizens of Edenborough invited to a Feast, appointed a Fast; and the whole day
with taunts and mocks, derided and scoffed the King of France, the Duke of
Guise and the Ambassadors. And as the Ministers did this openly; so certain of
the Scotch Nobility, (parties with the English) ceased not to persecute the
French Ambassadors secretly in such sort, that first La Mottef retired
himself, and after him Maninguil; leaving notwithstanding some certain seeds
of discord amongst those who had seaz'd and kept the Kings Person.

The King of Scotland seeks the love of the Queen of England.
As soon as they were departed, the King presented by Colonel Stuart, and I.
Coluil, all affection and service to the Queen of England, requesting her
counsel for the allaying of troubles, and also for the contracting of a
marriage. But then those that were keepers or detainers of the Kings person,
seeing that the French Ambassadors were departed out of Scotland, began to take
courage, which after was increased by the death of the Duke of Lenox: who
finding small comfort from the French King, that then was entangled with diverse
intestine troubles, and striving likewise to please Queen ELIZABETH, The Lord
Esme Stuart Duke of Lenox reputed a Papist by some malicious ill-willer of his,
dyed at Paris a true and sincere Protestant.
departed this life at Paris: and by the testimonies which he gave on his
deathbed, being at the point of death, in the presence of all the assistants,
he declared himself to be truly of the Protestants Religion, confuting and
conuicting the malice of those that had falsely accused him to be a Papist.

This the death of Lenox, much secured those that detained the King, who
rejoiced for the still retaining of him in their power: whereupon they began to
exult. But see, they little suspecting any such matter, the King, although he
had scarce yet attained to the age of eighteen years, disdaining to submit
himself any longer to the rule and government of three Earls, being an
absolute King of himself: as he before-times had given way to the time; so now
finding a time opportune to his purpose, he set himself at liberty, The King of
Scotland sets himself at liberty.
and with a few selected men retired himself to the Castle of Saint Andrews,
taking occasion by a rumor that was spread, that the Nobility disagreeing
amongst themselves, had brought with them several troops of Soldiers into
that part of the Country, there to hold an assembly which he appointed,
fearing lest he amongst these tumultuous iarres should be exposed to some
unexpected danger. And to that effect he dispatched Letters to Queen ELIZABETH,
wherein he promised to entertain a constant league of amity with her, and to
embrace her counsel in the establishment of his affairs; excusing himself
that these things fell out so suddenly, and unawares to him, that it was not
possible for him to give her notice thereof sooner. Afterward, His Majesty
uses kindly those who formerly had seaz'd themselves of his Royal person.
using gentler speeches, and mild persuasions, showing an affable countenance
to those that were his guardians, he admonished them, for the better shunning
of turmoyles, to retire from the Court, promising to them his gracious favor
and pardon, if so be they would entreat it. Of these Gowry only asked pardon,
and submitted himself, using this small distinction, That he had offended not
in matter, but in form. Calls to the Court all such Nobles as stood and were of
his side.
After this, he called back the Earl of Arran to the Court, accepting him for
one of his favorites, much laboring to establish the hearts of his Nobility
in a mutual peace and amity, and to purge both the kingdom and the Court
from intestine iarres and discord.

Whilst he was thus busied continually in these matters, Walsingham is sent
into Scotland from Q. Elizabeth
there arrived at his Court Sir Francis Walsingham, sent from the Queen of
England, out of her earnest love and great care that she always had of him,
lest by ill counsels, being of a flexible age, he should be diuerted from the
amity of England, which would be to the prejudice of both the Kingdoms.
Walsingham at his ariuall found the King accompanied with the chief and flower
of his Nobility, and the affairs of Scotland better settled then he expected.
Being received and admitted, after much discourse he rehearst those admonitio^s
taken out of Isocrates which the Queen before in her letters had instructed him
with: That he which commands ought so to cherish truth, as to give more credit
to its simple affirmation then to the oaths of others: That he should take heed
of evil counselors, remaining still constant and always like himself. The
King of Scotland answers him freely.
The King made this free and hearty reply: That what he writ more then his
thoughts meaning, was against his will, much refusing, yet enforced by the
compulsion of others, that he being a free Prince, ought not to be reduced to
such streights that others should force counselors upon him, whom he
altogether misliked: That he had done nothing but for his own honor and
safeguard: That the pledge of his love, which he before had vowed to his
indeared Sister the Queen of England, he now freely and deservedly offered;
and that now he could produce more fairer fruits of amity, being obeyed of
all his Nobility then before when he himself was made obedient to one and to
another, and ruled as it were rather by entreating, then by power or
commandment.

Walsingham ^emonstrations to his sacred Majesty.
After this, Walsingham requested the King not to impute to Queen ELIZABETH any
thing that had happened in Scotland, showing him how good and profitable their
friendship had hitherto been, and how expedient both for himself as also for
either Kingdom, if so be she suffered no neglect, but were firmly assured;
and if the differences and contentions which happened amongst the Nobility of
Scotland were but for a certain Amnestia abolished by the authority of the
Parliament: that those that were removed from the Court should be taken into
grace: that Religion should be conserved entire in it self; and a firm league
established betwixt the two Kingdoms. Neither was Walsingham any way defective
in the distribution of his money amongst the Kings Officers and Attendants,
that by their means he might effect these things. The King thus modestly
replied: That he willingly embraced the friendship of England, and would not be
wanting in any observance toward the Queen; but most constantly defend the
Religion received. The King answered them.


With this answer he graciously discharged Walsingham, notwithstanding he
suspected him to be transported both against himself, and his mother, and with
an intentive providence, beyond the expectation of his years, The King
propounds a Pardon, to those who had seaz'd themselves of his person
he managed his affairs, and proposed to the great praise of his clemency,
letters of grace to all those that had seized his person, if they within a time
prefixed would come and entreat pardon. But so far they were from asking it,
that they privately took counsel together, and complotted how they might have
him again under their power; which was the cause that he presently commanded
them within a certain time to leave the Kingdom: He commands such as refused
it to void the Kingdom.
whereupon some retired them to one part, and some to another; that is to say,
Mar, Glan, Boide, Zester-wemi, and Loch-leuin into Flanders; Dunfermelin into
France, and Angus was confined to Angus within certain prescribed limits.
Only Gowry hatching in his brains new stratagems, remained in the Realm
beyond the prefixed day; but to his own confusion, as hereafter shall be
recited.

Thus those that before had driven the Duke of Lenox out of Scotland, His
Majesty re-established the Reputation and Honor of the Duke of Lenox, causing
likewise his children to return into Scotland.
were within the revolution of the same year themselves expulst the Land. And
the King to whom Lenox in his life time was much indeared, and beloved, after
his death cherishing the memory of his goodness, he reestablished, and
vnclouded his reputation, by suppressing certain defamatory books, which some
malignant persons had dispersed to eclipse his worth and virtues; he likewise
recalled his children out of France; confirms his son Lodowicke in his
fathers honors; and his daughters after they were grown to ripe years, he
preferred them in marriage; one with the Lord Marquess of Huntley; the other,
with the Earl of Mar. And that he might show himself a King by exercising
in due time his authority, whereas those of the conspiracy had declared in a
public assembly, instituted by their authority, that the arrest and detaining
of his person was justly and lawfully performed, and thereupon enrolled the said
Declaration amongst the public Registers: the King on the contrary, The
Ministers are against the King of Scotlands Authority.
in a general assembly of the Nobility and States, declared that it was
traitorously done. Notwithstanding, the Ministers, as the supreme Judges of the
Realm, pronounced in a Synod conuocated by their authority, that it was most
just, and did hold it fit that those which would not approve thereof, should
undergo the censure of Excommunication.

Q. Elizabeth obtains of the Musconian Emperor a peace for the King of Sweden.
In those days the wars betwixt the Emperor of Muscouia, and the King of
Swethland under the Artique Circle, must not be left to oblivion. John King of
Swethland perceiving his powers far too weak to resist so great an Emperor,
sent in Noble Embassy toward Queen ELIZABETH, H. of Wissembourg his near
kinsman, and A. Rich his Secretary, by Letters to request her Maieesty to
intercede by Embassage to the Emperor for the conclusion of a peace between
them. That Emperor requires an absolute alliance with England, being a suter to
her Majesty, to grant him an English Lady for his wife.
Which she presently undertook, and without delay performed so well, that with
reasonable conditions she induced the Muscouit to a composition of peace: who
forthwith treated with her concerning the alliance, of which I have often made
mention, and that he might be allowed refuge and a retreat into England, if
any disastrous adversity should fall upon him: likewise he desired a Wife
should be given him out of England. But Sir Hierome Bows, Knight, being sent
Ambassador, found it a difficult matter to content the Emperor. For the
Muscouite most importunately labored for an absolute league in such terms as
he himself should set down; Sir Hierome Bows is sent Ambassador to him from
England.
neither would he give any hearing to any remonstrances which he proposed,
that it was not the duty of a Christian, neither would the Law of Nations
permit, that hostile enmities should be denounced, and practiced; or open
wars begun, before the party from whom the wrong proceeded, were admonished
to repair the injury, and desist from it.

The Queen appointed the Sister of the Earl of Huntington to be given as a
Wife to him. But when she was certified, that the Laws of his Country would
permit him at his own pleasure to repudiate and put away his wives; She
excused the matter by the sickliness of the maid, and by the love of her
father, that was not able to bear the absence of his Daughter in a Country so
far distant. And also that it was not in her power to dispose of in marriage,
the daughters of any of her subjects, without their parents consents.
Nevertheless, the Ambassador so far prevailed, that the establishing of the
Merchants privilege, was granted. The Emperor died.
But death taking away the Emperor, the year following, the affairs of the
English began by little and little to return toward Russia, and the
Ambassador returning, not without much danger of his life, was with much
commendation kindly received of the Queen. He was the first that brought into
England, where the like was never seen (if an Historian may with good leave
make mention of so small a thing) a beast called Maclis, which is a creature
likest to an Alce, A certain kind of Dear called Maclis.
very swift, and without joints. And moreover, certain Dear of wonderful
swiftness, which being yoakt and driven, will with much speed draw men up and
down in Chariots like horses.

But to return again to the affairs of Muscouia, Theodore the New Emperor of
Muscouia disallowed the company or Monopoly of Englands Merchants.
Theodore Iohannide, son to John Basil, succeeded in this great Empire; a
Prince by nature of a slow capacity, yet he knew well how to follow the advice
of his best Counselors. He gave free passage to all Merchants of all
Countries into Russia; and being oftentimes solicited by the Queen of England
to confirm the privileges granted by his father to the Muscouian Company of
English Merchants, importing thus, that it might not be lawful but to the
English of the said society, to land upon the North coasts of Russia, and there
to exercise their traffic, without paying of any tribute or custom, because
they were the first by sea that found a way to those parts. He again
requested that all the English in general might be suffered to traffic in
Russia, esteeming it injustice to give leave to some, and forbid others,
saying, that Princes should bear an equal hand amongst their subjects, and
not convert into a Monopoly, or the particular profit of some few men that
commerce by which the right of Nations ought to be common to all. And as for
the custom he promised to take by the half less of them of that society,
then of others. Other privileges he added in favor of the Queen, and not
for the desert (as he said) of that society, of which, some he has observed
that have euilly dealt with his subjects. Other answer could the Queen by no
means procure, or obtain; albeit she afterward sent about the same affairs
Egide Fletcher Doctor of the Law, who set forth a book called, The policy or
tyranny of the Russian, wherein were contained many things worthy observation,
but it was presently suppressed, lest it should breed offense to a princely
friend.

Alberto Alasco a Polonian Nobleman came then to England to see Queen Elizabeth.
The same Summer came from Poland, neighboring upon Russia, into England, to
visit the Queen, one Albret Alasco, Count Palatine of Sirad, a man most
learned, of comely stature and lineaments, wearing his Beard long, richly
clothed, and of graceful behavior: the Queen with much bounty and love
received him; the Nobles with great honor and magnificence entertained him;
and the University of Oxford with learned recreations, and diverse pastimes
delighted him; but after a while finding himself ouercharged with debt, A
wonderful and fearful Earthquake in Dorsetshire.
he privily stole away.

In this year also was seen in Dorset-shire a thing no less prodigious, then
that which was seen in the year 1571 in Herefordshire. A field of three Acres
situated in Blackmore, both with trees and hedges was removed out of its own
place into another, leaving in its stead a huge vaste gappe, but the highway
leading to Cerne shut up; whether this was by some subterranean earthquake,
such wherewith (as Seneca reports) the heads of the gods in the bed of
Jupiter were turned into the contrary parts: or out of too much moistness,
caused by the springs abundantly flowing in those parts, the field being
situate in the side of a Hill, let others make inquiry.

This was the last year to Thomas Ratcliffe, The death of Thomas Ratcliffe,
Earl of Sussex.
being of that Family the third Earl of Sussex, a man of haughty courage,
exquisit counsel, of a singular faith toward his Country, and of an
illustrious Progeny. He had to his Mother the Daughter of the Duke of Norfolk;
for his Grandmother, the daughter to the Duke of Buckingham, Constable of
England. Himself also had past through many great honorable imploiments. As
being sent Ambassador by Queen MARIE into Germany to the Emperor Charles the
fifth, to contract a marriage between her and Philip. Then again into Spain
to the said Philip, there to cause him to ratify the conuented Articles. Also
for Queen ELIZABETH he went Ambassador to the Emperor Maximilian, there
likewise to contract a match between her and Charles Duke of Austria. He was
Lord Deputy of Ireland, Governor of the Northern Provinces of England; also
the Queens Chamberlain, chief Justice in Eire of all her Majesty's Forests,
Parkes and Chases beyond the River Trent; famous for the victories he had
obtained against the Hebrides and Scots that made spoil of the frontiers. Dyed
at London, after he had been afflicted with a long disease, leaving no issue
behind him; albeit he had had two wives, the Lady Elizabeth Wriothesly, and
the Lady Francis Sidney; and his brother Henry succeeded him in the Earldom.

Henry Wriothesly likewise, Earl of Southampton, paid like tribute unto death,
a man much devoted to the Roman Religion, Likewise the decease of Henry
Wriothesly Earl of Southhampton.
and to the Queen of Scots, which he bought with the anger of his Queen, and
restraint or liberty. He was son to Tho: Wriothesly (who for his tried
virtues by Henry the 8, from the dignity of Baron of Wriothesly of Tichfield,
and Knight of the Order of the Garter, was advanced to that sovereign
greatness of being Chancellor of England, and appointed him one of the
supervisors of his last Will. And by Edward the 6, he was graced with the style
of Earl of Southampton.) He left by his Wife, Daughter of Anthony Brown,
Viscount Mountague, Henry his son that succeeded him, and a Daughter married
to Thomas Lord Arundel, Baron of Wardour.

Sir Humphrey Gilbert, Knight, drowned upon the Sea by shipwreck.
About the same time Sir Humphrey Gilbert Knight, a man acute and deliberate,
esteemed industrious both in Peace and War, was by the raging Ocean deprived
of life, returning from the North parts of America, which we call
New Foundland: whither he a little before, having sold his patrimony, made a
voyage in hope to build there a Colonie. And there by the sound of a Trumpet
proclaimed the Country to be under the English regency. It is a most difficult
matter, and a very hard thing to bring the Colonies in far countries.
(For Sebastian Cabot in the year 1497, under the Reign of Henry the 7, made
the first discovery thereof.) And then divided the Land severally to his
companions. But he was taught (too late) by the devouring seas, and default of
means, which forced him to break off his designs, teaching others also by
his example, that it is a matter of greater difficulty, by the expenses of a
private man to plant a Colony in far distant Countries; then he and others,
blind in their own errors, have to their utter overthrow persuaded themselves.

The death of Edmund Grindal, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury
Upon the same instant, Edmund Grindal Archbishop of Canterbury, Metropolitan
and Primate of England, being blind, and aged above sixty years breathed his
last. Who at his return from exile, which he endured under the Reign of
Queen MARY, was first invested Bishop of London, then Archbishop of York, and
finally of Canterbury, living much honored with the favor of Queen
ELIZABETH, until by the foul deceits and treacheries of his enemies he was
suspected to be a favorer of the Conuenticles of those turbulent Ministers,
and such as were called Prophets. But the reason was indeed, because he
condemned as unlawful the marriage of Julius an Italian Physician, with another
man's wife, which much distasted the Earl of Leicester. A wood called Tamarin
first brought into England.
Such small means as he had gathered, he bestowed in the founding of a School
at Saint Be in Cumberland, where he was borne, and to the advancement of
Learning on both the Universities.

The English besides is bound to him for the bringing in of Tamariske, or
Tamarin into England: for having found by experience that it was a sovereign
remedy against the great and indurate passion of the Spleen, he was the
first that caused it to be planted there.

John Whitgift was his successor, John Whitgift is preferred to the
Archbishopricke of Canterbury.
being advanced from the Sea of Worcester, to the Archbishopricke of
Canterbury, a man of singular goodness and learning. He obtained much
commendation for his Justice in the precedencie of Wales, and likewise for his
great doctrine in the defense of the Ecclesiastical policy, which by his
worth, wisdom and patience, he daily increased. The Queen, (who held for a
maxim, that she ought not to be more remiss in Ecclesiastical affairs then
in politic) above all commanded him to re-establish the discipline of the
Church of England, that as then lay dismembered by the conniuency of Prelates,
the obstinacy of innouators, and by the power of some great ones, whilst some
Ministers covertly impugned the authority of the Queen in things
Ecclesiastical, separating the administration of the Sacrament from the
preaching of the Word; using to their own fantasy new rites of services in
their private houses, utterly condemning the Lethargy, and the appointed
manner of adminishing the Sacrament, as being in many things contrary to the
holy Scripture; and therefore many refused to go to Church, but openly became
Schismatics: the Papists all this while applauding them, and drawing many to
their party, as though there had been no unity in the Church of England. To
abolish which things, and to reduce them to an unity: He propounded these
Articles to the Ministers, by them to be subscribed.

He endeavored to unite the English Church.
FIrst, That the Queen had Sovereign power over all those that were borne
within her Dominions, of what conditions so ever they were; and that no other
Stranger, Prince, or Prelate, ought to have any power, either Civil, or
Ecclesiastical, within her Majesty's Realms. Secondly, that the Book of
Common Prayers, and that of the ordination of Bishops and Priests, contained
not any thing contrary to the Word of God, but might be lawfully used; and
that they should use that and no other form of Prayer or administering of the
Sacraments. Thirdly, That they should approve and allow of the Articles of the
Synod holden at London, the year 1562, published by royal Authority, and
should hold them as conformable to the Word of God. But it is incredible what
Controversies and Disputations arose upon this: what hatred and reproach he
endured of the factious Ministers: what troubles and injuries he suffered of
certain Noblemen; who by placing men unfit in the Church increased their
estate, or else had hopes upon the goods of the Church. But by his constancy,
and patience, he overcame all difficulties, using for his Motto this, which he
chose not rashly: Vincit qui patitur.

Neither was the Church only tossed and turmoiled by those people within the
Realm: but by others, who had left the Kingdom; as by R. Brown, a Cambridge
Divine, of whom the new Sectaries were called Brownists: Brownist Schismatiques.
and by R. Harison, Master of an inferior School. For these men presuming to
judge of Religion, according to their own imaginations; by certain books
which they set forth at that time in the Country of Zealand, and dispersed
through many places in England, utterly condemned the Church of England as no
Church. Which books, notwithstanding, were prohibited by Royal Authority,
and strongly confuted by many learned men, and two of the same sect also put to
death at Saint Edmundsbury; yet many were entangled in the snares of this new
Schism.

On the other side, there were certain books, dispersed by certain Papists
against the Queen and other Princes, as excommunicate, which caused diverse
admirers of the Papal power to revolt from her Majesty. Amongst others
Someruille was so far incensed by it, that without acquainting any, he took
his way one day toward the Court, breathing forth threats against the blood of
Protestants, furiously set upon two with his naked sword. And being
apprehended, he protested he would kill the Queen with his own hands:
Whereupon being brought to judgment, and condemned, he accused E. Ardern his
father-in-law, a man of ancient nobility of Warwick, with his wife and their
daughter Someruille, with Halle a Priest, as accomplices in the fact. One
Someruille strangled himself in prison, and Ardern is hanged.
Three days after, Someruille was found strangled in the prison; Ardern being
condemned was the day following hanged and quartered: as for the women and the
Priest, they were pardoned. Every one imputed the bad event of this Gentleman
(who indeed was allured by the deceits of the Priest, and condemned by his own
confession) to the malice of Leicester, which he had incurred by rashly
opposing him in all things he could, misterming him as an adulterate; and
contemning him, as a man newly sprung up of nothing.

The English betray Alost, and do deliver it into the hands of the cruel
Spaniard.
These things were thus carried at home. But it happened abroad about the last
month of this year, that the English which were in Garrison in ( Alost) a
town in the Netherlands, perceiving they were neglected, wanting of their pay;
and being unfurnished of victuals, they were brought into such streights, that
Pigot their chief Commander with the rest of the Captains betrayed the town,
and induced by the promise of certain sums, they delivered it over into the
hands of the Spaniard; A miserable end of Traitors.
and therefore fearing to be disgraced by their own party, they joined
themselves with the Duke of Parma; from whom likewise by little and little
they fell off, after they found his faith failing in every point. But an
unfortunate end betyded to every one of those that were authors of this
treachery. For Pigot retiring into Spain in hope of a recompense, was there by
them both mocked and derided: so returning into the Low Countries, was by his
Countrymen apprehended, and sent into England, where he miserably dyed in
prison. Datton from a Traitor turned Pyrat, The Earl of Desmond is killed.
and was hanged in England: Vincent likewise in Brabant. Tailor was struck
through the body by the Earl of Westmerland. And Walsh after he had been
oppressed and beaten with infinite miseries, was murdered in France. Thus God
the revenger of all Traitors, follows Treason at the heels. As Ireland the
same year by many notable examples could witness:

For that famous Rebel, and Traitor to his Country, Gerard Fitz-Gerard, or
Geraldide, the eleventh of that Family, Earl of Desmond; after that his men
(who had miserably vowed sooner to renounce God then forsake him) were consumed
by sword and famine; he fled into certain unfrequented Caves where he lived;
frustrating (almost by the space of two whole years) the hope of the English
that sought to apprehend him: at length he was discovered by a common
soldier, who not knowing him, had almost cut off one of his arms: whereupon
he disclosed himself, and was, after he had received many wounds upon his
body, slain; his head was sent into England, and there placed on a pole upon
London Bridge.

The like unfortunate end happened to a man of great power in Ireland, extracted
of the line of Maurice son to Gerald of Windsor, an Englishman, a warrior
most famous amongst the chief that brought Ireland into subjection, in the
year 1570, possessing great Lordships, even whole Provinces, with Kerria which
is a County Palatine, and diverse Castles, having under his command many
land-holders; besides 500 Gentlemen at the least of his own kindred and name.
Of all that, and more, of his life also, he was deprived, leaving only some few
of his family behind him: this his own and his friends ruin, he himself
procured, by violating his faith, which he ought to his Queen by the
persuasion of certain Priests. Nicholas Sanders, an English Seminary Priest
affamisht himself.
Amongst which one Sanders an Englishman was the principal, who dyed for
hunger almost in the same instant, being left of all friends, and distracted
from his senses by reason of the cross success of the Rebels, contrary to
his expectation, wandering through Woods, Groves and Mountains, finding no
succor or relief. After his death were found in his pocket sundry Orations
and Letters written to confirm and harten the Rebels: stuffed with large
promises of the Pope and Spaniard. Thus the divine Justice of God (if it were
lawful to judge) closed up his mouth with hunger, which was always open to
stir up and move rebellions, and to vomit forth slanders and lies. For he was
the first (to pass over other things) that raised and dispersed that horrible
slander of the birth of Queen ELIZABETH'S mother; which thing was not to any of
those times known, only the hate of the Papists began to manifest it self
against her; neither was it heard of in England for the space of forty years
after, but the circumstance of time, does plainly convict him of falsehood an
vanity, and himself also not agreeing with his own sayings (as it behooves
a liar) does argue the same. Yet there be some distempered spirits that blush
not to stain their Papers with this most impudent lie and slander.

Jacob Fitz-Eustace.

Vicount of Balting glass fled away out of Ireland.
That is to say the son of Eustace, Viscount of Baltinglas, a man of great
esteem amongst the Nobility of Ireland; being terrified with the tragical
successes of these men, took his flight into Spain; where after a long and
languishing grief he yielded up his Ghost. Having before through the zeal
which he bore to the Roman Religion taken up arms with the Rebels against his
Princess; and in a kind of obscure breuity, writ to the Earl of Ormond his
neighbor decended from Saint Thomas of Canterbury, inciting him to do the
like, in his exhortation amongst other he used these words. If Saint Thomas of
Canterbury had not suffered death for the Roman Church, you had never been
Earl of Ormond. For Henry the second to expiate the murder of S. Thomas
bestowed large possessions upon his Ancestors.

Sir John Perot is made Lord Deputy of Ireland.
Sir John Perot,

Knight, who to his great praise had been Governor of Mounster; being this
year created Viceroy, or otherwise Deputy of Ireland, and presently after
received the sword of Justice; he assembled the States of the Land to the
holding of a Parliament, in which certain Laws were enacted; that the Earl
of Desmond which was slain a space before should be condemned of Laesae
Maiestatis, and all the possessions as well of him and others of the Rebels in
Mounster confiscate. Which the Queen set to sale at a very low and small
price; that she might inuit laborers and husbandmen to them, lest such
fertile grounds should be untilled, and altogether waste (for the rebellion
had spoiled and deuasted the same.) But some of those that had Commission for
the enquiry and searching out of the possessions of the Rebels, and others that
were to prize and set the same to hyre, Laboring men are sent into Ireland.
began to expel and chase from their possessions with such violence those who
were true subjects, that the Queen was constrained to repress them by an
Edict, lest the violent avarice of some particular men might kindle and inflame
a new rebellion* In which the Viceroy took much laudable pains; although by
the English he was accused and blamed, for being too indulgent and favorable to
the Irish, and too too rough to them. But he equally distributing justice to
either part by favoring as well the Irish, as the English, brought the
Province into a most desired tranquillity, and with a mild and gentle command
subjected to the obedience of the Laws, the most barbarous inhabitants of the
same: holding the Scotchmen of Hebrides, The gesture and behauiours of John
Perot Viceroy of Ireland.
that from their Islands did break into Ireland, to a hard task. And enforced
Donel Gormi (that is to say blue) with his brother Mac-Conel, who had possessed
themselves of the little Country of Glinnes, and Surley-boy, (that is to say,
Red) their Uncle, that had invaded the Country of Rout, neighboring and
adjoining to the Island Richnee, now called Raclis, to such a point, that after
many of their kindred were overcome and slain by the valorous exploits of
Captain Meriman, they received the oath of allegiance to the Queen, accepting
from her Majesty certain Lands in that corner, under conditions that they
should serve the Kings of England only in their wars, and not any other
whatsoever without their permission: that they should furnish forth upon any
expedition a sufficient number of horse and foot; and that a certain number of
Beeues and Hawks should every year be truly paid. Thus much for what has
past in Ireland.

Book 3.
THE SEVEN AND TWENTIETH YEAR of Her Reign. Anno Dom. M.D.LXXXIV.
Troubles in Scotland.
DIVERSE Scots that had compacted with Gowry, who now again was plotting of new
stratagems to get the King of Scots into his power, secretly returned from
Ireland into Scotland upon the entry of the Spring. There they protested
openly, that their intent was only for the honor of God, the truth of
Religion, and to secure the King, the Realm, and the League with England,
against those that with wicked devices would seduce the King, not being as yet
of sufficient age. The King having notice of these things, he forthwith
commanded Colonel Stuart to apprehend, before all, Gowry the chief Architect
of the conspiracy, who presently retired himself to a Port called Dundey, as
though he would have departed the Kingdom, where he knowing himself guilty,
despising the Kings authority, obstinately withstood them, and defended
himself in his lodging: but after two hours, he was apprehended, and led to
prison. The Earl of Gowry is taken.


In the mean while the Conspirators surprising the town of Sterlin, they
constrained the Castle to yield. But understanding that the King was marching
toward them in person with an army; and finding themselves but weakly
accompanied, in respect of the number, which Gowry had promised them; also in
vain attending succors out of England, they forsook their hold. And as every
one being full of fear, sought to shift for himself: the Earls of Mar, The
conspirors are dispersed.
Glan, and Angus holding together, with others took their flight through many
by-ways into England: humbly requesting the Queen to relieve them in their
afflictions, and be an intercessor for them to their King, Queen Elizabeth
succoureth some of them.

The King demands them by the League,


seeing that they were deprived both of their fortunes, and the Kings favor,
by endeavoring for the good of her and her Kingdom. The King on the contrary
accused them to the Queen of many heinous things, demanding according to the
league of alliance between them, that they might be delivered into his hands.
But there were some about the Court that persuaded the Queen that they were
men most obedient to their King, and most desirous of his welfare; but in vain.
that having him under their custody and power, yet never attempted any thing
against his state or person; and that law which was usually expressed in
leagues concerning the delivery and restoring back of Rebels, was long since
abolished and out of use amongst Princes. These men also endeavored to persuade
the King of Scots that he should deal more mildly and gently with men of such
and so great rank, and not to drive them (as it were headlong) through
despair to more bad designs. Remonstrating to him, that terror and violence
were but feeble and unhappy props of power, alleging to that end two
tragical examples drawn out of the Scottish History, attributing great
praises to his mother, and Francis her husband, that at the first rising of the
French civil war, past over the injuries and offenses of the Nobility without
regard.

Walsingham favors the fugitives. Hunsdon against the^.
Walsingham, that studiously favored the fugitives, by letters commanded that
they should be received into the Island called the holy Island; but Hunsdon
(who showed himself a greater friend to the King of Scots then any other)
opposed it, because the jurisdiction of the place appertained to him, as
governor of the East frontiers, he thought it altogether unfit, that any
entrance should be permitted to the Scots in a place of strength, neither would
he obey the letters of the Secretary without express command from the Queen.
Controversy, or the power of a Secretary argued.
From hence arose a controversy, whether a Secretary could by his authority
direct or execute the affairs of his Prince, without receiving special
command from him, and without the counsel of the governor of the place: What
was determined thereupon is not manifest, but the Scots were not admitted into
the Isle. Nevertheless it was esteemed expedient, that they should be in some
sort favored, to oppose the contrary faction which arose in Scotland, which was
that the Ministers had spread and rumored abroad, that the King was about to
forsake his religion, but they could not produce or allege any argument
probable (although they had framed many, but only that he was wholly
transported with a filial love toward his mother, and received as a most
indeered to him, those which he knew were affectionate to her.

The arraignment of Gowry.
In the mean space Gowry was brought to judgment before the Peers at Sterlin.
And was accused to have plotted a new conspiracy against the King after he had
been confined prisoner to his house: Notwithstanding that the King had lifted
him up to great honors, riches, and Commands, and accounted of him as a
kinsman. To have consulted by night which the servants of Angus for the taking
of Perth and Sterlin. To have resisted by force of Arms, the authority royal
at Dundey. To have concealed the conspiracy which was complotted to ruin the
King, and the Queen his mother. And lastly, To have consulted with the
sorceresse Maclene. To all this he pleaded innocence, He defends his own
cause.
and an unspotted faith toward the King. He acknowledged the benefits which
he had received. He complained bitterly of the Earl of Arran as his enemy,
and one thirsting for blood, saying that he was apprehended by his cunning
policies, being upon the point of departure out of the Kingdom, and by him was
with the hope both of life and grace which he promised him, so far allured
and treacherously ouer-reacht that he confessed all that was objected to him:
and therefore those things ought not in right and equity, or any consequence,
be brought against him, being by treachery and deceit extorted from him. As for
the resistance which he made he excused, because he persuaded himself that
the letters of protection, sealed with the Kings great Seal, which he had
with him, were of greater consideration and value, then which the Earl of
Arran had written with his own hand for his apprehending. He likewise
answered that he was not so much blameworthy, in concealing for so short a
time the conspiracy against the King and his Queene-mother, as he deserved
praise at last for disclosing of it. And finally, protesting, that from his
heart he utterly hated all witches and sorcerers, he openly said, that if
there were any at all, he verily believed that they lived in the Courts of
Princes. The Peers, after they had according to the custom sworn, that they
had in no ways moved or incited the Kings Advocate to accuse him, they
pronounced him guilty of Laesae Maiestatis, He is beheaded.
and in the end his head was cut off, which by his friends was presently taken
and stiched to the body, and so buried.

Even in the same time whilst these Scots enterprised these things against
their King, in the service (as they pretended) of Queen ELIZABETH, to their
own ruin. Certain English likewise to do service to the Queen of Scots,
began to plot against their own Queen things of no less weight, and attended
on with the like bad success. Of which was chief Francis Throckmorton eldest
son of John Throckmorton Judge of Chester, The treason of Francis Throckmorton.
but by devices of Leicester he was degraded, and punished, because that (if I
fail not in these law matters) he had stuffed and corrected in many places a
copy of judicial transaction taken out of the original which was corrupted,
and did not present it with all faults and defects. This Francis became first
suspected by reason of letters which he had written to the Queen of Scots, and
were intercepted: and therefore he was clapped into prison, where he beginning
to confess, The Lord Paget retyreth into France. The complaints of the
Catholics.
Thomas Lord Paget and Charles Arundell a Courtier secretly left their Country,
and fled into France, where they with others zealous in the Roman Religion
bitterly deplored their misfortune; complaining amongst themselves that by the
means of Leicester and Walsingham, they had without any desert utterly lost the
favor of their Queen, that they were unworthily afflicted with injuries and
opprobries, that many stratagems were devised against them, and diverse snares
laid, to force them against their own wills and intentions to run into the
crime of Laesae Maiestatis: neither was there any hope of help or succor left
for them within the Kingdom. And surely at that time, that they might with
more ease sound the minds of men, there were put in practice many fraudulent
devices; counterfeit letters were suborned, in the name of the Queen of Scots,
and the rest of the fugitives, with their hands fasly thereto subscribed, and
these were cast into the houses of the Papists. Spies are suborned.
Spies were likewise sent forth to gather the dispersed rumors, and captate
scattered speeches. Then reporters of tales and falsities were accepted and
welcomed; and many were suspected: but amongst others the Earl of
Northumberland, and his son; the Earl of Arondell, Many suspected.
who was co^fined to his house, and his wife which was given in keeping to
Shirley; G. Howard brother to the Earl; and H. Howard their Uncle, brother to
the Duke of Norfolk; who was oftentimes examined about Letters written from
the Queen of Scots; Charles Paget, and a certain fellow as then unknown
called Mopus: and notwithstanding he was wise and innocent, yet he had much to
do to defend and warrant himself from their traps. Neither were these
artificial policies, and easy credulities to be holden or esteemed, as
things vain; when the matter lay upon the safeguard of the Queen. For then
the detestable malice of the Papists began to manifest it self, The malice of
the Papists against the Queen.
publicly divulging books, wherein they exhorted the servants of the Queen
to do by her as Judith to her immortal fame dealt with Holofernes. The Author
of these books could not certainly be discovered; but the suspicion lighted
upon one G. Martine of Oxford, a man well learned in the Greek and Latin
tongues; and one Carter a Booke-binder, because he caused them to be imprinted
was put to death.

And forasmuch as by these books the Queens honor was much distained, The
clemency of the Queen toward the Papists.
and she rumoured abroad to be tyrannous and cruel; She which above all
things labored and studied to leave to the world a happy memory of her
goodness; She was much moved and incensed against those that had knowledge of
the causes which thus provoked the Papists, as barbarously cruel, and
injurious to her honor. Insomuch that they found it needful for them, to
excuse themselves by divulged writings, importing these protestations of their
part.

THat they had always entreated the Priests in a more milder fashion then they
deserved, neither ever urged any questions to them concerning Religion; but
only of their pernicious machinations against their Prince and Country; moved
by strong suspicions with probable signs and arguments thereto. That Campian
was never so extremely tortured, but that he was able to walk and subscribe
his hand to his confessions. But Brian refusing either to speak or write his
name that was author of those mystical writings which were found about him,
was kept from all food, until by writing he demanded it. But this yielding no
sufficient satisfaction to the Queen, she commanded the Commissaries that were
appointed for criminal proceedings, that is to say, the examiners, to abstain
from tormenting, and the Judges from punishing. And a short while after, those
seventy Priests, whereof some were condemned to be put to death, and all of
them had incurrred the censure of the Law, she caused to be banished out of
England; Priests are banished.
amongst which, the most eminent were G. Heywood, son to that famous
Epigrammatist, the first Jesuit that entered into England; I. Bosgraue a
Jesuit also; I. Heart, of singular learning above the rest; and E. Richton that
monster of ingratitude, who presently after, vomited up the poison of his
malice against the Queen, to whom he was indebted for his life, and published
it in open writing.

Edward Stafford Ambassador for the Queen in France, diligently observed,
Fugitives demanded of the King of France.
how the Baron of Paget and Arundell were arrived in France: But could not
penetrate into their designs. Nevertheless he solicited the King of France
to expel as well them as Morgan and other English that were confederates and
complotters against their Queen and Country. But his answer was: The answer of
the King of France.
THat if they did plot or enterprise ought in France, the King according to
equity would chastise them; but whatsoever they had done in England, the King
would neither enquire after, nor execute the Law upon them. That all Kingdoms
were free, and open to fugitives, and that every King should labor to defend
the liberties of his Kingdom: That ELIZABETH her self had not long before
received into her Realm Montgomerie, the Prince of Conde, and others of the
French Nation. And that (at that time) Seguri the King of Navarre his
Ambassador, remained in England, plotting new devices against the King of
France.

Whilst these things past on, Bernardin Mendoza Spaines Ambassador in England,
secretly past into France, murmuring and raging, as if he, contrary to the
right of Ambassie, had been forced out of England; being indeed a man of
violent and turbulent nature, and having himself abused the holy and sacred
rights of Ambassadors, did deserve (according to the opinion of many) after the
ancient severity, to be pursued with sword and fire: He was commanded to
depart the Realm, because he had intermixed himself amongst those wicked
conspiracies, with Throckmorton, and others, The Spanish Ambassador sent out of
England.
that labored for the bringing in of Strangers into England, and dispossessing
of the Queen: for which being gently reproved, he in stead of excusing and
purging himself by a modest reply, accused the Queen and her Council about
the money which was detained from the Geneuois, for the aid and succors which
were sent to the States of the Netherlands, to the Duke of Anjou, and to
Antonio King of Portugal, and also for the Pyracies of Drake. But lest the
King of Spain should think the rights of Embassy were violated by this, and
not the offense of Mendoza revenged, W. Waade is sent into Spain.
Waade one of the Queens Council for the expedition of Letters, was
dispatched into Spain, there plainly to demonstrate how mischieuously Mendoza
had behaved himself in his Embassage. And to signify likewise, lest the
Queen should be thought by returning of Mendoza, to renounce the ancient
friendship between the Kingdoms, that she was ready to perform all Offices of
humanity toward him, if the King in Mendoza's place would send any other more
careful for the maintaining of friendship provided that the like might be
performed to her Ambassador in Spain. Is not receiued^
But the King disdaining to receive or confer with Waade, referred him to his
Council. Whereat Waade somewhat incensed, boldly declared, that it had been
an ancient custom over all, that the Ambassadors should be admitted to speak
in presence even of their enemies, and in time of War. And that the Emperor
Charles the fifth, father of the King, gave admittance to the Herald that
denounced war against him from the King of France, refusing to impart to the
Council the tenor of his Ambassie. Now Idiac Secretary to the King of Spain
endeavored himself much to come to the knowledge of those matters, but his Art
and policies failing him, he was fully instructed out of France of the whole
passage by Mendoza. Whereupon laying aside the quality of a public person, he
familiarly declared to Waade, that to his grief he saw many men which bent
all their studies to break and sever with mischievous devices the Leagues and
amity of Princes and to increase their enmities. That the injury was done to
the King of Spain himself, and not to Ambassadors: first on the person of
Dispez, and then of Mendoza. That there was no reason why he should any more
accuse Mendoza to the King, that had received for his fault (if he committed
any) sufficient punishment, being so ignominiously and disgracefully sent
back. That the Catholic King had dealt justly in rendering like for like;
and as the Queen had dismissed Mendoza without hearing, but appointed him to
be heard by her Council, the King in like manner had appointed him to the
Cardinal Granuellan. To this Waade made answer, that there was a large
difference between himself that had never given the least distaste to the
Catholic King, and Mendoza who had highly and grievously offended the Queen,
having insolently, a great space, disdained and refused to come near her, and
committed many things unfitting and unworthy an Ambassador. Notwithstanding all
this, Waade could not be admitted but returned into England without being
heard. All those crimes for the most part which were objected against Mendoza
were taken out of the confession of Throckmorton.

For when Throckmorton saw himself at the point of being apprehended; he sent
unto Mendoza a little trunk, wherein were contained his secrets; nevertheless
his other trunkes being diligently searched, there were found two Catalogues;
in one of which were contained the names of the Ports which were most
appropriate and convenient for the landing of their troops; in the other, the
names of such Noblemen in England, as did entertain and embrace the Roman
Religion. Which Catalogues when he saw produced, he cried out aloud, that they
were things suborned, and that he never saw them before that time; and that
they were purposely inserted into his trunk by some that plotted his
destruction: and being tortured to force him confess, he still persisted: but
tortures being applied the second time, he confessed all that he knew; and
being examined touching the Catalogues to what end they were written, he made
this Declaration.

THat a few years since taking his journey to the waters of Spaw,
Throckmortons confession.
with one Ieney and Englefield, they consulted among themselves of the means
by which England might be invaded of the strangers, and the form of the
government changed, and to that end the names of the Ports and Noblemen were
set down in those Catalogues. That Morgan had signified to him by Letters out
of France, that the Catholic Princes had already deliberated upon the
invasion, and by the auspicious succors of the Duke of Guise to set at
liberty the Queen of Scots, the Guise wanting nothing but money and some
helping hands in England. That to procure these things C. Paget under the
assumed name of Mopus, was sent into Sussex, where the Guise had determined
first to land his troops. That he had communicated the business, and showed
the names of the Ports and Noblemen, to Mendoza, who was now perfectly
instructed by the rect of the conspiracy. Neither does he deny that he had
promised his own help and industry. And had also advertised Mendoza with what
Noblemen being a public personage, he might confer with; with whom, he
himself being but a private man, could not without danger hold parley. And
with him found the means by some of the principal Catholics, to take up
soldiers in the Queens name, then when the stranger forces should ariue, to
be joined with them. These things he freely confessed. He denies all.
Nevertheless being accused publicly in the Court at London, he precisely
denied all, affirming that he had spoken out of his own invention and not the
truth, only to free himself from the tortures again; and openly accused the
Queen of cruelty, He seeks an evasion.
and those of the Inquest of falsehood, framing an evasion for himself out of
the distance of time which had passed between the Commission of the fact, and
Judgment. For in the 13 year of Queen ELIZABETH, certain offenses were
inserted into the rank of those of Laesae Maiestatis, for which no man cold be
brought to judgment, if the delinquent were not accused within six months
after he had offended, and the offense also verified by the oath of two
witnesses, or the confession voluntary without constraint by force or violence.
That the time was long since expired, therefore he ought not to be produced
to judgment. But the Judges showed him by ample demonstrations, that the
crimes of which he was accused were of another quality, and therefore by
virtue of an ancient Law enacted under the Reign of EDWARD the 3, he was found
culpable and guilty of Laesae Maiestatis, which does not admit any limitation
either of time and proof; whereupon the fatal sentence was pronounced against
him. But he persuading himself of the mercy of the Queen, Being condemned he
inlargeth his confession. About to d^e he denies all.
by writing again confessed all, in more ample manner then he had done
before, all which, through his inconstancy, coming to the Gibber, he utterly
denied, but it was all in vain and to no avail.

William Waad being returned out of Spain, was about this time sent to the
Queen of Scots, for the holding of a treaty between her and Mildmay, which
two years since was propounded, and broken off, as already has been showed.
She protested to him by diverse oaths that she had seriously labored to effect
it: A new treaty with the Queen of Scots.
and also devoted to Queen ELIZABETH, both herself and all her best
indeauors, promising wholy to depend of her, if she would vouchsafe to favor
her with such and so great love and honor: To these she faithfully promised,
that if so be this treaty might proceed, she would make intercession to her
son, and so effectually, that he should receive into his gracious favor Angus
and the rest of the Scottish Nobles, and the Bishops of Rosse and Glasco their
agents in France, should not complot or enterprise any thing against the Queen
or Realm of England, and that they should from thenceforth cease from the
faction of the English rebels and fugitives.

Queen ELIZABETH joyfully received these news, and seeing that the Earls of
Angus, Mar, I. Hamilton, and Glam, remained at that time fugitives in
England, she made use of proffered occasion, and sent Beal, with the Earl of
Shrewsbury to the Queen of Scots, to signify to her, that if she still
persisted in the same opinion which she had declared to Waad, then Mildmay
should presently be with her, to conclude for her enlargement. And that they
should work so far with her, that in the interim she would be an
intercessor to her son the King, for the restoring of the fugitives, and to
persuade him that they had not enterprised any thing against his Majesty,
Propositions made to her.
but only against certain rash Counselors, that with their wicked and
perverse Counsels would corrupt his goodness; And finally, that they should
sound her as much as possible they could, concerning the practices of the
Guise, to which (being a woman of a prudent understanding) she made this answer.

She answers.
THat she desired nothing more then that the treaty might proceed, and
earnestly requested the same of the Queen as of her elder sister, to whom she
should give all respect and honor. That she had not spoken any thing to Waade
but under certain conditions, and she persuaded herself that he was a man
freely honest and just, and would not speak otherwise. As for the restoring of
the fugitives, she thought her help very behouefull, and would not fail
therein, if there would redound or to her, or to her son any profit or good,
and if they would with all humility submit themselves to the King, and yield
obedience to him: but if not, that the Queen would not assist them, but her
son, that they might be reduced into order. Furthermore not to dissemble,
That she when she was in a sickly estate, committed herself and her son, to
the faith of their near kinsman, the Duke of Guise: but as for his
undertakings against the Queen she was altogether ignorant; neither, if she
had full knowledge thereof would she reveal ought, except she might be
certainly secured of her liberty, knowing it to be but a small sign of wisdom
to forsake certain friends for uncertain hopes. She entreated that she being
a free Princess might not be more cruelly dealt withal, then was Queen
ELIZABETH being a subject and imprisoned by her sister Queen MARIE: or then
the King of France not long before dealt with Navarre, being his subject and
rebelling against him. She desired also, that the treaty might be brought to
some end, before any messenger were sent into Scotland about those affairs.
And forasmuch as the most Christian King had acknowledged her ordinary
Ambassador, She demands to be associated in the Kingdom with her son.
and Seton whom her son sent into France, to be Ambassadors from Princes of
equal and the same authority, she requested the Queen giving her that honor
that she would, without any prejudice, cause that association of her and her
son to be published in Scotland. These things had a good hearing, The treaty
dissolved by surmises.
but soon by objections of fears frustrated, which were interposed by those
that well knew how to increase hatred between incensed women: but above all,
by produced papers, which Chreicton a Scottish Jesuit, sailing into Scotland,
and being apprehended by certain Pirates did tear in pieces. But these torn
Papers being cast ouer-boord, were by a wind (as Chreicton also verified)
miraculously blown into the ship again; and by Waad with great labor and
artificial skill were collected and joined together, wherein were discovered
new counsels and plots of the Pope, Spaniard, and Guise for the inuading of
England.

This and the various rumors of imminent dangers that were dispersed abroad,
were the causes, that to cut off the way to all wicked designs, and ambushes
of sedition, and to provide for the safety of the Queen, upon whom both the
Realm and Religion depended; by the device of Leicester, most men of all
estates and conditions through whole England, which were not possessed with fear
of her, but for her, did bind themselves by a general love with their mutual
vows, subscriptions, An association begun in England.
and seals in a certain association to persecute withal their powers even to
the death all such (whatsoever they were) as should plot or attempt any thing
against her.

The Queen of Scots easily understood, that in this general Association her
own ruin was comprehended: therefore being wearied with her long continued
misery, The Queen of Scots makes new propositions.
and fearing yet worse, She made this proposition by Naue her Setary, to the
Queen and her Council.

THat if she could obtain her liberty, with an evident testimony of love and
sincere affection of the part of Queen ELIZABETH; She would contract and
confirm a most straight League of amity with her, and most officiously cherish
and affect her above all Christian Princes, and blot out of her memory all
injury and offenses. She would acknowledge her the true and lawful Queen of
England, and never pretend or take upon her any claim or right to the Crown
during her life, neither would she ever enterprise any thing either directly
or indirectly against her; but for ever renounce all interest in the title and
Arms of England, which by the command of Francis her husband, and the Popes
Bulls of deposition, she arrogated unto her self. Yea furthermore, would be
included in that association, and defensive League for the Queens saueguard,
without prejudice to that ancient alliance which has been between France and
Scotland. Provided that nothing be enterprised, during the life of Queen
ELIZABETH, or after her death, to the prejudice of her, her son, and their
heirs in the succession, before it were first declared before the assembly of
the Estates of England. She would for the confirmation of these things, remain
in England for a time as a pledge, and if so be she might be permitted to
depart out of England, she would leave other hostages. Furthermore, she would
not alter any thing in Scotland, only she desired that she and those of her
Family might be suffered to have the free use of their Religion, in her own
house. She would forget and forgive all injuries, which she had received in
Scotland (with this condition) that whatsoever had been raised to her infamy
and disgrace, might be abolished. She would recommend to the King such
Counselors as she knew to be studious of peace with England. She would
reconcile the fugitive Noblemen, if it were possible for her: if also they
would submissiuely acknowledge their fault, and if the Queen of England would
promise to assist the King against them, if after their reconciliation they
should fall from obedience. As for the marriage of her son, she would do
nothing without the priuitie of the Queen. She desired that because she would
do nothing without the counsel and consent of her son, he might be joined
in this treaty for the more solid and firm assurance thereof. She doubted
not, but the King of France would intercede, and conioyntly oblige his faith
with the Princes of Loraine to entertain and effect the conuentions thereof.
She entreats for a mature and happy answer, lest any discommoditie or
hindrance should fall between. And finally; requested that she might be
allowed a little more liberally in her imprisonment, whereby she might
clearly perceive the love of the Queen toward her. Queen ELIZABETH seemed
to take a great delight in these things, as being full of courtesy and honor,
and was then almost persuaded to grant her liberty: but there were some in
England that with new propositions and apprehensions of strange doubts, did
dissuade her. But the matter being almost known all over, The Scots of the
English faction oppose them
those Scots of the adverse faction did labor to trouble and hinder the same,
Crying out, that it would be the final ruin of Queen ELIZABETH'S safety if
she were set at liberty, of both the Kingdoms, if she were admitted to the
administration of Scotland conioyntly with her son: and lastly of the true
Religion through Great Britain, if she were only permitted to exercise the
Roman Religion.

The insolency of the Scotch Ministers.
Not contented with this, certain Ministers in Scotland after they had charged
the Queen with slanders and calumnies, even in their Pulpits and common
assemblies, they vehemently and bitterly exclaimed against the King and his
Counsel: whereupon being commanded to appear before them, with disdain and
contempt they refused it. As if the Pulpits were exempt from the authority of
Kings, and Ecclesiastical persons subject not to the command of the Prince,
but of the Presbytery; Against the Laws.
contrary to the Laws enacted the same year by the assembly of the estates,
wherein was confirmed the Kings authority for ever over all his subjects, as
well Ecclesiastical, as Laymen, that is, the King and his Council to be fit
and competent Judges in all causes; and whosoever denied or refused the same,
to be holden guilty Laesae Maiestatis. Ecclesiastical Laws of Scotland.
The assemblies of Ecclesiastical persons as well general as special (as
also those of the Laymen) wherein they arrogated to themselves an infinite
power of calling of an assembly at their own pleasure, against the Kings
consent, in which they would prescribe laws to the King and Kingdom, were
utterly prohibited and abolished. The popular equality of Ministers was
abrogate. The authority and jurisdiction of Bishops (whose calling the
Presbyters condemned as Antichristian) was established. And all defamatory
writings against the King, the Queen his Mother, and the Council, were
interdicted: And namely the History of Buchanan, Buchanans writings reproved.
and the Dialogue of the right of the Kingdom, as containing many things
worthy to be condemned and extirpate.

Some of the Ministers received these things with such impatience, that they
straight left their Country, and powered out their complaints and griefs
throughout al England, as if the True Religion had now been chased out of
Scotland. But Queen ELIZABETH with a deaf ear neglected them, deeming of
(...) as authors of ^ouation; neither would she permit them to preach in
England: nevertheless she made use of them to hinder all prejudice and
detriment which the Religion in Scotland might receive. And likewise when the
Earl of Arran was with all respect employed for the conservation of the amity
with England; She thought they would opportunely serve to the purpose, that
the fugitive Scots might not be banished from the assemblies which were
instantly to be holden, nor the King diuerted from the friendship of the
English. A fained conference.
Whereupon a parley was appointed between the Earl of Arran and Hunsdon
Governor of Barwicke. But before it was holden, the fugitives, and all those
which were in the expedition with Sterlin, were banished from the Assemblies,
which were hastily to be Conuocated. Whom Arran likewise in his Parley which
presently followed, charged with many weighty accusations; and amongst the
rest, that they had of new conspired the ruin of the King. But he devoutly
promised, not to pretermit any thing which he thought would content and
pleasure Queen ELIZABETH; neither would he do any thing that might endamage
her, so long as he remained in grace and favor with the King. Notwithstanding
these things, the Scottish borderers (by the private practices of the Spaniard,
The Scots and English make incursions one upon another.
who labored to withhold Queen ELIZABETH from the Flemmish wars) being a
month after brought into Rhedisdale, performed there all the deeds of
hostility; the bordering English in like manner with fire and slaughter
revenged themselves of that injury upon Liddesdall.

Then was sent Ambassador from Scotland Patricke Gray heir of that Family, a
complete young man, The Ambassie of Patrick Gray.
that thought himself equal, if not exceeding, for the dispatch of greatest
affairs. The especial tenor of his Ambassie was for the repressing of the
incursions on both sides, for the restoring of goods taken by Pyracie, and for
the reconciling (according to the League) of the Scottish fugitives, or else
removing of them from the frontiers of Scotland, because they continually
invented new stratagems, with other of their confederacy in Scotland, against
the King. And the better to obtain these demands, and incline the Queens mind
and affection toward the King more fully, he promised to discover hidden
enterprises that were plotted against the Queen. To the first and second
Article she answered as she thought fitting, but as for the sending back of
the fugitives she thus replied: THat she was verily persuaded, that those
Noblemen had not so much as entertained a thought of enterprizing any
mischief, and that that uproar which so happened in Scotland, proceeded not
from any evil intent to the King, but of the mutual discords which daily
arise amongst the Nobility about the vnder-age of the King, and therefore that
belonged to the King to appease, and to tie his subjects to him (by suppressing
factions) in one bond of obedience.

Yet that she might in some sort yield satisfaction to the Kings just
Petition, and also receive intelligence of those secret practices, which he
spoke of, she commanded the Scottish fugitives to remove themselves farther
from the limits. He is suspected of bad dealing.
But the Queen made show, that what he had revealed then unto her, she had
knowledge of before. Whereupon arose a suspicion amongst many, that the
Ambassador had been hired by some, to disclose something to the prejudice of
the King and his mother, and had opposed against the acceptance of these most
just conditions, which the mother of the King had proposed by her Secretary
Naue.

Whereupon the patience of the Queen Mother that had so oftentimes been
deluded, began now to break out into flames of grief and indignation, The
patience of the Queen of Scots offended.
and the desire which she had to obtain her liberty, caused her to lay open
her ears and mind to all the pernicious counsels of her friends or enemies.
And so much the rather, because, she persuaded her self, that the general
association was devised to take her life from her, because likewise she had
intelligence, that by the practices, of some she was to be removed from the
custody of the Earl of Shrewsbury (who was a just man, and one that no ways
favored their design) and delivered into the hands of new guardians. But to
bring this more fairly about, lest the singular fidelity and trust of the
Earl of Shrewsbury might be thought to be suspected, for it was not thought
good to offend the reputation of so great a personage, (albeit it had been
diminished with private calumnies, by the reproachful criminations of his
importunate wife) certain suspicions were collected of some designs for her
delivery, through certain Emblemes which were sent unto her, importing thus.
Argus with his many eyes cast into a sleep by Mercury, sweetly playing upon
his Flute, with this Motto.

Eloquium tot lumina clausit,
Un Beau Discourse a ferme aultant de Lumieres.
Mercurius beheading Argus, keeper or watcher of Io: A young branch set in an
old stock, and bound about with cords, whereabout was written: Per vincula
cresco,
Ie crois Par les liens.


A Palm depressed, yet rising again; with these words; Ponderibus virtus
innata resistit.
La virtue qui vient de Naissance resist a l' oppression.


That Anagram also gave much distaste; ARMATA VERITAS. MARIA STEVARTA.


Besides all this, Letters were produced, as though intercepted, wherein the
friends of the Queen Prisoner did complain, that they should be deprived of
all hope of liberty, if she were delivered into the custody of Puritans. Under
this collected pretext, she was withdrawn from the Earl of Shrewsbury (which
he had often desired) and committed to the custody of Drugon Drurey with
others: She is committed to new guardians.
And that of purpose (as some supposed) that thereby being driven to despair,
she might be made the readier to entertain mischievous counsels, and devices,
and so brought into the Ambushes, which were prepared for her. For the Earl of
Shrewsbury had been her guardian for fifteen years with such watchful and
wary providence, that he left no place or space for her to enterprise ought
against others: nor for others to plot any thing against her. She earnestly
seeks for liberty.
Then she solicited with much importunity the Pope of Rome and the Spaniard,
by Inglefield, to finish with all mature expedition, what they had begun,
Things plotted against her.
whatsoever betided her. And Leicester (who was thought to labor in the
perverting of the lawful succession) privately sent murderers (as some report)
to dispatch her out of the way. But Drury more respecting honesty, and equity,
in his heart hated those treacherous designs, would not suffer any to have
access unto her. Some private messengers nevertheless conveyed Letters, some
true, some false unto her, by which she might be transported, through the
imbecility of her sex, to a pernicious ruin, as shall hereafter be related.

That the love of Queen ELIZABETH might wholly be diuerted from her, it was
whispered in her ears, how that Alan for the Ecclesiastical Catholics of
England; Inglefield for the Lay Catholics, and the Bishop of Rosse for the
Queen of Scots, by common suffrages, Counsel holden amongst the Papists.
and with the consent of the Pope and Spaniard, had decreed to spoil Queen
ELIZABETH of her Kingdom; to disinherite the King of Scotland from the same,
as manifested Heretics; to give the Queen of Scots in marriage to a Catholic
Nobleman of England; and by the English Catholics to elect him King, which
Election should by the Pope be confirmed, his children by the Queen of Scots
to be openly declared legitimate successors to the Crown of England, and all
these things by the faith of one Heart a Priest. Who this Englishman should be,
Walsingham studiously indeauoured to find, but to no purpose: but the suspicion
lighted upon H. Howard brother to the Duke of Norfolk, one of the Nobility,
not married, a great Papist, and mightily favored of the Papists.

This year obscurely dyed in miserable exile C. Neuill, The death of the Earl
of Westmer land.
that perfidious rebel against his Prince and Country, being the last Earl of
Westmerland out of that family, which has been so fertile in Nobility, that
besides six Earls of Westmerland, have sprung of the same name, two Earls of
Salisburie and of Warwick one Earl of Kent, NEVILL a most noble^ most ancient
and illustrious name.
one Marquess of Montague, one D. of Bedford, one Baron Ferrers of Ousley,
diverse Barons of Latimer and Abergauenny, a Queen, five Duchesses; omitting
Countesses and Baronnesses, with the Archbishop of York, and a copious
offspring of Nobility.

In England none dyed more worthy of memory, then Edmund Plowden, The death of
Plowden.
who as in the knowledge of the Laws of England, of which he well deserved in
his writings, he was above others excellent, so in integrity of living amongst
those of his profession he was second to none.

Alancon dies. The Prince of Orange is slain.
But in France, Francis Duke d'Alancon left the world, forced by a malady
proceeding of the grief of mind: and in Holland, William Prince of Orange, who
with three bullets from a Pistol was shot through the body.

Queen ELIZABETH much lamented the death of these two, and dispatch into
France B. to signify to the King how greiuously she bore the death of the Duke
whom she had found a dear and faithful friend; likewise to advertise him of
the afflicted estate of the Netherlands by the loss of the Prince of Orange,
The power of Spain grown terrible.
and the terrible puissance of the Spaniard, having all the Princes of Italy at
his devotion, the Pope most affected to him, the Cardinals as it were his
vassals, and many brave and singular men both for peace and war under his
pay; that the house of Austria in Germany was far and wide extended, having
all other families allied to it by marriage, at all times at their service; that
by the late addition of Portugal, and the East India, his wealth and forces
were so augmented both by sea and land; that he was become far more powerful
and redoubted, then ever Charles his father was; and that he would go near,
if once he had brought the Netherlands under his power, to subject all the
rest of the Princes of Christendom to his greatness, unless he were in time
prevented.

THE EIGHT AND TWENTIETH YEAR of Her Reign. Book 3.
Anno Dom. M.D.LXXXV.
QVeen ELIZABETH to oblige the King of France in a stricter bond of friendship
unto her, having the precedent year adopted him one of the Order of the
Garter, The French King invested with the order of the Garter.
she sent Henry Earl of Darby into France with the rites belonging to the
same order, there more solemnly to inuest him. With great honor he received
them, and at evening prayers was inuest therewith: but the English refused to
be present at the Mass: and with holy vows he promised to observe the laws
of the Order, in all points wherein they were not opposite to the order of the
holy Ghost, and S^. Michael, to which he was before sworn.

At the same time a Court of Parliament was assembled and holden, wherein Will.
Parry by birth a Welchman, o^ obscure parentage and mean fortunes, by his
style a Doctor of the Law, but endued with little learning, a man puffed up,
and haughty in mind, very spruse and neat, was of the inferior house, where
hearing a Law demanded against the Jesuits, he only opposed it, declaiming,
that the law was cruel, bloody, and pernicious to the nation: the reasons
being demanded of him, he obstinately refused, except it were in the presence
of the Council royal: whereupon he was committed to custody; but his reasons
being heard, and submission made, he was again admitted into the Court. Then
presently after, Is accused of treason.
he was accused of private conspiracy against the Queens life, by Edmond
Neuill, who laid claim to the inheritance of the Neuills Earls of
Westmerland, and the title of Baron of Latimer, as being the next heir male.

This Parry (to relate from the depth of the matter) two years before,
returning from Italy, to insinuate himself into the Queens grace, and obtain
credit with her, he secretly made known unto her, that Morgan and other
fugitives had mischieuously consulted upon her death; feigning that he had
dealt amongst them to no other end, but to discover intents, and provide for
the Queens safety. This was the cause that induced her to give little credit
to Neuills accusation; Nevertheless she commanded Walsingham to examine Parry,
if that he had (to make proof hereof) treated with any malecontent or
suspected person. He plainly denied it, neither (being in other matters of a
sharp apprehension) could he perceive the evasion which the lenity of the
Queen had laid open to him. He perceives not the evasion.
For had he affirmed that he had dealt with Neuill (only to undermine him) whom
before, he had certified the Queen to be a malecontent and suspected person,
doubtless he had freed himself from danger. But mischief once conceived does
dazell the fight of the most acute understanding. Neuill wanting witnesses was
brought face to face with Parry, who after many sharp and bitter speeches on
both sides, began to give way, and was committed to the Tower of London, where
he voluntarily made this confession, which in a few words I will comprise.

IN the year ( quoth he) 1570 being admitted (after my oath taken) into the
number of the Queens servants, His confession.
I remained affectionately devoted to her Majesty until the year 1580, at
which time I was with much ignominy brought in question of my life. (For he
violently had entered into the Chamber of Hugh Hare to whom he was indebted, and
grievously wounded him, for which by law being condemned, by the Queens
gracious pardon he was acquitted) From thenceforth I lived much discontented in
mind, but obtaining license, I passed into France, with a resolution never to
return, He consulteth with Jesuits about the murdering of the Queen.
because I was much addicted to the Catholic religion. At Paris I reconciled
my self to the Roman Church: at Venice I had conference with Benedict Palmy a
Jesuit, concerning the afflicted Catholics in England; and I affirmed that I
had bethought of a means to ease them, if the Pope, or some other Theologians
would instruct and satisfy me whether the deed were lawful or not. Palmy
praised my intent as a work of piety, and recommended me to Campege the Popes
Nuncio at Venice, With the Popes Nuncio.
Campege to the Pope. I demanded Letters to go to Rome under the public
faith. The Cardinal Comese delivered Letters to me; but being somewhat too
brief and succinct, I demanded others of more ample contents, which I likewise
received. But then I returned to Paris; where I incountred Morgan; who gave me
to understand, that there were some that did expect, With Morgan.
that I should undertake some not able piece of service, for God and the
Catholic Church. I answered, I was ready at any time even to kill the
greatest subject in England. And (replyeth he) why not the Queen her self?
That (quoth. I) may with ease be done: if so be it were manifested to me a deed
lawful: With Priests.
because Wiat a Priest (with whom concealing the persons, I had conference
hereof) assured me that it was not. (And Chreicton a Scot dissuaded me,
teaching me, that mischief should not be done that good might come of it;
that God was better pleased with Aduerbs then with Nownes; that a deed be well
and lawfully done, then that the deed is good: Neither if I could redeem many
souls by the destruction of one, were I to do it, without the express
commandment of God:) Nevertheless having bound my self and my faith by my
Letters and promises in Italy, I thought it would be a crime unpardonable, With
the Pope himself.
now to desist, if only the Pope would by his Letters approve the same, and
grant me a plenary Indulgence, which I with Letters requested of the Pope by
Rag^son his Nuncio in France, who much applauded my design. Being returned
into England, He discloseth the matter to the Queen.
I obtained access to the Queen; to whom, in private, I unfolded the whole
conspiracy, yet covered over with the best Art I could. She heard all without
any alteration by fear; but I departed with much terror, neither shall I ever
forget what then she spoke; That the Catholics should not be called in
question either about their Religion, or the primacie of the Pope, so long as
they were obedient and good subjects. In the mean time as I daily labored in
the Court for the government of Saint Katherines: I received Letters from the
Cardinal Comense, wherein I found mine enterprise much commended, and an
absolution in the Popes name. This I likewise imparted to the Queen. What
effect it wrought with her I know not. But it gave fresh courage to me, and
removed all scruple. Nevertheless I had no will to offer any violence to the
Queen, if she would be persuaded to deal more mildly with the Catholics.
But so often as I was to come into her presence, I laid aside my dagger, lest I
should be transported to murder her. And when I considered; her person, He
wauereth in his mind.
and her truly royal virtues, I was distracted with many doubtful cares: for
my vows were recorded in heaven, my Letters and promises amongst men. These
things did I often toss over in my unquiet mind; She never deserved well of
me, indeed she saved my life, but if in such a cause had she taken it away,
it had been tyranny. Thus being discontented with my estate and condition, I
left the Court. Alans book adds fresh courage to him.
At last I happened on a book of Alans against the Justice of Great Britain,
out of which I was taught, That Princes excommunicate for heresy, might be
lawfully deprived both of rule and life: This vehemently incited me to
prosecute my purpose. Neuil offers him his help.
This to Neuil (whom I had invited to my table) I read over, six whole months
before he did accuse me. After this he came home to me. And let us hear (quoth
he) somewhat, since we can obtain nothing of the Queen, and so he propounded
some things concerning the releasing of the Queen of Scots. But (quoth I) a
matter of more weight, and more aduantagious to the Catholic Church, is now
hammered in my head. The next day he likewise visited me, and touching the
Bible with his hand he did swear, he would conceal and constantly pursue all
whatsoever that might be profitable to the Catholic Religion; I in the same
manner took mine oath. So we determined with ten Knights more, to set upon the
Queen as she rid through the fields, and there to murder her, which thing
till now he has concealed. But receiving news of the Earl of Westmerlands
death, being transported with the hope of succeeding him; he forthwith,
violating his oath, He discloseth the matter.
discovered and accused me. This was his confession in the presence of the Lord
of Hunsdon and Fra. Walsingham Privy Counselors to the Queen, acknowledging
his fault, he craved pardon by his Letters to the Queen, to Burghley the
chief Treasurer, and to the Earl of Leicester. Parry is arraigned.
A few days after, being brought to judgment in the Palace of Westminster, and
the Articles of his accusation being read, he confessed himself guilty. His
confession being recorded in the Acts, Judgment was demanded to be pronounced
against him, confessing himself guilty. Whereupon Hatton thought it expedient,
to satisfy the multitude there present, that the crime might openly be
declared according to his confession; which Parry of his own accord confirmed,
and desired the Judges that he might read it himself. But the Clerk of the
Crown did read it, with the letters of Cardinal Comese, and those which Parry
had writ to the Queen, to Burghley and to Leicester; which he acknowledged for
true; yet he denied that he ever had any absolute determination to kill the
Queen. But being commanded to speak if he had any thing to hinder judgment
from being pronounced against him, he disturbedly answered, as tormented in
his conscience for the crime which he had undertaken, and said, I see plainly
that I must dye, because I was not fast and constant in my resolution. Being
commanded to speak his meaning more amply. My blood (quoth he) be upon you. So
the sentence of death being pronounced, he began to rage, and summoned the
Queen to Judgment before God.

The fifth day after, he was set upon a Slead, and drawn through the midst of
the City to Westminster: being at the place of his execution, after he had
vaunted how faithful a guardian he had been unto the Queen, he said he
never had any intention to take her life away. Thus in boasting manner,
Punished with death.
not in a word committing himself to God, he was punished like a Traitor
according to the Law, in the great Palace yard at Westminster, where the States
of the K^ngdome* were in great number assembled for the holding of the
Parliament.

I^ this Parliament, some, Laws demanded in the Parliament against Bishops.
either out of a desire of nouation, or reformation, earnestly persecuted the
Ecclesiastical estat^ (although the Queen had forbidden it) demanding laws
to repress the jurisdiction of Bishops, in that which conce^ned the gift of
Faculties, in the Collation of the holy Orders Ecclesiastical Censures, and
the oath they take in their office: proposing a new oath to be taken in the
Chan^ery, and Kings Bench: that is, they should not counter^and the civil Law
of England. Against Non-residents.
They required that eue^y Pastor should be resident in his own Church; and
dec^^med that the Church of England was destitute of learned teachers: when
without doubt it could then number up more learned Divines, then any former
age, or any other reformed Church. But the Queen favoring above all, the
Ecclesiastical moderation, reproved those Nouators, as changing still to
worse, and rejected their demands and propositions, as intended to subvert her
Prerogative, and sovereign power over Ecclesiastical matters. The association
established.
But as for the Association (which I have spoken of) it was by the suffrages of
all confirmed, and established; THat four and twenty or more of the Queens
Privy Council, or of the Nobility, chosen by the Queens Letters Patents,
should make inquest after those, that would invade the Kingdom, incite
rebellion, or attempt to offend or offer violence to the Queens Person, for or
by any one whomsoever that shall lay claim to the Crown of England. And that
he for whom or by whom any such thing is attempted, shall be altogether
incapable of the Crown of England, and deprived of all right, and pursued to
the death by all the Queens subjects: if by these four and twenty Noblemen
they shall be judged culpable of invasion, rebellion, offense, or violence, and
so publicly declared.

Laws against Jesuits and Priests.
Laws also were enacted for the defense of the Queen against the Jesuits and
Popish Priests; which did then invent by the Ball of Pius Quintus the Pope,
many mischievous and dangerous matters; That is to say: That they should depart
the Realm within forty days. And that those which should after that time
come or stay in the Kingdom, should be holden guilty of Laesae Maiestatis:
And all such as wittingly or willingly did receive or nourish them, should be
guilty of Felony. Felony.
( For so are all capital Crimes under Laesae Maiestatis called:) That those
which were brought up amongst the Seminaries, if they returned not within six
months after the denunciation made, and submitted themselves to the Queen in
the presence of a Bishop, or two Justices, should be holden guilty of Laesae
Maiestatis. But of those that submitted, if within ten years after they should
approach nearer to the Court of the Queen then ten thousand paces, their
submission should be void. That those that should any manner of way send money
to the Seminary students, should be liable to the punishment of Praemunire (
that is perpetual exile, Praemunire.
with the loss of their goods) if any of the Peers of the Realm, that is,
Dukes, Marquesses, Earls and Lords, shall transgress these Laws, he shall
undergo the judgment of the Peers. Whosoever shall have knowledge that any
Jesuits, and such as have any secret abode within the Kingdom, and not make
discovery of them within twelve days, shall be punished according to the
Queens pleasure, and abide imprisonment. If any one shall be suspected of the
number of those Jesuits or Priests, and shall not submit himself to
examination, he shall for his contempt be imprisoned, until he shall submit.
Whosoever shall send his children or others, to the Seminaries and Colleges of
the Popish profession, shall be amerced a hundred pounds of English money. All
such as shall be sent thither, if they return not within a year, and conform
themselves to the Church of England, shall be deprived of all succession, and
inioying of goods, in what manner soever they shall fall unto them. If the
Wardens of the Ports shall permit any other but Saylors and Merchants to pass
beyond the Seas, without License from the Queen, or six of her Counsel; they
shall be deprived of their offices, and the Masters of such Ships shall be
punished with the loss of their goods, and of their voyage, besides
imprisonment for a whole year.

The severity of these laws (which were thought for those times no more then
needful) did much terifie the Papists of England; and amongst others, Phil.
The Earl of Arundel resolves with himself to fly out of England.
Howard Earl of Arundell, the eldest son to the Duke of Norfolk, was in
such sort affrighted, that he resolved, lest he should offend against them, to
leave the Kingdom. Three years before, he was by the gracious bounty of the
Queen reestablished in the Rights and Honors of his father. But a short while
after, being secretly accused by some of the Nobility, and men of power, he was
deprived of her favor; so being privately devoted to the Roman Religion, he
embraced an austere course of living. This was the reason that he was twice
called before the Privy Counsel, and notwithstanding that he justified
himself against all objections, yet was he commanded to confine himself
within his own house. Six months after, or thereabouts, being established in
his right, he entered in to the assembled Parliament; but the first day before
the speech was ended, he vvithdrew himself. The Parliament ended, he being
as it were certain of his escape; He writes to the Queen.
he writ Letters to the Queen (which he commanded should be delivered after
his departure) wherein was contained a long and sorrowful complaint OF the
malice of his adversaries, to which he was forced of necessity to give way,
because they began to triumph over his innocence. A remonstration of the
unfortunate deaths of his Ancestors. First of his great Grandfather, who was
condemned without answering for himself, then of his Grandfather, who lost his
head for matters of small moment; and lastly of his father, who was
circumuented by his enemies; but never transported with hate to his Queen or
Country. And a Declaration, that lest he should prove an heir to his fathers
infelicitie, that he might more freely apply himself to the service of God,
and provide for his souls health, he had left his country, but not his
dutiful allegiance to the Queen.

Is apprehended.
Before these Letters were delivered, he went into Sussex, where being about to
imbarke himself, by the treachery of his men, and discovery of the Pilot,
he was apprehended, and committed to the Tower of London.

The Earl of Northumberland is found dead.
In the Tower at that time remained prisoner Henry Percy, Earl of
Northumberland (brother to Thomas that lost his head at York) a man full of a
quick wit, and haughty courage, suspected, privately to have consulted with
Throckmorton, the Lord Paget, and the Guise, concerning the inuading of
England, and freeing of the Queen of Scots, to whom he had always borne great
affection. In the month of June he was found dead in his bed, being shot
through with three bullets under the left pappe, the door of his chamber being
barred to him on the inside.

The next neighboring Enquest sworn after the manner by the Coroner, having
searched the body, The Coroners Enquest.
considered the place; and finding a Pistol in the Chamber with Gunpowder,
they examined the servant that bought the Pistol, with him that sold the same.
Whereupon they pronounced the Earl murderer of himself. The third day after,
the Nobility were assembled in the Star Chamber, where Tho. Bromley
Chancellor of England succinctly declared, that the Earl had treacherously
consulted against the Queen and his Country; which he perceiving to be
discovered, and terified with the guiltiness of his conscience which convinced
him, he became his own murderer. But to satisfy the multitude, which is
always credulous of the worst, The causes of his imprisonment manifested.
he commanded the Queens Attorney, and her Counselors at Law, plainly to
unfold the causes of his imprisonment, and the manner of his death. Whereupon
Popham chief Attorney to the Queen beginning from the rebellion raised in
the North parts sixteen years before, demonstrated by the public Acts; THat
he was arraigned for the rebellion, and for consulting of the freedom of the
Queen of Scots: That he had acknowledged his fault, and submitted himself,
and was therefore amerced five thousand Marks. But the Queen (such was her
gracious clemency) exacted not a penny from him: and after that his brother had
been deservedly punished for the same Crime; the Queen confirmed him in the
honor of Earl of Northumberland. Nevertheless, he undertook new counsels
for the delivering of the Queen of Scots, the inuading of England, and
overthrowing of the Religion and the Queen* That Mendoza the Spaniard had
given intelligence to Throckmorton, that Charles Paget under the name of Mopus,
had in private treated with him concerning these matters in Sussex: That the
Lord Paget had likewise signified the selfsame thing to Throckmorton, and was
also manifested by the Papers of Chreicton a Scottish Jesuit; and that Charles
Paget had declared all to Shelley at his return out of France, After this
^gerton the Queens Solicitor demonstrated, that by the circumstances, and
suspicious care which the Earl had to keep himself secret and close, he
showed himself guilty of these matters, that is to say, That the Earl,
knowing none of those to be in England that could accuse him but the Lord
Paget (whom Throckmorton had familiarly entertained) a few days after that
Throckmorton was intercepted, he prepared by the help of Shelley a Ship for
Paget to pass into France. That so soon as Throckmorton had begun to make
confession, he retired from London to Penworth, and forthwith sent for Shelley
to him; signifying to him that he was at that instant in danger both of life
and fortunes, he entreated him to conceal the matter, and to cause them to
retire that were knowing of the departure of the Lord Paget, and the ariuall of
Cha: Paget; all which he presently dispatched, and likewise removed a far
off the servant that he had used between C. Paget and himself. The
Solicitor further added, That being a Prisoner he had corrupted his Keepers,
and by their means gave Shelley to understand all what he had confessed. That
Shelley also, by a woman which was hired to be a private messenger between
them; let him know, that he could no longer abstain from confessing; that
their conditions were far unequal, because he should be forced by
torments; but the Earl by reason of his place and order not, therefore sent
him the copy of his confession. Whereat the Earl groaned, and would often
say, (as Pantin the servant of his Bedchamber confessed) that by the
confession of Shelley he was undone for ever.

After this, the manner of his death was by testimony of the Coroners inquest,
of the Lieutenant of the Tower, and of Pantin, openly declared: and from thence
was gathered that he for fear lest his house should be utterly subverted, and
himself dishonored, had dispatched himself. The Earl of Northumberland is
lamented of diverse.
Certes diverse good men much sorrowed that so great a personage should perish
by so miserable a death; being induced thereto partly because they naturally
favored Nobility, and partly because he had obtained much praise by his valor.
What the suspicious fugitives muttered against a certain Bailiffe a seruitor
of Hatton, who a little before was appointed one of the Earls keepers, I will
ouer-passe, as not certainly known. Neither do I esteem it fit to insert
any uncertain things, or vain heare-sayes.

Queen ELIZABETH having seen the open conspiracies of the Guises, against the
Protestant Religion, the King of France, and her self, well perceived whence,
and by whom these mischiefs were dispersed through England. She to oppose
their designs, and to contract a league amongst the Protestants, for the
defense of the Religion; sent Thomas Bodley to the King of Denmark, Queen
Elizabeth labors to contract a league with the Prince of Germany.
the Elector Palatine, the Dukes of Saxony, Wittenbergh, Brunswicke, Lunbourgh,
the Marquis of Brandenburgh, and the Landsgraue of Hessen. And amongst other
things she commanded him to advertise the King of Denmark, that it behooved him
above the rest to oppose the practices of the Guise, because they have made no
question to claim the Kingdom of Denmark as their kinsmans right for the
duke of Lorraine, as being son to the daughter of Christierne the 2, King of
Denmark, neither did the Duke of Lorraine himself dissemble the same, then
when not long before he labored to obtain the Queen in marriage.

The like with the King of Scots.
And to provide, least any danger should break through Scotland as through a
back door into England, she sent Edward Wotton to signify to the King, how
acceptably she embraced the declaration of his love to her, by Patricke Gray,
and by Justice Cleric. And to draw him to a mutual League of offense and
defense, by proposing to him the dangers that then threatened and menaced the
profession of the Gospel: And to offer him an annual pension the better to
maintain his Royal Dignity, because the revenues of his Kingdom were much
shortened by the negligence of the Regents. And to commend unto him in the way
of marriage the daughter of the King of Denmark. And earnestly in her name to
make intercession for those Noblemen of Scotland that lived banished in
England. And to promise him that she would send them back if she found the
offense against the King to have been practiced by them. Wotton found the King
affectionately bent to this League (notwithstanding that the Earl of Arran,
and others of the French faction labored to divert him) and the Estates of
Scotland gave their consent under their hands and seals, for the conservation
of Religion, to embrace this League; provided that the Queen would promise,
not to prejudice or hinder the Kings right in the succession of England, so
long as he remained constant in his friendship and alliance. But this matter
was retarded and hindered by the death of Fra: A relation of the death of
Russell.
Russell, son to the Earl of Bedford, who was slain the next day after.

For I. Forster and T. Carre of Fernihurst governors of the middle borders
between the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, having assigned an assembly
upon the seven and twentieth of June, to treat of the receipt and emploiment of
the Fynances of the Kingdom, after the promise of safety, made by both parties
with their oaths, and Proclamation, The manner of his death.
that none should offend either in word, deed, or look (for so the borderers
spoke.) The Scots brought with them to the place the number of three thousand
men or thereabout, being armed, and set in order of battle, with their
ensigns displayed, and their drums beating, contrary to the custom in such
affairs, but the English not surpassing three hundred. The Governors were no
sooner seated to hear the complaints, but a tumultuous vproare was raised by
the occasion of an Englishman taken in theft; the Scots discharging a shower of
bullets, slew amongst others, Russel, and put the English to flight, and
eagerly pursuing them for the space of four miles within England, they carried
some back with them as prisoners. The author of this murder was not assuredly
known, but the English imputed the fault to the Earl of Arran then Chancellor
of Scotland, and to Carre of Fernihurst. The Queen presently dispatched
Ambassadors and Letters, demanding that the murderers might be delivered into
her hands. Because Henry the seventh King of England had long time before
delivered into the hands of James the fourth, King of Scots, Will. Heron, and
seven other Englishmen, for murdering of To: Carre of Cesford upon a day of
assembly: and not long before Morton the Regent, sent Carmichel a Scot into
England, for the murder of George Heron. The King after protestation of his
innocence, promised to send Fernihurst and the Chancellor himself also, so
soon as by clear and lawful proofs they were convicted, of set purpose to
have violated the safety, or to be guilty of the murder. Fenwick an Englishman
accused Carre before the King, but was refuted by his simple denial, because
he could not produce any Scotchman for a witness. For it has been a
custom, The proofs amongst the borderers.
and so a Law, amongst the borderers, in their judgments of causes (bred by an
inueterate hate) that no witness can be admitted but a Scot against a Scot,
and an Englishmen against an Englishman: Insomuch that though every one of the
English which were present, had plainly been beholders of this murder, yet
their testimony would prevail nothing. Arran nevertheless was confined within
his own house, The death of Thomas Carre of Fernihurst.
and Carre was kept prisoner at Dundey, where in a short time he dyed. Having
been a warlike man, and one prompt and fit to enterprise matters of
importance, who for his constant love and faith to the Queen of Scots, and the
King her son, was twice deprived of his goods, and driven from his Country,
and the fight of his children; yet he patiently supported his banishment,
remaining constant against all adversities, and bearing himself ever like
himself.

The fugitive Scots are sent out of England back into Scotland.
Whilst the question of this murder was deferred, and a gentle disputation
raised, whether the twelve thousand Crowns pension offered to the King were to
be accounted according to the English, or the French account: the Queen being
much incensed for the death of Russel, and the violation of the safety; and
being persuaded by some Scotchmen which enuyed Arran, that he was a favorer
of the Jesuits, and that he strongly labored in France and Scotland, to
hinder the League, that it might not be contracted, she gave permission to the
fugitive Scots, as Angus, with John and Claudius Hamilton, Mar, and Glan,
which were reconciled to him in their common exile; and to the rest that lived
banished in England, to return into Scotland well furnished with money, to
work the ruin of Arran.

They have intelligence of others remaining in the Kings Court.
The Earl of Bothwell, and the Lord of Humey, Humey Coldingknoll, and others in
Scotland had before promised them aid: and above all, Maxwell lately created
Earl of Morton, out of a certain hope he had to shun the penalty of the
rebellion which he had raised in the Country of Annand, if the Earl of Arran
were once subverted. In the very Court also were Patrick Gray his bitter enemy,
Belenden a a Justice of the Church, and Maitland Secretary, drawn into
parties against Arran.

The fugitives being entered into Scotland, they commanded all persons by a long
Proclamation in the Kings name to give them assistance, They enter into
Scotland.
for the defense of the Evangelical truth, to free the King from mischievous
Counselors, and to conserve love and friendship with the English: they
appointed the place for their assembly at Fawkirk, where they mustered 8000 men.

Arran (who for suspicion of the death of Russell was by the King commanded to
keep within Keneil) hearing of these things, he hastily retired to the King,
and accused Gray as the author of these enterprises. Gray ingeniously excused
himself in presence of the King. But whilst Arran makes great preparations
for the defense of the town, the enemies appeared in readiness to scale the
walls. He certainly knowing, that they sought nothing but his head only,
Sterlin is taken by them.
and suspecting the fidelity of his men (for he was hated of most) he
secretly withdrew himself by the bridge; the rest, all abandoning the town,
betook themselves to the Castle with the King. The fugitives straight possessed
themselves of the Marketplace, and then besieged the Castle. The King demanded
by his Messenger Gray the cause of their coming: they answered, To submit our
selves to the King, and humbly to kiss his Highness hand. He offered to
restore to them all their goods, if they would retire. But they replied, that
they made no esteem of their goods, in comparison of the Kings gracious
favor, desiring him to admit them to his royal presence: the King consented,
but upon these conditions; That they should not attempt any thing either
against his Majesty's Person, or their lines whom he should nominate, and that
they should not bring in any innovation into the government of the Kingdom.
They vowed their lives for the safety of their Prince, protesting that they
conceited not so much as a thought of bringing in of Novelties. But they
desired for their better assurance that their adversaries might be delivered
into their hands, with the fortified places of the Realm. Of this matter they
consulted the whole day: but necessity compelling, by reason of the multitude,
wherewith the Castle was full stuffed, They are reconciled to the King.
and the want of provision, they were at last admitted to the King. And
forthwith the Earls of Montrosh, of Crawford, and of Rothese, the Colonel
Stuart, Downi, the brother of the Earl of Arran, and others were delivered
into their hands; the Earl of Arran was publicly accused to have conspired
against the estate: and as for themselves, the King indulgently pardoned them,
as good and well-deseruing subjects. Hamilton Arbroth was established Governor
of Dunbriton, Coldingknol of the Castle of Edenborough, Angus of Tomtall, Mar
of Sterlin, and Glan Captain of the Kings guards.

After this, having by their faithful duty removed out of the Kings opinion,
all such crimes wherewith their enemies had burdened them, and all suspicions
which they had raised of them; Amnistie.
by a general Amnistie all banishments and proscriptions, which had for what
cause so ever been adjudged and ordained, since the Coronation of the King,
were abolished; excepting only those which had relation to the murder of the
Kings father, and such as were adjudged against the Archbishop of Glasco, the
Bishop of Rosse and of Dunblan. And with a common and most constant consent of
their minds the Sovereign Authority of the King, in contracting of a league
with the Queen of England, and deputing of Ambassadors, was confirmed unto him.
Only Maxwell abused this singular clemency of the King. For having obtained by
the benefit of the Amnistie free Pardon for the cruel slaughter and Pillage
committed upon the Iohnstons: yet such was his audacious pride, that
contemning the authority of the Laws, Maxwell establishes the Mass.
he commanded the sacrifice of the Mass to be celebrated at Dunfrise, which of
nineteen years before had not been permitted in Scotland. For which deed he
was punished with three months imprisonment.

Neither was, in these turbulent times, Ireland next adjoining free from the
tempests of rebellion. For when the rest of the Provinces of that Isle were
settled in a profound peace, a great rebellion broke forth in Connach the west
part of Ireland, proceeding of the natural disposition of that nation,
impatient of rest and quiet, and also of the hate which they conceived against
Rich. Bingham their Governor, complaining that his Commands were sharp and
bitter. The rebellion of the Bourgs in Ireland.
The Governor seeing the great and powerful men of Ireland exercise such
grievous tyranny upon the poor miserable peoples, forcing them to acknowledge
no other Prince then them; he omitted no means to restaine them, and confirm
the royal authority, although he was often for the same odiously accused of
cruelty to the Queen and Deputy. Thomas Roe-Bourk of the most noble family of
Bourg in England, was the first that opposed himself, and being sent for to the
lawful assembly in the County of May, he refused to come. The Governor for a
time dissembled, seeming not to make account thereof: but presently after he
commanded him and two others, turbulent spirits of the same house, to be
apprehended, lest they should break out into a more dangerous rebellion.
Thomas was slain in fight ere he could be intercepted. Meiler and Theobald,
the other two, were taken and hanged; and thus had the whole rebellion been at
the beginning compressed, had not certain English, enemies to the Governor,
advertised the rest of that family, prouidently to beware of the Governor, and
by any means not to come near him: They being thus encouraged, they likewise
persuaded the Ioies and Clandonels, who were powerful in the multitude of
their tenants, that the Governor would handle them with as little lenity, but
by little and little would utterly ruinate their power. Besides they so much
prevailed with the Deputy by their friends, that he commanded the Governor not
to undertake any violent act against the^ of that family, (though they did
degenerate) without his knowledge and advice.

In the mean space whilst the Governor was absent in the Country of Twomond,
where Mahon-Obrean rebelling, slew himself, after the Castle was taken by the
Governor; The son of Edmond Bourg of Castel-bar, and Richard son of another
Richard surnamed by the Irish for his villainies, the Deuils-hooke, having
gathered together a multitude of lewd fellows, they surprised two Castles at
Lake-Masci and fortified them: from whence the Governor easily expulsed them,
chasing them amongst the forests and mountains; he took Richard the brother
of Thomas Bourg, who in humble manner came to entreat him, and hanged him as a
robber. And having so far pursued the rest through the woods that scarce any
were to be seen, the Lo: Deputy commanded him to stay his pursuit; and after
they had given hostages, to receive them into his protection. A short while
after, whilst the Governor stayed at Dublin, and soldiers were raised in
Ireland for the Low Country wars; they again advanced their Ensigns of
rebellion, and many which had refused to go to the wars of the Netherlands,
joined themselves in great numbers with Clan-Gibbon, Clan-Donel, and Joy; and
being increased in number and strength, they openly declared, that they would
after the custom of their Ancestors, Mac-William.
have for their Governor their Mac-William, that is, a Nobleman, by the
election of the people out of the house of Bourg, or any other whom they should
call out of Spain, but they would not admit of the or Sheriff.
Viscont, nor be present at the Assemblies. The Archbishop of Tuam, Bermingham,
the Lord of Atterith, and Dillon, Deputies for the Governor, proposed to them
most reasonable conditions; but they refusing to submit to order, began to
exercise their fury upon the villages of the Champian, with fire and rapines,
and by ruining of the fortifications. The Scots of Hebrides called into Ireland.
They sent John Itcleaf, and Walter Kittagh of Bourg to the Scots of Hebride,
requesting them with their auxiliarie troops to enter upon the Connach, in
which Province, there were then but a small number of Soldiers in Garrison,
promising to give them certain Lordships if they would chase away the English,
and defend the rebels.

The Deputy receiving advice of these things, The Governor laboreth for a
peace, but in vain.
commanded the Governor, to pursue the rebels, who gathering up forces, sent
the Earl Clan-Richard chief of the family of Bourg with Bermingham, to treat
with them of a peace; but they refusing, he forthwith caused their hostages to
be put to death: and knowing that nothing could disadvantage the English more
then a long war; and on the contrary, nothing more accommodate the Irish:
himself and the Earl Clan-Richard with their troops of horse defended the
champian from the injuries of the rebels, and John Bingham the Governors
brother, entered with his Companies of foot amongst the woods, pursuing their
steps, and wearying them in such sort, seizing and driving back with them 5000
head of cattle (the greatest part of which according to the custom of the
Country being distributed to the soldiers) that about 40 days after, being
in a manner perished by a grievous famine, they left their caves, scarce
knowing one another by their faces, and demissiuely submitting themselves, they
delivered hostages to the Governor. Only the sons of Edmund of Bourg of
Castell-barr (whom they had decreed to create Mac-William) persisted in their
rebellion, He pursues the rebels.
until their father was taken, and by virtue of the law convicted, to have
incited his sons to this rebellion, and was therefore punished with death, and
all his lands adjudged confiscate. At the same time the Governor received
news of two thousand Scots of Hebride under the conduct of Kittagh, And he
brings them to submission.
and Itcleaf of Bourg, that were even then in readiness to break in upon
Connach. In great have he leauied his troops, and gathered his garrisons
together, and with infatigable labor, though sometimes they were hidden amongst
the woods, forests, and pastures, and sometimes they wasted the time in making
approaches and retreats, from one side to another, and through crooked windings
and intricate ways, he diligently pursued their steps, observing night and day
their turnings and returnings through corners and by-ways, carefully placing
spies behind, Next the Scots of Hebride.
before, and on either side of them, still expecting a commodious time to set
upon them. At last, counterfeiting a retire, as though he had thought himself
too weak for them, he left them; whereupon they presently with great alacrity
marched toward Ardenare upon the river Moine, and proclaimed themselves Lords
of the Province. He being instructed of their journey by his spies, followed
them, and found them besides Ardenare, where he put his men in battle array,
and sounding a charge with his trumpets, he held them play with skirmishes,
still retiring backward until he had drawn them from a moist and moory
ground, into a place more solid and firm, where all his troops (with great
silence) joined together. Whom he does assault,
Then giving them a fresh and lively charge, slaughtering many, he forced them
somewhat to recoile, when instantly the muskettieres discharging upon their
front, and himself with his troops of horse falling upon their flanckes, with
such fury assailed the^, that he put them all to rout, pursuing them to the
river, where they were all either slain or drowned, excepting 40 which saved
themselves by swimming over to Tiraule, and those which the day before were
departed from the Army to fetch in booty: but after this, they were almost all
put to the sword by John Bingham, and the inhabitants of the County Slego. and
defeats them,
Three thousand of their party perished in this conflict, and amongst them
their principal Commanders, Donel Gormi, and Alexander Carrogh the son of I.
Mac-Conel, which of long time had been troublesome to the Country; and those of
the House of Bourg which were causers of this miserable expedition. Of the
English a small number was slain, but many were sort hurt; and certes this
victory was both famous and profitable, for the instant and future times; the
title of Mac-William being utterly abolished in the County of Connach, and the
insolency of the Scotch Islanders repressed in Ireland, The title of
Mac-William abolished.
which was not long before so great, that it was accounted amongst the Irish a
crime of Laesae Maiestatis to entertain or lodge any of them; and for the
better restraining of their wonted rapines, Perot gave in charge to the chief
personages of Vlster that they should train up in the exercise of warlike
discipline, a certain number of Soldiers.

In the mean time, the States of the Netherlands being afflicted with the
desolate condition of their affairs, The Estates of the Netherlands consult of
a Protector.
consulted amongst themselves whether they should have recourse either to the
King of France, or Queen of England for refuge and succors. For they were both
at that time disco^tented with the Spaniard, but suspicious also one of the
other: The French could not endure that the English their ancient enemies
should increase their power by the addition of the Netherlands, and the English
in like sort the French. De la Prune the French Ambassador for the
Low Countries, Reasons of the French side.
that he might divert the Estates from the English, made this demonstration:
THat the Sea flowing betwixt England and the Netherlands; the English were too
far distant, and could not at all occasions be ready to assist them, their
command also was intolerable; and for that cause were in times past driven out
of France, and were like then to hazard the same in Ireland: That the
succession of the Realm was uncertain, and whether MARIE Queen of Scots or
JAMES her son did succeed, both he and she would be ready to give up the
Netherlands to the Spaniard for the assurance of their own affairs. But that
the French were opportunely adjoining and neighboring, their command most
mild, and their succession certain in the person of the King of Navarre, who
was of the same profession with them.

Such as favored the English, maintained the contrary; For the English.
THat they were not so far disseuered, but they could commodiously send them
aid, without the hindrance of any. That it appeared by the Histories what the
French Command had been of yore in the Netherlands, what it now was, by the
surprise of Dixmond, Donkircke, and Dendermond, and the furious and perfidious
invasion of Bruges, Alost, New-port, and Antwerpe; and what their faith was
having been so often obliged by Edicts, and nowithstanding violated by the
cruel Massacres which have been committed in the towns. That the succession
of England was assured in the person of King James, who was zealous in the true
religion. Besides the English were of the selfsame religion, and faitfull
obseruers of the ancient League with Burgundy. That their traffic had
brought infinite wealth to the Netherlands, and their ports most commodious for
them.

They are refused by the French.
The Estates nevertheless by Ambassadors implored the aid of the French King,
by whom they were received with a fearful silence, and a long time deluded
with procrastinations, by reason as well of their envy to the English as of hate
to the Spaniard, so the Ambassadors returned home at the last, and conceiving
hope from the former bounty of Queen ELIZABETH, they determined to fly to her
for protection.

The English consult about the protection.
Hereupon was holden a consultation in England, whether they were to be
received into their protection, or no? Some were of advice, that they should
presently be received, and aid forthwith sent them (...) brought them in
subjection, should become a vexation to the English on that side. Other some
advised, that they were to be esteemed as Rebels, and unworthy of succors, as
being revolted from the fidelity which they ought to their Prince.

THe Spaniard had not violated any of the Articles of his Joyful entrance,
which they sought for as a color and pretext for their rebellion, and
deposition of their lawful Prince. But admit that he had violated them, yet
was he not for that to be punished with the loss of his principality. And
although some suppose that obedience should be so long denied him, until he
had recompensed his fault; yet others esteem that the divine Laws, to which
humane laws must yield, Princes should, as powers ordinated by God, be simply
and for conscience obeyed. For God has given them the Sovereignty of command,
and to subjects the glory of obedience. And that subjects should wish for good
Princes, but endure all whatsoever they be. That these Provinces were fallen to
the Spaniard, not by the election of the people, but by the hereditary right of
their Ancestors, and the donation of the Emperors. That the Dutchmen had
received privileges from their Princes, but had lost the same by a crime of
Laesae Maiestatis, in taking up Arms against them. That these were not the
estates of the Netherlands that had demanded protection, but certain Plebean
persons, that had attributed to them the Title of Estates. It was therefore
thought by the judgment of these, most expedient, that the Queen should not
intermeddle with the affairs of the Netherlands, but rather strongly to
fortify her own Kingdoms, indeuouring daily by her natural bounty to oblige
the hearts of (...) increase her treasury, to have her Navy always well
prepared and furnished with necessaries, to fortify with garrisons the frontier
towns toward Scotland, to conserve the ancient military discipline of
England, which was corrupted by the Dutch wars. That in thus doing England
would be impregnable, secured on all sides, and a terror to the enemy. That
this would be the most commodioas means to avoid the wars, which might fall
upon such as are begirt with potent neighbors. That none would offer to
provoke them, seeing them so well furnished of money, and forces, guarded with
the good will and love of their subjects, and always ready and prepared to
revenge themselves. And that it would be preposterous wisdom, to consume
money, and Soldiers, which are the life and soul of war in another cause,
and for Princes or people of no ability, being subjects to another rule, and
by reason of their poverty must always be supplied with fresh succors, or by
ingratitude totally providing for their own affairs, will neglect those that
had assisted them, as the English had while-ere in France experimented to their
loss, in the Bourgongnian cause; and not long since in the defense of the
Protestants. But such as were of this opinion as men degenerate, slothful, and
addicted to the Spanish party, moved the men of war to much indignation.

The Dutch offer themselves to the Queen.
So soon as the Ambassadors of the Estates presented themselves to the Queen,
with earnest affection they beseeched her to assume the rule of the united
Provinces of the Netherlands, and to receive them into her protection, and
perpetual homage, being undeservedly oppressed. She graciously gave them
hearing, but refused to take upon her their rule and protection. Nevertheless
to raise the siege from before Antwerpe, which was then reduced into great
necessity, and oppressed by the Prince of Parma, she promised them, if they
would deliver for a Gage into her hands the town of Sluice with all the
artillery, forthwith to send them four thousand soldiers. But whilst these
things were propounded, Antwerpe was yielded up, Antwerpe is yielded up.
because the passage of the River Scald by admirable devices was quite cut off.

After that the Queen had settled a while her thoughts and cares upon these
matters, and perceived the great cruelty of the Spaniards which they exercised
upon the Dutch her neighbors, and the hate which they bore to England, and the
Religion which was there maintained: for the Spaniards were verily persuaded
that they could never reduce the Netherlands to order, if they first subdued
not England. The Queen deliberateth with her self.
) To hinder war from coming home to her ( Scotland as yet wavering) and that
the forces of the Spaniards might not be too far extended in the adjacent
Countries, which would be most commodiously seated for the transporting of
wars into England; for exercising of traffic as well by sea, as the River
of Rhine: And to hinder, that there might not be any provision of Navigations
carried to her enemies, which besides were well provided of strong Shipping, and
men of valiant spirits, that if they should be joined with the English Navy,
it would be an easy thing for them to be soon Commanders of the Sea, so rich
and powerful, that they had long time since without any foraine aid, suppressed
the insolences of their proudest enemies: and that they might not commit
themselves to the trust and faith of the French: She resolved that she was
bound in Christian charity, to succor the afflicted Dutchmen, being
professors of the same Religion, and in wisdom to provide for the
conservation of a people, which God had committed unto her, She takes upon her
the protection.
by cutting through the ruinous complots of their enemies, not for any desire
of glory, but for the necessity of goodness. Whereupon she openly took upon
her the defense of the Netherlands. The Christian Princes admiring such a
Masculine valor in a woman, to have such a magnanimous spirit, as to denounce
war (as it were) to so potent a Monarch. Insomuch that the King of Sweden
speaking of her, said, that she had taken the Diadem from off her own head, to
expose it to the doubtful and dangerous event of war.

These were the conditions that were agreed upon between Queen ELIZABETH and
the Estates of Holland.

Under what conditions.
THe Queen would send as succors to the United Provinces 5000 foot, and a
thousand horse under a general Commander of famous remarke, and during the
war would pay the soldiers; which should after the Peace were made, be paid
back by the Estates, that is to say, in the first year of the Peace, such
sums as had been disbursed in the first year of the wars, and the rest in
the four years following. In the mean time they should deliver into her
hands for assurance the town of Flushing, the Castle of Rameken in Zeland, and
the I Will of Breil, with the town and both the Skances. The Governors that
should be appointed, should not have any command over the Inhabitants, but
only of their Garrison, which should pay the Tributes and Imposts, as well as
the inhabitants. Those places should after the money were repayed, be
delivered back not to the Spaniard, but the Estates. The Governors and two
other English which the Queen would name, should be admitted into the Council
of the Estates, and the Estates should not entertain any League without the
Queens advice; nor she, the Estates not acquainted therewith. Ships for their
common defense in equal number, and at a common expense should be set forth
under the command of the Admiral of England. The Ports of either should he
freely open to either. With other conditions which were printed and exposed to
all men's view. For the memorial of this alliance, the Zealanders triumphing
with joy, caused new money to be coined, bearing upon one side the Arms of
Zealand, which is a Lion floating upon the waves, with this inscription: Luctor
and emergo: Ie comba et me sauue
J fight, and I save my self.


On the other side the Arms of the towns of Zealand, with this Authore Deo,
fauente Regina.
God Author, the Queen favorable.


The Queen by a book set forth, gave all to understand, The Queen publishes
the causes.
that in times past Leagues and Societies were contracted between the Kings of
England, and the Princes of the Netherlands for the mutual faith and defense
one of another. She remonstrateth the barbarous cruelty of the Spaniard,
against the miserable Netherlanders; and the mischievous complots which they
had wrought against her self: that had with much labor sought a Peace, and
had done this to keep the Dutch from reuolting. Neither did she propose any
other thing to her self in aiding of them, then that the Dutch might enjoy
peaceably their former liberty; her subjects safety; and either Nation a secure
commerce and traffic.

And to provide that war should not assail her at home, She sends forth a
Navy to the West Indies to divert the Spaniard.
and set the Spaniard to work abroad. She set forth a Navy to the West Indies,
under the command of Sir Francis Drake, and Christopher Carlisle of one and
twenty sail, in which besides Saylors were 2300 voluntary soldiers, which
surprised in the I Will of Saint James, near to Cap-Verd, the town of Saint
James which gave name to the Island, where they celebrated with the thunder of
the Cannon, The town of S. James taken by the English from the Spaniard.
the Coronation day of Queen ELIZABETH, which was upon the fourteenth of
November; and pillaging the town they found great store of Meal, Wine and
Oil, but no money at all. The fourteenth day after they set sail, and many
which kept their quarters and guard in the open air, and slept upon the
ground, were taken with grievous sickness called Calentura, A disease called
Calentura, whereby many perish.
whereof they dyed; a disease very familiar in that Island, and dangerous to
strangers which sleep in the open fields. The first of January they arrived at
Hispaniola, where the soldiers being landed in a secure place, by the
direction of a Spaniard, whom they had taken and kept to that purpose, they
marched in order against the town: and h^uing repulst a hundred and fifty
Spanish horsemen which opposed their passage, The surprise of Hispaniola, or
Saint Dominick by the English.
and putting to flight certain Musketeers which were placed in Ambush, they
entered pell-mell into the town with them by the two western gates, and all
the inhabitants, being struck with fear and terror fled out at the North
gate of the said City. The English brought their troops into the Marketplace
near to the great Temple: and because they were not in number sufficient to
man the town, they fortified it with rampars of earth, after that they seized
upon other convenient places. So having the whole town in their possession and
command, they remained a month there. And seeing the inhabitants offered but a
small sum of money to redeem their town, they began first to set fire upon
the suburbs, and after upon the fairest house in the town, until the
inhabitants had redeemed their town with 25000 Crowns of gold, which with much
pain they gathered. They found there no great store of pillage, excepting some
pieces of Artillery, with Corn, and Sugar: for they used there naught but
Copper money, and glass vessels, with some made of earth, which were brought
out of the East India. Amongst other things, in the town Court, were found the
Arms of the King of Spain, with the world under placed, from whence a horse
with his foure-feet rampant was figured, leaping out, with this inscription:
Non sufficit orbis. The proud and audacious Motto of the Spaniards Avarice and
Covetousness.

The world does not suffice.


Whereat some scoffing, took it for an argument of the infinite avarice and
ambition of the Spaniard, as never satisfied.

From thence sailing up into the Continent of America, The English do assault
the City of Cartagena.
five miles from Cartagena they left their ships, and under the conduct of
Carlisle they in the silence of the night, being ranged in order of battle,
marched along the shore, whilst Drake with his armed Shallops in vain
assailed the Port of the town which was fortified with a rampire and a chain
extended in length. To Carlisle a troop of horse showed themselves, but
straight retired: he pursued them, till he came to a narrow passage fortified
with a stone wall betwixt the inward Haven of the Port of the Ocean, which was
so straight that scarce a Cart could pass: It was defended with Barracadoes
full of stones, and five great Cannon, wherewith they often discharged upon the
front of his companies, yet without effect, whilst Carlisle by the benefit of
the darkness, being politic in avoiding dangers, taking opportunity by the
ebbing of the Ocean, drew his men down lower by the sands just to the entrance,
which they courageously forced, notwithstanding two great Ships from the inward
Haven of the Port which carried eleven great pieces, and three hundred
Musketeers furiously thundered against their flank. This done, they easily
gained the Barricadoes which were placed at the entrance of every street, and
chaced the Spaniards and Indians, which cast poisoned darts amongst them. Being
thus Masters of the town, they made six weeks aboade there, and received for
the ransom of the town 110000 Crowns, which were paid presently down, and
distributed man by man to the Mariners and Soldiers, and especially to the
neediest. But the pillage was little; for the Inhabitants being forewarned by
them of Hispaniola, had removed all their most precious and richest things in
to far distant places. The disease called Calentura still remaining amongst
them, and much diminishing their numbers, they were constrained to leave off
their design of surprising Nombre de Dios, and make sail for their return by
the Cape of the I Will Cuba, which is called Saint Anthony, where they took in
fresh water out of rain pits.

They set fire upon the towns of S. Anthony, and S. Helena.
Then sailing along the coast of Florida, they seized upon two towns, Saint
Anthony and Saint Helena, which were abandoned by the Spanish Garrisons, and
burned them; and being carried further upon a ragged and rocky coast, they found
the English in the Plantation of Virginia (so called in the honor of They come
to Virginia.
ELIZABETH the Virgin Queen) which Sir Walter Raleigh (whose worth and virtues
purchased him the honor to be one of the Queens chiefest favorites) by his
never enough praised labors, in the discovery of remote Countries, and
promulgation of the glory of the English Navy, had placed there as Colony.
Drake offered to Ralph Lan President there, all offices of humanity, two ships
with provision, and some men, if they thought good to remain there and
prosecute what they had begun: if not to transport them for England. But
whilst provision was prepared for these ships, They bring the Colony thence.
there arose a violent storm, and extraordinary furious tempest, which severed
and dispersed the whole Navy, in such sort, that it could not be collected
together again, until they all arrived in England. Insomuch that Lan, and the
rest that were with him, being oppressed with penury, and much diminished in
their number, they all with one voice requested Drake to give them passage for
their Country, which he willingly agreed to.

These were the first (that I know of) that brought at their return into
England, that Indian Plant called Tobacco, Tobacco.
or Nicotiana, which they used, being instructed by the Indians, against
crudities of the Stomach. And certes since that time it is grown so frequent
in use, and of such price, that many, nay, the most part, with an insatiable
desire do take of it, drawing into their mouth the smoke thereof, which is of
a strong sent, through a Pipe made of earth, and venting of it again through
their nose; some for wantonness, or rather fashion sake, and other for healths
sake, insomuch that Tobacco shops are set up in greater number then either
Alehouses or Tauernes. And as one said, but falsely, the bodies of such
Englishmen, as are so much delighted with this plant, The booty of the English
voyage and expedition.
did seem to degenerate into the nature of the Savages, because they were
carried away with the selfsame thing, believing to obtain and conserve their
health by the selfsame means, as the barbarians did. In this voyage perished
seven hundred men, and almost all of that disease, called Calentura. The
pillage was esteemed to be worth 60000 pounds of English money, Their pillage.
besides two hundred and forty great pieces of artillery, as well Brass as
Iron, which were taken from the Enemies.

Whilst these things thus passed in America under the torride Zone, A search
made for the discovery of a way to the East India.
John Dauis made search under the frigide Zone for a way to the East India, by
the upper part of America, with two ships, at the expenses of William
Sanderson, (a man who by setting forth Globes has well deserved in the studies
of Geography) and of other inhabitants of London. He took his course toward
the North; and being five hundred miles from the Cape of Not in Ireland, he
discovered the Coasts of Greeneland, whose Cliffes being white by reason of the
snow which covered them, might easily afar off be discerned, and so round
begirt with Ice, as with a forewall, for the space of two miles from the shore,
that it was inaccessible. The course of this coast he followed, which bent
first toward the West, and then Northward to 64 degrees in Latitude; from
thence passing the Ice, his course brought him amongst certain green
flourishing Islands, where he found the Inhabitants of a middle stature, little
eyes, without beards, and of milder disposition then the most part of Northern
people. From whence sailing to 66 Degrees in Latitude, he encountered a shore,
which discovered it self by little and little toward the West, with a Or
Straits.
sea of equal largeness: into which being entered forty miles, and being full
of hopes, he turned sail homeward upon the end of August. The following year
he entered fourscore miles into these Straights; where he observed this sea
to be on all sides well stored with Islands, and in his return found it full of
fish. The third time he set forth, with two ships appointed for fishing, and a
third for the discovery of passages, in which having sailed to 83 degrees into
this Sea, and discovering it to be forty miles in breadth, he returned.

An Edict against Woad.
During this, an Edict was published in England, to repress the avarice of some
private persons, that had converted the fertilest fields and pastures, into
grounds to sow Woad in, for the use of Dyers, not without much loss to the
Cloath-workers and Husbandmen, which are commonly fed with Milk, Cheese, and
such like meats. Whereupon it was forbidden, to sow that herb within eight
miles of any of the Kings houses; and four miles of Cities, Market-townes, and
of other places wheresoever Drapery is used.

The company of the Barbary Merchants.
But to the intent that English Clothes might be sold to greater gains, it was
permitted to the Earl of Warwick and Leicester his brother, Tho: Starkey,
Gerard Gore, and other Merchants of London, to recompense their losses which
they had sustained in Africa, being to all others prohibited, to traffic in
Mauritania Cesariense, for the space of ten years. Which Mulley Hamet Xerisi
received into protection.

In the beginning of this year dyed Edward Lord Clinton High Admiral, The
death of the Earl of Lincoln.
who in the year 1572 was by Queen ELIZABETH, created Earl of Lincoln. He
was honorably interred at Windsor. Henry his son succeeded him in his
honors: but Charles Howard Lord of Effingham (Chamberlain to the Queen) in
the Admiralty. And to him in his Office succeeded the Lord Carry, Baron of
Hunsdon, Governor of Barwick, who a few years before supplied the place of
Fra: Russell, Earl of Bedford, Of the Earl of Bedford.
the second Earl of that Family, a Nobleman true professor of Religion and
virtue: who having ouer-liued three of his sons, Edward, John and Francis,
and had but one living, who was Lord Russell, Baron of Thornaugh, and three
daughters, all three Countesses: one married to the Earl of Warwick; the
second to the Earl of Bathe; and the third to the Earl of Cumberland, he
dyed of a Gangrene, the next day after his son Francis was slain upon the
borders of Scotland, (as before is related) and was interred with John his
father at Cheney in Buckingham-shire: to him succeeded Edward son to Francis
his third son.

About the end of this year, the Earl of Leicester being out of an itching
desire of rule and glory, The Earl of Leicester sent into Holland.
easily persuaded by those which studied more to assure their own fortune and
power in the Court, then his Honor; passed with great pomp and state into the
Netherlands with this Title; General of Her MAJESTY'S auxiliary troops: He
had also some command over the Nauy-Royall: His Lordship was accompanied with
the Earl of Essex, the Lord Touchet Baron of Audley, and the Lord North, Baron
of Kertling, with Sir William Russell, Sir Tho. Sherley, Sir Arthur Basset,
Sir Walter Waller, Sir Gernase Clifton, and many other Knights, attended on by
a chosen company of five hundred Gentlemen. The Queen at his departure forbade
him to entertain a thought of any thing, which would be unworthy either of
her, or of the place which he was seated in. His instructions.
She commanded him to learn with all possible diligence, what Garrisons the
Estates maintained; how, and by what means. And her Majesty still being
careful and good to the Soldiers, charged him to know by what Art they
inhaunced, and put down the value of their money (for in that Art they excelled
all others) lest the Soldiers should receive that at a higher rate then they
could put it off for. She admonisht him to cut off all provision from the
enemy, and to his power restrain the Dunkerks, which much infested the seas.
Finally, she recommended to his trust the Nobility of that Country; and above
all the children of the Prince of Orange.

THE NINE AND TWENTIETH YEAR of Her Reign. Book 3.
Anno Dom. M.D.LXXXVI.
DVDLEY Earl of Leicester, landing at Flushing, was first by his Nephew Sir
Philip Sidney Governor of that City, honorably received: and after by all the
towns of Zeland and Holland, with all sorts of honors, acclamations,
triumphs, devoted panegyricks, Banquettings, Absolute Authority is given to
Leicester by the Estates.
and such like things. And being in the month of July come to the Hage, the
Court of Holland, the Estates general (so they are called) by Letters Patents,
gave to him the sovereign command and absolute authority over the United
Provinces, with the Title of Governor and Captain General of Holland, Zeland,
and the united and confederate Provinces. Then being saluted of all with the
attribute of His Excellence, and tickled with flatteries, as if he had been
seated in the highest and amplest degree of honor; he began to assume royal
and Kingly thoughts of Majesty. The Queen offended thereat.
But the Queen being highly offended, that the Estates had imposed and received
him with such exceeding honors, with a little letter abated the swelling wind
wherewith he was puffed up, then when he least thought thereof. And these were
the contents: YOu shall understand by this messenger, which we have expressly
sent unto you, She expostulateth with him.
with what contempt you have behaved your self against our pleasure. We had
not thought, that you, a man we have raised from the dust, and favored above
all others, would have violated, in so great a matter, our command with so
great contempt, even in a matter which so much and nearly concerns us and
our honor. But though against your duty you have made so little respect of our
honor, yet think not that we are so grossly negligent in the repairing thereof,
that we can pass over so great an injury with silence and oblivion. Therefore
we command you, that you, setting apart all excuses, incontinently, according
to the faith and duty wherein you are bound unto us, perform all whatsoever
Heneage our vnder-Chamberlaine shall in our name declare unto you, except you
will draw upon your head a greater danger.

In other Letters which she sent to the Estates general, she thus reasoned,
THat they without her advice or priuity, With the Estates also.
had to her reproach, transferd upon Leicester the absolute rule of the united
Provinces, notwithstanding she herself had refused the same, and had
manifestly declared to all the world, that she had but only given aid and
succors to her afflicted neighbors, and not in any wise taken any command unto
her. And therefore she advised them, To dispoile Leicester of that absolute
authority, since she had prescribed to him his limits: not that she thought
their cause was not to be defended, but that she might keep safe her honor,
which then her life she rather esteemed.

The Estates answered: THat they were much agrieued, They excuse themselves.
that in giving to Leicester without her advice the absolute rule, they had
offended her Majesty; and requested her to mitigate the offense by the
necessity of matter; remonstrating to her, that of necessity that authority
must have been transferd upon one or other, for the avoiding of troubles;
neither was the authority such as that word Absolute did seem to infer,
seeing that principality and seueraigne rule, with the dignity of Governor,
still remained entire amongst the people. But to revoke the power which had
already been transferd, would be a means to precipitate the Netherlands into
extreme dangers.

By these letters of the Estates, and those of Leicester, which he (as one
well skilled how with feigned tears and grief to re-obtaine the favor of so
gracious and mild a Princess) had written in a sorrowful style this offense,
by little and little vanished into oblivion.

In the mean space Leicester received the contributions of of the Provinces,
and established military laws; and whilst he labored to impose new taxes upon
their commerce, he stirred up the hate of the people against him. Now had
Charles Earl of Mansueld, by order from the Duke of Parma Governor for the
Spaniard in Flanders, for the space of some few months beleagerd Grave a town
in Brabant situated upon the river Mase, and had round entrenched himself.
Leicester sends succors to relieve the City of Grave besieged.
Leicester to relieve the town, sent the Earl Hoenloe a Germane, and John
Norris an English Captain, who having begun to raise a scance near to the
town, that they might from thence send provision and succors to the besieged,
were soon assailed and repulst by the Spaniard: but certain fresh companies
of English joining with the other, and falling upon the Spaniard, repulsed them
with a great slaughter; only Norris received a small hurt. But the Duke of
Parma coming with fresh supplies began furiously to play upon the town with
his great artillery, whereupon Homart Governor of the town; being a young man,
and unexperienced in martial affairs, without abiding any assault, after he
had conditioned for his own, But it is yielded up.
and the Inhabitants lives, he yielded up the town. Whilst Leicester in the
mean space expulsing the Spaniards out of the Betow, The Spaniards expelled
out of the Betow.
an Isle situated between the Rhine and the Waale, and fortified the scance
near Telon; Hemart for having unadvisedly yielded Grave was (for an example to
others) beheaded.

An aduentrous enterprise.
The Duke of Parma passing into Guilderland lodged his army before Venlo, where
Skenke of Freezland, and Roger Williams a Welchman, being men of a resolute
courage, put in practice a haughty enterprise, breaking through the army of the
Duke by night, with intent to enter into the town, and having slaughtered
many, they had pierced as far as the Dukes tent. But they were repulsed: and
though they failed of their expectation, yet were they praised amongst the best
soldiers for their aduentrous hardiness. Soon after the town of Venlo was
yielded up. In the interim, Venlo is lost.
the Lord Willoughby Governor of Bergen op Zome intercepted store of Corn
which was carried toward the enemy. On another side Phillip Sidney, and Maurice
son to the Prince of Orange, surprised Axele a town in Flanders. Axele is
taken.
Sidney swelling with courage by reason of this success; being allured with
hopes from some of the garrison of Graueline, Graueline attempted.
he by night attempted to take the town, but La Motte the Governor, by whom
this plot was laid, issued out upon him unexpected, whereby he perceived that
he was deluded, and retired with the loss of some few men, safe and in perfect
health. William Pelham General of the English horse scoured up and down
Brabant. Parma parting from Venlo, marched to Bergen, where Colonel Morgan
with 1200 English under his command lay in Garrison, which he beleagerd:
Leicester made have to raise him, but finding himself unequal in the number
of his men, slenderly provided of munition, not any place for retreat at hand,
and the leaguer of his enemy strongly fortified: to draw the enemy from Bergen,
he in likewise beleag^rd Duisbrough, and after that by the force of his cannon
he had made a breach, Duisbourgh beleagerd.
preparing to give an assault, the town upon composition yielded; so he
entered, Which yields.
and took possession of the town before the Duke of Parma had altogether left
Bergen to come to relieve it.

Parma suspecting, that they would also march against Zutphen a neighboring
City, he caused provision to be carried into the town but at the second return
of the carriage, the English by the favor of the time which was then misty,
encountered the Spaniards which conuoyed the same. Then began betwixt them a
tumultuous conflict. The English standing two volleys of shot untouched,
remained firm, putting to flight the troop of horse sent forth under the
conduct of G. Cressiac a Wallon, who dismounted from his horse by the Lord
Willoughby, was taken; Hannibal Gonzago with many others being slain. Yet few
of the English perished: but oh! Sir Philip Sidney is slain.
He that countervail'd many men, whose valor paralleled if not exceeded the
best, Sidney, his horse being slain, whilst he ascended another, was shot
through the thigh, of which wound five and twenty days after he dyed, having
scarce out-liued his father four months, and was much lamented of all good
men. Leicester his uncle returning into England performed his obsequies and
funeral duties, in the Church of St. Paul at London with great magnificence,
and solemnities due to a noble Soldier. James the King of Scots honored him
with an Epitaph, both the Academies consecrated their tears to him, and the
new College of Oxford erected a stately monument to his lasting memory. And to
speak truth, the virtue of this man, his natural magnificent bounty, his
adorned literature, and his sweet and mild behavior, well deserved all this,
yea and more.

Leicester, though sad and sorrowful, eagerly assaulted the forts before
Zutphen, and to expugne them with better success, he seized upon the Island
with the places of defense therein; then assaulting the lesser fortress, The
valor of Edward Stanley of the house of Elford.
he subdued it by the valor of Edward Stanley who laying hold of a Spaniards
Pike, wherewith he struck him, kept such fast hold that he was by the Pike
drawn into the Fort, vvhereat the Spaniards were in such sort amazed, that
they fearfully fled. Leicester for this valorous exploit Knighted Stanley,
rewarding him with 40 pounds English presently paid him down, and a 100 Marks
yearly pension during his life. The night following the Spaniards abandoned
the greater fort leaving behind them all their munition, and retired into
Zutphen. Leicester thought it not expedient to beleaguer the town at that
time, being then almost in the depth of vvinter, and the vveather very sharp;
besides, having garrisons round about it, he thought it sufficiently besieged.
For Sir Edward Stanley remained at Deuentrey, being six English miles from
thence on the North side, with 1200 footmen, as well English as Irish. Rowland
York kept the fortresses of Zutphen near to Deuentry with 800 foot, and 100
horse. There were garrisons likewise placed toward the East parts, at Lillo,
Sherenbourg, and Douay.

Leicester having placed the rest of his troops in garrison, and seeing that
the Duke of Parma was far thence retired, he returned to the Hage, where the
Estates received him with many complaints: THat the moneys were not well
distributed, The Estates complain to Leicester against himself.
that he inclined his ears to evil Counselors, that the numbers of the
auxiliary English were not complete, that foreigne soldiers were inrol'd
without their consent, that military discipline was neglected, that wagons
and pioners were compeld, that the privileges of the provinces were conte^ned,
and that new forms of contribution were devised.

They requested him to apply a speedy and healthful remedy to these things. He
that had his whole intendments busied about his return into England, with a
courteous answer gave them fair promising. But upon the day wherein he was to
depart, he committed the administration of the Provinces to the Counsel of the
Estates, and upon the same day, by letters of restraint secretly dispatched, he
reserved to himself the whole authority over the Governors of the Provinces,
Towns, and Castles, and exempted likewise the accustomed jurisdictions from
the Counsel of the Estates and Governors of the Provinces, and so upon the
third day of December he passed over into England. He returns into England.
Thus for this whole year were the English affairs carried in the Netherlands.

In England, Phillip Earl of Arundel who all the year had been kept close
prisoner, was accused in the Star Chamber.

The Earl of Arundell is accused of many things
THat he contrary to the Laws, had succored the Priests, had interchange of
letters with Alan and Parson, Jesuits and enemies to the Queen: That he had
derogated from the Justice of the Kingdom by public writing: and had
enterprised to depart the Kingdom without license. He answered them well, and
is but fined.
But having made protestation of his obedience to the Queen, and love to his
Country, he modestly excused himself out of his zeal to the Catholic
Religion, and his ignorance of the laws, and submitted himself to the
judgment of the Assembly, who adjudged him to be fined 10000 pounds, and so
long imprisonment as the Queens pleasure should prescribe. But of these things
in the year 1589 must more amply be discoursed.

The King of Denmark intercedeth for Peace with the Queen of England.
About this time arrived in England from Frederick 2. King of Denmark, Hen.
Ramely Chancellor for the German affairs, with a warlike train and guard of
Musketeers, who at large declared, with what affection the K. of Denmark was
transported toward Queen ELIZABETH, and the general peace of Christendom;
to which he promised with his best indeauors to move the King of Spain to
condescend: THat (as he said) the common enemy of mankind, might not any
longer with humane blood water those seeds of war which he had sown in the
Netherlands.

The Queen gave him a gracious hearing; and having often graciously
entertained him with diverse discourses, she highly commended the pious
intention of the King of Denmark. And by the Lord Burghley, Treasurer; Charles
Howard, Lord High Admiral; Henry Lord Carry, Baron of Hunsdon, Chamberlain;
and Sir Francis Walsingham, principal Secretary, she gave him this answer;
THat she desired nothing more, Queen Elizabeth answers.
then to embrace a League of amity (in which were coucht no treacheries) with
her neighboring Princes. But considering the complots of the Spaniard which
he had practiced against her, she could not but provide for her own safety,
the defense of the True Religion of Christ, and the conservation of the
privileges of her allied neighbors in their entier.

The selfsame answer to the same purpose she gave to Bodellan, sent into
England by the Duke of Parma to treat of a Peace.

In the mean space she furnished the King of Navarre, by the hands of Horatio
Pallauicine with a large sum of money; She furnishes Henry King of Navarre
with money.
in whose person only, the Guises oppugned the reformed Religion in France.
But the Queen was to nothing more attentive, then to confirm a solid amity
between England and Scotland, and to conioyne them in one united League of
mutual offense and defense, She desires a league with Scotland.

By what counsel.


whereby she might not only cut off all hope of aid from Scotland to foraine
Nations, but to the Queen of Scots her self. For Queen ELIZABETH suspected,
that she, being greatly incensed, had embraced some perilous counsel, since
that the conditions which were presented by her, were rejected; the
association agreed upon, and she (as is before related) delivered into the
custody of Sir Aim Poulet and Drury. And it was apparently manifest, that the
Jesuits on one side, and the fugitive Nobility of the other, The fugitives
and Scottish Jesuits do suggest diverse things to the Queen of Scots.
had suggested her with diverse designs, and abrupt counsels, by their Letters
written one against the other. For the Jesuits perceiving that there was no
other hope left for the establishing of the Roman Religion, either by her, or
by her son, they framed to themselves new devices; they began to coin for
the Spaniard (whose greatness they always labored to increase) a new and
fained right to the succession of England. And (as Pasquier reported) they sent
Saumier (if the name be not fained) into England, which was one of their own
society, for to draw the Nobility to the Spanish faction, and to force her to
some dangerous matter; denouncing that if she were any way troublesome, that
neither she nor her son should reign at all. And by inciting the Guises, her
alliance, to new commotions against the King of Navarre and Prince of Conde, to
the intent to hinder them from aiding of her and her son.

The French labor to hinder the League.
But to conclude the League which was begun by Wotton, and interrupted by the
slaughter of Francis Russell, which also Desneuall the French Ambassador, and
Corselle, a man of an impatient disposition, who not long before was
ignominiously driven out of England; began now to hinder; Thomas Randolph was
dispatched, whose dexterity in the Scottish affairs, was accounted wise and
fortunate, although to the King he was scarce welcome, by reason of the
troubles which he formerly moved in Scotland. He proposed to the King the same
conditions of the League, which Wotton had before propounded. The King of Scots
propounds conditions.
The King would have to be added the Articles concerning the yearly pension
assigned, and the prejudice not to be offered to his Right to the Crown of
England, and would have them inserted into the Contract. The Ambassador
according to his instructions promised him an assurance of these things in a
writing separate by it self, provided that he constantly embraced the League.
The King, out of the love which he bore to his subjects, propounded that the
Scots might enjoy the selfsame immunities in England as the English themselves.
But the Ambassador showing him that it could not be done except by the
Parliament authority; and the States of England would not easily accord
thereto: the King deliberately proposing the Articles to himself, agreed unto
them, and commanded them to be imparted to his Nobility, to the intent that
they likewise should confirm them with their subscriptions. Yet the French
Ambassador murmuring, first, said, that the Queen had desired this League, not
out of any love to the King, but for the just fear which she had, lest she
should be ruined by her enemies which were joined against her: then he
iniected many fears, intermixed with threats, that the amity of France, which
is most profitable to the Scots, would be by this means dissolved: Lastly, he
coniured the King, that he would not do any thing without the King of France
his counsel.

But the King, who well knew these to be but vain speeches, He is not deterred
by the French.
could not be retarded or diuerted from his purpose. For he well knew that the
English forces were much increased by Englands League with the Low Countries,
made this serious answer.

King James's answer to them.
THat he had reposed his confidence in the divine bounty, and not in the
friendship of such as were contrary to the glory of God. Neither was it less
lawful for him to contract a League with the Queen, without the French Kings
counsel, then it was of late for the King of France to join in friendship
with her, without his advice. And although the Queen, that she might not be
thought to buy this alliance, did send him less money then he expected, and
made less expression of the assurance of the succession, nevertheless for the
zeal which he bore to Religion, and his singular affection to the Queen, he
commanded the League to be concluded; and further to acquit his promise, he
determined to send into England the Carrs, which were suspected murderers of
Francis Russell.

The League of fast friendship.
A little after, upon the beginning of July, the Earl of Rutland, the Lord
Euers, and Tho: Randolph for the Queen: the Earl of Bothwell, the Lord Boide,
and James Humy Coldingknoll for the King of Scotland were assembled at
Barwicke, and there consummated the League, which was called The League of fast
friendship, (because the word of offense was displeasing to the Scots) as
follows.

FOrasmuch as the Reigns and Governments of of these Princes, are fallen into
these doubtful and dangerous times, wherein the neighboring Princes, which
will be called Catholics, acknowledging the Papal authority, do contract
Leagues, and by mutual alliances, do oblige their faiths, to ruin and
extirpate, the true, pure, and Evangelical Religion; not only out of their
own Territories and Dominions, but also out of foraine Kingdoms. To the end,
that those which do embrace the Evangelical Religion, might not seem less
careful to defend and protect the same, then those which at this time do
exercise the Roman Religion are for the euersion and overthrow of it: The said
Princes for their greater assurance, and security of their own persons, upon
whose safety depends the good and welfare of the people; and for the
conservation of the true, ancient, and Christian Religion, whereof they at this
present make profession, have consulted and agreed to combine themselves in a
straiter knot of mutual alliance and friendship, then has been till now
amongst the Predecessors of their Majesty's. The first ARTICLE.
PRimarily then, to the end that this so godly and necessary Proposition of
either Prince in this turbulent estate of things might come to an effect, for
the common good, and propagation of the truth of the Gospel: it is conuented,
agreed and concluded, that the said Princes shall by this mutual and holy
League, be especially careful to defend and conserve the true, pure, and
Evangelical Religion, which they now profess, against all others that for the
ruin thereof shall enterprise any thing against either of them; and shall
labor and endeavor with all possible diligence, that the rest of those Princes
which are professors of the same Religion, might accord with them in this holy
propounded League, and conioyning their forces conserve in their Dominions the
true service of God, and defend and govern their subjects under the said
ancient and Apostolical Religion.

The second.
ITem, it is conuented, accorded, and concluded that this mutual League for
the defending and maintaining of the Christian and Catholic Religion, which
at this present is holden by either Prince, and by the grace of God observed
and nourished in their Realms and Dominions, shall be a League of offense and
defense against all those that shall hinder, or endeavor by any means to hinder
the exercise of the same within their Realms and Dominions; notwithstanding
all Treaties, Leagues of friendship, and Confederations past between either of
them, and all adversaries and persecutors whatsoever of the same Religion. That
if at any time any Prince or State whatsoever, of what condition so ever he be,
shall invade or infest, the Realms, Dominions, or Territories, of either of the
said Princes, or any part of them; or indomage or iniure any manner of way
their Majesty's persons, or subjects; or shall attempt these, or any of these
things,

The third.
IT is conuented, accorded and concluded, that neither of these Princes,
receiving intelligence from the person invaded, injured, or indomaged, shall
directly, or indirectly; openly, or covertly, aid, counsel, or favor, at any
time, the said inuaders, or infestors, in what kind of invasion so ever it
shall be; or by whomsoever it shall be attempted, notwithstanding all kindred,
affinity, amity, or (...) before contracted, or after to be contracted.

The fourth.
THat the said Princes shall reciprocally send aid either to other, in manner
as follows: If the Kingdom of England shall be invaded or molested by any
stranger upon those parts which are far remote from the Kingdom of Scotland,
the King of Scotland after demand made by the Queen of England, shall
incontinently and without delay send two thousand horse and five thousand foot*
or any less number, according to the pleasure and request of the Queen, to
be conducted at the expense of the Queen, from the frontiers of Scotland next
adjacent to the Kingdom of England, into any part of England whatsoever.

The fifth.
THat if the Kingdom of Scotland shall be invaded or molested by any
stranger, upon those parts which are far remote from the Kingdom of England:
the Queen of England after demand made by the King of Scotland, shall
incontinently, and without delay, send three thousand horse, and six thousand
foot, or any less number, according to the pleasure and request of the King*
to be conducted at the expense of the King from the frontiers of England, next
adjacent to the Kingdom of Scotland, into any part of Scotland whatsoever.

The sixth.
THat if the Kingdom of England shall by any one be invaded upon the North
parts within threescore miles of the borders of Scotland, the most illustrious
King of Scotland being requested and demanded by the most excellent Queen of
England, shall assemble all his forces and troops to his possibility,
effectually and without delay; and joining them with the English troops, shall
pursue in all hostile manner those that shall invade the Kingdom of England,
their favorers and assistants whatsoever, for the space of thirty days
together, or longer, if occasion and necessity shall require, according to the
space of time, which the subjects of Scotland were anciently accustomed, and to
this day do hold, for bringing of succors to the defense of the Kingdom.

The seventh.
THat when the King of Scots shall have notice given him from the Queen of
England of any invasion or deuastation happening in Ireland, he shall not only
forbid the inhabitants of the County of Argathel, of the Isles, and places
adjacent to the said County, and the inhabitants of all other places whatsoever
in the Kingdom of Scotland, not to enter into the Kingdom of Ireland, and to
his power to hinder them from entering: But also in what time so ever it shall
happen, that the inhabitants of any part whatsoever of the Realm of Scotland,
shall, contrary to the intent of this Treaty, enter in hostile manner into any
part of Ireland, with an extraordinary and unusual number of Soldiers: the
King himself, after he had given notice to the Queen of the said entry,
shall, by a public Edict, denounce the said inuaders, breaking in hostile
manner into the said Realm, for Rebels, disturbers of the public peace, and
men guilty of attempt against the estate, and as such shall pursue them.

The eighth.
THat neither of the said Princes shall give (or permit any other in any sort
whatsoever to give) at any time hereafter, any aid, favor, or assistance, to
any conspirator, rebel, or one revolted from either Prince; or suffer any such
person or persons in public or in private, to make stay or aboade in their
Dominions. But either of the said Princes, upon the first notice, or request of
the Prince (from whom they have revolted) offered, shall deliver or cause to be
delivered up the said conspirators, or Rebels, without any delay or
procrastination, (according to the Conuentions, in our former Treaties between
our selves, and our predecessors, expressed) or at least shall compel them to
depart out of the bounds of their Dominions. And furthermore, so long as the
said Rebels, or conspirators shall remain in the said Dominions, either of the
said Princes shall give reasonable satisfaction for all the wrongs and damages
done by the said Rebels.

The ninth.
THat to compound for all and singular the injuries and controversies which
have happened since the time that the most excellent King of Scots took the
government of the Kingdom upon him, and for the space of four years before,
by reason of the frontier limits, or amongst the borderers. The Princes shall
on either side, within six months after this league concluded, send capable
Commissioners, desirous of peace, well instructed, with commands sufficient and
proper for the same affairs, to some commodious place upon the frontiers of
both Kingdoms, which shall determine and end all causes and controversies by a
friendly and honorable composition.

The tenth.
THat neither of the said Princes shall contract any League or confederation
with any other Prince, Commonwealth, or Communalty whatsoever, to the
prejudice of this present League and union, without having and obtaining an
express consent from the other, by Letters, either subscribed with his hand,
or sealed with his Privy Seal.

That both Princes, when either of them shall be duly requested by the
Ambassadors or Commissioners of the other, shall approve and confirm this holy
League of Society, both by Oath, and under the Great Seal. And further, for
the greater assurance and stabilitie of the same, shall deliver, or cause to be
delivered Letters Patents at a certain time, which by the mutual consent of
either Prince shall be constituted.

The eleventh.
THat all the precedent Treaties of friendship, and Conuentions of Leagues
between the Predecessors of the said Princes, their Kingdoms and Dominions
(though now seeming out of use) shall remain in their virtue, force, and
vigor. And likewise this present treaty of mutual alliance, and fast
friendship shall not derogate in any manner from the precedent Treaties, and
confederations passed by the said Princes, with other their Allies, or diminish
in any part their weight, and authority, (only excepted the defense of the
pure Religion which the said Princes do defend and exercise at this present in
their Kingdoms) in which manner we understand, that this present League of
offense and defense, in its own force shall remain ratified, and inviolable.

That when the King of Scotland shall come to the age of five and twenty
years; he shall (so soon as he conveniently may) approve and confirm by a
public assembly of his Kingdom this present League. Likewise the Queens
Majesty shall do and accomplish the same thing, and shall cause to be done
and accomplished in the Court of Parliament, by the Nobility and other states
of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland.

In the same month that this League was concluded of, A conspiracy against
Queen Elizabeth.
a most pernicious conspiracy was discovered against Queen ELIZABETH; of which
(in as few words as may possible be) I will expound the original and
progress, according to that which I have extracted out of the voluntary
confessions of the conspirators. Some out of the English Seminary at Rheims,
admiring as it were with astonishment, a certain omnipotency in the Pope of
Rome, believing that the Bull of Pius Quintus against Queen ELIZABETH was
dictated to him by the Holy Ghost; persuaded themselves, and others also that
desired the glory of being Martyrs: that it was a meritorious thing to murder
such as were excommunicate; yea, and a martyrdom to dye in such a cause.
Giffard Doctor in Divinity, Gilbert Giffard and Hodgeson Priests, so far
possessed the mind of John Savage with these things (who was reputed to be a
bastard) a man ready at all assayes, that he freely and voluntarily vowed to
murder Queen ELIZABETH. How discovered.
And to make men believe, that they desired to assure the Queen and her
Counselors, they published a book at the same time, wherein they admonished
the Papists of England not to enterprise any thing against their Queen, but
with their tears (which are the weapons of Christians) to combat against her
enemies. And also by this means they dispersed a false rumor, that George
Giffard a Gentleman of the Queens Guard, had sworn to murder her, and to that
end was by the Guise hired with large sums of money.

Ballard returns into France.
In Easter Holidays, John Ballard Priest of the same Seminary, after he had
visited many Papists in England and Scotland, and had sounded their minds, he
returned into France, accompanied with Maude, Walsinghams Spy, a most crafty
dissembler, that had seduced his easy nature, and treated with Barnardino
Mendoza then Leidger for the King of Spain in France, and Charles Paget who
was wholly devoted to the Queen of Scots, about the means to invade England;
representing to him, the apt opportunity of the time which then was, because
the men of war were then absent, and busied in the Low Countries: neither was
there a fitter time to be hoped for, because the Pope, Spaniard, Guise, and
Parma had then determined to invade England, to divert the wars from the
Netherlands. But Paget clearly demonstrated, that it would be in vain, to go
about to invade England so long as the Queen was living. Ballard sent back
into England.
Ballard nevertheless was sent back, after he had sworn, to procure speedy
succors to them that should invade, and the liberty of the Queen of Scots.

Meets with Babington.
At Whitsontide this Priest arrived in England, apparelled in Silks, in the
habit of a Soldier, and by a borrowed name called himself Captain Foscue.
He consulted at London about these things with Anthony Babington of Dethicke
in Darbyshire, a young man of a famous house, of a haughty spirit, in learning
surpassing his age, and very zealous to the Roman religion; who without leave,
had before passed into France unknown, and there became familiar with Thomas
Morgan a servant to the Queen of Scots, and the Bishop of Glasco her
Ambassador; who continually sounded in the ears of his ambitious young man, the
heroical virtues of the great Queen of Scots, in whose service he might
obtain the means to rise to great Honors. Whereupon the young man conceived a
certain hope, and Morgan, without his knowledge, commended him by Letters to
the Queen. For after that he was returned into England, the Queen of Scots
graciously saluted him with her Letters; and after that, Morgan made use of him
for conueyance of Letters to and fro, until such time, that she was delivered
into the custody of Poulet: then he, perceiving the danger which might ensue,
desisted. Ballard (as I said) consulted of the aforesaid things with Babington,
he plainly thought that the inuading of England would be to no purpose so
long as Queen ELIZABETH lived. But Ballard giving him to understand, He
instructs him in the stratagem.
that she had not long to live, because Savage who had vowed to murder her, was
then arrived in England; Babington was of another advice, and thought it not
fit, that affairs of such greatness should be committed to him alone, lest he
should fail in the attempt. But to six valiant and Noblemen, of which he
would have Savage to be one, to the end he might not infringe his vow. And
therefore Babington sought out a new means for the inuading of England by the
strangers, at what Port they should land, what assistance should be joined with
them; how the Queen of Scots should be set at liberty: and lastly, for
committing the tragical murder (as he called it) of the Queen of England.

Whilst he wholly bent his cogitations upon these matters, Babington receives
Letters from the Queen of Scots.
he received Letters by a boy unknown from the Queen of Scots, written in a
familiar Character betwixt them: wherein she gently blamed him for his long
silence, and commanded him with all speed to send the packet of Letters sent
from Morgan, and delivered to him by the Secretary of the French Ambassador,
which he performed, and by the same messenger sent her a Letter, by which He
writes back to her.
HE excused himself of his silence, because he was destitute of opportunity
to send to her, since she was given into the custody of Sir Aim Poulet that
Puritan, wholly devoted to Leicester, and a cruel and bitter enemy to the
Catholic faith. He writ of the conference which he had with Ballard. He gave
her notice that six Gentlemen were chosen to commit a tragical murder; and
that he with a hundred others at the instant would deliver her. And he desired
her to propound recompenses to the heroical actor of this tragedy (so he
called it) or to their posterity if they dyed in the attempt.

She answers him.
She answered these Letters the 27 of July: And SHe praised his singular
affection to the Catholic religion, and to her self. But she admonished him
to be considerate in this enterprise, and that he should conclude an
association amongst the authors and actors in the same, for fear of the
Puritans; not to attempt any thing before he was sure of the foraine succors to
stir up some combustion in Ireland, whilst the blow was to be given here; to
draw to his faction the Earl of Arundel and his brothers, with the Earl of
Northumberland, and secretly to repeal into the Kingdom the Earl of
Westmerland, Paget, and others.

She prescribes the means of her delivery; EIther by subuerting of a Cart in
the Port, or setting fire upon Stables, or by intercepting of her when she
should ride to take the air, or recreate her self between Chartle and
Stafford. Finally, she requested Babington to promise recompenses to the six
Gentlemen, and to all the rest.

He had now associated to him certain Gentlemen of Noble race burning with
zeal toward the Roman Religion; His associates in the conspiracy.
amongst whom the principal were Edward Windsor, brother to the Lord Windsor,
Baron of Bradnam, a young man of a pleasing and mild disposition. Thomas
Salisbury issued from a house of ancient Knighthood in Denbigh-shire. Char:
Tilney of a remarkable and famous race; who was the only hope of that house;
with one of the Gentlemen Pensioners to the Queen, whom Ballard a while before
had reconciled to the Roman Church: and Chidiock Tichborn of Hampshire, and
Edward Abington, whose father was the Undertreasurer of the Queens household;
two brave young men; Robert Gadge of Surrey, John Trauerse, John Charnock of
Lancashire, I. Jones, whose father was keeper of the Wardrop to Queen MARIE:
Savage, of whom I have spoken: Barnwell, of a Noble House in Ireland, and Henry
Dunne Clerk for the receipt of first fruits and tithes. Into this company
Polly insinuated himself, well instructed in the affairs of the Queen of
Scots, very expert in dissembling, who still from day to day, laid open all
their counsels to Walsingham, and by the mischievous advice which he suggested
to these young men, being of themselves inclined to evil, he precipitated them
to far worse matters: notwithstanding Naue the Queen of Scots Secretary,
had forwarned them of him.

Babington gives to every one his task.
To these Babington communicates the matter, but not to every one, all; he
showed to Ballard, Tichborne and Dunne his own Letters, and the Letters of the
Queen of Scots. Also he soliciteth Tilney, and Tichborne to do the deed. At
the first they refuse to stain their hands in their Princesses blood. But
Ballard and Babington laboring hard to teach and give them to understand how
just and lawful it was to kill Kings or Princes excommunicated, and that if
right were to be violated, it must needs be for the Catholic Religion; yet
notwithstanding they with much ado are persuaded to it. Abington, Barnwell,
Charnock, and Savage yielded their ready consent with alacrity, swearing to
act the murder. Salisbury they could not possibly induce to be a Regicide,
nor draw to any thing more, then to employ his best endeavors for the
deliverance of the Queen of Scotland. Babington makes choice of Tichnore to
be the odd man over and above the number of those that should do the deed; of
whose secrecy, trust and resolution he made no doubt; but he was then abroad
in travel. Babington commands that before they had taken their oath, they
should not impart the business to any.

After this, they met in Sr. Gyles fields to confer further; They confer
together.
in Paul's also, and in Tauernes, where they feasted often, puffed up with vain
hopes of preferment to great honors and dignities: whereupon they would often
commend the noble courage of those valiant Scots, which had lately seized on
the Kings royal person at Sterlin; and Girard the Bourgonian, who slew the
Prince of Orange at Delph. Moreover, Their vanity.
they grew to that height of vanity, that thy would needs have the pictures of
them drawn in a table, and Babington in the midst, with this versicle or
inscription: Such be my consorts, as dare incur my dangers.

But this pleased them not so well, as being a little too plain, wherefore they
exchanged it with this other; Quorsum haec, alio properantibus.

Some are of opinion that this table was once showed to Queen ELIZABETH in
private, of which she could not discern or know any other man by his effigies,
but Barnwell only who had had at diverse times access to her Majesty from the
Earl of Kildare whom he served; but being instructed in the business, she
knew him to be the man should have attempted her life; for on a time walking
abroad, and espying Barnwell, whom she beheld with an undaunted countenance,
turning herself suddenly toward Sir Christopher Hatton Captain of her Guard,
and others; she said, Am not I fairly guarded now, having not one man of my
followers, that is provided of a sword? This Barnwell reported this to the rest
of his fellows, telling the^ how easily it might then have been done, had he
had his consorts with him: and Savage said the same.

Babington in care to bring in the foreign aides, sends Ballard to work for
him. Insinuates with Walsingham.
After this, Babington cast all his care, how he might bring in the foreign
power according to his promise. For the more certainty he resolved to pass
himself into France and to send Ballard before to the same end, for whom in an
other name he had procured a license to travel. And for the better avoiding of
suspicion, insinuates himself with Sir Francis Walsingham, by means of Polly
already spoken of, whom he earnestly entreated to procure him a Pass from the
Queen to go into France, promising him he would be exquisitely industrious to
find out all the hidden plots the English fugitives had in hand concerning the
Queen of Scots: He commends much the young Gentleman's purpose, Deceit by
deceit deceived.
promising him not only his Pass, but greater matters. Nevertheless putting
off from time to time both the one and the other, having served his turn in
the mean time by his own intelligencers, who had acquainted him beforehand
with all things, though they thought themselves as secret as the Sun; he who
discovered most of these matters to Walsingham, Giffard discovers all the
conspiracy.
was one Gilbert Giffard, descended from the noble family of the Chilingtons in
Staffordshire near Chartley, where the Queen of Scots had lain, and was then
sent by the fugitives into England, under the name of Luson, to put Savage in
mind of the vow he had made: and being now to be their factor, was to keep
himself close, and the Queen of Scots letters safe which were to be sent
over, when as they could not in those dangerous times draw in the Countess of
Arondel, the Lord Lumley, the Lord H. Howard, nor Sir G. Shirley.

The fugitives to try whether they might safely expect letters out of England
from Giffard, sent often empty white papers (which they call blanckes) bound up
in packets like letters, which perceiving by the answers they received that
they had been delivered, and now believing their cariers better then before,
write materially, but in characters. Whether this Giffard was troubled in
conscience, or corrupted with money, before he carried over his letters, or
terified with fear, I cannot well tell; but he went to Walsingham first in
secret, to whom he discovered himself, and for what cause he was thus
employed into England, offering his service for the love he bore unto his
Princess and Country, with promise that what Letters so ever from the
Fugitives, or the Queen of Scots should come into his hands, he would
acquaint him with. Sir Fran: Walsingham, embracing his offer, entertaineth him
kindly, and sending him into Staffordshire, writ to Sir Aim Poulet,
entreating him to give this Giffard leave to entice some of his servants. He
unwilling that any servant of his (as he said) should by dissimulation, or
otherwise, be brought to turn Traitor, seemed not to be pleased therewith.
Nevertheless suffered him to practice until he had brought in a
Beare-brewer, and an Oate-meale-man, his near neighbors, whom he made sure.
Giffard with a few crowns had easily corrupted the Brewer; who by a hole made
artificially in a wall, wherein was a stone that was to be easily put in and
out, he both delivered and received Letters, the which by Carriers appointed
for the purpose, viz. relapsed Priests, came to Sir F. Walsinghams hands. He
opened them, took Copies of them, and by the cunning of Tho. Sends the
Letters he received, to Walsingham.
Philips found out the Charactory, and by the device of Arthur Gregory, so
closed them up again, that it was not to be perceived that they had been
unsealed, then sent them to whom they were directed, according to their
superscriptions. In this fashion were the two first Letters intercepted which
the Queen of Scots had written to Babington, and his answers again to her
(wherein in the same Characters was added at the end of the Letter a
Postscriptum: in which they found six Noble-mens names, if no more) as also
other Letters, which all in one day were written to the Spanish Ambassador, to
the Lord Paget, Char: Paget, the Archbishop of Glascow, and Sir Francis
Inglefield: all which were first written out, and so sent away again.

So soon as the Queen understood by these Letters, what a horrible storm
was ready to light on her, as well out of diverse places abroad, as at home;
she commanded out of hand, Ballard upon his departure is taken.
to apprehend Ballard, who was at unawares taken in Babingtons house, being
upon his departure for France. This brought a thousand doubts and dreadful
thoughts into the perplexed heart of Babington, who hereupon went to
Tichbourne for his advice what to do. Tichbournes counsel was that every
man should fly out, to save himself. But Babington was of a mind to send
forth Savage and Charnocke to perform the murder. But first, that he might
have the better access in Court, to apparel him richly; and to this end, had
conference with the rest in Paul's that day. But changing his opinion, and
having hidden in his perplexed heart, Babington soliciteth for Ballards
liberty.
the thorns of his sorrows, importuneth Walsingham by Letters and entreaties,
being then at the Court, without further delay to let him have his License for
France, and for that he had special use for Ballard to set him at liberty.
Walsingham deferred his suit with fair promises, laying the taking of Ballard
upon Young the cunning Catcher of the Papists, Falls into the same net.
and upon his Pursuiuants, aduising him as it were in kindness to keep him
out of the claws of such as they; and this he easily persuaded him to (being a
young man) and to take his house in London for his lodging for a while, till
the Queen had signed his Pass, and till himself returned to London, that
they might confer the more privately together of such great matters, and that
otherwise by his often goings up and down, which he must needs use if he be
lodged any where else, the fugitives could not but grow suspicious of him upon
his going into France.

In the mean time one Scudamore, a servant of Sir Francis Walsinghams, was
commanded to have an eye to him, to accompany him every where; giving him to
understand, that this was done to save him from Pursuiuants and Sergeants. This
web Walsingham had closely wouen without the knowledge of the Queens
Council, and thought to lengthen it a little more. But the Queen would not
have it so, lest in not seeking to save her self whilst she might, her
Majesty should seem (as she said) rather to tempt God, then to trust in him.
Hereupon a letter was sent from Walsingham at Court, to his man at home, to
look a little more narrowly to Babington then he had done. This vvriting was
delivered him unsealed, sitting at table next to Babington, who took occasion
to read it with him. He having a guilty conscience began to suspect that all
was discovered; so that being the night following with Scudamore, and two
others of Sir Francis Walsinghams servants at supper in a Tavern; Gets
himself out.
After they had supped, he rises from the table, leaving his Cloak and Rapier
behind him, as if he had gone to pay the shot, taking the benefit of the dark
night, slipped away to Westminster, where he changed his clothes with Gage,
which Gage soon after put off in Charnocks Chamber, and put on his: being so
arrayed, they went to save them in Saint John's Wood, near the City, where
Barnwell and Dun came to them. The mean while, they were proclaimed traitors
through the whole country. Lies in a wood.
They lurked in woods and by ways, after the French Ambassador had refused to
lend them money, and Tichbourne horses. Babington cut his head-haires, and
because he was fair of complexion, they besmeared his face with the husks
of green Wal-nuts. Hunger at the last enforced them to retire themselves into
the houses of the Bellamis near Harrow-hill, Harrow-Hill.
a people zealously affected to the Roman religion, which hid them in barnes,
and put them in Rusticke apparel, and relieved them with meat. But being found
ten days after, They are found.
they were conveyed from thence to London, and the Citizens to express their
great joy, rung Bells, made bonefires, and sung Psalms; which the Queen much
commended, and gave the City thanks.

And all the rest of the conspirators
The other Conspirators were taken presently after, the most of them in the
Suburbs; Salisbury in Cheshire: his horse being shot through by those which
pursued him, and Trauers with him: after they had swom over the River Weauer:
and Jones in Wales, who not unacquainted with the treason, had lodged them in
his house, after he had heard them proclaimed Traitors, and had changed Cloakes
with Salisbury and his man, (who was a Priest) which fled on horseback. Many
days were spent in the examination of these, which bewrayed one another, All
discovered.
not concealing any thing of the known truth.

Now whilst these things past thus, the Queen of Scots and her servants were
by Sir Aim Poulet kept with watch and ward, that she might not hear thereof,
although it were known all the Land through. But so soon as they were all
taken, Sir Tho: Gorge was sent to aduertize her briefly hereof, which he did
purposely, she not dreaming of any such matter, but was now mounted on
horseback to go hunt, and under a show of honor is conducted up and down
from one Noble man's house to another, not suffering her to return home. In the
mean time, Sir John Manners, Ed. Aston, Ri: Bagot, and Wi: Waade (who knew not
any thing of this business, The Q. of Scots kept with a guard and separated
from her servants.
having been lately sent into this Country) received Letters and Commission
from the Queen to execute the same, to separate Naune, and Curle, and the rest
of her servants, to be kept safe and several from coming to have any
communication with her, or she with them. And breaking open the doors of her
Closet, sent away to the Court all her Desks, or Coffers, wherein were any
Letters under her own hand and Seal. Her Cofers with Letters sent to the
Queen.
Then Poulet (as it was commanded him) seized upon all her money, that she
might have no means, to bribe any, promising to restore it to her again. The
Coffers being opened before Queen ELIZABETH, diverse Letters were found written
to her by Strangers, copies of such as she had sent to sundry; notes, memorials
and secret Characters ^o the number of threescore more or less; with diverse
amorous Letters, and Letters of complement from some great men of England:
ELIZABETH notwithstanding passed all over in silence, using her old Motto.

Video, Taceoque.
J see, and say nothing.
But as they had knowledge of these things, those who before had favored the
Queen of Scots, from thenceforth were her adversaries.

After this, Giffard sent into France, dies miserably.
Giffard (having first played his part in this Tragedy) was sent into France,
as if he had been banished, but before he went, he left with the Ambassador of
France, an indented Paper, willing him not to deliver the Queen of Scots her
Letters, nor those of the Fugitives to any but him that should show him a Paper
suitable to that, the which he left secretly with Walsingham. He returning into
France within a few months after, being committed to prison for some impuritie
of life, and suspected of these matters, ended his days miserably, confessing
that the most of that which he had said was true, as was apparent by that
which was found in his Deske.

The thirteenth day of September seven of the Conspirators were arraigned, who
confessed themselves guilty, The Traitors come to Judgment.
and were condemned of High treason. The second day after, the other seven was
likewise called to the bar; who pleading not guilty, put themselves (as the
manner is) to be tried by God and the Country, and were by their own
confessions found guilty and condemned: Only Polley (though he were guilty of
all) saying he had something to speak to Sir Fran: Walsingham was not brought
forth.

Are punished.
Upon the 20 day of the month, the first seven were hanged on a Gibbet, a
seaffold being set up for that purpose, in S. Gyles fields, where they had
commonly used to meet. They were no sooner hanged, but presently cut down:
their privy members cut off, their bowels ripped up, and quartered (they yet
alive, and looking about them) which was not without some note of cruelty. The
first was Ballard the Arch-traytor, after he had asked God and the Queen
forgiveness, if ever he had offended her. Then Babington (who never seemed
dismayed at Ballards execution) whilst the other turning aside, prayed on
their knees, confessed his faults ingenuously; and being cut down from the
gallows, and lying upon the block to be quartered, cried aloud in Latin;
Parce mihi Domine Jesus. Savage (the Rope being cracked) fell from the Gibber,
and being presently snatched up by the executioner, had his members cut off, and
was bowelled alive. Barnwell excused his crime out of a pretext of conscience
and Religion. T^^hbourne most penitently confessing his offense, was much
pitied of the beholders: so also was Tilney a man of modest demeanor, and of
comely personage. Abington* of a furious and turbulent spirit, threatens, that
shortly there should be no little bloodshed through England.

The next day, the other seven being drawn to the same place, suffered the
same punishment* But with less severity, by the Queens commandment, who
hated the first days cruelty after she heard it* ^or they hung till they were
dead, and then were taken down, bowelled, and quartered. Salisbury was the
first, who dyed very penitently, exhorting Catholics, never to attempt the
restoring of Religion by force of Arms Dunne, who was next, spoke to the same
effect Next was Jones, who protested he had diverse times dissuaded Salisbury
from the enterprise, nor did ever approve the bringing in of foraine invasion.
Charnock and Trauers were earnest in prayer, commending themselves to God, and
to the Saints. Gage acknowledges the bountiful favors of her Majesty
toward his father; and his own detestable ingratitude by his treachery.
Hierome Bellamie, (who had concealed Babington after he was proclaimed
Traitor) confused and silent, concluded the Tragedy. For, Babingtons brother,
being guilty of the same, had strangled himself in prison.

After this execution, M. Nauue a Frenchman* and Curle, The Queen of Scots her
Secretaries examined.
both Secretaries to the Q. of Scots, being examined of the Letters, copies of
Letters, Notes, and Characters found in the Queens Closet, presently confessed,
and subscribed, that they were their hand-writings, dictated from her to them
in French, taken by Nauue, and translated by Curle into English, and written
out in secret Characters. Neither denied they, that they had received Letters
from Babington, and that they, by her bidding, had written back to him again.
I will not say, that they were hired to say what they did; yet this was
plainly to be seen by their Letters, and what Curle challenged at that time
by Walsinghams promise; but he reproved him as unmindful of the gracious
favors he had received, saying, that he had confessed nothing, but what his
fellow Nauue urging him to, he could not deny.

Presently after, Sir Edward Wotton is sent into France, The King of France is
advertised.
who was to certify the King of all the Conspiracy, and to show the Copies of
the Letters of the Queen of Scots, and of others of the Nobility of England,
to testify the truth of the cause, that the King might perceive in what peril
the Queen was, by the practices of Morgan, Charles Paget, and others then
resident in France.

The Council could not determine what should be done with the Queen of
Scots. Sundry opinions how to dispose of the Scottish Queen.
Some advised not to deal with her too rigorously, but to have her kept (...)
in Prison, for that she was not the Author of the conspiracy: but conscious:
and because she was sickly, and not likely to live long. Others were of opinion
to have her put to death by course of Law, for fear of endangering Religion.
But the Earl of Leicester thought it better to dispatch her with poison, and
sent a Divine to Sir Francis Walsingham, to tell him, that he thought it might
lawfully be done. But Sir Fr. Walsingham protested that he was so far from
consenting to have any violence offered her, as that he had diuerted Mortons
purpose, which was to have had her sent into Scotland, and to have slain her
on the Borders. It was argued again amongst them, by what Law she should be
judged. Whether by that of An. By what Law she should be judged.
25 of Edward the 3, (by which, such were held guilty of Treason, as conspired
the death of the King or the Queen, which should bring war upon their
Kingdom, or take part with their Enemies) or by that of Anno 27 of ELIZABETH,
which I spoke of. But the advice of those, which thought better of the latter,
prevailed: for it was made in the case, which was now to be handled, and
therefore proper. Commissioners appointed to hear the cause.
There was chosen by Commission, many of the Privy Council, and of the Peers
of the Realm, to proceed, by virtue of the Law aboue-mentioned, and to pass
judgment against such, as had raised rebellion, invaded the Land, or offered
violence to the Queen, etc. And behold the words of the Statute, as they are
in the original. A Commission granted to that end.
ELIZABETH by the Grace of God Queen of England, France and Ireland, etc. To
the most Reverend Father in Christ, John, Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and
Metropolitan of England, and one of our Privy Council; and to our beloved and
faithful Tho: Bromley knight, Book 6.
Chancellor of England, and of our privy Council; as also to our well-beloved
and faithful William CECILL, Baron of Burghley, Lo: high Treasurer of England,
our Privy Counselor, etc. Greeting, etc. The rest of the Lords Commisioners
names, for breuities sake, are William Poulet Marquess of Winchester, Edward
de Vere Earl of Oxford* Lo: high Chamberl^ine of England, George Talbot Earl
of Shrew^bury Earl Marshall, Henry Gr^y Earl of Kent. Henry St^^^^y Earl of
Derby, William Somerset Earl of Worcester, Edward Manners E. of Rutland,
Ambrose Du^ley E. of Warwick, Master of our Ordnance, Henry Herbert Earl of
Pembroke, Robert Dudley E. of Leicester, Master of our horse, Henry E. of
Lincoln, Charles L. Howard high Admiral of England, Anthony Viscount Montagu,
Henry Carry Baron of Hunsdon, Lo. Chamberlain of our household, Henry Neuill
Baron of Abergaueny, Edward Lord Zouch, Edward Parker L. Morley, Will. L.
Cobham, Lord Warden of the cinque Ports, Edward L. Stafford, Arthur Lord Gray
of W^lton, John L. Lumley, John L. Stu^ton, William L. Sands, Henry L.
W^ntworth, Lodowick L. Mordant, John L. Saint John of Bletso, T^^mas Sackvill
Baron of Buckhurst, Henry L. Compten, Henry Lo. Cheney, Sir Francis Knolls
knight, Treasurer, Sir Jacob Crofts knight, Co^troller, Sir Christ. Hatton
Vice-Chamberlaine, Sir Francis Walsingham our Secretary of State, William
Dau^son Esquire. our second Secretary, Sir Ralph Sadler knight, Chancellor of our
Duchy of Lancaster, Sir Walter Mildmay knight, (...) Aym^ Poulet knight,
governor of our Island of sarsey (all our tr^sty and beloved privy Counselor,)
and Sir Christopher W^ay knight L. chief Justice of the Common plees, John
W^^sey esquire. our Secretary for the Latin, Sir Edmund Anderson knight, L. chief
Just. of our Bench, Sir Roger Manwood chief Baron of our Exchequer, Sir Thomas
Gaudy, and Sir William Pickering.
thus inserted.

Then after the rehearsing of the Law, or Act (as we term it) these words
follow.

FOrasmuch as since the last Session of Parliament, to wit, since the first of
June, in the xxvij. year of our reign, diverse things have been attempted and
conceived, tending to the hurt of our royal Person; as well by Mary, daughter
and heir to James the fifth, late King of Scotland and Dowager of France,
pretending a title to the crown of the Kingdom of England: as also by diverse
other persons, with the priuitie of the said Mary, according as it has been
given us to understand. And whereas we intend and determine, that the said Act
should in all and by all be well, duly, and effectually executed, according to
the form and tenor of the said Act. And that all the offenses in the
aforesaid Act, and the circumstances of the same (above mentioned) be duly
examined, and sentence, or judgment, accordingly be given, agreeable to the
tenor and effect of that Act: We give to you, or the mayor part of you, full
and absolute power, license and authority, according to the purport and meaning
of the above recyted Act, to examine all and every thing and things, tending to
the impeachment of our royal person, which have been practiced or conceived,
as well by the aforesaid Mary, as by any other persons whatsoever, with the
knowledge and priuity of her, all circumstances of the same (and other
forenamed offenses whatsoever specified, as has been abouesaid) and all
circumstances of the said offenses, and every of them. And moreover, according
to the forenamed Act, to pronounce sentence, or judgment, according as the
matter shall appear to you, upon sufficient proof: And therefore We command
you, that ye proceed diligently upon the foresaid matters, in manner abouesaid,
upon certain days and in certain places, as you, or the mayor part of you,
shall think good. Commissioners come to her.
Most part of these Commissioners met together the 11. of October, at
Fotheringham in the county of Northampton, upon the river Nen, where the
Queen of Scotts was then kept. The next day after, the Commissioners sent to
her, Mildmay, Sir Aim Poulet, and Barker public Notary, who delivered unto
her the Queens Letters; which when she had read, with a bold spirit and
maiestick countenance, she thus answered: She answers the letters upon the
sudden.
IT grieueth me, that my dearest sister the Queen has been so badly informed
against me, and that after so many years as my body has been shut up, and
kept with watch and ward, the many just conditions which I have offered for my
liberty, have been neglected, and my self abandoned. I have sufficiently
advertised her of many dangers, yet nevertheless she has not given credit
unto me, but always rejected them, though I be the next of her blood. When a
combination was begun, and an Act of Parliament thereupon made, I foresaw
that what dangers soever might happen either from foreign Princes abroad,
discontented persons at home, or for Religion, would redound upon me, having so
great enemies in Court. Book 3.
I might take it ill, to have my son contracted without my knowledge; but I
omit that. Now as touching this Commission, it seems strange to me, to be
arraigned in judgment like a subject, being an absolute Queen, not committing
any thing prejudicial to the Queens royal Majesty, to any Princes of mine
own rank and dignity, or against my son. Mine heart fails me not yet,
nor will I faint in adversity: I refer me to my confession made to Bromley
now Lo: Chancellor, and Baron Lauar: I am ignorant of the English laws and
Statutes; I have no Counselors at law: Who are my Peers, I know not. My notes
and writings are taken from me, and there is none dares mediate for me. I am
free from all trespass against her Majesty, I have animated none against her,
neither am I to be called into judgment, unless it were for some word or
writing of mine own, that could be produced against me, wherein I have
recommended my self and cause to some foreign Princes; which I would not
deny.

The day following Sir Aim Poulet and Parker, two of the Commissioners,
repaired to her, who showed her (in writing) her answer, and demanded whether
she would persist therein: which after she had heard read distinctly and truly
unto her, she commended it, saying she would.

But this (quoth she) was out of my mind, Adds the next day to her answer,
that which I would have added now; that the Queen wrote unto me, that I was
subject to the laws of England, and to be judged by them, because I lived
under their tuition. To which I answer: That I came into England for aid; and
having ever since been detayned prisoner, I could never enjoy the tuition or
benefit of the laws, nor till this present had I any to teach them unto me.

In the afternoon, certain of the Commissioners, with some learned
Counselors at the Civil and Canon Law, came to her. The Chancellor and
Treasurer showed their authority by Commission; telling her, That neither her
detayning in captivity, nor her Princely prerogative, could privilege or
exempt her from answering in the kingdom; gently entreating her, That she
would be pleased to hear what was objected: if not, they were to proceed by
course of Law against her, though absent. She answers, She refuses her
trial.
She was no subject, and that she would rather dye a thousand deaths, than
acknowledge her self to be one, seeing that by such acknowledgement, she
should prejudice the sovereignty of her royal Majesty, and become liable to
the Laws of England, yea, in case of Religion: notwithstanding, she was ready
to answer to all things in open Court of Parliament, though she knew that
this Convention was (for formalities sake) purposely continued for the taking
away of her life, already condemned in opinion. She wishes them to examine
their own consciences, and to remember, that the spacious Theater of the
world, was more than the Kingdom of England.

Then she began to complain of some injuries offered her: but the Treasurer
interrupting her, recited favors which she had received from her Majesty,
namely, that she had punished some for impugning the title of her right to
England, stayed the State when they would have condemned her for seeking to
have married with the Duke of Norfolk, and for consenting to the rebellion in
the North. But when they saw she made no reckoning thereof, they departed from
her.

After a few hours Sir Aim Poulet and the Solicitor, presented the
Commission, and the names of the Commissioners to her, that thereby she might
see, they were to proceed by no fraudulent, but a legal course in equity. As
for the Commissioners, she took no exception; but that she excepted against,
was the severe new Law, Exception against the new-made Law.
as unjust and purposely devised against her, and upon which their Commission
depended, whereof they could show no president: neither would she ever yield
unto it. She demanded by what Law they should proceed, Civil or Canon? saying,
they must send for Interpreters from Padua, Poytiers, and other outlandish
Academies, because there were none in England that understood them: adding
further, that by the express words of the Queens letters, it appeared she
stood already convicted of diverse crimes, and condemned before she was tried;
and therefore had no need to come before them to a second hearing: but desired
to be resolved of some scruples she had found in the letters, yet would not
deliver them out in writing, because (she said) it became not a Queen to play
the Scribe.

For this cause the selected Commissioners went again to her, of whom she
desired to know what these words meant; For that she was under the Queens
protection.

To which the Chancellor made answer: This was easy to be understood by any;
yet was it not the subjects part, to interpret their Sovereigns meaning,
neither were they come for that cause. She likewise required them, that they
should show forth the Protestation, which once she had made. But it was
answered, That it had not been allowed, nor should it be now: because it was
prejudicial to the Realm of England. Then she demanded by what authority
they were to proceed. To whom it was answered, By the authority of the
Commission, and the Civil Law of England. But (says she) you make Laws as
you list, and I am not bound to submit my self to them, seeing the English
long since refused to be subject to the Law-salique of France: and that if they
would proceed by the Civil law of England, they must produce examples, for
that, that Law consists, for the most part, of presidents and ancient
customs. But if by the Canon Law, none but the founders thereof ought to be the
expositors. Answer was made, They would proceed neither by the Civil, nor
Canon, but by the Law of England: yet by the Caesarian and Canon Law both, it
was plain (if she would hear it) that she ought to appear. She refused not
(she said) to hear them, by way of discourse, but not iudiciarily.

From this she fell into other speeches: That she never had any thought to
destroy the Queen: That she had been forced to endure many injuries: That she
should become a common stone of offense (if she were thus still abused:) That
she had offered to employ Nauue, for the repealing of the Popes Bull, and that
she would sundry times have excused her innocence (by letters) but was not
permitted: finally, That all the offers of good will, which she had offered for
twenty years space, were still rejected. As she slipped aside by these
pretty digressions, they brought her to the point, and entreated her to say
plainly, whether she would answer the Commissioners. She replied; Their
Commission was grounded upon the new Law, which was made to entangle her;
having therefore just cause of suspioion, she could not endure it: and having
always carried a true heart, she would not now trespass so much against the
Kings of Scotland, her ancestors, as to acknowledge her self a subject to the
Crown of England. For what were that else, but to proclaim them rebels and
traitors? notwithstanding she refused not to answer, yet by no means in the
nature of a subject; for that she had rather perish, than to answer as a
malefactor.

Sir Christopher Hatton persuades her to appear.
Then answered Sir Christ^pher Hatton, Vice-Chamberlaine, saying: You are
accused of conspiracy against our sovereign La: the Queen (an anointed
Queen) but not condemned. You say you are a Queen. Admit it: yet are you not
of royal estate, neither by the Caesarian, Canon, nor Law of nations or of
nature, exempt from answering in such a case. For all justice would swerve, nay
ly dead, if such crimes should escape unpunished. If you be innocent, you
dishonor your self in your reputation, to refuse to come to judgment. You
protest your self to be so, but the Queen thinks otherwise, yet not without
cause, to her great grief; and has appointed persons honorable, wise and
upright, to examine your innocence, who must hear you with equity and favor,
and will be very joyful that you shall clear your self of these crimes.
Believe me, the Queen her self will greatly rejoice: for she assured me at
my departure, that no greater grief had ever befalne her, than this of your
accusation: wherefore setting aside this vain conceit of soueraignety, which
at this time stands you in no stead, show your self blameless, attract no
more suspicion to your self by subterfuge, but rather wipe away the spot,
which else will stick perpetually upon your reputation.

I refuse not (said she) to answer in open Court of Parliament, Her
tergiuersation.
before the States of the Realm lawfully conuecated so I may be declared next
heir to the crown; or else before the Queen and Council, so my protestation
be admitted, and I acknowledged the Q^eenes next kinswoman.



The Chancellor asked her, if she would answer when her Protestation was
admitted. Never will I (quoth she) put my self under this new Law, mentioned
in the Commission. Whereupon the Treasurer concludes: We will proceed
notwithstanding in the case to morrow, be you absent or obstinate.

Examine (said she) your own conscience: respect your credit, and God reward
you and your children as you deal with me in your judgment. The morrow after,
which was the 14. of the month, she sent for some of the Commissioners to
come to her, and desired them that her Protestation might be admitted and
approved. The Treasurer asked her, if she would answer the Commission, if it
were simply admitted and recorded in writing, She yields at last to appear
and answer.
without approbation. At last she condescended, though very hardly, because she
would not seem to derogate from her predecessors or successors. And then she
said, that (being persuaded by Hattons reasons, after she had thought of them
considerately) she desired to purge her self of the imputed crime.

Instantly the Commissioners came together in the Chamber of presence; at the
upper end whereof was placed a Chair of Estate for the Queen of England, and
in a remote place below, a Chair for the Queen of Scotts, opposite to the
other. The manner of the sitting.
By the walls on the otherside were seats; on the one side sat the Lo:
Chancellor of England, the Earls of Oxford, of Kent, Derby, Worcester,
Rutland, Cumberland, Warwick, Pembroke, and Lincoln, and the Viscount Montagu:
on the other side, the Barons d'Abergaveny, Zouch, M^rley, Stafford, Gray,
Lumley, Sturton, Sands, Wentworth, Mordant, S. John of Bletso, Compton, and
Cheny. After these, the Knights that were of the Privy Council, Cr^fts,
Hatton, Walsingham, Sadler, Mildmay, and Poulet. Right over against the Earls,
sat the two chief Justices, and the chief Baron of the Exchequer: on the
other side, the two Barons, the other Justices, Dale and Ford, Doctors of the
Civil Law: and at a little table in the midst of the room, Popham Attorney,
Egerten the Queens Solicitor, Gaudy Sergeant at Law, the Clerk of the
Crown, and two other Notaries.

When she was come and set in her place, Bromley Lord Chancellor turning
toward her, spoke to this effect. THe Queens most excellent Majesty of
England, The Lord Chancellor speaks to her.
being certified (to her extreme grief of heart) that you have practiced the
subversion and ruin of her, the Kingdom of England, and the Religion
established therein: to discharge her self of her duty toward God, her self
and her subjects, without any malice of heart, has appointed these
Commissioners to understand the things you are accused of, how you can
discharge your self of them, and demonstrate your innocence. Upon this, she
rose up, and said: She was come into England to crave the aid that was
promised her, Her protestation
and yet ever since she had been kept a prisoner: protesting withal, that she
was no subject to the Qu. of England, but a free and absolute Queen, and
therefore ought not to be brought to appear (upon any cause whatsoever) before
any Commissioner or Judge, but God the sovereign Judge of the World; nor would
she derogate so much from royal Majesty, or her son the King of Scotts, her
successors, or other absolute Princes. But she was now come in presence, to
answer what should be objected, and desired her servants to bear witness of
the same.

The Chancellor, taking no notice of her being promised aid, answered: That
this protestation was vain, Recorded.
forasmuch as whosoever in England, of what condition or estate soever, shall
offend the law, must be subject to the same, and be examined and judged
according to the late established Act. Therefore this protestation (made as it
were in prejudice both of the Queen and her Laws) was not sufferable. The
Commissioners, notwithstanding, commanded it to be recorded, with the L.
Chancellors answer. Then the Commission, which was grounded upon this Law
(whereof I have so often made mention, being openly read, she with great an
imositie again reinforceth her former protestation, is a thing directly
enacted against her, and of set purpose, whereof she charged them upon their
credites. The Treasurer (having answered, that every one in this Kingdom did
hold the Laws, even the newest of all, not to be contradicted) said, That the
Commissioners should judge her accordingly, what protestation or interruption
soever she made or interiected. In conclusion, she said she was ready to give
attention, and to answer any fact against the Queen of England.

Proceeding.
Gaudy expounded the Law from point to point, affirming that she had offended
against it; and then entering into an historical narration of Babingtons
conspiracy, he concluded, That she had known, approved, and consented to the
same, promised assistance, and had shown the way and manner. To which she
answered boldly: She denies the former allegation.
THat she never knew Babington, nor had received any Letter from him, nor
written to him, nor attempted the Queens death: and to make it good, they must
show some sign under her own hand. That she never had heard speech thereof,
neither did she know or assist Ballard. But she had learned of some, that the
Catholics suffered great troubles in England, and that she had writ to the
Queen, entreating her to have compassion on them. That many persons, whom she
knew not, had offered her their service, yet she stirred not any up to commit
any crime; and being in prison, she neither knew of, nor could hinder their
practices.

Moreover, they insist upon Babingtons confession, that there had been
intercourse of letters betwixt them. She confessed, that she had had
conference, by letters, with diverse, yet notwithstanding it followed not, that
therefore she was accessory to their wicked designs. She desired them to show
any thing under her own hand, demanding withal, what hurt any had received by
any letters which came to her for a whole year together. Then were the copies
of Babingtons letters produced and read to her, Copies of letters showed.
describing the plot of the conspiracy.

AS for these letters (said she) it may possibly be that Babington writ so: but
let it be proved that I ever received them. If Babington or any have affirmed
it, they have belyed me. Others crimes are not to be cast upon me. A whole
Packet, that had been detained a year together from me, about that time came
to my hands, but sent from whom I know not. To prove the receipt of Babingtons
letters, there was read the principal points of the letters out of his
confession, Extracts out of Babbingtons confession.
wherein he voluntarily granted, that she had received them, and had written
back again; in which letters was mention made of the Earl of Arundell and his
brethren, and of the Earl of Northumberland: which hearing, she wept, and
said: NOw alas, miserable woman that I am, how many things has that noble
house of the Howards endured for my sake! And after that, having dried her
cheeks, she said: BAbington might confess what he pleased: She denies them.
but to say, that she had practiced to escape, was a notorious untruth. That
her adversaries might (as well as she) get the same characters, and write what
falsities they would in the same: nor was there any probability, that she
should use the help either of Arundell or Northumberland for her escape,
seeing the one was a prisoner, and the other a young man, and unknown to her.

They read also the abstracts of Savages and Ballards confession, They urge her
with the confessions of Savage and Ballard.
importing, that Babington had showed them letters of hers. But she protested,
He had never received any from her. On the contrary, she was so far from
consenting to the inuading of the Realm of England* or giving counsel
thereto, that she always persuaded the contrary.

Then they showed her letters, wherein she had commended and approved
Babingtons proiects. She demanded the sight of them: which having seen, she
said, These never came from her, but peradventure from the Alphabet of the
letters she had in France. That she had labourd to recover her liberty, being
a thing we all naturally desire; and to sundry which had offered her help to
that end (whom she would not name) she answered not a word: yet notwithstanding
she heartily desired, that the persecution of Catholics might cease in
England, and that she had begged it in love of the Q. She would not purchase a
kingdom with the blood of the poorest subject, much less of the Queen. That
many had practiced dangerous matters unknown to her, and that (by letters)
some had asked her forgiveness for so doing, that never had spoken to her
thereof. That any might easily counterfeyt the ciphers or characters: as a young
fellow in France (not long since) had done, nominating himself the base
brother of her son, the King of Scotts: She blames Walsingham.
and she suspected, this was Walsinghams doing to have her life, who, as she
heard, had practiced both against hers and her sons. She protested, she had
never conceived any thing hurtful to the the Queen, and that she would more
gladly lose her life, than to be a cause that the Catholics should be so
afflicted and cruelly tormented. And with that there gushed from her abundance
of tears.

But (said the Lo: Treasurer) there has not any been put to death for
Religion, which would become an obedient subject: only some few, for
committing treason, in maintayning the Popes Bull and authority, against the
Queen. Yet I have heard, said she, the contrary, and have read as much in
printed books. The authors of such books, replied he, write also, that the
Queen is to be deprived of all regal power. Then Sir Francis Walsingham, who
was touched a little before in words, taking his time, stood up; and, having
protested that he carried no ill will in heart, said: I Take God to record,
Walsingham makes his Apology.
in the place of a private person I have done nothing unbeseeming an honest
man; nor any thing in public, but that becomes a person of my rank. I must
say, that out of my zealous care for the Queen, and the good of the Kingdom,
I have been inquisitiue in discovering conspiracies against her. If Ballard had
offered me his service, I would not have refused it, but rather recompensed him
for his pains. If I conspired with him, why bewrayed he it not, to save his
own life? This answer, as she said, satisfied her. And She desired him he
would not be offended at that which she had heard by report; and that he would
no more believe her calumniations, than she did his: for these pick-thankes
are men of little credit, which pretend one thing, and say another; and that
he would not by any means believe, that ever she had conspired the death of
her dearest sister the Queen.

And here she brake forth into tears again, saying: I will never make
shipwreck of my soul, by conspiring my dearest sisters death and ruin.

The Lawyers answered, That would appear by evidences. This past in the
forenoone.

In the afternoon, to prove this, they produced the copy of the letters which
Charles Paget had written, Charles Pagets letters are produced,
and Curle one of her Secretaries, testified she had received, touching
conference had with Mendoza and Ballard, for inuading the Realm, and setting
her at liberty.

This, she said, was nothing to the purpose, nor any proof that she had plotted
the Queens destruction. and Babingtons,
The Lawyers passing further, said, That they could prove she had conspired the
Queens death, by the confession of Babington, and letters of his; wherein he
called her his Lady and most excellent Queen: as also out of those she had
written unto him; And by the way, put her in mind of consultation had, how the
kingdom of England was to be transferred to the Spanish King. She confessed,
that once a Priest had visited her, and said, That if she interposed not her
self, her son and she both would be excluded from their inheritance: but she
would not name him. He added, That the Spaniard pretended a title to the crown
of England, and would yield to none but her. Then they pressed her upon
Babingtons confession, from the testimonies of her Secretaries Nauue and Curle,
and letters written interchangeably betwixt them. and the testimonies of her
Secretaries.
And though all the proof was grounded upon their bare assertions, yet were
they never brought forth face to face. She confessed Curle to be an honest
fellow, but no fit witness against her: That Nauue (sometimes Secretary to
the Cardinal of Lorraine) had been commended to her by the King of France,
and that he might be easily drawn for money, She obiecteth against their
credites.
hope or fear, to depose falsely; and had bound himself thereto by a rash
oath, having Curle (a fellow of a flexible nature) at his command, to write
what he would. And it may be, they had put things into the letters which she
dictated not, and possibly such letters might come to their hands, which
notwithstanding she never saw. Then she broke into these or the like speeches:
THe state of all Princes is at a weak stay, if they depend upon the writings
and testimonies of their Secretaries: for my part, I delivered nothing to them,
but what nature put into my mind for the recovery of my liberty; nor ought I
to be convicted, unless it be by mine own words or writing. If they have
written any thing prejudicial to the queen my sister, they did it without my
knowledge, and therefore let them be punished for their inconsiderate
insolency. I know for certainty, that if they were present, they would clear
me in this case: and if I had my manuscripts here, I could answer all this
particularly my self.

With that the Treasurer objected, Arguing about transferring the kingdom.
that she had determined to send her son into Spain, and to convey to the
Spaniard the right she challenged to the Kingdom of England. Whereto she
answered: That she had no kingdom to bestow, yet was it lawful for her to
give her own at her pleasure, neither was she to be accountable to any
therefore.

And when they objected further, out of Curles testimony, that she had sent her
Alphabet to D. Lodowick and Fernhurst, she denied not, But she had written out
many of them: and amongst others, that for D. Lodowick, after she had
reco^mended him and another to the honor of Cardinal. And without offense, she
hoped, it was as lawful for her to have intercourse of letters, for the
dispatch of her affairs with people of her own religion, as it was for the
Queen with those of another religion.

After this, they urged her again upon the evidences of Nauue and Curle, which
agreed together: whereto she either replied as before, or rejected them with a
precise denial: protesting again, that she neither knew Babington nor
Ballard. With this, the Treasurer interrupting her, said, That she knew Morgan
very well, who had secretly sent Parry to slay the Queen, and that she had
given him an annual pension. She said, She knew not that Morgan had done so,
but she knew well, She excuses her self for having given Morgan an annual
pension,
that he had lost all he had for her sake, and therefore it stood with her
honor to relieve him: neither was she bound to revenge the wrongs done to the
Queen by one who had well deserved from her; yet had she always done her best
to dissuade him from such wicked enterprises: saying withal, that out of
England likewise there were pensions given to Patrick Gray, and other Scotts,
by pensions given to the Scottishmen.
enemies to her and her son.

Whereto the L. Treasurer answered: Because the treasure of Scotland had been
much impaired, by the negligence of the Regents or Vice-royes, therefore the
Queen had dealt the more bountifully with her near kinsman your son.

Then was showed some of the letters, which she had written to Inglefield, to
the Lo: Paget, and to Bernard Mendoza, touching the foreign supplies: but
when she had answered that, That tended not to the ruin of the Queen, because
some strangers had a desire to procure her liberty; and that she had manifested
plainly enough to the Queen, that they sought nothing but her freedom: the
matter was prorogued till the next day.

On the day following, she reiterateth her protestation before mentioned,
requiring to have it recorded, and a copy thereof to be delivered her:
lamenting, That the most reasonable conditions, which she had offered the
Queen, were still rejected, especially having promised to deliver her son
and the Duke of Guise Hostages, that neither by her, nor by her means, the
Queen nor kingdom should receive any detriment. She offers the Duke of
Guise and her son pledges for her liberty.
That she her self (altogether excluded from all hope of liberty) was now most
unworthily handled, whose honor and reputation was called in question by
common Lawyers, who, by their contorted arguments, make slender circumstances
matters of great consequence; whereas anointed and consecrated Princes are not
subject to laws, as private persons. Moreover, whereas the authority of their
Commission is to examine matters tending to the hurt of the Queens person, yet
they so handled the matter, and so wrested their letters of Commission, that
they called in question the Religion she professes, the immunitie and majesty
of foreign Princes, and the private commerce they have amongst themselves by
writing, and brought her to be arraigned at a Bar like a malefactor, to the
prejudice of Majesty and sovereign dignity: And this was done to no other
end, but to bring her in disgrace with the Queen, and to seclude her from the
right of inheritance to the Kingdom. She called to mind withal, How Qu.
Elizabeth her self had bin questioned about Wyats rebellion, though she were
most innocent: protesting most deuoutely, that notwithstanding she wished the
Catholics welfare, yet she desired not the procurement thereof by the
slaughter or blood of any one. She had rather play the part of Hester than
Judith, rather make intercession to God for the people, than take away the life
of the meanest.

Expostulating the matter, she complained that her adversaries had bruited it
abroad, that she was of no religion: Which was that time, she said, when she
desired to be informed of the Religion of the Protestants, but none would
vouchsafe her the favor; a sign they had little care of the safety of her
soul. Then concluding: When you have done all you can (said she) against me,
you shall advance your selves nothing in your cause or hope. And so inuocating
God, and appealing to the Princes of her acquaintance, desired she might have
another day of hearing, and that she might be allowed an Advocate to plead her
cause; and being a Queen, she might be believed upon her royal word: For it
was extreme imprudence in her, to be arraigned before those whom she perceived
to be armed with prejudice against her.

To this the Lo: Treasurer made answer: The Lord Burghley answers.
FOrasmuch as I represent two persons, the one of a Counselor, the other of a
Commissioner, first hear me speak as a Commissioner: Your protestation is
registered, and you shall have a copy of it. The power which we bear, has bin
imposed upon us under the Queens signet, and the great seal of England, from
the which there is no repeal: Nor are we come with any prejudice, but to
censure according to the rules of Justice: Nor do the Lawyers exaggerate the
matter, otherwise than to make it plainly appear, wherein you have offended
against the person of the Queen. Our authority is to hear and examine the
matter in your absence, yet notwithstanding we have willed you should be
present, for that we would not seem to derogate in any thing from your
honor: Nor have we any purpose to object against you any thing, but what your
attempts have been against the person of the Queen, or with those with whom
ye have been confederate. Your letters were read, only to show your practicing
against the queens person, and such other things as concern the same; which
are so intermixed, they cannot be sequestered: therefore the letters were read
wholly, and not in parts, to extract the particularities of the things you had
entreated of with Babington.

As he was thus speaking, she interrupted him, saying: That the circumstances
indeed were probable, She interrupteth him
but not the thing: That her sincerity depended not upon her Secretaries
fidelity or memory, though she knew them to be ingenuous. Or if for fear of
punishment, or hope of profit and escape, they had confessed any thing, it was
not to be admitted, for diverse good reasons which she had alleged before.
That the minds of men are carried away with many passions: for her Secretaries
would never have confessed such things, if either profit or some other hope
had not induced them thereto. That the letters might be directed to others than
them they were written to; and that oftentimes many things had been inserted
that were not dictated. And if her papers had not been taken from her, or if
she had a Secretary, she could more soundly have confuted their objections.

But, said the Lo: Treasurer, He proceeds.
they will object nothing but since the xix. of June; and your papers would
stand you in no stead, seeing the Secretaries and Babington himself,
vninforced by torture, have confessed that you sent these letters to Babington.
But if you shall deny this, let the Commissioners judge, whether there be more
credit to be given to your denial, or their affirmation. But to return to
the point; mark what I denounce as a Counselor: You have mentioned many
things for the procuring of your liberty, (which have had no success) and that
has proceeded from your self or the Scotts, not from the queen. For your
Lords of Scotland have refused to deliver the King of Scotts in hostage: and
when last there was a treaty about your liberty, Parry was sent from Morgan,
your clyent to slay the queen. Ah, said she, you are mine adversary. I,
replied he, I am adversary to all Q. Elizabeth's enemies. But enough of this.
Let us return to our proofs.

When she refused to hear, Yet we will hear, said he. And I too, answered
she, in another place, and will defend myself.

Letters showed again.
Now they read again her letters to Charles Paget, wherein she certified him,
That there was no way left for the K. of Spain to bring the Low Countries into
his subjection* but by placing a Prince in England to serve his turn: And her
letters to the Lo; Paget, to hasten the aid he should send for the inuading of
England: And those which Cardinal Allen had sent her, wherein he saluted her
by the name of Most excellent Lady; and certified her, that the matter was
recommended to the Prince of Parma. Whilst they were reading them* she said,
She interrupteth their reading.
That Babington and her Secretaries had accused her to excuse themselves: That
she never heard of six murderers, the rest were nothing to the purpose. She
held Allen a venerable Prelate, and knew no other head of the Church, but the
Pope of Rome; neither could she tell how he, or other stranger kings, did
style her: nor could she hinder them (in their letters) from calling her queen
of England. Affirms her Secretaries were not to be credited.
Affirming, that her Secretaries were not to be trusted, for that they had
proceeded against her, contrary to the duty and fidelity which they had sworn
to her. That the perjured are not to be credited, though they swear never so
much: neither did she think their oaths were to be taken in any C^u^t of
conscience, because formerly they had sworn fidelity and silence; neither were
they any English subjects. That Nauue had often written otherwise than she
dictated, and Curle always that which he told him. That she could bear with
their faults ^n all things, but such as touched her honor. They might also
confess these things for to save themselves, thinking that in so doing, she
could not hurt them, and that being a queen, they would deal more gently with
her: And that she had never heard of Ballard, but of one Hallard that had
offered his service to her; which notwithstanding she refused, because she had
heard that he had likewise proffered it to Walsingham.

After this, when they read certain notes out of letters, She is accused
again for transporting the Kingdom. She condemns her Secretaries as perjured.
which Curle confessed he had written to Mendoza in her secret characters, and
pressed her with them, as having had a purpose to make over the title of the
kingdom to the Spaniard, and that Allen and Parsons were resident now in Rome
for that cause: she protesting that they had forsworn themselves, answered; I
being a prisoner, without hope of liberty, languishing in grief, and in
despair t^ perform that which many expected from me, who am n^w in my
declining age, and without my health: some were of opinion to settle the
succession of the English Crown upon the Spaniard, or some other English
Catholic. A book was sent me, to declare the Spaniards right, but because I
refused to receive it* some were grieved at me. As for the rest, being at this
instant out of all hope of aid from England, I have resolved not to reject
that of the Stranger.

Upon that, Sir Thomas Egerton, the Queens Solicitor, opened to the
Commissioners what would become of them, Sir Thomas Egertons (the Q
Sollicitors) demonstration.
their honors, goods, and children, if the kingdom were so transported. But
the L. Treasurer answered, That could not be, because by the Law the Crown was
hereditarie. Then ask^d he the Queen of Scotts, if she had any more to say.

She desired to be heard in open Parliament, She crauest a hearing i^ open
Parliament.
or in presence of Queen Elizabeth and her Council; not doubting but one
Queen would have consideration of another. Then rising up, with a bold
countenance, she conferred apart with the L. Treasurer, Hatton and Walsingham,
about some business. That being done, they reiourned their meeting together
again until the xxv. of October, in the Star Chamber at Westminster. And
this is that which I have gathered from the memories of Ed. Barker, chief
Clerk of the Council, Tho. Wheeler public Notary, and Clerk of the Court
of Canterbury, and other credible persons, whose assistance I have had in this.

At the time appointed, all the Commisioners being assembled together, except
the Earls of Shrewsbury and Warwick, who then were sick: and Nauue and Curle
having voluntarily, without hope of future preferment or present reward,
affirmed and ratified by oath, that all and every the letters, and copies of
letters to fore produced, were most true; sentence was pronounced against the Q
of Scotland, signed and sealed by the Commissioners, and recorded in these
words: WIth one unanimous accord and consent of theirs, Sentence pronounced
against her.
they pronounce and give their sentence and judgment, which was read aloud,
upon the last day, and in the assigned place, saying, That since the end of the
aforesaid Sessions of Parliament, specified in the said Commission, to wit,
since the said first day of June, in the year xxvij. before mentioned, and
before the date of the said Commission, many things have bin attempted and
conceived against the Realm of England, by Anth. Babington and others, with
the knowledge and priuity of the said Mary (pretending that the Crown of
England appertains to her) tending to the hurt, death, and destruction of the
royal person of our sovereign La: the Q. that is to say, that since the first
of June, Ann. 27. and before the date of this Commission, the said Mary,
pretending as aforesaid, practiced and conceived against this Realm, many
things tending to the hurt, death and destruction of the royal person of our
said Lady Q. Elizabeth, against the form of the Statute specified in the said
Commission.

This sentence bred diverse doubtful opinions amongst men, Some suspect the
credit of the Secretaries.
because it was grounded only upon the credit of the Secretaries; and they
were never brought face to face, as was required by the first Statute Anno 13.
of Elizab. some thinking them men of credit, and some not. I saw Nauue's
Apology, which he wrote to the Kings Majesty in Scotland, 1605. wherein he
greatly labors to excuse him self, protesting, that he was neither author
nor perswader to this matter, nor yet the first discouerer. And that he had
neither by negligence nor ignorance failed in his Or, duty.
devoire, but stoutly at his death defended the contrary, to all the
accusations brought against the Queen his Mistress: notwithstanding there are
public Acts thereof to be seen. Now the same day the Commissioners and
Judges of the Realm, declared, Declaration that the sentence against the Q. of
Scotts did nothing prejudice her son. A Parliament held. The banishing of
traitors confirmed.

The States approve and confirm the sentence and desire the publication thereof.


That this sentence did derogate nothing from the right or honor of James King
of Scotland: but that he remained and was in the same rank, estate and right,
as if it had never been.

A few days after, the Parliament sat at Westminster, commenced by certain
authority granted by Qu. Elizabeth to the Archb. of Canterbury, the L.
Treasurer, and the Earl of Derby, as her Lieutenants, and that not without
example: wherein was confirmed a Proscription, that the goods and possessions
of the L. Paget, C. Paget, Sir F. Englefield, E. Jones, Chediock, Tichburne, C.
Tilney, and other traitors, were adjudged confiscate. The States of the Realm
also, after they had by general suffragie and consent, approved and confirmed
the sentence pronounced against the queen of Scotland: all with one accord (by
the Lo. Chancellor) presented a petition to the queen, wherein they desired,
that for the preservation of the true Religion of Christ, the tranquillity of
the land, the security of her person, the good of them all and their
posterity, the Sentence against Mary Q. of Scotland, might be publicly
pronounced, according to the tenor of the Law: alleging reasons drawn from
the dangers stirred and practiced against Religion, her own person and the
Realm, by her who was a mother-nourse of the Roman Religion, and had sworn an
inviolable accord to extirpate the Religion now established, and had long since
laid claim to the Crown, Q. Elizabeth yet living; esteeming, that (seeing she
was excommunicated) it was lawful to conspire against her, and meritorious to
take away her life: She had ruinated some noble houses of the land, and had
kindled the fire of rebellion in England: That to pardon her, were to destroy
the people, who much repined at her impunitie, and that she could not be freed
from the oath conspiracy, otherwise than by punishment: and lastly, they
recited the example of the horrible vengeance of God against K. Saul, for not
putting Agag and Benadad to death. And this is that which was presented by the
States of the Parliament.

Queen Elizabeth with a most grave countenance, and ^^^^sticall speech,
answered to this effect: The Queen answers.
THe benefits which God has bestowed upon me are so great, that I do not only
acknowledge them with humility, but call them to mind with admiration,
wanting words sufficiently to express them. And although there be no mortal
alive more bound to the Almighty, who has so often and so miraculously
delivered me from eminent dangers; yet am I most of all for this, that after
having governed this kingdom now the space of 28 years, I do find in my
subjects the same, if not far greater affection, than when I came first to
the Crown: the which entire love if I should find to fail, I might well
perhaps perceive my self to breathe, but not to live. And now my life has bin
attempted to be taken away, it grieueth me most, that it was by such a person
as was of mine own sex, estate and rank; to whom I was so far from bearing
ill will, that on the contrary, after she had complotted diverse matters
against me, I wrote to her in private, that if in any writing secretly she
would acknowledge them, I would bury them all in oblivion. Neither would I have
done this to entrap or circumuent her; for I knew already all she could
confess: and although the matter was at that pass, yet if she had but showed
her self truly penitent, none should have taken her cause (against me) in
hand. Nevertheless, if only it had concerned mine own life, and not the
safeguard of my people (without ostentation be it spoken) I would willingly have
pardoned her. If England by my death might flourish the more, or gain a better
Prince, I could be well content to lay down my life: for I desire to live
only for your good and the peoples. Neither is there any cause (I have so
led my life) why I should desire life, or fear death. I am not ignorant of
the common state of life; I have obeyed, I have commanded: I have had both good
and bad neighbors: I have found treason in trust* I have bestowed some
benefits ill, and where I have done good, I have been badly requited. When I
ponder these things in mind, I see what the condition of the present time is,
and I foresee the future, thinking them the happiest that soonest depart hence.
But against these, and such like, I have put on a warlike resolution, that
whatsoever shall happen, death shall not surprise me unprovided.

As touching these late treasons, I will not so much prejudice neither my
self, nor the ancient laws of my country in such fashion, as not to think
this arch-treason to be subject thereto, although this new had never bin made;
the which (although some favorers of her have suspected so) was not made
against her, but was so far from entangling her, that rather it was an
advertisement or preadmonition to her, not to come within the danger of it:
nevertheless seeing she has now incurred the law, it is thought good to
proceed against her by virtue thereof. But you, captious Lawyers, you are so
precise, so curious in the quercks and quidities of law, and to follow the
formalitie of it, in stead of interpreting the true sense, that forsooth
according to the form of proceeding, she should be called to judgment within
the county of Staffordshire, there to appear holding up her hand at the
Bar, to stand to the verdict of twelve men, upon her fact. And is this a
brave fashion of proceeding against a Princess? But I have thought good rather
(avoiding such absurdities) that it was more convenient, to refer a matter of
such importance to the Peers and Judges of the Realm, to be examined. And yet
hardly will that serve, because all the world have their eyes upon us Princes,
as if we were set upon a Stage, and do mark afar off the least spot or
blemish that is on us: so that we had need to be careful, we do nothing
unbeseeming us. But you have by this new law brought me into such a narrow
strait, that I am to determine upon the punishment of a Princess my next
kinswoman; whose practices have afflicted me with so great grief, that, not
to augment my sorrows in hearing it spoken of, I did willingly absent my self
from this Parliament, and not (as some think) for fear of treachery.
Notwithstanding I will not leave (although I use few words of it) to put this
secret out of my heart, which I have seen with mine eyes, and read the oath,
by which some have bound themselves to dispatch me within one month. From
hence I foresee your danger in my person; and certainly I shall be careful and
diligent to repel it. I have not forgot the combination you have made for my
safety, of which I never thought before I saw it confirmed under the signs and
seals of the most part of you: and assuredly it has bound me in strict bonds
of love toward you perpetually, who do affect no greater comfort, than in the
love of you and the commonwealth. But for as much as the matter now in hand,
is an example as important, as rare; I deem you expect not, that I should
resolve any thing for the present: For My manner is, even in things of less
consequence, to be long in deliberating, about that I must once resolve upon. I
will pray to God Almighty, that he will illuminate My heart, to foresee what
is commodious for the Church, the Commonwealth, and your safeties.
Notwithstanding, lest delay should bring danger, you shall (as the opportunity
of time will serve) understand My purpose. In the mean time, I would you
should expect all the goodness from Me, which good Subjects may look for from
a good Princess.



She desires them to find out some other remedy.
Twelve days after, when she had more deeply weighed the matter in her mind,
seeing her self with many doubts and difficulties variously distracted, and
unable to counsel her self; she sent the Lord Chancellor to the Noble men,
and Pickering to them of the Lower House; entreating them to consider more
seriously of so weighty a matter, and to devise some more wholesome remedy,
that the Queen of Scotlands life might be preserved, and she secured.

Their Answer to her.
After they had deliberated a long time, and considered, that the good or ill of
Princes concerns the Subjects; with one-according voice, they all put on
again the same resolution, which they had before, grounded upon these Reasons:
THat so long as the Queen of Scotland lived, Queen Elizabeth could not be
secure, unless she would become penitent, and acknowledge her crimes; and
that she should be kept more straightly, and bound by oath and writing; or that
she should deliver Hostages; or that she should depart the Kingdom. Of her
Repentance they had no hope, for that she had been ungrateful to Queen
Elizabeth, who had saved her life; and would not so much as acknowledge her
faults: As for a straiter Guard, her handwriting, oath, or Hostages, they
would be all as nothing; for that Queen Elizabeth being dead, all these would
vanish away instantly. As for departing the Land (if she were out of it) they
feared she would raise Arms against it.

The L. Chancellor, and Pickering the Speaker of the Lower House, declared
these things at large to Queen Elizabeth; importuning her earnestly, that the
Sentence should be put in execution; showing her, That if it were injustice to
deny the Execution of the Law to the meanest Subject, much more to refuse to
grant it to the whole Body of the People, who with one voice and will demanded
it so justly. To which she answered: O how wearisome is that way, Her reply to
them.
where We find nothing but irksomeness whilst we are going in it, and when it is
past, unquietness? I am troubled this day (if ever the like) whether to speak,
or hold My tongue: if I should speak, and not complain, I desemble: if I hold
my tongue, the pains you have taken is in vain: if I complain, it will seem
strange; notwithstanding, I confess, that My first request was both for your
security, and mine own: Some other means should have been found out, than
that you now propound: Insomuch, that I cannot but complain to you, though not
of you; for that I learn by your demands, that My safety depends upon
another ruin. If any think, that I have purposely prolonged the time, to
purchase a counterfeit praise of clemency; undoubtedly they wrong Me
unworthily, and he that searches the depth of all inward thoughts, knows it
well. And greater wrong they do Me, if they think that the Commissioners
durst pronounce no other sentence for fear of displeasing Me, or seeming to
neglect My safety. For either My Officers have failed Me in their duties, or
else certified the Commissioners, that My will and Command was, That every one
should proceed freely, according as they thought good; and that they should
tell Me in particular, what they purposed to publish openly. Out of the great
affection I bore her, it was, that I would have some other means invented, to
have prevented this mischief: But because it now clearly appears, that I
cannot be safe, unless she die; I am touched with a deep dolor, to see that
I, who have showed favor to so many Rebels, wincked at so many treacheries,
should at the last be seen to deal cruelly with so great a Princess.

Since I took in hand the managing of this Kingdom, I have seen infamous
Libells cast out against Me, as a Tyrant. Much good may it do the writers: I
thought they would signify some strange thing, and indeed it was strange to Me,
to be taxed of tyranny; I would it were as strange to hear of their impiety.
But now, what is it they will not put forth in their writings, when they shall
know, that I have consented that an executioner shall imbrue his hands in the
blood of My nearest Kinswoman? And in the mean time, I am so far from
cruelty, that I would not to save My life, do her any violence; nor have I had
so much care to prolong it, as (in the preserving of it) to preserve hers, and
with intolerable grief, that it cannot be so still. I am not so senseless, as
not to see the perils which lie before Me; so unadvised, to whet the knif that
shall cut My throat; nor so careless not to respect My life: But I think with
My Self, that there are many; which for the safeguard of a Prince's life,
adventure their own; but I franckly confess, I am none of that number. These
things have I often cast in My mind: But forasmuch as diverse have employed
their tongues and pens against me, give me leave to defend My Self as I may,
to the end you may see what a woman she is, for whose welfare you have been
so circumspect. Certainly I do well, and with gratitude of heart call your
vigilant care to mind, but never shall be able to give you condign thanks,
although I should live as long as every one of you.

So soon as I received the Scepter, being not unmindful of God, who gave me
his grace, I begun my Reign in his service, and the Religion wherein I was
borne, and have been brought up, and I hope shall die. And although I am not
ignorant, how many ieopardies have encompassed Me at home; and how great
Princes, for changing Religion, have envied Me abroad, yet have I not been
moved thereat: For I know, that God, whom alone I respect, will defend both Me
and My cause. From thence have sprung up against Me, so many attempts and
conspiracies, that I wonder I live; but God has always been my succor and
support, and sent me aid beyond My expectation. Since that, to prove My self
a Proficient in the Art of Reigning, I have of long time bethought Me, what
things were fitting for Kings, and have found, that nothing is more necessary,
than to be plentifully furnished with the predominant Virtues of Justice,
Temperance, Wisdom, and Fortitude. For the two last, which appertain more
properly to men, My sex permits Me not to attribute them to my self: but as
for the two precedent, and the more mild, I dare say (without glorying) I have
with indifferency, conjoined the highest with the lowest. I have not preferred
any unworthily: Mine ears have not been too credulous; nor have I (before I
heard the cause) past my judgment rashly: yet I will not say, but many things
perhaps have bin brought by report to me, by some too partially affected to the
Parties; For the good and wary Prince is often sold, for that he cannot hear
every Cause. My judgment (the best it could) has evermore inclined to the
Truth; as he which admonished his Friend to make no answer, before he had
repeated the Alphabet; so have I done nothing unadvisedly.

As concerning therefore your Counsels and Consultations, I acknowledge them so
elaborate, prudent, and provident for My conservation, issued from hearts so
sincere, and so well-affected to My service, that it is My part to endeavor
with all My power, not to be unthankful to men of so great demerit. But as
concerning your demand, I entreat and charge you, to hold you content with an
Answer without Answer. I commend your Judgments, and apprehend the reasons
thereof. But excuse Me (I pray) for that doubtful perplexity of thought which
troubles Me. Let the most gracious affection which I bear you be acceptable
and pleasing to you; and withal this Answer, if so be you esteem it an
Answer. If I say I will not do your demand, perhaps I shall say more than I
think: If that I will; I (whom you would so gladly preserve) shall run
headlong upon mine own destruction. And I think (such is your wisdom) you
would not that, if you observe seriously the times, and manners of persons.
After this the Parliament was prorogued.



At that time were sent to the Queen of Scotland, The Q. of Scotland is
certified of her judgment.
the Lord Buckhurst, and Beal, to certify her, that Judgment was given
against her; and that it was approved most just by Authority of Parliament,
and that the States had demanded the execution thereof; for Justice, Security,
and Necessity: And therefore they persuaded her, that after she had
acknowledged her offenses to God and Queen Elizabeth, she should satisfy
therefore by repentance before she dyed; and to show, that if she lived, the
Religion received in England could not stand. At which she seemed to triumph
with extraordinary cheerfulness: giving thanks to God, and rejoicing, that
she was held to be a worthy Instrument, for the re-establishing of her Religion
in this Island. She did with great fervor and affection desire a Catholic
Priest to direct her Conscience, and to administer the Sacraments; refusing
(upon the first motion) the Bishop and the Deane, which they recommended to her
to that end: And she greatly blamed the English Nation, saying often: The
English have many times murdered their Kings: and it is no strange thing, if
they do the like to me, who am derived of their Royal blood.

The Ambassador of France slays the publishing of the Sentence.

Notwithstanding, it is published.


L'Aubespine the Ambassador of France stayed the publishing of this Sentence:
yet by suite and soliciting of some Courtiers, it was published in the Month of
December, with the sound of a Trumpet through the City of London, in the
presence of the Mayor, the Sherifes, and certain selected Citizens. And Queen
Elizabeth protested seriously in the Preface of this publication, that she had
been drawn to it, with great grief of heart, by a certain necessity, and
the earnest request of the States of the Kingdom. Notwithstanding, there were
some that thought, it was done by a certain familiar policy incident to
women, who seem to do by compulsion, the thing they most desire.

The Queen of Scotland carries herself with a resolute courage.
The publishing of this Sentence of death being declared to the Q. of Scotland,
she was so far from fainting in courage, or seeming disanimated, that with
alacrity casting up her eyes and hands toward heaven, she thanked God for it,
and getting leave of her keeper Sir Aim Poulet, she wrote to Q. Eliza.

That She puts off all malice of mind toward her; gives thanks to God
for this Condemnation, She moves a request to Queen Elizabeth.
seeing it was his good pleasure to add an end to the irksome pilgrimage
which she had in this life; and desired her, for that she could not expect any
good from some hotspirited Nouators, which held the chiefest rank in England,
that she might be beholden to her alone, and no other, for the benefits
following:

First, that when her Adversaries were glutted in her innocent blood, her Body
might be carried from thence by her own servants to some sacred and hallowed
ground, there to be buried; and above all, into France, where her Mother lies
in rest, seeing that in Scotland they had offered violence to the dead bodies
of her Ancestors, profaned or ruinated the Churches: and in England, she could
not hope for any burial according to the Catholic solemnities, amongst the
ancient Kings, both their Ancestors: And so her Body that never had rest so
long as it lived with her Soul, may have some at last after it is parted from
it.

Secondly, (for that she feared the close tyranny of some) she may not suffer
her punishment unknown to the Queen of England, in some secret place, but in
the sight of her servants, and other people, which may truly bear witness of
the Faith which she showed in Christ, of her obedience to the Church, and of
the end of her life, against the false rumors which her Adversaries may bruit
abroad.

Thirdly, that her servants may be suffered peaceably to depart whither they
will; and to enjoy the goods she had bequeathed them by her Will. She
beseeched her, in the name of Jesus Christ, to grant her these things, and
combined her thereto, by their alliance in Blood, by the Ghost and memory of
Henry the seventh, Progenitor to them both, and by the Princely honor which
sometimes she had. Then she complained, that all her Princely Robes were taken
away by the command of the Counselors. She presageth; their malice will
extend to worse things. She added, that if they had showed without fraud or
falsehood the papers which they took from her, it would clearly have appeared
by them, that nothing had caused her untimely death, but the doubtful care
which some had of Queen Elizabeth's safety.

Finally, she entreated her, to return her an Answer under her Hand, touching
these things. Whether these Letters came to the hands of Queen Elizabeth, I
cannot say.

Opinions of the Q. of Scotl. cause.
As for the rest, there past, according to the diversity of men's natures,
diverse speeches upon this matter; not to speak of the declamations and
exclamations made by the Clergy pro and contra, which commonly are very sharp.

In her behalf.
Some weighing the matters in equity, thought they had handled her too hardly,
because she was an absolute and free Princess, over whom God alone had the
command, being very nearly allied in blood royal to Q. Elizabeth; and that
being driven out of Scotland by the rebels, she was no sooner arrived in
England, but Q. Elizabeth promised her upon her Princely word, by Hen.
Mildmore, to show her all courtesy, and to welcome her with all royal deeds
of hospitality; yet nevertheless, contrary to this promise, imprisoned her,
and violated these sacred rights. That she could not be held but for a
prisoner of war, and to such it was lawful to practice any means for their
liberty and freedom. That she could not commit treason, because she was no
subject: and that none has power over his equal. That, that had disanulled
the sentence of the Emperor against Rob. King of Sicily, because he was not
subject to his Empire. That if Ambassadors, which ^^e but Princes servants,
shall have conspired against those to whom they are employed in Embassage, are
not culpable of treason, much less the Princes themselves: and that the will
ought not to be punished, unless it take effect. That it was a thing never
heard of, for a Queen to pass under the hands of a common executioner. That
she was condemned contrary to the law of God, the Roman Civil Law, and the
English; yea, even against the Statute of the Parliament Anno 13. of Elizabeth,
whereby it was ordained, That no person should be called into judgment for
having attempted the ruin of the Prince, but upon the testimony and oath of
two lawful witnesses, who should be brought face to face before the accused;
and in her trial no witness was produced against her, but she was condemned from
the testimony of two Secretaries absent. They discoursed diversely also of the
credit that was to be given to domestic servants, being prisoners: They much
commended the speech of Adrian the Emperor: Testibus, non testimonijs
credendum, That we should rather trust the the witnessors, than the witnesses.
Others privately complained, that Spies or Intelligencers had been suborned,
who by forgerie, false letters, and deceitful sleights had deluded this
Princess exposed to injuries, had prevented her purposes, encouraged her to
bad matters, of which she had not so much as once thought, had she been kept
as was requisite, and if such fraudulent Machinators had not been put to her
to that purpose. That it has been a familiar thing in all ages, for those
that are enuyed by Courtiers, even against their wills to be brought into
treason, and to heap more dangers (more treacherously*) upon the innocent,
being once restrained of liberty.

Others thought that she was not a free and absolute Qu. Against her.
but only titulary, because she had forsaken her kingdoms government, and
was under the protection of the queen of England, so soon as she was come
within the kingdom: and as in doing well she had tasted the benefit of the
Law, so in doing ill, she was subject to the rigor thereof; according to the
Lawyers Maxim: He deserves no benefit of the Law, which trespasseth against
the Law. Otherwise the condition of a stranger-king, offending within the
country of another, should be better than of him which reigns well: That she
was a subject temporally, but not originally; because that in respect of regal
authority, there cannot be two absolute Princes together in one Kingdom: That
by the common received opinion of Lawyers, The king out of his Territories is a
private man, except in expedition of war: and therefore can neither confer
nor exercise the royal Rights. Besides that, that she had lost her
soueraignety of Empire by her trespass: and that those which are subject to a
King by reason of domicile, may commit treason. As touching the parentage,
there is no nearer kindred than our country; for that it is a second Divinity,
and our first and greatest parent. As touching the promises of the duties of
humanity and hospitality, these are no privileges to commit evils
unpunished: That promises are to be understood so long as things remain in the
same estate, and are not changed. That he which has committed a crime,
deserves not to enjoy any promised security, and the rights of hospitality as
sacred: but our country is more sacred. That the Prince, no more than the
Pope, never binds his hands, and that all Princes are more nearly obliged to
their Co^mon-wealths, than to their promises. That if they should proceed with
her, as with a prisoner in war, they object I know not out of what author,
That only captives are to be pardoned, from whom we can suspect no disturbance
of the peace; and no others. And that every one has power over his equal,
always and when the equal submits himself to his judgment, either
expressly by word, or secretly by contract, or else by offending within his
jurisdiction. That the Pope had cut off the sentence given by the Emperor
against Rob. King of Sicily, because the fact was not committed within the
Emperors dominions, but within the Popes. That by the law of Nations,
Ambassadors have been so favored for the necessity of their Ambassages, as
not to be violated: but Kings which trespass in the country of another, have
no such grant. Finally, that in matter of treason, the will, though wanting
effect, is punishable: and to practice the death of the Prince, nay to know of
the practice, and to conceal it, is held for treason. That many Kings have
been condemned and punished, as namely Rescuporis of Thrace, by Tiberius,
Licinius and Maximinianus by Constantine the great, Bernard of Italy, Conrade
of Sicily, etc. And that which is the sum of all, The sovereign Law is the
safety of the people: now no law more sovereign, than the welfare of the
Commonwealth. And that Jupiter himself made this law, That whatsoever is for
the commodious good of the Commonwealth, is lawful and just. On the contrary,
that the Bishops of Rome have put to death some Ecclesiastical Princes, not
for the safeguard of the Commonwealth so much, as for their own particular:
as Boniface the eightth put to death Celestine the fifth, deposed from the
Papacy, fearing that he should be called again, because of his singular piety:
Urban the sixth, who caused five Cardinals to be sewed up in sackes, and cast
into the Sea, beheaded some, and two others he caused to be baked in an Oven;
and for the more terror, commanded they should be laid on Mules, and carried
about the country. Moreover that Secretaries are not to be held for servants,
and that domestic witness is to be admitted for proof of secret things done
in the house. And it was argued upon, whether the accusers which have sworn
voluntarily, and those which are suspected of crimes, ought to come face to
face in criminal matters, to maintain the accusation. Lastly, That there is no
such perfect example, but has some thing in it which is not just. These, and
such like, are the matters which then were debated.

The Q. of Scotland's son intercedeth for her.
In the mean time the K. of Scotland, for the remarkable dear love he bore
his mother, labored with all his power, by the imploime^t of W. Keith, to save
her; omitting nothing beseeming a good and virtuous son: but without
success, because the Scots were divided into factions amongst themselves, Some
Scots against her.
and more favored Q. Elizabeth, than their prisoned Q. insomuch that some of
them by private letters solicited Q. Elizabeth to hasten her punishment: and
that the Ministers of Scotland, being commanded by the King to pray to God in
the Churches for his mother, they obstinately refused so to do, for the hate
they bore the Religion which she professed. The K. by letters and messages.
And though the King had formerly been earnest (by messages and letters) with
Q. Elizabeth in his mothers behalf, yet then he became more instant;
complaining, That it was most unjust, that the Nobles, the Counselors and
subjects of England should give sentence against a Queen of Scotland, borne of
the English blood; and as unjust also but to think, that the States of England
can by authority of Parliament exclude the true heirs from the right of
succession, and their lawful inheritance. The which some did often threaten,
to cause the more terror.

He sent also Patrick Gray and Robert Meluin, to delare to Q. Elizabeth, That
the great proximitie which was betwixt them, would not let him believe, that
she would violate that renowned reputation, which she from all parts had
purchased by her virtues; and especially by her mercifulness, which she had
reserved unstained with any spot of cruelty; and that she would by no means
now defile it in his mothers blood, who was of the same princely dignity,
parentage, and sex: whom he (because his mothers blood had so great an
interest in him) could not forsake, nor leave to the cruelty of those, who had
so long breathed after his death, as well as hers.

After he had by other letters showed at large, with what heaviness of heart,
and doubtful perplexities he was afflicted, by reason of this weighty
business, which touched and bound him in nature and honor, and into what
extremities of distress and danger his reputation was like to fall among his
subjects, if any violence were offered to his mother; these things he
propounded to her serious consideration, And propounds some things
considerable.
drawn from the inward sense of his sorrow and filial affection: How greatly
it concerns his honor, being a King and son, if his dearest mother (who
was also an absolute Princess) should dye an infamous death, and that by her
commandment who was the next in league of love and consanguinitie. Whether by
the word of God any thing may justly be enacted by law against those, whom God
has established for the administration of justice; whom be vouch safeth to
call gods upon earth, whom he has anointed, whom he has forbid to touch,
because they are his anointed, and whom he will not permit to suffer wrong
unrevenged. How monstrous a thing were it that an absolute Prince should be
subject to the censure of subjects: How prodigious, that an entyre Prince
should lead the way, to give such a detestable example, to profane the
diadems of others: What should enforce her to this bloody cruelty? Honor, or
profit? If honor, then might she acquire more and greater in pardoning; for so
(to her eternal glory for her clemency) should she bind to her for this
benefit, both Him and all the Kings of Christendom, whose affection otherwise
she should lose, together with her reputation, and brand her self with the
mark of cruelty. If profit, it is to be considered, whether any thing can be
accounted profitable, but that which is just and honest. And then concluded, in
desiring her to send such an answer by his Ambassadors as should be
welbeseeming so pious a Princess, and not unworthy for such a King as was her
most affectionate kinsman. But these Ambassadors, intermingling tempestiue
menaces with their messages, were not pleasing: and so taking their leave, some
few days after returned back, carrying with them as little comfort as hope.

As the K. of France did by his Ambassadors.
Pomponius Bellieure, sent for this cause from the King of France, had access
to the Q. of England, (accompanied with l'Aubespine de Chasteauneuf the
ordinary Ambassador) and having given her to understand how many contrary
thoughts had troubled the K. of France; on the one side, for the singular
affection which he bore her; on the other, for the near alliance of kindred
which was betwixt him and the Q. of Scotland: propounded to Q Elizabeth at two
several times in writing, these and the like things, viz. Bellieures reasons
for the Qu. of Scotland.
That it nearly concerned the K. of France, and other Kings, that a free Queen
and absolute Princess should not be committed to death.

That the safety of Queen Elizabeth would be in more danger by the death of
Mary, than by her life, and that being set at liberty, she could not attempt
any thing against the Queen of England, because that her want of health did
promise no long life.

That she had arrogated to her self the Kingdom of England, was not to be
imputed (as a crime) so much to her, as to that she had learned in her youth of
naughty Counselors.

That she came into England as a suppliant, and therefore she could not be
justly detained, but was at the last to be released either for money or mercy.
And besides, that an absolute Prince ought not in any sort to be brought to
arraignement: which made Cicero say, that it was a thing never heard of, that a
K. should be called in question, of accused of any capital crime.

That if she were innocent, she ought not to be punished: if culpable, she
should be pardoned, because that would redound to the greater honor and
profit, and would remain an eternal example of the English clemency.
Alleging to this purpose the History of Porsenna, which drew out of the fire
the right hand of M. Sceuola, who had conspired his death, and let him go.

That the first precept to reign well, is to spare blood: that blood cries
for blood, and to be severe upon her, cannot but seem a thing cruel and
bloody.

That the K. of France would endeavor seriously to dissolve the designs of
those, which conspired against Queen Elizabeth, and that the Guises (the Queen
of Scotland's kinsmen) should swear and subscribe to do the same, who would
take it very grievously if she were put to death, and perhaps, would not suffer
it unrevenged.

Finally, they required she should not be handled with such rigorous and
extraordinary judgment: for if she were, the King of France could not but
take it as a most grievous offense, howsoever the other Princes took it.



To every one of these Articles, answer was made in the Margent, Answers to his
Reasons
That the Queen of England hoped, that the most Christian king of France made
no less reckoning of her, than of the Queen of Scotland, who had practiced
her destruction, she being an innocent Princess, her near Kinswoman, and in
league of Alliance with the King of France: That it is expedient for Kings and
their Countries, that wicked actions be not left unpunished, especially against
Princes.

That the English, who acknowledge Queen Elizabeth the sole Supreme Gouernesse
of England, cannot at once acknowledge two Sovereigns, free and absolute
Princes; nor any other whilst she lived could participate in equality with
her: Neither could she perceive how the Queen of Scotland, and her Son,
which then reigned, could be held at once for Sovereign and absolute Princes.

Whether that the safety of Queen Elizabeth be exposible to greater perils,
she being put to death, seeing it depends upon future contingencie: That the
Estates of England, having well weighed this point, are otherwise conceited:
namely, That whilst she lives, there will always be new plots of mischief
breeding; especially, because it is now come to that issue, that there is no
hope left for the one, if the other be not extinct: and this saying should
often present it self to her mind; Either I shall dispatch her, or she me.
And the lesser time her life shall last, the more celeritie will the
Conspirators use, to execute their plots.

That hitherto she would never renounce her claim and challenge to the English
Crown, and therefore was for just cause to be detained in prison, and detained
must be, till she renounce it, although she came to England for succor and
support. And for what cause soever she was put in prison, she is to be punished
for the faults she has committed since the time of her imprisonment.

That the Queen of England had pardoned her before, when she was condemned of
all the Estates, for consenting to the Rebellion in the North; the which was
raised, to have made the Marriage betwixt her and tbe Duke of Norfolk: and to
pardon her again, were imprudent and cruel mercy. That none are ignorant of
that Maxim of the Lawyers: An offender found within the Territory of another,
is to be punished, where he is found to have committed the fault, without
respect of Dignity, Honor, or Privilege. And that the same is permitted as
well by the Laws of England, as also by the examples of Licinius, Robert King
of Sicilie, Bernard King of Italy, Conradine, Elizabeth Queen of Hungary, Joan
Queen of Naples, and of Deiotarus, for whom Cicero pleading, said: It is not a
thing unjust, though unusual for a King to be arraigned. His very words are
these: Primum dico pro capite, fortunisque Regis, quod ipsum etsi non iniquum
est, in tuo duntaxat periculo: tamen est ita inusitatum, Regem capitis reum
esse, tante hoc tempus non sit auditum.

That she that has been found guilty by a just Judgment, ought to undergo
punishment; forasmuch, as that which is Just, is Honest; and that which is
Honest, is also profitable.

That the History of Porsenna has no allusion to the matter in question,
except it were to be thought, that there are a great number yet behind, of
them, which conspire against Queen Elizabeth; and so could persuade her out of
fear and some little respect of honor, to dismiss the Queen of Scotland,
without putting her to any pain; as Porsenna past off Mutius, after Mutius had
told him, there was yet 300. more of his Fellow-Confederates, which had sworn
his death. Besides, that Mutius set upon Porsenna in open war, and assured
himself, that by sending Mutius away, he was out of all danger.

That blood is to be spared, but that is innocent blood: That God has said,
Blood cries for blood, it is true; and that France both before the Massacre of
Paris and since ca^ testify this.

That punishment by death, justly inflicted, cannot be accounted bloody, no
more than a wholesome medicine, can be deemed hurtful.

Howsoever the Guises, the Queen of Scotlands Cousens relish it, Queen
Elizabeth has more nearer cause to respect her self, her own safety, her
Nobility, and the good of her People, on whose love she wholly depends,
than the discontent of any other whosoever: And that the matter was now at that
point, that the old Proverb of the two Princes, Conradine the King of Sicilie,
and Charles the Duke of Anjou, might be used, and truly said, of these two
Queens, THE DEATH OF MARY, THE LIFE OF ELIZABETH: And THE LIFE OF MARY, THE
DEATH OF ELIZABETH.

The promises of the French King, or the Guises, cannot secure the Queen of
England, nor the Realm of assured safety: much less make amends for her
death, if she be made away.

That the French King cannot discover, or keep in the plots of Treason, which
are practiced against him in his own Country; much less this against the
Queen of England; for that Treason is closely carried, and therefore
inevitable. And if the wicked act were once committed, what good would come on
it to claim their promises? How can the life of an incomparable Prince, after
death be repaired? and what redress can be found out for the Commonwealth,
(failing with her) in this sad confusion of all things?

That the hand-writings, or oaths of the Guises can be of no great moment; for
that they hold it a meritorius matter to put to death the Pope of Romes
Adversaries, and may easily have a dispensation of their oath. And when Queen
Elizabeth shall be slain, and the Queen of Scotland, which is of the House of
the Guises, advanced to the Royalty, who is he will accuse them for her death?
or if they should be accused, that can bring her to life again?

But in that the Ambassadors have said, That the Judgment was rigorous and
extraordinary; they have spoken indiscreetly (for they saw neither the
proceedings of the business, nor heard the proofs) and have with too much
asperitie reprehended the Estates of the Realm of England, being Personages of
chiefest note in the Kingdom, for nobleness of Birth, Virtue, Wisdom, and
Piety. Yea, and that they have altogether delivered these speeches from the
King of France, to terrify the Queen of England, and the Estates of the Land.
That the English are not wont to fear the Frenchmens menaces, nor can these
divert them, from providing how to settle their State in security, Forasmuch
as the Ambassadors, in the mean time, have not made any demonstration or
mention, how to prevent the imminent ieopardies, and dangers hanging over
Englands head.

THE NINE AND TWENTIETH YEAR OF HER REIGN, ANNO DOM. M.D.LXXXVII.
AS men thus (according to the variety of their apprehensions) discoursed
busily, and at large of these matters, as they were led either by envy or
affection: D' Aubespine the Ambassador for France in England, who was of the
Faction of the Guises, The Ambassador of France attempteth Queen Elizabeth's
life.
thinking, that if he could not by Arguments or Reasons deliver the Queen of
Scotland, yet would he by some mischievous craft: Treats privately, and first
with one William Stafford, a young Gentleman, and apt to conceive strange
hopes, whose Mother was one of the Ladies of Honor, and his Brother Ledger in
France, about the killing of Queen Elizabeth. At first he dealt with him
underhand, but afterward more plainly by his Secretary Trappe, who promised
him, if he performed it, that he should have thereby, nor only great glory, and
a large sum of money; but also exceeding favor from his Holiness the Pope
of Rome, the Guises, and all Catholics. Stafford, as loathing such a monstrous
mischief, would not be the Actour thereof; but notwithstanding, notifyed to
him one Modey, a fit fellow to be imploed in matter of murder, and one who
would dispatch it though never so bloody, for money. This Modey was a prisoner
in London; to whom Stafford made it known, that the French Ambassador desired
to speak with him. He answered, that he desired the same, if he were out of
Prison; entreating him in the mean time, to speak with Cordalion, the
Ambassadors vnder-Secretary, who was his familiar friend. The morrow after,
was sent to him Trappe and Stafford; which Trappe (Stafford going apart) grew
into talk with Modey, how and by what means they might kill Q^eene Elizabeth.
Modey advised to have it done by poison, or by bringing privately into the
Queens Chamber, a barrel of Gunpowder, to be secretly set on fire. But this
liked not Trappe, who desired a resolute fellow, which feared nothing, such a
one as the Bourgoignon, which had slain the Prince of Orange.

Stafford had quickly revealed this to the Council: Stafford discovers the
enterprise to the Counsel.
And Trappe (now preparing himself for France) is apprehended, and being
examined, confesses all the matter. Hereupon, the twelfth of January
following, the Ambassador was sent for to the House of Cicile, whither he came
about evening, where there was present at that time, by the commandment of the
Queen, Cicile the Baron of Burghley, Lord High Treasurer of England; the Earl
of Leicester, Sir Christopher Hatton, Vice-Chamberlaine to the Queens Majesty;
and Dauison, one of her Majesty's Secretaries: who declared, that they had
invited him thither, to acquaint him with the cause, why they had stayed his
Secretary Trappe, being bound for France; and so discoursed to him the whole
matter, as Stafford, Modey, and Trappe themselves had confessed; and had caused
them to be brought in, to testify the same before his face. The Ambassador
(with great impatience) bending his brows, and standing up, said: That he
(being the Kings Ambassador) would not abuse his Master the King of France, or
prejudice other Ambassadors in that kind, to be a hearer of Accusations, be
what they will. But they having answered him, that these things were not
produced as accusations against him; but to let him perceive that they were
neither false nor feigned: and, to the end he might take occasion to convince
Stafford of Calumny the more freely; he became quiet. But so soon as
Stafford came in, and had begun to speak; he interrupting of him, in railing
manner, swore: That Stafford had first mentioned the matter, The Ambassador
denies it.
and that he had threatened to send him bound hand and foot, to the Queen of
England, if he would not give over that business; and that at that time he
forbore him, for the love and affection he had to his Mother, his Brother, and
his Sister. Stafford falling on his knees, protested many times up on his
Salvation, That the Ambassador had first broken the matter to him. The
Ambassador then more moved than before, Stafford was commanded forth, and
Modey not permitted to come in.

The Ambassador mildly rebuked.
Hereupon the Lord Burghley, out of his own words, and Trappe his Confession,
reproved him, but somewhat gently, for this intended mischief. The Ambassador
answered; Whether an Ambassador be to discover the attempts, if he know any to
be committed against the Prince to whom he is sent.
If he had been guilty, or acquainted with the matter, yet as being an
Ambassador, he was not bound to reveal it to any but his own King. Burghley
answering, said; Admit it be not the part of an Ambassador (which yet is a
matter questionable) to discover such matters, but only to their own King,
when the life of a Prince is in hazard: yet it is the part of a Christian to
prevent such enormities, as touch the life of a Prince; nay, of any private
Christian. This he stoutly denied, and withal recited an example of a French
Ambassador, not long agone in Spain, who knowing of a treacherous practice
against the King of Spain, although it concerned his life; yet discovered it
not to him, but to his own King: for which he received great commendation,
both of his King and of his Council. But the Lord Burghley very gravely
admonished him, hereafter to have a care how he offended her Majesty, and not
to forget his duty, and her Majesty's mercifulness, which was loath to offend
the good Ambassadors, by punishing the bad: neither was he all this while
exempt from the fault, though freed from the punishment.

From this attempt, such as were the sworn enemies of the Queen of Scotland,
and sought to do her hurt, took occasion hereby to hasten her death; knowing
that in extreme danger of safety, Fear leaves no place for Mercy, and took
order (the more to terrify the Queen of England) to spread rumorous speeches
daily, and false and fearful exclamations all over the Land; to wit: That the
Spanish Fleet was already landed at Milford-Hauen; That the Scots were come
upon their borders; That the Guise was in Essex with a mighty Army; That the
Queen of Scots had broken prison, raised a great troop of Soldiers, and
began to make a Rebellion in the North; That there were new plots in hand, for
murdering the Queen, and to burn the City of London; yea, That the Queen
of England was dead, and such like: which in those that are crafty and
fearful (by a natural desire) are nourished, and increased; and Princes
(credulous by curiosity) will soon lend their ears thereunto.

By such divulged horrors, and fearful arguments, they brought her Majesty
into such trouble and perplexity of mind, that she signed the Letters of
Warrant to her deadly Sentence, and was persuaded most of all to it, by
Patricke Gray Scottishman, whom the King of Scotland had sent to dissuade the
Queen of England, from putting his mother to death: But Gray the Scot, more.
who many times put these words into her ears; Mortua non mordet: Being dead,
she will byte no more.

And notwithstanding, as she was naturally slow to anger, she had this custom,
She weighs these businesses.
that she never would enter unadvisedly, or without premeditation, into any
action: so she began to weigh in her mind, whether it were better to put her
to death, or to let her live. From putting her to death, she was dissuaded, By
her own natural clemency, not to use cruelty to her who was a Princess and
her next kinswoman; from the fear that she had, Histories should make her
infamous to posterities, and from the dangers which might fall upon her, as
from the part of the King of Scotland, who then was the next in succession to
the Crown of England: so also from the Catholic Princes, and from desperate
people, who would attempt any thing. From pardoning of her likewise, she
foresaw no less danger to ensu^; That the Nobility which had given the
sentence against her, would covertly seek to regaine the favor of her and her
son; and that could not be done without danger to her self. That her other
subjects would take it ill, when they perceive their labor to be lost; and
though then they were careful for her welfare, yet hereafter they might grow
careless: and that many would change their religion, and become Popish, upon a
supposition of greater hopes, seeing her preserved, as it were by fatal
providence, to inherit the Kingdom of England. That the Jesuits and
Seminaries, whose eyes were all cast upon her, seeing her sickly, and not like
to live long, would be so much the more busy to procure the death of Q.
Elizabeth, to set up their religion.

Her Courtiers also ceased not to suggest these and the like things, unto her:
The Courtiers persuade her,
Wherefore should you pardon so monstrous a malefactor, being already justly
condemned; who, after she had subscribed to the combination made for the
preservation of your health and safety, notwithstanding presently after
attempted the taking away of your life, and thereby to procure the utter ruin
of Religion, By reasons.
the Nobility, and commons? Clemency indeed is a Princely virtue, but not to
be showed to such as are merciless. Let the vain show of mercy yield to
life-preseruing severity, and have regard, that your mercy bring you not to
misery. It is enough to have the commendation of clemency, in that you have
once given pardon: to pardon her again, were nothing else but to pronounce her
innocent, to condemn the States of the Kingdom of injustice, to animate her
agents to attempt new mischiefs, and to discourage your faithful subjects
from having any care for the preservation of the weal public. Religion, the
Commonwealth, your own welfare, the love of your country, the oath of
association, the care of posterity to come, do all together beg and beseech
you, that she which desires the destruction of all these, may speedily be
brought to destruction her self. If these be not heard, there is no safety
left for this State, and Historians will leave it recorded to the ages to come,
that the fair sunshine days of all prosperity, which were in England under
Q. Elizabeth, ended in a dark and dreadful evening, nay turned into a dismal
night of eternal obscurity. Our posterity shall find, that we wanted wisdom;
having power to foresee our miseries, but not to prevent them: the which will
thereby become the greater: the grossness whereof will be imputed, not so
much to the malice of our enemies, as the improuident stupidity of these times.
That the life of a titulary Queen of Scotland, was not so much worth, as the
safety of this whole kingdom: nor is there any place left for lingering; for
delays are dangerous. We should not give malefactors of that monstrous nature,
leave to breathe, which from their insolency will take their last support, and
from the impunity of their crime, expect some recompense. He which keeps not
himself out of danger when he may, seems rather to tempt God, than to trust
in him. All the danger that can be from strangers, will cease with the cause,
and cannot harm England, unless it be by her. What will or power soever the
Pope can have to hurt, will cease with her death. The Spaniard can have no
cause to find fault, who for his own security, put his only son Charles to
death, and does what he can at this present also to make away Don Antonio King
of Portugale, the more to extend his ambition. The king of France entertayneth
an inviolable league of love with England, and is above all things so
interested herein, that by the present dispatch of the Q. of Scotland, the hope
of the Guises shall be laid flat under foot, since it is so that (out of the
desperate hope they have in the long looked-for aid from their kinswoman)
their insolency is grown so great at this time against him. That the King of
Scotland, even in nature, and out of a true respect of his royalty, cannot but
be moved to displeasure at his mothers death, yet he will rather (out of better
deliberation) wayt wisely, till time shall ripen his hopes with security, than
to attempt, out of season, the things which can afford him nothing but
disturbance and danger. And the nearer he shall grow to his great hopes, the
farther off will foreign Princes (who of customary course are always
opposite to the growing greatness of others) estrange themselves from him.

They propounded also to her domestical examples, because that that which is
warranted by president, And by examples.
is the more tolerable: As, What comportment the Kings of England (for their
securities) have had with their competitors, namely, Henry the first with
Robert his elder brother, Edw. the third, or rather his mother, with Edward the
second, Henry the fourth with Richard the second, Edward the fourth with Hen.
the sixth, with his son the Prince of Wales, and George of Clarence his own
natural brother, Henry the seventh with the Earl of Warwick, the younger son
of the Duke of Clarence, and HENRY the eightth with De-la-Poole Earl of
Suffolk, with Margaret of Salisbury, and Courtney Marquess of Exeter: all
which (in comparison of their offenses) dyed for very slight matters. Neither
did the Courtiers only suggest these, and the like to the Queen; but diverse
fiery-tongued Preachers also, took occasion to exercise (with all asperity of
spirit) the heat of their desires, in hastening on her death. Sundry also of
the vulgar sort were of the same temper, according as their affections or
humors carried them away with hope or fear.

Amidst these sad-afflicting thoughts of mind (which so troubled the Queen of
England's perplexed heart, She is notwithstanding suspensiue and perplexed with
doubtful fears.

She commands a Warrant to be drawn for the execution.


as that she delighted to be all alone, and to sit solitary by her self,
neither looking up, nor uttering any speech; yet would suddenly many times,
break out into these words, and sighing, say, AVT PETERE AVT PERCVTE, and
withal, also a kind of Emblem: PREVENT THE STROKE BY STRIKING) she delivered
Secretary Dauison letters under her hand and seal, wherein he was commanded
to make ready a Warrant, under the great seal of England, for the execution of
the Qu. of Scotland, and to keep it private, not acquainting any therewith,
lest happily in this turbulent time of fear, some sudden violent danger might
happen. But the morrow after (some sudden affright mixing it self with her
pensive thoughts and meditations of mind) changing her former purpose, she
recommanded Dauison (by Killegray) to dispatch his Warrant. Dauison, going to
her, told her it was ready, and sealed. Whereat she grew very angry, saying, He
was too hasty. But for all this, he forbore not to publish the matter, and to
impart it to the Council; Her Council send secretly.
who (believing that willingly, which they desired earnestly) were easily
persuaded, that the Queen had given commandment for the execution; and
(unknown to her) sent presently away Beale (who, out of a fervor of zeal
which he bore to religion, was more eagerly bent against the Queen of
Scotland, than any other) and with him two executioners, and letters Patents,
whereby authority was granted to the Earls of Shrewesbury, Kent, Derby,
Cumberland and others, to proceed in this execution. And although the Queen
had told Dauison at that time, that she had a purpose to deal otherwise with
the Queen of Scotland; yet for all that, he did not stay or recall Beale.

Now as soon as the Earls were arrived at Fotheringham, they found the Q. of
Scotland with Sir Aim Poulet and Sir Drue Drury, to whose custody she was
committed; and then (reading the Mandate) showed the cause of their coming,
admonishing her, in few words, to prepare her self to dye against the next
morrow. Sh, ehearing that, with an undaunted courage and countenance, answered
them: I Never thought, that my sister, the Queen of England, The Q. of Scotl.
prepares herself for death.
would have consented to my death, seeing I am not subject to your law: but
since her pleasure is such, death to me shall be most welcome. And surely that
soul were not worthy the eternal joys of heaven, whose body cannot endure
one stroke of a Headsman. She desired of them to have conference with her
Almner, her Confessor, and Meluine her Steward. As for her Confessor, they
flatly denied her him; and appointed her for comforters, the Bishop and Deane
of Peterborough, whom she refused. Thereupon, the Earl of Kent (a zealous
professor of Religion) amongst other his speeches, uttered this: Your life will
be the death; and your death, the life of our Religion. Then having made
mention of Babington, she confidently affirmed, she never kn^w of his
practices. She referred the due revenge of all to God: and having inquired
what was become of Nauue, and Curle, asked; If ever it was heard of, in former
times, that the Servants should be suborned to betray their Lady and Mistress
to death, and also be admitted as Euidencers against her. When the Earls were
departed, she called in for supper, the better after to dispose of her
businesses. She supped that night (as her manner ever was) very temperately:
and noting her servants at supper time, both men and women, to weep and
mourn; with cheerful aspect, and hearty alacrity, she comfort them,
bidding them to wipe their eyes, and rather to rejoice with her, for that she
was now to depart this Gulf of miseries. Then turning to Burgon her Physician,
she said: Have you not observed how powerful and great the Truth is. For
(quoth she) the common report is, That I am to dye for conspiring the Queen of
Englands death; but the Earl of Kent, notwithstanding, told me even now, That
the fear they have of their Religion, is the cause of my death. Now this is no
criminal fact committed against the Queen of England, but the fear they have
conceived of me, which has brought this slaughter upon me, the whilst some
besides (every one for himself, seeking to serve his own turn) conspired
under a pretext of Religion, and the Commonweal.

Supper being almost done, she drank to all her Servants; who in order, one by
one, upon their knees, took her pledge, mingling their tears with the wine,
and craving pardon of her, wherein soever they had been negligent in doing
their duties: so did she likewise of them. After supper, she perused her Will,
looked over the Inuentory of her vtensiles, and Jewels, and so set down the
names of such to whom she had bequeathed any thing, to every one their share
apart. To some of them, she distributed money with her own hands. She wrote
also to her Confessor, to pray for her. And to the King of France, and the Duke
of Guise, by her Letters she recommended her Servants. This done, she retired
herself at her ordinary time to her rest, slept a few hours; and awaking, past
the rest of the night away in Prayers.

The fatal day beginning to appear, which was the 7. of February, she attired
her self in such garments as she usually wore upon Festival days; and
calling her Servants about her, caused her Will to be read, desiring them to
take in good part the Legacies she had given them, seeing it was not in her
power to make them better. Then wholly fixing her mind upon God, she betook her
self into her Oratory or place of Prayer, where with sighs, grievous gronings,
and fervent prayers, she called upon God; till such time as Thomas Andrey,
Sheriff of the Shire, signified to her, that it was now time for her to come
forth. Then forth she came, in gesture, She is brought to the scaffold.
carryage, and demeanor, right Princely and majesticke; cheerful in
countenance, and in attire very modest, and Matron-like: she wore a linen
veil upon her, and before her face, which she discovered: at her girdle hung
her Rosarie, or row of Beads, and in her hand she held a Crucifix of Iuory.

In the Porch or passage of her lodging, met her the Earls, and the rest of
the Noblemen, where Meluine (one of her Servants) falling on his knees, and
pouring forth tears, bewailed his unlucky fortune, that he was designed the
man, that should carry into Scotland the sad message of the tragical death of
his dearest Mistress. Oh weep not (quoth she) for you shall shortly see Mary
Stuart at an end of all her sorrows. You shall report, Her speeches to Meluine
her Steward.
that I dye true and constant in my Religion, and firm in my love to Scotland
and France. God forgive them which have thirsted after my blood, as the Heart
does for the Water-brooke. Thou (oh God) which art Truth it self, and which
soundest the deepest secrets of my inward heart; even thou know how
earnestly I have desired the union of the two Kingdoms of England and
Scotland. Recommend me to my Son; tell him for certainty I never did, or
attempted any thing prejudicial to the Kingdom of Scotland. Counsel him to
entertain amity with the Queen of England, and be you his true and trusty
Servant. By this, the tears flowed from her eyes, she repeating again, and
again, Adieu, Adieu, Meluine: who wept all the while, no less lamentably. To
the Earls.
Then turning her toward the Earls, she entreated them, that her Servants
might be gently used, that they might enjoy the things she had given them by
her Will, that they might be permitted to be with her at her death, and lastly,
might be safely conducted and sent home into their Countries. Her two first
requests they granted, but for the having of her Servants by at her death, the
Earl of Kent seemed scrupulous, fearing there might be some superstition in
that. To him she said: Fear you not, Sir: the poor wretches desire nothing
but to take their last leaves of me. And I know, my Sister, the Queen of
England, would not you should deny me so small a request: For, for the honor
of my sex, my Servants should be in presence. I am the nearest of her Parentage
and Consanguinitie, grandchild to Henry the seventh, Dowager of France, and
anointed Queen of Scotland: Which when she had said, and turned her about, it
was granted her, to have such of her Servants as she would nominate. Then she
named Meluine, Bourgon her Physician, her Apothecarie, her Chyrurgion, two of
her Maids, and some others, of which Meluine carried up her train. Then the
Noblemen, the two Earls, and the Sheriff of the Shire going before, she came
to the Scaffold, the which was built at the upper end of the Hall, upon the
which was a Chair, a Cushion, and a Block, all covered with black. So soon
as she was set, and silence commanded, Beal read the Warrant or Mandate, to
which she listened attentively, as if it had been some other thing. Then
Doctor Fletcher (Deane of Peterborough) made a large discourse of the condition
of her life past, and present, and of the life to come. Twice she interrupted
him, entreating him not to importune her: Her last words.
Protesting, that she was settled and resolved in the ancient Roman Catholic
Religion, and ready even now to shed her blood for the same. He vehemently
exhorted her to be repentant, and with an undoubted Faith to put her whole
trust and confidence in Christ: But she answered him; That she had been borne
and brought up in this Religion, and was ready to die in the same. Then the
Earls saying they would pray for her; She replied, she would give them great
thanks, if they would pray together with her, but to communicate in Prayer
with them which are of a different Religion, were a scandal, and great sin.
Then they bade the Deane to pray: with whom, whilst the Assembly about him
joined in Prayer; She falling on her knees, and holding the Crucifix betwixt
her hands, prayed in Latin, with her own people, out of the Office of our
blessed Lady.

After the Deane had ended his Prayers, she prayed in English for the Church,
for her Son, and Elizabeth Queen of England, beseeching God to turn his
heavy wrath from this Island, and protesting (as she held up the Crucifix) that
she reposed her hope of Salvation in the blood of Christ Jesus: she called
upon the holy Company of Saints in Heaven, to make intercession for her unto
him. She forgave all her enemies: then kissing the Crucifix, and making the
sign of the Cross, she said: As thy arms (oh Lord Iesu-Christ) were spread
forth upon the Cross, so receive me into the same arms of thy Mercy, and
pardon me my trespasses. Then the Executioner asked forgiveness, whom she
forgave: and her servants (she making haste) took off her upper garments,
crying and lamenting aloud: yet neither by her kissing or crossing of them, did
she ever change her cheerful countenance, but bade them forbear their
womanish weeping, saying; That she was at the end of all her calamities.
Likewise turning her self toward her other servants, most pitiously weeping,
she signed them with the sign of the Cross, and smilingly bade them all,
Adieu. Then having a linen cloth before her face, and laid her head upon the
Block, she recited the Psalm; In thee (O Lord) have I put my trust, let me
not be confounded for ever. Then stretching forth her body, and many times
together ingeminating these words; Lord into thy hands I commend my Spirit, her
Head at the second blow was cut off; the Deane crying aloud, and saying, So
perish all the Enemies of Queen Elizabeth; to which, the Earl of Kent
answered, Amen: so likewise did the people weeping. Afterward her body being
imbalmed, and solemnly made ready was with Princely Funerals interred in the
Cathedral Church of Peterborough. And in Paris were her Obsequies in most
magnificent manner, also, celebrated by the Guises; who neither in her life
omitted any offices of love or kindred toward her, nor yet after her death, to
their great land and glory.

Here you have seen what was the lamentable end of the life of Mary Queen of
Scotland, daughter to James the Fifth, King of Scotland, grandchild to Henry
the seventh King of England, by his elder daughter, of 46. years of age, and
the 18. year of her imprisonment. A woman most constant in her Religion; of
singular zeal and sanctimonie toward God; of invincible animositie and
courage; in wisdom above her Sex; of surpassing beauty, and worthy to be
recorded in the Catalogue of those Princes, who of happy and prosperous, became
miserable and unfortunate. Being yet an Infant, she was with great sedulitie
sought for, both by Henry the eighth, King of England, for his son Edward;
and by Henry the second, King of France, for Francis the Dolphin. She was sent
into France at five years of age, and at ten married to the Dolphine. After
the death of her husband, returning into Scotland, and being married to Henry,
Lord Darley, she had by him JAMES, the First Monarch of Great Britanne. She
was persecuted by Murrey her base Brother, and others her disloyal and
ambitious subjects deposed from the Kingdom, driven into England, circumuented
(as some worthy persons have conceived) by certain in England, careful for
the retaining of their Religion, and the preservation of Queen Elizabeth's
life; exposed into perilous attempts, by others (desirous of re-establishing
the Romish Religion) and brought to ruin by the intimations or witnesses of
her absent Secretaries; who (as it is thought) were corrupted with coin. By
her Tomb was fixed, and soon after taken away, this following Epitaph: MARIA
SCOTORVM REGINA, The Epitaph.
REGIS FILIA, REGIS GALLORVM VIDVA, REGINAE ANGLIAE AGNATA, ET HAERES PROXIMA,
VIRTVTIEVS REGIIS ET ANIMO REGIO ORNATA. IVRE REGIO FRVSTRA SAEPIVS IMPLORATO,
BARBARA ET TYRANNICA CRVDELITATE, ORNAMENTVM NOSTRI SECVLI, ET LVMEN VERE
REGIVM EXTINGVITVR: EODEMQVE NEFARIO IVDICIO, ET MARIA SCOTORVM REGINA MORTE
NATVRALI, ET OMNES SVPERSTITES REGES, PLEBEII FACTI, MORTE CIVILI MVLCTANTVR.

NOVVM ET INAVDITVM TVMVLI GENVS, IN QVO CVM VIVIS MORTVI INCLVDVNTVR, HIC
ERAT: CVM SACRIS ENIM DIVAE MARIAE CINERIBVS, OMNIVM REGVM ATQVE PRINCIPVM
VIOLATAM, ATQVE PROSTRATAM MAIESTATEM HIC IACERE SCITO; ET QVIA TACITVM REGALE
SATIS SVPERQVE REGES SVI OFFICII MONET, PLVRA NON ADDO, VIATOR.



IN the lamentable death of this great Princess, manifestly appeared (as some
have observed) the providence of God: The providence of God plainly seen in her
death.
For the things which Elizabeth and Mary wished from the beginning, and were
resolved upon in all their designs, were hereby effected and consummate.
Queen Mary (as her self confessed at her death) desired nothing more fervently,
than that the Kingdoms of England and Scotland (which were divided) might be
united and joined in one, in her dearest Son; Nor Elizabeth, but that the
true Religion, together with the good and safety of the People in England might
be continued and maintained. And England now with unspeakable joy and
gladness, acknowledges, that God Almighty has granted both their desires, to
her unexpected and everlasting felicity.

Elizabeth is sorry therefore, and grieueth thereat.
So soon as report (the messenger of this death) had brought the news thereof
to Queen. Elizabeth, who not so much as thought of any such matter, she took
it most impatiently: her speech, and countenance, at once failed her: through
the extremity of her grievous discontent, she became quite comfortless and
disconsolate; and attired her self in mourning weeds, bitterly lamenting, and
sheading many brinish tears from the compassionate rivers of her eyes. Is
angry with her Council.
She sharply rebuked her Council, and chased them out of her sight,
commanding they should be questioned. And as for William Dauison, he was
brought into the Star Chamber to be tried. And so soon as her passionate
anguish and excess of sorrow, suffered her to write, she suddenly addressed (by
sir Robert Carey) to the King of Scotland, this Letter following, of her own
handwriting: Queen ELIZABETH's Letter to King JAMES.
MOST DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER:
Would to God you did know, but not feel, with what incomparable sorrow my
sad-afflicted heart is troubled, by the late lamentable event, which happened
contrary to my mind and meaning: but because my Pen abhors the recital
thereof, you shall understand it by this my Kinsman. I beseech you, that (as
God and many good men are witnesses with me of my innocence) you also would
believe, that if I had once commanded it, I would never have denied the same. I
am not so base-minded, nor of such a degenerate or ignoble spirit, as that
^ither I am afraid to do the thing that is just, or to disclaim it being
done.

But as it is most dishonorable in Princes, to cover or color the conceptions
of their hearts, in disguised words: So will I never dissemble any action of
mine, but let it appear in its own lively colors. Know this for certainty,
that as I am sure, it happened not by any fault of mine; so if I had ever
intended such a deed, I would not have imputed it to others. Nor can I assume
that to my self which I never thought. The rest, the Deliverer of these lines
will impart unto you. For my part, I would have you believe, that there is none
more entirely loving you, nor more studiously careful for the good of you and
yours, than my self. If any have suggested to you the contrary, be you
persuaded, that such a one bears more affection to others, than to you. God
keep you long safe and sound.




Whilst Sir Robert Carey was on the way with these letters, William Dauison
was brought into the Starr-Chamber before certain Commissioners, to wit, Sir
Christopher Wray Lo* chief Justice of the K. Bench, who for that time was
likewise made Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal; the Arch Bishops of Canterbury
and York, the Earls of Worcester, Cumberland, and Lincoln; the Lords Gray
and Lumley, Sir James Crofts Comptroller of the Queens house, Sir Walter
Mildmay Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Gilbert Gerard Master of the Rolls,
Edm. Anderson chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Sir Roger Manwood chief
Baron of the Exchequer. In the presence of these, Sir Francis Popham, the Qu.
Attorney general, accused William Dauison of contempt against her Majesty, of
the breach of his allegiance, the neglect and omission of his duty; for that
the queen of England, out of her royal clemency, being unwilling that the
queen of Scotland (although she stood condemned) should be put to death, for
certain causes best known to her self, such as were not to be sounded into
by any others, nor could be drawn from her, either by the importunate urging
of the States of the land, or by her Council: notwithstanding she had
commanded the Warrant for her execution to be drawn (for the preventing of
some eminent perils) the which she committed to the said William Dauisons trust
and taciturnitie; he, being a sworn Secretary, forgetful of his faith and
obedience, (contemning her Majesty's command) had imparted the same ^o the
Council, and brought her to execution, without the knowledge or pri^itie of
her Majesty.

William Dauison (such was his singular modesty) answered temperatly, and yet
with audacitie;

That he was very sorry, that he should be thus troublesome to Commissioners,
concerning the Q. of Scotland and the judgment given against her (most
grievous, if it were) to the impeachment of his credit, if not to the final
loss thereof; which to him was all in all. But this most grieved him, to be
taxed of contempt against her Majesty; to who^ for her Princely favors, he
was so obliged, that his offense must thereby be the more intolerable. That he
confessed himself guilty of the crimes objected against him. That he had made
shipwreck of his credit, which he reckoned equivalent with his life. If in
making his Apology, he should contest with the Queen, he should do that which
were most unbeseeming the obedience of a subject, the respect of a servant, and
the fidelity and reputation of a Secretary. He protested before God and the
Commissioners, That he had done nothing therein wittingly and willingly, but
what he was persuaded was the Queens will and pleasure; wherein if by
ignorance or negligence he had done any thing prejudicial, he could not but
for that be sorry, and submit himself to the censure of the Commissioners.

Now as touching the particulars: Whereas the Queen blamed him for having
been ouer-hasty in setting the great seal to the Mandate, he avouched; That
she had darkely signified, but not expressly commanded that he should keep it
by him: Neither, as he thought, had he trespassed in matter of secrecy; for
that he had not imparted it to any but the Council. As touching that, that he
did not revoke the Warrant, after the Queen had given him to understand that
she had altered her mind; he affirmed, That it was agreed upon by the
general consent of the Council, that forthwith it should be sent away, and
the Queen of Scotland executed, for fear the Queen or State might be
endangered or damnified.

Upon this confession, Sir Thomas Egerton the Queens Solicitor (having read
some part of it) began to press him. They urge him upon his own confession.
But he desired him to read it all through, and not selected parcels here and
there; though he had rather it should not be read at all, because in it were
contained some secrets not fit to be revealed; oftentimes interposing these
words, That as he was unwilling to contest against the Qu. so was he loath his
modesty should be prejudicial to the truth, or his own reputation.

The Queen, Sergeants reprove him.
Sir Thomas Gaudy and Sir William Pickering, the Queens Sergeants at Law,
likewise in many and sharp speeches, rebuked him, for that he had fraudulently
abused her Majesty's Privy Council, as was confessed by William Cecill Baron
of Burghley, Lo: high Treasurer: to whom (doubting whether the Queen had
granted that they should proceed to the execution of the Queen of Scotland) he
affirmed and protested she had: as also he said the like to the rest, who had
subscribed to the Warrant or Mandate, for the execution of the said Q. of
Scotland. Here Dauison, shedding tears, desired the Lawyers not to urge him
any further, but that they would remember, That he was not to contest against
the Queen; wherefore he wholly submitted himself to her Majesty's conscience,
and the Commissioners censure.

The Judges opinion upon his fact.
Sir Roger Manwood, beginning, made an historical relation of the Queen of
Scotland; how from her tender age she had usurped the Arms of England: and so
continuing his discourse to Babingtons conspiracy, commended the sentence
pronounced against her by virtue of the law, made known the clemency of the
Queen, and gave censure, that Dauison, for his inconsiderate anticipation,
should be fined at ten thousand pounds, and imprisonment during the Qu.
pleasure.

Sir Edmund Anderson argued, that he had done right, but not rightly; otherwise
the man was honest.

Gerard was of the same opinion.

Sir Walter Mildmay, after he had declared with what mature deliberation, and
settled gravity, they had proceeded in judgment against the Queen of Scotland,
and by what great, and how many entreaties and imprecations queen Elizabeth
was drawn thereto; produced against Dauison this passage out of the holy
Scripture: The heart of the King is in the hands of the Lord; and therefore
none, much less a servant, ought fraudulently or covertly to anticipate the
determinate purposes of Princes, without whose advice nothing ought to be done,
especially in matters of so great moment, as is the death of a Prince. But he
cleared Dauison of malice, yet reproved him, as having been inconsiderate in
Princes affairs, and too forward in preventing the queens determination. And,
for a caveat hereafter to men of his rank and place, not to commit the like
error; accorded with the rest concerning his fine and imprisonment.

Sir Jacob Croft checked and chid him, for having unwisely uttered the things
which he ought to have concealed, for that Princes impart that to some one of
their Council, which they conceal from the rest.

John Baron Lumley was of opinion (with the Judges) that the sentence against
the Qu. of Scotland was justly given, yet seriously auerred, That in the memory
of the precedent times, it was never heard or read, so high a contempt to have
been committed against a Prince, that the Lords of the Council, in the
queens house, at the Council Table where her Majesty was (as it were
President of the Council) should have decreed such a business, and that
without her priuity, they (and Dauison too) having free access unto her when
they pleased; protesting, That if he had but one only son that were faulty in
such a fact, he should think him worthy to be very severely punished. But being
persuaded of the honest disposition of the man, he would censure him no deeper
than others did.

Arthur Lord Gray, inflamed with a religious zeal, in a set speech, yet
somewhat exasperate, excepted against him, saying: The L. Gray defends him.
DAVISON is accused to have behaved himself contemptuously toward the Queen;
and this contempt is urged to the full: for that he employed his diligence in
dispatching the Q. of Scotl. That he bewrayed secrets, and concealed from the
Q. the sending away of the Warrant. But what was this Qu. he was so busy to
make away? Was it not she (I pray you) by whose life our religion the queen,
the kingdom, and every one of us were in continual danger? yet it is for her
being so cut off, that we have this days business in hand. Now my opinion
is, That he which has delivered our England from so great evils, deserves to
be royally recompensed. I do not think him to have revealed any secrets, for
having imparted the matter only to the Council, (and Magistrates appointed
for matters of State,) whom chiefly it concerned to understand that and such
like, and which the queen her self before had uttered to two or three. If
Dauison have offended in any thing, it is chiefly in this, That the queen
meaning to take another course, he told her not that the Warrant was already
sent away. But questionless he was driven into a double doubt: whether to lose
the queens favor, in sending away the Warrant without her knowledge; or by
recalling it, to bring new plots and perils to the queen. Who remembers not
how turbulent the time was? what fearful rumors were every where dispersed?
If any wrong or violence had then happened to the queen or religion, whilst the
Mandate was in his hands, had not the fault truly been in him? Should not we,
our wives, and children, have fallen furiously upon him? Should we not have
imbrued our hands in his blood? have cursed his imprudence, and have erected, to
his eternal ignominy, a trophee of indiscretion, engraven in letters of blood?
What mulct or penalty soever you impose upon him, shall not displease me; but
surely I will always hold him for an honest man. This is the Orator-like
speech, which we heard the Lord Gray made, and delivered with a good grace and
manly countenance.

The three Earls agreed in opinion with the rest, concerning the premised
penalty inflicted upon Dauison, and with the Lo: Gray, touching his reputation.

The Archbishop of York discoursed of matter of Religion, and showed the
blindness of heart, and natural corruption, to be the fountains from whence
it sloweth.

The Lords Grace of Canterbury approved the act, and commended the author of
it, but disco^mended withal the manner or circumstance of proceeding which he
had used.

Lastly, Sir Christ Wray (Lord Keeper of the privy Seal) having made a brief
recapitulation of all the Commissioners opinions, confirmed the penalty
imposed by them, Sentence given against him.
and declared, That although the queen (being justly moved to displeasure) had
submitted her Counselors to examination, yet notwithstanding she did then
pardon them; acknowledging, that what they had done, was from a desire and
design tending to the defense of Religion and the State, and the repelling of
eminent dangers.

Dauison became humble Petitioner to the Commisioners, He makes request to
the Commissioners.
That they would entreat for him; not to be restored to the honorable place of
Secretary, which he formerly enjoyed, nor to have his liberty granted him, nor
his fine or punishment mitigated: but that he might yet be partaker of her
Majesty's gracious favor. The which, for all this, he never regained:
nevertheless she sometimes supplied and relieved his wants.

And thus this Dauison, a man of honest disposition and esteem, not cunning
nor acquainted with Court-tricks, was purposely brought upon the Stage (as
diverse have thought) to be an actor in this Tragedy: and being put out of his
part, as being at a non plus in the last Act, was for a long time after shut up
in prison, to the great grief of many. Hitherto has been related what was
publicly done against him: Now observe, in brief, how he excuses himself,
as I have collected out of his own accusation, and the Apologeticall
discourse, which he made thereof to Sir Fr. Walsingham,

The queen (said he) after the Ambassadors of France and Scotland were
departed, Dauison his particular Apology.
wished me to show her the Warrant for the execution of the sentence,
pronounced against the queen of Scotland. Having showed it, she willingly set
her hand thereto, and bid me likewise affixe the great Seal of England; and
iestingly, said, You will show this now to Walsingham, who is sick already,
but will dye when he sees it. She added by and by, That she had put it off so
long, because she would not seem to be carried away by violence; yet knowing
well the necessity thereof. Then blaming Sir Aim Poulet and Sir Drue D^ury
for not having eased her of that care and trouble; commanded Walsingham to know
the cause of their cessation and delay.

The day after I had sealed the Warrant, she forbade me, by Killegray, to do
it; then telling her, that it was done already, she checked me for my
diligence, saying; That by some wise-mens advice, another course might have
been taken. I answered that just courses are always good and sure. But
fearing she would cast some blame on me, as she had formerly done upon the Lo.
Burghley about the Duke of Norfolks death: I disclosed the whole matter to Sir
Christ. Hatton; protesting, that I would never hereafter be so forward in so
weighty a business. Hatton presently discovered it to Burghley, and he to the
rest of the Council, who all concluding upon the dispatch of the execution,
vowed (as reason was) to be faulty alike; and to effect it, sent Beale
instantly away with the Warrant and Letters. The third day after (I perceiving
the Queen to be troubled in mind, to have the precedent night (as her MAJESTY
said) dreamed of the Queen of Scotland's death) I asked her, if she had
changed her purpose. She answered me, That some other means might have been
used; and then inquiring of me, Whether I had received any answer from Sir Aim
Poulet; I showed her his letters, wherein he refused to undertake the
execution, as unjust: to which, in great choler she replied; He and his
confederats are all faithless and perjured, in promising great matters, and
not performing: but she should find some, that for her sake would do it. As
for my self, I told her how ignominious it was, and into what perils she
should bring Poulet and Drury. If she approved the deed being done, her renown
would be blasted with injustice and disgrace (besides other dangers:) and in
disallowing it, she should ruinate men of worthy merit, and their posterity
for ever would be undone. To conclude, the very day that the queen of Scotland
dyed, her Majesty checked me iestingly, for that it was not yet dispatched.

Now setting aside to speak of the anger and sorrow which the Queen of
England conceived for the death of the Queen of Scotland, and her anger
against William Dauison, the truth is, that the King of Scotland, her only
Son, drew thereof extreme anguish, bitter and passionate torments; showing
himself a more pious Son then any that can be heard or read of; he lamented
night and day his dear Mothers lamentable end, in weeping, and shedding many
sad and brinish tears in his bitter agony; not thinking that Queen ELIZABETH
(in regard of the mutual love which was betwixt them, the late and strait
contracted league of amity, and the intercession of so many mighty Princes)
would have suffered his Mother to have been exposed into the cruel hands of
an Executioner, she being a Princess of coequall Majesty, of her nearest
alliance and consanguinity from the Blood Royal: nor could he receive in
Scotland, Sir Robert Carry, Son to Henry, Baron of Hunsdon, who was sent with
Letters from ELIZABETH, to excuse her Majesty, and to cast the fault upon
Dauison, and the Council. He heard him (but hardly) from the mouth of another,
and hardly received the Letters he brought. He reuok't the authority of his
Ambassador in England, and thought of revenge: For there was no want of folk,
which were busy to egg him on by persuasions, that the Christian Princes
would not leave unrevenged so great and grievous an injury offered to Royal
Majesty, and to the Royal Name.

The Estates of Scotland, The indignation of the Nation of Scotland.
which were then gathered together in multitudinous numbers, protested to his
Majesty, that they were ready, and pressed to revenge this death, to defend the
rightful Title which he had unto England, and in that to hazard both life
and goods, and that they could not digest this injury, offered not so much to
his Majesty, as to the whole Nation of Scotland. Some persuaded him to demand
Nauall assistance of the K. of Denmark, with whom he had then begun a Treaty,
touching marriage with his Daughter. Others (addicted to the Roman Religion)
exclaiming against the Queen of England, that She which had slain the Mother,
would willingly slay the Son too; Suggestions used to the King.
put it into his head to join rather with the Kings of France and Spain, and
with the Pope of Rome, and that he might easily by this means possess
himself of England. Above all, he should not trust the Protestants of England;
That they were now at the full height of their power, and sought secretly his
ruin. Others admonished him, not to show himself openly inclined to any party,
but to hold both Papist and Protestant in suspense. Because that if he should
openly rank himself with the Protestants, all the Papists of Europe in their
practices, would make him their mark to shoot at, and would provide them in
England some other Support then he, to rely upon, which could not be without
danger to him. Others advised him, to continue constant in amity with England,
not to expose or put forth a certain hope into the uncertain hazard of
war, and to persevere in the Religion now received; wherein if he should seem
to waver, he could neither purchase friends, nor put off enemies. These were
the things propounded to him by one and other, as every man's particular
pleasure or desire carried him. The King himself, of perspicuity, and
politic apprehension above his age, being some times alone by himself, and
sometimes with some few others; not with precipitate rashness (which is always
blind) but with deliberate consideration, at many times, and for a long space
together, cast these things in his mind.

Qu. Elizabeth indeuoureth to appease them.
But Queen ELIZABETH, after she had laid all the fault upon Dauison, and the
rash credulity of her Council, seeks by little and little to wear away his
grief, lest consolations untimely applied, should the more irritate; and
attended, till the dolor (being appeased by the protraction of time) would
suffer it self to be dealt withal. For, perceiving then, that the French did
sharpen and incitate the young King to revenge, and fearing, that through
subtle sleights, and eager desire of revenge, he might be diuerted from the
Protestant Religion, and from loving the English, she employed all her possible
industry, and Princely means, to cure his wounded heart, and alienated from
her:

And for that cause propounded to him, by such Agents as she had in Scotland,
as also, by the Lord of Hunsdon, Governor of Berwicke.

FIrst, By what reasons.
what danger there was in making war upon England, for this cause, which now
to all the Estates of England seemed necessary for the good of the whole Island,
and most just. And whether he were of power to go through withal, England
being then never more potent in military men, money, and munition, and Scotland
never weaker, being brought low, and exhaust by civil and intestine broils.
If he would have the assistance of foreign powers, let him learn by the
experience of his Mother, (who so long and often implored that in vain,) what
labor and trouble he would have to obtain it. And if he should procure it,
what success could he hope for by it, seeing that England joining with the
shipping of Holland and Zeland, feared not the most puissant Princes of Europe.
What hope could he put the King of France or the King of Spain in, since his
power being once increased with the addition of England and Ireland to his
Crown, ought to be contrary to their design, and that his Religion was so
directly opposite to theirs, that they could not aid and succor him, but to
their own prejudice. That the King of France could not behold, but with
grief, the King of Scotlands Dominion augmented by the Kingdom of England,
without fear that he should pursue the ancient right which the English have in
France, or give assistance to the Guizes his Allies, who at this instant gape
for the Kingdom of France. That the King of Spain, who would questionless
give place to his ambition, because that he brags (though falsely) to be the
first Catholic King issued from the Bloud-Royall of the English, and of the
house of Lancaster. That to this purpose some Jesuits and others have with
their uttermost power endeavored, during the life of Queen MARY of Scotland,
to enthrone him by election, in the Kingdom of England, as most fit to
re-establish there the Roman authority in eiecting from the Crown both
Mother and Son. Nay moreover, they begun to persuade the Queen of Scotland
to make him thereof a legacy by her Testament, if King JAMES her Son would
still persevere in the Protestant Religion. Let the King consider whither these
things do tend, what succor he can look for from Spain, and to what
ignominy he will precipitate his Soul to his eternal damnation, and all
Great-Britaine to his utter ruin, if he forsakes the true Religion in which
he has been educated. That the Peers and States who have given sentence
against his Mother, seeing that he meditates upon a revenge, will not fail to
exclude him from the Crown of England, by a new Act of the right of
Succession. That in giving place to necessity, and keeping in the agitation of
his courage, he will mediate easily their love, since that which is done,
cannot be undone. Let him then expect to possess in his time the most
flourishing Kingdom of England, and enjoy in the mean while a Crown of
security, and believe that those which can tell well how to weigh and prize
things, will judge, that he has sufficiently foreseen to his honor, in not
failing in due opportunity to do his Mother all the dutiful services of a
most pious son. Moreover, let him likewise assure himself, that the Queen
of England will accounnt, hold, and esteem him as her own son, and will do
him all offices of amity, and use him as a Mother her dearest son. These are
the things that Queen ELIZABETH endeavored with great care to possess the
King with: and to the end he should not doubt but that his Mother had been
put to death without Queen ELIZABETH'S consent, she resolved to send him the
sentence pronounced against William Dauison, sealed with the broad Seal of
England, and all the Commissioners hands subscribed thereunto: and to appease
his Majesty the more, another judgment signed by all the Judges of England,
certifying that that sentence pronounced, could in nothing hinder or be
prejudicial to his right to the Kingdom of England.

In the mean time that Q. Sir Francis Drake is sent into Spain, to prevent the
coming of the Jnuincible Navy for the invasion of England.
ELIZABETH by these or such like reasons endeavored gently to calm the King of
Scotlands agitations, foreseeing the war wherewith she was furiously
threatened by the King of Spain, whose hopes to frustrate, she sent Sir
Francis Drake with four Royal Ships well appointed, to the Coast of Spain,
and elsewhere, with command to take, burn, and pillage all such Ships as he
could find, as well in the Harbors and Port-Townes, as on the Ocean: Drake
arriving in the Straight of Gibraltar, entered the Haven thereof, where, after
he had caused six great Ships to fly under the Forts protection, he took
and burnt a hundred Ships, more or less, in the which there was infinite
provision of warlike munitions and victuals, and among others, the Great
Gallion of the Marquis of Santa Cruz, called Rageusa, richly laden with
merchandise. From thence, returning to Cape S. Vincent, His expeditions.
he there burnt all such Ships and Fisher-boats, which lay in that Rode: And
then went to Cascalet Haven, which is situated at the mouth of Tage: he urged
there the Marquis Santa Cruz to fight: but he not daring, stirred not, but let
Drake freely sail along that Coast, and take their Ships without the least
impeachment. Then, having turned sail to the Isles of Azoris, met by chance
(which he took with ease) a great and lusty Ship, most rich, and well
furnished, called Saint Philip, The great Carraque Saint Philip is taken.
which was returning from the East Indies: This act caused the vulgar sort of
Mariners of diverse Countries to take the name of Philip for an ill sign or
prognostication against Philip King of Spain.

By this Drakes worthy, though brief expedition, England was much enriched
and; the Spaniards sustayning so great a loss of munition and warlike
preparations, were constrained to give over their design they had to invade
England for that year: The profit which the English received thereby.
Since which time, the English begun with alacrity courageously to assault
those great and huge Ships, most like unto Castles, which they before did much
dread and fear, and discovered so plainly the opulent and rich commodities of
the Indies, and the means how to trade and traffic in those Eastern parts,
in such sort, The East Indies Company.

Thomas Cauendish circuits the Earth.


that they have since established an aduantagious trade, and profitable
navigations in those Countries, having established an East-Indie Company of
Merchants.

At that very time, Thomas Cauendish, a Suffolk man, which two years since
was gone out of England, with three good Ships was sailing the Sea in another
Climate of the World, and having past beyond the Straight of Magellan, burnt
and ransacked in the entry of Chile, Peru, and New Spain, many Towns of the
Spaniards, took and pillaged near Calliforma, eighteen rich Ships laden,
and a sumptuous Ship-Royall of Spain, with infinite riches, returning happily
the same year into England (by Philippinas, Molaques, the Cape of bona
Speranza, and the famous I Will of Saint Helen) with a precious booty, and
memorable glory, as being only the third, who, since Magellan, circuited the
whole Earth.

As Sir Francis Drake, and Master John Cauendish purchased to their perpetual
honors an illustrious glory and splendent reputation, in doing their Country
good service, so at that time two other English men, Sir W. Stanley, Stanley
and York, Traitors.
and Rowland York, got an ignominious name of Traitors. This York, borne in
London, was a man most negligent and lazy, but desperately hardy; he was in his
time most famous among those who respected Fencing, having been the first that
brought into England that wicked and pernicious fashion to fight in the Field
in Duels, New kind of Duels brought into England.
with a Rapier called a Tucke, only for the thrust: the English having till
that very time, used to fight with Backe-swords, slashing and cutting one the
other, armed with Targets or Bucklers, with very broad weapons, accounting it
not to be a manly action to fight by thrusting and stabbing, and chiefly under
the waste. This York having received some light injury by the Earl of
Leicester in the Low Countries, ran away, and lived as a Soldier a certain
time on the Spanish side; and lastly, being reconciled, was made Governor of a
strong Fort, situated near the Town of Sutphen. But as he was not used to
pardon wrongs, and suffer himself to be despised, he hammered in his head how
he might be revenged: and he being corrupted with money, yielded up not only
the said Fort to the Enemy, but also many and sundry times he protested by
oath to Sir William Stanley (who had formerly borne Arms in the wars of
Ireland, with a singular fidelity and generous valiancy) that he was manifestly
accused and convicted to have been one of Babingtons conspiracy, by the
assertion and confession of the Conspirators; and that he looked but for the
hour that he should be apprehended and hanged. By these or such like
persuasions he drew him to be a consort to his wickedness, and second to his
wicked designs, causing him to yield up the fair, strong, and rich City of
Dauentry to the Spaniard, against the oath and faith he had given both to the
Earl of Leicester, and the States. After this perfidious man had committed
this deplorable crime, he considered the haynousnesse of his offense, and
foresaw that he should be forthwith exclaimed of, and attainted of Treason:
but he fortified his affrighted and trembling conscience upon this, that he
had restored a place detained by Rebels, to him who was the right Lord and
owner thereof: and as he was a rank Papist, caused incontinently Papists to
flock to his Regiment, which consisted of one thousand and three hundred
English and Irish, for to instruct them in the Romish Religion, vanting, he
would make a Seminary of soldiers, who would by arms courageously defend the
Roman Church, as Seminary Priests by words and writings: and to that purpose
Allen (who shortly after was made a Cardinal) sent him suddenly Mass Priests,
publishing withal a little Book, by which he commended his treason in the
behalf of Pope Pius the Fifth his Bull against Queen ELIZABETH, exhorting and
exciting the rest to do the like treachery, as if they had not been bound to
serve and obey a Queen excommunicated by the Pope. But behold, mark here the
end, With what success.
the Spaniard set York and Stanley together by the ears; afterward, they
poisoned York, who dyed thereof miserably, they pillage his goods, and his
body having been buried in the ground, three months after, the States of
Holland caused it to be taken up, and hanged on a Gallows in chains. (So much
for York). Now for Stanley; they turned him and his Regiment out of Dauentry,
and exposed them to danger, leaving them to stray and wander up and down at
the mercy of their Enemies, to their great despise and disgrace; so that some
perished lamentably with hunger, others fled away, with much ado to escape and
save their lives. Sir William himself went into Spain, hoping to be there
questionless made much of, and well rewarded: but neither was he welcome, nor
received according to his expectation there, but abhorred and detested;
nevertheless offered he his service to assist in the inuading of England: but
the Spaniards, who never trust a Traitor twice, would not put their confidence
in him: for the Spaniards hold still this for a Maxim, That it is lawful to
honor in some sort a Traitor, but not to put any trust in him.

Sir William then thus learned, (but too late) that he had first wronged and
betrayed himself.

These Treasons caused the Earl of Leicester to be greatly hated of the
Confederate Netherlanders, The States of the united Provinces do blame the
Earl of Leicester.
because that these Traitors had been his Favorites, and likewise Englishmen
borne, which Nation that people free and too licentious in speech, ceased not
to offend by injuries, until they were reprehended for it, and forbidden by
the States. In the mean while, they wrote tedious lines to the Queen, by
which they greatly condemned the Earl of Leicester, blaming him to have
unadvisedly administrated the Commonwealth in that which concerned their
treasure, the war, and trading, and imputing the damage and hindrances
caused by these Traitors, to the restraint which he had made of their power,
and his credulity. The Queen, (as ever wise) for to examine and accord the
business, also to sound if they would condescend to a peace with Spain, sends
thither, to that end, the illustrious Lord Thomas Sackuile, Baron of Buckhurst,
whom, in Leicesters absence, her Majesty had newly made one of her
Priuy-Councell; together with Norris and Clarke; all which, labored with no
less care than fidelity about it. But the ire and choler of Leicester (who
was of a mind that the Lord Buckhurst showed himself so officious and
diligent, to no other purpose but to spy and observe his actions) and the
favor and power which he had about the Queen, were so great, that the Lord
Buckhurst at his return was confined to his House the space of many months.

The States send for Leicester again, to raise the siege before Sluice.
Afterward, the States called back Leicester from England for to succor their
City of Sluice, which the Duke of Parma had then beleaguered with seventeen
thousand men, battering it so suriously, that he made a great breach: but Sir
Roger Williams, Sir Francis Vere, and Sir N. Baskeruile, with both the
Wallownes, and English Forces of that Garrison, defended it along time
courageously with great praise and applauded valiancy; but Leicester, which
should have succored them, Leicester is molested.
being retired, by reason of his weak force, they weary forced to yield.

And indeed the States having truly reserved that Sovereign degree and power
which they at first had given him by words, would not furnish him with a great
and sufficient Army, and he dained not to subject himself to particulars of
small rank and note, who under the name of States, striued to domineere over
him, notwithstanding that their Governor had the same authority that Charles
the Fifth had over his Commanders of the Low Countries.

From thence derived open hatred on both sides, the which discovered themselves
yet apparently, after that he had mentioned to agree upon with Spain: for
their ears abhorred, and their hearts detested the very name of peace, as
prejudicial and obnoctious to their affairs.

Leicester goes about to make himself Lord over their Cities.
Even as then he perceived his authority to diminish, he had recourse to
fraudulous deceit, and resolved to breed factions with the people there, and
to make himself Master of the City of Leyden, with other Towns. But being
frustrated of his hope, of the loss of some with his men, and to the great
coffeehouse that this action provoked, (Queen ELIZABETH sending for him) he
gave over the government and free administration of the States of the United
Provinces, He is called home again.
and was derided and laughed at of many, but most by those who envied him,
having forsaken the Title of his Excellency, which never any Englishman had
taken upon him before him. The Title of his Excellency.

Leicester distributes Medailles coined en memory of his person, to those of
his faction.




Leicester, upon his departure for England, distributed, for a perpectuall
memory of his person, to such as were of his faction, a Medaille or pieces of
Gold which he had caused to be coined; on the one side, there was his picture;
on the other, a Flock, with some lost Sheep, a Dog, who going from them,
turned back his head to look on them, as if it were for pity, with this
Inscription; Ie quite malgre moy,
J forsake to my grief,
And near it this; Non point le troupeau, mais les ingras.
Not the Flock, but the ungrateful.
And questionless he intended to invade the Netherland Dominions for
himself: but those Nations have not only kept, by their care and diligence,
the liberty which they hold by their Ancestors, wholly to themselves, against
the Spaniards might, who war as well with their art and deceits, as with
their goods, as likewise against the French and English by craftiness and
policy, yea, against the Prince of Orange himself, who acted the Foxes part;
but also they have it maruellously increased by the favor of their
neighboring friend; and which is more worthy admiration, is, that whereas
other countries are ruinated by the war, these united Provinces are enriched
thereby.

The States established in his room, The Estates do put in Leicester; place,
Prince Maurice of Nassau.
for Governor of the united and confederate Provinces, Prince Maurice of
Nassau, then about twenty years of age, son to the Prince of Orange, by his
Wife the Lady Anne de Saxe, Daughter to that Heroic Elector Maurice; and
Queen ELIZABETH established in Leicesters stead, Peregrine Bartue, Lord
Willoughby of Eresby, General of the English auxiliary Forces which then were
in the Low Countries, whom those of Leicesters faction much troubled: for the
Garrisons of Geertruiden-Berg, Worcom, Nerden, Heusden, and above all, that of
Middlebourgh, being at the English devotion, excited troubles, under pretext
that they had sworn loyalty and obedience to the Queen. And Sir William
Russell, Governor of Flushing, having drawn to his side the inhabitants of
the Towns of Emuid and of Camp, were mistrusted by the Estates, to have a
determination to reduce the whole Island of Zeland under the English: Leicesters
faction in the Low Countries. Russell suspected.
and this suspicion was increased the more, by the coming of Englands Lord
High Admiral out of England, who though he much labored to pacify these
troubles, the States nevertheless possessed with fear, dissembled not their
mistrustings, but witnessed it both openly to the World by certain pieces of
Silver, which ingeniously they caused to be coined and stamped with the figure
of two earthen Pots swimming upon the Sea (according to the ancient Apologue)
with this Inscription; Si nous nous hurtons, nous nous casserons.
Jf we knock one at another, we shall be broken.
And privately by Letters which they wrote to the Queen, who (being most
careful of them, and yet in nothing forgetful of her self, could prudently
foresee those infinite dangers then apparent, the Spanish Fleet being then
imminent,) commanded the Lord Willoughby to bring into submission such English,
as excited or stirred up troubles; to be punished by the States, which he most
happily performed with the Prince Maurice of Nassau, Leicester being then back,
Leicester auoids his adversaries accusation.
and quickly finding out that the Baron of Buckhurst, and others, prepared
themselves to accuse him to have ill administrated the affairs of Holland, and
that therefore he ought to come into judgment before the Council Table,
wisely withdrew himself privately to the Queen, and prostrating himself
humbly at her feet, beseeched her Majesty to testify and speak for him,
coniuring her not to receive ignominiously him whom she had sent magnificently,
neither to bury living and seeing, him, whom she had raised from the dust. He,
by these sweet and eloquent speeches, calmed so her discontents, that
moderating the anger of her wrath, she received him into her favor as before.

Therefore being called in question, and brought before the Council Table, he
(whereas he should have appeared in an humble manner according to the custom
of others) took his place among the Lords of her Majesty's Priuy-Councell, and
as the Clerk had begun to read the chief Articles of his accusation,
interrupted him, complaining they had done him wrong to have restrained those
public instructions granted unto him, to private ones; and, in appealing to
the Queens judgment, avoided and annihilated all accusations, whereby his
adversaries were much indignated: but they broke their anger in silence.

In this year, in the month of February, died Henry, The death of the Lord
Neuill, Baron of Abergauenny.
Lord Neuill, Baron of Abergauenny, grandchild of Edward Neuill, who in King
HENRY the Sixth's Reign, enjoyed the title of Baron of Abergauenny, by his
wife, who was only Daughter and Heir to R. Lord Beauchamp, Earl of Wigorn,
and Baron of Abergauenny, by whose right, the Daughter and Heir of this Henry,
Lord Neuill, challenging the title and honor of this ancient Barony, had a
memorable suit in Law about it, with Edward Neuill, the next Heire-male to the
said Lordship, to whom the Castle of Abergauenny was legacied by Testament;
and since, the honor and title of the same Barony was conferred and confirmed
unto him by Act of Parliament, where he took place among the Peers of that
High Court, as the first Baron of England.

And the Duchess of Somerset, being very aged;
There died also in the same year and month, four Noble persons, both
illustrious and famous: the first was, the Lady Anne Stanhop, Duchess of
Somerset, about ninety years of age, wife to Edward Seymor, late Duke of
Somerset, and Protector of England. This Duchess, by mere envy and hate she
bore to the Lady Katherine Parr, Queen of England, and Dowager of King HENRY
the Eighth, excited diverse tragedies in the Noble House of the Seymors, at
Dudley Earl of Warwickes persuasion, during his plotting of the ruin of this
puissant and princely House; and all, to prevent, lest she, who was Wife to
this Noble Protector, should give place or precedence to this Queen Dowager,
who then was her Husbands Brothers wife. The next was, Sir Ralph Sadler, And
Sir Ralph Sadler;
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, a prudent and learned man, whose worth
and virtue had been approved in diverse weighty and important affairs of
State. He was the last Banneret of England: which worthy dignity of Knighthood
had bin conferred on him at the famous Battle of Musselborough. After him, also
died Sir Thomas Bromley, Also, Sir Thomas Bromley.
Lord High Chancellor of England, having scarce attained to the sixtieth year
of his age, a man excellently well seen in the Law. Six days after, he was
followed by Edward Manner, The Earl of Rutland dies;
Earl of Rutland (to whom the Queen had chosen and appointed for his
Successor, the third of the Noble House of Manner, a Noble man, most learned
and skillful in the Law, and humane Arts) having but the Lady Elizabeth, one
only Daughter for heir, then but very young, who was married to William
Cecill, Baron of Burleigh, And Sir Christopher Hatton
Lord High Treasurer. Sir Christopher Hatton, who was a Noble personage,
excellently endued with rare virtues, (flourishing at that time illustriously
at the Court, as one whose merit had purchased him the honor to be dearly
affectionate and intimate to her Majesty, in whose favor his worth greatly
advanced him) was from a Courtier established to this high dignity of Lord
Chancellor of England, is made Lord High Chancellor.
not with little discontent of the Judges and professors of the Law, who since
Churchmen had bin deprived and dismissed of that honor, had iudiciously
discharged that place, with no less glory and equity, than prudence and
discretion, which is the supreme magistracy of the Law; yet in former times
past it was oftener provided for with Ecclesiastical men, and Nobles, than of
others: Nevertheless, though Sir Christopher Hatton had been advanced to that
place, by the subtle art of some Courtiers, who hoped, that by his absence
from Court, and the difficulty he should have to exercise duly so high and so
weighty a Magistracy, should wear out and diminish the great favor he was in
near Queen ELIZABETH. Nevertheless, he behaved himself in that high Seat
of Justice, discreetly and worthily, to the well-liking of the Queen, and
admiration of all her Subjects, discharging that Dignity with as great
magnificence and honor, as any whatsoever had done before him, studying to
supply by equity, that which he wanted in the knowledge of the Law.

Sir John Perot being this year sent for out of Ireland, William
Fitz-Williams, Lord Deputy of Ireland for the same time.
left that Kingdom very peaceable to Sir William Fitz-Williams for he had
drawn from those persons whom he suspected to be apt to rebel, oaths and
hostages, which they as soon granted unto him, as he demanded; for, not
seeming any way to favor rebellion, he imprisoned diverse Irish Rebels; and
such as were more dangerously given to rebellion, he hanged them, showing and
admonishing the rest of their duty, and the fidelity which they ought to their
Sovereign in so doubtful a time. The Irish seeing the sincere love, respect,
and affection he bore to them who were true subjects, most willingly lent their
ears thereunto, and were true obseruers of his instructions.

The reason why it is a difficult thing to war against Jreland.
Hitherto (that I may a little stray) were the Irish wars very easy to the
English: and eight hundred foot, with three hundred horse, were esteemed an
invincible Army: For Randolph, with six hundred English, with much facility
defeated O-Neale with four thousand Irish. Collier, in the year 1571. with
his only one Company, prevailed likewise against one thousand Hebridians in
Connach. The Butlers, with a great Company of the Rebels, were overthrown by
three hundred Horsemen. And (to pass the rest over) two Companies of foot,
surprised in one day above twenty of the Irish Castles. But after that the
Perots had by command daily exercised themselves at home in their own
Country, and were well instructed in the discipline of Arms, and in the use
of their Muskets, to resist the Hebridians, and being practiced in the wars of
the Netherlands, had learned the arts of fortification, they vexed the English
(as we shall find) with a difficult and dangerous war.

THE THIRTIETH and most marvelous year of her Reign, Book 3. 1588.
the euer-remembred Year of the Lord. Anno Dom. 1588.
TO this admirable year of Christ 1588. A wonderful and admirable Year.
are we now arrived: Which by Regiomontanus the Astrologian, was foretold about
a hundred years before, to be a Year of Wonder; and by the Germane
Chronologers to be the Climacterical year of the World. The rumors of wars,
which were before but slender relations, began now daily to be augmented, and
were now become, not as before, a variable report, but an assured certainty by
the general voice of all men; that the Spaniard had prepared a most invincible
Navy against England; and had out of Italy, Sicilie, and also America, Great
preparations are in hand in Spain to assault and invade England.
gathered into Spain the old experienced Commanders, such as were most famous
Captains, skillful in military affairs.

For the Pope of Rome, with certain religious and devout Spaniards, and some
English Fugitives, had long ago diligently exhorted the Spaniard to invade and
conquer England, but that counsel was by the Portugals wars for ten years
before interrupted; which now they carefully reiterated, and with much
instigation persuaded him; that since Heaven had heaped upon him infinite
benefits and blessings, by subiecting to his Empire the Kingdom of Portugal,
with the East India, and many other wealthy Islands; By what counsel.
that it was now his part, of duty to enterprise something, which might be
agreeable and pleasing to God. That there could be nothing more acceptable to
God, nor ought more worthy himself, than the advancing of his Church. That the
Church could not with more glory and merit be advanced, than by the conquest of
England, and there, by the extirpation of Heresy, to plant the Roman
Catholic Religion. That these wars would be most just, not only because
they were most necessary, but because they were undertaken to propagate the
Religion of Christ, seeing that the Queen of England being excommunicated,
notwithstanding obstinately persisted against the Church of Rome, had succored
the Rebels in the Netherlands, molested the Spaniards with continual pyracies,
had surprised and pillaged diverse towns both in Spain and America, and
lately, violating the Majesty of all Princes, had caused the Queen of Scots to
be put to death: Therefore such wars should be no less profitable than just.

Because by this means the King of Spain, making addition to his Empire of
the most flourishing Kingdoms, he might easily extinguish the Netherlandish
Rebellion, which was nourished (as it were) by the breath of England, he
should assure to himself the voyages to both India's in safety, and so lessen
the annual expenses, laid out for the conuoying of his Fleetes forward and
backward. To prove this to him with more facility, The reason why.
they suggested that the English Navy was neither in number, greatness, nor
strength, comparable to the Spanish, (the Portugal Fleet being then added.)
That England was altogether unfortified, neither was it furnished with
Commanders, Soldiers, Horse, or provision for wars, but destitute both of
friends and money; besides, there were many through the Kingdom, which were
addicted to Papistrie, and would soon join themselves in his aid. Last of
all, so great were the forces of the King of Spain, both by Sea and Land, and
the virtue of the Spaniards such, that none would dare to oppose him, and
therefore they promised assuredly a certain victory. To this enterprise also,
that God had presented a fit opportunity: for the Turk having then concluded a
truce with him, and the French being entangled with intestine wars, were
neither to be doubted or feared. That it was more facile to subdue England than
the Low Countries; because the passage out of Spain into England, is more
short and commodious, and through a vast and open Sea, but into the Netherlands
of greater length and difficulty, through a narrow Sea, and very near
adjacent to England. That the Netherlands were in a manner continually a strong
Bulwark, being on all parts fortified with Towns and Castles, but England not
with any; and therefore it would be an easy matter even at the first, in an
instant, for him to penetrate to the very heart of the Land with an Army.
Finally, according to that military Axiom: That the Enemy should not be left
behind; therefore it was most necessary for the Spaniard to subdue England,
being a mortal enemy, by whose assistance the Low Countries had so long
sustained a great war; and with whom they could not at all stand; So that if
England were but once conquered, the Netherlands must of necessity yield to
subjection.

They consult about the means how to assault and subdue England.
These matters thus resolved, they began seriously to deliberate upon some
means for the invasion of England. Aluarus Bassanus, Marquess of Santa Croix,
General of the Navy, was of a mind; That before all, some Port or other in
Holland or Zealand, should by those Land-troupes which the Prince of Parma had,
and some few Spanish Ships sent before, be unawares to them surprised, where
the Spanish Fleet might make their retreat, and from thence most opportunely
begin the invasion, because that in the British Sea, being tempestuous, the
winds are subject to often changing, the ebbing and flowing thereof
principally to be observed, the Fleet could not safely ride. Of this advice
likewise was the Prince of Parma, who earnestly urged this expedition. Others
notwithstanding disallowed thereof, as being a thing difficult, full of danger,
requiring much time, great labor, large expense, yet uncertain of success;
neither could it be done secretly or unawares, and by the English would easily
be hindered and frustrated. And these were of opinion; That one might at less
charges, and with more facility, assault and subdue England, if at the mouth
of the Thames a puissant Army of Spaniards and Flemmings were placed and
conuayed in a powerful Navy, to take at the first (unawares) the City of
London, the Capital and Chief of the Kingdom. This seeming easy, was
resolved upon, and speedily determined to be put in execution; yet some,
nevertheless, were of a mind, that war should first be proclaimed by a
Herald, and that in so doing, it would be a slight to take away all suspicion
from all Neighbouring-Princes, and move the Queen to call to her help,
foreign soldiers, (who as mercenary, being insolent and vile) would behave
themselves rudely, and tumultuously, ransacking and pillaging the Countries in
such sort, that it would take away the love of her Subjects, and put England in
confusion. But these minds were not seconded by those who were obstinate, as
relying upon the assurance of their forces and strength, contenting themselves
to put their cause, their Navy, and Armada's into the Popes hand, and into the
intercessions of the Catholics to the Saints; and to afright and terrify
England, they set out a Libell, printed, containing the particulars of so great
an equipage, which truly was such, that in Spain, Italy, and Cicilia, the
Spaniards were amazed, and astonished at it; and therefore audaciously termed
it: The invincible NAVY.

The Duke of Parma caused also Ships to be built in Flanders by the
commandment of the Spaniard, Preparation in Flanders.
and likewise a number of Flat-bottom'd Boats, each of them big enough to
transport thirty Horses, with Bridges fitting to them; hired Mariners out of
the East-Land Countries of Germany; provided Pikes sharpened at the one end,
and shod with Iron, with hooks on one side; twenty thousand Vessels, and an
infinite number of Wicker Baskets, and placed in the Sea-Townes of Flanders,
one hundred and three Companies of foot, and four thousand horse, amongst
which were seven hundred English Fugitives, a most contemned and despised
Company; Traitors hated.
Neither were Stanley their General, nor Westmerland, nor any other who had
assisted either with purse or person, regarded: but for their impiety against
their Country, prohibited all access, and deservedly, and as ill presages,
not without detestation, rejected. And Pope Sixtus the Fifth, lest he should
seem to be wanting, renewes unto Cardinal Alane (an English man, sent into
the Low Countries) [ The Declaratory Bulls of Pius the Fifth, and Gregory the
Thirteenth, The Popes assistance.
] excommunicates the Queen, deposes her from her government, absolues her
Subjects from their allegiance, publishes in print the [ Crusado] as against
Turks and Infidels, whereby out of the Treasury of the Church, he bestows
upon all assistants plenarie indulgence: whereupon the Marquess of [ Burgaw]
of the House of Austria, the Duke of Pastraua, Amadaeus of Sauoy, Vespasian
Gonzaga, John de Medices, and diverse other noble Gentlemen served in this war
as Volunteers.

Preparation in England
On the other side, Queen ELIZABETH, lest she should be unawares oppressed, with
singular diligence prepares as many ships and warlike necessaries as was
possible. And she her-selfe (who was of a piercing judgment in distinguishing
of dispositions, and when she was at her own election, without commendation
of others, always happy) designed by name the principal Officers to the
several Offices in the Navy; By Sea,
and made Charles Howard of [ Effingham] Lord high Admiral of England,
General; of whose good success she was very well persuaded, as a man whom
she knew to be skillful in Navigations, provident, valiant, industrious, and of
great authority amongst Seamen, by reason both of his moderation and Nobility.
She sends him seasonably enough to the West parts of England; where Drake,
whom she made Vice Admiral, joined himself with him; She commands Henry
Seimer, the second son of the Duke of Sommerset, to lie in wait upon the
Belgique shores, with forty Ships, English and Dutch, to hinder Parma's
coming out of the Rivers with his forces; Although there wanted not some who
earnestly advised to expect the Enemy, and receive him in a Land-battel, as it
was deliberated in HENRY the Eighth's Reign, when the French threatened England
with a mighty Navy.

For the Land-seruice, there were twenty thousand Soldiers dispersed upon the
South shores: besides, two Armies of choice trained Soldiers were levied and
enrolled; And Land.
Of the one consisting of one thousand horse, and two and twenty thousand foot;
Leicester was General, and had his Camp at Tilbury, not far from the mouth of
the Thames; (for the Enemy had certainly determined to approach London first.)
And of the other which consisted of thirty four thousand foot, and two
thousand horse for the Queens guard, she made the Baron of Hunsdon General.

Arthur, Lord Gray, Sir Francis Knollys, Consultation for defense.
Sir John Norris, Sir Richard Bingham, Sir Roger Williams, Knights, great and
expert Soldiers, were appointed to consult about the Land-seruice; They
aduized, That all those places which were fit for the Enemies approach, either
from Spain, or the Low Countries, as, Milford-Hauen, Falmouth, Plymouth,
Portland, the I Will of Wight, Portsmouth, the Downs upon the Shore of Kent, the
Thames mouth, Harwich, Yarmouth, Hull, etc. should be fortified with works and
with Garrisons; that the trained Soldiers upon all the Seacoasts, should
meet, upon giving a sign, to defend these places, they should with all their
endeavor hinder the Enemies landing; But if he should happen to land, that
they should waste the Country far and near, spoil every thing that was
useful, that he might find no victuals but what he brought upon his
shoulders; and to keep the Enemy continually busied and distracted with
assiduous alarmes, and crying, [ Arm, arm,] day and night; But that they
should not fight till other Commanders should join their forces with them;
That amongst the Leaders, they should nominate one which should command the
forces of every several Province: But it is superfluous to set down in
particular what inland Provinces were appointed to guard both the shores, what
number, what arms, and what manner of fight was prescribed by them.

About this time, there were diverse who made often remonstrances to the Queen,
that the Spaniards were not more dreadful abroad, And concerning the Papists
at home.
than the Pontificians dangerous at home; for that the Spaniards had not dared
to have entered into hostility with England, but upon confidence of and from
them, and therefore that [some pretenses were to be devised to make them
shorter by the head;] alleging the example of HENRY the Eighth, when the
Emperor and the French King, upon the Popes instigation, were ready to invade
England, Presently, as soon as he had caused the Marquess of Exceter, the
Baron Montacute, Edw. Neuill, and others, whom he suspected to favor the
Enemy, to be executed, the invasion fell with them; but she refusing this
counsel, as too cruel, thought it sufficient to commit to prison to [
Wisbich] in the Fen-Countries, certain of the Pontificians, and those none of
prime note neither. And having an eye and a care of every place, with frequent
Letters excites those of the Nobility and Gentry, which were without them ready
enough, gives instruction what was to be done in Ireland by [ Fitz-Williams]
the Deputy; Admonishes the King of Scotland, both by his own Servants, and
her Messengers to be vigilant over the Papists, The King of Scotlands alacrity
against the Spaniards.
and Spanish Faction in his Country: But he well knowing how great a tempest
and destruction threatened him, out of his perpetual love to true Religion, and
the Queen, of his own accord, had now before refused to give audience to the
Bishop of Dunblan, sent to him from the Bishop of Rome; and had caused a League
to be made amongst the Protestants in Scotland to resist the Spaniards; And he
himself, marching with his Army into [ Annand] having taken Maxwels camp, who
contrary to his faith given, was then lately returned out of Spain; and
enclining to the Spanish faction, caused him to be cast into prison, proclaimed
the Spaniards Enemies, and with great alacrity provided arms against them.
Book 3^


Amongst these great preparations of War on both sides, ouertures of peace
were nevertheless made. Conference of peace in the mean time.
About two years before, when the Prince of Parma had considered with himself
how difficult a thing it was to end the Low Country war, while they were
daily aided with supplies from the Queen, had by Letters (using also the
assistance of James Crofts, a Priuy-Counceller, a man very studious of peace,
and of Andrew Lo, and others) seriously negotiated for a treaty of peace, and
that he had authority from the Spaniard to that purpose; She fearing that
this was but a pretense, whereby to make a breach of friendship betwixt her and
the Confederate-Prouinces, and secretly to draw them to the Spaniard, deferred
the matter for a time. But now that the imminent war might be auerted and
avoided, she resolved to treat of peace, but with the Sword in her hand, and
the Duke of Parma refused not the treaty.

Therefore, in February, there were sent into Flanders, Commissioners sent to
that end into Flanders.
Henry, Earl of Derby, William Brook, Lord Cobham, James Crofts, Controller
of her Household, Valentine Dale, and James Rogers, Doctors of the Laws, who
being with all humility received in the Dukes name, they forthwith sent Dale
unto him, to consult of the place of meeting, and to peruse his Commission from
the Spaniard. He appointed a place near to [ Ostend,] not in [ Ostend] it
self, which was now held against the King by the English; and promised to show
his Commission at the meeting. He aduized them to be speedy, lest something
might fall out which might disturb or interrupt the treaty of peace. Richardot
said openly, [That he knew not what might be done to England in the mean
time.] Not long after, Rogers was sent to the Prince, by the Queens express
commandment, to know certainly, if the design for the invasion of England were
yet enterprized, which both he and Richardot seemed to intend. He affirmed,
That he had not so much as thought of the invasion of England. When he desired
a quick dispatch and expedition of that affair, he blamed in some manner
Richardot, who was sorry to have uttered any such words concerning Englands
invasion.

Propositions of the English answered.
The twelfth of April, the Earl of Arenberg, Champigny, Richardot, Doctor
Maesie, and Garnier, Commissioner from the Duke of Parma, sat in Commission
with the English under Tents, near the Town of Ostend, to whom they gave
place and precedence; and after their protestations that the Duke had full
power given him to treat and conclude a Peace, the English propounded to them,
that before all things it was requisite to embrace a truce. But they refused
it, alleging, that if a Peace was not forthwith concluded, it would be
preiudicious to the Spaniard, who since six months, had to their great
charges maintained a puissant Army. The English insisting, replied, that that
Peace was promised, before those troops were conveyed into Flanders. They
answered again, that it was true, they had promised it six months ago, but
that it was not then accepted. Moreover, that it was not in the Queens power
to undertake it for the Hollanders and Zealanders, who daily acted deeds of
hostility. But the English maintained, that it would be general for all the
Queens Dominions, and likewise for the Kingdom of Scotland. Yet they
nevertheless would not agree thereunto, but merely for those four Cities
which the Queen then had in possession, as Ostend, Flushing, Bergen up Zoom,
and the Breele, and that during the said Treaty, and twenty days after,
provided that in the mean while it was lawful to the Queen of England to
assault Spain, and to the King of Spain to invade England, as well out of
Spain, as of Flanders. During that time thus runned in speech about this
Truce, and the place appointed for the conference, which at last was appointed
at Bourbourgh, Sir W. Crofts, who for the great desire he had of peace, was
gone to Bruxels, without the knowledge of the rest of the Commissioners,
propounded in particular some Articles, for which he afterward was imprisoned
upon the Earl of Leicesters accusation (though that to the judgment of
others, he ought not to have been reproved or disauowed) (yet it is not
lawful to Commissioners to exceed the limits of their Commissions prescribed
unto them.) Finally, the English seeing they could not obtain a full and
intyre cessation of Arms, nor to see at all the Commission containing power
for the Duke of Parma to treat of peace, they propounded: THat the ancient
alliances between the Kings of England, and the Dukes of Burgundy, might be
renewed and confirmed. That the Flemmings might peaceably enjoy their
privileges, and serve God with liberty of conscience. That the Spaniards, and
other strangers might be sent out of Flanders, to rid the Flemmings, and the
neighbouring-Prouinces of all fear* And that if they would grant these things,
the Queen, to show that she had not taken up Arms for her own particular
interest, but for the necessary defense both of the Flemmings, and her self,
would willingly hearken unto any reasonable conditions touching the Towns
which she then possessed in the Low Countries, paying the money which she had
laid out about them.

Whereunto the Dukes Deputies answered: THat when it would please them friendly
to confer with them about the renewing of their ancient alliances, there
should be no disagreement in that regard. That stranger Princes had nothing to
do with the Flemmings privileges, of grace granted as well unto the
reconciled Towns and Provinces, as unto the rest which by force of Arms have
been brought unto obedience. That their stranger-Souldiers were of necessity
retained there, because they were up in arms both in Holland, England, and
France. As for Towns taken from the King, and expenses of money, the King of
Spain might well demand recompense of the Queen, of many thousands of Crowns
spent in the wars of the Low Countries since her assisting and taking into
her protection the rebellious Flemmings.

Complaint made unto the Duke of Parma.
About this time, Dr. Dale, by the Queens commandment, was sent unto the Duke,
to make a friendly complaint unto him of a Book lately set forth by one Allin,
an English Cardinal, by which he admonished the Nobles and people of England
and Ireland, to join with the forces of Spain under the Dukes conduct, for
the execution of Pope Sixtus the Fifth his Sentence published by a Bull against
the Queen, by which he declared her an Heretic illegitimate, and cruel
against the Queen of Scots, etc. and commanded her Subjects to assist the Duke
against her. Many of those Bulls were printed at Antwerpe, to be dispersed in
England. The Duke made him answer, that he had not seen any such Book or
Bull, and that he would not undertake any thing in the Popes name, yet that
he was to obey his King. Moreover, that he honored and admired so much the
Queen for her Royal virtues, that next unto the King, he made more account of
her Majesty, than of any other Prince. That he had counseled the King to
treat of that peace which would be more profitable to the English than to the
Spaniards; for, (quoth he) if the Spaniards be overcome, they can easily
recover their loss again: but if you be once vanquished, your Kingdom is
utterly lost. Whereupon Doctor Dale replied, That the Queen was powerful
enough to defend her Kingdom, and that himself might well judge, according to
his grave wisdom, that she could not easily be overthrown by the loss of
one battle, seeing the King of Spain himself, by so long a war, could not
as yet recover the inheritance of his Ancestors in the Low Countries. Well,
(said he) these things are in the hands of the Almighty God.

Afterward, the Commissioners had many conferences and alterations, and, as it
were, weaued the same web again. When the English desired a toleration of
Religion to be granted but for two years to the [Vnited Provinces,] it was
answered, That [as the Spaniard interceded not in the like kind for the
English Catholics: so they hoped that the Queen, in her own wisdom, would
forbear to request any thing of the Spaniard prejudicial to his honor, his
oath, and his conscience.] When they required re-payment of the money which the
States of Brabant owed the Queen, they answered, That [that money was lent
without the Kings priuity or authority. But all accounts being cast up, it
might appear both how much that money was, and how much the King had spent in
this war, to whom more ought to be paid.] By such kind of answers, they
deluded the English, until the Spanish ARMADA approached the coast of England,
and the thunder of their Ordnance was heard from the Sea. Then receiving a
conuoy from the Prince, (who, during this treaty, had brought almost all his
forces to the shore) by his Commissioners were honorably conducted to the
borders near Calais. So vanished this treaty into nothing; The conference
breaks up.
undertaken by the Queen (as the wisest sort of men judged) to auert the
Spanish Fleet, continued by the Spaniard, to surprise England unawares, and
unprovided: so that both of them seemed to sew the Foxes tale to the Lyone skin.

That Spanish ARMADA, The Spanish Armada
the greatest and best furnished with men, munition, and all warlike
preparations that ever the Ocean did see, and arrogantly named Invincible,
consisted of one hundred and thirty ships, in which were nineteen thousand,
two hundred and ninety soldiers, eight thousand, three hundred and fifty
Mariners, two thousand eighty Gally-slaues chayned, two thousand, six hundred
and thirty pieces of great Ordnance. The General was Alphonsus Perez Guzman,
Duke of Medina Sidonia. (For Antonius Columna, Duke of Palian, of S. Cruz, or
of the holy Cross, designed General, dyed during the preparation) and under
him was John Martinus Recaldus, a most skillful Nauigator. The third before the
Calends of June, 28. Maij.
they loosed from out of the River of Tagus, and bending their course toward
the Groin in Galicia, Sets forth, and is dispersed.
by a strong tempest they were dispersed, three Galleys with three Oars on a
seat, being by the industry of David Guin, an English slave, and the
perfidiousnesse of the Turkish Gally-slaues, carried to the coast of France,
after some time, with great difficulty met at the Groin, and the Havens
thereabouts. So distressed and weather-beaten was it, as it was reported, that
the Queen was constantly resolved not to expect it that year, and Secretary
Walsingham wrote to the Lord Admiral, (as if the War were at an end) to send
back four of the greatest Ships. He (a man not very credulous) excusing
himself fairly, entreated him not to believe anything in so important a
matter, without mature deliberation; and desired that he might retain them,
though at his own charges. And having a prosperous wind, sailed toward
Spain, with hope to surprise the Weather-beaten ships in the Harbors. When he
was almost upon the coasts of Spain, the wind became South: and he, who was
commanded to defend the English shores, fearing lest they with the same wind
might arrive in England unespied, returned to Plymouth.

Sets out again.
With the same wind, the twelfth of July, according to the Julian computation,
the Duke of Medina, with his whole Fleet, weighed ancor again, and set forward
from the Groin. About two days after, he sent before into the Low Countries,
Roderick Telius, to aduertize the Duke of Parma of the approach of the ARMADA,
and to inform him of other needful business. For he had commandment to
join himself with the Forces and Fleet of the Prince of Parma, and to waft
them over into England, under the protection of his Armada, and to set on shore
his landforces at the mouth of the Thames. Now what was done every several day
in this Navigations, according to the most credible relations, both of the
Spaniards, and our own Countrymen, that the truth may more clearly appear,
I will briefly deliver.

The sixteenth day, there was a great calm, and a thick cloud covered the sea
till noone, and then a strong North-winde blew, then a South-winde till
midnight, and then an East: So that the ARMADA being much scattered, could
hardly re-collect it self, till it came within sight of England, which was the
nineteenth day of the month: which day the Lord High-Admirall of England,
being certainly aduertized by Captain Flemming, that the Spanish Fleet was
come into the British sea, (vulgarly called the Channel,) and discovered not
far from the Lizard, the wind then keeping the English Navy in the Port, The
English Navy sets out.
with great difficulty, and no less industry, and alacrity of the mariners,
(himself not disdaining to pull at the hawser amongst the common Soldiers) at
length brought them into the open Sea.

The next day, the English came within ken of the Spanish ARMADA, built high
like Towers and Castles, rallied into the form of a Crescent, whose horns were
at least seven miles distant, coming slowly on, and although under full
sails, yet as though the winds labored, and the Ocean sighed under the
burden of it, the English purposely suffered them to pass by them, that they
might pursue them with a favoring gale of wind.

The one and twentieth of July, the Lord high Admiral of England, sending
before him a Pinnace called the Defiance, The first fight.
by discharging a piece of Ordnance out of her, provoked them to the fight, and
presently out of his Ship called the Arke-Royall, the Admiral thundered upon a
Spanish Ship, which he thought to have been the Admiral of Spain, but was
the Ship of Alphonso Leua. At the same instant, Drake, Hawkins, Furbisher,
peale terribly upon the Rear which Ricaldus commanded; who performed all the
parts of a valiant and discreet Commander, to stay the Ships under his
government from flying, desiring to ioyn with the body of the Fleet, until
his own Ship, extremely battered with shot, became unserviceable; and with
much difficulty mingled her self with the rest of the Fleet: Then did the Duke
of Medina re-collect his dispersed ships, and with full sail held on his
course. Neither could he do otherwise, The ability of the English Flees.
in regard both that the Wind stood fair for the English, and that their
ships invaded, retired, and re-inuaded them upon every quarter with incredible
celerity. When they had continued the fight sharply two hours, the Lord high
Admiral of England thought good to retire, in respect that he wanted forty
ships which were not yet come out of the Haven.

The night following; a Spanish Ship, called the St. Katherine, being very much
battered in this conflict, was received into the midst of the army to be
repaired. And a huge great Cantabrica.
Catalonia^ ship of Oquenda, in which was the Treasurer of the Fleet, was set
on fire with Gunpowder, by the device of a Flemmish Gunner. But the fire was
seasonably quenched by other ships sent in for the purpose; amongst which, a
Gallion of Peter Valdes, falling foul with another Ship, and her foremast
entangled and broken with the others sayleyard, the Air being stormy and the
night dark, and none able to relieve or succor her, was forsaken, and became
a prey to Sir Francis Drake, Peter Valdes taken.
who sent Valdes to Dertmouth, and gave the Ship to be rifled and pillaged by
the Soldiers. And Drake being that night commanded to carry the Lantern in
the poope lighted, neglected it: for following certain Germane Merchants
Hulkes, whom he took to be enemies, it was the occasion that almost all the
English Fleet lay still, because they could not see the Lantern.

Neither could he and the rest of the English shipping come near the
Admiral, till the evening following, who the precedent night, with the ships
called the Mary, and the Rose, hotly pursued the Spaniards. All this day, the
Duke was securely busied in setting his Fleet in array, and commanded Alphonso
Leua to draw up, and join the auant-gard and the rear together, and assigned
every several Ship his station, according to the form prescribed in Spain,
with pain of death to every one that forsook their stations, sends Ensign
Glich, to the Duke of Parma, to inform him of the estate of the Fleet; and
committed the Ship of Oquenda in Biscay, The Ship of Oquenda taken.
(having first removed into other Ships, the Kings treasure and the mariners)
to the mercy of the Seas. Which the same day, with fifty mariners and soldiers
more or less, miserably maimed and half burnt, fell into the English men's
hands, and sent to the Port of Weymouth.

The three and twentieth day of the month, at break of the day, the Spaniards
having a prosperous Northwinde, turned sail toward the English, who to get
advantage of the wind, easily turned themselves toward the West, and after
they had contended to prevent each other of the benefit of the wind, both
parts prepared themselves to the fight, and fought confusedly, and with various
success, while in one place the English valiantly fetched off the London ships
dangerously circled in by the Spaniards, in another, Ricaldus then in danger,
with no less resolution of the Spaniards, was disingaged. There was never more
lightning and thundering of the Artillery, then there was on both sides, most of
which notwithstanding went in vain from the Spanish, flying sheere over the
English Ships. Only Cock an Englishman, in a small Bark of his own, dyed
gloriously in the midst of his Enemies. For the English Ships being much
less tha^ the Spaniards, with great dexterity invaded the enemy, and having
discharged their Ordnance, retired presently into the open Sea, and leuelled
all their Shot with a certain and successful aim, against the great and
sluggish Ships of the Spaniards: And yet the English high Admiral thought not
fit to grapple, The English Admirals providence.
and so try the fortune of a fight hand to hand, as many inconsiderately
persuaded: For the enemy had a strong and well appointed Army abroad, which he
wanted: their Ships were far more in number, greater of burden, and stronger,
and higher of building, and they fighting from above, threatened nothing less
than certain destruction to them that fought against them upon the lower
Ships: And he did likewise foresee, that the loss of his men would be much
more prejudicial to him, than the victory could be profitable; For being
vanquished, he should have brought the Queen into almost inevitable danger;
and being Victor, he should only have a little blaze of glory, for the
dissipation and discomfiture of his Enemy, and slaughter of his Soldiers.

The four and twentieth day of the Month, there was a mutual intermission of
all hostile acts. The Admiral sent diverse small Barks to the next shores of
England, for supply of ammunition, and divided his whole Fleet into four
squadrons; the first of which himself commanded; the second, Drake; the third,
Hawkins; and the fourth, Forbisher; and appointed certain Pinkes or Pinnaces
out of every squadron, to make impressions upon the enemy at the dead of night
in several quarters; but a calm following, that counsel wanted success.

The five and twentieth, which was Saint James his day, a Gallion of Portugal,
called the S. Anne, which could not keep company with the rest of the Fleet,
was set upon by diverse small English Barks; In aid of whom, Laeua and Diego
Tells Enriques, with three Galleasses, made out, whom the Lord Admiral, and
the Lord Thomas Howard in the Golden Lion (which by reason of the great calm,
were feign to be towed by fisher-Boats) so battered with the canon, The third
fight.
that not without great difficulty, and with great loss of men, they brought
off; after which time the Galleasses never offered to fight: The Spaniards
report, that that day the English at a nearer distance than ever, with their
great Ordnance extremely rent the Spanish Admiral, being at that time in the
Rere; and having slain many of their men, shot down their maine Mast, but
that Mexia and Recaldus came opportunely, and repelled the English. That then
the Spanish Admiral, accompanied with Recaldus and others, invaded the English
Admiral, which escaped by the sudden changing of the Wind; that thereupon the
Spaniards left the pursuit, and holding on their course, sent another messenger
to the Duke of Parma, with all speed to join his Fleet with the Kings ARMADA,
and to send supply of Bullets. Of this the English were ignorant, who write,
that they shot off the Lantern from one of the Spanish Ships, the beake-head
from another, and terribly battered a third; that the Nonesuch, and Mary Rose,
having had only a short conflict with the Spaniards, left them, and with other
Ships went to the rescue of the Triumph then in danger. So that the relations
of them that were present at the same actions, are different for the manner,
while every one remembers that which he observed of his own side.

Knights created for their valors, by the Right Honorable Charles Howard,
Earl of Notingham, Lord High-Admirall.
The day following, the Lord High-Admiral of England, for their valor and
fortitude, Knighted Thomas Howard, the Lord Sheffield, Roger Townesend, John
Hawkins, and Martin Furbisher. And it was concluded, thenceforth not to assault
the Enemy, till they came to the Streights of Calais, where Henry Seymor, and
William Winter expected their coming. So the Spanish Fleet went on with a full
Southwest wind, the English fleet following them. But so far was the title of
Invincible, or their terrible aspect unable to affright our English shores;
that the Youth of England, (leaving their Parents, Wives, Children, Kindred,
and Friends, out of their dearer love to their Country) with Ships hired at
their own charges, joined themselves in great numbers with the Fleet, with
generous alacrity, Diverse Noblemen and Knights of England, join themselves
with the English Fleet before Calais.
and incredible courage; and amongst others, the Earls of Oxford,
Northumberland, Cumberland, Sir Thomas and Sir Robert Cecill, Sir Henry
Brook, Sir Charles Blunt, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir William Hatton, Sir Robert
Carey, Sir Ambrose Willoughby, Sir Thomas Gerard, Sir Arthur Gorge, and other
worthy Nobles, of great note and account.

The seven and twentieth day of the month, The Spanish Fleet lies at anchor,
and rests betwixt Calais and Dover.
toward evening, the Armada cast anchor near Calais, being aduized by the
Pylots, that if they went further, it would be in danger to be carried into
the North Ocean by the tide; and over against them, within cannon shot, lay the
Admiral, and the English Fleet at anchor, to whom Seymor and Winter joined
themselves. Now was the number of the English Ships come to be one hundred and
forty, all able for the fight, swift of sail, and apt to cast about to take
any advantage, and yet there were not above fifteen of them, which bore the
weight and burden of the War, and repelled it. The Spaniards presently (as
often before) by frequent messengers, The Duke of Parma is sent for again by
the Spaniards.
urged the Duke of Parma, to send forty Fly-boates, without which he could not
fitly fight with the English, by reason of the magnitude and sluggishnesse of
the Spanish Ships, and the great dexterity and agility of the English; and
earnestly required him to put forth to sea with his Fleet, whom the Armada (as
was agreed) should protect as it were with wings, He is unprepared.
till their arrival in England: But he being unprepared, could not readily
come, his flat-bottom'd Boats being withal very broad, were full of leakes,
victual was wanting, and the mariners detayned a long time against their
wills, The good service of the Hollanders, who hindered Parma from joining his
Forces with the Spanish Navy.
were stolen away. Besides, the Hollanders, and Zelanders ships of War which
houered about the Ports of Newport and Dunkerke, whence they were to set out,
were so well provided of great Ordnance, and Harquebuzziers, that he durst not
come from the shores, unless wittingly and willingly he should cast himself
and his soldiers into visible and manifest danger: yet did he not omit any
thing worthy of a diligent, industrious, and valiant Prince, being strongly
inflamed with a desire to subdue England.

The Spanish Forces to assault England.
The number of the Gallions of Portugal.
THe Gallion S. Martin, as Captain General, and principal of the Fleet, was
of the burden of one thousand tun, there were in her three hundred choice
Sould^ers, one hundred and seventy Mariners, and she carried fifty pieces of
Ordnance.

S. John's Gallion, called the Admiral general, of the burden of one thousand
and fifty tun, had in her two hundred thirty one soldiers, one hundred
seventy nine mariners, and fifty Canons.

S. Marks Gallion, of the burden of seven hundred ninety two tun, with two
hundred ninety two Soldiers, and one hundred and seventeen mariners.

The Gallion S. Philip, of eight hundred tun, four hundred and fifteen
soldiers, and forty Canons.

The Gallion S. Lewis, of eight hundred and thirty tun, with three hundred
seventy six soldiers, one hundred and sixteen mariners, and forty Canons.

S. Matthews Gallion, of seven hundred and fifty tun, with two hundred
seventy seven soldiers, two hundred mariners, and forty Canons.

S. James Gallion, of five hundred and twenty tun, with three hundred
soldiers, one hundred mariners, and thirty Canons.

The Gallion of Florence, of nine hundred sixty one tun, with four hundred
soldiers, one hundred mariners, and fifty two canons.

S. Christophers Gallion, of three hundred fifty two tun, with three hundred
soldiers, ninety mariners, and thirty Canons.

S. Bernards Gallion, of three hundred fifty two tun, and two hundred and
eight soldiers, one hundred mariners, and thirty canons.

The Ship called Zabra Augusta, of one hundred sixty six tun, with fifty
five soldiers, fifty seven mariners, and thirteen canons.

The other Zabra, called Iulia, of one hundred sixty six tun, with fifty
soldiers, and seventy two mariners, and fourteen canons.

The whole body of the Portugal Fleet, consisted of twelve Vessels, viz. ten
Gallions, and two Zabra's, the whole burden whereof, made up the number of
seven thousand seven hundred thirty seven tun, and three thousand three
hundred thirty soldiers, one thousand two hundred thirty three mariners, and
three hundred and fifty canons, with all other necessaries, as Bullets, Powder,
Match, etc.

The Fleet of Biscay, commanded by the General, Don Jean Martinez, de Ricalde.
THe Admiral, called Saint Anne, of seven hundred sixty eight tun, with
three hundred twenty three soldiers, one hundred and fourteen mariners, and
thirty canons.

The Admiral Grangrina, of one thousand one hundred sixty tun, with three
hundred soldiers, one hundred mariners, and thirty six canons.

S. Iago, of six hundred sixty six tun, with two hundred and fifty
soldiers, one hundred and two mariners, and thirty canons.

The Conception of Zebeleu, of four hundred sixty eight tun, one hundred
soldiers, seventy Mariners, and twenty canons.

The Conception of John, of four hundred and eighteen tun, one hundred
sixty four soldiers, seventy mariners, and twenty four canons.

The Magdalen of John Francesco d' Ayala, of five hundred and thirty tun, two
hundred soldiers, seven mariners, and twenty two canons.

S. John, of three hundred and fifty tun, one hundred thirty soldiers, one
hundred mariners, and twenty four canons.

The Ship called the Mary, of one hundred sixty three tun, one hundred and
eighty soldiers, one hundred mariners, and twenty four canons.

Another, called the Manuel, of five hundred and twenty tun, one hundred and
thirty soldiers, forty three mariners, and sixteen canons.

A Ship called S. Mary of Monte Mayor, of seven hundred and seven tun, two
hundred and twenty soldiers, fifty mariners, and sixteen Canons.

Other Vessels belonging to this Fleet, called Pinnaces.
THe Pinnace, called the Mary of Aguirra, of seventy tun, thirty soldiers,
twenty three mariners, and ten canons.

A Ship named Isabella, of seventy one tun, thirty soldiers, thirty two
mariners, and twelve canons

The Pinnace, called the Miguel de Susa, of ninety six tun, thirty
soldiers, twenty six mariners and twelve canons.

The Pinnace of S. Stephano, of seventy eight tun, thirty soldiers, twenty
six mariners, and twelve cannons.

This whole Fleet consisted of fourteen Vessels, ten great, and four
lesser, called Pinnaces, their whole burden amounted to six thousand five
hundred sixty seven tun, two thousand thirty seven soldiers, eight hundred
sixty three mariners, which make up two thousand eight hundred and two. Also,
two hundred canons, one thousand one hundred and ninety bullets, four hundred
sixty seven quintalls of powder, every quintall accounted for one hundred
twenty five weight, one hundred and forty of bullets, and eighty nine of match.

The Fleet of Castile, whereof Diego Flores de Valdes was General.
THe Gallion general, called the Christopher, of seven hundred tun, having
in her two hundred and five soldiers, one hundred and two mariners, and thirty
canons.

The Gallion S. John Baptist, of seven hundred and fifty tun, with two
hundred and fifty soldiers, one hundred and forty mariners, and thirty canons.

The Gallion S. Peter, of five hundred and thirty tun, with one hundred and
thirty soldiers, one hundred and forty mariners, and forty canons.

S. John's Gallion, of five hundred and thirty tun, with one hundred and
seventy soldiers, and one hundred and twenty mariners, and forty canons.

The Gallion S. Iago el Mayor, of five hundred and thirty tun, with two
hundred and thirty soldiers, one hundred thirty two mariners, and thirty
canons.

The Gallion S. Philip and S. Iago, of two hundred and thirty tun, with one
hundred and fifty soldiers, one hundred and sixteen mariners, and thirty
canons.

The Gallion S. Medela, and Celedonia, of five hundred and thirty tun, with
one hundred and seventy soldiers, one hundred and ten mariners, and thirty
canons.

S. Annes Gallion, of two hundred and fifty tun, with one hundred soldiers,
eighty nine mariners, and twenty four canons.

Our Lady of Vigenia, of seven hundred and fifty tun, with one hundred and
ninety soldiers, one hundred mariners, and thirty canons.

The Ship called the Trinity, of seven hundred and eighty tun, with two
hundred soldiers, one hundred twenty two mariners, and thirty canons.

The S. Katherina, of eight hundred sixty two tun, with two hundred
soldiers, one hundred and sixty mariners, and thirty canons.

The S. John Baptist, of six hundred fifty two tun, with two hundred
soldiers, and one hundred and thirty mariners, and thirty canons.

Our Lady of Rosaria, called the Pinnace, with thirty soldiers, twenty six
mariners, and twenty four canons.

The Pinnace called S. Anthony of Padua, with three hundred soldiers, and
forty six mariners, and sixteen canons.

The number of this whole Fleet of Castille, consisted of fourteen Gallions,
and two pinnaces; their entyre burden amounting to eight thousand seven
hundred thirty four tun, having in it two thousand four hundred eighty five
soldiers, one thousand seven hundred and nineteen mariners, together
amounting to four thousand one hundred seventy seven men, and three hundred
eighty four canons, with all other necessaries, and bullets, powder, and
match.

The equipage of the ships of Andeluzia, commanded by the General D. Pedro
Valdes.
THe Admiral Ship, of one thousand one hundred and fifty tun, having in it
fifty soldiers, one hundred and eighteen mariners, with fifty pieces of
canons.

The S. Francis, of nine hundred and fifteen tun, with two hundred and
thirty soldiers, sixty mariners, and thirty canons.

The Gallion S. John Baptist, of one hundred and ten tun, with two hundred and
fifty soldiers, twenty mariners, and forty canons.

The S. John Gargaren, of five hundred and nine tun, with one hundred and
seventy soldiers, sixty mariners, and twenty cannons.

A Ship called the Conception, of eighty tun, with two hundred soldiers,
sixty five mariners, and twenty five canons.

The Bear, or Ship called S. Anne, of nine hundred tun, with three hundred
soldiers, eighty mariners, and thirty canons.

The S. Katherina, of seven hundred and thirty tun, with two hundred and fifty
soldiers, eighty mariners, and thirty canons.

The Trinity, of fifty tun, with two hundred soldiers, twenty mariners, and
thirty canons.

The S. Mary de Iuncar, of seven hundred and thirty tun, with two hundred
and forty soldiers, eighty mariners, and twenty four canons.

The S. Bartholomew, of nine hundred seventy six tun, with twenty five
soldiers, eighty mariners, and thirty canons.

A Pinnace called the holy Ghost, with forty soldiers, thirty three mariners,
ten cannons, and well stored with bullets, powder, and other necessaries.

This Fleet consisted of ten Gallions, one Pinnace, which in burden amounted
altogether to eight thousand seven hundred and two tun, having in it two
thousand four hundred soldiers, eight hundred mariners, two hundred and sixty
canons, and all other necessaries thereunto belonging.

The Fleet of Guypuscoa, by D. Michell de Quendo.
THe Generals Ship, called S. Anne, of one thousand two hundred tun, having
in it thirty soldiers, ninety mariners, and fifty canons.

The Admiral, called the Lady of Roses, of nine hundred forty five tun, with
two hundred and thirty soldiers, sixty four mariners, and thirty canons.

The S. Savior, of nine hundred fifty eight tun, with thirty three
soldiers, eighty mariners, and thirty canons.

The S. Martha, of five hundred forty eight tun, with one hundred and
eighty soldiers, seventy mariners, and twenty five canons.

S. Stephen, of nine hundred thirty six tun, with two hundred soldiers,
seventy mariners, and thirty canons.

The S. Barba, of five hundred twenty five tun, with one hundred and sixty
soldiers, fifty mariners, and fifteen canons.

The Mary, of two hundred ninety one tun, with one hundred and twenty
soldiers, forty mariners, and twenty canons.

The S. Cross, of six hundred and eighty tun, with one hundred and fifty
soldiers, forty mariners, and fifteen canons.

The Vrsadoncella, of five hundred tun, with sixty soldiers, forty mariners,
and eighteen canons.

The Pinnace called the Ascension, of six hundred tun, with thirty
soldiers, twenty mariners, and twelve canons.

The Pinnace called S. Barnaby, and another named Our Lady of Guadalupa, with
the Pinnace called the Magdalen, these three in burden, soldiers, mariners,
canons, and other necessaries, equalled the pinnace of the Ascension.

There was in this Fleet of Guypuscoa, fourteen Vessels, which were in
burden all together six thousand nine hundred ninety one tun, had in it two
thousand ninety two soldiers, six hundred and seventy mariners, making up
the number of two thousand seven hundred and eight men, two hundred seventy
seven canons, with all other necessaries.

The Fleet of Eastern ships, called, Leuantiscas, whose General was Martin de
Vertendona.
THe Generals Ship, called Ragazone, of one thousand two hundred ninety four
tun, having in it three hundred and fifty soldiers, ninety mariners, and
thirty five canons.

The Admirals ship, called Ia Laua, of seven hundred twenty eight tun, with
two hundred and ten soldiers, eighty mariners, and thirty canons.

La Rata S. Mary, the crowned, of eight hundred and twenty tun, with three
hundred and forty soldiers, ninety mariners and forty canons.

The S. John of Cicilia, of eight hundred and eighty tun, with two hundred
and seventy soldiers, seventy mariners, and thirty canons.

The Trinity Valencera, of one thousand one hundred tun, with two hundred and
forty soldiers, ninety mariners, and forty six canons.

The Anunciade, of seven hundred and three tun, with two hundred soldiers,
ninety mariners, and thirty canons.

The S. Nicholas Predaneli, of eight hundred thirty four tun, with two
hundred and eighty soldiers, eighty four mariners, and thirty canons.

The Iuliana, of eight hundred tun, with three hundred and thirty soldiers,
eighty mariners, and thirty six canons.

The S. Mary of Pison, of six hundred sixty six tun, with two hundred and
fifty soldiers, eighty mariners, and twenty two canons.

The Trinity of Escala, of ninety tun, with three hundred and two soldiers,
ninety mariners, and twenty five canons.

This whole Fleet consisted of ten Ships, whose burden was seven thousand
seven hundred and five tun, and had in it two thousand eight hundred and
eighty soldiers, eight hundred and seven mariners, and three hundred and
eleven canons, with all other necessaries.

The Fleet of Ships called Vrcas, whose General was Lopas de Medina.
THe Generals Ship, called the great Griffin, of six hundred and fifty tun,
having in it two hundred and fifty soldiers, sixty mariners, and forty canons.

The Admiral, called S. Savior, of six hundred and fifty tun with two
hundred and thirty soldiers, sixty mariners, and thirty canons.

A Ship called the Pedro Martino, of two hundred tun, with eighty soldiers,
thirty mariners, and thirty canons.

The white Falcon, of five hundred tun, with one hundred and seventy soldiers,
forty mariners, and eighteen canons.

The Blacke-Castle, of seven hundred and fifty tun, with two hundred and
fifty soldiers, fifty mariners, and five and twenty canons.

A Bark of Hambourgh, with six hundred soldiers, fifty mariners, and twenty
five canons.

La Cassa de Par-grand, together with Sir Pedro el Mayor, the Samson, and S.
Pedro el Minor, of as great burden as the Bark of Hambourgh.

The Bark of Danske, of four hundred and fifty tun, with two hundred and
ten soldiers, fifty mariners, and twenty five canons.

The white Falcon Mediana, of three hundred tun, with eighty soldiers,
thirty mariners, and eighteen canons.

The S. Andrew, of four hundred tun, with two hundred and fifty soldiers,
and forty mariners.

La Cassa de var Chica, of three hundred and fifty tun, with one hundred and
seventy soldiers, forty mariners, and fifteen canons.

La Cuerba Bolante, of four hundred tun, with two hundred and ten
soldiers, forty mariners, and eighteen canons.

The white Polonia, of two hundred and fifty tun, with sixty soldiers,
thirty mariners, and twelve canons.

The Adventure, and S. Barba, which were as much in burden as the S. Iago, of
six hundred tun, with sixty soldiers, forty mariners, and nineteen canons.

The Ship called El gatto, of four hundred tun, with fifty soldiers, thirty
mariners, and nine canons.

The S. Gabriel, of two hundred and eighty tun, with fifty soldiers, and
twenty five mariners.

The Esayas of like burden.

So that these twenty five Vrcas, are in burden, ten thousand two hundred
seventy one tun, and carried three thousand two hundred twenty one
soldiers, seven hundred and eight mariners, and four hundred and ten
canons, with all necessaries, as Powder, Lead, and Match.

Pinnaces and Zabra's commanded by Don Antonio de Mendoza.
THe Generals Ship, called our Lady del Pilar de Zaragossa, of three hundred
tun, with one hundred and twenty soldiers, fifty four mariners, and twelve
canons.

La Caridade Inglesse, of one hundred and eighty tun, eighty soldiers,
thirty mariners, and twelve canons.

S. Andrew d'Estoches, of one hundred and thirty tun, fifty one soldiers,
thirty mariners, and twelve canons.

The Pinnace of the Crucifix, of one hundred and fifty tun, with fifty
soldiers, thirty mariners, and eighteen canons.

A Ship called our Lady del puerto, containing as much as the Pinnace of the
Crucifix.

The Conception of Caraffa, and of our Lady de Beguoa.

The Conception of Capitillo, with the S. Ieronimo, are of sixty and seventy
tun, with fifty soldiers, and thirty mariners, and eight canons apiece.

Our Lady of Grace, the conception of Francis Lastero, our Lady of Guadalupa,
the Conception of the Holy Ghost, and our Lady of Fresneda; these Ships
contain just as much as those aboue-mentioned. Moreover, a Ship called Zabra
la Trinidad, with another Zabra S. Andrew the Conception, together with the
conception of Sommarriba, S. Katherine, S. John de Caraffa, and the Assumption,
contain as much as those that went next before.

The whole number of the twenty two Pinnaces and Zabras, were in burden, one
thousand one hundred thirty one tun, and had in them four hundred seventy
nine soldiers, five hundred seventy four mariners, and one hundred ninety
three canons, with all other necessaries.

The four Galleasses of Napler, commanded by D. Vgo de Mencado.
THe Generals Galleasse, called San Lorenzo, with two hundred and seventy
soldiers, one hundred and thirty mariners, three hundred slaves, and fifty
canons.

The Galleasse Petrona, with one hundred and eighty soldiers, one hundred and
twelve mariners, three hundred slaves, and fifty Canons.

The Galleasse Girona, with one hundred and seventy soldiers, one hundred and
twenty mariners, three hundred slaves, and fifty canons.

The Neopolitan Galleasse, with one hundred twenty four soldiers, three
hundred slaves, and fifty canons.

These four Galleasses carried altogether, eight hundred and seventy
soldiers, four hundred sixty eight mariners, two hundred canons, and one
thousand two hundred slaves.

The four Galleys of Portugal, under the command of D. Diego de Medrana.
THe Generals Gallie, with a hundred and ten soldiers, one hundred and six
mariners, one hundred slaves, and fifty canons.

The Princess Gallie, the Gally Diana, the Gallie Vazana, containing as much
as the Generals Gallie.

The brief and general account of the whole Fleet.
THe whole Fleet together, was composed of twelve Gallions of Portugal, in
burden seven thousand seven hundred thirty seven tun, carrying four
thousand three hundred and thirty soldiers, one thousand two hundred thirty
three mariners, four hundred canons, with ammunition of bullets, powder, and
match.

Of fourteen Ships of Biscay, commanded by John Martinez de Ricaldo: These
Ships all together were of burden, six thousand five hundred sixty seven
tun, and carried two thousand and fifty soldiers, nine hundred mariners, and
two hundred and seventy canons.

Of sixteen Gallions of Castile, in burden one thousand seven hundred tun,
carrying two thousand five hundred and sixty soldiers, and four hundred and
twenty canons.

Of eleven Ships of Andaluzia, in burden eight thousand seven hundred sixty
two tun, two thousand five hundred twenty five soldiers, nine hundred
mariners, and two hundred and sixty canons.

Of fourteen Ships of Guipuscoa, in burden six thousand nine hundred
ninety one tun, two thousand one hundred and two soldiers, seven hundred
and eighteen mariners, and two hundred and eighty canons.

Of the Eastern Fleet, with ten Ships in burden, seven thousand seven
hundred and five tun, carrying two thousand nine hundred soldiers, one
hundred sixty seven mariners, and three hundred and ten canons.

Of the Fleet of Vreas, twenty three in number, in burden ten thousand two
hundred seventy one tun; and in them, three thousand three hundred twenty
one soldiers, seven hundred and eight mariners, and four hundred canons.

Of twenty two Pinnaces or Zabras, in burden one thousand two hundred twenty
one tun; and in them, three hundred seventy six soldiers, five hundred
seventy four mariners, and one hundred and ten canons.

Of four Galleasses of Naples, carrying eight hundred sixty four soldiers,
five hundred mariners, two hundred canons.

Of four Galleys, which carried four hundred soldiers, and twenty canons.

In four Galleasses, there were likewise, one thousand two hundred
Gally-slaues, and in the four Galleys, eight hundred eighty eight; which
together, make up the number of two thousand eighty eight persons.

And beside the aboue-mentioned Powder, there were, if any danger or necessity
should happen, six hundred quintalls of powder.

So as in the whole Fleet, there was one hundred and thirty Ships, twenty five
Vrca's of the burden of five hundred, and seven hundred tun* nineteen
Pinnaces, of the burden of seventy and an hundred tun; thirteen Zabra's,
with two of Portugal, four Galleasses, and as many Galleys, of the burden of
fifty seven thousand eight hundred sixty eight tun; and in them, nineteen
thousand two hundred ninety five soldiers, and eight thousand four hundred
and fifty mariners, with two thousand six hundred and thirty gally-slaues,
and two thousand six hundred and thirty pieces of Ordnance of all sorts; among
which, were great and middle Culuerings, and some great canons.

There was likewise twenty small Vessels, called Caruels, for the service of
the Fleet, and ten Falua's, with six Oars apiece.

There were in this Fleet, one hundred twenty four Voluntaries, attended by
four hundred fifty and six servants bearing arms, and two hundred thirty
eight entertained by the King, with one hundred sixty three servants.

There was one hundred seventy seven persons appointed to wait upon the
Ordnance, with two Engineers, one Physician, one Surgeon, and thirty servants.
Fourscore and five both Physicians and Surgeons, with one hundred and eighty
Church men, all Dominicans, Franciscans, Flagellans, or Jesuits.

The Colonels Regiments, or Tertois paid by the King in this Fleet, with the
number of Men under every Regiment.
Don Francisco de Bouadilla, the Kings Camp-master general.

The Regiments of Sicily, commanded by Don Diego Pimentell, under whom were
twenty four Captains.

The Regiment of Tertio, commanded by Don Francisco de Tolete, under whom were
twenty five Captains.

The Regiment of Don Alonzo-luzon, under whom were twenty six Captains.

The Regiment of Yeffa comm. by Don Augustino Mexia, under whom were twenty
six Captains.

Diverse Companies of free bands, some of which were drawn from the troops of
Castile, by Don Iuan de Guzman; the others, from Portugal, by Gasper Sossa.

So that there were in the aboue-mentioned Regiments, or Tertois, and in the
companies of Suelty, one hundred seventy one Ensigns, amounting to the number
of eighteen thousand nine hundred seventy three soldiers, with thirty more,
to make up the number of nineteen thousand two hundred ninety five, with
diverse ministers, and officers, as well of justice as of the Dukes Court, one
hundred eighty five persons.

To be short, the whole Fleet consisted of eighteen thousand nine hundred
thirty seven foot, eight thousand six hundred and fifty mariners, two hundred
twenty four Voluntaries, with four hundred fifty five servants that were
allowed; and two hundred thirty eight other servants on one part, one hundred
sixty three on another; one hundred sixty seven persons appointed to attend the
canons, eighty five for the Hospital to sick persons, one hundred and eighty
Churchmen of all orders, twenty three Gentlemen of the Dukes Court, fifty
servants, seventeen superintendants general of the Army, one hundred servants
more belonging to them or to the offices of justice.

So that in the whole Army there were twenty eight thousand six hundred eighty
seven persons, besides two thousand eight hundred and eight Gally-slaues, that
tugged the Oar in the Galleasses and Galleys.

All these had good and sufficient provision, victuals, and things necessary
for so great and invincible an enterprise, which I for breuity will omit to
show at large, praying to God that theirs or others ambitious enterprises upon
England, may be still by the Almighty and euer-sauing hand of God confounded,
and ouer-whelmed like Pharao. Amen.

ABRAHAM DARCIE. Forces to defend England, against Spaines pretended invasion.
By SEA.
Under the command of the Right Honorable Charles Howard, Earl of Nottingham,
L. High Admiral of England.

ROYAL Ships.
Seventeen Royal Ships, attended by twelve other warlike Ships, and six
Pinnaces.

LONDON Ships.
Sent out by the City of London, sixteen tall Ships for war, and four
Pinnaces.

BRISTOW Ships.
From Bristow, three Ships, and one Pinnace.

BARSTABLE Ships.
From Barstable, three good Ships, and one Pinnace.

EXETER Ships.
From Exeter, two Ships and one Pinnace.

PLIMMOVTH Ships.
From Plimmouth, seven brave Ships, well appointed, with a Fly-boat.

Also, one Pinnace of the Lord Admirals.

Another* of the Lord Sheffields.

And one of Sir William Winters.

MERCHANTS Ships.
The Merchants Adventurers of England also sent ten lusty Ships at their own
proper charges.

In the BRITISH Seas.
There were also sixteen Royal ships sent into the narrow Sea, under the
command of the Right Honorable Lord Henry Seymor, with many other small Ships,
Barks, and Pinnaces, sent out of the North and West parts of England, by
diverse Noblemen, and other honorable persons, Gentlemen, and Merchants.

By LAND.
The Landforces (which were encamped at Tilbury in Essex, under the command
and government of Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester) were these following.

BEDFORD Shire.
OVt of Bedfordshire, there were seventeen Lances, forty light horses, and
five hundred foot sent, well appointed.

BVCKINGHAM.
From Buckingham shire, eighteen Lances, fourscore and three Light-horses,
and five hundred foot.

HARTFORD.
Out of Hartford shire, twenty five Lances, threescore light horses, and one
thousand foot.

KENT.
Out of Kent, fifty Lances, one hundred light horses, and five thousand foot.

SVFFOLKE.
From Suffolk, fifty Lances, two hundred light horses, three thousand foot.

ESSEX.
Out of Essex, fifty Lances, one hundred light horses, and five thousand
footmen.

MIDDLESEX.
Middlesex, thirty five Lances, fourscore and eight light horses.

SVRREY.
Raized out of Surrey, eight Lances, fourscore and eighteen light horses, and
a thousand foot.

NORFOLK.
Raized in Norfolk, three thousand foot.

LONDON.
Out of London, one thousand foot.

BARKESHIRE.
From Barkeshire, came one thousand foot.

OXFORD.
From Oxford shire, one thousand foot.

More by LAND.
There was likewise raised out of these Shires following, another ARMY,
cosisting of four hundred fourscore and one Lances, one thousand four
hundred thirty and one light horses, and thirty four thousand and fifty foot,
for the safeguard of her Majesty's Royal Person, and were under the command of
the Lord. Chamberlain.

GLOUCESTER Shire.
OVt of Gloucester shire, there were twenty Lances, one hundred light horse, and
two thousand five hundred foot.

SOMERSET.
Out of Somerset shire, fifty Lances, one hundred light horse, and four
thousand foot.

SUSSEX.
Out of Sussex, were twenty Lances, one hundred light horse, and two thousand
five hundred foot.

WILTSHIRE.
Out of Wiltshire, were twenty five Lances, one hundred light horse, and two
thousand three hundred foot.

BARKESHIRE.
Out of Barkeshire, ten Lances, fourscore and five light horse, and five
hundred foot.

OXFORD.
Oxford, twenty three Lances, one hundred and three light horse, and one
hundred and fifty foot.

CAMBRIDGE.
Cambridge, thirteen Lances, forty light horse, and seven hundred foot.

NORTHAMPTON.
Northampton, twenty Lances, fourscore light horse, and six hundred foot.

LEICESTER.
Leicester, nine Lances, threescore and ten light horse, and five hundred
foot.

WARWICK.
From Warwick, seventeen Lances, threescore and sixteen light horse, and
five hundred foot.

HVNTINGTON.
From Huntington, six Lances, twenty six light horse, and four hundred foot.

DORSET.
Dorset, one hundred and twenty Lances, and one thousand foot.

SVFFOLKE.
Out of Suffolk, were threescore and ten Lances, two hundred and thirty
light horse, and three thousand foot.

NORFOLK.
Norfolk, fourscore Lances, three hundred twenty one light horse.

HARTFORD.
Hartfordshire, five hundred foot.

SVRREY.
Out of Surrey, five hundred foot.

WORCESTER.
Worcestershire four hundred foot.

SOUTHAMPTON.
Southampton two thousand foot.

DEVON.
Deuon, two thousand foot.

LONDON.
London, nine thousand foot.

MIDDLESEX.
Middlesex, one thousand foot.

This true Description of Englands and Spaines Forces thus particularly set
down, was faithfully gathered, for the better satisfaction of the Reader, out
of sundry true English Manuscripts, and French Books, by

ABRAHAM DARCIE. But the industry of the Queen prevented both his diligence,
and the credulous hope of the Spaniards. For, by her command, the day after the
Spaniards had cast anchor, in the dead of the night, the Admiral sent eight of
his worst Ships, dawbed on the outsides with Greek Pitch and Rosin, and
filled full of sulphur, and other materials suddenly combustible, under the
conduct of Young and Prowse, with a full gale of wind directly upon the
Spanish Armada; which, as the Spaniards saw approach nearer and nearer to them,
(the flame shining over all the Sea) thinking those burning ships besides the
danger of the fire, to be filled with some deadly Engines; The Spaniards amazed
fly confusedly.
with a howling and fearful outcry, weyed anchor, cut their Cables, hoysed
their sails, cried out upon their rowers, and, struck with a horrible and a
pannique fear, with impetuous haste betook themselves to a confused flight.
Amongst which, the Admirals Galleasse had her Rudder broken, and went almost
adrift, and the day following, making fearfully toward Calais, ran upon the
sands, and after a doubtful fight with Amias Preston, Thomas Gerard, and
Haruey, was taken; Hugh Moncada, Hugh Moncada slain.
the Captain, being slain, and the soldiers and rowers either drowned or
slain, they found and carried away a great quantity of Gold. The Ship and
Ordnance were seyzed by the Governor of Calais.

The Spaniards affirm, that the General seeing these fiery ships coming,
commanded all the Fleet to weigh anchor, that the danger might pass them, and
to take again every one his place. And surely, he himself took his own
again, after warning given by a shot which was notwithstanding heard but of a
very few, because the Ships being on all sides scattered, were some of them in
that affright carried into the North Sea, and some others on the shores and
coasts of Flanders. In the mean time, The fourth combat.
Drake and Fenner assail with great noise of Cannon-shot that part of the
Spanish Fleet, which were rallying themselves before Grauelin, and were by and
by joined by Fenton, Southwell, Beaston, Cross, Raymon, and anon, by the Lord
Admiral himself, Thomas Howard, and Sheffield. The Duke, Laeua, Oquende,
Ricauld, and others, being come from the shore, sustained as well as they
could, the charge, which was such, as the most part of their Ships were torn
and bruised, and the Gallion S. Matthew, commanded by Diego Pymentel, and
appointed to assist Francisco de Toleda, in the S. Philip, was broken with the
continual batteries of Seymor and Winter, and being driven toward Ostend, was
again beaten by the Zelanders, and taken by them of Flushing, as was the other
called Saint Matthew, and all the rest of the FLEET grievously afflicted all
that day.

The last day of the Month, at the break of day, the Wind turned Northwest,
and the Spaniards striving to get into the straight again, are driven toward
Zeland. The English, as the Spaniards believe, ceased their fight, perceiving
some of their Ships in great danger, and ready to run on the sands and
shelues on the Coast of Zeland, but the wind changing to Southwest, the
Spaniards took the benefit thereof, and being gotten out from amongst those
sands, consulted in the Evening what they were to do, The Spaniards resolve to
return home by the North-Sea.
and by common consent, resolved to return into Spain by the North Ocean,
because they wanted many necessary things, and above all, Bullets, that their
Ships were broken, and that they had little hope of the Duke of Parma's putting
to Sea.

Being then already at sea, they took their route toward the North, followed
by the English Fleet, unto whom they would sometimes show their prowess: and
many being of opinion they would return, the Queen, with a Kingly courage,
mounted on horseback, and holding in her hand the trunchion of an ordinary
Captain, The Queen visits her Camp.
made a review of her Army, and camp, which was at Tilbury, walks up and
down, sometimes like a Woman, and anon, with the countenance and pace of a
Soldier, and with her presence and words fortifieth the courages both of the
Captains and Soldiers beyond all belief.

The very day of the last fight, the Duke of Parma having paid his vow to our
Lady of Halle, came to Dunkerke, but too late, and was there received by the
Spaniards with reproach, as if to favor Queen ELIZABETH, he had willingly
caused them to lose so fair an occasion to execute their enterprise.
Therefore, in some sort to content them, he punished some that had charge of
the victuals, and mocking notwithstanding at the Spaniards insolency and
arrogance, who brag that in all parts where they bear Arms, they ever draw
after them an assured victory, and that the English dared not to look them in
the face, much less endure their countenance. And surely, Bernard Mendoza,
with great pride and vanity sung forth in France, by a printed Pamphlet, the
triumph before the victory: But the English Lord Admiral, to keep the Prince
of Parma from coming out of Dunkerke, commanded Seimer and the Hollanders, to
keep the Coast of Flanders, and he himself followed the Spaniards behind,
until they were past Edenborough Frith in Scotland. For, some feared they
would retire to the King of Scots, at that time much incensed for the death of
his Mother; and that to appease him, Ashbey, her Majesty's Ambassador there,
offered him very good conditions, Conditions offered unto the King of Scots.
to wit, the dignity of a Duke in England, a yearly pension of five thousand
pound, and a guard for his person, at her Majesty's costs, and other things.
Now whether he did this of himself, or by procurement of others, I cannot well
say, nor take no pleasure to enquire thereafter: but so it chanced, that the
fault was imputed unto him, and these conditions were never accomplished.

The Spaniards then having lost all hope of pursuing their enterprise, and
judging their safety to consist merely in their flight, follow still their
route, without staying in any place. Thus did this Fleet return shamefully
into their Country, which was preparing three whole years with so infinite
expenses, after having been fought withal so oftentimes in one Month, and
then put to flight with the loss of many men, (and not of above one hundred
English, nor no Ship but Cocks Bark only lost) all the shot of those great
Spanish Ships, being spent in vain, flying over the English Ships) having also
gone round about the Island of Great-Britaine, by Scotland, the Isles of
Orchades, and Ireland, and been furiously beaten, and greatly diminished by
tempests, wrackes, and all sorts of miseries.

Money coined in memory of this famous victory.
In memorial of which defeat, there were certain Medailles coined, wherein
some had a Fleet graven vndersayle, and hastening away with all speed, with
this Inscription, Tout ainsi come l'on dit de Caesar, IL EST VENV, IL A VEV,
IL A VINCY. on peu dire de mesme de L'espagnol auss que IL EST VENV, IL A VEV,
mais qui pis est IL ^'EN EST ENFVY, aulieu que Caesar estoit victorieux.
Ilest venu, il^ veu, il a fuy.
He came, He saw, He fled.
And others, in honor of the Queen, with some Ships on fire among a confused
Fleet, with these words; Vne Femme a conduict ceste action.
A Woman conducted this Action.


As thus they fled, many of their Ships were lost upon the Coasts of Ireland
and Scotland, where some seven hundred Soldiers and Mariners were cast ashore,
who, at the request of the Duke of Parma, unto the King of Scotland in their
behalf, and by the Queens permission were passed into Flanders a year after.
But those poor wretches which were cast away in Ireland, Misery of the
Spaniards in Jreland.
were not so mercifully dealt withal: for some of them were slain by the
Irish dwelling in the woods; the other, by the commandment of the Deputy, who
fearing lest they should join with the Irish Rebels; and seeing that Bingham,
Governor of Connaugh, had refused upon his reiterated commandment to kill
those which had yielded themselves, he sent Foul the second Marshall, who,
drawing them forth which had hidden themselves, cut off the heads of about two
hundred of them, which the Queen detested with all her heart, as a deed full of
cruelty. This so affrighted the rest, that sick and weak as they were, and
half starued, they re-embarked themselves in their broken vessels, and were
for the most part sunk at Sea.

The Fleet being returned home, Causes of the defeat.
imputes this mischief unto the Duke of Parma, and unto their too-much
obedient prudence, in taking it for so heinous a crime, to disobey the
commandment imposed upon them: For they were straightly charged to attempt
nothing, until the Duke of Parma were joined unto them with his Forces,
without reserving any liberty unto themselves to judge of occasions which might
happen: a thing very fit to have bin done: and they boasted to have bin able
without that, to have defeated the English Fleet in their Port; and the men of
war were in great dispute, whether it were necessary, whatsoever happened, to
observe religiously what is commanded, lest by the neglect of obedience, the
commandment should be lost: Or if it were fitter to correct things commanded
by necessity, and apply them to present use, according to the growth of
affairs, that the occasions and moments of doing expeditions might not be lost.

The Spaniard takes patiently this overthrow.
The Spaniard did constantly bear this loss, as coming from above, rendering
thanks unto God that it was no greater, and used singular mercy and charity
for the comfort of the Soldiers and Mariners.

Queen Elizabeth caused a general thanksgiving to God for it, and public
rejoicing in England.
Queen ELIZABETH likewise commanded public prayers and thanksgiving to be
made in all the Churches of England, and went her self in triumph amongst the
Companies and Societies of London, which marched on both sides of her Majesty,
with their Banners, and road through the Streets (which were richly hung with
blue hangings) in a Chariot drawn with two Horses, (Princes themselves not
using four, as now adays particular persons do) to Saint Paul's Church, were
she gave God humble thanks, heard the Sermon, (which showed the glory due to
GOD alone,) and caused the Ensigns taken, to be there set up and showed unto
the people. Then she assigned some revenues unto the Admiral, for the
service which he had performed with so good and happy success; Praised those
who were of the English Navy.

The public joy is increased by the good news which came out of Scotland.


praised highly her Sea-Captaines, as men borne for the preservation of their
Country; and as often as she saw any of the other, called them by their
names, to witness that she took note of their deserts: which they took as
sufficient reward for their services: She also recompensed the maimed and
poorer sort with honorable pensions.

This public rejoicing was increased by the arrival of Sir Robert Sidney,
who being come out of Scotland, assured her Majesty, that the King of Scots,
embraced most affectionately the Queens friendship, made sincere profession of
true Religion, and would defend it with all his might: He was sent unto him
before, when Great Britain was first threatened with the Spanish Fleet, to
acknowledge by his reioycings and thanksgiving, of the good will which he
bore to the Queen, to praise his forwardness to defend the common cause; to
promise him reciprocal succors, if the Spaniard made any invasion in
Scotland; To give him to understand with what ambition the Spaniard gapeth
after the whole Monarchy of Great Britain, soliciting the Pope to
excommunicate his Royal person, both to spoil him of the Kingdom of
Scotland, and to exclude him out of the succession of the Kingdom of England;
To put him in mind of the threatenings which Mendoza, and the Popes Nuntio
uttered against him, and that therefore he was to take heed of Papists.
Whereunto, (that we may note it by the way) the KING answered graciously and
merrily: J expect no other courtesy of the Spaniard, then such as Poliphemus
promised to Ulysses, (to wit,) That he would devour him the last of all his
fellows.

About this time, died the Earl of Leicester, The death of Robert Dudley,
Earl of Leicester.
on the fourteenth of December, of a continual burning Fever, as he was on
his way to go to Killingworth: which death, although the Queen much grieved
at, yet this joy was never a whit diminished thereby. He was the fifth son
of John, Duke of Northumberland; under King EDWARD, first Gentleman of the
Kings Chamber, under Queen MARIE, who restored him to his first honors,
together with his Brothers and Sisters, Master of the Artillery at the Siege of
Saint Quintaines; and under Queen ELIZABETH, who affected him, because of a
simpathy of spirits between them, occasioned perhaps by some secret
constellation, which the Greek Astrologers call Sinastria; he was Master of
the Horse, His dignities and titles.
Knight of the Royal Orders of the Garter, and of S. Michael, one of the Privy
Council, Steward of the Queens House, Chancellor of the University of Oxford,
Justice in Eire of all the Forests beyond Trent, the Queens Lieutenant, and
Captain of the English Forces against Spaines, Governor, and Captain
general of the united Provinces of the Netherlands: he began in his latter
time to conceit a new hope and title of honor and authority, looking to have,
with Sovereign power annexed thereunto, a general Lieutenancy under the
Queen, both throughout all England and Ireland, of which he had gotten Letters
Patents, if that the Right Honorable William Cecill, Lord Burleigh, and Sir
Christopher Hatton had not opposed themselves thereunto, and also if the Queen
had not betimes prevented the danger which might have insued, in giving
too-much power to one man alone. He was reputed a complete Courtier, His
disposition and manners.
magnificent, liberal, a protector and benefactor of Soldiers and Scholars,
very skillful in temporizing, and fitting himself to the times, to serve his
own turn, very officious, and cunning toward his ill-willers; for a time
much given to Women, and finally, a good husband in excess. To conclude, as
long as he preferred a power subject unto envy before a solid virtue, evil
speakers took occasion to tugge and tear at him continually, during the best
of his fortune, by defamatory libels, which contained some slight untruths. And
to say the truth, he was openly held to be in the rank of those which were
worthy of praise, but the things which he secretly plotted, displeased many.
The Queen, who was flexible enough in all other things, and was hardly ever
seen to remit any thing due to her treasure, caused his goods to be sold to
their uttermost value, Leicesters goods are sold.
to pay that which he ought her.

The Duke of Parma having now broken off his purpose of inuading England, to
carry away notwithstanding with this great prepared Army for that end, some
glory from the English, and by the same means to open the way of Zeland, and
deliver Brabant from incursions, besieges Bergen ap Zoom, a Town of Brabant,
Berghen ap Zoom besieged by the Duke of Parma.
strong by reason of the situation thereof, and the Forts round about it, and
guarded by a garrison the most part English. But his endeavor was frustrated by
the foresight of the Noble Lord Willoughby, and the valor of the Garrison
Soldiers: For although that during the whottest of the siege, there arose a
great discord amongst the besieged, some favoring Drury, Governor of the
place, established by the Lord Willoughby, the English General, and others
adhering unto Morgan, provided thereof by the Queens Letters, each of them
notwithstanding having a care of the common good, behaved themselves valiantly,
and by sallies and other military devices, did all of them so find the Enemy
busied, that after having slain, taken, or drowned about four hundred, which
Grimston and Redhead, Who raises the siege.
feigning themselves to be Fugitives, had drawn into the Fort by great
promises, protestations, and oaths; the Duke having lost all hope of shutting
up their Haven, and to make himself Master of the Town, and seeing the Winter
at hand, and victuals failing, raised his siege two Months after. And the Lord
Willoughby, to honor with some recompense the well-deseruing, knighted Sir
Francis Vere, who then began to show himself, Sir Thomas Knowles, Sir N.
Parker, and Sir I. Pooly, for their worthy valors.

England being now freed from the present fear of a foreign War,
Innouations in England.
found not her self so happily delivered of an inward Schism; For
schismatic impiety waxes always insolent when any Wars be stirring, nor
ever did shameless and rebellious impudence, and outrageous malice more
insolently beard the Ecclesiastical Magistracy: For whereas the Queen, who
was EVER THE SAME, was very unwilling to innouate any thing in Religion,
thinking it the way to cut the nerves of the Ecclesiastical administration,
and the Royal Prerogative; some, which only admired the discipline of the
Church of Geneua, judging that there was no better way to establish it, than by
blazoning the English Hierarchy, and bringing the Prelates in hatred with the
people, did in scurrilous manner spit out their slanderous venom against this
Hierarchy, by certain injurious printed Books, which carried the Titles of,
Martin Mar-Prelate, and other scandalous Books.
Martin Mar-Prelate, or A Whip for the Prelates. Minerales Diotrephes
demonstration of Discipline, etc.

That the Authors of them seemed not to be professors of Piety, but rather
Roysters: nevertheless, they were Ministers, the one was named Penry; and the
other, Vuedall, and Job Throckmorton, a learned man, but a merry conceited
fellow, and had for their fautors or supposts, Sir Richard Knightly, and Sir
R. Wigston, worshipful Knights, grave and prudent personages (who had been
seduced by like Ministers) and had bin fined deep in the Star Chamber, in
case the Archbishop of Canterbury, according to his accustomed goodness and
mildness, had not with much ado appeased the Queen.

Whilst these, I say, Beginning of a great Rebellion in Jreland.
by slandering made way to this discipline, other companions in this their
enterprise, in contempt of the Laws, began to put it in practice, in diverse
corners of the Kingdom, holding Synods and Assemblies in certain places,
establishing to that end Presbyteries, of which number Thomas Cartwright,
Edmund Snap, Andrew King, Proudlous, Pain, and other Ministers being
committed, some turbulent spirits thought to have rescued them. But I leave
unto the Ecclesiastical Historian, the description of the petulancy of these
people, which was stayed by the wisdom and patience of the Lords Archbishops,
unto whom the knowledge of that business appertained.

Although that tempest which had thundered so loud, and with such threatenings
from out of Spain, was now blown over, yet fell there some little gusts, as
relics thereof in Ireland and Scotland, and out of England upon Spain,
rushed out a more grievous, as anon we shall declare. For, in Ireland, by
reason that Fitz-Williams, the Lord Deputy, who made search for all Spanish
goods lost by wrecke, did exact them with rigor, and by occasion thereof,
imprisoned some as favorers of the Spaniards; amongst other matters, occasion
was thence given and taken of all the troubles since happening.

Daniel Rogers sent into Denmark to condole the death of Frederick the Second,
Ambassador in Denmark.
and confirm the ancient alliances with his Successor, treats with the
Curators of the Kingdom, to procure THat the Danes should not bear Arms
against the Queen in the service of any Enemies of her Kingdom. That they
should not grant permission to stay Ships for particular faults, in the straits
of Denmark or Seiland. That the Iland-fishing, whereof the liberty was to be
renewed every seven years according to ancient order, might not be hindered by
any new devices. That the English might not pay any custom in the Sound, but
at their return from the Baltique Sea, nor in other Money than with that of
Denmark. That the proprietaries of the Ships should not be holden by the fraud
or deceits of Pilots and Ship-masters. That the things wherewith Cloth are made
up, were free and exempted from paying any custom; and that the Tribute called
Last gelt, should be forgiven to the English.

But these things were put off to another time, because of the Kings being
under age: for the Danes were in some fashion ill pleased and disconte^ted with
the English, for not passing then by the straits of Denmark, going into
Russia, but along the Coast of Norwegue, Finmarck, Lappy, Scrufinic, and
Biarmie. The Emperor of Russia most favorable to the English.
But Boris Theodoride elected and chosen Theodore Iahannide's Successor to the
Empire of Russia, who dyed upon the beginning of this year, he mist no
occasion to help and succor the English, purchasing carefully, by all means
possible, the Royal amity of Queen ELIZABETH.

FINIS.
To the READER.
Marvel not, READER, why I should produce,
In the Omega of my Work, excuse,
And crave remission of my errors past,
Lest any Zoylus should aspersion cast
On this my labors offspring: but do know,
Though I such height of baseness will not show,
To say all is bad, so my ambition is
No ways so great, to say that nought's amiss:
The Sun, sometimes eclipst, denies his light;
So that the Day seems turned into Night:
Fair Venus had a Mole upon her Chinne;
The luckiest Gamester cannot always win:
The rarest Man may err, and it is most sure,
There Is none but GOD, that spotless is and pure.
Then far be such a Philautie from me,
To say that none, faults in this Work can see.
'Twere strange, if that a Strangers Pen, and Press,
Should have no faults, when best Works have no less
Then stay (rash Censurer) and forbear
To condemn all, though some mistake be there.
A. D.


