TO ALL CHRISTIAN PEOPLE to whom these presents shall come to be read:
(...)and Vice Chancellor of this University of Cambridge sends greeting.
Know ye* that I the said Vice Chancellor, with mine assistant the Right
Worshipful (...) and one of his Majesty's Justices of peace within the
University and Town of Cambridge, and the precincts thereof, have admitted
and allowed (...) in the County of Cambridge (...) to keep a common alehouse
or tipling-house within the town of (...) aforesaid, having before taken bond
of h^^ said (...) by recognizance, in the sum of ten pounds of good and
lawful money of England, and of (...) of (...)in the county of Cambridge
(...)and of (...) of the same Town and County sureties of the said (...) in
the several sums of five pounds a piece of the like good and lawful money
of England, in the name of our Sovereign Lord the Kings Highness that now is,
for the due observation of all and singular the statutes and acts of Parliament
in that behalf hertofore made and provided, for the good ordering of common
alehouses, and also for the observing and keeping the clauses and articles
here under written. In witness whereof I have unto these presents set my seal
of office, to continue during the good will and pleasure of me and my
successor. Given at Cambridge the (...) day of (...) in the (...) year of the
reign of our Sovereign Lord JAMES by the grace of God of England, France, and
Ireland, King, defender of the Faith, etc. and of Scotland the (...)

I. That you suffer no scholars, no neighbors children, nor servants, nor any
dwelling in your parish to tipple in your house.

II. That you suffer none to tipple in your house on the Sabbath, day nor
festival day at the time of sermon or service, or at any time after nine of
the clock at night.

III. That you suffer no carding, dicing, or other gaming in your house.

IIII. That if any vagabonds or suspicious persons come to your house, you
shall acquaint the officers therewith, and so shall you likewise do if any goods
be offered in your house to be sold by any.

V. That you suffer no drunkenness, nor dissolute disorder in your house; and
if any happen to be, to acquaint the Constables of your Town and parish with
it, that the offender may be punished.

VI. That you draw your beer by ale-quart or pint, and not by Iugges nor
cups, and sell the best after the rate of a quart a penny, and the worst after
the rate of an halfe-pennie the quart.

VII. That neither your self nor any in the house do sell, or offer to sale
any Tobacco.


