A TREATISE UPON DEATH:

First publicly delivered in a funeral Sermon, anno Dom. 1630.

And since enlarged By N. C. Preacher of Gods word in Scotland at Kilmacolme in
the Baronie of Renfrew.

Hebr. 9. 27.

For it is appointed for men once to die, etc.



EDINBURGH.

Printed by R. Y. for J. Wilson, Bookseller in Glasgow.

Anno 6^5.

Christian Reader,
IN this changeable vicissitude of decaying time, and continual succession of
dying ages, there is nothing more certain then death, which is painted forth in
the face of all living creatures, Man not excepted, the noblest of all, who in
all sexes, ranks, and conditions must once die, and then enter into judgment.
For this radicate moisture must dry up, and this natural heat must grow cold,
this soaring breath must fly up, and this surmounting soul must flit out of
this earthly tabernacle, that it may return unto its native soil, where it
shall rest eternally in these heavenly mansions, stately habitations, and most
pleasant paradise of God: Whereunto Christ the spoiler of principalities and
powers, our captain, forerunner and perfect Savior is victoriously and
triumphantly gone before us, and now (according to his comfortable promise) is
preparing a sure place, a royal palace, for all those, who with a godly sorrow
groan under the unsupportable burden of their grievous sins, and with
assurance of faith believe in, and long after his saving and glorious
appearance. So that we need not sorely and immoderately lament, for the absence
of those whom we once dearly loved in this sower valley of tears and wearisome
pilgrimage of many stations, every hour whereof is more dangerous then
another; Seeing they have joyfully and happily arrived at their journeys end,
heaven, and at last are crowned with incomprehensible glory, strengthened with
never*fading immortality, replenished with exquisite joys of Gods favorable
presence, and drowned with overflowing pleasures at his right hand for
evermore. These points with many others in that kind I have handled in this
subsequent meditation, first publicly delivered by me in a Sermon at the
burial of an honorable Baron with his religious Lady both laid in their
grave at once, whose names of blessed memory I conceal from thee, for such
reasons as I thought good. Which meditation surely I had buried with them, or
at least closed up in my study, if not the good opinion of conscionable and
zealous hearers had raised it up again from the grave of oblivion, by their
diligent search and lecture of manuscripts here and there dispersed far from my
expectation and former intention. So that I was forced to review and enlarge
the original copy by the advice of my learned and much respected friends;
such as reverend prelates, doctors and pastors of our church, who have best
skill in such matters of spiritual importance. For I have ever been of that
mind, that every wise man should make choice of some entire and trusty
friends, who will be so far from flattering and fostering him with a self
conceit, that by the contrary they will plainly admonish him of his errors and
infirmities, and give him sound and ripe counsel, when there is any business
in hand that may especially concern his credit and estimation. Amongst the
which the operations which flow from the gifts of the mind have the first
place: and seeing none, how capable so ever, is fully adorned with them, he
should seek help of others. For God has not given all gifts to every one; and
he who is shorter-sighted then I, may see a spot in my face which I cannot see
my self; and it were to be wished that there were more premeditation in this
age, so fertile of invention, wits and writs. Did the Greek orators and Poets
go to their Athenaeum, and the Latin to their Aedes palatinae, for to consult
with the most learned of their time about the divulgating of their monuments;
and we who have more divine documents then ever any paganish Writer could dream
of, bring forth so abortive fruits? As for my self, I will not answer for
others, but if I had had no other to take counsel by, surely this lucubration
should never have seen the face of the sun, or come unto the hands of these
censuring and critic days: where there is nothing so good, but it has its
own carpers and enviers, nothing so bad, but it has its own favorers and
embracers. In it I meddle not with curious and fruitless questions, new
doctrines, dangerous tenants, accompanied with variety of ostentative and
sophisticate learning, and farded with the abused colors of prattling and
adulterate eloquence, wherewith too many seek their own praise, by disgracing
their sincere profession, by venting their lofty presumption, by scandalizing
their holy mother the church, by defiling the white robe of Christ's
righteousness, laid abroad to us in the gravitie, integrity, simplicity, and
majesty of divine scriptures, which ought to be the only square and rule of
our actions, the touchstone of our speculations, and the sovereign judge of
all our controversies. Which controversies alas, to the unspeakable grief of
the better sort, to the pitiful seduction of some miscarried simple ones from
the purity of truth to the impuritie of error, to the inevitable destruction
of many obdurate ones to fearful and damnable inconveniences, what by sects,
schisms and heresies this long time ago, what by oppressions, murders,
massacres, as bloody consequences, have troubled the peace of this Christian
world. Neither did I suffer this sermon to come to open light, because it was
my own brood, and first issue upon that grave purpose, which requires more
years, deeper learning, sounder judgment, longer experience, then I, a youth,
can attain to for the present, but because of two reasons which I add to the
former: The first is, because there is no meditation more familiar to me then
that of death: Out of the country, many thousands did fall on every side of
me: and in my country, since my admission to this painful and dreadful cure
of souls, one special point of my charge is to visit those good Christians
(over whom I watch) at their last farewell to this world, that I may render a
joyful and comfortable account of them to my Master the great shepherd of the
flock. The second reason is, because of two men, whom I highly honored during
their pilgrimage here; The one was a principal nobleman of my paroch, who in
his journey to heaven took such pleasure in reading this meditation, that he
himself did dict it to one of his servants a little before his death. And I
dare say, without flattery, that his generous and religious soul did even in
this life in a singular manner taste of the glory to come. O what divine
sentences! O what comfortable speeches did he utter to us who attended on him!
O what ravishing contemplations and private soliloquies had his soul with God
on his deathbed! These, as so many antidotes, preservatives and corroboratives
he used against that last agony: By these, as so many scales he climbed up to
the heavens. The other was my dear and honorable father, who before his
departure out of this mortal life delighted much in reading, hearing and
meditating on this discourse, and hoping that others should get instruction,
direction and consolation thereby, commanded me to publish it. So that I could
not disobey him, who was Gods instrument to bring me unto this world, to train
me up in the fear of the Lord, and who both in, and out of the country, did
prosecute me with his tender and fatherly affection in my painful travels, and
dangerous expeditions for the golden fleece of virtue, and whose life was a
clear mirror of Christian charity, yea above his power oftentimes, which he
did recommend to his children: for the Lord blessed him with abundance to the
end, and in the end crowned his former favors with a pleasant and peaceable
death, which he often craved at Gods hands, and which was a matter of greater
contentment to me, then if he had left me heir of whole territories, which
with the rest of the toys of this perishing world have but transitory joys,
like clouds rising in the morning, but dissolving ere night without any memory
of them at all. Nevertheless, honorable birth, good education, the pattern
of worthy acts, and the immortal fame of renowned ancestors, either in church
or policy, communicated to the emulous posterity for imitation, is not the
least portion of humane inheritance: and he who follows their famous examples,
engraven with letters of gold in chests of cedar, or in tables of marble, in
the never-decaying temple of sacred memory; he (I say) is not only in the way
to worldly honor and preferment, but also their footsteps lead him from grace
to glory, which is the most precious purchase a Christian can acquire. Without
the which all is but dung and dross: for one drachme of goodness is better
then a whole world of greatness; even as a little pearl is of greater worth,
then a big rock of flint; or as the sun is higher esteemed then the whole body
of the firmament spangled with stars, every one striving with another in
beauty.

To be short then, it is no inbred opinion of my self, who am conscious of many
infirmities in this body of death, that makes me to acquaint thee (O Christian
Reader) with this funeral meditation, which perhaps may live when I am dead.
In the mean time I wish it may teach thee, me, and other mortal men, our
Christian duty in this point, rest with us familiarly at home, warn us in our
journey, remember us of our present mortality, guard us against our last
enemy, prepare us for that future immortality and full happiness of soul and
body conquered to us by the victorious death, and meritorious passion of the
only son of God our only Savior: In whom I rest ever,

Thine to power, N. C.

Ad Lectorem.
SI procul obscuri tenebris ab inertibus Orci
Sit tibi propositum succinctae stamina vitae
'Ducere per virtutis iter* dum fata diesque
Suppeditant; animam ne mors inopina labantem
Auferat incauto, neu formidabile Lethi
Imperium quod cuncta domat, terrorve sepulchri,
Vltricesve mali furiae, aut quascunque sinistro
Nox genuit faetu pestes, quodve horridus Orcus
Spirat inexhaustum flagranti pectore sulphur,
Solicitent miseram trepid a formidine mentem:
Huc ades, en Campbellus opem tibi praebet anhelo
Ante ferens gressus. Vt quae (velut orba carina
Remige) Jactatur variis impulsa procellis
Fortunae instabilis, tandem men's edita coelo
Assuescat patriam paulatim agnoscere sedem.
Ille etenim ingenii nixus pernicibus alis,
Judicioque nitens memori, quae docta vetustas
Naturae e tenebris hausit ratione sagaci:
Et quae sancta cohors patrum (quos inclyta virtus
Reddidit aeternos) veriquoque fontibus hausta
Mandavit scriptis; and quae ter maximus orbis
Conditor indulsit divina oracula terris,
Hoc except a tulit tenui comprensa libello.
Ex quibus instructus triplici penetralia Ditis
Agmine perrupit saevi, mortisque ferocis
Spicula contundens, vinclis dare colla coegit.
Qud tu magnanimo superat a morte volatu
Aethereas subeas seeds, lautaeque Deorum
Accumbas mensae, factus novus incola coeli.
PATRICIUS CAMPBELLUS.

A preface before the Sermon.
YE are all here conveened this day to perform the last Christian duties to a
respected and worthy Baron, with his honorable Lady, who both have lived
amongst you in this land, and whose embalmed corpse, both ye now honor with
your mourning presence, and happy farewell to their grave. I am here designed
to put you all in mind by this premeditate speech, that the next case shall be
assuredly ours, and perhaps when we think least of it. Therefore that I may
acquaint these who need information in this point with the nature and matter of
such exhortations, let them remember with me that there are two sorts of funer
all sermons, approved and authorized by our reformed churches in Europe: The
first whereof, I call, for orders sake, Encomiastick, or Scholastic, because
it is spent in the praise of the defunct, and only used in schools, colleges,
academies, and universities, by the most learned; And this is ordinarily
enriched with pleasant variety of strange languages, lively lights of
powerful or atorie, fertile inventions of alluring poesy, great subtilties of
solid Philosophy, grave sentences of venerable fathers, manifold examples of
famous histories, ancient customs of memorable peoples and nations; and in a
word, with all the ornaments of humane wit, learning, eloquence. Which howbeit
I might borrow for a while, yet I lay them down at the feet of Jesus, and being
sent hither not by man, but by God, whose interpreter and ambassador I am, I
prefer before them the smooth words of Moses, the stately of Esaias, the royal
of David, the wise of Solomon, the eloquent of saint Paul, and the ravishing of
saint John, with the rest of divine writers, Gods penmen, out of whose
inexhausted treasury of heavenly consolation, and saving knowledge, I wish to
be furnished with the secret preparation of the sanctuary, and to be
accompanied with the full power and evidence of the spirit of my God. For there
is another second sort of funeral sermons, which I call Ecclesiastic, or
popular, viz. when the judicious and religious preacher, only for the
instruction and edification of the living, frequently assembled at burials, and
earnestly desiring at such doleful spectacles to be rejoiced in the spirit of
their minds, takes some convenient portion of scripture, and handles it with
piety, discretion, moderation, to his private consolation, the edification of
his hearers, and the exaltation of the most high name of God. So that having no
other ends but these three, and taking God to be my witness that I abhor all
religious or rather superstitious worship given to the dead, and being
naturally obliged to come here, and oftentimes requested by my near and dear
friends, yea abundantly warranted by these who have the prioritie of place in
church government above me, and as it seems by your favorable silence, and
Christian attention, invited to speak, I have purposed by the special
concurrence, and assistance of the spirit of my God, to deliver unto you a
brief meditation upon death. Pray ye all to God to engrave it by the finger of
his all-pearcing spirit in the vive depth of my heart, that again by way of
spiritual communication, I may write it upon the tables of your hearts (as it
were) with a pen of iron, and the point of a diamond, that both preacher and
hearer may lay it up in their memories, and practice it in their lives and
conversations. And I entreat you all (and most of all these who are of a tender
conscience) I entreat you I say, in the tender bowels of mercy, not to
misconstruct my coming hither, which ought rather to be a matter of singular
comfort, then of prejudged censure; a matter of profitable instruction, rather
then of envious emulation; a matter of pious devotion, then of repining
contention. I think not shame, with the glorious apostle to preach in season,
and out of season, for the converting, winning, and ingathering of souls. I do
not say this, That I consent to these who contemn and condemn altogether such
meetings; for albeit I would confess unto them, that the time, place, and
persons were extraordinary (as indeed they may seem to these who have not
travailed out of their paroch churches, or seen foreign countries) yet the
customs of the primitive church (see Nazianzen, Ambrose, Jerome, etc.) and of
our reformed churches in France, Genevah, Germany, upper and lower, in great
Britain, and elsewhere, makes all three ordinary; and the subject of this
present meditation, viz. Death, proves the same to be common.

THE SERMON.
Hebr. 9. 27. For it is appointed for men once to die, etc.

THis is a short, a memorable, a grave assertion. Short, because few in words,
but full of substance. Memorable, because a remembrance of death. Grave,
because the vive representation of it before our eyes should teach us our frail
and transitory condition in this world. But that I may proceed with a clear
method, without the which there is no solid discourse, mark these points: 1
The logic analysis of these words: 2 The grammatical and critical
expositions: 3 The doctrines, conform with their several uses inferred upon
them: 4 And lastly, the conclusion of this whole action by way of application
to these two dead corpse.

The division.
As for the analysis, I shall not be curious in it. Ye see only the subject of
this sentence is, Men once to die. The attribute, Appointed; The sentence it
self is general, because the appointment is general, Death general; The
subject of death, Man, general; The number of death, Once, if unity can be a
number.

The exposition. The appointment of death.
As for the exposition; There are three words which need to be cleared. The
first whereof is appointed, (...), expounded by worthy Suidas, Laid up as a
reward; and so indeed death is the wages of sin. Phavorinus following that
most learned Hesychius, turns it (...), it is prepared; and so indeed it is
prepared for all men once to die: But our Greek and Latin, ancient and modern
writers translate it, ordained, decreed, established for all men once to die. I
embrace their orthodox versions; yet they will suffer me to explain this word
by others in scripture, (...), it is foreseen; (...), it is foreknown; (...),
it is forepurposed; (...), it is predestinate that all men must once die. I
confess all these four words are to man diverse, modo percipiendi; yet to
God, they are all one; who howbeit he be the first and the last, yet in him
there is neither first, no^ last. So that the meaning is this; It is the
irresistible will, eternal decree, unchangeable purpose, unsearchable counsel
of the wise and everliving God, That all men and women living upon the face of
the earth, must once die. Obj. But this may be called into question by two or
three instances taken out of the old and new testaments: In the old, Genes. 5.
we read, That Enoch was no more seen by man, but taken by God. And 2 King. cap.
2. that Elias was caught up in a fiery chariot unto heaven, so that they were
both translated not to see death. In the new we read, 1 Thessalonians. 4. That these
who shall survive at the day of judgment, they shall be changed in the
twinkling of an eye, and caught up into the clouds for to meet with the Lord
in the air, and to be ever with him; so that these also shall not taste of
death. I answer first, That some few extraordinary instances do not altogether
break the band of ordinary courses once set down by God, who is without shadow
of turning or changing. Secondly, I answer, That Enoch and Elias, in so far as
they were men, they were mortal, but in so far as they were such men, they
were immortal, that is, In so far as they were types of the resurrection and
of the prototype Jesus, the immortal, coeternall, coessentiall Son of God the
Father. And as for those, who shall remain alive upon the earth on that great
day, their death will not be real, but analogicall, not actual, but virtuall
or equivalent, that is, They shall not die as their predecessors, a natural
death; but their extraordinary change shall supply or be in stead of an
ordinary death. So that ye may manifestly perceive, the appointment of God is
surer then the center of the earth, or the foundation of the heavens: for these
two are grounded upon it, and it upon none, except it self, the center and
fundament of all, whose appointment is himself, in whom there is no
composition, no accident; Quicquid enim in Deo, Deus est; that is, whatsoever
is in God, is (...) very God, him very self, one and the same; yesterday, to
day, and for ever. And thus far of the exposition of the first word, appointed.

The second word is, Death: Suidas by a periphrase, (...) that is, a refuge
from evils, and as it were a most safe haven after some storm. Phavo^inus, who
wrote after the rest of Greek authors, gives four short descriptions of
death, (...), The description of death.
(...) that is, A separation of the soul from the body; A disjunction of the
four elements, whereof our bodies are made; The loosing of the life; The
chasing away of cares. Scripture calls it a loosing, not a losing, or
dissolution, not a destruction. Our Theologues they commonly make three sorts
of death: First, (...), Natural death; not that nature is the cause of it, for
it is sui conservatrix, a defender of it self; but that it is made common to
all things in nature, and under the sun: things also above (the divine nature
only excepted) have their own changes, as well as their influences. Secondly,
(...), Violent death, when the course of nature is interrupted, by some strange
event; common also to all living creatures: And the Pagans themselves without
any contradiction acknowledged these two sorts. The third is called, (...), The
death of deaths, called spiritual death; and it is twofold; either first, when
a man is dead in his sins, through desertion, occoecation, obduration,
impenitence, or last, when a man because of his continuance in the same is cast
away from Gods presence and union as a reprobate, and consequently is adjudged
to the hells without any recoverie, deliverie, mercy. God preserve us from
this estate, and happy shall we be, if we die, before we die, for so we shall
not die, when we die; that is, if we die to sin, before our body die, for so
when it dies, we shall not die spiritually; and he that will live when he is
dead, must die while he is alive, that whether we live, we live to the Lord; or
whether we die, we die to the Lord, Whether we live therefore, or die, we are
the Lords, Romans 14. 8. For Christ to us in death and life is advantage, Philip.
1. 21. For Christ therefore died and rose again, and revived, that he might be
Lord both of the dead and living, Romans 14. 9. And thus far of the exposition of
the second word, Death.

Man the map of misery.
The third word is Man. I know the naturalists, being blindfolded, intoxicate,
and infatuate with self-love, and self-conceipt gave innumerable glorious
titles to man; and amongst the rest, they called him the monarch of heaven and
earth; the midst betwixt the Creator and the creature; the Lord, compend, and
picture of this world, a little world, the delight and miracle of nature, the
miracle of miracles, yea, a mortal God, and (as the Stoics say) in one thing
less then God. But it is to be remarked, that the most solid Philosophers did
call man amongst other disparagements, the pattern of imbecilitie, the prey of
time, the pastime of fortune, the pourtraict of inconstancy, the subject of
envy and calamity: Or (as Diogenes says) rottenness in his beginning, a
beast in his life, the food of worms in his death. But to leave all exotic
observations, let us speak of him, in the language of Canaan. There are three
words, which in the original signify man; The first word (...) Isch, (...),
noble, strong, worthy, excellent man: for in the estate of innocence and
integrity, he was created perfectly holy in body and soul; in which sense
Philo Judaeus calls God (...), the pattern; and man, Gods (...), image;
(...), effigy; (...), workmanship. But alas, O man, thou have made a great
change, and have lost infinite treasures, for earthly toys; of holy thou art
become unholy; of perfect, imperfect; and art metamorphosed from the image of
God, to the image of Satan. The second word is (...) Enosch, (...), painful,
sorrowful, miserable man: for by his vile apostasy from his Lord and King,
from his Master and Father, he has brought shame and punishment upon himself,
and through him to his whole posterity, as water is derived through the
channel to the streams; or as the sap of a tree is sent up from the root to
the branches. The third word is, (...) Adam; and this word is almost one with
Enosch; for it signifies weak, feeble, impotent man, and so it is
distinguished from Isch: As in greek, (...) differs from (...), Psalm 49.
(...) been Adam; (...) been Isch; that is, the rich, and the poor, the noble,
and the ignoble, potent, and impotent. But this third word, Adam, signifies
most especially, the matter whereof we are made, clay, earth, dust. And in
this sense Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. Jer. 22. 29. say, O earth, earth, earth, hear the
word of the Lord; that is, O man, man, man, earth by constitution, earth by
disposition, earth by dissolution; set down in the Latin well; terra quam
terimus, terra quam gerimus, terra quam quaerimus. And Chrysostom says more,
it is our country, ournurse, our mother, our board, our house, our sepulcher:
Augustine terms it, our strange land; and Nazianzen, our stepmother: and
this is Gods own conference with man in that terrestrial paradise, Genesis 3. 19.
Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return; confessed by Abraham, Genesis 18.
27. I am but dust and ashes: and by Job, chapter 10. 9. O Lord thou have made me as
a pot of clay, and wilt bring me unto dust again. And this is amplified by
Solomon, Siracides: yea the Turks and Pagans, who affirm, that we were once
made of earth, and must return to it again, as waters to the sea. And this is
Gods own voice to Isaias, chapter 40. 6. repeated in 1. Peter, 1. 24. All flesh is
grass, and all the glory of man is as the flower of grass; the grass
withers, and the flower thereof decays. Where first, mark the matter of
man, in the word, flesh, that is, a senseless dead lump, till that the Lord,
and Prince of life breathe into his nostrils the breath of life, and so he
become a living soul. Secondly, the continuance of man, and that very short,
represented first by grass, which the mower cutteth, the wind withers, the
frost consumes: secondly, by a flower, which the hand plucketh, the wind
shakes, the rain walloweth, both of small endurance; for one winter takes
away both. Even so man may in the pleasant flower of his age, bud, flourish,
fructify; but when the smiting wind of Gods decree blows on him, he
withers, decays, dies. And when he is gone, were he ever so glorious in
this life, there is no more memory of him, then of a beautiful flower in a
mowen meadow; his loyal wife, his loving children, his near friends, his dear
companions, all forget him: and howbeit in the vanity of their ambitious
spirit, and pride of their lofty heart, they would erect sumptuous tombs,
speaking trophies, gorgious monuments (only times prey) upon him, he is not
sensible of such things; for, Esaias 63. 16. Abraham is ignorant of us, and
Israel knows us not: and after this life he must be in one of these two
estates without a third, either in hell sempiternally confined; and if he be
there, what comfort can he receive of funeral preparations, multitudes of
convoy, bearing of branches, and such like superfluities, which reach not
beyond the span of this life? or if he be triumphing in heaven, no earthly
pomp, no humane magnificence, no worldly pre-eminence can add any thing to
that superexcellent weight of glory, no more then a drachme to the weight of
the whole earth, or the dust to the balance, or a spark to the bucket, or a
bucket to the boundless, bottomless Ocean; or a candle can add to the
matchles sun in his pride at the midday. And thus far of the exposition of the
third word, Man.

The assertion, It is appointed, etc.
General doctrine. All men must die.
NOw I come to the doctrines. The first is general, and it is the pillar
whereupon I prop the rest, viz. The demonstration of the invincible truth of
this Reason 1. Whatsoever has natural original tends to dissolution.
assertion, It is appointed for men, etc. by these strong and forcible reasons.

The first reason is taken from the mother of all things, and especial
handmaid of God, Nature: for it has appointed that all flowers, from the
stinking weed to the fair lilie; that all trees, from the Hyssope upon the
wall, to the Cedar in the forest; that all herbs, from the green grass, to
semperviva; that all minerals, from the iron to the gold; from the rough stone
to the precious pearl; that all the fishes, from the greatest Leviathan, to
the least minime; that all fowls, from the Eagle to the midge; that all the
creeping creatures from the Elephant or Crocodile to the basest worms, have
their own beginnings, progresses, ends. Because the very four elements
whereof they are made, are naturally subject to their combined transmutations,
the earth being subtilized to the water, the water unto the air, the air unto
the fire, and these unto their prima materia, their chaos, and it unto nothing.
And this nature is so pregnant, sedulous, and wise, that it keeps its own
appointed time, as the wise man says, Ecles. 3. There is an appointed time for
every thing under heaven. If time, then there must be a prius and a posterius,
a last as well as a first. As for example, the crane, the swallow, the stork,
the woodcock, the cuckoo with her titling, know the seasons of the year,
according to the course of sun and moon, from which proceeds the beauty of
the spring, the heat of summer, the fruitfulness of the harvest, and the cold
of winter, one following after another; and as one comes, so the other goes,
by an alternative vicissitude of time, which at the last (seeing now it
consumes all things) must be consumed by it self, when it shall find nothing
to feed upon. For now we may say, Where are those ancient works made of brick
and stone; yea, of flint, brass, adamant, by the most cunning artificers? are
they not redacted unto their original inform, disforme dust? Where is the
tower of proud Babel, the church of Ephesian Diana, and that glorious one of
Solomon? Where is the Capitol of Rome, and the invincible Byrsa of Carthage?
where Thebes, with her hundred ports, spacious Nineve, and beautiful
Jerusalem? Has not time devoured all, and much more, with their builders,
indwellers, upholders? And shall not London, Paris, Rome, Constantinople,
Cairo, Quinsay go that same way? Yes assuredly: for things artificial, as well
as natural have their own periods, which they cannot outreach, otherwise they
were infinite; a property, which cannot be attributed to any thing created
properly.

The second reason is taken from experience, Reason 2 Experience daily teaches
us the necessity we have to die.
the schoolemistresse of fools: for it is the surest that ever man got; and it
appoints and teaches, that our life is a dying life; and that the first step
to it, is the first step to our death; and that the longer we live, the nearer
we are to death, and our being here is equally divided between life and death.

Manil. Statius.
Na scentes morimur, finisque ab origin pendet.
Quidquid habens ortum, finem timet, ibimus omnes.
So that the continual work of our life, is a building of death in us: for we
die daily; and if we live but one day, we see all; so all days are alike, it
is that same day and night, that same sun and moon, these same elements and
heaven which our forebears have seen before us, and there is no new thing under
heaven. But to repeat things from the beginning; does not experience teach us,
that where there is one come to fifty years, there are ten not come; but to
see a man pass his climacterick, and then 80. years, it is rara avis in
terris. Never man yet lived a 1000 years, which are but one day in the sight of
God; for one age is the death of another: childhood the death of infancy;
youthhood the death of both; manhood the death of these three; old age the
death of these four; death the death of all: even so one generation is the
death of another. To the Hebrews succeeded Babylonians, Chaldeans, Assyrians,
Medes, Persians, Egyptians, Sycionians, Greeks, Romans, and to them we who
live in this deficient and vicious age: and as they have transferred the lamps
of their lives to us; so we by continual succession of time must lay down the
same without any contradiction to our posterity. That sun which ye see setting
over your heads, the ebbing and flowing of the sea, which environeth us, that
earth whereupon we walk, lately renewed, now growing old; and to come nearer,
these graves whereupon ye trod in your entry, this Churchyard, these
through stones, that dead bell, that beir, that doleful convoy, these two
corpse, and that wide opened sepulcher, tells us, that we must die. And as
Catullus says, -- Ostentant omnia lethum.
Death is painted with the net of a fowler: and with this ditto, Devoro omnes,
I devour all. All things above us, beneath us, about us, within us, and
without us, tell us that we must die. Do not all the creatures summon one
another to it? the least is swallowed up by the most; the weakest by the
strongest. And such is the gluttony and insatiable appetite of man, that he
has not spared one of them, but from the tame to the wild beasts, from the
foul of the air, to the fish of the sea, his womb is become the tomb, or
rather filthy retract of them. So that seeing he is nourished with
perishingthings, he cannot according to the maxims of Philosophy but perish
himself too, being corruptible in his conception, of frothing sperme;
corruptible in his mothers belly, of excrementitious blood; corruptible on her
breast, of vaporous milk; corruptible in his whole life, of earthly food; but
most of all corruptible in his death, from the which he is called in Greek
(...), in latin mortalis, that is, subject to death: and this is so
experimented by man, that one premonisheth another, our forebears our fathers,
and they us, and we our posterity, to our journeys, pilgrimages, warfares end,
Death.

Reason 3 What God decrees, nothing can disanull.
The third reason is taken from GOD, whom the Egyptians call Theut; the
Persians, Syro; the Arabians, Alla; the Magicians, Orsi; the Latins, Deus; the
greek, (...); the Hebrews, Jehovah, Elohim, Adonai, all in four letters, to
let you see that he is the God of all nations, the God of gods, who appointed
all things to come to pass according to his good will and pleasure; whose
appointment is the Cardinal, supreme, architectonick cause of these two former
subordinat appointments; for it is the cause of causes; and without damnable
curiosity, we ought not to go further; it is a precipice, and we must not
cast our selves headlong off it; it is a great gulf, too deep for our shallow
wits; let us admire, adore it. But to leave the infinite names which Lullists,
Rabbines, Caballists, Paganes, Divines give to God, he is termed (...), the
best deviser; (...), goodness it self; (...), of most free will; (...), him
very self: and so his appointment must be holy, righteous, perfect,
irresistible, whose appointment is (...) for whatsoever God ex voluntate
beneplaciti, has first concluded within himself, or acted in the parliament,
or secret counsel of himself before all time, that ex voluntate signi must be
execute by nature, and taught by experience in time; seeing these two are his
loyal and faithful servants, who must not, nor cannot, nor will not control
their masters uncontrollable will, who even trystes with them for the real and
effectual accomplishment of all actions. Therefore because it is ratified from
all eternity in that supernall throne of Gods justice, that for sin all men
must once die, then for the execution and exhibition of the same on earth,
nature must play its part, and experience its part; for of necessity, the
severe sentence of a sovereign and inappellable judge must be reverently
obeyed. But so it is, Job 14. 5. All the days of man are determined, and the
number of his months is with God, and he has set him bounds that he cannot
pass. And 7. 1. There is an appointed time to man upon earth. The poet says
well, Stat sua cuique dies. Hence it is that Deuteronomy. 30. 20. God is called by
Moses, the length of the peoples days: and David, Ps. 31. 15. says, that his
time is in Gods hands; who as he has begun to spin the thredof man's life, so
he is only able to spend it. And this is it which the fabulous Poets forge of
their three fatal sisters, Clotho, Lachesis, Atropos, the spinster, twister,
and cutter of the small thread of man's life. We acknowledge no Chaldaick fates,
no poetic sisters, no blind fortune, no coactive necessity of destiny: but
the wise, just, good, Almighty providence of God, which not only extends it
self ad vermiculos in coeno, but also, angelos in coelo, and man who was made
a little inferior to the Angels; and alas now by his default he is lower then
the worms. Indeed Naturalists may know, that there is a God in nature,
forming, reforming, performing, confirming, perfecting all things; without the
which they could not stand one moment: and this is only a Theoretick knowledge,
and it may be without sanctification. But we who are enlightened with the light
of grace, and the sunshine of the Gospel, and taught and inspired by Gods
Spirit, have a practique and saving knowledge: whereby we not only admire his
power in the creation, his wisdom in the administration, his constancy in
the conservation, his beauty in the decoration, his bounty in the
augmentation of all things; but also are particularly informed, and fully
persuaded, Deum esse vitae necisque arbitrum. Vtramque vero (says Tertullian)
disponendo praescivit, and praesciendo disposuit, that God is the commander of
life and death, who in disposing foreknew, and in foreknowing, has disposed of
them both. The Lord says, Deuteronomy. 32. 39. I kill and make alive. God is not
careless of us, as the Epicures have dreamed, but by his special providence
he has such an extreme fatherly regard to us, that one hair cannot fall out
of our head, one cubit cannot be added to our stature, with it; without the
which a little sparrow cannot fall to the ground. So that ye may evidently
perceive, that nature, experience, and God himself prove the truth of this
assertion, It is appointed, etc.

The uses of this general doctrine are especially these two.
Use 1 of instruction. When God decrees, man ought not to repine.
The first use is of instruction, It is appointed, etc.

Then let not us be so foolish as to fret against nature; so stubborn as to
grudge against experience; so profane, as to dispute against God: Why have thou
made us thus? for Esaias 45. 9. Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker? shall
the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What make thou? That threefold
appointment is (...), the bottomless deep of the unsearchable ways of God.
It is a labyrinth, we may well find the entry, but never get the outgate of
it; it is a steep rock, we may well climb up, but the downfall is great; it is
an Ocean, and our boat is too light and shallow for it; not unlike the head of
that great river Nilus, which could never be found out. So that seeing our
days are short, let us say with Moses, Psalm. 90. Lord teach us so to number
our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. And with that notable
pattern of patience, that excellent doctor upon this point, Job 14. 14. All
the days of my appointed time will I wait til my change come: always in much
humiliation and reverence, prostrating our souls before the sacred and
dreadful Majesty of our God, who rides upon the heavens, and dwells in
that inaccessible light, clothed with ravishing glory, armed with innumerable
legions of angels, crowned with unspeakable blessedness; at whose presence the
Cedars of Lebanon are thrown down, the forests denuded, the earth trembles,
the sea roareth, the mountains melte like wax; and all the inhabitants of the
earth are as stubble before the fire; the sun and moon obscured, the stars
darkened, the powers of heaven weakened, the Cherubims and Seraphims cover their
faces, not able to behold the brightness of him, whom the angels adore, the
thrones worship, the devils fear. So that we must confess, whether we lie or
stand, we run or walk, we sleep or awake, or whatsoever we do, we can neither
by force, subtlety or request recall his irrevocable decree, by whose
unsearchable wisdom, and unchangeable providence, and almighty power, all
befalls us, that does befall us. Is it then Gods ordinance to day to deprive
our king of a valiant subject, the nobles of a peer, the country* of a baron,
the house of a head, the obedient son of a dear father, and our selves of a
welbeloved and worthy friend? Let us be taught, that the rarest and highest
spirits live shortest, and have the swiftest course, and that these whom God
tendereth most, are earliest taken to himself: and let us not be so ignorant as
to lay the blame upon second causes, such as the influence of heaven, the air,
the diet, the complexion, untimely disease, the company, the mediciner; but let
us look higher to the cause of causes, GOD; who is as the first wheel of the
horologe, which leads the rest: as the primum mobile, which draws about
with it all the inferior spears. To be plain, what are we but clay in the
great potters hand? GOD make us pitchers of mercy, and not of wrath; vessels
of honor, and not of dishonor: What are we? not idle spectators, but real
actors in the scene of this world; and God is the great playmaster and
ringleader: what ever habit or person he commands us to take, that we must
play well. Let us enact a comedy, and not a tragedy: for this has a joyful
beginning, but a woeful end: Lord make us wise actors, and not formalists,
temporizers, verbalists, hypocrites, that in the last act of our lives (which
either is the most joyful, or the most doleful) we may prove good, solid,
and persevering Christians, that so we may receive the crown of life.

The seconduse is of consolation.
Use 2 of consolation. Death of friends to be entertained with patience.
Is it Gods appointment to take from us by death these whom we love in their
life, as our other selves; such as a dutiful wife, an obedient child, a kind
friend: then let us say with Job, chap. 1. v. 21. The Lord has given, the Lord
has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord. Let us not burst out into
womanish complaints, O dear father where art thou! O sweet son where art thou!
O loving husband where art thou! shall I see you no more! Nor unto heathenish
and comfortless exclamations in cursing the elements, or in blaspheming their
false gods, thirty thousand in number: nor unto the excessive, or immoderate
lamentations of some Paganes, as these of China, who bury themselves quick
with their dead: nor unto the barbarous, and savage custom of Scythia, who
bury their dead in their stomachs by eating the^; nor unto the vain super
fluities of Indian or Egyptiack lustrations, or denicall festivities,
viscerations, funeral plays, and banquets called Silicernia, invented by the
old Romans: nor unto the sottish and blockish stupiditie, apathie, or
indolence of the Stoics, who had no more sense then if they were stocks or
stones, and defined man to be (...), id est, well wrought clay, who with
Epictetus thought no more of the death of their trusty and best friend then of
a pitcher, fallen and broken upon the ground: but we ought to keep a laudable
sobriety, and golden mediocrity, having warrant of God, instinct of nature,
practice of Christ, examples of the Saints. 1. Warrant of God, who commands us,
mourn with those that mourn, for we shall be comforted, Mat. 5. 4. And if he
be moved in the very bowels of his compassion for the sins of his people, how
should we be moved for our own sins, which procure our death, and the
death of our best beloved? for the Christian heart should not be a marble, but
a melting; not a stony, but a fleshie; not a hardened, but a contrite heart;
and godly sorrow is one of the passions thereof. 2. Instinct of nature: not
only the tender hearted Pelican, but the irony hearted Ostrich will love her
young ones: the cruel Lioness, the fierce Tigre, the fiery Dragon, the
venomous Serpent, Viper, Basilisk will bring up, and nourish their wicked
brood; and shall a reasonable mother forget her child, or when it is dead
before her, not let a tear fall? or can the son here present, see his loving
father, and compassionate mother lie cold and stiff, and not sigh, sob,
groan, weep, to testify his inward, howbeit inutterable grief? in such case
where the eyes are dry, the heart must be of stone, flint, adamant. 3. Practice
of Christ, who wept over dead Lazarus; he might have quickened him at the first
instant, yet to express his natural affection he wept: but we, seeing we
cannot restore these two unto life, let us mourn for them, for fear the God of
nature think us unnatural, who if we shed moderate tears, he will seal
them up in the bottel of mercies, till at length he wipe all tears from our
eyes, that we may see clearly these quos praemittimus, non amittimus; quos non
absumptura mors, sed aeternitas receptura est: that is, whom we lose not, but
send before us; whom death will not consume, but eternity resume, as says
Ambrose. So that we ought to glory in this, that in them as arrha's and
pledges, and forerunners, one part of us is already glorified. 4 Examples of
the Saints, as of Abraham, Genesis 23. 2. who mourned for his wife Sarah. Of
Jacob, Genesis 37. 33. who mourned exceedingly for Joseph, whom he thought a
wild beast had rent in pieces. Of Joseph again, Genesis 50. 1. who fell upon
Jacob his fathers face, and wept upon him, and kissed him. Of David, 2 Samuel 1.
who lamented with his lamentation over Saul and Jonathan. Of Judah and
Jerusalem, with Jeremie and the singers, who mourned greatly in the death of
their good king Josiah, which is called the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the
valley of Megiddon. Zech. 12. 11. Object. But ye will say, What? may we not
weep exceedingly at funerals, being grounded upon that same public example of
the Israelites, 2. Chron. 35. 24? I answer. Indeed all occasions are not alike,
by reason of the diverse qualities of the defunct, who being all one to God, to
man are not so. Therefore if at any time great lamentation should have place,
and if the nobility, ministry, commonaltie, should utter their inward grief,
with outward gesture-of clothes or speeches; then it should be especially at
the death of good, godly, and virtuous pr inces, who because they are Gods
lieutenants, deputies, and vicegerents, and vive representations on earth, God
himself calls them gods, and will have them to die like men. Now as in their
lives and reigns we ought them for conscience sake, worldly respect, and
civil honor: so in their death we should be affected toward their happy
memories as it becomes Christians; because oftentimes by the sins of the
people many princes reign: for our sins, alas, our sins they remove the
light of Gods favorable countenance with the best men in church and policy;
who because we are not worthy of them, such as Heroic kings, well-affected
nobles, wise counselors, great officers of state, inferior judges, religious
prelates, and zealous preachers, who are as so many lamping lights and
beautiful stars in the right hand of Christ, fixed by God in the firmament of
his militant Church, are often taken from us in judgment; and if they be once
eclipsed, like the sun, they breed darkness upon the horizon of this inferior
world. Did ye not deeply consider, when that God from the heavens did frown
upon us, in taking away the only Solomon of our time, our gracious Sovereign
King JAMES of thrice happy memory, two of our special pieres, two props of our
commonwealth; with two great divines, two pillars of our church, followed a
little thereafter, and yet we had greater occasion to mourn for our sins then
for them? for they were taken away, that they might not see the judgments to
come. But not to digress overmuch upon this discourse, receive these two
wholesome instructions. The first is out of Ecclesiasticus, a wise, though not
a canonick book, chap. 38. Let tears follow the dead, and cover his body
according to the custom, and neglect not his burial, and then comfort your
selves for your heavines, for it cannot do him good, but hurt you. I remember
of the Epitaph of one of the kings of Assyria, (...): Looking upon me, learn to
lead a holy and gody life. And if the dead would speak, they would teach us
this, Videte quod sumus, eritis quod sumus, fuimus quod estis; See what we are,
ye shall be as we are, we were as ye are. To this effect have two eyes in
burial, one cast upon the dead, and so there will be none of us so unnatural,
but he will be touched as he who feels not the loss, but the absence; not
the captivity, but the liberty; not the death, but the change of his friend
to a better estate. And if we do so, our carriage cannot but be decent, modest,
circumspect, wise, charitable; in a word, Christian, another eye fixed upon
God, who is al eye, and not only beholds the things of this great universe, but
also the very inward reins, and most latent corners of the hearts of men. And
if we do so, there will be none of us but will bridle his natural affections and
secret passions in such fashion, that they carry him not beyond the bounds of
right, reason, moderation, religion. The second is out of St. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
13, 14. I would not have you ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are
asleep, that ye sorrow not even as others which have no hope: for if we believe
that Jesus died, and rose again, even so also them who sleep in Jesus, will God
bring with him, that we may all meet where our last randevous, heaven, is; and
there be united to God, who is the center of all, yea all in all. And thus
far of that general doctrine with the uses thereof. Now let me come to some
special doctrines which are as so many necessary consequences of it.

Doct. 1. Deaths stroke is inevitable.
The first doctrine by way of consequence is this, [It is appointed] Then there
is nothing in this world able to save a man from the piercing stroke of death;
beauty cannot keep Absalom, nor strength Sampson, nor valor Josua, nor
wisdom Solomon, nor policy Achitophel, nor court Haman, nor the crown Saul,
nor an hundredth and twenty seven provinces Ahasuerus, nor the palace
Nebuchadnezzar, nor nine hundred sixty and nine years Methusalem: What? the
best things could not keep the godliest from the same. Righteousness could not
keep Noah, nor faithfulness Abraham, nor meekness Moses, nor integrity
Samuel, nor patience Job, nor a blameless life Zacharias, nor the heart of God
David. The bark defends the tree, the feather the foul, the scale the fish,
the feet the Hynde and the Hare, and armor one man against another. And as
says Epicurus, against all other things we may arm our selves, but against
death there is no armor, for it consumes armor it self: in which sense
Alexander the great said to the Gymnosophists, he could not give them
immortality. And the wise man affirms this, Prove. 30. 16. The grave, the
barren womb, the earth, and the fire, they never say, Enough. As the barren
womb cannot be filled with seed, nor the earth with waters, nor the fire with
fuel, so the grave is never satisfied with the dead. Death is rigorous,
inflexible, inexorable, irrevocable, irreparable. This is verified in the
worthy Patriarchs, or Genearchs, before and after the flood; in the religious
judges and kings of Israel, in the divine Prophets, Evangelists, Apostles, in
the reverend fathers, doctors and preachers of the primit^^ and reformed
churches, in all the Martyrs, with the rest of Gods elect, two being
extraordinarily excepted. Yea, it behoved Christ Jesus, God and man in one
person, hypostatically united, albeit he was the prince of life, to lay down
his precious life for man, dead in sins and trespasses, and so take away the
guilt of sin, and the sting of death. So that unhappie is that man who seeks
and sues by all means to flee from death; for wheresoever he go it will meet
him, either soon or late, or whosoever places his chief felicity here, where
there is nothing but misery, or thinks of a brittle and transitory cottage,
to make a sure and permanent city: for as long as we are in the flesh, we are
absent from the Lord, debarred and sequestrate from our eldest brother, who
even now is preparing a place for us, that shall never be taken from us. And by
the contrary, happy is he that prepares himself timously, that when deaths
doom is execute upon him, he may be found ready for those heavenly mansions,
so glorious by creation, so beautiful in situation, so rich in possession, so
commodious for habitation; Where the king is Christ; the law, love; the life,
eternity; life without death, light without darkness, mirth without sadness,
health without sickness, wealth without poverty, credit without disgrace,
beauty without blemish, bounty without measure, felicity without any mixture
of misery. O Lord take us from our selves to thy self there, where thou shall
be life to our souls, health to our bodies, sight to our eyes, music to our
ears, honey to our mouths, perfume to our nostrils, meat to our bellies, truth
to our wits, good to our wills, peace to our consciences, delight to our
affections: in a word, as says Bernard, where thou shall be the soul of our
souls. We say with Augustine, Fecistinos, domine, ad te: inquietum erit cor
nostrum donec requiescat in te. Thou art the center of our souls, we cannot be
at rest till that once we see thee, that in seeing thee, we may know thee; in
knowing thee, we may possess thee; in possessing thee, love thee; in loving
thee, live with thee and in thee; in living with thee, and by thee become one
with thee, receive that palm of victory, the garland of triumph, that crown
of immortality from thee. Oh fain would we be at thee! but our sins cloy and
clog us, and pull us down by the neck and shoulders. O Jesus who art our
valiant and unconquerable captain, take thy al-piercing sword from thy thigh,
and cut the fetters of sin, and the bands of Satan, that our souls, like so
many soaring Eagles, may flee out of these base and corruptible prisons of our
bodies, to those royal palaces of that free, new, supernall Jerusalem, the
mother of us all.

Use of admonition. This life should be a preparation to the other.
Use of admonition: Is death inevitable, and the stroke thereof irreparable?
then let us in time think upon it. This is the day of salvation, if this
sunshine of grace once set, it will never rise again; and we are either won or
lost here; and there is no repentance, no preaching, no conversion, no church
in hell. In the mean time, this our natural life is but a broken reed, a
cob-web to lean unto, which because of the inconstancy, uncertainty,
shortness, naughtiness of it, is justly compared by profane and divine
writers, to a passenger, to a walking, to a pilgrimage, to a race, to a post,
to a chariot, to a whirlegig, to a warfare, to a tabernacle, to the flitting of
a tabernacle, to a turning wheel, to a stage play, to a table-play, to dice, to
counters, to a tale, to a tennice-court, to a weavers shutle, to the days of a
hireling, to the months of vanity, to the wing of an eagle, to an eagle in
the air, to a span, or hand-breadth, to a smoke, to a blast, to a breath, to
wind, to a passing cloud, to a vanishing vapor, to a bell, to a space, to a
tide, to an ocean of waters, to a ship sailing through the sea, to a gown soon
put off or on, to a sleep, to a night watch, to grass, to hay, to a fading
flower, to a leaf, to a thought, to a dream, to a shadow, to the dream of a
shadow, to vanity, to vanity of vanities, to nothing, to less then nothing.
This Epicharmus alludeth unto, while he calls man (...), a blown bag.
Aristophanes, and Plutarch (...), like the flies of Aristotle at the river
Hipanis, which appear in the morning, are in their full strength at noone, and
die at night; like Jonah his gourd which sprung in one night, and withered in
another; we are like a blast, and away with us as ye say in your trivial
proverb. And this we shall see more clearly if we look more narrowly to our
life; Euripedes (...). This Augustine expounds, I know not whether to call
this a mortal life, or a vital death: (...), says one, is (...), our life is
a violence or trouble, (...) is (...), our body, a sepulcher: (...) is (...),
our beauty and color, a carrion: (...) is (...), our frame and shape, a band:
(...), our generation is a casting of us unto earth; and another, funus est
fumus, our burial a rieke. So that this is (...), a life not a life. And this
shall be more manifest if we take a view of our ages. First, our infancy is
full of infirmity and tears; when we are in our mothers bellies, the least
fall of her may crush us into pieces, the smoke of a candle may smother us, and
she is so ashamed of our birth, that no honest matron desires to be delivered
of us in public; And are we once come to light, we creep in our own filth when
other creatures take them to their feet or wings to feed themselves. Secondly,
our childhood is full of wantonness and foolishness, we hunt after toys and
trifles, not able to govern our selves; wearisome of the instruction of our
parents and masters; and when they have much troubled themselves with us, we
are not worthy perhaps the pains taking on. Thirdly, our youth-hood is full
of vain, idle, and rash pleasures, leading us to debauchery, lulling us asleep
in their bosom for to cut our throat, like so many pillules of gold, which
under their outward beauty, keep an inward sowrenesse; like so many Dalila's to
betray us to our enemies; or like so many Sirens to devour us; or like so many
Judases to kill us with a kiss. Fourthly, our manhood is full of pride,
emulation, ambition, with thousands of carking, irking, and pricking cares: so
that in this life we walk upon briars, and he who has the crown on his head,
his heart is full of thorns, and neither his purple, nor his precious stones,
nor the magnificence of his fare, or his court, can keep him from traitors,
flatterers, and assasinates. So that some princes have thus spoken of their
purple, O cloth more glorious then happy! Fifthly, our old age is full of
sickness, complaints, miseries; for when a man has done what he can to make
himself honorable, rich, learned, wise, then it comes to the which few win;
many wish to come to it, but they are no sooner arrived, but they would be far
from it: for with it are catarrhs, colic, gravel, gout, fever, etc. till that
death give the stroke; so that we begin in tears, and end in miseries.
Astrologers, such as Proclus, Ptolemee, and Aliben, have more subtly then
solidly compared our ages (looking to the perfection of the seventh number) to
the seven planets, in this manner: First, our infancy, humide, moveable, to the
moon, in the which having none, or very little use of reason, we live and grow
like plants: and in this only we differ from them (as Philo Judaeus says) that
other plants have their root on earth, but ours is in the heaven. Secondly,
our childhood to Mercury, wherein we are taught and instructed. Thirdly, our
youth-hood to Venus, the days of love, dalliance, and pleasure. Fourthly, the
Zeni of our youth, the prime of our beauty, to the sun in his goodly array.
Fifthly, our ripe and full manhood to Mars, when we bend our desires,
intentions, determinations toward preferment, honor and glory. Sixthly, our
raw old age, to Jupiter, when we begin to number our days and to apply our
hearts unto wisdom. Seventhly, our rotten and decrepit age to Saturn, when
we are overclouded with sorrow, tending to the door of death, which lies wide
open at all times to all persons, when the tide of our days shall have a
perpetual ebb, without a full plemmura, and our leaf once fallen, shall never
spring up again, till that the world be no more. So that ye see, howbeit the
spaces of our short time be compared to the heavens above, yet they make us not
immortal. For as they have their own courses, which begin and end according
to their proper motions: even so we are wavering and wandering planets, till
that our first mover God settle us with eternal rest. In the mean time, we may
say with Job, chapter 14. 1 Man that is borne of a woman is of few days and full
of trouble. And with Jacob, Few and evil are the days of my pilgrimage.
Therefore let us live as sojourners, aiming at our journeys end; as runners,
looking for the prize; as fighters, sweating for the crown: for this is a
strange land, and this world is a banishment, and heaven is our country, and
paradise our native soil, and GOD our Father, and Christ our Brother, and the
Spirit our comforter, and the spirits justified our kindred, and the holy
angels our companions. Why do we not long for them? But alas, poor miserable
wretches that we are, we fix not the eyes of our souls upon that life which
is hid in Jesus, otherwise we would be willing to lay down this transitory,
uncertain calamitous life, for to regain that permanent, secure, and glorious
life. Oh, if we could see with the eyes of faith the things that are not seen
by the eyes of a natural man, and which wait for us! then ten thousand worlds
would not hold us back from them; for if there were so many, they would not be
able to content our illimited desires, and infinite appetites. What is then
able to fill them? I answer; the sovereign good, the great GOD, with the
superabundant treasures of his free grace, and undeserved favor, and
bottomless ocean of the multitude of his medicinal compassions. O Lord,
drown us therein, that the deep of our uncurable miseries may be swallowed up,
by the deep of thy restaurative, and preservative mercies: for this is the life
of thee our everloving, everliving God in Christ Jesus. Sweet hearts, pray that
ye may be once inspired by this; and surely heaven shall be your home; God
your portion, strength, salvation, with whom if once ye dwell there, ye shall
lack nothing. What would ye have? Is there a better then eternal life? it is
there. Would ye have a crown? Is there a bettter then an incorruptible crown
of uncomprehensible glory? it is there. Would ye have a kingdom? Is there a
better then that which cannot be shaken? it is there. Would ye have an
inheritance? Is there a better then an immortal, undefiled, that fades not
away? it is there. And where? where the poorest beggar of you shall be richer
then all the kings of this earth; for putting a way his clouts, he shall put on
the glorious robe of Christ's righteousness, and receive that crown of
justice, weightier then the whole mass of this earthly globe, because it is
the eternal weight of glory, and so is more precious then all the diadem's
and scepters of Alexander, Caesar; with the mightiest princes, who now are
turned into muddy dust, filthy stink, dreadful horror, perpetual oblivion:
for death is able to make us know our selves one day. It will tell to the
proud, that he is abject; to the rich, that he is a beggar; to the beautiful,
that he is evil favored; to the ambitious, whom now territories, and
dominions will not content, then seven foot of ground shall cover him, with
these two short words, hic jacet; here he lies; and quem terra non cepit, urna
capit: He whom the universe could not contain, his ashes lie in a little
pitcher.

Doct. 2* What must be oncedone necessarily, should be done courageously.
The second doctrine by way of consequence is this; (Is it appointed, etc?) Then
man should prepare himself not only for the end of this decrepit world that is
come upon us, but also for his own end, with a generous and masculous courage,
saluting and inviting that which he cannot shun. The thing that makes us so
negligent is our not preparation at all: for the day of our dissolution is
assuredly at hand; death is at the door, where it knocks it must enter, no
iron or brazen gates are able to resist it; it will take the man whom God has
pointed out with his finger; with its flooked arrow it wounds him to the heart,
and like a rigorous sergeant lays hold upon him, and imprisoneth him, till
that his life, which is our debt for sin, be paid. This is the King of kings
great taxation, from which there is no redemption, exception, exemption, from
Caesar to the cotter. For how think ye death will reason with all and every
one of us? whatsoever part of argument we hold it will overcome us, for our
obligation is personal or individual, and none can sit the summons. Come O
king from thy throne! come O counselor from thy counselhouse! come O courtier
from thine attendance! come Oswaggerer from thy clothes of silver and gold!
come O nobles from your pastimes! come O prelates and preachers from your
chayres! come O husbands from your wives! come O merchants from your shops!
come O craftsmen from your trades! come O beggars from your brats! come Caesar,
come cotter, sleep all in the dust! And howsoever ye differ in ranks,
qualities, sexes, conditions, there is no distinction of persons; king and
subject, rich and poor, noble and ignoble, young and old, all are equal here.
Juvenal says, Mors sceptra ligonibus aequat, Death equals the mace with the
mattock. And Horatius, Pallida mors aequo pede pulsat pauperum tabernas
Regumque turres, -- Pale death levelleth the country cabine and the kingly
palace both alike. Ambrose more clearly, Nulla distinctio est inter corpora
mortuoru^, nisi forte, quia gravius foetent divitum corpora luxuria distenta;
There is no difference betwixt dead corpse, but that rich menscorps stink worse
then others. Chrysostom more pathetically, Proficiscamur ad sepulchra; ostende
mihi patrem, ostende uxorem tuam; ubi est qui purpuram induebat? nihil video
nisi putrida ossa and vermes, differentiam nullam video: Let us go to the
sepulchers; show thy father, show thy wife; where is he who was clothed in
purple? I see nothing but rotten bones, and worms; no difference can I
perceive. Therefore laying all worldly considerations aside; the king his
scepter, the counceller his robe of justice, the courtier and swaggerer their
roaring shows, the nobles their sword, the scholar his pen, the labourer his
spade, the merchant his purse, the tradesman his instruments, the beggar his
bag: Every one of them promiscuously and indifferently must conclude thus, O
rottenness thou art my father, O worm thou art my mother, and my sister.
Believe me says Augustine, in opened sepulchers have been found in dead men's
sculs, earth-toades; in their nerves, serpents; in their bowels, worms. This is
a grave meditation, and profitable contemplation to thee, O man; and I pray
thee consider it deeply with me. I am assured to die ere it be long, but thou
art hewn out of that same rock, thy mothers belly with me; and art made of
that same stuff, dust and ashes with me. I am conceived in sin, so art thou;
I am born in sin, so art thou; I am fostered in sin, so art thou; I am in the
prime of my years, but alas, in the strength of sin; I know not if thou be in
the first, I know well thou art in the last and worst estate. God immortal
pity us mortal men, and prepare us in time to redeem our misspent time, and
to number our days one by one, for fear, when the decretorie day of death is
come, we have not oil in our lamps, and our loins girded toward our Masters
coming. And again we beseech thee, O gracious Father, who delightest not in
the death of sinners, prepare us, of all sinners the most: for endless and
unspeakable are the torments of an unprepared man before, at, and after death*
O dissolute and desperate sinner, then make no more delay, and let thy
conscience be troubled at this, let thy spirit tremble at it, let thy heart
smart for it, and let all the faculties of thy soul be afraid of it, that when
it is come, ye need not to fear at all.

Use of exhortation. Timely preparation surest provision.
Use of exhortation. Therefore let us not be so foolish and sluggish, as those
who only learn to die upon their deathbed, as if it were an easy and
momentanie lesson. Augustine, Sero parantur remedia, cum mortis imminent
pericula. It is no time to prepare remedies, against imminent death. Foreseen
dangers, harm least. But let us study it in the morning, that the evening of
our days may be calm and peaceable. Yea, let us gather our selves together
before the supreme decree of death pass out against us at unawares, that so
we may meet it with as much readiness of mind, as it is willing with
greedines to receive us, who should not be drifters off of repentance, like
Salomons sluggard; or any more supersede, flatter or foster our selves with
vain and deceitful conceits of the immortality of this melting mortality,
or admire this dying carcass, which the worms must feed upon ere it be long,
or be ravished with the astonishing fabric of our bodies which are but clay
tabernacles, and death at our flitting will dissolve the pinnes thereof.
Therefore O young man, remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. O strong
man, go not a whooring from the living God! O old man, who have one foot in the
grave already, let death be set before thy eyes! And think not, O beastly
drunkard, O devouring glutton, but as thou insultest over thy companions in the
excess of meat and drink, so thy liver will fail thee, and the powers of
death, and of the grave shall triumph over thee ere it be long! O leacherous
man, who sowest where thou dare not reap, deflowring virgins, defiling the
honorable bed of marriage; the fiery heat of thy concupiscence shall be
quenched in the floods of oblivion ere it be long! O avaricious extortioner! O
ambitious worldling, howbeit now thou can pledge whole monopolies, devour
widows houses, eat up the poor, rob the altar, yet thou shall get one morsel
that thou can not digest ere it be long! O generous man, howbeit thy heart
now erected in thy breast inthe form of a restless piramide be the fountain
of thy life, it shall be dried up like a summer strype, ere it be long! And as
it was primum vivens, so it shall be ultimum moriens, ere it be long. O brave
man, thy noble and straight face, which now contemplates the heavens, shall be
defaced in the slimie valley ere it be long! O wise man, who know the
estates of kingdoms, the secrets of princes, the mysteries of nature, and have
made up a storehouse within thee of all commendable virtues; thou and they
shall perish together ere it be long! O eloquent man (whom of all men I think
to be most complete) thy tongue which now flows like milk and honey, and
powers Nectar, and Ambrosia upon the famished and thirsty souls of thy
hearers, and drowneth as it were the soil of their hearts with a soft-silver
running river, shall lick the dust ere it be long! O thou comely Rachel,
beautiful Bethsheba, alluring Dalilah, thy pampered and well covered skin,
in the grave shall be like that of a drudge, or vile kitchin-maid ere it
belong! O young gallant, who art enamoured with thy beauty, thinking thy self
another Adonis, Nereus, Narcissus, thou shall be like Aesope, or Thersites ere
it be long! And whatsoever thou be, O man, hear what I say, Thy force once
must languish, thy sense fail, thy body droup, thine eyes turn in thine head,
thy veins break, thy heart rent, and thy whole frame like an old rotten oak
shall fall to the ground, or like a leaking ship, shall sink into the harbor
of thy grave. The wise man compares thee to a ruinous house, which decays
piece and piece; but that comparison is familiar to those who are acquainted
with scripture. The certainty whereof should weane and spean our affections
from the base things of this earth, and should work in us an ardour of mind,
a vehemency of spirit, a serious and sedulous endeavor to be delivered from
the prison of this body, the Red sea of the miseries of this life, the
captivity of sin, the thraldom of our corruption, the tyranny of Satan.
Ye know, if a courageous man be many years in a stinking, solitary, and dark
prison, he would be glad to change his infamous life, with a glorious death:
But if the judge command the jailour to bring him forth to be set at liberty,
I pray you, when he sees the brightsome light of the sun, and tastes of his
wonted joys in meat, drink, apparel, company, is he not ravished within
himself? Even so it is with us, while we are in Mesech, in the Egypt of sin,
under our spiritual Pharaoh the devil, being compassed about with robbers on
the land, pirates on the sea, heretics in the church, few or no godly men, we
cannot but be plunged in a deep dungeon of grief and sorrow. But when it will
please that unappealable judge, that high possessour of heaven and earth, to
command the jaylour, Death, to loose us from the prison of this body, then we
shall behold the glorious face of the Son of righteousness, and eat and
drink of him, who is the bread and fountain of life, and be clad with the robe
of his justice, and enjoy the blessed company of Saints and Angels in the
highest degree of happiness. This heavenly meditation so possessed many godly
ones of old, that long beforehand, not hating their natural, but longing
after a supernatural life, welcomed and invited death. This made Moses to
prefer the reproach of Christ before the court of Pharaoh. This made Elias to
cry out, It is enough, O Lord, take my soul, for I am no better then my
fathers. This made David to say, Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit,
because thou have redeemed my soul. This made Polycarpus to say, Receive me
Lord, and make me partner with thy Saints of the resurrection. This made
Ignatius, Paul's disciple, Bishop of Antioch to say, I care not for things
visible or invisible, so that I may win Christ. And in another place, fire,
gallows, beasts, breaking of my bones, quartering of my members, crucifying of
my body, all the torments of the devil together, let them come upon me, so that
I may enjoy my Lord Jesus, and his kingdom. This made Hilarion to say, Depart
my soul, why fear thou? why tremblest thou? thou have served CHRIST now
almost seventy years, and art thou afraid to depart? This made Jerome to say,
Let us embrace that day (viz. of death) which shall assign every one of us to
his house, which shall free us of the snares of this age, and restore us to
paradise and the kingdom of heaven. Which made Gregory Nazianzen to say, That
that day shall make us partakers of that fruition and contemplation of the
sovereign good, and place us in the bosom of Abraham, and shall unite us to
the assembly of Saints and congregation of the just: where, says Epiphanius,
(...), viz. The garners are sealed, and the time fulfilled, and the combat
ended, and the field empty, and the crowns are given. This made Augustine to
say, I desire to die, that I may see Christ, and I refuse to live, that I may
live with Christ. This made Ambrose to say, I am not afraid to die, because I
have a good master. This made the Apostle St. Paul to say, I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, for that is the best of al: and, That al
otherthings are but dross and dung in respect of the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ. God work this desire in us, for while we are at home in
these bodies, we are absent from the Lord, and ground it upon the assurance of
the remission of our sins, and our perfect union, and plenary reconciliation
with our God in Christ Jesus. The Lord give us grace to be persuaded with the
Apostle, that if the earthly house of this tabernacle be dissolved, we have a
building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor.
5. But alas, here is our misery, that every one of our bodies is a remora to
hinder the ship of our souls to stretch sail within the saving harborie of
Gods crowning mercies. God fasten the anchors of our faith and hope therein,
that after the tempest of this life we may enjoy peace, and everlasting
happiness.

Doct. 3. It is bootlesse to fear what we cannot avoid.
The third doctrine by way of consequence, is this, It is appointed. Then let
no man fear death: for it is inevitable, and whether we fly from it, or go to
it, it ever follows us at the heels; it hangs over our heads, as the rock
does Tantalus his head, which cannot be removed. There are, who desire not to
hear tell of it at all, and if the preacher urge this point, he becomes
odious. To the old Latins this word was so ominous, that they periphrased it
by another* for when they should have said in plain terms, Mortuus est, He is
dead; they said, Vixit, He lived: Abiit ad plures, He went to more: for there
are more dead then living. As for the vulgar sort, they are so besotted with a
bruitall stupiditie, that they think not on death at all. But a generous heart
should make it its object, its butt, acquainting it self with it at all times,
representing it before its eyes; even in the least occurrences it may seize
upon us. A king of France died of a small skelfe of a spear in the midst of
his pastime; An Emperor, of the scratching of a pin; Anacreon, of one grain
of a raisin; Aeschylus, of the shel of a snaile, which fell from the claws of
an Eagle in the air; Milon, with both his hands in the clift of an oak;
Charles of Navarre, of the fire of a candle in aquavitae; Philemon, and
Philistion, of laughter; Dionyse Tyran. Diagoras and others, of joy. O what a
feeble creature is man, that the very least vermin, spider, gnat, does kill
him, and yet fears death, which the Heart, the Elephant, Phoenix, and longest
living creatures must yield to, without any grudging or reluctance. Certainly
there is no passion more violent in man then fear, and produces more strange
effects; but of all fears the fear of death is the most foolish, mad and
desperate, for it may well hasten and aggravate, but never stay or diminish the
dint thereof, Multi ad fatum venere suum dum fata timent, Many precipitate
their end in fearing it. Seneca in O Edip. Optanda mors est sine metu mortis
mori: the most desirable death is to die without fear of death, Idem. Aristotle
the chief of Philosophers, calls it (...), most fearful, because as it
cannot be eschewed, so it kills the man. Yet this is a maxim, that no sound
naturalists will go from, that good and valiant citizens (such as Pericles
praised in his funeral oration) should undergo it, for the defense of their
wives, children, friends, city, country, gods. And the Stoics themselves
defend their Philosophy to be a continual meditation upon death, because the
motion of the soul being ravished out of the body by contemplation, is a
prentiship or resemblance of death. And they deemed him to be the best
Philosopher, who gave the surest precepts against the fear of death. So in my
opinion, he is the best divine, who teaches himself and others to do well,
to die well. Would we die well, let us first do well. Qualis vita, finis ita:
such life, such death. August. Non potest male mori, qui been vixerit; he
cannot die ill, who lived well; for a godly life has a happy death. The very
Paganes of old, the Romans, Greeks, Egyptians, who howbeit they became vain
in their imaginations, and their foolish hearts were darkened, Romans 1. 21. and
ignored the resurrection of the dead, yet they might have taught many of us now
adays, by a spotless life before the world to die well, because they
esteemed, an easy death should follow after a reproachlesse life. But alas,
men live now, as if there were no death to follow, no hell to swallow, no count
to render, no judgment to be executed, no soul to keep, no God to fear, no
devil to torment: or else they lull themselves asleep on the devils pillow,
the cradle of carnal security: And with the Epicure, Sardanapalus, and the
rich glutton, they never think upon death till it surprise them, and they
either care not, because they conclude, there is no pleasure after this life,
or else they despair, casting themselves headlong into horrible agonies, and
inextricable perplexities. In the mean time ye may wonder, that Pythagoras,
Socrates, Anaxarchus, Codrus, Cleombrotus, Curtius, Seneca, Cato, Cleopatra,
died resolvedly, and yet they knew not where they were going. Why then are we
pultrons and cowards, seeing we are assured to go upon the wings of angels to
the bosom of Abraham. Their natural courage made them to disdain it, Mors
non metuenda viris, Manhood is not daunted with death, Lucanus. Shall not then
our spiritual knowledge persuade us that our death is nothing but a passage to
life, a passe-port to immortality, a door to paradise, a seasure of heaven, a
chartre upon glory; or, as says Bernard, a passage from labor to rest, from
hope to reward, from the combat to the crown, from death to life, from faith
to knowledge, from pilgrimage to our long home, from the world to our father.
And as another says, It is a change of the cross, unto the crown; of the
prison, to the palace; of captivity, unto liberty. Scripture is more pithie, it
calls it, A sleep, a rest of our flesh in hope, a going to our fathers, a
gathering to our people, a recommending of our spirit to God, a rendering up of
the ghost, a walking with God and the Lamb. Object. But some may say here; Why
should we not fear, seeing worthy persons, yea reverend churchmen who led a
godly life, and exhorted sundry not to fear, were mightily troubled at their
death, and when they should have had most peace, they were most disquieted? I
answer. Their fear was a diligent, not a diffident; a holy, not a hellish; a
filial, not a servile; a godly, not a devilish fear; because they feared God as
a judge, and they hoped in him as a Savior; they feared him, and so they sued
for him, appealing from the tribunal of his justice, to the throne of his
mercy; ab irato Caesare ad placatum, from an offended God in the height of his
justice, to a pacified God in the depth of his mercies. And I would have the
simple ignorant people to* know here, that outward disturbances in fits, of
heavy, exasperate, inveterate sickness, are not evident and infallible tokens
of a total or final desertion: for the godly patients may have inward joy,
glorious and unspeakable, which the standers by see not. And by the contrary,
some who have led a lewd life, without any remorse of conscience, or
compunction, or contrition of heart, may seem to have a peaceable death, and
say that they are ready for their God, when in the mean time their heart
gives their mouth the lie. Others desire to die, because of great poverty, or
intolerable pains, or loss of goods, good name, friends, etc. But God make us
not to fear death; because we are assured of his favor in the pardon of our
huge, and manifold transgressions, and imputation of Christ's righteousness,
for that is only the thing which justifies us before God.

Use of encouragement. Then why Use of encouragment. Death is an enlargement
from thraldom, a delivery from troubles.
should we fear death? Agathias calls it (...), the mother of tranquillity,
(...), the stayer of sickness: Euripides, (...): the greatest remedy of
evils: Aeschylus, (...), the medicine of incurable diseases: Anacreon, (...),
a deliverie from travels; which after trouble, gives us rest, heals our
sickness, takes away our poverty, ends our greatest fears and cares. It is
the way of all flesh, and it is common to kings and beggars, as well to die, as
to be borne. And one of the seven sages, Thales, says, that they are both
indifferent. But to Christians they are both profitable, for Christ in life and
death is advantage: Philip. 1. 21. If it please the Lord we live, let us employ
our life well, for it is a talent given to us for the use of our Master; if to
die, what need we to fear? for all these who are gone before us cry out, Come,
come after us; there is no danger in death; all the hazard we incur, and
jeopardie we run into, is in our lives. Is not this life a continual misery,
a perpetual tempest, a (...), a common hostage, and receptacle of all
calamities, and our death is an issue of these miseries, the harbrie mouth,
leading us to the most sure haven, the heaven of heavens, the bridegroomes
chamber? 1 Object. Death is most dangerous, and so most fearful, because it is
the way to hell, from the which there is no regresse. Answer. To the wicked
indeed it is such, but to the godly it is the gate to heaven, and hither you
must make your progress. 2 Object. It takes away my life, which is so near and
dear unto me. Answer. Upon a condition to give a better which shall never be
taken from thee. 3. Object. But my losses are great. Answer. Let me never hear
that of thee again, that it is a great loss of such a man's life, or that thou
losest any thing in death; that is an idle querimony, to the which Socrates
answers, O dii boni, quantum lucri est emori! O what great gain is it to
die! for ye may leave an earthly possession, for an heavenly patrimony;
uncertain goods, for a certain treasure; the company of the wicked, for
Saints and Angels; earth, for heaven; baseness, for glory; unsufficiencie, for
alsufficiencie. 4. Object. But there are pains in death. Answer. There is
nothing without pains, and the better the thing be, the greater pains: but to
speak properly, it is the remnant of thy life that tormenteth thee, and not thy
death: for what is it but a not being in this world? for when we are, death is
not: and when death is, we are not. Now a not being has no dolor: for as
when we were not at all, we found no dolor, so when we shall not be, we
shall find none. Wherefore then fear thou the day of death? for every day
of thy life is a preparation to it; and that last period of days is not
properly thy death allenarly, for every day contributeth to it. And as the last
drop emptieth not, nor fills the bottle, and the last path wearieth not, nor
the last stroke cutteth down all the trunk of the tree, but every one
helps another: so every day we go to death, and the last, we arrive at it.
So that it boats with us, it rides behind us, and leaves us no more then the
shadow of our bodies, till at last it cut the thread of our desires and lives,
and take us from the world, and from our selves. So that we die at all hours,
and all moments, and if we desire to live long, we enjoy a languishing death
victorious in many assaults. So that Epictetus answered well to Hadrian,
demanding this question, Which is the best life? he answered, The shortest. And
Solomon says, That the day of our death is better then the day of our
nativitie: for this is the beginning of our dolours, and that is the end, and
our access to supreme happiness: for then this body shall return to the
dust, and the spirit to God the giver, with whom we shall enjoy a full life,
and our passions shall be buried, and our reason enlarged, and the whole man
placed in his own element, the heaven his country, from the which he was
banished.

Furthermore, did not Cicero, Seneca, and before them Theophrastus, Crantor,
Xenocrates, leave rare monuments and documents, against immoderate dolor in
death, as also against the fear thereof? but thou art better taught then those,
that death is the very entry to that eternal day, nunc stans feast, Sabbath,
with the Ancient of days, and that the separation of the soul from this body,
is nothing but an union and communion with God. And shall naughty soldiers
under their temporary captain, hazard their misspent life at the mouth of the
canon in a furious skirmish for the pennie-pay, and thou not lay down this
tedious life for the kingdom of heaven, whereunto thou have undoubted right,
by thy triumphing general, the captain of thy salvation, the Lord Jesus, the
Lord of Hosts? 5. Object. But the pangs of death are insupportable, who can
abide these cruel and deadly wounds? Answer. That same Jesus by his glorious
and meritorious death, has sweetened, seasoned, sanctified them to thee in such
fashion, that they shall be unto thee like the launcet of a Surgeon, which
pricketh and heals together like worme-wood; or the potion of a skillful
mediciner, which is sour, but wholesome. 6. Object. But the fear of judgment
after death, makes me afraid. Answer. That same Lord Jesus, judge of judges,
thy eldest brother shall be thy judge, in that great day of retribution, and
remuneration, and he cannot but look upon thee with compassionate eyes,
seeing he is flesh of thy flesh, and bone of thy bones, and thy cause is his
cause, for he is thy advocate, and intercessour daily. 7. Object. But the
pains of hell, which are unspeakable, universal, eternal, are very fearful,
and much affright me. Answ. That same Jesus thy redeemer, as he made the grave
his bed, so he keeps the keys of hell, and the gates thereof cannot prevail
against thee. To conclude then, let us all resolve courageously to attend
death, laying aside all fear, ever hoping that the Lord shall be with us, to
the end and in the end.

Blessed shall we be if we die in him, for so we shall rest from our labors,
and in death celebrate three solemnities. First, our birth day: for we shall
revive. Secondly, our marriage day, which shall be accomplished with Christ.
Thirdly, our triumph day: for through Christ we shall triumph over the world,
our own flesh, sin, death, the grave, hell, the devil, principalities and
powers whatsoever, and receive that crown of glory. So that through Christ we
are more then conquerours, who says, I will redeem them from death: O death, I
will be thy death: O grave I will be thy destruction, Hosea chap. 13. 14. Are
we gods in Christ? let us not fear death. Lethum non omnia finit, Propertius:
Death puts not a period to all things. I say more, death makes us endless.
Cicero affirms, that after death he shall be immortal. Horace, that the
best part of him shall live. Ovid, that the best part of him shall be carried
above the stars. The Egyptians, Brachmanes, Indians, Thracians, Persians,
Macedonians, Arabians, Americanes, and all polished nations have consented to
the immortality of the soul. But here we surpass them, that after death and
resurrection, our bodies shall live for ever. This is an essential and
fundamental point of our belief.

THE SUBJECT.
Men once to die.
NOw let me speak of the subject of this assertion, Man once to die. It is not
said in the original (...), to all men; but (...), to men; because indefinite
propositions in matters necessary are universal. The meaning is, All men and
women must once die. Ovid, Tendimus huc omnes: we tend all to death, and that
once. Horace says very well, Omnes eodem cogimur: Omnes manet una nox, and
calcanda semel via lethi. This is a passage common to all; and let it be so,
we should live again, we must run over the same race. Catullus, and
Epictetus say, That as our life is but one day: so our death is but one night.

Doct. Death is certain in uncertaintie.
The doctrine upon the subject is this: As there is nothing more certain then
death, so there is nothing more uncertain then the time, place, and manner
thereof. This doctrine has two points.

I prove the first, that there is nothing more certain then death, leaving the
former reasons. First, from the word fatum, which expresses the nature of
death; so called, a fando, because the Lord has spoken it; his word is his
work. And seeing he has uttered this sentence, That all men must once die, it
cannot but come to pass. So that there is a fatal, infallible, inexpugnable,
necessitant necessity laid upon man, once to die. Man is termed (...), the
end of all, (...), nature perfected, (...), a visible God, (...), a compend of
this great world; and as the heavens and earth wax old and perish, so he, the
resemblance of both, must follow the pattern. I confess with Zoroaster and
Trismegistus, that he is an admirable piece of nature, because both natures,
superior and inferior, uncreated and created do meet in him. And if these
visible creatures be as so many scales, to climb to that invisible Creator,
man must be one of the most curious steps of that ladder. If we look within the
intrals of the earth, we may see there rich mines of silver, gold, and precious
stones. If we behold the face of it, we shall find there such a variety of
herbs, flowers, fruits, trees, creatures, which may breed admiration in the
dullest spirits. And is the sea less admirable, by reason of the flux and
reflux thereof, the quantity of fishes and monsters therein nourished? And is
the air any thing inferior to these two: full of fowls, clouds, raines, snow,
hail, lightnings, thunder, and innumerable meteors? But when we lift up our
eyes to the astonishing vault of heaven, whose curtains are spread over these,
enlightened with the sun and moon, and twinkling stars, with their towers,
retowres, aspects, effects, influences, we cannot but be ravished with a more
singular and divine contemplation. Yet here is a greater wonder, that all these
things are abridged in thee, O man, of seven foot-length? And as the world is a
book in the which God may be read in capital letters: so both the world and
God, may by the most ignorant, easily be read in thee as in a written table,
seen in thee, as in a clear glass. Thy flesh represents the dust; thy bones,
the rocks; thy liver, the sea; thy veins, rivers; thy breath, the air; thy
natural heat, the fire; thy head, the heavens; thy eyes, the stars; thy
joints, moving so actively, sinnews stirring so nimbly, senses working so
quickly, like the secret resorts of nature, But I pray thee enter within thy
inward parts so excellent; thy spirit so supernatuall, thy reason so divine,
thy appetite so infinite, thy soul (...), the engraven image of God: thou
may justly say, that thou art ultimus naturae foetus, the last essay and
effort of nature, and the theater whereupon God may be seen with mortal eyes,
representing the four corners of the world: thy face, the east; thy back, the
west; thy right side, the south; thy left, the north. And whereas other
creatures have their countenance downward toward their natural mother the
earth, thine are upward, toward thy spiritual father, God; that thou may
raise thy self from all earthly vanity, to a serious contemplation of the
divinity, wherein are placed thy unchangeable comfort, thy unspeakable
contentment, thy unconceivable felicity. Whence I infer this; Whatsoever of
us is like to the creature, must die; but that which has received the
indeleble character of God, is perpetual. So that our souls are immortal, our
bodies are vassals and slaves of death, in which respect we are all said to
die.

And that this doctrine may be the more clear, I shall prove it in the second
place by way of induction. Look to the virtues; the stout as well as the rash,
or the coward; the temperate, as well as the untemperate or stupid; the
liberal, as well as the prodigal or avaricious; the magnificent, as well as
the niggard or vainglorious; the magnanimous, as well as the proud or
pusilanimous; the modest; as well as the ambitious or base minded; the meek as
well as the angry, or angerlesse; the courteous, as well as the flatterer, or
churlish; the sincere, as well as the dissembler, or bragger; the civilized
man, as well as the rustic, or the scoggen, or the officious pleasant; the
just as well as the unjust, must all once die. The stout man may fight against
death; the temperate man keep a sober diet to prolong his life; the liberal
propine it; the magnificent make expenses; the magnanimous disdain it; the
modest smile at it; the meek embrace it; the courteous cherish it; the
civilized welcome it; the just man execute judgments upon others; but none of
them can overcome death. Look to the superior faculties. The religious divine
in foro poli; the curious lawyer, in foro soli; the skillful mediciner in his
shop, must all once die. The first of these may teach of it; the second may
make a testament after it; the third may prescribe a recipe against it, but
none of them can cast off its yoke. Look to the arts and sciences; the
experimented Grammarian may find out sundry significations of the word Death
in diverse languages; the dainty Poet may make an Epitaph or Epicede; the
flowing orator, a funeral Sermon; the subtle Logician may dispute pro, and
contra; the ingenuous moralist may discourse trimly upon it; but what can these
do, but what mortal men can do, after all that they can do, die! Therefore let
not the beaten warrior think, that all his stratagems can defend him, or the
polished politician dream that all the maxims of Matchiavel, or the counsel
of Achitophel can preserve him. Let not the Geometer be so busy, as to search
out the place; or the Arithmetician, number the day; or the Astrologue, tell
the manner of his death: let not the profound naturalist wade into the deep
thereof; nor the transcendent Metaphysician flee from it: for there is no art
nor science under heaven which will learn a man not to die. Look to the ages;
the embrion in its mothers belly, the babe on its mothers breast, the wanton
child, the rash young man, the strong man, the witty man, the old man, the
decrepit man; all must once die. Look to the conditions of men: Prince, pastor,
and people, all must once die. And to compendize that which I thought to
enlarge, both elect and reprobate, all must once die; they for the abolition of
their miseries, and position of their happiness: these for the position of
their miseries, and remotion of all happiness. They to be glorified in soul
and body: these to be damned in both. So that the godly die, that they may
live to God, and with God in heaven; the ungodly die, that they may live to the
devil, and with the devil in hell. God preserve us from hell, and reserve us
to heaven.

I prove the second point of this doctrine, which is this; There is nothing
more uncertain, then the time, place, and manner of death, as a poet says,
Nemo novit mortis tempusve, locumve, modumve: The time, whether in the spring,
summer, harvest, winter of the year, or of man's years; whether at the point of
the day, morning, midday, evening, night, midnight, it is uncertain. He that
dies early in the morning, is the babe; he that dies at the third hour, is
the young man; he that dies at the sixth hour, is the strong man; he that
dies at the ninth hour, is the old man; and he that dies at the eleventh
hour, is the decrepit man. And therefore the Greek poet compares man to an
apple, which is either pulled off before the time, or else in time falls off
on the ground. And Epictetus to a candle, which is exposed to wind; it may
shine a little, and then goes out. The place, whether in thy house, or in the
temple; in thy bed, or at the table* in the mountain, or in the valley; in the
wilderness, or in the fields; on sea, or by land; in or out of thy country,
it is uncertain. The manner, whether by sword, famine, pestilence, sickness,
heat, cold, hunger, thirst, rack, rope, by peace, or war, by a natural or
violent death, it is uncertain. Of all these I might bring both exotic and
domestic examples, but I leave them to your daily reading, and hearing of
divine and profane histories. Only I infer these uses upon the precedent
doctrine, by way of direction from the dead, and consequently from these two
dead corpse lying before us.

Three directions touching the certainty of death. Direct. 1. In life remember
death.
Receive first then three directions upon the first point, viz. The certainty
of death.

The first direction is, Vive memor lethi, fugit hora, Persius. In thy life
remember of thy death, for thy hour slippeth. Time is precious, but short; and
this is a hard lesson, Memento mori. This was accustomed to be said to the
Emperors in that great triumph at Rome, Memento mori, homo es, mortalem te
esse memineris, Remember to die, man thou art, and remember that thou art
mortal. All these did follow Philip, Alexander the greats father, who
commanded his chamberlain thrice every day to round the same sentence in his
ears. To this effect, when the Egyptians did solemnize their natall days,
they had a dead scull upon their table, to put them in mind of their
mortality. One Churchyard in Paris, I remarked, has more sculls, then there
are living heads in Scotland. St. Jerome was wont to have in his study before
him, a dead man's scull with a running glass. But alas, such is our folly,
that scarcely can we remember of death, when we see the same painted upon the
mortcloath: we may lose a leg to day, an arm to morrow, an eye the third
day, and these will not teach us to prepare our selves toward it. Consumption
in the lights, a stone in the bladder, the gout in our feet, the palsy in our
hands, 2000 known sicknesses in our bodies, (to omit unknown, for every member
of our body is subject to diverse diseases) will not advertise us. Our house
is ruinous, but we cannot flit out of it. Chance tells us, that death is
latent; infirmity, that it is patent; old age, that it is present, as says
Hugo. What? for all this we cannot be enough admonished. And this is it that
Jerome finds fault with, Quotidie morimur, quotidie commutamur, and tamen
aeternos esse credimus: We die daily, we are changed daily, yet we think our
selves eternal. In the mean time, in our most lively life we may perceive the
very print and footstep of death. For we do see continually, and hear the
cries of mothers for their children; of spouses, for their husbands; of
servants, for their masters; visitation of sick, mediciners, preachers, in our
houses, at our bedheads, all warning us, that we are besieged by death.

Direct 2. So live as thou were pres^ntly dying.
The second direction is, Fac hodie, quod moriturus agas: so lead thy life as
if thou were even now dying. Every day that we live (complains Anselmus) we
come from our country to our banishment; from the sight of God, to darkness;
from the pleasure of immortality, to the corruption of death. Petrarcha
affirms, that he had not a morrow to look to; and that to day he was prepared
to die. Seneca, a divine Philosopher to this purpose: Dic dormitanti, potes non
expergisci; dic experrecto, potes non dormire amplius; dic exeunti, potes non
reverti; dic redeunti, potes non exire: id est, Tell to him that sleeps, it
may be that he awake not; and to him that is wakened, that perhaps he shall
sleep no more; and to him that goes forth, that he shall not return; and to
him that returns, that perhaps he shall not go back.

Horace.
Quis scit an adjiciant hodiernae crastina vitae,
Tempora dii superi. etc.
Martialis.
Sera nimis vita est crastina, vive hodie.
Both did borrow it from Euripides, (...): It is too late to morrow, live to
day. Happy is the man whose way, journey, time, business, breath goes
together, walking before GOD as Abraham, with God as Enoch, in God as Paul.
Happy is the man, who is ever ready, like a ship to loose with a fair wind;
like a horse for the bell, not standing still as Joshuas sun, or returning
back as Ezekias sun, but running its race as David's sun. Provident is he
who makes this testament aforehand, and calculats this year to be his
climacterick year; this day, this hour, this moment, this breath to be his
last.

Horace.
Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum,
Imagine every day to be thy last day; for this life is a lead, and not a
property; a farm, and not an heritage; an hostage, and not an abode; if God
warn thee to remove, thou can not suspend his summons.

Direct 3* Look always to thy end.
The third direction is, Respice finem: Remember thy end (says the wise man)
and whatsoever thou take in hand shall prosper: thou may well propone, God
dispones. Thou may entitle thy self with Alexander the conqueror, the son
of Jupiter Hammon; and with Sapor king of Persia, brother to the sun or
moon, copartner with the stars, king of kings: and exalt thy self with the
titles of the king of Spain, Prester John, the Turk, the king of China; thou
may sail over the mountains with Antiochus, dry up the rivers with
Sennacherib, and bridle the seas, as the Monarchs in their pride have
attempted; who with Edom have lift up themselves above the clouds, as the
eagle, and builded their nest amongst the stars. But if thou have not builded
upon the rock of Sion, thou have erected but a Babel, a mass of confusion, and
death shall cross, crush, and cut all thy designs, and harbor thee in the
place of silence, where thou shall neither see, nor be seen any more. Thou
should then meditate on these three: 1. Respice, Look back to that which thou
wast, Earth: 2. Aspice, Behold what thou art, Earth. and 3 prospice, Consider
what thou must be, Earth. There thy beginning, continuance, end. Lord teach us
to begin well, to continue better, to end best of all: for the end crowns
the work.

3 Directions touching the uncertainty of death.
These are the three directions upon the certainty of death: receive also three
other directions, upon the uncertainty of the time, place, manner.

Direct. 1 Think everyday thy last day.
The first direction is upon the Time. Howbeit it be certain to God, yet to
man it is uncertain: yea to Christ as he is the son of man, who comes as a
thief in the night. Therefore let us have oil in our lamps, and our loins
girded toward our masters coming: let us watch and pray, not knowing the day
nor the hour. The preterit time is gone, the present is a moment; and the
future is uncertain. The day is short, the work is great, our Master is at
hand, therefore let us be busy, says Rabbi Simeon. And if Apelles the
painter, thought every day lost wherein he drew not a line: So we Christians,
with Bernard, should think every moment of time lost, which we have not
consecrated to God. Seneca affirms that a great part of our life slideth away
with evil doing, the most part by nothing doing, the whole by doing that which
we should not do; and in the mean time death comes upon a suddentie. Does
not one complain that he has left his house half builded; the other that his
victory is not crowned; another, that his meditations are not printed; another,
that he has not married his daughter; another, that he has not paid his
debts? And why? because we are improvident, and have not in time thought upon
our last time, which God in his wisdom has not revealed unto us, for fear
we be holden in continual inquietude. Augustine says well, Vnus dies
ignoratur, ut multi observentur: which Gregory expounds, The last hour is
uncertain, that we may suspect it, and hasten to it. David's child died an
infant, Eutychus a youth, Sampson a strong man, David an old man, Methusalem a
decrepit man. God teach us to be ready at all times, for death is a fixed point
which we must touch.

Direct 2 What we expect somewhere, let us wait for every where.
The second direction is upon the place. Because we know not in what place
death will seize upon us, let us wait upon it in all places; for there is no
corner in nature, but death reigns in it, subduing all things under it self,
as an implacable tyrant. The babes in Bethlehem died in their swaddling clouts,
Jacob in his bed, Eglon in his summer house, Saul in the field, Sennacherib in
the temple, Joab at the horns of the altar, a Marquess of Mantua, Speusippus
a Philosopher, and one of the Popes of Rome, in the arms of whores. Let us
send short and pithie ejaculations to God in all places, that he who is
omnipresent, may be powerfully present with us, where death encountereth us,
and in what estate we meet it, in that same we shall compear in judgment.

Direct 3. An uncertain death requires a prepared life.
The third direction is upon the manner. This is a saying repeated by many, ad
vitam unus est exitus, ad mortem paene infiniti: There is one passage to life,
viz. our mothers belly, but to death, are almost infinite. Raman hanged Jobs
sons, smothered the mothers of Jerusalem, with their younglings starved to
death; Herod worm-eaten, those of Sodom burnt with fire and brimstone, those of
the old world drowned with an uncomparable deluge of waters. Diverse are the
kinds of the Saints death; Esaias was cut through the middle with a saw; Peter,
James, Paul and John, beheaded; Steven, Philip of Bethsaida, and Matthias
stoned; Bartholomew his skin pulled off him; Thomas thrust through with a
spear; Luke hanged; Andrew, Simons brother, and Christ himself crucified: of
the Christians under the Emperors of Rome, some pricked, some roasted to death,
some devoured by cruel lions, some by ravenous wolves, some by fierce tigres,
some with one or other exquisite torment pained to death. Our lesson is, who
are here present, to lead a sanctified, and renewed life, serving God without
fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life,
that we may obtain a pleasant, easy, and precious death in the eyes of the
Lord; (...); an happy death is immortality to soul and body: for every manner
of death, how execrable soever, shall be sanctified on the tree, whereon Christ
was crucified. And thus far of all the points of my text.

The conclusion.
Now my Noble, Honorable, Reverent, and well beloved Auditors, least I should
omit any circumstance of this action looked for by you, I come to these two
dead corpse lying at the lip of the grave, from which ye have received six
directions, and if they could speak any more, they would make up the seventh,
which is the most perfect number, that is to say, Learn of us to die, for ye
must follow after us; and we cannot come back unto you. So their mouths are
stopped, and we need not to speak unto them any more, for they will not hear
us, therefore we must speak something of them. To pray God for them, we
should not, for it will not avail them; to praise them (howbeit praise
worthy) I am assured that critics and censurers would take to themselves
larger matter, then perhaps were given them, all consenting with one voice and
mind, that I a friend were driven by the violent stream of affection, and the
tempestuous storm of passion, either upon the Scylla of ostentation, or the
Charibdis of assentation. But I hope the sail of my sincerity shall carry the
ship of my mind from these two rocks, to the safe harbor of your favorable
audience, and sparing censures; and that my mouth shall utter nothing, but that
which the carper himself, a framed friend, an impartial judge, a charitable
christian ought to say, to wit, That this rare spectacle of one husband and
spouse which cannot be severed in death, would seem in the eyes of a natural
man pitiful and deplorable, but to us who see with spiritual eyes, joyful
and comfortable: for they are with God. And this is remarkable, Their joy was
one, their grief one, their love one, their life one, their death one, their
burial one, their tomb one, their grave one, their glory one. And great is
our union with them, howbeit we be separate for a while: for charity bids
us say, That our baptism is one, our faith one, our hope one, our love one,
our reward one, our pilgrimage one, our race one, our warfare one, our country
one, our commonwealth one, our city one, our religion one, our church one,
our spirit one, our Christ one, our God one, the father of us all, above us
all, in us all, all in all.

These are strait bands betwixt them and us, for that same golden chain of
mercy which has pulled them unto heaven is fastened to our souls, that we also
in our own time may be drawn hither. In the mean time we are banished and
strangers, they gone home and citizens; we in Sodom, they in Zoar; we in O
Enon, they in Salem; we in a terrestrial cottage, they in a celestial
paradise; we in clayie tabernacles, they in glorious pavilions; we are on this
border of the sea, they on the other; we drowned in the sea, they in the ark;
we in the desert, they upon the top of mount Pisgah; we in Egypt, they in
Canaan; we tossed to and fro, they in the harbor mouth. Again, we in a
labyrinth, they in the fortunate Isles and Elisian fields; we hunt after
shadows, they enjoy the substance; we amongst Bears and Wolves, they with the
Lamb; we fighting, they triumphing. And what more? we sick, they whole; we
blind, they enlightened with that inaccessible light; we see through a glass,
they face to face; we know in part, they fully; we poor, they rich; we
naked, they clothed; we wear clouts and rags, they bear crowns and
scepters; we hungry, they satisfied; we feed upon the fruits of the earth,
they upon that quickening Manna, the bread of Angels; we imprisoned, they set at
liberty; and that which the ignorant would think a wonder, we dead, and they
living. Why go we then with mourning apparel, seeing they have white robes?
Why weep we any more, seeing all tears are wiped from their eyes? Why do we
lament, seeing they sing songs of triumph upon golden harps and viols, with the
melodious, harmonious sweet-singing-chorestrie of Angels? Surely if it were
possible that glorified souls were subject to grief, they have greater occasion
to mourn for us, then wefor them, whose bands amongst themselves are so
unseparable, that death cannot break them; and greater love we read not of any
two then of these: for it is stronger then death. O happy couple above the
eloquence of man and angel! Many a loyal husband and chaste spouse would be
glad of such an end. And what an end? Let the envious Momus, and injurious
backbiter hold their peace, and let me who stand in the presence of God, and in
the face of his people, and in the chair of verity, tell the truth: to wit,
That honorable Baron whose corpse lies there in the flower of his years, in
the strength of his youth, in the prime of his designs, even when young men
use to take up themselves, is fallen, and mowne down from amongst us, like a
may flower in a green meadow.

His virtuous Lady who having languished a little after him, howbeit tender in
body, yet strong in mind, and full of courage, took her dear husbands death in
so good part, that she did not give the least token of hopeless and helpless
sorrow. Yet wearying to stay after her love, she posted after him, and slept
peaceably in the Lord, as her husband before her.

This, Noblemen, Gentlemen, and men of account amongst us have assured me. So
then, as neither the husbands ancient house, nor his honorable birth, nor his
noble allye, nor his able and strong body, nor his kind, stout, liberal
mind, nor the rest of the ornaments which were in him alive, and which
recommend brave gentlemen to the view of this gazing world, could keep him
from a preceding death. So neither the spouses noble race of generous and
religious progenitors, nor a wise carriage in a well led life, nor the rest of
her womanish perfections, could free her from a subsequent death, both due to
them and us for our sins. God has forgiven theirs; God forgive ours also. They
have done in few, all that can be done in many years; They have died well: God
give us the like grace. In the mean time, their relics and exuvies, terrae
depositum, shall lie there amongst other dead corpse, of their forebears and
aftercommers, all attending a general resurrection: And their souls the best
part of them, coeli depositum, have surpassed the bounds of this inferior
world, and are carried upon the wings of Cherubims and Seraphins, to the bosom
of Abraham, for to change servitude with liberty, earth with heaven, misery
with felicity, and to be made partakers of that beatifick vision, real
union, actual fruition of our God, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and
at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore. How shall we then conclude, but
with a hopeful and eternal farewell, till it please God, that we all meet
together on that great day, on Sion hill, and go into these everlasting
tabernacles of the temple of the most High, in the holy city, supernall
Jerusalem, amongst the Hierarchies of that innumerable company of Angels, the
general assembly and church of the first borne, written in heaven by the
finger of God, and the blood of the Lamb? When and where they with us, and we
with them, and the whole multitude of the militant and triumphant Church,
reunited under Christ the head, shall be fully and finally glorified.

O fools that we are, we long with a vehement desire, to see our earthly
princes coronation in this earthly kingdom: I pray you let us wish with an
holy impatience, redoubled sighs, unfeigned groans to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ, that we may see our own glorious coronations in that kingdom of
glory? For, O what solemnities! O what festivities! O what exultations! O what
exclamations! O what triumphs shall be there! when the heavens and earth shall
clap their hands for joy. Why do these base minds of ours creep any more like
worms on earth, and soar not with the wings of heavenly contemplation, that
our conversation may be in heaven? Why do we not fly with the golden feathers
of faith and hope, to embrace in the arms of our souls our gracious redeemer,
who is at hand, and stretches forth his powerful hand unto us? O let us lift
up our heads, and open the everlasting gates of our souls, that the king of
glory may enter in, and find room therein, howbeit the heaven of heavens is
not able to contain him; who is the joy of the heavens, the hope of the earth,
the light and life of the world, the ease of the oppressed, the comfort of the
afflicted, the advocate of sinners, the reward of the just, our only Savior. O
let us set our affections upon him, and behold him, whose love shed abundantly
in our hearts, should swallow all other love, who is the wisdom of God, and
ours before the world, set as a rose of stars upon our head, when others
shall be confounded.

Therefore bow down the knees of your hearts, with your voices, your hands and
eyes unto heaven, saying, O come thou (whom our souls both love and long for)
Lord Jesus, yea come quickly, and tie us unto thy self by the band of
perfection, the coards of thy unspeakable love. We die, we divine after thee,
O sweet life, O dear love! Tarry not while we are ready, but take us to thy
self, and cover us with the banner of thy love, and present us holy,
harmless, acceptable before thine heavenly father, that we may dwell with
thee, and in thee eternally, and through thee possess the things which neither
eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor the heart of man was ever able to
conceive.

Now to this Jesus our redeemer, to the Father our Creator, to the holy Ghost
our comforter, one GOD in three persons, let us render from the bottom of our
souls, all Honor, all Praise, all Glory, for ever and ever, AMEN.

AMEN.
VIRI NOBILIS JOANNIS CRAFORD II, D. KILBVRNII, aeternae memoriae sacravit hoc
epicedium Ninianus Campbellus.
SIccine Kilburni, florentis stamina vitae,
Ante diem rupit Parca severa tuae*
Attamen exultas, quoniam men's inscia fati,
Praepetibus pennis caelica templa subit*
Haurit ubi puros latices, and Nectaris uvas,
Caeleftis dia vivit and Ambrosia.
Ponite luctificos gestamina tristia cultus,
Ponite funereas vos pia turba faces.
Vivit quem fletis, votum super omne vigetque
Despectans oculis inferiora suis.
Non est mortalis, (quantum mutatur ab illo?)
Qui colit aetherei culmina celsa poli:
Atque Dei vitam degit felicibus ausis,
Humano major nomine, voce, vice.
Idem hoc nati, patris, and matris, qui uno eodemque mense obierant, Epitaphium.
POst natum Genitor, post hunc dulcissima Matter;
Hoc gaudent tumulo corpora trina simul.
Natus praecessit Genitorem, funera Matter
Tertia subsequitur, Mensis and unus erat.
Felices animae! quibus his excedere terris,
Sic datur, and vita jam potiore frui.
VIRI CONSULTISSIMI SCAEVOLAE SAMMARTHANI Galli memoriae sacravit hoc carmen
NINIANUS CAMPBELLUS.
VMbrosas Heliconis inter oras,
Pimplaei and nemoris sacros recessus,
Me jam Pierio calore raptum
Cerno: dum me ditor polire carmen
Cultum, nobile, molle, delicatum,
Indictum ore alio, beatiori
Vena progenitum, sinuque Phoebi.
Quo te prosequar omnibus canendum
Seclis, magne senex, tuique dotes
Vrbani genii facetioris,
Docti judicii politioris,
Aequem Sceptrigeri polo Tonantis.
Si fas sit numeris phaleuciorum,
Te laudare virum disertiorem
Phoebo, Mercurioque, gratiisque.
Quem circumvolitat novena turba,
Longaeva and Themis, and severa Pallas,
Testes aetherii tui caloris.
Cujus fama vigens virum per ora
Doctorum advolat aureis quadrigis.
Ast nobis cadis ah tuis ademptum
Lumen! proh dolor orbi and universo,
Extinctum jubar aurei nitoris!
Ni jam stellifero polo micares,
Despectans humiles soli jacentis
Tractus, ut simul omnibus renatus,
Es lux fulgidior priore luce.
Qua nostros oculos rapis sequaces,
Et totos animos sereniori
Perfundis radio tui decoris,
Fulgens clarior hespero recenti,
Multo and pulchrior imminente luna:*
Vt diam nequeam videre lucem,
Quam praebes tremulis meis ocellis,
Et toti patriae tuae decorae,
Ex qua nasceris alma fax futuri
Secli, gloria and orbis universi.
Cui tu perpetuum diem reducis,
Aut mentis facula benigniori,
Dicatae sophia secretiori,
Sermon aut nitidam indicante mentem.
Cui cedunt veneres Catullianae,
Et limpha liquida suaviores
Melliti latices Terentiani.
Cum vis vincier aspero Cothurno,
Et cedunt lyrici canora plectra,
Et grandes numeri Maroniani,
Et fervens genius Lucretianus.
Quicquid Gallia parturit decori,
Quicquid Graecia protulit venusti,
Et quicquid Latium dedit politi,
Id vincis. Licet invidae Caemaenae
Certent, ambiguam facis coronam,
Cunctis vatibus, and stupente Phoebo,
Cingis tempora Laurea perenni.
Vt corpus jaceat licet sepultum,
Fatali tumulo, O beat vivas,
Auctor maxim carminis tenelli,
Limati, sapidi, aurei, politi!
O quantum tibi nominis paratur!
Dum cantaberis orb note toto,
Nullis Scaevola conticende linguis.
Sed quo tendimus alta musa? Siste
Gressum. Quove rapis nova tumentem
Laud? aut insolito furore plenum,
Sustollis modo vitreo daturum
Ponto nomina? caetibusque centum,
Misces Mercurialium virorum?
Quos men's ardua vexit ad bicornis
Montis culmina, Pegasique celsos
Pennis vestiit. Ast apis sagacis
Jnstar, libo rosas amoeniores,
Et gratas violas, Thymumque dutce,
Propter flumina, roscidasque ripas
Formosi Ligeris, libentiusque
Fingo carmina manibus litandis,
O divine senex, tuis dicata!
Nam nunquam mihi te silere fas est,
Totam qui meritis tuam beasti
Dilectam patriam, entheaeque linquis
Mentis pignora docta, rara, diva,
Vt te dicere nemo posset unum
Praeter te, O niveae parens loquelae.
Parisiis prius edita. Anno, 1629. Call. Sextileis.
IN OBITUM VIRI COLENDISSIMI JACOBI Legii Glascuensis archiepischopi, de
civitate, Academia and ecclesia ibidem meritissimi.
Ad civitatem Glascuensem.
ALmaquid incedis funesto Glascua cultu,
Et faedata modis tristibus ora geris?
An quod vester amor vita jactatus acerba,
Praesul post longae taedia dura morae
Suspiret potiore frui? qui gaudia laetae
Carpat, and innocuis concelebratajocis.
Sentiat ac purum divini numinis haustum,
Atque nova multum luce triumphet ovans,
Nonquae sublimis transcendit culmina mundi
Celsa triumphatrix men's modo plena deo
Tangitur immodico luctu. Quid inania vota
Fundis? divino vivitur arbitrio.
Illum flere nefas, cujus pars optima vitae
Nil aliud docuit quam didic isse mori.
Si mors dicenda est, per quam prope numenamicu^
Inque serenati degitur arce poli.
Ad Academiam Glascuensem, and doctos qui ad funus exornandum eo confluxerant.
AH prima coelicura, virtutum parens,
Lumen juventae vividum,
Phoebi supellex, dia nutrix artium
Seeds honorum splendida,
Quid nunc jaces afflicta curis acribus
Et mersa patris funere,
Praeluxit olim qui tibi? nunc additus
Caelo jubar fulget novum.
Lugesne ademptum coetibus mortalium,
Qui gaudet aula caelica?
Nec non beatus, totus and plenus Deo,
Portum salutis appulit?
Ast heu miselli volvimur nos fluctibus,
A patria ostraprocul.
Non hic querelis mollibus, non planctibus
Vrgendus heroes amplius.
Tradux olympi nam soluta ergastulo,
Men's fessa terrae ponderis,
Miscetur albo coelitum, qui concinunt
Lauds dicatas numini.
Quod gloriosa luce perfusi vident,
Mirantur, and fixi stupent.
Non est quod ergo prosequaris Nenia,
Manes quietos praesulis,
O turba vatum, quae pia in fletum fluis,
Moerente lessu personans.
Cunctis terenda est haec semel lethivia,
Nos proximi fato sumus:
Quos continenter distrahunt moeror, pavor,
Et mortis atrae vulnera,
Donec peracta, fata quam cernent, vice
Clemens Deus nos uniat;
Qui gestiamus libero and vero bono,
Per tota laeti secula.
Anno 1632. Nonas Novembris.
IN OBITUM VIRI INTEGERRIMI GVLIELMI BLARI, Pastoris vigilantissimi
fidissimique apud Britannodunenses.
POstquam pastores divos tot lumina mundi,
Condidit obscuro mors inimica peplo,
Tune etiam, pie Blare, jaces ereptus amicis,
Et comitom tantis nox dedit atra viris?
Heu rerum ingenium, probitas, doctrina, pudorque
Vnius hac plaga suneris icta cadunt.
Nec non pullato squalens ecclesia cultu
Luget* et hoc feretro triste levavit onus.
En nos, quos sophiae junxit tibi sacra cupid^
Coelestis, tessu tangimur usque tuo.
Sed de siderium, lachrymae, gemitusque dolorque
Nil prosunt, nusquam conspiciendus a^es.
Hins no^ ^e^tendi, non tu, qui laeta capessis
Gaudia, justitiae sole nitente mieans.
Nam certe in tenebris vitae, vitiique stupore
Degimus hoc avitur^^ misella hominum.
Aliud in Nobilissima ejus verba suavissimae consolationis plenissima.
QVale melos cantat sinuoso flumine Cygnus,
Instantis praeco funeris ipse sui;
Tale canis nuper, dum coeli gaudia cernis;
Pendet ab ore pio lecta corona tuo.
Dumque Deo raptus contendis in aethera nisu,
Mox novus ex ipso sunere factus olor.
Laetus ut aeterno moduleris carmina plectro,
Queis summi resonant fulgida tecta patris:
Vtque leves temnens curas, and vota gementum
In cassum, vero jam potiare bono.
Anno 1632. pridie Call. Decembris.
Viri Nobilissimi Domini Gulielmi Coninghami, Glencarniae Comitis
illustrissimi, apotheosis.
O Te beatum luce fulgentem nova
Gemmantis instar sideris!
Vixti soli lumen, polo nunc adderis
In templo amaeno, lucido,
Plenus deo, sublimior multo meae
Venae faventis numine.
Quamvis calorem sentiam mox entheum
Qui pandit alas ingeni,
Per cuncta rerum, non potest attollier
Men's pressa vinclo corporis.
Quo tu volasti plurimum fretus Deo
Heroes stupendis ausibus,
Vltra minaces spes, metus omnes leves,
Vitae and fugacis toedia:
Et degis heroum choro mixtus pio,
Caelesti raptus gloria.
Nec tu jacebis diutius terrae in specu,
Qui nos egenos excipit.
Eheu misellos patria dulci procul
Quid non piget nos exili?
Vt te sequamur qui praeivisti lubens,
Pars illa nostri nobilis,
Ast tantulum salve, and vale nostri cape haec
Desideri nunc pignora.
Nonas November. 1631.
In obitum viri clarissimi Guilielmi Strutheri, Ecclesiae primum Glascuensis,
deinde Edinburgensis Pastoris fidissimi and facundissimi.
FAcunde praeco melle quovis dulcior,
Aut melle si quid dulcius;
Qui me solebas poculis rorantibus
Suadae potentis me gere,
Demergis eheu lach ymosi funeris
Me fluctibus nunc obrutum.
Quam semper altis imminent virtutibus
Parcae ferocis vuine a!
Quaesensit aevi lumen, and noster soli
Nestor Britanni Bodius.
O quantus heroes (judicet Phoebus licet)
Toti canendus seculo!
Nulli secundus Camero aeternum silet;
Nec sensa prudens eruet
Caelestis almi, conspicandi oraculi
Mirante doctorum choro.
Succedis illis qui voves morti nihil;
Nam posthumae laudis satur,
Transmittis orbi scripta tot vivacia
Quot nullus expunget dies:
Struthere claras qui colis divum domos,
Vitaque gaudes caelica,
Felix perenni qui refulges otio,
Liber caduco tempore.
Qui terra tanti muneris compos fuit?
Cui vasta coeli machina
Arridet ultro, cuique supremus favor
Stellantis aulae militat.
Huc advolasti gloriae actus curribus,
Et vectus alis ingeni.
Sic functa fato redditur natalibus
Men's, nomen in terris manet.
Dum sol corusca luce diffundet jubar
Caeleste cunctis, siderum and
Volventur orbs, laudibus cresces novis,
O fax futuri seculi.
Anno 1633. idus Decembr.
IN OBITUM JOANNIS ROSAE, oratoris, poetae, Philosophi and Theo logi eximii,
and Pastoris Mechlimensis facundissimi.
O Coeligermen, charitum flos, veris ocelle,
Gloria musarum, dulcis amice Rosa,
Carperis heu parcae funesto pollice, nunquam
Culmine Parnassi conspiciende Rosa.
Cunctis anteferende rosis, queis gaudet and Hybla,
Saltus and Idalius, littus and O Ebalium,
Etpraedives Arabs, and Paestiroscidatempe,
Atque Paphos Tmolus, Gnosia terra, Cilix.
Vtlicet aeterno jam decantere triumpho
Mox vatum numeris concelebrande Rosa,
Luxerunt obitum Muse, Suadela files^it
Vocalis, mundae cui labra picta rosae.
Amissum queritur long pulchrima Cypris,
Qui modo vernabat lumina bina, Rosam.
Nec myrtus placuit divae, nec vitis laccho,
Nec Pani pinus, nec platanus genio,
Mellea nec quercus grataest devota Tonanti,
Nec lauro cinxit tempora Phoebus ovans*
Ex quo decideras lethali vulnere carptus
Ah Rosa jam nobis, raptus and ante-diem,
AEgide non gestit Pallas, ralaria nedum
Interpres divum nectere vuli pedibus.
Quippe diique deaeque omnes hoc funere maerent,
Quod tibi jam faciant debita justa, Rosa.
Non compus bellus, non flumina viva Lycet,
Non Jovis aurifluae plurimus imber aquae,
Non tristes lachrymae, non Castalis unda superne
Font fluens liquido te refovere queunt;
Quo minus arescas Pimplaei gratiaruris,
Nec non Pierii sedula curae soli.
Numte lacteolo gestabit pectore Musa
Amplius? aut Phoebus candidiore sin^e
Excipiet posthac? certe melioribus horis
Crescis ubi zephyrus lenia flabra movet.
Nec sentis calidos aestus, nec frigora brumae,
Neveprocellosi flamina saeva noti.
O Rosa ter felix, de quo vel Jupiter ipse
Certet, and ardenti captus amore tui.
Qui te plantavit cognati semen Olympi,
Afflat ubi Ely siis aura beata rosis.
Quid multis? Rosa non intermoriture perennas
Clara tuae stirpis gloria, rara poli.
Sit tibi perpetui veris, sit floris origo
Caelica, sitque liquor dius, odorquetibi.
EPITAPHIUM ROSAE ad viatorem.
Quid stupeas qui prata vides defesse viator,
Quod pereat nostri gratia tanta Rosae?
Namque rosa nil est brevius, properantius aevi,
Nil, ut mane viret, sole cadente perit.
Pulchralicet durat sugitivo tempore, Nonne
Nutrit and vna dies, tollit and unarosam?
Haecque tuae formae species, haec lucis imago
Viva docet vitam sic properare tuam.
Vt qui pubescis primo nunc flore juventae,
Moximproviso curva senecta premat,
Sis nivea rutilaque rosater pulchrior, ora
Inficiet pallor, funereusque color.
Anno 1634. idus Octobr. NINIANUS CAMPBELLUS.


