A DRAVGHT OF ETERNITY. Written in French by JOHN PETER CAMVS Bishope of
Belley.

Translated into English by MILES CAR Priest of the English College of Doway.

AT DOWAY, By the Widow of MARK WYON, at the sign of the Phoenix.

M.DC.XXXII.

TO THE NOBLE AND VIRTUOUS LADY THE LADY ANNE ARVNDELL, WIFE TO THE RIGHT
HONORABLE, COVNTE ARVNDELL LORD OF WARDER.
MADAME,
This FIRST DRAVGHT (...) Lineament of the BLESSED and ACCVRSED ETERNITY,
which has the reputation of a Maister-peece of one of the prime and
master-pe^cills of that flourishing and well spoken France, seems to me nether
unworthy, nor unfit to be presented to the veiwes and thoughts of our English
Catholics. The subject is most sovereign to remove contentions, and move to
wholesome thoughts, thoughts of Peace and not affliction. The Author a Bishope.
Worthy to be heard for his Reverence. Sweet withal, and peaceable, and
pleasing to every one. And as powerful, so pious in speech. If I should
instile him a wonder of knowledge. A milken flood of French eloquence. Renowned
for innocence of life and piety. The invention were not mine. If I should
demand, who could ever comprehend the greatness of the wonders with which this
famous Bishope does daily enrich the world, since even the number of his works
will shortly wax incomprehensible, being an vndraynable fountain of
inventions, whence all the world does quench its thirst, making whole volumes
of his thoughts, MONSIEUR DE LA SERRE that renowned Historian of France, would
glory to be the author of the demand. If I should term him a flood of
eloquence flowing this day through all France, in the multitude and variety of
his sermons and noble writings; and speak of the happy sallies of the
incomparable fullness of wit which every one admires in him; that honor of
France and of Bishops SALES (whom a straight spiritual consanguinitie made him
repute and call his Father) would esteem the speech but spareing. Daigne then,
MADAME, this small work with the protection of your Honorable name, and permit
it to pass out under the same, as a poor testimony of your Charitie's
manifold obligations to many, A DRAVGHT of whose worth, I must confess, I had
a respectfull ambition, to have made a light and grace to my weak endeavors
therein; yet feared indeed, how so unskillful a pencill, and in so great a
distance, could take to life so gracious a Prototype: I know, the Sun
communicating its heat and light to Regions furthest remote, makes men of
meanest skill promise themselves ability to set it out in its true colors;
while yet they, whom a sound knowledge has placed nearer unto it, laugh to
discover the poor painters errors. I am not ignorant, that as in faces, so in
graces of the mind, the most exquisite and peerlesse do most entice Art to
attempt, and yet do most labor, and furthest out-goe it. It Is a hard task to
take the true picture of Charity. Especially that which (according to our
Sauiour's counsel) is exercised in secret; at least, in the secret of a
heart, which a pious intention locks up from all touch of vanity, or humane
respect. But this point I know also, your Honor's Goodness will easily permit
me to pass over, yea her virtue will impose silence upon me. I will therefore
obeying, draw Tymant's veil over this inimitable visage, this beauty and life
of all your perfections: and will leave that mark of mine own insufficiency,
a testimony, to after-ages, of your unspeakable worth. License in the interim,
my pencill, such as it is, rudely to essay the expression of that, which the
honor and hap, I had some time to see your Honor, left deeply imprinted in
my heart, whereof the Idea's are yet, and ever shall be fresh and lively. A
truly Catholic ZEAL to see JUSTICE and PEACE kiss. A singular GOODNESS OF
NATVRE obliging and engaging all. The law of CLEMENCY, (an ormament as goodly
as rare in that hight of honor) in your tongue, shining together with a
heavenly PIETY, in all your words, in all your actions. A BOVNTVOVS HAND open
to the needy; and palms streched out to the poor. In fine a truest mark of
nobleness, a richly pious CONTEMPT of nobility and riches. My Table is too
little, my skill too slender, to comprise, or set out in any just proportion,
those troops of virtues, which, in your heart, do wait upon their sovereign
Queen, CHARITY. Madame your Bounty would give a large field to a skillful
hand. But our profession and practice being not to praise, but to pray: we will
ever pray for your Honor's prosperity, and leave your works to praise you,
in the gates of the heavenly Jerusalem.

Your Honor's most humble and obliged Servant MILES CAR.

A word to the Reader.
CVRTEOVS Reader, The Author will have you know,

First that this little work, was the fruit of one of his Spiritual
Retraites. The Manna which he gathered in the Sacred Desert of Penance. A child
of Prayer rather then of study; begotten at the foot of the Cross: brought
out in the abundance of his heart: speaking to the heart rather then to ear.
Thence he desires the heart may rather pervse it then the ey, at least that it
may be eyed in piety, fear and simplicity of heart.

Secondly, that, though he were prevented (howbeit without his knowledge) in
this subject, by two most excellent pens, DREXELIVS, and LA SERRE, yet he falls
in with nether of them, but walks a middle way: for leaving the first in his
diligent search of Antiquity; the second, in his affections, eleuations of
mind, motions, and rich amplifications, he applies himself only to the
meditation, or simple Contemplation of Eternity.

Thirdly that in the version of diverse passages of the holy Fathers etc. he was
not scrupulous in tying himself to their terms (their sense was his aim: in
that he is faithful) Say the like of holy Scripture. Hence the Translatour
will crave pardon, if faithfully following his author, he give not always the
words of Scripture, though he mark it in another letter, to bring more light
and life to the reading, While the humble majesty thereof, is, at least,
pointed at.

A TABLE OF THE STROKES OF THIS DRAVGHT OF ETERNITY.
The first STROKE.
THat Eternity is little considered. Page 1. 2. That all the evil in the
world, comes from want of thinking of Eternity. p. 8. 3. How profitable it is
to think of Eternity. p. 10. 4. Eternity is the proper thought of a
spiritual man. p. 13. 5. The sensible man thinks not of Eternity. p. 19. 6.
Sin depriues us of the consideration of Eternity. p. 22. 7. Things present
do hinder the contemplation of Eternity. p. 26. 8. That we put a rate upon
present things rather by their neerenesse then worth. p. 31. 9. The weakness
of Faith, makes Eternity less considerable. p. 36. 10. Origen's error
touching the Eternity of the pains of Hell. p. 42. 11. Eternity cannot be
defined. p. 46. 12. That Eternity is incomprehensible. p. 48. 13. Eternity is
ineffable. p. 50. 14. An imperfect description of Eternity. p. 53. 15. What
Time is. p. 56. 16. Eternity compared to Time. p. 62. 17. An elevation of the
mind to God, upon the comparison of time to Eternity. p. 67. 18. Man's life
compared to the worlds continuance. p. 70. 19. The force of the thought of
Eternity. p. 74. 20. That this life is only lent us to think upon Eternity.
p. 80. 21. An enterie to the consideration of the accursed Eternity. p. 88.
22. The horror of this subject. p. 92. 23. It is an universality of evils. p.
95. 24. The pains of sense, and first of the sight and hearing. p. 100. 25.
The pains of other two senses, the Smelling and tasteing. p. 107. 26. The
pain of the sense of touching. p. 110. 27. A since to God. p. 116. 28. Of
interior pains. p. 118. 29. The Prison of Hell. p. 127. 30. Of the pain of
Damni. p. 131. 31. The continual grief. p. 135. 32. The Eternity of the
torments of Hell. p. 144. 33. Of the desperation of the damned. p. 153. 34.
Pains without intermission. p. 156. 35. Whether it were better for the damned
not to be. p. 161. 36. Why there pains are eternal. p. 166. 37. An
Apostrophie to God and the soul, upon the accursed Eternity. p. 171. 38. A
passage to the blessed Eternity. p. 181. 39. The finenesse of this subject. p.
186. 40. That the eternal felicity is the petfection of all good things. p.
189. 41. Of the place of the Blessed Eternity. p. 195. 42. Of the magnificence
of the place: p. 199. 43. Of the essential happiness of the blessed. p. 207.
44. The happiness of the point of the soul. p. 215. 45. Of the felicity of the
powers of the soul, and first of the memory, p. 221. 46. The advantages of
the understanding. p. 227. 47. Of the light of Glory. p. 236. 48. Of diverse
degrees of Glory. p. 240. 49. In what measure the beatified understanding sees
God in Heaven. p. 245. 50. Whether the beatified understanding sees all in God.
p. 252. 51. The pleasures of the Will. p. 256. 52. The felicity of the
inferior portion of the soul. p. 264. 53. Of the dowries of the beatified
soul. p. 268. 54. Touching the qualities of the glorified bodies. p. 271. 55.
The pleasure of the Senses. p. 276. 56. A continuation of the precedent
subject. p. 283. 57. Of the Aureola. p. 287. 58. The Blessed society of the
Elect. p. 292. 59. The Excellences of this holy Society. p. 296. 60. Other
excellencies. p. 302. 61. A continuation of the excellencies. p. 308. 62. A
flight of the mind toward this happy compaignie. p. 317. 63. Another flight
of mind. p. 320. 64. Eternity is the fullness of Beatitude. p. 326. 65. Means
whereby to arrive at this happy Eternity. p. 334. 66. A continuation of the
former discourse. p. 345. 67. Another mean. p. 352. 68. That this thought of
Eternity is the abridgement of all spiritual life. p. 363. 69. A continuation
of the formar discourse. p. 368. 70. Of the essential Eternity. p. 376. 71.
That this essential Eternity is all things. p. 384. 72. An application of the
Heart to this essential Eternity. p. 391. 73. An aspiration of Hope. p. 403.
74. A practice to engraue in our heart the memory of Eternity. p. 409. 75.
Other endeavors. p. 420. 76. An other memorial of Eternity. p. 424. 77. The
moments where upon Eternity does depend. p. 444. 78. The present moment. p.
450. 79. The eternal doom. p. 458. 80. Adoration of the essential Eternity.
p. 474.
FINIS.
ATTESTATIO.
LIbrum hunc, cui titulus A Draught of Eternity, Authore Reuer.mo IOANNE PETRO
CAMO Episcopo Bell. diligenter perlegi; adeoque nihil in eo Fidei aut bonis
moribus contrarium reperi, vt aeterna laud and lectione dignum Iudicem: ac
proinde, ob quem, tam Interpreti quam Authori aeternam debeant, ad aeternitatem
aspirantes.

GVILIELMVS TALBOTTVS S. Theol. Professor.

APPROBATIO.
HIc liber, cui titulus, Crayon de l'Eternite, gallico Idiomate a R.mo Domino
D. IOANNE PETRO CAMO Episcopo Bell. Conscriptus, and in Anglicum sermonem opere
Rd D. MILONI^ CARRAEI versus, cum nihil contine^ contra Fidem seu bonos mores,
vt mih^ docti and Fide digni viri testimonio constat^ imprimatur. Actum Duaci
die 26. Maij^ 1632.

GEORGIUS COLVENERIV^ S. Theol. Doctor and Professor, a^ librorum Censor.

A DRAVGHT OF ETERNITY.
That Eternity is little considered.
THE FIRST STROKE.
O People deuoyde of the spirit of counsel, and unprovided of true providence:
God grant thou would be wise, and understanding, and that by a mature
foresight, thou could reach to the end of future things. These are the words
of the great law giver of the Jews, taxing that Nation of inconsideration, of
an incircuncised heart, and a stiff neck, and laying the greatest part of
their faults, upon the little attention they had to foresee future things. To
which purpose says S. BERNARD excellently well. In these words of Moses,
three things are recommended unto us. Wisdom, Understanding, and Providence.
And I conceive them to be assined, and applied to three times, to represent in
us a Draught of Eternity. Which we will do in this manner; in moderating
things present by wisdom; in discering things past by the judgment which we
will make of our selves; and by an exact prudence in disposing our selves for
the time to come. An^certes, wisely to dispose of thing present, and seriously
to recogitat^ things past in the bitterness of ou^ soul, is the abridgement,
yea the top of all spiritual exercises, and the form of all interior
discipline. To the end that, according unto the Apostles Counsel, we may live
in this life soberly, and piously, by observing sobriety in the use of things
present; by redeeming with a worthy satisfaction, time unprofitably spent,
without gathering any fruit toward our salvation; and by opposing the Buckler
of Piety, against the dangers which do menace us for the time to come, Tell me
now my dear Athanasia, whether that with which the divine MOSES did so justly
and truly vpbraid the Israelites, may not, and ought not by as good right, be
cast in the ^eeth of the new Israel of God, a people of acquisition; and of an
acquisition so paynefull and bloody of ^he souls of the greatest part of
Christians, redeemed with so great a price, and with so plentious a redemption
since worldlings are so lulled a sleep in the region of the shadow of death,
that they loose the remembrance of this so wholesome a thought of Eternity,
which should never be razed out of their memory in any moment of this mortal
life? Let us wish in their behalf, that which the great Conductour of the
children of JACOB wished for his brethren, who was held the swetest and
mildest amongst men, (what ever be reported of the sharpness of his spirit
amongst the waters of contradiction) and let us pronoune of men buried in the
dust of this life. I would to God, that the Spirit of wisdom, understanding,
and Counsel would descend into their souls, and the divine goodness grant
that it way be found in ours, to speak with S. BERNARD, tha^ we may sweetly
dispose of thing present with wisdom; condemn our former offenses by a
judicious understanding; and foresee things to come by a clearesighted
counsel. God grant we may be wise in our present behavior; understanding to
correct our life past; and provident for the time to come; that by Gods mercy,
we may die the death of the just, and our end way be like unto theirs; and that
the end of our life may be precious In the sight of the just Judge, who prouids
crowns to such as have lawfully fought. Heavens grant, my Athanasia, that our
soul departing this life, may be like unto the lamp, whose flammes ^re fed by
an aromaticall oil, and which never smell so well, as when ^t is extinguished:
and that it does ^nfranchise it self out of this clayie ^ouse of our body, for
no other end ^ut to breath out it self toward ^eauen, leaving the earth
embaulmed with a good odor in JESUS CHRIST; as it is written, that the memory
of the just should be sweet, as the sent of perfumes powered out. Which shall
be, most dear soul, if from this valley of tears, we provide stepps in our
hearts toward the blessed eternity; and if upon each occasion, we eleuate our
thoughts thitherwards, thoughts which shall be to God, as that little rod of
smoke compou^ded of all the perfuming ponders. Whereof mention is made in the
heavenly Epithalamion: and if separating our selves from the troops of those
who sleeping in a letergy, amidst their riches, delights, and vanities, shut
their eyes against the clear light of eternity, and repuls^ the rays of the
Sun of Justice. Alas, these wretched slaves to the^ own riches, possessed by
the which they think they possess^^ sleep at their ease; pass in an
imaginary felicity, the mome^ts of their days: but at their awaking, they find
their hands empty; put into the waights they are found light; and which is yet
worse, in one point, in an instant they descend into eternal torments. So
slept SAMSON, after he was bereft of his force. TOBIE when he had lost his
eyes: and Isboseth when he was deprived of life. God looked down from his
heavenly mansion, says the kingly Prophets, to see whether amongst men their
were any of a good judgment, and a wise foresight, who sought him as he merits;
that is, with his whole heart. But he found that every one diuerted from his
service, and converted themselves to vain and unprofitable things, forsook
the Creator for the Creature, Eternity for a moment, whereupon none does do
good, no not one. The ways of Syon, that is, of the Blessed Eternity, weep to
see themselves forsaken and aba^doned, none frequenting their solemnities. O
Eternity how considerable thou art, but o the misery, and misery vvpon misery,
how little thou art considered!

That all the evil in the world, comes from want of thinking of Eternity.
II.
YET, Athanasia, we may affirm it with an undaunted boldness, since with an
undoubted truth; all the evil in the world, comes through defaut of this
consideration. For Eternity being well waighed, is a light which does dissipate
the shadows, and disperse the clouds of sin. Thy judgment o Lord, are razed
out of his memory that offends, and thence it is, tha^ he defiles all his
ways, and falls at every foot, says the divine Psalmist. Where you are to
note, that in this place, he speaks of that judgment, whose irreuocable
verdict, shall bring some to eternal rewards, others to eternal pains.
Contrariwise the same Prophet confesses, that he betook himself to the
works of Justice, out of the apprehension he had conceived of the chaste fear
of this eternal judgment. How can an Archer, (unless by mere chance.) Hit
the mark he remarkes not? and how should he arrive at Eternity, that thinks
not of it, nor directs his course that way? And with what face, can one that
will not follow Gods commandments, beg of him, that he would conduct him in
the way of eternity? The general desolation of the earth, says JEREMY, yea
the abomination of desolation, is, that none considers in his heart, that is,
seriously, this great and universal end of Eternity, and thence their are so
few clean and ruminating beasts which can be offered to God in the Sacrifice
of Justice. Whence so many shipwrakes in the world, that vast and spacious sea
(where so many weak mortal vessels are split against the manifests shelues)
but through want of the Compass, and for that we direct not our thoughts in
the point of Eternity?

How profitable it is to think of Eternity.
III.
COntrariwise next to Gods grace, one of the Principles of eternal salvation,
is to think of it: It is a mark so fair and ample, that he that looks upon
it, hits it. And who ever has a firm and stayed aim cannot miss this Butt.
The means to attain to it, are easy; the ways sometimes uncouth, are now
plain and bet: the mountains reduced into playnes. The commandments are not
hard: the yoke is sweet, and the burden light. Is it not true Athanasia,
that we run in the ways of the divine commandments when heavenly love
extends our heart toward the glorious Eternity? It Is this fair RACHEL that
makes our days seem moments; and our labors delights, when we think of that
pourchace. Is it not this thought that does furnish us with Eagles wings, to
take a flight without stooping from the wing, by continuing perseuerantly in
good: and aids us with wings of a done, to mount up to our true repose, which
is no other then Eternity? Mark with what courage this Eagle speaks, with
what sweetness and promptitude this done: I have thought of the days of old,
and thought again of the years of Eternity. Would you not say, that that were
the Center, where all the lines of their desires meet: that that is their one
necessary. It is the hair, in which all the headhaire of the sacred spouse
does end, and the point, wherein all the rays of her sight, are received and
stayed. That this point which had never any beginning, nor shall have end, is
that little seed in the Gospel whence the great trees of all virtues spring:
the little stone of DANIEL, which grows up to a maine mountain, MARDOCHEES
little source; which after it had branched out it self into fair floodes of
good works, becomes an Oceane of light? Which makes we stick to this Truth,
that as the want of this thought of Eternity, is cause of the ruin of all the
lost souls: so when man prayseth God in this thought, the rest of his
thoughts, do lead him through the paths of heroical virtues, to the solemn
Feast and delightful Saboath of Eternity: For the just shall live for ever,
and their reward shall be with our Lord; who is himself she guerdon of his
followers and servants.

Eternity is the proper thought of a spiritual man.
IV.
O Thought, Athanasia, passing all other thoughts, and from whence issue, as
the beams from the face of the Sun, all other good thoughts! o oil that
swims above all other liquours; oil of the wise virgins La^pe; oil of the
widow that never fayles; fountain of oil springing toward eternity! Certes
there is no thought more worthy the spirit of man, an immortal spirit, a
spirit brother to the Angels, then that of Eternity: for it is the thought of
God, he being eternity it self: throw thy thoughts upon God, sings the divine
Psalmist, fix, o man, all thy cares in this heavenly object, walk in his
sight, and be perfect. what do I say perfect, it is to be already in a degree
of Beatitude, and a Beatitude far greater, then that whereof the fair Queen of
Saba spoke, when she named those Courtiers blessed, who are daily in the
presence of the wisest of Kings, Since that he, who does contemplate the King
of Kings and Sages, yea wisdom it self, draws from the glorious presence of
him who is far other then SOLOMON such advantages, as may be admired, but never
expressed, nay nor yet conceived. o who will favor us so much that all our
conversation may be in heaven, as was his, who was rapt up into the third
Heaven, if not the continual thought of this eternal object, which is the
Center of our wishes and desires? o Eternity, thou art the true Sun, where
the legitimate young Eagles are tried. Thou art the glorious star toward which
all well composed hearts, like spiritual Turne-soles, do incessantly turn
their view; hearts flourishing with good desires, and laden with fruits of good
works, their flowers being fruits of honor and honesty, that is, extremely
honorable. The great Apostle being returned out of that strong and wonderful
rapture, and that heavenly schowle, where he had learnt the secreets, which it
was not lawful for a man to speak, being in earth with open and entire eyes
saw nothing at all, (so was he dazzled with the rays of eternity!) or if he
saw any thing, it was but dirt, and doung; and the great spiritual Giant of
our age, as the devout AVILA styles him, the Founder of the Company of Jesus,
when he came out of his Ecstasies. o, quoth he, how durtie and diminutiue is the
earth in my sight, when I consider the beauty and goodlinesse of Heaven! All
seems abject to true bred souls that ends not in eternity, nothing is able
to bound their desires, save that object which has no bounds. What can I
desire in heaven it self, which is the measure of Time, and consequently
limited: what can I pretend in the earth, which is too wretched and miserable
to engage my affection, which takes a far higher flight. No, o thou God of my
heart, goes on the Psalmist, I will have nothing but thy self, thou art my
part forever. True it is, I have but a mortal condition in this vallie of
tears, yet my pretensions are not such, they reach to immortality. If the
passage to eternal solace, ly through the fire and water of sufferance, in
lieu of being disamayed at it, I will be comforted in it, knowing that he who
alone is of himself immortal, becoming mortal for the love of me, made his
entry into the Temple of Honor, through that of Labor, not permitting
himself access to his own glory, but through the door of dolor. And
again, does not Faith deliver as an Oracle, this Apostolical speech. The
light and passing moments of tribulation, do load us with the weight of
eternal glory. Nothing did so powerfully move that generous maid of our
days, the Holy mother TERESA, to so many heroical enterprises which she
undertook for the advancement of Gods glory in his Church, by the reformation
of a whole Order, as this thought of Eternity: for being as yet very young,
she animated her self to piety, and to the desire of heavenly things, while
she conferred with her little brother (o Little Angels upon what can your
thoughts be placed but eternity!) and by this word NEVER which by way of
emulation they did often iterate (their thoughts being far more deep and
penetrating in that their tender age, then their words) she laid the fundation
of that goodly edifice of perfection, which God has made appear in her,
making choice of weak things, to confound the strong, and by this spiritual
Amason, fastening confusion upon the house of the world, and the Prince of
darkness, a place more disordered, then the house of Nabuchodonosor. All that
is temporal, is reputed as nothing, to a soul whose whole pretensions are set
on Eternity. It is the bird of Paradise, which never comes upon the ground,
but by the thread of mere necessity. Every other object is unworthy of her
courage, unworthy to possess any place in her affections. It is the true, and
only thought worthy of an immortal, and reasonable spirit.

The sensible man thinks not of Eternity.
V.
But alas the sensible man is not capable of it. I term him a sensible man,
who deprived of the knowledge of the nobleness of his being, the lively Image
of the divinity: walks after the troops of brutall passions, feeding the
Bore of his sensuality, the Lion of his wroth, the Dragon of his pride, the
woolfe of his avarice. This man being advanced to the honor of reason, and
called to the lote of Saints, by the light of grace; has suffered this light
to be obscured, has not understood who called him to this happy portion, and
therefore he has been compared to horses without reason, and has been made
like unto them. This man has his eyes fixed in his head, not seeing a
hairebread above it, or below his feet, a deplorable blindness! He is like to
those wicked old men who would attempt upon the honor of the chaste Susanna,
who hung down their heads toward the earth, least they might see heaven. The
fire of concupiscence falling into his heart, hinders him to see the Sun. And
albeit natural light tell him, that his soul is immortal, yet he turns it
not upon eternity; because his owle-like eyes, are not able to sustain so
grateful a splendor. No, for the shine of the day star which is so lovely
in it self, and so beloved of pure eyes whose aples are strong, is dreaded of
such as have a weak and waterie sight. O how miserable is this unfortunate
man, this child of darkness, this almost blind, and so weake-sighted Heli,
that he cannot see the lamp of Syons eternal Temple, save only when it is
extinguished; how miserable, I say, is this man, since the light that is in
him, is darkness, and covered with so many ashes, that it is quite smothered:
and what great hazard he runs of loosing the eternal light of glory, who
walks in so palpable darkness, and is buried in the shadows of so black an
oblivion!

Sin depriues us of the consideration of Eternity.
VI.
YOu will happily ask me, o Athanasia, whence proceeds so deep a blindness,
and so deadly a numnesse in this poor man, who rarely or never thinks of
eternity. To speak the truth, the heavens stand astonished, and the gards of
those heavenly Gates quake with desolation in it; because that miserable man in
the same instant, commits two greiuous crimes, leaving the source of life of
the blessed eternity, to build unto himself with the length of time, and in
earth, running cisternes, which can hold no water; because here below we all
die, and flow as waters upon the face of the earth, till we be arrested in our
coffin. I need not seek far to find the origin of this disorder, since that
sin is the prime cause of this blindness. My virtue has forsaken me, quoth
the king of penite^ts and Prophets after his fall, and the light of mine eyes
is no longer with me. That each sinner is blind, is a truth so clear that it
needs no proof: Leave them there, says our Savior speaking of certain
offenders, they are blind, in a blindness signified by that of Tobie, and
Samson, and by the palpable darkness of Egypt. And if while the sky is laden
with fogie mists, we neither discover Sun nor heaven, or to speak with
David, while rain makes black and darksome clouds appear: much less can the
soul covered with the filme of sin, see and contemplate him, who shines from
above the eternal mountains; for the true and divine wisdom, takes not up
his resideme in a soul defiled with the malice of sin; nor in a body
subject to sense and passion. And if, nor the light of the sun, nor of a
torch can be decerned through gross bodies, as might be a wall; much less can
eternal thoughts shine in a soul, where sin erects a wall, which does
separate from his grace, who makes not only, as Job says, the East, and the
stars, but even Eternity it self. o miserable soul, who feeds the flocks
of thy durtie passions in a land far distant from God, far from true felicity;
for salvation is far from sinners. Lost souls! since such as stray from God
do perish. o God whom thou do forsake, shall be forsaken; well may their
names be written in the land of the dead, but never in that of the living, nor
in the Register of the glorious Eternity. Jesus preserve us, my Athanasia,
from so daunting a malediction, us I say, who by the grace of God, do detest,
the disasterous night of sin, being received out of the tempests of
darkness. We who love the day light, and sweetly walk therein; we who put of
the works of darkness, and put on armor of light to walk honestly before
God, Angels and men. We who protest that we were nether borne nor do live,
for any other end but incessantly to contemplate, not the Heavens and the
Sun, as that ancient Anaxagoras said of himself, but the blessed Eternity,
and the first cause thereof. We who sing with the royal Prophet. Mine eyes are
always toward the eternal God: I have him always before my face: he is the
only object of mine eternal thoughts.

Things present do hinder the contemplation of Eternity.
VII.
THere is yet another thing, that causes worldlings to loose the memory of
Eternity; and the sight of this POLESTARRE, in the navigations of this mortal
life. Do you desire to know it, Athanasia? It is the things present. The world
is full of a kind of people, who are only worldly wise, knowing only terreane
things, and with these they have their understanding endarkned, as the Apostle
speaks, who search only the things that are upon the earth, not the things
above; and who resembling the unclean beasts, have their eyes so fixedly
turned upon the earth, that they cannot recover them to heauenward, unless
themselves be ouerturned. That we are not to admire, that Eternity has so few
contemplatours, seeing that the ancient Philosopher has so many disciples,
who said, that the things which are above us, do no ways concern us. Verily
as it is imposible with one ey to see heaven and earth, and to behold in the
same place the Artique and Antartique Pole, though a man were even placed under
the Equature, or the Equinoctial line; so is it impossble, that the mind of
man should in one thought accompany present and future, temporal and eternal
things. Those twinns are incompatible, and would cause in it too griping
conuulsions: Things visible are te^porall, and eternal things are not seen,
says the Doctor of the Gentiles, like as one of the Poles is invisible unto
us, and far more Pilotes know how to sail, under that of our Orison, then
under that of the Antipodes, that being unknown unto us, and subject to other
stars, and other rules of navigations. We must not therefore wonder that so few
direct their course toward Eternity, and that TIME has so great a train;
since the MAXIMS of temporal and eternal things are not only different, but
often also contrary, and always further dista^t then Heaven and Earth. The
soul betwixt these two Extreamities is like unto the child in the EMBLEM,
being hoysted up by the wings of it desire to things of the next life, but kept
down to things of the present life, by the stone of this earthly habitatio^,
abating the flight of the Spirit toward things above. It is this Talent of
lead, mentioned by the Prophet, which swayes down to the ground, such as
desire to be freed from it, and yet cannot, so faint hearted they are to
performe^ the good which they desire only with an imperfect will! For if they
desired it with an absolute will, and to that effect employed the power they
have, Grace would never quite them in so fair a way. Thus did the youngman in
the Gospel, who showed himself so desirous to undertake the ways of eternal
life, whereof he made so earnest a Petition to our Savior: but when he had
learnt that to enter thither by the straight way and narrow Gate, he was to
forsake his present possessions, to aspire with more facility to the Treasures
of Eternity, he returned sad, and administered occasion to the son of God to
make that sweet discourse to his disciples, of the difficulty of entering
into heaven, with the load of riches. For which cause Saint Augustine termed
the love of present things, the glue which glewes the feathers of the mind, and
hinders her flight toward Eternity. While the Crystal is sole, and in her
native purity; it is transparent, and in it are seen the objects put before
it: but being once spread over with lead or quicksiluer, our sight is stayed in
the Glace, and by reflection, we see the picture of what is before it, and not
at all that which is behind it. A neat and purified spirit, not soyled with
the lees and skumme of terreane affections, Has by the light of Faith a clear
Prospect upon Eternity, and the things of the next life: But as soon as it
applies it self to earthly objects; It discryes nothing but the fayding shapes
of this world. And as hounds fall easily at default in the Spring, when the
fresh smells of flowers, make them loose the sent of the game they poursue: So
the mind that is carried to the search of heavenly things, runns counter,
misled by the neerenesse of present things.

That we put a rate upon present things rather by their neerenesse then worth.
VIII.
FOr though many of those that are carried away by their allurements, know well
that they are not comparable in worth to eternal things, yet rather by their
neighborhood then valor, they make a strong impression. Who would not say
that the full moon is greater the^ the stars, it appearing as another Sun
amongst the lesser lights, which the night discouers in the heavens: yet is it
not so, as the Astrologers assure us, but her proxmitie causes this mistake.
Present things obnoxious to the decay of time, are so short in continuance;
that they are but flying vapors, as soon bet down, as blown up, seeming
rather appearances, or the shadows of a dream, then solidities; while yet
being nearer, they appear to the eyes of such as muse, or rather abuse
themselves therein, more worthy of consideration then eternal things, which are
not limited in their extention, nor have end in their being. And who knows
not, (to keep in our comparison) that the influences of this star, the
nights great eye, are more forceable then any other, excepting that which is
the fountain of all light, and which does communicate it to all the rest? We
must say the like of things present, that by reason of their neerenesse, they
strike the soul, by the senses, a more violent blow, then the future do,
which are beheld, as a thing in absence. Whence we have a MAXIM; that present
objects move the powers, which things in distance do but slowly shake. But all
this proceeds from want of Faith, as hereafter we will declare; for if this
virtue were closely united in the mynds of those, that do believe her
propositions, she would make things hoped for, appear as present, invisible
things visible, according to the definition thereof delivered us by the great
Apostle. The Moon appears in diverse shapes, or altogether disappeares,
according to the different oppositions of the earth, between it and the Sun.
We may say the like in the matter we treat of, that Eternity is seen, or
shut up from souls, according as they are more or less infected with earthly
affections. o Love of the world how long will thou obscure the fair light of
heavenly love: o thick cloud why do thou shut from so many eyes, the aspect
of the glorious rays issuing from eternal lights? behold this torch thrown
down: the wax which while it was below the flame did feed it, is the very
bane of it: The love of inferior things, guided according to the order of
Charity; does not impeach eternal love; but when perishable things are
preferred before those that are permanent, then this clear lamp, which shines
to our feet to conduct us in the way of eternal peace, being smothered with
material things, dies out. o Smoke! o unfortunate dung! how many Tobies thou
beatest blind? Iron does naturally run after the Loadstone, yet many things
hinder this stones attraction, as when it is rubd with garlike or greese, when
it is near unto a Diamant, or when it is placed in too great a distance from
the iron. And our souls, who of their own natures are immortal, by their
own instinct do tend to Eternity, as to that which they most affect; but as
soon as the garlike or greese of the pleasures, and delights which are tasted
in things present, do attrape them; or when the lying luster of worldly
honors keeps them at a gaze, it is not strange, that Eternity, which they
behold as a thing a far of, does so little work upon their affections. Shall I
speak in a word what is the Remora, which stops the ship of our hearts,
under the sails of our desires sailing toward Eternity? it is, that every
one seeks himself, and not the glory of God. It is, as that old Antipheron,
that in every thing having our eyes turned upon our selves, in every thing we
seek our own interest. Few hate their souls in this world to gain them to
Eternity. Few renounce all things present; and yet fewer themselves, who are
more, not only present, but pressing, to follow Jesus Christ, and to do the
will of God in earth, as it is in heaven.

The weakness of Faith, makes Eternity less considerable.
IX.
But what do I say to do the will of God, Alas! how many wicked, how many mad
men, say in their heart, their is no God. Our lips are to our selves, who is
our Lord? Come let us crown our selves with present roses, before death, the
death of all pleasures, make them fade away; let not a flower of vanity, of
loose desire, of lucre, put up the head in the meades of this mortal life,
which we take not a taste of, before the grave shut us up. And it is there that
this want of belief maks us loose the veiw of the North-starre of Eternity
which I give for a third cause. Yes, quoth our Savior himself to his
Disciples, do you think that the son of man coming to judge the world, in
his last coming, shall find Faith in the earth? and do we think there is
Faith in this end and dreges of ages wherein we live? Verily if we form a
judgment of Faith by works, as the scripture teaches us, it will easily be
gathered by the fruit the world brings out, that there is nether Truth, nor
Faith, nor Memory of Gods justice, or Eternity, left in the heart of man. All
err from their mothers womb, and stray from the paths of equity, being
heavy hearted, and slow to believe that which is taught them by faith touching
things to come. They love vanity, and seek after falsitie and lies. o how
deceitful are the children of men in their waightes, suffering themselves to
be deceived in the Vanity of their senses. Let us consider this more nearly,
and practically. Faith tells us many glorious things of the City of God, where
he reigns eternally with his Elect, where he makes his love take root as in a
fertile field. It tells us, that this Kingdom is of all ages; that all the
Blessed are Kings; heirs of God, and coheires with Jesus Christ. That God is
there, all in all filling them with an eternal felicity: that his power is an
eternal power: That his Kingdom shall have no end. And in our Creed we
protest, that we believe life everlasting the life of the world to come, That
such as do well shall enter into the blessed Eternity; and the wicked into an
eternal torment. That is one of the principale articles of our Faith, and as
it were, the pin upon which the rest move and turn: for if all should die to
us togeither with the body; if there remaynd no hope if another life, does not
the Apostle say plainly, that under our Christian law, we were the most
miserable creatures alive. But o God how weak and faint is faith in these
articles, if we look upon the lives of most Christians? o sinners, who believe
so well, and live so ill, having only a dead Faith, not quickened with
Charity, nor seconded with works suiting with your belief, do you not blush
to see your hands contrary to your tongues, your actions to your words, and so
great contradiction in your self, by the continual war which your will
makes against your understanding, whence is bred in your heart that remorse and
griping, that gnawing worm, which permits you not even in your pleasures,
false follies and superfluities, any contentment, that is pure and without
mixture of bitterness, tempering your laughter with grief, and ouersowing a
thousand thorns amongst the roses of your fleeting delights. o miserable
wretches! willingly would I say, either live as you believe, or believe as you
live, not crucifying a new again the sun of God by your vices, and that far
more cruelly and unworthily, then the executioners did to the cross betwixt
two thieves, upon the Mount-Caluarie: for the scripture assures us, that if
they had known him, as you profess to do, to be the King of glory, they had
never treated him so barbarously; but you barbarously crucify him, not now in
his passing and passible life, nor upon Mount-Caluarie, nor yet betwixt two
thieves, but even set at the right hand of the majesty of the Highest, and
reigning in the Eternity of ages, betwixt the Father and the Holy Ghost. What
do you think, Athanasia, of the infidelity, or cruelty, of the most part of
wicked livers, who have the face to profess themselves of the faithful? Yet
if they believed as they live, their actions would be like their belief, and
as Ethnikes, upon whom the light of truth has not shun, they would be less
punished: but the servant that knows the will of his master, and does it not,
merits he not a double punishment? And these wilfully blind creatures, deserve
they not to fall into the accursed ditch, full of snares of fire and brimstone,
and to have part in the chalice of eternal tempests and tormoyles?

Origene's error touching the Eternity of the pains of Hell.
X.
ANd it happens somes times that for the punishment of this contradiction
betwixt their life and belief, God permits them to fall into a reprobate
sense, and suffers them to perish in the Deluge of their error, leaving them
in the obscurity of their understanding, to walk in the vanity of their
thoughts, poursuing the desires of their hearts, following the straying rowtes
of their own inventions. Alas who would not tremble, who would not quake with
fear, to see this mighty, this prodigious, this incomparable wit, Origene,
fallen into this error, to believe that after a long continuance of torments,
the damned should be drawn out of Hell, to enjoy the vision of God: and this,
because he could not comprehend eternal torments, which are so rightuous in
Gods justice. This so learned, and well disposed a man, who knew all the
Scripture, did he not find in a thousand places of these divine writts, that
there is nothing more inculcated, nor more solidly proved, then eternal fire,
then the immortal worm, then eternal death? So true it is that Faith and
experience are incompatible, that to understand we must believe, and to
believe, we must captiuate our understanding; and the soul that does imbarke
her self upon the Ocean of the mysteries of our belief taking humane reason
for her guide suffers a woeful shipwrake in the midst of the course of her
navigations. While the discovery of the Indians had not yet brought us the
news of a new world, situated under another Pole, and another Horison then
ours, the opinion of the Antipodes was laughed at; learned men improued it; and
S. Augustine himself held it ridiculous. But this concerns this world only,
not eternal salvation. The error is far more dangerous which stumbles at the
Eternity of pains, because it takes also away the Eternity of recompenses:
overthrows the truth of the souls immortality, brings a foot again the
fopperies of transanimation, or passage of souls out of one body into another,
and breaks down the fundations of all truth. Yet this great wit, and withal
of so good a life, suffered shipwrake upon this shelfe, blinded in his own
imaginations, as the ancient Philosopher, who lost his sight; by fixing it too
setledly upon the globe of the Sun, experiencing the Truth of this oracle,
who too curiously searches into the secreetes of the divine Majesty, shall be
oppressed which the greatness of his glory. It shall suffice us for the
present, to oppose the strong buckler of our belief against this error, a
buckler, not only of a double, but a centuple temper, and not pearceable by
the darts of humane reason, since the scripture (which we will show in its
place) does minace nothing more frequently, nor establish nothing more
strongly, then eternal punishments prepared for the Devil, his Angels
Apostates, and all such as by sin shall betake themselves to that reuoulted
crue's side. We will ponder the reason of this eternal curse, as the order of
this subject shall require.

Eternity cannot be defined.
XI.
NOw I set upon the hardest piece of my task, to wit the beginning; and who
knows not that a good beginning is half the deed doing? And who can be
ignorant, that to enter into a discourse, and put ones self upon it by a
reasonable conduct, an ouerture must be made unto it, by the definition of the
subject which a man is about to handle? And here it is, that even at the very
threshwood, my pen falls out of my hand, since the matter, whereof I am about to
represent a poor draught, is none of those that can be defined: for I pray
you, Athanasia, this word, Definition, does it not sound as it were some finite
thing? And what proportion can an infinite thing bear with a finite, or what
line can measure an infinite thing? Now Eternity being of this nature, who
sees not, that no definition can comprehend or compass that, which in it self
has no bound. To what end then should we offer to shut up wthin the terms of
a definition, that which never had beginning, nor shall have end? were it not to
essay to shut up the Ocean in a shell, according as an Angel in a child's
liknesse said to S. Augustine, while he proiected in his understanding, that
admirable work of the Trinity which he left us? And tell me, how can that
flow from a slender pen, or be expressed by a drope of ink, which cannot enter
into the imagination, nor the understanding of man, who being finite, is in no
sort able to contain an infinite thing, such as is Eternity? In vain
therefore have some great and curious wits strayned themselves in defining a
thing indefinite, and which is much better conceived by admiration, then
discourse.

That Eternity is incomprehensible.
XII.
FOr in your opinion, Athanasia, what is Eternity but God himself, who is not
only eternal, but Eternity it self, and wherein that which we call Eternity
does so subsiste, that without its being, which is eternal, Eternity should
not be at all. When therefore we name Eternity, let us say with the great
Stoicke speaking of the terms of Fortune, Providence, and destiny, that we
only change Gods name into another, and that it is the divinity which we name
by paraphrase. For since, according to the Diuine's Axiom, all that is in
God is God himself, because, he is all Essence without any accidents, all the
qualities which we apply unto him by way of Attributes, to speak of his
greatness, according to our weakness and manner, that is, in a stutting wise,
are no other thing then himself, though diversely considered by us, his unity
comprehending in it self by way of emine^cie all the multiplicitie of our
thoughts. So that when we name his Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, Power,
Immensitie, Eternity, and a thousand other magnificences we attribute unto
him, we consider this Sun in his beams, which are all begun and ended in
himself. It is he then that has not only immortality, as the scripture
faith, but even Eternity: and who being without beginning or end, (though the
beginning and end of all things) is by a necessary consequence Eternity it
self. Judge you now, Athanasia, if it would not be, not only a temeritie, but
even a manifest folly, to essay the defining of him, who is, as an aunciant
father said, incomprehensible to every thought, and ineffable to every created
tongue.

Eternity is ineffable.
XIII.
ANd how do you think, said the same father, that that should fall within the
compass of a style, or be expressed by words, which never entered the ear,
which was never discovered by the eye, nor was ever apprehended by any humane
conceit: and he speaks there of the felicities, which God has prepared in
his Eternity, for such as love him, and such as he has predestined to his
glory. What will then Eternity it self be, if its beams be so daseling, its
delights so ineffable? A small scantling of this Beatitude appearing in the
eyes of S. Peter upon Mount-Thabor, did blind, or ravish and transport him in
such sort that not knowing what he said, he demanded of his dear transfigured
master, to erect there three Tabernacles, as though he had would before his
sufferances, have established his repose in that place for ever. The prophet
having seen only the Almighty, in passing, as the divines speak, was so
estonished at it, that receiving from him Commission to denounce his pleasure
to his people, he cried out, Lord I am a child who am only able to cry, a, a,
a, I cannot speak: the least communication of the Almighty being ineffable.
And the great Apostle being rapt up into the third heaven, where he learnt
news of Eternity, confessed after he was returned out of his rapture, that
they were secrets that could not be related. And Moses having only seen God
by the shoulders, that is to say, in his works, as some interpreters
understand it, he is taken with such an admiration, that having received
commandment to denounce unto Pharao Heavens doom, he pretends for excuse, his
tongues disabilitie, which is an evident sign, that the Almighty, is
ineffable, as well in himself, as in his works. Whence the ancient Egiptians
in their simbolicall divinity, represented the Dietie in the shape of a
Crocodille, a beast which is said to have no tongue, to intimate, that it is
not possible to speak as one ought of a majesty so high, and elevated beyond
all understanding.

An imperfect description of Eternity.
XIV.
TRue it is notwithstanding (to the end we may give some ouerture to a thought
and a discourse in a subject, which of it self is incomprehensible and
ineffable) that considering Eternity as a certain thing abstracted from the
Divinity, in quality of a divine Attribute, we may in some sort, not indeed
define, yet describe it, and form some imperfect draught thereof, where we may,
by better reason, add that, which that ancient Painter was wont to put upon
his admirable Pourtraitures, Appelles made this, signifying thereby, that he had
not given the last touch to his work; or else, that his imagination past that
which his pincell had put down. Without saying then with Simonides, who was
asked touching the Dietie, that the more he considered it, the more he found to
be considered in it, being a botomelesse Abisse. And without respiting the
resolution of the point, for the space of a hundred years to come, a time
wherein we shall not be upon the face of the earth, following the Areopagians,
who remitted to a like term, the decision of an invincible difficulty. We
thinks we may say of Eternity, that it is no other thing, then a continuance
which having no beginning, shall also have no end. In these few words (in my
conceit) as in the hollow of one of those mirrors, which from their effect,
are termed burning glasses, the beams of this great Sun of Eternity are
received. Whose present being perpetuated, is of a more large extent then
either the time past or time to come, since they are bounded by time, but
Eternity is infinitely beyond any time imaginable. I am not ignorant, that
this shortning description brings down the mountain Athos, to be a moate in
the Sun; makes the Sun be seen in a Basin; and imitates the Geographers
who show the whole universe in the compass of a small Map. But even as the
same Geographers being come to the extreamities of any Land, made known unto
them by their Art, represent unto us the Sea's illimited vastness, giving us
thereby to understand, that they make no further discovery: so in this matter
of Eternity, all that we can do, is to make us loose our veiw in the
boundless sight, of a thing past, which never had beginning; and of a thing to
come, which shall never have end. Whence it comes to pass, that as there is no
pencell that can ever represent the Sun to the life, nor the aires
transpare^cie, nor yet the fires liveliness; so is there no plume of so high a
flight, as to arrive at the representation of Eternity. And that Ancient
Painter; who put such a rate on his own Pieces, as that he said of them, that
they were painted only for Eternity, would have had his hands full in
representing Eternity it self, for which he said he labored with such art,
and strife of mind.

What Time is.
XV.
But to come to that indirectly, which we cannot directly attain unto, me
thinks we shall bring some light into this obscurity, by comparing contraries
together; and by considering Time which we know, we may make our selves some
way to the knowledge of Eternity, at whose greatness we stand amaysed. So the
Apostle teaches us to search out the invisible things of God, by the footsteps
of such things as he has made visible unto us. But is it possible that Time,
which is so little and diminutiue a thing, should raise us to the knowledge of
Eternity which is incomprehensible and ineffable? The Geometritions, who take
the measure of all solid bodies from a point which is not, and which not being
found in nature, is only in the imagination, make a breach to this thought,
and make us hope the effect of the proposition of that incomparable Ancient
Mathematician, who demanded only a point out of the earth, wherein he might
place his engine, to shake the whole mass of the universe, which has no other
fundation, as the Prophet says, then its own weight and stabilitie. What is
Time then properly speaking, but an instant, as little perceptible, as the
mathematical point? It is a moment cutting of things past from things to come;
and which, more quick then quicksiluer, runs away being presst, and slides out
of his hand, that strives to hold it. In naming it, we loose it, so subtle and
glib is it by nature. It were to waygh the fire, and measure the wind,
according to the terms of the Prophet, to strive to stay this Protheus: In
an instant he vanishes: and while you think to show him with your finger, he
is gone. To count time past, with Time, were impertinent, since now it is not;
nor has that which is not, any qualities, says the Philosophers Maxim. And
yet should we less justly, attribute unto Time, the time to come, which as yet
having no being, can be no other wise instyled, then with the name of nothing.
What is Time then, but an instant, so closely inuironned, or rather, asseiged
with a not-beeing, that in thinking to hold, or show it, it is already slid
from its being in nature. Such as have endeavored to show its incomprehensible
litlenesse, give it a little more scope, imitating therein the Geometritions, who
draw their points into lines, their lines into superficies, and their
superficies into bodies, upon which they exercise the Rules of their Art. For
to make us understand, that Time is no other thing, then the measure of the
PRIMVM MOBILE, they were constrained to gather together as many instants, as
are contained in 24. hours, composing thereof a reasonable distance, whereupon
to enlarge their discourse. Wherein they have followed Democrites fantasy, who
composed the world of a collection of atoms, bringing to a gross body many
petty percells, which according to the signification of the word, have no body
at all, which are empty and almost chimericall imaginatio^s. As then
(following the Maxims of Philosophy) Arithmetique, being come to the number
of ten, which is a full and perfect number, is forced to begin again,
extending its multiplication to infinity; and as all that is written, is
framed out of 24. letters; even so, the course of the PRIMVM MOBILE, whose
violence draws about with it all the other Spheres, is ended in the distance
of 24. hours, though in proper speech Time be but an indivisible, and almost
imperceptible instant. Wence the length of ages, years, and mo^thes, is drawn
from the multiplication of days; as also the length of days from that of
hours; and hours by the asse^bling of many instants. Whereupon the Scripture
in the Acts, and in the first Epistle to the Thessalonensians, join together
those words, Times, and moments, to teach us that Time (a thing which should be
so precious unto us, and whereof alone, according to an Ancient, the avarice is
laudable) consists only of moments; moments so short and light, that the
Scripture in an other passage, represents them only, by the twinkling of an
eye. Go mortells and plot great matters; let your proiects, in your
imagination, reach to Eternity: you who have only the present time, that is,
a moment, in your power, and a moment which is lost in the very instant, in
which you think to graspe it, being a shadow which flies such as follow it.
Who would not stand amaysed at the blind madness of most men, who build their
hopes upon things so frail; and comforting themselves in the expectation of a
fortune, say as they believe, that Time works all; miserably for saking the
pretensions of the blessed Eternity, for flitting moments, which like to
lightning, meet with death in their birth. Unadvised Atalantases, who for
aples not of gold, but gilt only, stop the course of their best designs,
and loose the aples, or rather, the crowns of Eternity.

Eternity compared to Time.
XVI.
TO what end shall we now place thy great torch of Eternity, before the eyes
of those blind wretches, who are diued so deep into the darkness of Time,
that they are not able to sustain the shine of so glorious a light? Yet let us
not omit, Athanasia, for the consolation of the good, to strike sparks of fire
out of Time, which we have represented in so small a shape, and reduced to
simple moments, to the extent of that vast Eternity, whose immensitie does
swallow up all ages imaginable. I must confess there is always some
imperfection, in the comparison of things disproportionable. For to say it is
to place a fly by an Elephant; a moate by a mountain: to compare a drope of
water with the whole Ocean; and earth to Heaven, which in regard of the
Heavenly Spheeres, appears but as an imperceptible point; all this is to say
nothing; or if to say any thing, it is to make known the weakness of man's
wit, and imbecillitie of his imagination. Lets hoyste up the sails of our
thought, and say, that Eternity does as far out strippe years and ages, as
the great Sun the lesser stars, eclipsing all their light as soon as it
appears in the Horison. And if Antiquity represented Time in Saturn who
devoured his own children, for that it does incessantly nible away the
moments, hours, days, months, years, and ages: Eternity infinitely passing
Time does swallow it up as a point; and when Time shall cease to be, Eternity
shall thrust out its continuance into a NEVER, which shall never have end, as
it never had beginning. It is too sparingely spoken to call it an Abisse that
cannot be sou^ded: that it is an Ocean receiving all the waters of the world,
without being augmented. Nay rather let us apply unto it, that which the
Ancient Philosopher applied unto the Divinity, that Eternity is a circle,
whose center is extended every where, and whose circunference has no bounds.
O Eternity cries out a devout personage, who is able to conceive what thou
art? I propose unto my self a thousand years; I conceive a thousand thousand
years; I pass in imagination as many millions of ages, as are moments in
time, from the beginning of the world, and yet have I found nothing that comes
near to Eternity. o Eternity thou shall continue for ever and ever: what is
it to say for ever and ever? It is to say everlastingly. But what will
everlastingly say? it is a thing that passes the reach of all human
capacity. If we say with the Angel of the Schowle, that it is an immovable
durance whose continuation shall never fail, how shall we compare it with
Time, whose continuance is cut of by every moment, and which would cease to
be, if God by an only word should stop the motion of the Heavens. If we say
with the Apostle of France, that it is an immortal thing, incorruptible,
inuariable, having its being all at once: how can we compare it with Time
which is a variable, corruptible, changeable, mortal thing, and whose being
consists only of a succession of instants? a transitory being, which
subsists only by a flux of moments, which tend continually to ruin, and
change as many faces, as it conteynes instants, which made Job say, that the
life of man does never remain in the same state. For since it is but a
succession of days, who knows not, that though some days resemble others,
yet are they never the same? If we say with a Christian philosopher in his
Consolatio Philosophiae, that Eternity is an indivisible and accomplished
being, without end or limite, who sees not that it is the true conterpoise of
Time, whose imperfect being is bounded with every instant? If we say with
another Doctor, that it is a present without either praeter-perfect, or future
Time; and a spheere whose center is continually without any circuit at all, who
sees not that it is to drink up Time into a nothing, to place a thing so
little, beside so huge a thing? Yes verily, heaven and earth shall pass, and
shall be worn like a garment, but Eternity shall be still itself, and its
constant and perpetual youth shall never wax old.

An elevation of the mind to God, upon the comparison of time to Eternity.
XVII.
O Eternal God who art author of Time, yet make thine abode in Eternity,
and whose government, and Royalty does extend it self PLUS VLTRA: adorable
Dietie who art from Eternity to Eternity: that is to say; without beginning or
end, subsisting eternally by thy self; who art seated upon thine eternal
Throne: whose power is an eternal power; and whose Kingdom is the Kingdom of
all ages: bring to pass o great God by that mercy, which thou eternally
builsted in heaven, that the consideration of the immense and incomprehensible
greatness of eternity, may be so lively imprinted upon our heart, that the
affections which link them in so strong bands to tra^sitorie things, and to
the moments of things temporal, may be so weakened, or rather brought to
nothing, that nothing may stay us here below, or hinder our course toward the
goal of eternal felicity. Take us by the right hand, o Lord, conduct us to
thy glory, by the royal way of thy heavenly will and lead us in the eternal
way Thou o great Jesus, son of the eternal liueing God, who art, our way,
Truth, and life direct our steps in the way of true life. And which is this
true life, but life everlasting? which is nothing else but to see thee in the
bosom of the Father, who begets the great TODAY of Eternity. Raise up the
abbated currage of mortals, and readuance their drooping thoughts toward
their origin. Let them take so full a taste of the Manna of the blessed
Eternity, that things possessed in Time may become loathsome unto them. Let
them repute all time vain, in respect of Eternity. Grant, o Lord, that this
wholesome thought may be so deeply engraue^ in our memory, that it may serve as
a threade to conduct us in the Labirinth of the worlds malice; and that we may
pass through the use of temporal things with so well a directed conduct, that
we may not loose eternal.

Man's life compared to the worlds continuance.
XVIII.
ANd if all the continuance of Time be so little in respect of Eternity, as I
have declared unto you, what shall the course of man's life be, if we compare
it, I will not say to Eternity, (for the distance is too great) but only to
the continuance of the world? How many men (termed by the old Philosopher the
little worlds) has this world (which the same Philosopher termed the great
man) devoured? How many lives have and shall run out, since the beginning of
the world, to the consummation thereof? Truly it is not imaginable, though other
wise finite and limited by number and season. If you ask the wisest of men,
who was wise too by a heavenly wisdom, to what he does compare the shortness of
man's life, he will tell you that it resembles a shadow, which soudainly
vanishes; a courser which passes with a mimble speed; a vessel on the sea
under full sails in a favorable gale which swiftly glides ore the waves; The
flight of a bird, which with a strong and lively winge cuts the air; and an
arrow, which being shot from a strong and forcible arm, flies home to the
mark. If you move Job upon this point he will tell you, that the days of man
are very short upon the earth; that his life is a vapor, as soon cast down,
as drawn up: that it is a wind, whose measure is short, nor can it be
extended, a measure so small, says the Psalmist, that its substance is a very
nothing: and withal a measure which is in his hands, who keeps the key of
life and death: It is not in the hands of men, to the end that living in so
great an uncertainty, he may not rely upon the continuance of his days nor
trust to the common course of nature, an error too too ordinary. Measure me a
blast of wind, and weigh me a flame, said a Prophet, speaking of the lightness
and vanity of earthly things, the shape and desire of which pass like a
floode. But be it, that all these things had some weight, and soliditie, yet
since their use cannot exceed the course of this mortal life, one may
clearly discover, that they leave but upon a slender reed, and an earthly
fundation. For if our life, compared to the worlds continuance, be but a
moment; what a inconceaueable part of a nothing will it be, if we add, that the
worlds continuance, (what ever we feign to our selves of the length of it) is
but a moment in respect of Eternity? A thousand years before the face of the
Eternal God, says the Psalmist, is but as yesterday which is past. And all
the years of men, is but as the watch of a might which is reputed for nothing.
This causes Job to say, that all the glory of man, is as a dream that
vanishes, and cannot be recalled; and that it passes like unto a nightly
vision. Verily all these descriptions dictated by the Holy Ghost, are lively
pictures of the vanity, and Nothing of man's life, whose durance is so short,
that an only instant does often separate the Cradle and Grave. All that we see
is but a point, says the great Stoicke, yea less then a point, if any thing
less can be imagined. Shall we then gruge at the moments of tribulation which
do afflict us therein, which being well husbanded do work in us a crown of
eternal glory. No No, what sufferances soever do vex us in this dying life,
they enter into no comparison, with the glory which shall one day be revealed
unto us.

The force of the thought of Eternity.
XIX.
NO never, Athanasia, though our mind turn it self on every side and make
choice of subjects most pregnant to move it, and to give it the most forceable
impressions, to embrace good, or avoid evil, never shall it light upon any
thought so fruitful to produce this effect, as the thought of Eternity. O
mome^ts, you are but chafe, and dust before the face of this great wind. This
is the great vanne which can separate the corn from the chafe, and separate
precious from vile things. Eternity is that Moses his rod, able to devour
the serpents of our sins; and to draw water from rocks, that is, can beget
compunction in the most flintie heart. It is a violent blast, which drives us
forwards toward the Desert of penance; which urges us to return into the
Sheepe-fold of grace, if by error we have strayed from it, or by sin, like
lost sheep. It is the end of all ends; the end of all consommation, and the
extreamitie of extreamities, wither the wiseman does send us, if we desire to
abstain from sinning everlastingly. For if death; if judgment ensuing; if the
terrors of Hell, serve for a bitt to the strongest mouth, and for a restraynte
to the most desparate soul; what will it be if we add thereunto the importance
of an Eternity? If we consider the Blessed Eternity, it is a Ionathas his
honey: if the Accursed, it is a Tobie's gale, sovereign to cure the thickest
and deepest blindness. There is no Filme which falls not from the (...) washed
with this water. No Torrent of sin, which may not both be sustained and
repelled by this strong bank. It is a Sun which does break and disperse
the clouds of vice which strive to hide the light of grace. Lets approach then,
Athanasia, to this Torch, and our darkness shall be blown over. If we desire to
be borne again to Heaven, let us, imitating that only bird, consume our
selves in the beams of that great starr. And if the thought of the worlds last
day, Judge of all the other days, filled S. Hieromes heart with such dread,
that it made him loose both food and repose, his sleep being interrupted, by
the terrible found of the Archangells trumpet, which sounded incessantly in his
imagination: what weight shall that eternal doom have in our hearts, which
shall crown the just with roses that cannot fade; and shall inuolue the wicked
in quenchlesse flames, which being kindled with the blast of Gods wroth, shall
continue as long as the Deity it self. No, I do not believe, that all the
Antidotes which Spiritualists prescribe against the poison of sin; that all
their remedies put together in one mass, can have the like effect, in the
purging of a soul, that the importance of an Eternity well pondered, can
work therein. O Lord thou have given a sign to those, who have thy fear
imprinted upon their hearts, that they may avoid the arrows which thou
shuttest from the bow of thy wroth; and that, by flight, they may free
themselves from the eternal torments which do attend them: torments by which
such only are overtaken, as for want of foresight and consideration, dread
them not, as an ancient Father does teach us. O how happy is the soul, whose
eyes God daynes to open, over so perilous a precipice, that thereby she may
avoid it, and please our Lord in the Land of those that live in his grace. For
they that pass their days in this happy Abode, are not subject to this
second death, which has no resurrection (for out of Hell there is no
redemption, or escape) Their eyes owe no tributarie tears, since they are not
afflicted with the torment of malice, nor does their feet stumble in the way
of salvation, which is that of the blessed Eternity. Think of the last end,
says the wisest of men, and thou shall never offend. If then the thought o^
death, and of that which followe^ death, has so much force in a soul that is
occupied in it, as to divert it from all evil: what will it do I pray you, in
a well composed heart, which can iudiciously ponder the weight of things, when
it shall come to think, that temporal death is but an instant which separates
the soul from the body; and that the particular judgment which does
immediately follow this separation, is past in a moment: marry that the decree
of this judgment is of an eternal and uninterrupted continuance. Why, the
threate of a temporal death, and the loss of a flourishing estate, written
upon a wall by a celestial hand, was able to seize the soul of Baltazar with
so daunting a terror, that the scripture assures us, that all his bones were
thereby disioynted: so thoroughly did fear possess both body and soul! How
forceablely then shall the fear of an eternal death, work in a solid
judgment, and in a heart that thinks seriously of its salvation. Will it not
in this thought pronounce with the kingly Prophet: All my bones were troubled,
that is to say, all my powers were disordered: and again: All my bones shall
say unto thee, o eternal Lord, who is like unto thee?

That this life is only lent us to think upon Eternity.
XX.
O Momentes of this mortal life, how carefully ought you to be managed, since
by you, as by so many stepps, we mount to Eternity! I, for God has only
placed us in this region of death, to breath continually to that of the
liueing: nor are we in this Desert, for any other end, then to travel to the
Land of Promise. Which shall one day be distributed amongst us, according to
the line of distribution. The Angels at their first creation, were placed in a
state of grace, and full freedom; and had a time to resolve their choice of
glory or reprobation, by obedience, or reuoulting: and following their
election, that great division was made, which does eternally separate the
Blessed, who kept their principality; from the accursed, who fell from Heaven
into the Abisses below. Men, afterward created of so noble substances, to
repair the ruins of those that were fallen, have also the time of their life
to resolve and determine what shall become of them for all Eternity. For which
cause they were created straight and free; fire and water were put before them,
that they might make election of which they liked. And they apply according to
their own will, the use of their freedom, nor are they to impute it to others
then themselves, if by their own malice misfortune befall them. He that shall
sow benedictions shall reap benedictions; but he that shall commit wickedness
shall draw a curse upon his own head, and that an eternal one, according as
it is written: Go you accursed into eternal fire. For at last, in the periode
of our life, when as time shall be no more to us, certain it is that God will
examen our works, be they good or bad, and according to them, will reward each
one. Then every ones praise or blame, shall proceed from the mouth of God. Now
we are in the forked way of virtue or vice, which was shown to the young
Hercules, as an Ancient Author writes. It is in our power to take toward
the right or left hand; and to sow the seeds in this life, whose fruits we
shall gather in the next. Certes as the lines drawn from the Center of the
earth, might go to the circumfere^ce of the Heavens: so according to our
comportment in these short momentes which we are to live in earth, the
definitive Sentence of our eternal Abode, shall be given. It is our part
therefore, tymely to think of our affairs, and to foresee what shall become of
us: for the scripture does teach us, that we shall reap according as we have
sown. He that shall sow in spirit shall reap eternal life. The chaste
Susanna being pinched with bitter perplexities, while those two infamous
firebrands of dishonestie, threatened her the ruin of her reputation, unless
she condescended to their lewd desire, chowsed rather to fall innocent into the
hands of men, then stained into his, to whom nothing is hid, who tryes the
hearts and reins: and who can cast the body and soul into eternal torments.
Me thinks sure each considerate heart, will take her part; and will pourchace
at the price of transitory and momentarie pleasures, endless pains. For it is
a thing too horrible to fall into the hands of the liueing God; the God of
vengeance, terrible over all those of the earth. Contrariwise he will easily
and willingly embrace all kind of pains and sufferances, who shall weigh as he
ought, that is, in the waightes of the SANCTVARIE, these words of the sacred
ORACLE That we are to enter into the Kingdom which knows no end; to the
reside^ce of Glory, through many tribulations: since that our Savior Jesus
Christ, was as it were forced to suffer, before he could enter into his
eternal Felicity, which he had wholly obtained, and which, was necessarily due
unto him. The Parobolicall history of the wicked Rich-man, and the poor
Lazarus, is a rich Table, representing this truth unto our eyes set out in
lively colors. Every one knows the different success of the one and the
other; and what answer Father Abraham made to this miserable reprobate's
complaints. Call to mind, Son, that thou tookest thy pleasures during thy
life, and that Lazarus, suffered many afflictions. Now your estates are much
changed: for he is replenished with joy and delight; and thou oppressed with
desperate greeues, and with punishments which shall never end. O double
Eternity! thou art like to those figues which were presented unto the
Prophet, whereof some were strangly bitter, the others extremely sweet. The
Blessed Eternity is a LAND OF PROMISE and rest, whose fruits are of an
unmeasurable greatness, and incomparable sweetness. The accursed, is a foreign
Region, full of disorder; a daunting desert, far removed from the face of God:
where the fiery serpents do stinge without cure, and kill without all hope of
recovery. O ETERNITY! The more I consider thee, the less do I know thee,
and the deeper I endeavor to diue into thy bottom, more bottomless I find
thee! Thou art the floode of the Prophet, which cannot be past, nether at the
ford, nor otherwise. The Gyantes groan under thy waters, nor can any beast,
even though it were an Elepha^t, pass over thee by swiming, to use S.
Gregory's words. All that can be said of thee, is nothing in regard of that
which should be said. Though a man speak all he is able, yet can he not
sufficiently express thee, even to represent the least stroke of thine
infinity. Birds, although they cannot soar to the highest region of the
air, leave not for all that to fly: And what if we cannot comprehend
Eternity; yet ought we not cease to speak what we conceive of it, though we
cannot conceive, what we ought to speak thereof. A man may enjoy the light of
the Sun; walk in its resplendant rays; and now and then steal a look upon
it; though he be not able to have his sight still fixed upon its globe. We are
to do the like in this subject of Eternity: and be it, that our sight does
disperse and loose it self in the immensitie of its extent; yet are we from
time to time to consider it, since life is ^ent us for no other end, but to be
spent, for the most part in this attention. This is that which the Prophet
terms, courageously to attend God, and with patience to supporte this
attention. And the Apostle: To attend the blessed hope, of the coming of the
great God. I Lord, said the great S. Augustine, burn, cute, pinch, slice here
below, so that I may not perish eternally.

An enterie to the consideration of the accursed Eternity.
XXI.
But do you not think it high time, Athanasia, that we should draw nearer by
the consideration of both the Eternities, and that, for our spiritual profit
we should make a kind of particular examen, and as it were, an Anatomy. We
will begin at the accursed Eternity, that we may follow the method which the
Spiritualistes observe in the reformation of the soul, beginning with fear,
according to that of the wise man; the fear of our Lord is the beginning of
true wisdom. And is it not true wisdom to think seriously and tymely of
eternal salvation, and to direct our stepps toward the paths of this peace,
which passes all understanding, nor shall at any time be troubled with the
noise of wars, but shall enjoy with God, the abundance of a plentiful repose.
I have done Judgment and Justice, that is, I have behaved my self justly in
all mine actions, says the Royal Prophet. Will you have the reason of this
uprightness? because I have dreaded the severity of the eternal Judge. And
another Prophet brings in Sinners converted to the father of mercyes, speaking
in this wise. O Lord through thy fear we have conceived good pourposes, and by
it, we have at length produced and brought forth the spirit of salvation. The
needle, following the Contemplatiues worn similitude, goes always through
before the silk; and sharp and pearceing FEAR (according to that word of
David: Lord pearce my body and soul with the FEAR of thy judgments) is still
the forerunner of joy, joy the inseparable fruit of the tree of true Charity.
I see then, that there I must begin: but a secret horror does fasten upon
mine imagination, when I represent unto my self so mournful and daunting a
matter. It is a far other thing the^ that place of horror, and vaste solitude,
whereof the Prophet speaks: for it is the very herbour of eternal horror,
eternal reproach. It is the accursed den, where DEATH does eternally
inhabit. What Memori^ has not this remembrance in abomination? What
Understanding does not fly a consideration so odious. What Will has not an
auersion from a subject so distastefull? What Fantasy does not turn it self
from so sad an object? What Pen in lieu o^ writing would not fly away from a
matter so much to be fled? What Ink black enough to equalize the blacknes of
those coals of desolation? This notwithstanding, my Athanasia, the most holy
and most wise, do admonish and council us to think frequently of it, and to
descend into Hell liueing, that we may not descend thither dying, says a
Father of the Church subtly and truly. True it is, this medicine is bitter,
and its bitterness may cause a kind of drunkenness, and distraction of mind,
marry it is a wholesome distraction, and its conuulsions gives health and
holiness to the soul it does seize upon. It is that volume of the Prophete's,
bitter in the mouth, but restorature in the heart. What abundance of people
fall into this gulf, for want of forefeeing it. Let us cast our selves into it
by foresight, Athanasia, but as Diverse into the sea, to bring up the pearls of
good and holy resolutions.

The horror of this subject.
XXII.
IT is nevertheless very hard, that I may not say impossible, to be hold this
subject in the face without astonishment. For if the very words, eternal
Reprobation and Damnation, make the most constant and resolute courage quake;
what will the consideration of their effect do? A woman became once a Statua
of salt upon the aspect of an abominable town burnt with heavenly fire, the
inahbitants whereof descended into Hell alive. I would to God that the sight of
the accursed Eternity would make us as immovable as Statua's to bad actions,
and would Season us with the salt of true wisdom. Moses had an horror and an
apprehension of his rodd, while departing out of his hand, he saw it
tra^sformed into a serpent, and although God commanded him boldly to take hold
of this beast by the tail, yet durst he not do it without trembling. O
Athanasia, what heart is so resolute, as to behold the rodd of God, rodd of
direction in his Kingdom, changed into a rodd of iron, driving away the
reprobate, as earthen potts, and in a rodd of fury, and not quake with a just
fear, since that even the heavenly. Intelligences, the celestial Virtues
assured of their salvation, shall be moved with fear, when the great Judge
shall come at the consommation of the world, to hold his last Assizes. That
which the Poets fabulously relate of their Medusa, and of the Sunn's
retrogradation least it might give light to the horrid and unnatural banquet
of Thiestes, are but weak strokes of the sacred horror, which the
consideration of the cursed Eternity does imprint, upon a soul. The reprobate
to prevent the definitive and irreuocable sentence of their eternal
condemnation, shall one day inuoke the mountaignes to fall upon them: and to
bury them in an eternal oblivion. And if the heat of the Babilonian furnace
did affright all the beholders with the fiery flashes which it vomited out:
what must the aspect of that eternal furnace (made hot with the wroth of God,
and maintained in a continual heat with a blast of brimstone), needs work
in a heart, that has its sight sharpened by Faith?

It is an universality of evils.
XXIII.
I Will discover unto thee all sorts of good, says God to his favorite
Moses, in manifesting my self unto thee. Yes, for in the vision of God all
felicity is comprised, as also all sorts of evil in the privation of this
object of the sovereign Beatitude. For if the supreme Felicity, according to
all the Divines, be a perfect collection of all good; does not the rule of
Contraries oblige us to believe, that the top of the sovereign infelicitie
is a collection of all evil. Go to then, my Athanasia, let us represent unto
our minds all the calamities and torments imaginable and vnimaginable, and let
us load the shouldiers of one only with this heavy mass; and let us
affirm, that such is the least part of the sufferances of the damned. In this
world calamities are always in a manner particular, so that it is an
extraordinary thing, to see the same party assaulted with two or three at the
same time: and when the defease is violent, it dures not; for that either the
desease cease, or the patient oppressed with it, cease to be. In Hell it is
not so; for all the torments which we can comprehend, yea even those which are
incomprehensible, meet in the same insta^^ upon the damned's head, upon whom
scourges are reunited, and ruine^ multiplied; even as the Eagles, to make use
of the Scriptures comparison, and haulkes do in troops seize upon carrion. O
God, said the good Job, that man of greeues, and oppressed with infirmities and
miseries, thou have rolled upon me all the billows of thy wroth. And David in
a like air, I am come to the broad sea, and the tempest has swallowed me up:
how much better do these words suite with the reprobate, who perceive the
heavy hand of the Divine justice upon them, without all hope of solace? To
them it belongs to read in the book of Lamentations, maledictions, and
misfortunes, which the Prophet did sometimes write by Gods command to reclaim
Israel from its vice and destruction: to them, I say, who are fallen to the
bottom of all miseries. The great Angel of the Schowle, S. THOMAS, giving a
reason why all calamities conceauable do fall upon the damned, says after S.
BASILE, that in the end of the word, when fire shall generally purge it, there
shall be a separation made of all pure and impure things in the elements, and
as that which is pure shall be reserved for the pleasure and content of the
Elect; so that which is impure shall be cast into the Sink or center of the
earth, where the common opinion places Hell, to be a continual torment to the
damned, being most just, that as by their sin they abused all creatures, so
they all should conspire to torment them, as it is written in the book of
wisdom. That all the world shall fight for the service and glory of the
justice of God, against the mad men. Propose unto your self then, o Athanasia,
a person reduced to that point of misery, that at one instant he should be
afflicted with all sorts of pains, not only in the principal members, but
even in the least parts of his body, so far forth, that he should resent
particular stingings through every pore. Speak the truth, to behold the most
vile and wretched creature on the earth in this dismale estate, would it not
move horror in your heart? And yet, Faith does assure us, that the torments of
the damned are far other, and that all this collection of evils, is but a poor
part of their cup. And Verily, most reasonable it is, that such as employed all
the powers of their body and soul to offend the sovereign and eternal
Goodness, should in every of them be eternally punished by the Sovereign
Justice. The numberless number of those pains are expressed in diverse
passages of holy Scripture, where it speaks, of Fires, Ice, Darkness, Blindness,
Gnashings of teeth, Tears, Hungar, Thirst, Deseases, Swords, Howlings, Gale,
Absinth, Prisons, Worms, Serpents, Whirlewinds, Tempests, Fournaces,
Thunders, Wheels, and a number of other scourges, whereof we find every lease
full.

The pains of sense, and first of the sight and hearing.
XXIV.
ANd whereas general discourses seem not to be so efficacious as particular
ones, let us descend, Athanasia, from the generality of those eternal pains,
to the particular consideration thereof. The Contemplatiues divide them into
penas sensus, and penas damni, whence comes the word damnation, and it is
incomparably greater then the former, though it far less strike upon the
imagination of vulgar minds. The Sight, amongst the exterior senses holds
the first place, and the privation thereof, is numbered amongst the greatest
miseries of this life, by the just TOBIE a worthy witness of so troublesome a
discommoditie. Now Faith does teach us, that the damned shall be in thicker
obscurities then those of Egypt, and that the tempest of darkness shall possess
them for ever. And in the Holy Scripture Hell is marked out in these words,
exterior darkness. For an Eternity, says the Prophet, light shall not be
discovered therein; for although God be there, as it were in every place; and
that darkness cannot obscure his natural light, yet his will is, that in this
dry Lake, that is, void of all consolation, the darkness cover the face of the
Abisse; and that the eyes of the damned, though otherwise capable of sight, see
nothing but that which may trouble and torment them. The fire of the divine
angar being once fallen down upon them, they shall never more discover the
Sun, in punishment of the abuse of this noble sense in time past, and that in
lieu of contemplating the Heaven, they have made their looks dwell upon the
earth and creatures. And although light be as inseparable a quality of fire as
heat; yet as of old when the three children were thrown into the fournace,
the divine power leaving the light, did suspend the heat of the flame that it
should not attempt upon those innocents: so in Hell, he will permit the heates
actiuitie upon the reprobate, and yet will deprive the fire of light, to leave
them in obscurity amongst the dead of ages, buried in an eternal oblivion,
and far removed from the light of his face. So shall our Lord divide the flame
from the fire, says the Psalmist, that is according to some interpreters, he
shall separate the light from the heat. And even as during the palpable
darkness, which God did of old spread over Egypt, while the Israelites enjoyed a
delightful light, the Idolaters were either blind, or afflicted with frighting
visions: so in Hell, amidst the pitchie blacknes of that region of the shadow
of death, if at any time the damned enjoy some obscure glimses, seeing as
though they saw not, it shall be only to epsy the hideous shapes of amaysing
fantomes, and horrible visions of Devils, whose aspect shall be more
insupportable unto them, then the rest of their tortures. So that, if for the
thicknes of this smoke, and the blackness of these obscurities, the privation
of the use of this sense be an irksome torment unto them: the short use, which
at times they shall have of it, will only serve to add to their torment,
always unfortunate both blind and seeing. I will omit the particular pains of
this delicate part, which, as the Physicians observe, in its dainty litlenesse
is obnoxious to so many different deseases, which shall be yet diuersified both
in quality and quantity, according as the reprobate shall have abused that
noble Sense, which had been in Heaven one of the principal organes by which
the joy of our Lord had entered into their hearts. O God with what frightes
shall their souls be tortured by the sense of hearing, a sense, by so much
more lively and capable of pains, as it has more commerce with the mind. Ah!
what a mad music will there be heard, of howlings, scrikes, gnashings of
teeth, and groans of desperation! If the thu^der clapp and trumpets sound,
which did resound upon the mountain where God delivered his law to MOSES put
all Israel in such an ALARVM, and struke the hearts of the people with such
astonishment, that they said unto their law giver, Let not our Lord speak unto
us least we should die. What a death shall it be in death it self, to hear
the voice of many waters, or rather the ouerflowing torrents of so many
maledictions and horrible blasphemies, which rage and despair shall draw from
their execrable mouths full of the stinch of a hellish brimstone. o how
iarring the discord, and how detestable the roarings of those victimes of the
eternal fury! The ears of those eloquent Orators, and pleasing Poets, who
had taken so great complacence in the grateful fall of their measured
periodes, and in the sweet cade^ce of their rymes, shall find themselves at
that time in a wonderful disorder. The ears of those Princes which admitted
only silken words, and the oil of sinners, that is, flattery; who took
content to be praised in the desires of their heart, and blessed in their
iniquities; who found no better music then that which their own praises made,
as ALEXANDER said, who was as great in vanity as valor, will then be struke
with terrible accents. The ears of those Adonises (this word signifies Song)
those Ninnions of the Goddess Venus whose baits are dishonest songs. Those
of these effeminate Musicia^s, and dainty Dames who must be lulled a sleep by
singing new aires, more pernicious then those of the Poets Syrenes, shall then
have their ears filled with dreadful plaintes, resembling the voice of the
Storke or Dragon, to whom a Prophet compares his own, while he lamented the
incurable wounds of the people of Israel. But the damned shall be principally
frighted, and shall quake to hear the thunder clape of the heavenly wroth,
which shall continually resound in their ears. Whereas the just, says the
royal Prophet, shall be in the eternal memory of God, and shall not fear
the dreadful crake of his wroth.

The pains of other two senses, the Smelling and tasteing.
XXV.
ANd if Hell be the world's sink, and the Receptackle of all the filth of this
great Frame, and with all a deep du^geon, where the air has hardly any
access; how great must the stinch and infection needs be, of so many
corruptions heaped one upon another, and how insufferable the smell of that
infernal brimstone, mixed with so many corrupted matters? When we read the
sufferances of certain Martires, who were afflicted with smells and vermin in
dark prisons, we esteem those lent martirdomes as painful as the violent.
Nay some natures there be that can so little support evil smells, that to enter
into a Hospital makes them swoone: And yet what is all this in comparison of
the infamous exhalation of this gulf of horror of which we speak? Alas,
Athanasia, LAZARUS his sisters though very affectionate to their brother,
could not endure that JESUS CHRIST should cause his grave to be opened, by
reason of the stinch, which they apprehended would issue out of it, albeit he
were but dead for the space of four days. O infernal Cave without all vent
or breathing hole; receptacle of filth and dunge; eternal grave of such as die
continually and yet cannot die! with what abominable filth art thou not filled?
you dainty offenders who live only amidst parfumes and Roses, who are daily
laden with all the Parfumers drouges, then it is, that in steed of sweet
odours you shall rott in execrable smells, for punishment of that, that by your
evil exemple, you were in your life time an odor of death to death, and not,
an odor of life to life, and a good odor in JESUS CHRIST as pious people are.
Then shall be said of you, that which a Prophet pronounced of Israel in
Captivity; those that were clad in purple, and imbaulmed with parfumes, have
embraced dunghills. With what afflictions shall not their taste be tormented.
For besides the gale of dragons, whereof the scripture says they shall drink:
and the bread of grief, which shall be their common food, a continual hungar
and thirst shall terribly tyrannise over them. They shall endure the hungar of
mad-dogges, says the Psalmist: And as touching the thirst which the burning
heat of the reuengefull flame shall cause in them, the story of the wicked
Richman does furnish us with an authentical proof. Just judgment of God upon
those who in their life time cramd themselves with the worlds fayding
delights, crowning themselves with roses, and spoiling all the flowers of the
meades of pleasures! All the most horrible famine that Scripture and histories
propose unto us, are but weak pictures to that which the damned shall suffer
in this unfortunate Residence of eternal miseries.

The pain of the sense of touching.
XXVI.
THe sense of touching, the grossest of all the rest, yet the furthest
extended, affording more hold to misery, in my opinion, shall be more
afflicted then the rest, and the subject upon which the most cruel punishments
shall be exercised. Yes, Athanasia, for all the torments which the Scripture
does propose unto us, as prepared for those which by the divine Justice shall
be cast into the dark Dungeon of that eternal Jail, seem to fall upon this
only sense. They shall pass says JOB, from snowie waters, that is, from the
extremity of cold, to intolerable heates. Whole floodes of fire and brimstone
shall shewre down upon those unfortunate wretches, and again, a part of their
chalice shall be fire, hale, snow, ice, and the boisterous blast of tempests.
You see that all this belongs to the sense of touching. And indeed this
eternal fire, whither the reprobate shall be condemned by the last sentence;
and this Pond of fire and brimstone, whither they shall be cast headlo^g, shall
work principally upon this Sense. The hatchet is already put to the root of
the tree, said the forerunner of Messiah; and that which shall yeald no fruit
shall be cut down and cast into the fire. He has already taken the vanne
into his hand, put into it the corn and chafe, being resolved to separate
them, and reserueing the one for his Granarie, to cast the other into a fire
which shall never be quenched. And if amongst the torments which human
Justice has invented for the punishment of crimes, there is none held more
rigorous then that of fire, by reason of the great actiuitie of this element:
what shall the heat of that fire be, which shall be the executioner of the
Justice of the God of vengeance, whose Zeal shall be inflamed against the
wicked, and shall kindle the fire which shall eternally burn in the
extremities of Hell, as MOSES does express it. The Contemplatiues strive to
persuade us, that the material fire which we experience here below, is but as
a painted fire, in respect of that, whose flame does cause a horrible
combustion, says EZECHIEL, which shall never be extinguished. The Reprobate,
says S. JOHN, shall drink the wine of Gods wroth, and shall be tormented with
fire and brimstone, and the smoke of his torment shall assend for ever and
ever, that is, shall never end. And here it is, o my dearest soul, to purge
thee from the rouste of thine iniquities, and to make thee absolutely and for
ever renounce sin, an accursed cause of so horrible an effect, that I must
brand thee with a wholesome mark, and make the descend in thought, into those
disasterous flames, asking thee with the Prophet ISAYE, whether thou art able
to live in this deuoureing fire, and whether thou will make choice of thy
habitation in eternal flames. I must urge thee upon this point, o my soul!
and without using distinctions or euasions, without all exceptions, thou must
answer my demand. This fire is prepared for the Devil and his reuoulted
Angels, says the holy Euangilist, consider, whether thou will enter into this
accursed crew, and take part of the dreggs of their chalice. There is noe
mean, either must sin be forsaken, or thou thy self be given up a prey to
this eternal torment. It is long since this sentence was pronounced, which
teaches us, that we are either to do penna^ce in this life, or eternally to
burn in the next. To avoid these straytes and slipe away to the right or left
hand, is impossible; Heaven and earth shall pass, but the words of truth shall
never pass. If thou be not altogether blind, and if the light of reason be yet
with thee, I doubt not but thou will make a happy choice, and to escape so
dangerous a gulf, thou will cast thy self into the arms of grace, and Divine
mercy, which admites only the penitent, and repentant prodigalls: go then, my
dear soul, upon this thy holy resolution, and beg of the Divine clemency,
that he would finishe his work in thee, and that he would bestow grace upon
thee, to accomplish that, which it has made thee will, and begin. For unless
God build, in vain does a man go about to build; and all that is not
established upon the fundation of his assistance, cannot choose but be ruinous.

A since to God.
XXVII.
O Great God who art a consuming fire, whose words are fire and as a hammer
brusing the hardest stones. Who appears in the burning bush, when thou will
give a law of terror and dread unto the world; and sends that of love in
fiery tongues, whose Zeal is as burning as fire, and whose lamps are fire and
flames, whose jealousy is strong as death, and hard as Hell. Who makes the
fire of thy Divine Justice issue from amongst the thorns, to destroy the
tallest Cedars of Libanus, who kindlest the reprobate as coals with the fire
which proceeds from thine irritated face. Who continues the furnace where they
are plunged, in its wounted heat, by the torrent of burning brimstone which
flows from the face of thy just indignation. O God of revenge, let this
thought make so lively an impression in our ^magination, that we may be thereby
roused out of the lethargy of pleasures, concupiscence, and wordly ambition
which keep us asleep. Let the fire, which walks before thee as executioner
of thy terrible Justice, and which does consume thine enemies, to wit the
reprobate, never depart from our memory; may it be unto us a torch, and pillar
of light, in the darkness of the world and our errors; a Lamp to our feet,
and a light to our ways whereby we may discover the gulf which will swallow us
up, unless we prohibit the feet of our affections, to follow wicked ways,
and command them to walk in the ways of thy law. Thou o Lord, who did
deliver the three children out of the Babilonian furnace (a figure of that
wherein the reprobate burn for ever) preserve us from those abominable flames,
where thou art continually blasphemed; and exempting us from the sharp and
burning ones of thy wroth, place us in the light and bright ones of thy love,
where like Pyralides, and sacred Salemanders, we shall live happy, without
pain, or consummation, singing honor praise, and benediction unto thee for
the Canticle of our deliverance.

Of interior pains.
XXVIII.
LEt us now come, Athanasia; to the consideration of interior pains. And let
us judge of the torments of the soul, as well by the advantages which it has
over the body, as by the large share it has in the malice of sin, which is
consummated in the will. If a Stoicall philosopher had light enough to
discern, that every disordered mind is its own Torme^ter: what a torture
shall the reprobate find in their own hearts, in this accursed place of
disorder, which is replenished with the horror of an eternal confusion? There
their understanding shall be darkened with clouds: because they shall be
overtaken with a night of obscurity, and be covered with the thick shades of
death. I will omit the subtle schowle questions, whether they shall be
entangled in errors and ignorances, whereof those accursed inahbitants of that
black prison seem to complain in the book of wisdom, when they say, that
the Sun of understanding does not enlighten them. Upon this subject I will
only stike to that vndoubled truth, which teaches us, that they are fallen
for ever into a reprobate sense, which causes their will (still following that
which the understanding proposes unto it) being bent to vice like a crooked
bow, as the Psalmist terms it, to hate God with an implacable and extreme
hatred. But if some subtle disputant go about to teach us, that since the
will cannot hate Good which is its proper object, it is impossible that it
should conceive a true hatred against God, who is the sovereign good: we will
answer him with the Angelical S. THOMAS, that the damned do not hate God in
himself, because they know him not such as he is, (as do the Blessed who by
reason of that knowledge cannot leave to love him) but only in his works: for
the understanding of the damned conceauing God as Author of the torments they
endure, causes their will to be incensed against him with a mortal and raging
hatred: And whereas, nor God, nor the pain, which they suffer can cease to be,
their courrage cease not, and their will is continually tortured with this
insufferable auersion. Their memory also shall have its peculiar torment: for
if the blessed in Heaven rejoice in the labors and reproaches, which they
endured for the love of God, and that through the fire and water of
tribulations they are entered into rest: the memory of pleasures past shall be
an extreme torment to the reprobate, when they call to mind, that for those
transitory moments they are fallen into pinching and endless pains. They
shall roar out with ESAV to have sold their heavenly inheritance for a mease
of potage. For comparing in their mind pleasures past with those that are
eternal, and apprehending the approach of torments whose cruel panges they
feel, will not this memory, think you, draw upon them an insupportable
affliction? With what Phantomes and monsterous imaginations shall their
fantisie be tortured? Frame a judgment of it, by that which happens to such as
in this life, finding themselves guilty of greeuious crimes, fear to fall
into temporal Justice. They may indeed sometimes be in a secure place, but
never in security. They may be hid from the eyes of men, and be placed out of
their reach; but never shall they be able to hide themselves from themselves,
or escape the assault of their own conscience. While they wake they are vexed
with fears and suspicions: their sleep is interrupted with wicked dreams,
dread does still haunt them: at each ones approach they quake with fear, and
the Furies having seized upon them, grant them nether Peace nor Truce: their
dissipated thoughts put their hearts upon the Rack. Now if the apprehension of
humane Justice, which has power only over the body, give so daunting
Alarumes to the imagination; what will the sense of the darts of the Divine
Justice do, which are so many vessels of death and burning arrows shot at
the damned soul? But who can express the strange Chaos, and horrible
confusion which shall inhabit the inferior appetite of the lost crew? For if
all the disorder of man's life spring from his passions, which as blustering
blastes are shut up in the two caves Concupiscible, and irascible: what
disorder, judge you, must those wretched souls needs feel in that part, what
contradictions in themselves, what conuulsions, what rage, what fury? Alas
that noble passion, LOVE, Queen of all the rest, the Sun and salt of life,
that passion which might have made them happy for ever, if they had turned it
toward God, that soueraignely amiable object, being as it were razed out of
them, the perpetual auersion they have to love, shall afflict them as the
panges of a woman in childbirth, who cannot yet be delivered. S. CATHERINE OF
SIENNA being upon a day present while a possessed person was exorcised, the
Devil being commanded to declare his name, he answered with a hideous how
leing; I am the accursed DEPRIVED-OF-LOVE. At which the Saint was so moved,
that she thought she should have fallen down in a Trance. Touching the
passion of hatred, it shall be outrageous in the damned, whence shall proceed
their continual blasphemies against God, and the perpetual maledictions and
imprecations which they shall make against the creatures. And if they have any
Desires, they shall be execrable ones, to see all the world partakers of their
pains: not that they are at all solaced thereby, but only to give way to the
incredible malice, of which they are full. Their auersion from all good shall
be as much tormenting, as in it self it is execrable. Of Joy, there must no
mention be made in that place of dolor: But co^trarwise of an incredible
Sadness, which shall oppress them without all consolation. The heat of Anger
shall redouble the heat of their flammes. Hope banished from their hearts,
shall leave the place void to Despair, which shall be one of their greatest
and fiercest Tormentors. And beit that an impudent and shameless audacitie
shall open their blaspheming and stinking mouth against Heaven, yet shall an
eternal horror make them quake, though indeed nothing can befall them, worse
then that which they already endure. Thus shall they be tossed with the blast
of those tempestuous winds, being burde^some and insupportable to them selves.
And though their body be within Hells bosom, yet shall they bear about with
them another Hell in their own bosoms. They shall vomit out venomous words
against themselves being weather-beaten by their passions, as with contrary
winds upon the sea of so many calamities. They shall be devoured with the
sharpest gnawing of the bloody birds of their inordinate affections. They
shall be given up in prey to their own rage, as the Poets Acteon to his own
hounds.

The Prison of Hell.
XXIX.
ANd if liberty be reputed so great a good, that all the goods of life, yea
life it self, without it, are esteemed as nothing, whence it is, that amongst
the joys of the blessed, the liberty of the children of God is placed. What
conceit are we to make, my Athanasia, of the eternal captivity of the
damned, in a prison so horrible as that of Hell? O Lord how true it is, that he
that sins, adiudgeth himself to a perpetual slavery: but a slavery far
other then that which Israel suffered in Egypt, where the Devils are far more
cruel then Pharaos officers, who put the Hebrews to dig and delue the
earth. A prison, says S. CIRILLE, all on a fire, and where the darkness shall
never be enlightened with any ray of light; where pestilent and gnawing worms
live in spite of death. Who would not fear, says S. BERNARD, this worm that
cannot die, this place full of fire, this smoke, this stinking brimstone,
those blasts of tempests, those thick and black fogges of exterior
darkness? For what light, I pray you, can penetrate into the bowels of the
earth, whither every living creature descended, of those that reuoulted from
MOSES, as the Psalmist teaches us, and as we gather out of the book of
Numbers. For to doubt whether Hell be in the Center of the earth, a place
furthest remote from the glory of the blessed, seems to me a thing
impossible, after one have well waighed the places of Scripture, and of
Fathers, pointing out this truth. ISAY, speaking of the descent of Messiah into
Hell, Hell which is below the earth, says he, was troubled in thy arrival.
And the same Messiah is made speak in this sort by Ecclesiasticus: I will
penetrate the inferior parts of the earth, and I will visit all those that
sleep therein. And the very Devils in S. LVKE besought our Savior, that
casting them out of the bodies which they possessed, he would not send them
into the Abisse. S. CIRILLVS ALEXANDRINVS speaking of Hell, terms it a black
Cave under ground, replenisht with darkness, smoke, and all miseries, where
the damned souls are as in a dungeon. TERTVLIAN calls it a Treasure of fire
shut up under the earth. And S. AUGUSTINE teaches in diverse passages, that
Hell is under the earth; as also S. GREGORY the Great. There is the lake, or
rather the cisterne without water of consolation, whither those unfortunate
souls are banished. A prison far other then that which was so irksome to
JOSEPH, since that those accursed souls are there bound hand and foot,
afflicted with ineffable torments. And which is yet worse, without all hope of
delivery. To which if we add the compaignie of Devils, whose accomplices they
made themselves, by reuoulting, with them, from their Creator, I do not
think, that any thing more horrible can be conceived. Alas the stateliest
house in the world, being designed to any one for his prison, appears
forthwith to him graceless and disagreable, so powrefully does love of
liberty possess men's mynds! what will that house be where all imaginable and
vnimaginable evils make their general Assembly, following the conceit of the
great Roman Muse?

Of the pain of Damni.
XXX.
But amongst all those evils, Divinity teaches us, that none is comparable to
that which is called the pain of damni, whence damnation, and the damned take
their names. No, not all the exterior ones, nor yet all the interior ones,
which breefly we have represented, can any way enter into comparison with this,
which alone, does further surpass them all in greatness, the^ the highest
celestial spheere, does surmount this earthly globe. Which I will endeavor,
to make you understand, Athanasia, by this consideration. In sin there are
two principale malices, the first, is the auersion from the Creator; the
other, is the conversion to the Creature: which God declares by the mouth of
his Prophet in these words: my people at once committ two evils, they forsake
me, who an the fountain of liue-water, and they make unto them selves broken
Cisternes which can hold no water. To this second malice, belongs that pain of
Sense, whose miseries we expressed in the precedant stroke: but to the
abandonning of the Creator, appertains the pain of damni, which consists in
the eternal privation of the sight of God, wherein is placed the highest point
of the immortal beatitude. Now, I apprehend, says the Father with the golden
mouth, that part of glory incomparably more great then all the other torments.
And the same adds, that ten thousand torments like to those of the damned
are nothing being compared to this privation. Wherein this Doctor is followed of
all the rest, and the school does teach it as a constant truth, which cannot
be called in doubt, without shaking the grounds, and violating the principles
of Christianity. S. THOMAS strikes further into it: for though the pain of
damni be equal in all the damned, and that of sense unequal, according to
that which is written, that the torments are proportioned to the unlawful
delights: and although as well those of sense, as of damni, be equal in
respect of the Eternity of their durance; yet does he hold, that the pain of
sense, and that of damni, do differ almost as much as a finite and infinite
thing: for certain it is, that touching the senses, the punishment of the
reprobate comes far short of their demerits, the Divine goodness not being
able to conteyne his mercy, even in the effects of his greatest wroth: but as
for the loss of an infinite good, where in the pain of damni does consiste,
who sees not, that this punishment is in some sort infinite? And if insensible
things find no rest till they be reunited unto their Center, since they were
not separated from it but by violence; how intolerable must the state needs be
which does separate a soul for ever from its true principle, which is God,
without all hope of return. O rebellious Absalomes! for an Eternity you shall
be banished from the Court of this heavenly Father, who does no longer
accnowledge you for his children! Prodigalls that you are, who by your reuoults
and deboistnesse have dissipated the substa^ces of this eternal Fathers grace:
then shall there be no more time of repentance left for you: and in this
perpetual separation from his face, you shall remain for an Eternity in that
foreign land covered with the shadow of death, because you did wilfully
separate your selves from the Author of life. God will reject you eternally,
eternally shall you be deprived of the light of his countenance and of the
light of that glory, which is the part and portion of the Blessed. For ever
shall you lament the loss of this priselesse treasure; as Michol spent tears,
and could not be comforted for the loss of her Gods. You shall sob, but in
vain, in vain shall you moan the loss of the God of Gods, whose dear
presence had as thoroughly replenished you with happiness, as his absence does
oppress you with disaster.

The continual grief.
XXXI.
THe geife of this so irreparable a loss shall be so bitter in those wretches,
that we may count it, Athanasia, for one of their greatest torments. For when
they begin once to consider what they are, and what they might have been; and
for what dolours they have changed the inconceaueable felicities, which were
prepared for them in the sight of God; the fruitless repentance of their
folly, will so vex them, that thence shall spring those tears, those
gnashings of teeth, and those groanings, which the scriptures do allote the^.
Thence that immortal worm, which incessantly shall gnaw them, mentioned by
ISAY, a worm which S. THOMAS, and all the Doctors hold to be spiritual, not
corporal, and that it consists only in a perpetual repentance, and remorse
of conscience, which shall sting them, no otherwise then worms are wont to
gnaw the bodies in which they are bred and fedd. For this grief rising from
the remembrance of their sin which is the cause of all their evils, and of so
deplorable a privation of the sight of God, shall live continually in their
memory, and shall cause a sharper remorse in them then all their other
tortures. When they shall call to mind so many secreete inspirations, so many
exterior exhortations, so many interior motions, which they had felt, to
reclayme them from their wicked ways; when they shall reflect upon time
misspent and lost, which they might have made use of for their conversion, and
for the redeeming of their unfortunately spent days. When they shall represent
unto their thoughts, how often they were warned to forsake the ways of
sinners, and not to sit in the chair of pestilence, to which they turned a
deaf ear and would not understand welldoing. And when they shall come to
contemplate the unfortunate estate, to which the contempt of so many
remonstrances shall have reduced them, together with their negligence in not
making use of occasions past, which will never more present themselves unto
them: o God! with how fruitless an abomination of their crimes, and with how
furious and mad an indignation shall they be transported? But lets rather hear
them in their own words, expresst by the holy Ghost in the book of wisdom,
where he brings them in, speaking in this sort. We have strayed and wandered
from the ways of truth, nor have we been enlightened with the light of
Justice. The Sun of understanding has not cast his beams upon us, where you
are to note by the way, that these children of the Devil speak thus,
following their Father's spirit, which is the spirit of Lies, since sufficient
grace to be saved, and necessary light to descerne what is good, is denied no
man, God desiring that all should be saved, and should come to the knowledge of
truth. But let us hear the continuation of those unjust plaintes. We gave our
selves over to the ways of iniquity, and to the paths of our ruin; we have
wandered in painful ways, being ignorant of the paths of our Lord. Here you
see how they mix cokle with the good corn, wheat with Chafe, I mean, they
mix truth with falsities, putting darkness for light: For true it is, the way
of vice is painful and loathsome, and to speak with the Prophet, it is
besett with thorns: but it is most false to affirm, that they knew not the
Divine pleasure, since the light of nature, and the light of Faith, MOSES and
the Prophets do more then sufficiently point it out; wherein they offend
doublely in seeking to excuse their sins, and become so much more liable to
punishment, that having known the will of their great master they did it not.
Let us closely follow the groans of the reprobate, and see how the Rack
compells them at length to confess the truth: what has pride profited us;
what advantage have we gotten by the vanity of riches? all that, is past as a
shadow; as a Post, that rides at full speed; as a ship sailing on the sea
under full sails, leaving behind her no marks of her passage: as a bird
swinning in the air, whose trace is not found; as an arrow which flying cutts
the air, and the air presently reunites it self. So have our days run by,
without leaving any mark of virtue: we have spent in malice, all the Time
which was liberally bestowed upon us, to work our salvation, in fear and
trembling. We have past the course of our age in apparences, and in the
vanities and false follies of the world, and in an instant we are fallen into
Hell. In this sort, do those wretches gnawen with a continual sorrow,
unprofitably repent them selves, and groan under the pressure and affliction of
heart, which is the Hell of their Hell. How did the Egiptians, think you,
grieve, who contemned IOSEPHES counsel to make their provision of corn,
during the seaue^ years of plenty, which were so abundant, that wheat was no
more esteemed then sand, while, during those others of famine, they were
constrained to give the most precious things they had, yea even their ^owne
liberty, least famine might drive their souls out of their bodies. What a
lively sense of grief shall they be touched withal, while they shall
consider, that their former abundance caused in them many offenses; and that
their present want is the punishment of the same offenses: but especially when
they shall see PHARAO made Master of all their goods, as well moveable as
immovable, and that of his simple subjects, they are become his slaves. O how
heartily they would have wished that they had given credit to the good IOSEPHES
prophicies, who advised them to be myndfull in their plenty, of the hard time
to come, and to make good provision in time of harnest, while their granaries
and Cellers ouerflowed on every side. But how light is this temporal misery
if it be compared to the eternal sorrow which shall torment the reprobate,
advertised by so many remonstrances as well by writing as by word of mouth,
which bett upon their eyes and ears, and made them inexcusable, in not having
redeemed lost time; and in having, by the hardness and inpenitence of their
heart, heaped up a treasure of anger, in the day of our Lords anger. What a
remorse shall they feel, to see that their wounds wax old in the face of
their imprudence. And that while they might have purchased an eternal and
priselesse felicity for a glass of cold water given in the love, and for the
love of God; yea have borne away the crown of glory, by natural and
necessary actions being done in grace with conformity to Gods will (at so
easy a rate does the supreme Goodness sell heaven!) and that these truths
were so frequently proposed unto them by the Gospel, and the preachers
thereof, who as trumpets made them resound in their ears, they not being moved
with all this, less sensible then the walls of Hierico, who fell at the sound
of the prestly trumpett. What a heart-breake it shall be unto them to think
how little they inioyed, and for how little a space they possessed the same: what
benefits they have lost; from how fair adua^tages they are fallen: how little
was demanded at their hands, for a priselesse glory: together with the
torments passing conceit, which they shall endure without all hope of end. To
speak the truth, as there is no head so strong that turns not, nor body so
stiddie that shakes not, at the aspect of a deep descent; so me thinks, there
is no brain that is not troubled, by bending its atte^tion toward the
eternal sorrow, which shall incessantly gnaw upon those miserable catiues.

The Eternity of the torments of Hell.
XXXII.
But when all is done, Athanasia, reason must render the Ghost, and humane
wisdom must be drunk up in the consideration of the Eternity of those pains,
which we have set out in weak colors: For if those torments, how ever great,
how ever long, were to have end, yet hope would in habit the bottom of
Pandoras bote, nor should this hope be void of some spark of consolation. But
alas! in saying never, we say a term without term, and which, for the time to
come, shall continue as long as God shall be God. The Reprobate, says the
sacred text, shall be forsaken of God eternally. Eternally shall God be angry
with them, and that without reconcilement. This Abisse never renders any thing
it once swallows up, the souls that are once cast headlong thither, never
return. Out of that Jail there is no redemption. There, no thoughts of God,
but such as are blasphemous; no praise is rendered him in that accursed dungeon.
The flame of the Babilonian furnace burnt 49. handfulls high, but could never
raise it self to the fiftith, a number of IOVBILIE and Pardon, as figure of
that whereof we speak, where there is no remission of sins. There, says the
Psalmist, are the damned devoured of death, no otherwise then sheep do grase:
for as the grass putts up again under the sheep nibling tooth, so shall the
reprobate be continually struke with the sting of a living death, and still as
they shall be devoured by it, they shall revive to new punishments, wherein the
truth of that shall be seen, which the Poets did only fabulously relate of
the liver still renewed, as by the vultour it was devoured. The wicked, says
the holy Gospel, shall be cast into the fire, and they burn, in steed of
saying they shall burn. A wonderful speech, which by a present tense, in lieu
of a future, does represent the Eternity of this endless torment. For after a
thousand ages, and as many millio^s, as ce^tenaries of million of millions, one
may still affirm of these accursed souls, they burn: while incessantly they
pay the reuenew of a rent, whose principale they shall never extinguish. No,
for Eternity being, a perpetual Today, and a continuance remaining still in
the same being; how can that run by, which stands still in the same state? And
if there be any thing new, it shall be the Canticles of joy, which shall
continually be new in the blissed Eternity: In the accursed, the reprobate
shall suffer, and daily shall attend new sufferances, and their sense still
lively, shall never be hardened thereby. Their being accustomed to endure, shall
not make their torment lighter, or less insupportable. Whateuer ever
calamities we suffer in this life, be they never so great and greuious, they
dure only for a time, says the Prophet DANIEL, but to the damned, time shall
not be. Lets call to mind, says S. PACION, that in Hell there is no place left
for repentance. For the time thereof is past. Happy is he who by a good
confession foreruns the face of the Judge justly irritated with our crimes: who
does promptly perform all the good in this world, which his hand is able to
work. And who does well in every thing, while in this life precious time is
lent him. For now it is the hour to rise from the sleep of the death of
sin: for our salvation or damnation are nearer then we believe. But, will it
please you Athanasia, that to give life to this Draught we may borrow from this
subject of the Eternity of those pains, the colors of some excellent pincell
of antiquity. Hear S. AUGUSTINE then, or rather see how he setts out this
eternal misery in its colors. As for the accursed souls, says he, their
death, is without death; their end without end; their term, without term.
For their death shall be still living; their end shall still be beginning; and
their term shall never expire. Death shall stifle without killing them. The
Torture shall bruise without distroying them. The flame shall burn them,
without affording light at all; for this fire shall be dark; and horror shall
inhabit this darkness; and darkness shall increase the torment of the flame.
Thus shall they be set upon with the sense of dolor and horror; incessantly
suffering and dreading. S. GREGORY the GREAT, almost in the same air, gives
us assurance of the Eternity of pains. In this torture of the reprobate,
says he, death is immortal, and end endless. Because death lives there
continually, and continually the end begins anew. Where be now, says S.
BERNARD, the children of the flesh, the lovers of the world, whose conversation
in earth, was amongst vanities and delights; what have we left of them but
corruption, and a most distastefull memory? They had a life of it in the
earth, they eat and drunk delicately, they lived at their ease, and in an
instante they descended into Hell. Their flesh in earth serves only now for
wormes-meate; and their soul burns in eternal flames. For what did their
glory and vanity serve them, what benefit did they reap of their transitory
joys? what advantage did their great power bring them? say, what has their
foul pleasures, and abundance of wealth left them? To what a low ebb is their
soaring ambition reduced! Alas the extreamitie of their joys was followed with
tears and gnashings of teeth, which shall never have end: and out of their
short delights, they are fallen into torments, rigourous beyond measure, and
long without end. From the mouth of these two or three reprochlesse witnesses,
let us draw this word of Truth, that the undoubted Eternity of these pains of
Hell, puts upon them the seal or mark of Infinity, since one shall never see
an end of their continuance, or of their intiere consummation. If I took as
much content in filling pages, as I precisely study brevity, I might have
here a large feilde, by giuinge my imagination leave to run, in those vulgaire
similitudes, or conceits, which give to weaker wits slender Idea's of
Eternity, so far forth as man's understanding can reach. But I omit the little
immortal bird drawing dry the Ocean, by drawing thence every hundred thousand
years one drope of water. I leave the number of the stars, of the leeues of
trees, the sands of the sea, and all the Arithmetique of the most skillful
masters at the end of its line, and other the like conceits, which I blame
not, for the respect I bear to the great and devout personnages, who did
apprehend them fitting, good and fruitful, not only for the common, but most
advanced souls. I will pass, I say, these thoughts, leaving them to each
ones invention, as their gust or spiritual profit shall move them. For my
part, Athanasia, I confess unto you simply and sincerely the hardness of my
own heart, wherein they made but a weak impression.

Of the desperation of the damned.
XXXIII.
But in recompense hereof, I was wonderfully moved with the consideration of
the furious and inconceaueable despair, which the Sight of this horrible
Eternity of pains shall cause in the hearts of the damned. And truly, as the
worm which eats the aple, is bred in the self same fruit, so shall this
eternal despair, like to a gnawing worm, issue out of the self same
Eternity whence it does spring. True it is that the torments which the damned
shall suffer in all the members of their body, and in all the faculties of
their soul, are extreme. Yet the consideration that they shall never have
end, adds another extreamitie to this extreamitie, which passes imagination,
and which will incite these accursed wretches, fallen into a reprobate sense,
to open their mouth against Heaven, and to horrible blasphemies against God, as
much, or more, then the sense of their punishments? And if the Prophet said,
that he would cry like a dragon, and groan like an o^trige, over the desperate
and incurable wounds of Israel, how much more terrible shall the how lings of
the reprobate be, animated with a spirit of despair and rage, in seeing their
calamities void of all hope of redress? So that it is the opinion of ALBERT
THE GREAT, and DENIS THE CARTHVSIAN, that this thought of Eternity, shall much
more afflict them, then all the pains of their tortures. Which the great S.
AUGUSTINE expresses in these terms. Being tormented without interruption or
end, they shall live deprived of all hope of pardon, all expectation of mercy,
wherein does consiste the greatest of their calamities. For if they could but
hope that their torments would have end, after so many millions of years as
all the creatures, even to the worlds end, shall have had hairs on their head,
be this number as great and incredible as it will, yet is it finite, and this
imagination of an end would in some sort solace their sufferances. But whereas
there is no end proposed unto them, they give themselves over to despair, and
impatie^ce does double their pains. This moved the Prophet to say that their
worm shall not die, and their fire shall never be extinguished, never be
consumed, because this worm of despair shall torture their understandings,
while the flame burns their body: being most reasonable, that those who with
body and soul offended an eternal God, should be punished in body and soul,
and be adjudged unto pains that should last as long, as God should be God,
that is for ever.

Pains without intermission.
XXXIV.
THis so dreadful despair, shall yet be augmented, Athanasia, by a
consideration which I find, no less singular, then remarkable: to wit, that
those pains shall not only be eternal, but also without intermission. For
the damned shall not only pass in an instant, from one extreamitie to
another, and as JOB says, from frosen waters, to devouring fires, but their
torments shall be continual, and continually in a point insufferable, and
without intermission at all. No part of repose, or abatement of pains are
there to be hoped. It Is a war that shall never have truce. In the sufferances
of this life, be they never so great, there is always some moderation or place
to breath in; in that they stay not still in the same state. As the heavens do
incessantly roll: So all that is under those rowleing spheeres, are obnoxious
to changes and reuolutions. The seasons do continually change, and continually
renew the face of the universe. The Moon increases and decreaseth. The Sun
does advance it self, or put it self in a greater distance from us. The sea
has its ebb and flowing: and the springs, rivers, and floods, run day and
night to find the Sea. Man's age runs daily to decay. Kingdoms and Empires,
have their times to flourish and fade. Deseases are lightened, in that they come
but by fits, and by the hope we have to end, or mend. In adverse fortune we are
comforted, by expectation to find her favorable. The sharpest and most violent
sickness, has its interualls, and qualifications. Sleep is the common charm
of greeues, and often by its dreams, it rayseth the condition of the most
miserable (for the space it continewes), above the happiness of the most happy.
But in Hell, sleep flies from the ey-lids of the reprobate, nor does rest,
seiourne near unto them. Their tears do never dry up: their Ague is
continual, and without intermission. Without relaxatio^ they die in living;
without relaxation, they live in dying. And if a rain continuing for 40. days
only, was able to drown the whole world: o God what a Deluge of miseries
shall choke those miserable souls, upon whom, without release, floods of fire,
and darts of fury and malediction, shall shower down. And if things most
aggreeable, turn disagreeable by continuance; in so much that the Manna, a
food no less delicious then miraculous, became loathsome to the Israelites; And
if eating every day the same dish, makes us loath the most toothsome and
exquisite bit: if ways that ly through great plains, though otherwise fair
and facile, seem tedious: And if none would purchase the possession of a
crown, upon condition, to ly without sturring in a most delicate, and richly
parfumed bed for the space of thirty or forty years. What shall it be I pray
you, continually to ly extended, upon inconceaueably hot burning coals, and
amongst execrable stinches, and all the torments that can be imagined, without
repose, without intermission, without comfort, without hope, and without
release, for a whole Eternity, O you that are deaf, says ISAYE, hark; o you
blind, behold! But who is blind, but he that is slave to sin; who is deaf
but he that is made slave to his vices? And thou who see so many things,
see thou not this? And thou that have thine ears open, hear thou not
this? But alas how many are there in the world, who have eyes, but not to see,
and ears but not to understand truths so manifest? O Lord, thou who do
every thing so well, who make the blind see, and the deaf hear: open the
eyes, and ears of those, whom the vanities and filth of the world do make
blind and deaf; To thend that those that do run to their ruin, and do
precipitate themselves into horrible misfortunes for want of foreseeing the^,
may by the fear of thy judgments reclaim their footsteps from those so
slipperie ways. O God who is able to relate the power of thy wroth, and to
know, without amaysement, the effects of thine indignation? o how horrible a
thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God! hands so heavy, that JOB
being only touched with the tippe of one of the fingars thereof, and that for a
small space too, inuites all creatures to take pity of him; o how burdensome
and insuportable are they to the reprobate!

Whether it were better for the damned not to be.
XXXV.
Form a judgment of it out of this consideration, Athanasia, that without
respite they search after death and it comes not; they shall wish for it, and
it shall fly from them. Upon which the Deuines move a fine question; to wit,
whether it were not better for the damned to be no more, or never to have been
at all, then to subsiste without anihilation amidst so many living deaths. To
which the Angel of the schowle, S. THOMAS, makes answer with no less
subtilitie then soliditie, that the non-esse being considered purely in it
self, is the evil of evils, and the most miserable condition imaginable, and
that thus, it cannot in general be desired. But being taken as delivering us,
from a being accompained with all sorts of miseries; and as it is a privation
of so many calamities, it may be wished for of those who are in so deplorable a
state. Whence it is said in the Gospel of that reprobate which betrayed the
son of man, and who through despair hanging himself was burst in the midst.
It had been better for this man that he had never been. And JOB in the
extreamitie of his afflictions curseing the day of his birth, wished that he
had never bone. S. AUGUSTINE confirms this opinion when he says: The wicked
and impious persons that are plunged in eternal fires, shall live in despite
of themselves; for they would be glad, if it were in their power, to end so
accursed a life; but none will oblige them with the benefit of such a death as
would make them senseless of their pains. And again, the Scripture daignes
not this continual sufferance with the name of life; for to be continually in
such extreme torments, seems not so much to be a life, as a perpetual death.
Whereupon in Sacred writ; this damnation, is called a second death, to
distinguish it from the first, where unto all that are upon the face of the
earth, are liable. And albeit it be called death, yet is none extinguished
thereby; for to live in continual torment, is not to live, but to dic. The same
Doctor, in another passage, says to the same purpose. If the damned souls
live in those eternal pains, where the unclean spirits a^ tormented, they
are rather to be said t^dy then live, and that eternally. For there is no worse
nor more dreadf^^ death, then when death cannot dy^* Pope INNOCENTIVS gives
authority to that belief, in these terms. Then (speaking of the accurse^
Eternity) death shall be immortal. (...) death how much more sweet should
thou be, if thou did extinguish so dolorous a life, then to constrain one t^
live in such hellish torments; and which is yet worse, torments of so long
continuance. I, for the number of years in Hell, is numberless. The last
year of those punishments shall never arrive. After a thousand million of
years, there will remain as many again to be counted, and those also being
sommed up; we are to begin anew again. CAIN after five thousand years of a
living death, is, as in the first day of his tortures: and after a thousand
million ^f million of years, he shall begin ^new to suffer. And though the
^icked richman has thirsted two ^^ousand years in the flames which ^oe burn,
but not consume him, he (...) yet to expect, and shall expect for ^ternitie,
one drop of refreshing ^^ater, which shall for ever be de^yed him. When
humane justice ^oth adiudge a criminal to exqui^te tortures, for some great
and ^^ormious crimes; to die is reputed a ^uour, since by that means, he is
^eed from the cruel torments which ^reife does imprint in his body. But (...)
the Divine justice which is exe^uted in Hell, there is no stroke fa^orable;
where one is to languish ^or ever in a death which cannot ^ie. Which is a Hell
in Hell, worse ^hen a thousand Hells.

Why there pains are eternal.
XXXVI.
But lets withdraw our view* Athanasia, from so horrible* spectacle, whose topp
is Eternity. And let us put the last finga^ to this draught all red with
flames with the reason which Deuines give of the Eternity of those pains. I^
there any thing more conformable to the Divine Justice, say they, the^ to
punish those eternally, who for loosse pleasures, vanities, and transitory
toys, have contemned the torrent of eternal delights, glory riches, since
that by the rule of equity, the punishment is to have proportion with the
fault? Further, ad^ they, he that dies in mortal sin renouncing grace, which
is as the Herbingar, and Porter of Glory, i^surprised by death, in a state of
s^peruerted a sense, and in such an auersion from God, that it is credible,
that if he had lived for ever, he had still persisted in his malice, and had
been buried in evil days, in so much, that by loosing his life, he did not,
for all that, loose his will to offend, which makes him perish in his
reprobation, and makes him worthy of an Eternity of pains. Again, seems it
not reasonable, that he should be punished in Gods great Eternity, who has
offend God in the little Eternity of his life? Let us add to this, that all
which is in God being God himself, because he is all being, all essence, all
substance without accidents, and consequently, his justice being equal with
his mercy, if he reward a cup of cold water given in his grace, and for his
love, with an Eternity; why should we find it strange, that he should
eternally punish sin, that accursed nothing, or rather that proud Giant,
which does oppose his darksome privation, against that divine being,
souueraignely lightsome. Yea, this truth, though heaven and earth pass, shall
stand in force for ever, that God shall destroy everlastingly, all that shall
work iniquity, and that being driven from the sight of his face, they shall
suffer mortally eternal pains. Those accursed souls shall one day hear the
folish Virgins dismission, who came without the oil of grace and Charity.
Begone, the gate of the eternal marriages, are shut against you for ever.
Begone I know you not. And this daunting sentence, which shall be without
Appeal, is pronu^ced in the burning Court of the worlds comsu^mation. Go you
accursed into eternal fires, prepared for the Devil and the partakers in his
reuoult. The Manna which of old, fell for 6. days upon Israel, ceased to fall
the seventh; and he that neglected to make provision of two measures thereof,
the day before the Saboath, with fasting was forced to pay his negligence. Such
as in the time of this life, lent to negotiate and labor, have been flouthfull
in gathering the Manna of grace; shall not be received in the other life, which
is the time wherein all work cease. The sluggard, says the wiseman, who in
winter fearing the cold has neglected to till, shall reap only in his field
briars and nettles in harvest time: and poverty, and hungar shall encompasse
his gate. For which cause the same wiseman calls him prudent and considerate
who tills and sowes in its season; threatening him with confusion and misery,
who sleeps and takes his ease, while he is to put his hand to the work.
Verily such a man deserves to be compared to horses and mules, who have no
understanding, and yet not to a generous horse nether, but even to a jade, who
having still at his sides so quick and bloody a spur, as that of the
thought, especially, of the accursed Eternity, does not strive to draw
himself out of the dirt of vice, and to spring swiftly on in the course of
virtue. Alas what does not a sick-body endure to be quite of his desease, what
bitter potions does he not take down, what bleedings lancings burnings. In a
word, what does he not resolutly undergo to recover his health, and to prolong
for a time this mortal and miserable life; and yet to draw our selves out of
the gates of death, and those also eternal, and out of the horrible tortures
whereof this little draught makes a weak representation, shall we use no
endeavors?

An Apostrophie to God and the soul, upon the accursed Eternity.
XXXVII.
OEternitie! o powrefull, rigourous, and jealous God! God of Revenge! o Lord
thou art just, and all thy judgments are justice and equity it self. I adore
them great God, yea my soul cast upon the earth, and my mouth joined to the
dust, I confess that all thou do, proceeds from a true and just judgment;
and that all thy ways are replenished with justice. For who am I dust and
ashes, a worm and not a man, to enter a dispute with thee? Who if thou would
observe and examine our faults, who is able to sustain thy face, and to enter
into judgment with thee? Yet as thou art soueraignely Good, thou permitst men
to discuss matters with thee. And being Truth it self, thou art willing, that
they should propose unto thee the things they conceive to be just and true. In
this Confidence, o Lord, approaching toward the Throne of thy mercy, after the
consideration of those eternal pains I have now contemplated, I hope thou will permit my poor soul to make a weak sallie toward thee. Lord those
souls which thou do banish, to those endless flames, which derive all their
heat from the fire of thy wroth, are they not the workmanshipe of thy hands?
And is not thy work mercy it self, as thy nature is goodness it self? Why
then do thou shut thy ears to their cries, and of a pitiful Father, to
those accursed souls, thou becomest, an inexorable, and severe, I dare not
say, a cruel Judge, as thy servant JOB terms thee, whom thou did try in
manifold sufferances? Where are thine aunient mercyes o Lord? have thou
forgotten to pardon, which is thine ordinary coustume? Why, have thou rejected
them for ever, and can they never appease thy anger? Ah! no Lord they know
well, that which they demand is not for thy glory; they that have been
prodigal of thy favors; that are not worthy to be called thy children, that
can pretend nothing in the inheritance of salvation, nor in the portion
replenished with light reserved to thy Saints. Their deeds of darkness has
rendered them unworthy of that bright day which knows no night. Being no longer
thy children, they cannot be heirs of thy Sanctuary; heirs of the Land of
the living; nor coheires with JESUS CHRIST whose precious blood, and merits,
they have trodden under their feet. Nay Lord, even they, do not demand to
depart out of Hell, nor to be freed from those pains, which are justly
inflicted upon them; for to appear before thy wrothfull face, would be a hell
and a Torture unto them, incomparably more rigorous then all the torments they
endure. Their only desire is to be reduced to nothing, since they have commit
the works of sin; which is a true nothing. But if thou daigne them unworthy
of this unfortunate favor, at least after many ages of pains, can they not
expect some moment of release? shall not some little drope of refreshment and
solace, after many thousand of years, be sent to water their withered lips,
their thirsting throtes, their burning tongues? Say Lord, will thou for ever
laugh at their living death? Will thou not for ever bow to their begging? O the
God of my heart! o the part of mine everlasting inheritance! What Is this that I
hear in the botome of my heart? what dradfull Echo makes resound therein these
words of horror? I will be inexorable unto them eternally. Softly, my soul,
make a stand here, step not a foot further. Do thou not see the fiery sword
in the Divine Iustice's hand, threatening over thy head, if thou advance a
foot. Do belong to thee temerarious wretch, to sound God's Majesty?
Fear thou not, to be overwhelmed with his glory? Do thou not see that
these reprobates are relinquished by the spirit of his heart, and precipitated
into an eternal oblivion in this second death? Leave them there then, and
kissing the son, that is, adoring the highness of the Scepter of this Divine
Justice, rejoice together with the just in this just revenge: and wash thy
hands in the ruin, and blood of those sinners. And drawing light from their
darkness, compound a wholesome treackle of the venime of their infelicitie.
Cast thine eyes rather upon the malice of sin, and by an effect so horrible,
form a judgment of the greatness of the Cause. Think if thou see a loving
Father justly casting his son into a burning furnace; that thence thou
oughtst to conjecture an enormious crime in the child; as well by reason of the
greeuiousnesse of the punishment, as by the Fathers rigor. o Eternal Father,
whose mercies are numberless, what an inward hate must thou needs conceive
against the unjust, and injustice; since thou do punish so rigorously, and so
eternally, the souls thou bought at so great a price; as is the blood of
thine own son, blood which cried better then that of Abel, blood able to
fetch out any stayne, to wash of all offenses, and to render them sknowie
white, whom sin had made cole-blacke, so that this ISOPE, this sopewort be
applied in a fit time, in a time capable of receiving this plentuous
redemption. Where are our thoughts, o my soul, how does not dread put us into
a trance, while sin presents it self unto our eyes, what a monster must it
needs be, for whom so darksome a Dungeon and boisterous tempest is prepared;
and fince that God who is infinitely good, is irreconciliably irritated against
those reprobate souls? How often, my poor heart, have we merited those horrible
punishments? wast not as often as we withdrew our selves from our duty by
mortal crimes, sinthens all the Devils there were damned for one sin? And
are they not then so many singular obligations we have to God, who expected us
so long to repentance? in not suffering his vengance to to take us in the
manure. If we slile the Doctors, who by their care and skill, recouere us, out
of a dangerous sickness, our Esculapeses. If a delivery out of prison draw
such an obligation upon us, toward the workers thereof; If a Princes grace do
so much engage us to him; as likewise the favor of being freed from fire or
water, to our deliuerers. What shall we render to this good God, who, as often
as we have offended, has recovered us from death, and death everlasting? Death
whose torment, does far surpass, all that can be said or thought of it.
Propose unto thy self, o my soul, a thing that shall never happen, according
to the order of the Divine Providence and Justice, though otherwise possible to
him that can do all, that God had drawn out of this dark hole into which
redemption enters not, some one of the damned crew, to give him time of
repentance for his sins: and consider what thanks he would render to his
Creator for so great a benefit; and how well he would husband this precious
time, to regayne himself out of the midst of his dreadful tortures. Now, my
dear soul, thou must needs have lost all sense and judgment, if thou
accnowledge not the benefit of preservation to be no less, then this
imaginary deliverance, since it withdrawes thee from the same torments,
merited by so many faults. Why do not we then spend our selves in thanks
giving, why are we negligent in redeeming lost time, sloathfull in running to
the remedy of Penance. The only Table of safety after the shipwrake of
grace? O God full of Goodness, who desires not the death of a sinner, but his
conversion and life. Ah! I beg this favor of thee; that at least I may
perform some part of that, which he would do, whom, by thine extraordinary
power, and mercy without president, thou migstest have delivered out of this
Gulf of horror. Ah! Lord I know this only part, would work my whole
penance: for never would mine eylidds wax dry, the aples of mine eyes would
ever swime in their fountains, night and day should I weep. My cheeks should
always be watered, and my tears should be my daily bread. I would embrace all
sorts of exterior and interior sorrow, to avoid those devouring flammes, and
the eternal rageings of that abominable Mansion, where thou art perpetually
blasphemed. O God my mercy! Save me from the Jaws of those roaring Lions,
prepared for their prey. Remove me from before the sharp horns, of those
savage Unicorns. Indew me, o Lord, with the spirit of Compunction, and
Penance, which is so necessary to avoid this Abisse. And thou, my soul, why
do thou dwell upon this thought of horror, why art thou vexed in it? Lift up
thy heart and hope in the mercy of the Highest. I, thou shall yet again praise
him, the time of his mercy is not expired to thee. He is the salvation of thy
face, and thy true God: no no by his assistance and grace, thou shall bear no
part in the abominable blasphemies of the region of the shadow of death: but
thou shall be aggreable unto him, and shall sing his praises in the Land of the
Living.

A passage to the blessed Eternity.
XXXVIII.
Happy land of the living! Athanasia, LAND OF PROMIS flowing with the milk
and honey of Divine favors and blessings (Land without thorns) free from the
captivity of JACOB. How glorious things are reported of thee, o City of God!
Sacred city, whose fundations are placed upon the holy mountains of
Eternity, who art watered with an impetuous flood of felicity and glory, and
with torrents of celestial delights. How lovely are thy tabernacles! O
mansion of the God of virtues, my soul and body do swoone in the
contemplation of thy wonders. O Lord how happy are they, who do inhabit thy
house^ they praise thee for ever and ever. Blessed is he who^ thou have
elected, and received into thy arms, he shall remain for ever in the wishfull
porches of thy heavenly Sion. Certes, Athanasia, my heart changing this
unfortunate object (wherein my pen was employed in the precedent strokes,) to
this other, wholly delightful one, of the blessed Eternity, does resent the
same joy, which the Mariners do experience, when after a rough storm, they
meet with a calm: the same alacrity which does enlarge the victors hearts,
when after a dangerous battle they triumph over their foes, and divide the
plentuous spoil. Now it is, that I may usurp the words of the Divine
Epithalamion. Winter is past, the rain and snow are blown over, and flowers
begin to appear in our land, but flowers that are of fruit of honor and
honesty, admirable fruits of the Land of Promis. There it is, that God does
wipe away the tears of his saints. There are there, no greiues or plaintes:
for all sorts of evils do vanish in the presence of this universal
felicity, even as shades do disappeare in the light's approach. And as wine
does taste sweeter after bitter amandes; and honey after the taste of wormeseed;
as deformity does raise the luster of an eminent beauty, it being the
property of contraries the one to advance the other by their neighborhood: so
after the harsh contemplation of so many astonishinge torments, the splendor
of the eternal glory, does shine in mine eyes, as a lightsome day following
out an obscure night. Such as do exercise their Arts about fornaces, are
accustomed from time to time, to releive their weakened sight, in beholding some
pleasing table, or to recreate them upon some delightful prospectiue. Sweet
light of the heavenly Jerusalem, whose lamp is the lamb, who has blotted
out the sins of the world, how fitly thou art represented to my eyes a little
to solace them, after they have poursued the view of that burning furnace,
which the wroth of God keeps eternally hot in the center of the earth? But on
the other side, as they that come out of a dark dungeon, have difficulty on a
souden to sustain the splendor of a clear day: so this souden return from
darkness to light; from dolor to delight; from sorrow to joy; from
unhappiness to happ; from death to life; and from punishments to felicity,
does give a certain assault to my heart; so true it is that the passage from
one extreamitie to another does astonish the most constant mind! The best
experienced Mariners, having once passed the line, are always a little troubled
when they are to alter the course of their navigations, and to sail under
another Pole, guided by other Cards, other stars. And yet o happy change
since we pass from tears to langhter, from punishments to reward, and from
pain to glory.

The finenesse of this subject.
XXXIX.
But who can without rauishment, o Athanasia, express the sweetnesses with
which this incomparable subject does replenish our understanding? O God if on
day we shall come to behold, that which nowme understand of the glory of thy
City, with what trance shall we be seized, when we shall be made like unto
thee, in beholding thee such as thou art, and shall be tra^sformed into thy
Image, and shall be conducted by thy spirit from light to light. It will be a
far other thing then the rauishment of JACOB upon the sight of his fair
RACHEL: for what comparison is there betwixt the Creator seen clearly and not
in a glass, and a catiue creature. Those beauties, in that disciples
revelations whom JESUS loved, is to the life represented unto us by this
glorious Jerusalem, which he does compare to a Bride richly adorned coming out
to meet her Bridgroome. A fit comparison, since this glorious Eternity, is no
other thing then the eternal banquet of the marriages of the lamb. O fair
IYDITH! who would not willingly endure the labors of the seige of Bethulia to
enjoy thee! and who dare complain of these moments of tribulation of this
afflicting life, spent in the conquest of thee? All the beauties of the
Bridegroom and Bride, which are by the fingar of the Holy Ghost so delicately
put down in the Sacred Epithalamion, which we instile the Canticle of
Canticles, are but shadows compared to the measure of the light of glory,
which God in his blessed Kingdom has prepared for his saints! O choice
souls, who like to other ESTERS, are designed for the imbracements of this
eternal ASSVERVS, what can be found that can enter into comparison with your
felicity, since it shall pass all humane sense and capacity? No neither the
flourishing Jerusalem, nor yet the Triumpha^t Rome can in any thing come near
unto this happy Abode. For she draws her light, from him who is wholly light,
and darkness cannot comprehend him, and who does inhabit an inaccessible
light. O my eyes let fall your eylides over your aples, and be blind to all
that is fair upon the face of the earth. For nothing can be pleasing in
presence of this excellent object, of the eternal house of the God of
Eternity. O God aid my sight, and enrich me with an Eagles ey, but let it be
a heavenly one, that I may not be dazeled with the aspect of so great a
splendor.

That the eternal felicity is the perfection of all good things.
XL.
EVen as (Athanasia) the accursed Eternity is the sink of all the evils
imaginable, as we have already showen; so is the blessed a collection of all
the good things that can be wished; for there the desire shall be replenished
with all that good is. And the Deuines to give us some knowledge of it, do
defime it: An eternal, immutable, and certain condition, deuoyd of all evil
of fault or pain, and odorned with all the advantages of nature, grace, and
glory. So that, says S. AUGUSTINE togeither with DAVID; this estate is
absolute in every point, seeing that the hungry soul is there saciated with
all the good things that can be desired. We have called it an eternal
condition, in which we see what a fair advantage it has over the crowns and
Empires of the earth, which stay so short a time upon one head, and the joy of
whose possession, is mixed with a continual fear of loosing them: for it is
written of the Kingdom of all ages, that it shall never have end. We added,
that it was not subject to change, in which we discover a notable difference
betwixt this eternal felicity, and the temporal ones of this world, which
never continue in the same estate. All that is here below, are sensible of the
perpetual turning of the Primum Mobile. For this eternity being God himself,
which of his own nature is immutable, it cannot be diminished: yea some
Doctors do hold, that the Blessed shall continually experience new accidental
glory, which shall be unto them a perpetual subject of new songs. We have
said that it is certain and sure: because the impeccabilitie of such as shall
be made participant thereof, by the freindshipp of God as the wisemans terms
it, shall deprive them of all fear of falling from it; besides that the
sentence of the reprobate being irreuocable, that of the blessed shall be of no
less continuance. And of what continuance? of the very fame with Gods being.
But o feast of contentments where none of those which do enjoy are disgusted,
no Israelite loathing this hidden Manna for the sweet and delightful point of
desire, shall remain deuoyd of all pain amidst the pleasure of the fruition;
so that by how much more they possess what they desire, by so much more they
desire to possess it. Whence one of the Apostles said, that the Angels in
heaven, desire to behold the glorious face of JESUS set at the right hand of
his Father in those places above, not that they see it not, but because the
more they contemplate it, the more they desire to contemplate it. In such sort,
that as in Hell the continuance of torments does not harden the reprobate,
whose pains are still as green and sensible, as they were the first day. So
in Heaven the Roses of glory do never fade, nor does custom dull the
continually lively taste of those incomparable delights. Go then o worldlings
o children of the earth, and forsake goods of such quality for the transitory
goods which do possess you, if we may give so good a name to those small
blossoms of contentments, that flourish and fade at once, which you gather here
below with such strife of mind; blossoms environed with thorns. Yes for
either those goods are false, or at the most, not purely good: and who soever
would take the pains to separate from their bulk, the evils wherewith they are
mixed, should find that chafe, feathers, and smoke have weight, in respect of
their lightness. For which cause our Savior does exhort us in the Gospel,
not to treasure up riches in the earth, where they are subject to ruste, and to
the theife's violent hand, but to heap up riches in heaven where all is safe
and sure. No, none can possibly heap up riches in these two so different
Abodes, Heaven and earth; for the Beautitude of the Kingdom of heaven, is
promised to the poor only; witness the example of the incompasionate
Rich-man: and our Saviors declaration of the almost impossible difficulty of
the rich-mans entry into Heaven. O how advised is he, who herebelow gathers
together the treasures of grace, and who co^uayes the^ through the hands of the
poor, in bills of exchange into the Eternity of glory, where such money is
current: for it is written, that good works follow them that die in our Lord
and that good trees are known by their fruit in this land of the living,
where he reapes benedictions, that has sown them in the land of the dead.
And I pray you, how should not Eternity be the perfection of all the good
things, which the senses and heart can never comprehend, sythe^s God himself
is the very great reward, of such as possess it: very great in deed, sith they
are rewarded beyond their service, every perfect gift, and every best present
proceeding from the Father of lights. Who does not see that he him self is an
vndrainable fountain of all goodness, being all desire, wholly to be desired,
and the fulness of all desires. He is that one necessary thing which compriseth
in it self, by way of excellency, all that is to be defired. Delights
without end are in his right hand, riches also and glory, wisdom, goodness,
power, greatness, beauty, the source of salvation, and the botome of all
beatitude, as the Psalmist does excellently sing. My salvation is in God, he is
my glory, my aid, and all my hope is in him. For assurance of this truth,
MOSES demanding of God the happiness to behold his face, I will show the all
good, said our Lord unto him, in appearing unto thine eyes.

Of the place of the Blessed Eternity.
XLI.
I Doubt, Athanasia, these general discourses sets your mouth on water, and
makes you desire to fill your appetite with more particular meats. To comply
therefore with your inclination, I will serve you up for the first dish, a
Draught of the place of this eternal Beatitude. Truly I might say that it is
situated in his bosom, who makes Eternity it self, and who being infinite,
cannot be bounded by any place, being present in every place by his being and
power; since that all is his, all comes from him, and all is in him, in him, I
say, in whom we live, move, and are. But that you may not loose your self in
those IMAGINARY SPACES where this infinite thing makes abode, which cannether
be comprised by the Heaven of Heavens, nor of heaven nor earth which he fills
with his immensitie, nor by any other place, I will tell you with all the
grauest Doctors of the Church, that God from the beginning of the world did
create this Kingdom which he provided for his Angels and Elect in the Heaven
called Empireall, that is to say of fire; not that it burns, but by reason of
the brightness of its flame, and the splendor of its light. This highest Heaven
was unknown to the ancient Astrologers, and is yet to the new, unless by the
light of faith, revealed by God to the Church and her Doctors. For the
Astrologers, like to all those that make profession of other mathematical
disciplines, grownding only upon sensible demonstrations, and making a
judgment of other places, by the diverse motions of the stars; and this that
we speak of being invisible and immovable, is placed above the knowledge and
laws of Astrology. It is then a firm, stable, solid and inuariably settled
heaven, called in holy Scrip. The firmament of heaven the heaven of Heavens,
the Land of the living, the Seat and Throne of God: and in Geneses, Heaven
created from the beginning, as BEDE, ALCVINE, TOSTATE, and the Master of the
sentences do interpret it. And there all the Fathers do establish the
mansion of the glory of God, together with his Angels and Blessed, following
these words of holy writ. We have a Mansion in heaven, not made with the hand
of man. And our Savior said to his disciples, your reward shall be ple^tuous
in heaven. And again before his Ascension, he said unto them, I go to provide
you a place. And what place is this, but that where he is set at the right hand
of the Majesty in the highest? S. BASILE THE GREAT, S. CLEMENT Romans S. CLEMENT
Alexan. S. JOHN DAMASENE, PHILO IVDAEVS, STRABON and S. THOMAS amongst other
Divines, do warrant this opinion.

Of the magnificence of the place.
XLII.
THus much concerning the situation, Athanasia, but for its magnificencie, what
tongue can express it, what pen describe it, since our thoughts and senses
cannot attain thereunto? O Israel how great is the house of God, how ample his
possessions! his Abode is goodly, high, immense, and infinite, these are the
words of the Prophet BARVCH. O eternal wisdom it is thou then, that do
powrefully extend thy force from one extreamitie to another, disposing all
things with an incomparable sweetness: thus speaks the wise man. O how happy
should I be, said the good TOBIE, if I could see the light of Jerusalem. O
God, said DAVID, how I am in love with the beauty of thy house, and with the
place of the habitation of thy glory. And if the glory of God incompassng the
Temple of SOLOMON, that miracle of man's Art and industry, added a grace unto
it, which did raise this maister-peece above all the works of the earth: what
shall that place be, where the Saints, in the light of gloric, see the
increated and inaccessable light of the Dietie. O you DAVID's houses of Cedars
hyde your selfs, house of SAVLTVS which SOLOMON built for his pleasures upon
the Mount-Libane; yea even you beauties of Libane hide your selves, fair topps
of Carmel and Saron. Veil thy self o thou throne of SOLOMON, thou
incomparable, yet humane work; for who dare make the handeworkes of man, enter
into comparison, with the mighty workmanship of God? What Palace, even of
those that appear the most proud and magnificent durst one compare with the
King of glorie's, incomparably more great, more wise, and more powerful then
SOLOMON; since all the pomp of this son of DAVID, is less prised in the
Scripture, then the simple nakedness of a place in the feilds, yea in this veil
of tears. Has this wretched and miserable world, any similitude whereby we
might make a conceit of the excellency, where tears and complaints are
permitted no entry, since it is crowned with all the contentments and
perfections that can be desired. In vain does S. JOHN in his revelations
represent unto us this heavenly Sion, as a City all of gold and precious
stones, these being but shadows of its true greatness, since the Heavens which
we discover, with the Sun and all the other stars are but the pauement of
the eternal firmament, the inhabitants whereof tread under their feet the
front of the brightest stars. All this universe, the object and wonderment of
the beholding eye, and all this great world which has so many lovers and
admirers, is but a miserable stable full of dunge and dirt, in comparison of
this seat of glory of God's elect, and the God of the Elect. O great Apostle,
how good reason thou had in contemplation of this eternal Felicity (which
consists in the sight of the true God, and of that JESUS which he sent) to
estee^^ all the rest dirt and dung? These visible heavens which in so high a
strain sing the glory of their maker. These nights and days, which do
proclaim his praises through all the earth: and so many wonderful works which
do raise our mynds by sense, toward the greatness of this Architect, who
sustaines this great bulk with three fingars, are but the footstooles of the
Throne of the eternal Salomo^, and stayres only by which we mount to his
glory. If we should here give bridle to our consideration, and permit our mind
to walk through the multitude of different creatures, which by their variety
do so beautify the face of the universe, do you not think, Athanasia, that
it would be a course of too long a breath, and such, as was a subject to so
many, the pens of antiquity, amongst others S. BASILS, S. AMBROSES, and
ORIGENS in their Exam. and the Expounders of Genesis. Let us content our selves
to draw from this spacious prospect, this inference. If the world, a place of
Nature, be a Stage, wherein is presented so many pleasant things: how rauishing
shall those beauties be, which God shall manifest unto his friends in the
Mansion of his glory, the Paradise of his delights? If he permit the wicked,
his enemies, such as offend him, to enjoy in this visible world so many
delights and pleasures; what will he communicate to those, whom he daignes to
crown with his heavenly and eternal favors, in the State of glory? A
Stoicall Philosopher speaking of the felicity of blessed souls, according to
the light of nature, obscured with the shadows of Paganism, could say, that
as much difference as there is, betwixt the dungeon of a woman's womb, and this
great world; so much is there between the wonders of this heavenly beatitude
of virtuous souls departed from their bodies, and the greatest beauties which
are seen in heaven and earth. To what length are we to drive this
dissimilitude, we that are enlightened with the light of faith, and taught by
so many faithful promises, as are contained in the Scripture touching this
blessed and vnconceauable Eternity. O Israel how goodly are thy tabernacles,
how delightful thy Pauillions: gardens watered with floods and fountains are
not so flourishing, nor are the valleys abounding with fruit, so abundant.
These are the words of a Prophet, who yet does but sparingly express the
delights of this happy Abode: where the light is continual, and the days
without nights, by reason of Gods presence, who is wholly light, and who does
not suffer those that do follow and adore him, to remain in darkness.
Whereupon the spirits which do serve before his Throne are called Angels of
light. It is a resplendant Residence, not standing in need of those tortches,
the Sun and Moon, which are only made to give light, to this low and
elementarie world, the heavenly Lamb being the Lamp, which does lighten the
eternal Sion. A Residence, where the flowers do continually accompaignie the
fruits, and where the extreamitie of heat and cold are banished, to make
place to an agreeable temperature, and far other then that earthly Paradise (a
garden of delight) wherein were placed our first Parents, created in original
Justice. A Residence in conclusion, wholly constant, and of an eternal durance.
From whence death is excluded, and the qualities, subject to bring in
alteration and change, are banished; and where all the inhabitants shall in
some sort be made participant of the immutabilitie of God. This stabilitie, is,
in my opinion, as it were, the crown of this fair place, even in that name,
far differing from the figure of this world, which incessantly slides away,
not unlike to ones shape in a mirror, which in an instant is both formed and
past according to S. JAMES. O City of peace! o triumphant Jerusalem! o Court
of the eternal Solomon! when shall we come, when shall we appear before the
face of this King of glory? when shall we be led into his Cellers? when shall
we pass through thy peaceable gates, gates dearer to God then all the
Tabernacles of JACOB? O delightful Abode, o wishfull Residence; if ever I
forgett thee, let me not only forget my right hand, but even my self: for if
I loose thee, am I not eternally lost, without all hope of redress, or mercy?

Of the essential happiness of the blessed.
XLIII.
But you will ask me, Athanasia, what will be the highest point of the glory
of those that do inhabit this place of delights. O my dear soul, if never
mortal ey saw what they see, how do you think I shall be able to express
it, with tongue or pen? Is it, in your opinion, any thing which can fall within
the compass of a discourse, or can be put down upon paper? Howbeit we will
declare unto you that which we have discovered, by the obscure light of faith,
rather in a glass after a dark sort, then openly, face to face, which is
reserved for the next life, as a reward for having believed it, without seeing
it. It is therefore the constant doctrine of the Catholic Church, that the
essence of the eternal glory does consiste in the sight of the sovereign
well-beloued, in the love of the sovereign well-beholden: do you understand
these few words well, Athanasia, which do lay open unto you, all that you are
to believe in this matter of the essential felicity of the Blessed? For
leaving a part all the thornie disputes and contestations of the school, upon
this point of the vision of the understanding, or of the fruition of the will,
the principal faculties of the soul, wherein does reside the happiness of
this supreme glory, whose object is God. Omitting, I say, their debate, who
will place Beatitude in an act of the understanding; and theirs, that will have
it to consist in an Act of the will, we will follow the common consent of
Doctors, and all the schools, who rejecting, in this behalf, all partiality,
have now for a common Maxim: That it consistes in two acts, of the
understanding and will, grownding therein upon the Scripture, which now assigns
the one, now the other, and somtymes both together. As when we read, that
eternal life, is to know one only God, And again. That we see now obscurely,
but in glory face to face. And in S. JOHN, we shall see him such as he is:
which does sufficiently prove, that supreme felicity consists in the
intimate vision of God. When again we mark this passage, thy Elect, o Lord,
shall be drunk with the abundance of thy house, and thou shall give them to
drink of the torrent of pleasure. And in the Gospel, enter into the joy of
thy Lord. And again, your joy shall not be taken from you, by which is
sufficiently showen, what part the will is to have in the essential glory.
And who would not gather hence, that it consists in the vision, and fruition
of the two faculties; God, who is infinitely greater then our hearts, filling
them both with vnimaginable delights, being, in quality of Sovereign Truth,
the object of our understanding, and as he is the Sovereign Good, the object
of our will, its repose and Center? But when the Psalmist sings. Taste and see,
how sweet is our Lord, does he not join them both together, being no less
proper to the will to taste, then to the understanding to see, and herein we
follow the interpretation of the learned HVGH OF S. VICTOR. And yet after the
same Divine Psalmist, had said, thou shall give them to drink of the torrent
of pleasure, does he not add? and in thy light we shall see light. This opinion
is confirmed by a Bull of Benetts the twelueth, who defines, that the souls of
the Elect, are blessed by these acts of seeing and enjoying. And the Roman
Cathechisme, put out by the Council of Trents order, places essential
Beatitude in the vision and fruition of God. It were an easy thing to show,
that the ancient Fathers of the Church, placed the essential beatitude,
sometimes in the one, sometimes in the other Power, and sometimes also jointly
in both, but the brevity which I proposed unto my self, from which I do
insensibly stray, makes me cut of many pieces of those great Oracles, which
would wonderfully beautify this stroke. Lets soberly content our selves with
this small reason. If the Blessed soul, did not embrace the heavenly Spouse in
his glory with both her arms, which are the understanding and will,
doubtless she would not be wholly satisfied: for who knows not even by
experience, that the will is not carried with less bent toward Good then the
understanding toward the Truth. Whence I gather, that necessarily her desire
must be replenished with all sorts of good things, according as the Scripture
does teach us, and the ensuing strokes will give us more amply to understand.
Therefore to speak properly essential Beatitude does consiste in the perfect
union of the soul to God, being made, as the Apostle terms it, one self
same spirit with him: which is done in the soul by Gods inward penetration,
called by the Divines, nor can we express it in any other term, an illaps;
which, me thinks, upon necessity, we may make use of in our tongue, as well
as of the word Relaps; finding that nether more rude, nor more improper then
this, which is received, and authorized by custom. Now this illaps of God into
the soul, does replenish it with the glory of God himself, and does as it
were, deifie it, according as S. JOHN speaks: we know that we shall be made
like unto him, when we shall see him, as he is. So that the soul shall be
filled and replenished with God, as the Moon, when she is perfectly full, with
the light of the Sun: or as a sponge when it is thoroughly wett, and filled
with liquor. And God uniting himself unto her, as the fire is united to the
burning iron, following the Conte^platiues ordinary similitude, shall be
joined unto her, and shall unite her so inly to himself, that she shall be as
it were transformed into God, who shall be, as says the Spouse in the
Canticles, entirely hers, as she again shall be entirely his. Which caused S.
BERNARD to pronounce those holy and loving words; our Beatitude, and our reward
is to see God, to live with God, to live of God and in God; to be with God and
in God, who shall be all in all. Now where this sovereign Good is, who can
doubt but there is also the sovereign joy and Felicity, true Liberty,
perfect Charity, eternal Assurance, and assured Eternity. In God is true
Gladness, complete Knowledge, perfect Beauty, continual Peace, Piety,
Bounty, Light, Virtue, Honesty, Sweetness, true Life, Glory, Praise, Repose,
gracious Friendshipp, and greatfull Concord. Hitherto are the words of this
mellifluous Doctor.

The happiness of the point of the soul.
XLIV.
But perfectly to understand, in what this essential glory does consiste, we
must call to mind, Athanasia, the division of the body and the soul, whereof
the Prophet speaks, administering an occasion to mystical Divines to divide
man's soul into three degrees, the inferior, superior, and supreme. Or if
you had rather, into three portions, the lowest, the highest, and the middle.
And they seat Appetite in the lowest region, the powers in middle, but in the
highest the point of the mind, the flower, unity, or essence of the soul, the
Latins Men's, the Grecians (...), the Hebritians, Nesamah, for all these words,
do but signify one and the same thing. Now to speak only in this place of
the highest, God being Spirit, a most pure Act, and mostone essence, although
in glory he be united to every blessed soul, yet is his union more
excellent, and eminent in this highest portion of the soul, then in those
below, even as we observe in man's soul, which is all in all the body, and all
in every part thereof, yet is more nobly, that is, it does more nobly exercise
its functions in the head, then in the other members of the body. So say the
Mistikes, that this highest portion of man's soul is the Spouse his bed,
Salomon's coutch, his Cabinet, and the place of his more particular delights.
There is the Divine essence united to the essence of the soul; there the
spiritual marriages (marriages the fulness of our eternal felicity)
celebrated, whereof so much mention is made in the holy Scripture. For as the
Bridegroom and Bride are two in one flesh, by the sacred band which does tie
them together; so the Blessed soul, by this union with her Principle, and
application to her end, becomes one spirit with him, through the excess of
that Charity, which is the band of all perfection. Thus is the soul
transformed and transfigured into light by the spirit of God, made participant
of the Divine nature, and conformable to the liknesse of his Majesty. It Is
true, that we are by nature made to the liknesse and similitude of God, whose
picture is so lively expressed in the soul, which is one in Essence, and trine
in faculties: Yet much more by grace, which makes us, as it were, certain
looking-glass, wherein that glorioule Sun makes the rays of his light and
love meet, while he expresses his perfections therein. Yet the Saints who are
in glory, whose faces are marked with his splendor, and do shine like the
Sun for perpetual eternities, are yet incomparably more lively pictures of
the Divinity. For even as the Sun meeting with a thick and darksome cloud
in the air, does sometimes so deeply imprint its beams upon its face, that it
appears another Sun; so are the Blessed in Heaven so transformed into God,
that they show as so many Gods, and as so many dearest children of the
Highest, as DAVID delivers it. This excellent beauty, with which the Divine
presence does adorn them, was cause, that S. JOHN espying an Angel, whom he
took for God, had adored him, if that spirit, no less humble then glorious
bright, had not given him to know that he was his fellow-seruant. And in my
opinion, in this near resemblance to God, the very top of the eternal
glory of the blessed, is placed. For what, think you, is God's own glory
and felicity, but the life which he has eternally of him self? the most
clear knowledge which he has of his immutable Truth; and the most arde^t love
which he has toward his own infinite Goodness? His Beatitude consisting in
the vision, love, and fruition, which the Divine and increated Persons of the
Blessed Trinity, have, of their own mutual knowledge, Love, and eternal,
perfect and infinite complacence. Now the soul of the Blessed being raised to
the vision, love, and fruition of the same Divine Persons, and of their Divine
and most indivisible Essence, ought not her supernatural and inineffable life,
by the resemblance which is betwixt her and God's felicity, to be said to be
the accomplishment of her glory? since that, without all fear of change, she
is wholly attentive to the clear contemplation of the prime and sovereign
Truth, inflamed with the love of the supreme and increated goodness, and has
the fruition of the infinite and unspeakable sweetness of God. O truly living
and happy life! when shall it be that we shall live in thee, and by thee? when
shall we, o my soul, inhabit this heavenly Jerusalem built as a City, and
with her glorious Citizens be made participant of him, who is still himself,
immutable, and whose years never decay?

Of the felicity of the powers of the soul, and first of the memory.
XLV.
THis essential Beatitude, Athanasia, is extended, and does spread it self
out, yet diversely, in the lower degree of the soul, to wit there, wherein the
three principal faculties or powers do reside. For even as the Prophet to
raise the widows dead child, did shorten himself upon this little body, and
did apply his mouth to its mouth, his hands to its hands, and his feet to its
feet: So God, who shall be all to all, shall fill all the soul, with the
abundance of his bounty, and shall communicate unto it a Divine life, which
shall not fear the assaults of death. The memory being entered into the
liberties of our Lord, shall call to mind the effects of his justice, and no
less those of his mercy: for she shall sing; no, never will I forgett thy
iustifications, o Lord, since in them thou have given me life. Filled with this
rauishing, and no less pressing then present object, she shall breath out the
remembrance of his sweetness, and shall exalt his adorable judgments. This
remembrance shall be her sovereign delight. O how she shall call to mind the
sweetness of the duggs of this incomparable goodness, far passing the fuming
wines of worldly delights. In how high a strain shall she take the memory of
this supreme sanctity! Alas how can she forget him, whom she has so inwardly
present, and who shall be more in her then her self, and to whom she shall be
so strongly tied in adauantine, and diamantine chains, that nothing shall ever
be able to diuerte her. Blessed memory replenisht with the fairest Idea's that
can possibly inhabit a heart! and which then, shall be a Magazine and memorial
of heavenly wonders! whether she make reflection upon things past, how dearly
shall she conserve the memory of the incomparable obligations which she shall
have to this Creator, Conseruer, Redeemour and Glorifier of her being. Such
as grace shall have led from greatest sins to repentance, favors before
bounding, where malice did superabound, o God! how highly shall they sing the
sacred Canticle of the Divine mercy? And those who by the same grace shall have
conserved the first stole of their innocence; and being preserved from the
abomination of desolation (whose deluge does ouerflowe the whole universe)
shall have been drawn to the safe harbor of salvation by the chains of love
and humanity, will not they have reason to bear a part in the fame Canticle,
and to pronounce, that that mercy which conserved them unstained amidest the
worlds impurities, is a portion of that which is eternally grounded and built
in Heaven. The royal Prophet calling to mind, out of what an Abisse of
miseries the Divine goodness had reclaymed him, recalling him so sweetly to the
accnowledgment of his faults, coniures his soul and all his interior powers
to bless God, exciting his memory never to permit his benefits to fall into
a disloyal oblivion; for he it is, that pardons, says he, all thine
infirmities; who cures all thy wounds; who recouers thee from eternal death;
and who crowns thee with his mercyes. O God what must this King of penitents
needs say in heaven, if he spoke thus in this veil of tears, reduced by a
holy repentance from his iniquities, to the state of grace. When the Saints,
whom God has pardoned many faults (for there are in Heaven penitent sinners
of all kinds) shall see them selves delivered from the innumberable torments
which they contemplate in the accursed Eternity, and which they had as often
deserved, as by their malice they had been separated from God, will they not
have great reason to say with the Psalmist? Thy mercy, o Lord, and thy justice
shall for ever be the subject of our song, upon this shall our Psalme-singing
be employed, whilst we walk in this immaculate way in which thou have put us.
And if the memory of pains and perils past, even in this world, be so
delightful, how much more shall the Saints and martyrs, who have suffered
much for the Almighties sake have cause to rejoice in this memory. While they
walked in the way of this mortal life, they sowed in tears, but in the
heavenly Sion, they shall reap an eternal joy. They shall sing this pleasant
Song: We have past through fire and water, but in the end we are entered into
refreshment. And they shall bless those light and transitory moments of
tribulation, which brought them to eternal glory. And if their memory do
stay upon the present felicity which they feel, and of which they have a
lively sense, with what contentment shall they not be crowned, in tasting the
ineffable goodness of God, who rewards them infinitely beyond their merits? Yea,
if they enlarge themselves upon the time to come, (if their be any time to come
in the immovable and euer-present state of Eternity) and if they consider the
new discoueries of gusts and contentments, which they shall continually make in
the Abisse of this infinite Beauty and Goodness of God, have they not a large
field of ioyfullnes and thankesgiueing? I will omit the Sciences with which she
is furnished by him who is called the God of Sciences, and who teaches men
science, and especially that Queen of Sciences DIVINITY, which consists in
the Contemplation of God, and which is the true knowledge of Saints. For I
pray you what do not they, says S. GREGORY, know, who see him that knows
all?

The advantages of the understanding.
XLVI.
Our manner of knowing and understanding, during this mortal life, stands in
need of the meditation of senses, whence this Philosophical Axiom, nothing
enters into the understanding, which past not first through the senses. And
verily, that which comes to the knowledge of sense, is but superficial. For
example, how does our sight know, but by a species or representation which the
object of this sense, sends out to our eye, which the Masters term, species
sensibilis, and is the cause that we see, and know by sight. What soever enters
into the knowledge of our understanding by this gate, is admitted in no other
sort. In like manner it is of other senses touching sensible and corporal
things. There are others more spiritual, as the Notio^s, or Principles of
Arts and Sciences, which our understanding conceiues by speculation. But how
does it conceive them, but by a subtle, delicate, and spiritual Image, which
is called Species intelligibilis. And then, by how many windings does this
species pass? how many changes and alterations does it endure, by the Common
sense, the fantasy, the understanding styled active, and then by the passive,
before it put on the proper shape to become intellectual? Lo then, how our
natural knowledge is formed by species and Images. Yea even the knowledge of
Faith, though supernatural, enters not into our soul, but under some kind of
composition, some simple, universal and abstracte cloud, which is Faith. Hence
it is, that the Apostle speaking of that kind of knowledge, by Faith, compares
it to an obscure sight, and as it were to that of a glass. And who knows not
that we see but merely in a glass, by means of the species which are formed
in it, a species which forms another in our eyes. So our understanding which
is the ey of our soul, does not asse^t to the truths of Faith revealed by
God, but by hearing them by the voice of the Church and her Pastures: (For
Faith is by hearing) or by reading them in the Creed and Canonical books.
But it fares not so, Athanasia, with the knowledge of the understanding in the
blessed Eternity. For there it shall see God without species, without
representation. The Deity uniting, joining, and applying it self in such sort
unto it, that that inward presence shall be in lieu of species. O dear God!
how nearly does this union approach unto unity, and with what wonders is this
application filled! The very proper essence of the Divine Truth being received
into the understanding without all Image or species. And then the peace of God
which passes all understanding, shall conserve and possess the hearts and
understandings, that is to say, the wills and understandings of those happy
souls. O who is able to express the incomparable happiness of those, who
without veil, without glass, without obscurity shall see face to face,
(being enlightened, and freed from all dimnesse and confusion,) that glorious
face which the Psalmist with such instance pursues? O what a glory shall it
be to behold, without being oppresst with the greatness of so high a Majesty,
those adorable, ineffable, incomprehensible mysteries of the most holy
Trinity! what a gracious favor shall it be, openly to discover the eternal
generation of the WORD, issuing out of the Fathers bosom, a generation, of
which the Prophet pronounces with admiration, who is able to relate it? what
a communication shall it be to see the Divine communications? yea the
communication of communications, which is that of the eternally reciprocal
love, and reciprocally infinite, of the Father to the Son, and the Son to
the Father, whence is produced as from one same Principle, the Holy Ghost?
Because the Father and the Son having but one will which does love, and one
goodness which is loved, the fountain of this production can be but one. O
mystery of mysteries! which it is better to admire then to deciphere, and
better to speak nothing of it, then too little. I had rather, in this place
which is not alloted to thy explication, imitate the Seraphins, who do veil
their eyes and feet, and fold their wings; and content my self, in
protesting my belief and alleagance in these words of the wellbeloued disciple
of JESUS CHRIST: There are three who give testimony in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the holy Ghost, and those three are one. I adore thee o great God in
the Trinity of thy persons; and in the unity of thy essence, and I do sink,
and become nothing before thine infinite greatness. What joy, Athanasia, has
this beatified understanding to discover this great mystery hidden from the
worlds creation, to wit, the Hypostaticall union of the eternal Word with the
flesh, which we call Incarnation. What a number of secrets are contained in
this great secret? what a number of wheels are fastened in this one wheel?
that is, what mysteries do depend of this mystery? and what a fire amidst
this wheel, fire which our Savior brought into the world, to the end it
should burn all the hearts of the faithful with his love, what delight shall
it be to behold this Abisse of beauties and perfections, which are in God by
way of excellency, and infinitely above all that we are able to imagine in the
Attributes which we frame of him. In this heavenly vision, as in the lively
fountain of all light, the shades of errors, doubts, opinions, and
ignorances shall vanish, which do inuiron and incompasse us in the almost
palpable darkness of the Egypt of this life. Faith it self, which revealed unto
us so many meruelles of God, and of his glorious City, shall disappeare in
this happy Abode, where we shall see, according as we shall have heard and
believed. Nether shall Hope be any more, because we shall enoye that, which by
Hope we expected. Charity alone shall never fail: never shall any thing cause
her holy flame to die out; contrariwise, in glory she shall be accomplished,
and come to the hight of her perfection. What a delightful entertaynement
shall it be for the understanding, to consider the windings of that wonderful
clock of the Divine Providence, as well in the government of the world in
general, as of all the souls in particular? and what thankesguings shall it
render to the fatherly care of the Divine Goodness, whilst it shall admire the
ways of God in the means which he has used, so amiably to draw it to so
great a felicity? O hight of the riches of the knowledge and wisdom of the
highest, shall it cry out, how wonderful are thy ways, and how
incomprehensible thy judgments. Then shall it be, that to the confusion of the
great Dragon, homicide from the beginning, that this word shall be seen
accomplished: you shall be as Gods knowing good and evil: For the understanding
cured of all desease of ignorance, and enjoying all good exempt from all evil,
shall perfectly know them both.

Of the light of Glory.
XLVII.
But before I pass over this felicity of man's understanding which he shall
enjoy in Heaven, I must tell you one thing, Athanasia, which cannot be
concealed from you, without depriving you of a pleasant and important
knowledge. True it is, that a created understanding shall behold God above in
his glory; without the help of any Image or species at all; yet not so, as
the Angelical Doctor shows very well, as that it sees him by the face of its
natural sight, which is as little able to sustain the brightness of the
increated light of the Divinity, as the night-birde to endure the Sun
beams. How then shall the created understanding see the Divine Essence without
any species? By the light of Glory, as the Divines term it, a special grace
by which God does fortify and enable it: a created light making the
understanding which it does inhabit, strong enough to approach the otherwise
inaccessible light of the Divinity, as does the Eagle the Sun. And it is of
this Grace Herbinger of Glory, that S. THOMAS understands that passage of the
Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans: God's grace is eternal life. And that:
eternal life, says S. JOHN, is to see God. It is of this light of Glory,
that all the Doctors understand that saying of DAVID: In thee o Lord is the
source of life, and in thy light we shall see light: that is to say, by the
aid of the created light, wherewith thou shall clothe the understandings of thy
Elect, they shall be able to fix their intellectual sight upon the brightness
of Saints, which is thy Deity. Even then as in this life we know the things of
the world by a natural light; and those of grace by the light of Faith, an
infused and supernatural light: so to see God in his Glori^, which is an
increated light, the understanding must be assisted by a created light, which
does dispose it to sustain the shine (which would otherwise dazzle and blind)
of that infinite brightness. And thus (holds on the Angel of the School) the
Essence of God shall be seen by the understanding, without all species on the
part of the Divine essence; but on the part of the understanding, this created
light of Glory strengthening it, shall be to it as a certain represe^tation
to take in and receive the light of the Divinity. Nor is their subtlety to be
regarded, who would make us believe, that as the Sun is seen by its own
light; so the increated light of the Divinity is seen by it self, without
the mediation of any created light, understanding as it were literally those
words of DAVID; In thy light we shall see light, that is, the light of thy
Divinity by it self. For as we know the things of Grace by the infused light
of Faith only, so are we to say the like of the knowledge of the things of
essential Glory, which consists in the vision of God, named by the Divines
Intuitiue Beatitude. And again, who granted those subtle Speculators; that
the light it self of the Sun, is the cause it is seen, since its beams do
rather weaken and blind, then strengthen and perfect our sight; witness that
wilful Philosopher, who lost his eyes by setting them too fixedly upon the
Sun. And verily the same would happen to the created understanding before the
increated light of the eternal Majesty, and it would be oppressed with that
infinite and inaccessible light, if God did not dispose it to this felicity,
by a particular aptitude, in strengthening it by the light of Glory.

Of diverse degrees of Glory.
XLVIII.
ANd it shall be this light of Glory, Athanasia, which shall make the diverse
mansions, which the Scripture mentions to be in the house of the Heavenly
Father, the blessed Eternity. For as one and the same fountain does divide it
self into diverse cha^nalls, in a greater or less quantity, according to
their sundry capacities: so the understandings of the Blessed, shall see the
increated light of the Divinity, proportionably to the created light of
Glory, which God shall form in them, according to the diversity of their
merit. For there, every one shall be rewarded according to his works, since
works follow the dead to punishment or felicity. And as the starts which
appear in the Heavens, receive more or less of the Sunns light, the fountain
of theirs, according as they are less or greater. So, says S. PAVLE writing
to the Citicens of Corinth, the degrees of glory shall be different, as one
star differs from another in brightness. For to affirm with IOVINIAN that
Beatitude is equal in all the Blessed, is an error fully refuted by S.
HIEROME (who wrote against this Heretic) and condemned by the Counsels. True
it is, says S. THOMAS, that on the part of the Object, which is God beholden
of all his Elect, Felicity is equal, but the inequality proceeds from the
fruition of this object, according to the capacity or incapacitie of the
understanding which does contemplate the same. But what is the cause of this
measure? The light of glory. And whence the measure of this light, but from
the greater or less Charity which inhabites the heart? For as following the
dimerit of offense, the eternal pains are different, so the Divine Justice
will have the reward diuersified according to the worth and degree of Charity,
which is as pure gold, the measure of all merit. A consideration which being
well pondered, would set a sharp spur of desire to the sides of our heart,
to advance and perfect us in this Queen of virtues, and carefully to manage
the occasions of well-doing, and all the moments of this mortal life, since
according to the rank of this quality, we shall bear away greater or lesser
advantages of Glory, the least degree of which, is better then the Empire of a
thousand worlds. And if the blessed souls were not satisfied and content, as
indeed they are, with this full, pressed, and ouerheaped measure of felicity
falling into their heart: And if any kind of sorrow could have entire into a
State so replenished with happiness, this would it be, that they had not
employed all the instants of their life to make progress in that virtue, which
makes them so much more capable of the power of our Lord, as it is found to
have been more emine^tly in them. O how true it is, that he who sowes
spareingly shall reap in the same measure. And he that sowes in benedictions,
shall reap a plentuous crope of benedictions. O centuple of this life! how often
shall thou be centupled in the life to come? In those Divine and celestial
Abodes, called by the Scripture MANSIONS, some are placed higher then others,
says S. AUGUSTINE, and do behold God more clearly. And S. GREGORY speaking
of the same subject, The great and little, says he, are in Glory, but they
enjoy it more or less, according to the diversity of their merit. Nor are we
upon this word Mansions to imagine to our selves, separated Celles, or Quarters
a part in the heavenly Jerusalem, where there is a perfect society amongst
the Blessed, together with a Community of all good things, each one reioyceing
no less in another felicity then in his own, all this holy Compainie having
but one Soul and one Heart in God, the one and only Object of their desires.
But by that word, says S. THOMAS after S. AUGUSTINE, we are to conceive diverse
degrees of Charity and rewards, which are had in this plentiful Rest, where
the Saints do reside for ever, as in the happy repose of the LAND OF
PROMISE.

In what measure the beatified understanding sees God in Heaven.
XLIX.
IT is no small question, Athanasia, to know how far the understanding
fortified with the light of Glory, does extend it self in the co^templation
of the Divine Essence, which it beholds without all help of species or
representation. But the Angel of the school gives a worthy satisfaction to
this holy curiosity, in teaching us that God, according to JEREMY, being, by
reason of his infinity, incomprehensible to every created thought, can never
be comprehended by any understanding, with what ever light of Glory they be
adorned and assisted. Because every creature being bounded, is not capable to
comprehend an infinite Object. Hence we have that fine and necessary
distinction, that the blessed shall see God, All indeed, but not totally; they
shall see him all, because being most simple, he cannot be seen but he is all
seen. But again, whereas he is infinite, there nether is, nor can be any
capacity out of himself which can totally comprehend him, nor embrace that
immense Infinity, which is only known of him self. We have some semblance
of this Truth, which cannot be seen, unless it be all seen, and yet is it
never totally seen, though it be even a limited creature, and has nothing
comparable to the Creator. So do the fish and fowls enjoy the vast extent of
the Sea and air, yet what fish did ever swime in all the waters; and what bird
did ever with flight measure the airs extent? All this notwithstanding is
possible, because it is finite. But the Divinity which is boundless cannot be
totally seen. For who did ever sound the depth of such an Abisse? And who has
ever known the sense of our Lord? Herein is discovered the impertinencie of
AETIVS and ENNANIVS old Heretics, who affirmed that God could be comprehended
by a creature, as though, forsooth, an illimited thing, could be shut up within
limits. An impertinencie pertinently refuted by those great lights of the
Church, S. BASILE, S. GREGORY OF NAZIANZENE, S. CHRYSOSTOM, S. AUGUSTINE, and
after them, by the Angelical Doctor. Yet this does not impeach the full and
entire satisfaction of the Blessed; nor does the natural incapacitie which
they find in themselves to behold God totally, any white vex them: yea
contrariwise it does augment their joy and contentme^t, which has no other
offspring then the love of God, a love of friendship, which does rather
respect the greatness and glory of the object beloved, then its own
interest; what a pleasing rauishment shall possess them; to behold the most
simple, only, and incomposed simplicity of that Divine beauty, which they
contemplate, all, though not totally, by reason of its incomprehensible
infinity? In beholding it, their desire is filled with every good thing: And
beit they see it diversely, as we have showen, yet are they thoroughly content,
according to the common similitude of a glass whereof the least is as well
filled with a little, as the greatest with much liquor. And after the desire is
saciated with the fruition of this ineffable Good, with what an excess of joy
are they taken, to know, that this adorable Deity has an infinite compainie
of other graces and perfections, still remaining to be seen and relished,
which are not totally comprehended nor known, save only by himself. Man does
then raise himself above himself; and liftes up his heart. But God, greater
then all hearts, does yet rise higher, nor can he be enco^pased by any other
then himself in his full extent. O how rauishing and admirable is that they
behold! And how good cause have they to sing with the Angels the three
Sanctuses to so dreadful a Majesty, in so high a strain, that the Gates of
Heaven shall tremble at it; and to pronounce: Thou art great and exceeding
laudable o Lord; and who can worthily enough sing thy excelle^ces in thy sacred
City, in thy holy mountains? Though all creatures should ouerset themselves,
yea melt away in joy and admiration, yet shall they never arrive at the least
of thine infinite excelle^cies. Hence it is that the HYMN of silence is the
best suiting praise, that can be offered unto thee, in thy Heavenly Sion. Yet o
God, how much more admirable is that which those souls do not discover in
thee, since it surpasses all created understandings, even strengthened with
the light of Glory? And to what a violent pain would the desire of knowing
thee totally, and loving thee deservedly, that is infinitely, put them unto, if
thy sweet and fatherly providence, (least the purity of their inspeakable
joys might be stained with the mixture of any discontent) did not change the
knowledge they have, that they cannot totally comprehend and embrace thee, into
a sovereign delight, that the glorious Object of their view and love, is so
immense, that it cannot be perfectly and entirely known and beloved, but by
thy self, by reason of the Divine infinity of thine infinite Divinity. Mean
while they draw from this great ALL, as from an vndraynable fountain, all
their common and particular delights, diuersely glorious, according to the
diversity of the light of Glory which is distributed unto them, whereby they
see him more or less, with proportion to their Charity and merit. We have
some dark resemblance of this here below in the use of our Senses. For is it
not true that the same Picture is diuersely beholden, according to the variety
of their opinions and skill that do behold it? Is not a dainty music
diuersely received into the ear of the hearer, according as their organes are
disposed, and they are attentive unto it? And to conclude this discourse with
an excellent similitude: The miraculous MANNA which pleased every palate, was
doubtless of a diverse relish to the Israelite, yet never any of them, nor
jointly all of them felt ever all the tastes with which God did endow that
heavenly and Angelical bread. We may say the same of the sight of God, the
highest point of eternal Glory: a sight which S. JOHN in his Revelations
terms a hidden Manna, for the reasons which we will reserve for that stroke
wherein we set out the pleasures of the Will.

Whether the beatified understanding sees all in God.
L.
BEfore I come to the Beatitude of the will, I desire to show, Athanasia,
whether, as the understanding enlightened with the light of Glory sees God
all; so it sees all in God. We cannot have an answer to this difficulty from
a better mouth then from the ORACLE of the School the Angelical Doctor, who
teaches us, that like as no created understanding can totally comprehend God;
so consequently can it not see in God all that he does, or is able to do, that
being reserved to God alone, who is of an infinite capacity, or rather
infinity it self. Marry it shall see more or less, according to the measure
of the light of Glory by which it is sustained. He shall see in God all that
he shall see, yet shall he not for all that, see all which God sees. Not
because all that which God sees is not visible in himself, but in regard of
the created understandings limitation, whence it cannot comprehend an illimited
thing. Nor is it to the purpose to affirm, that the Blessed, who shall
resemble the Angels, shall see like those heavenly spirits in the WORD (the
true Mirror without all Spot the likeness of his Fathers Goodness, and figure
of his substance; the splendor and candor of his light, being God of God, and
light of light.) All things as in a Mirror, being a thing commonly known, that
he that sees a Mirror, sees all things represented therein. For to make that
objection vanish like smoke, we need only to reply, that it is true indeed
when we speak of a Mirror which is comprehended by the eye. But this Mirror
of the WORD and the Divinity, being incomprehensible, how can it be imagined,
that a finit and limited understanding can comprehe^d that which is
incomprehensible? God therefore does only communicate himself infinitely unto
himself, by reason of the infinite capacity which he has to give and receive
such a communication: To creatures it is sufficient that he communicate
himself, with proportion to their sufficiency to receive him. For how can
they justly desire any more, after they be replenished with the fullness of God
so far forth as their capacity and ability can admit? But let us consider
further, Athanasia, how excellent this sight of things in God shall be, by the
manner of seeing, which shall be much more perfect then though they were seen
in themselves, in their nature and proprieties, or else by their species and
representation. For the beatified understanding being united unto God, and
beholding the very Divine Essence without species or image, shall by
consequence see all the creatures in this Divine Essence, without Species or
representations, in a far more complete and high manner, then though they were
seen in themselves, because they shall see them in the same manner they see
God, whose proper Essence shall supply the Species of things, all which it
contaynes in a most eminent manner. O incomparable glory of the blessed
understanding, since thou shall see the Essence of God, (without species,
without mediation, face to face) and in it, all things! Thou shall be blessed,
like unto God, and shall enjoy the felicity which God himself enjoys, since
his Beatitude consists in the loving contemplation of his own Essence.

The pleasures of the Will.
LI.
ALthough the advantages of the understanding be such as we have set them out
in the preceedent stroke, yet is the Will always his Mistrisse, and all his
labors and actions are directed to her. He is her Page, her Torchbearer, her
Forerunner; it is he, that discouers the GOOD, and proposes it to the Will to
be loved, who after she has known it, she imbraceth it. For according to the
Philosophers Axiom. The will is not carried to an object it knows not. Now
this Divine Essence seen without the mediation of Species by the
understanding, being the essential and infinite Goodness, whence all that is
good amongst creatures does flow, the will shall so closely, attentively and
inuariably unite her self unto it, that no creature either in Heaven or earth
shall ever be strong enough to separate her from this Charity so perfect and
accomplished. And out of this inseparable union of the will with the Sovereign
Good, her Rest and Center, a fountain of water of life running to Eternity,
shall spring up in the soul, and thence shall flow a floode of continual
joys and delights; so shall they be absorpt in the pleasures of our Lord, and
as it were drunk up in the Abisses of Divine sweetnesses. And if the wiseman
say, that all good things did accompainie wisdom in him, how much rather may
the blessed soul pronounce the same in the possession of the Divine wisdom,
and that eternal Kingdom, which in the Gospel we are exhorted to search
after, with promise, that in possessing of it, all good shall befall us: For
being accompained with a complete Charity, Charity the bond of perfection,
by a necessary sequall she shall be attended by all the Virtues, whose acts
she shall exercise with an incredible delight and facility. And this loving
fruition of God by the Will, is that hidden Manna, whereof mention is made in
the Apocalipse, reserved for the victorious inhabitants of the triumphant
Jerusalem. For as the Manna of the Wilderness did conteyne in it self all kind
of savors: so this union of the Will with the essential Goodness of God, does
co^prise all the favors heart can wish, in a most eminent^ manner. There is
nothing in the pleasures, honors, and riches of created things, which is
worthy to be compared to this treasure. The Manna was a celestial Food,
taking its name from the admiration of those who tasted it; for the word
imports What is this? and was spoken by the Israelites, when they saw it fall
from Heaven. And this gust of the will can be no otherwise expressed, but by
rapture: so far does it outstripe all humane capacity. It is called a hidden
Manna, for that being unknown to the world, it is only known of such as do
experience its sweetness, inconceaueable sweetness; which caused the Kingly
Prophet to cry out, o Lord how great is the multitude of the sweetness which
thou have treasured up for those that walk in thy fear. O God! might I dare
to express in this poor Draught the unspeakable contentme^t of the Will in
her union and application to the Goodness of the Divine Essence, to the
Divinity of the esse^tiall Goodness? O powrefull Virtue of Faith, to what a
high point of light do thou raise our souls in this veil of darkness? Yes,
Athanasia, even as the understanding shall be applied to the Prime Truth, which
is God himself; so shall the beatified will be inseparably joined to the
Essence of the Divine Goodness, and shall be eternally fedd and sustained with
God's own substance: in some sort; as a tender child, who hangs at his mothers
breaste, is nourished with the substance of the mothers milk. And thus shall
be accomplished that of the Prophet, I will lead her into a place a part, and
will speak unto her heart: and I will give her the milk of my dugges. Rejoice
Jerusalem with alacrity, that thou may be filled with the milk of
consolation, and that thou may suck and take delight in the full abundance
of his glory, thou shall be carried to the pappes, and thou shall be dandled
and lulled upon the knee. O Church Militant in earth, poor bleare-dyed LIA
with weeping in this valley of tears, not discovering the Sun which shines in
the Triumphant, be comforted, in that thou art not forsaken or abandoned of thy
JACOB: no, for he is with thee to the worlds end. Thou enioyest his
imbracements, which makes thee fruitful, in the feast of his grace, to wit,
the most holy Eucharist: for in this banquet, thou art fed with the substance
of his flesh and blood, applied to the substance of his children, to thend they
may learn by this wonderful mystery, that in the perpetual feast of
Glory, he will in like manner apply unto the Essence of their souls, his
Divine Essence, and that there, they shall taste and see how sweet he is. True
it is, that here below that Divine humanity is vayled with Sacramental
species, but above in the banquet of the Lambs marriage all shall be
discovered; Enigma's shall cease; and the understanding and will shall see and
taste without image and species the beauty of the Divine Goodness; the goodness
of the fair Divinity. Then, as S. AUGUSTINE says, the prize and crown of
virtue, shall be God himself, who gave the virtue. Who shall be seen above of
the Blessed without end, loved without distaste, praised without intermission.
So that this recompense is the greatest that can be, since it is nether Heaven
nor Earth, nor any other creature, but the very Creator and Lord of all. Who
though most-one and most simple, yet does he comprehend in himself in an
infinite eminency, all the perfections of all things. Whence it comes, that
the Blessed shall in him alone behold and enjoy all things, according to each
ones measure of Glory. And as creatures are in some sort here below, the
mirror, wherein is seen the beauty of the Creator; so above, God shall be
the Mirror wherein the creatures shall be seen much more perfectly then in
them selves. But in fine, Athanasia, the top of the felicity of the
beatified will shall be placed in her perfect love, the accomplishme^t of her
true end, and in that inuariable and immutable conjunction, with her rauishing
Object the Sovereign Good, which will make her wholly Divine, wholly transformed
into the Will of God, and to speak with the Contemplatiues, wholly deified.

The felicity of the inferior portion of the soul.
LII.
LEt us now descend; Athanasia, to the lowest degree of the soul, and lets
give a light touch of her Beatitude. Who is able to comprehend what goodly and
rauishing Idea's, the three faculties of the soul shall make resulte in the
imagination; and how withal, this light and gliding Mercury shall be stayed
in God, whose presence shall arrest all the motions of this stirring, unquiet,
and flitting faculty. And if we make a step lower into the appetitiue part,
where the Concupiscible and Irascible passions are lodged, motions which do
stir up such tormoyles, tempests, and disorders in our inward house in this
life; who would be able to express the heavenly order, and goodly government
that Reason, which then shall be, their absolute Mistrisse and Gouernant, shall
establish amongst them? And what a sure and happy Peace shall reign amongst
those people, who whileome were so subject to rebellion, while they sat in the
darkness of this life, and in the region of the shadow of death. Then there
will be no Love but of God, in God, and for God: no Hatred, but of that which
shall be contrary to this sovereign Love. No more desire but that which does
accompainie the fruition of the Divine object, which is continually to enjoy,
and eternally to behold that glorious face which the Angels continually desire
to behold, albeit they continually behold it. There shall be no more auersion
or flight, but from that which shall be contrary to that sacred desire: or
rather, there will be no more auersion at all, because this passion
presupposing evil, it shall have no Object in this place of felicity, where
infelicitie is not permitted entrance. Joy shall be perpetual, and always in
our Lord, since this sacred Residence is called the joy of our Lord: nor ca^
the scourge of sorrow approach his Tabernacles of confidence and joy, far other
then those which S. PETER wished upon the Mont-Thabor. Anger is a monster
banished from this Palace of Love. Even Hope it self shall vanish in the
possession of that, which with patience was expected. Despair thrown headlong
into Hell for ever, shall not recover it self from that fall, to inhabit this
place of delight. Chaste Fear full of respect, and wholly canded in Love, shall
remain in Beatitude for ever and ever. And with what courages shall not those
valiant Champions be enriched, who are there adorned with so many crowns,
having already past their co^bats, and lawfully fought. But to speak in a
more noble and high strain of those motions, which we term passions here
below, because we suffer by their mutiny, and reuoults, we should rather say
that they shall be happily changed into reasonable affections; and that humane
reason being united to the prime and sovereign, that is, the Divine Reason,
shall make use of all those faculties for the service and glory of the
Creator, applying all to his honor and praise, and making them in a glorious
manner wait upon CHARITY, whose proper Empire is to rule soueraignely over
reasonable affections, and to bestow upon them an honorable employment; So
shall the soul, as the Psalmist sings, and all her interior faculties bliss
God.

Of the dowries of the beatified soul.
LIII.
I Have espoused thee in Faith, I have espoused thee for ever, said God to a
faithful soul by one of his Prophets. Whence you see, Athanasia, that
herebelow, the betrothing is as it were passed between God and the soul, when
she adheares to him by a lively Faith, that is, quickened with love and
Charity: but that the consummation of the marriage, which is followed with an
indissoluble knot, is performed only in the Blessed Eternity. These two
sorts of espousalls are figured by the eare-letters, and bracelets with which
ABRAHAM presented REBECCA by the hands of ELIEZER for the pledges of their
marriage. For eare-rings are symboles of Faith, which does insinuate it self
by the ear, where the word of God enters: and bracelets are tokens of love,
whose true proof is the work says S. GREGORY: and is not the work
signified by the arm and hand, the principal instruments of operation? Now in
every well-ordered marriage, the Bride receaues some dowry of the Bridegroom,
whereupon in this great Sacrament of JESUS CHRIST and his Church and the
faithful Soul, which is a member of this Church the mystical body of our
Savior, the Doctors do assign dowries to the soul which enters into Glory,
according to that doctrine of ISAIE; our Lord has clothed me with garments of
salvation, and has adorned me with a chain as his Spouse: And that of S. JOHN
in his Apocalipse, who compares the triumphant Jerusalem to a Bride well
decked, being so adorned by her spouse. And touching those dowries in
particular, they reduce them to three heads, conformably to the three powers
of the Soul, and to the three Divine virtues, which God infuseth herebelow
into the hearts of the faithful, Faith, Hope, and Charity. For they say, that
the Memory is endowed with the possession of God, which does refer to Hope:
The understanding with vision or knowledge, in reward of Faith: and the Will
with the Divine Fruition, in recompense of Charity. This is the triple band,
which in Heaven shall inseparably tie us to God, a heavenly band which can
never be broken!

Touching the qualities of the glorified bodies.
LIVE.
Let Us now make a passage, Athanasia, from the interior to the exterior: from
the felicity of the Soul, to that of the body: and let us say, that to those
dowries, which I have deciphered in the former stroke, admirable qualities
shall be adjoined, which without distroying the being of the body, shall
work wonderful changes, and make them far more noble then they are in this
mortal life. We shall all rise again, says the Apostle, that is, as well the
Elect as the Reprobate, but all shall not experience this happy change: for
the bodies of the damned shall remain passible, heavy, gross, and dark; but
the bodies of the Blessed shall become impassible, subtle, light, and
resplendant. And to these four qualities it is, that the Doctors have reduced
the dowries of the glorious bodies. Impassibilitie is a quality which shall
make the body of an incorruptible temper, not obnoxious to change, exempt from
hungar, thrist, cold, heat, grief, infirmity, and from every thing that can
subject us to death, or pain. Glorified bodies cannot burn nor suffer in the
fire, nor be drowned in the water. In a word, nor can the tooth of Time, nor
any other force distroye them. They shall enjoy a continual youth, like to a
flower that cannot fade; a vigorous health, against which sickness can attempt
nothing, a quality of the heavenly bodies that suffer no alteration. Which
made the Apostle say, that that which was sown in corruption (he means the
corpse laid in the grave) shall rise incorruptible, and that which is mortal
shall put-on immortality. And again, the dead shall rise to incorruption. The
second dowry is subtlety, which shall indewe the body, as it were, with a
spiritual quality. I do not say that it shall become spirit, for that is the
error of some ancient Heretics refuted by S. AUGUSTINE in his books of the
City of God: nor yet, that the glorious body shall be made air, an Heresy
which S. GREGORY in his Morales ascribes to EVTICHIVS Bishope of
Constantinople, but I say, its subtiliti^ shall be so great, that it shall
pass through another body, as through Heaven and earth, which the Masters
term Penetration of dimensions. And of this dowry is understood that of the
Apostle, this sensible body shall rise again spiritual, (that is, resembling
the spirit in sundry things) yet in such a spiritualitie, as shall not deprive
it of its palpabilitie, according to that saying of our Savior to his
disciples after his resurrection: touch and see, a spirit has nether flesh nor
bones, as you see me have. And the same Savior did show the subtlety of his
glorious body, while he issued out of his Tomb not opening it, and entered into
the Hall where the Apostles were, the gates being shutt. The third quality
shall be an incredible Agilitie, and such as S. AUGUSTINE teaches, that the
body shall be where the Spirit desires, not that this motion, says S. THOMAS,
is performed in an instant, and without a mean, but that the swiftnes of the
passage, shall be, in a sort, imperceptible, and like to that of fire or
lightning, as says the wiseman. For the rest, says ISAIE, they run without
labor, and travel as far as they list, without being weary at all, because
this body sown in infirmity, shall rise again, says the Apostle, in such
vigor, (a vigor which S. THOMAS takes for Agilitie, or Mobilitie) that it
shall be indefatigable, and shall perform in a small time, an incredible
journey. The fourth and most noble dowry shall be Brightness, of which it is
said in S. MATTHEW, that the Just shall shine like the Sun in the Kingdom of
their heavenly Father: and again, that they should fly like sparks, as it is
in the wiseman. And S. PAVLE writing to the Corinthians, assures them, that
that which is sown in infirmity shall rise up in glory, that is, in
brightness, according to S. THOMAS his interpretation, grounding upon the same
Apostle, who says presently after, as one star differs from another in
brightness, so shall the glorious bodies differ after their resurrection. And
the same Apostle speaking to the Philippians tells the^, that our Lord will
reform the body of our humility, and will conform it to his brightness, a
brightness whereof he gave a proof in his Transfiguration upon the Mount-Thabor;
of his Agilitie by walking upon the waters; of his subtlety in his birth; and
of his impassibilitie escapeing often times, without hurt, out of the hands of
the Jews, who one while would stone him, at another time would throw him
headlo^g down, while as yet the time of his suffering death for our sake, was
not arrived.

The pleasure of the Senses.
LV.
THe glorious body being in this sort, as it were transformed by the four
qualities which I have touched in the former stroke. O, Athanasia, judge you
how exquisite the pleasures of the senses shall be, which they shall enjoy in
Organes so perfectly well disposed. It is a delightful question in Divinity,
to know, whether the dowry of impassibilitie shall exclude the act of the
senses, which S. THOMAS deneyes, by no less solid then subtle arguments, and
shows contrariwise, that the perfection of those qualities shall render the
pleasures of the Senses more pure, and their delights more excellent. He
seems to make some exception of the Sense of tasteing, for that the Kingdom
of Heaven being nether meat nor drink, but joy and Peace in the Holy Ghost,
and the beatified body standing in no need of food to sustain it, he thinks
that this Sense made to relish meats, remaynes unprofitable; and he would
rather attribute unto it, a delicious humiditie upon the tongue, which makes it
feel the taste of a hidden Manna; then to believe, that this faculty should
be there without its peculiar delight. And it is not without reason, that
Beatitude is compared in the Scripture to a great feast, and that the Sacred
Canticles mention so many sweetes, honey combs, dainty and inebriating wines;
and that the heavenly Spouse inuites those to drink and eat who are called,
invited and admitted to his eternal marriages. For though we cannot fully
conceive in this life what the endless delights shall be which God has in
his right hand to bestow upon his Favorites: yet does Faith teach us, that
there are secrets locked up in the treasures of his wisdom, to do that which
we cannot comprehend. Our Lord, says ISAIE, will make a solemn banquet in his
holy mountain for all nations, replenished with all sorts of good things, and
delicate meats, a banquet far other then that of ASSVERVS, which the scripture
delivers in such pomp, in the book of ESTER. O how happy shall he be, says
the Holy Evangelist, who shall eat bread in the Kingdom of Heaven; and shall
be invited to the marriage of the lamb. Behold, says the Savior of our
souls, what I have prepared for you in the Kingdom which my Father has given
me, that you may eat and drink at my table. And S. LVKE speaking of this
Eternal banquet: Amen I say unto you, says he, the Son of man shall girt
himself, and shall make his Elect, sit at his table, and he will serve them
according to their rank. And the Psalmist: the desire of the Elect, that is,
their appetite, shall be replenished with good things; and the same speaking of
himself, I shall not be saciated, says he, till the glory of our Lord shall
appear unto me. Could the delights of the taste be more plainly set out? By
how much the eye passes the other Senses in dignity, by so much its delights
shall be more worthy of consideration. O God what rauishing spectacles shall
they behold, and how all the worlds rarities shall show vile and obscure in
regard of the wondrous splendor of the heavenly Jerusalem! How shall the
diversity of the glorious bodies adorned with so many recommendable qualities,
ravish them! But leaving the Angels and Saints of the lower ranks, o blessed
eyes, what joy shall you not feel, in the vision of that glorious visage of
JESUS CHRIST? which the Angels have beholden for so many ages, and shall
behold for ever and ever, so far from being wearied of it, that they shall be
delightfully saciated with it. O Deified humanity, the sovereign glory and
felicity of the eyes that behold thee! o resplendant Sun of the East, o
star the light of the world! o Lamb who art the Lamp of the eternal Sion!
how happy are they, who, in these Tabernackles of assurance, shall incessantly
behold thee upon the Divine Thabor; and shall adore thee like the Elders of the
Apocalipse; before the Throne of thy Majesty in the highest! JOB beholding in
spirit this happy Abode, ravished with content, said, I know that my Redeemour
lives, and that at the last day I shall rise again, and shall issue out of the
ground, being a new again clad with the same skin, with which now I am
environed, and that in mine own flesh I shall see my God, my Redeemour, whom
with mine own eyes I shall behold and with no others, and this hope laid up
in my bosom, is my sweetest consolation. O Goodly Paradise! it is in thee,
that the ears shall hear those secret words, which S. PAVLE heard in his
Rapture, and which he durst not speak again. o blessed ears! it is in this
place that you shall hear the words of spirit and life, yea words of spirit
and life everlasting. o Saints! then shall you say, we will harken what our
Lord shall say unto us; yes, speak Lord, for thy servants are attentive. And
if the Queen of Saba did repute Salomon's courtiers happy, because they daily
heard the discourses of wisdom, which issued from his mouth; what shall it be
to hear him, who is incomparably more then SOLOMON, and who is wisdom it
self? o how delightful shall the discourses of Saints be; how delicious
their song and harmonious music! nay the Saints dance for joy in this holy
place, and God's praises do continually resound in their mouths. Be hust
heavenly Musicians, who so highly sing the Glory of God. Silence ye warbling
birds. Consorts of the world be still, while the Musicians of heaven tune their
instruments, and play of their Harpes, till they entone with one consent of
hearts and voices the Song of the Lamb. The Song always new, of him, who
alone works wonders.

A continuation of the precede^t subject.
LVI.
But do you not perceive, Athanasia, the sweet charm of all the parfumers
odoriferous Sentes? By means of those which you shall find in the Ca^ticles,
raise up your mind, I beseech you, to those delightful Sweetes wherewith the
Saints do embalme the Throne of the Lamb, the odor of whose garments
surpass all aromaticall spices. Those, who in this world by their examplaire
virtues have been a good odor in JESUS CHRIST, and an odor of life to life,
shall be then so sweetly parfumed, that our Savior will say unto them, as
ISAAC did to JACOB; behold the odor of my children, like unto that of a
flourishing field, and heaped with benedictions. It shall not be enough for the
sense of touching to be exe^pt from pain, by the privilege of impassibilitie,
but further, though it be the grossest of all the Senses, yet, enriched with
the dowry of subtlety, Agilitie, and brightness, it shall have also its
particular delights, marry such, as are innocent (for, as is in the sacred
Text, there shall be no more marriages, but every one shall be as the Angels
of God) and as pure as the very sunne-beames, although it be environed on every
side with a torrent of pleasures, which shall penetrate men in more places,
then they have pores in their body. I omit the glorious m^arkes, and
particular contentme^ts of the bodies which might have suffered pains, and
mortified themselves for the love of God; for as sinners shall be tormented
according to their lawless pleasures; so shall the Elect be rewarded according
to their sufferances. For which cause our Savior said: you are happy when you
are persecuted, because your reward shall be plentiful in heaven. For the love
of you, said the Psalmist^; speaking for the Saints, we have been mortified,
and led like sheep to slaughter. But o Lord, says the same, how thy friends
have been afflicted, and, as the vulgaire translation has, honored; how their
principality, that is, their Glory, was confirmed. And again, according to
the multitude of their greeues, consolations abounded in their Hearts. O my
wretched body what ought we not to endure herebelow, to arrive at the t^oppe of
such felicity? whither the^ Saints are come through fire, wheels, gibbets,
swords, haire-shirts, disciplines, austerities: and whither the King of Saints
entered by suffera^nces. O miserable body! too delicate a member to live under
a Head crowned with thorns, and wholly covered with blood. Tell me accursed
carcass* and victime of death, what privilege thou pretendst, that thou dare
presume by a manifest i^iustice, wallowing in soft lux and delicacies, to enter
into a Kingdom, all whose gates are made with Crosses; in a Paradise, where
none enters, that is not pierced with the fir^e sword of a loving
mortification? Hear this doom, or rather this thunder clapp, o my body, and
thou o my soul, If thou do not mortify with the spirit the actions of
sensuality, thou shall die? marry if thou mortifiest them, thou shall live.
And again, mortify your members which are upon earth, and carry still in
your body the mortification of JESUS CHRIST; so shall you be as dead, but to
the end you may live eternally.

Of the Aureola.
LVII.
BEsides the essential Glory which the Blessed shall enjoy, Athanasia, in the
sight of the Sovereign well-beloued, in the love of the Sovereign well-seene,
the Divines do note certain accidental ones, and as it were accessorie to
the prime and principal, which they have named Aureolas, grounding upon a
passage of Exodus, where there is command given to make a little crown called
Aureola over the Arc, bisides the crown of gold with which it was to be wholly
environed. Now this Aureola does chiefly reside in the soul, albeit by a
certain rebounding (says S. THOMAS, as also DENIS THE CARTHVSIAN) and
ouerswelling, it breaks out, and spreads it self over all the body, and does
even outwardly appear with a certain peculiar grace. And if Essential Glory
be different, according to the diverse degrees of Charity and merit, this
accidental, of which we speak, shall be varied, following the variety of
labors and victories. For as there is division of graces, so is there of
rewards to. Ordinarily these Aureolae are divided into three kinds; whereof one
is attributed to MARTYRS, who have conquered the world: the second to
VIRGINS, who have surmounted sensuality: the third to DOCTORS, who by their
learning have defeated the Arts and errors of the Prince of darkness. And if
these Aureolae be compared together, the common consent gives the first rank
and preeminencie to Martyrdom: for there is no greater charity, then to give
ones life for that which he loves. Never durst any, says S. AUGUSTINE,
prefer Virginity before Martyrdom, Chastity being but a lent martyrdom,
whereas to die in torments, is a violent one. A second is given to virgins, who
follow the Lamb where ever he goes, clothed in white stoles. The third to
Doctors, who were the salt of the earth, the light of the world, and the
Lamps of Israel. And when I say the Aureola shall be given unto Doctors, I
nether understand the learned, nor those that shall only have taken the degree
of Doctor ship in earth, and buried their Talent, and hid their Lamp under the
Bushall: For such Doctors shall enjoy in Heaven the simple guife of Charity
only, a thing common with the rest of the Elect; for as DANIEL says; they
shall be bright as the Firmament. But such, as shall instruct others in the way
of salvation and righteousness, shall sparkle and shine as glorious strarrs in
perpetual Eternities. Those then it is, that have taught and communicated to
the ignorant sound and wholesome doctrine, who shall carry away the Aureola of
Doctors. For as he is not crowned who has only the ability and strength to
fight and vanquish, but he that in effect does fight and overcome the enemy,
according to that: none shall be crowned, but such as have lawfully fought: so
those only that had knowledge, and made others participant of it, shall
partake of the Aureola of Doctors, according to that of the Gospel, he that
shall teach and do what is good, shall be called great in the Kingdom of
Heaven, Some understand those words of the Apocalipse of this Aureola: I will
bestow on him that shall overcome, a hidden Manna, and a white stone wherein
shall be graven a new name, which none shall know but he that receaues it: and
that of ISAIE, speaking of the Continent under the name of Eunukes: I will give
them a Mansion within the compass of the walls of my house, and an excellent
name amongst the children of men. As then, here below in earth, men are
ordinarily distinguished by their clothes: so shall those three bands have some
particular sign or mark, which shall make them notable amongst the rest of
the Blessed.

The Blessed society of the Elect.
LVIII.
ANd if an ancient Philosopher, Athanasia, following common sense, said, that
felicity is not full and accomplished without society, what compainie is
comparable to that, which the Blessed enjoy in Glory? Though God be sole and
one in Essence, yet has he society in the distinctions of persons, and thence
is not solitary in his Beatitude. What shall it be to behold the Society of
the three Divine persons united together in the unity of their being? yea
even to be united to this high Society, in the band of Charity, which is that
of perfection! what shall it be to be associated to the humanity of JESUS
CHRIST, our brother, according to Flesh, as he was Son of man, which for our
sake he took upon him: whence we are made children of God; and if children,
heirs; and if heirs of God, coheires of JESUS CHRIST in the inheritance of
Glory. O how happy shall they be who are inrowled into the holy FELLOWSHIPE
of JESUS CHRIST, and made partaker of his heavenly and Divine conversation? And
if it be written, that even in this world, he that is in Charity, remaynes in
God, and God in him; and that he that keeps the Commandments, is made the
Tabernacle, and lodginge, of the three persons of the Sacred TRINITY: what are
we to say of the state of consummated Grace, which is Glory, where Charity is
complete? O Divine Society! And if after the Divinity and humanity of our
Savior, we turn the ey of our consideration upon the admirable beauty of her
who is the holy of Holyes, yea the MOTHER of the holy of Holyes; and who next
unto God, to whom is due the worshipe of Latria, we honor with Hyperdulia,
what could be imagined more rauishing, since she is the mother of that very
Son, who was eternally begotten in the splendor of Saints, in the breast of
the eternal Father? were it not a spareing speech, to attire her with the
Sun; to make the Moon her footstool, and stars her crown? yes verily,
since her Son and her God, are her great crown, and incomparable joy,
according to that of the wiseman: a virtuous Son is the crown and joy of his
Father and Mother, And from this quality of MOTHER OF GOD, which is in some
sort infinite, there rebou^ds in her such an abundance of grace, that she is
not only invested with them, but ouer-inuested; not only full, but
ouer-heaped, so that next to the humanity of thy adorable Son, who was
conceived by the Holy Ghost of her pure blood, there is no created object in
Heaven that dare approach her beauty. It was written of ESTER that she was
extremely fair, incredibly graceful, meruellously amiable, and gracious in
the eyes of every one. But nothing below was powerful enough to gain the
Heart of the Heavenly ASSVERVS, save only the Divine Mary's perfections. O
vessel of Election, choice piece of the massiue gold of fair and pure
dilection, beset with all the precious stones of virtues; what a joy shall it
be to the Elect, thy little children, since thou art the mother of their Savior
and Father, to live eternally in thy happy compaignie? What sense of
obligation shall they testify unto thee, who by thy powrefull prayers received
so many sundry graces in earth? Yea that which is the top of all graces,
their admittance into the Palace of immortality? what a delight shall it be
to be associated to the troops of Angels, whose conversation is entirely
sweet and deuoyd of bitternesses, and to be made partakers of their splendor
and beauty, yea to become like to them, according as it is written; the Elect
shall be as the Angels of God; which is easy to be believed, since that in
some sort, they shall be made like unto God, when they shall see him face to
face, and such as he is. What a glory shall it be to be made an eternal
Citizen of that delightful Jerusalem, built as a City; to be participant of
the same freedom which the Saints of God enjoy, without all fear of falling
from it, or of being ever banished from that Residence of permane^t and
eternal abode. And if in the time of the Triumphant Rome, it was reputed so
great a privilege to be made free Denisan of that famous City, as then LADY
CONQVERESSE of a great part of the world: And if while Jerusalem flourished
under SALOMON's reign, it was so wishfull a thing to live there, and to have
a share in the delights and triumphs which were there ordinary. O heavenly
Society where God reigns in and amongst his Saints eternally; where
triumphs and pleasures are perpetual, and that in a life that shall never pay
tribute to death, how much more art thou to be desired?

The Excellences of this holy Society.
LIX.
But let us not content our selves, Athanasia, with a general sight of this
holy compaignie, but that we, may take more gust, and reap more fruit from
this speculation, let us walk our thoughts amidst the particular excellences
thereof, and let us weigh it, as we ought in the waightes of the Sanctuary. If
earthly Cities be esteemed for the multitude of their inhabitants, as was the
great NINIVE of old; since that, ROME, CONSTANTINOPLE, and now the incomparable
PARIS, who for the abundance of her riches, and the number of her inhabitants,
seems in deed, as in name, an Abridgement of Paradise: What esteem is to be
made of the numberless number of the heavenly Jerusalem. No, says JOB, the
number of God's Champions, upon whom the light of his countenance does shine,
cannot be counted. A thousand thousand Angels, says DANIEL, serve him, and
ten thousand millio^ assiste before his throne. And if the first quire of
Angels surpass the number of men; and that Quire be the lest in number, as in
all other qualities, how great must the number of the eight former quires needs
be, if according to the opinion of S. THOMAS, followed by DENIS THE CARTHVSIAN,
the number of Angels does as much outstripe that of men, who have been, now
are, or shall be, as heavenly bodies do put down the elementarie in
quantity? As for the Elect who are to succeed in the vacant Seats, and to
repair the ruins, of the Angels Apostataes, they shall be in so great
abundance, that S. JOHN says in his Reuelatio^s, that their number cannot fall
under the laws of Arithmetike. Count if thou can the stars in the Heavens,
and the sands on the Sea shore, said our Lord of old to ABRAHAM, and know that
thy posterity shall be yet more numerous. In what number shall the children of
the God of ABRAHAM ISAAC and JACOB be, who could out of stones raise the
children, of that great Patriarch, the Father of the faithful, and believers.
O Lord grant that I may be enrowled in the book of life, which shall contain
all their names, new names, which shall proceed from thy mouth; and that I may
confess thee, in that great Church, and triumphant assembly; and that I may
bless the amongst that people full of gravity. And it is an excellency no
less grateful to contemplate the fine distinction of ranks in that
incredible multitude, without all division or jealousy. For if in the Babilone
of the Reprobate, there be a horrible confusion and disorder: in this
Jerusalem, Mother of the Elect, there is a well governed Order by the Divine
wisdom, a thousand times fairer, then that which we daily behold in the
compositio^ of this great universe. There are many Mansions in my Fathers
house, says our Savior CHRIST. The Angels are divided therein, into three
principale Hierarchies, and each of these Hierarchies into three orders, which
make up nine Quires of all those heavenly Spirits. Thus are the troops of the
Army of the God of Hosts ranged: of which it is said in the Sacred Canticle,
speaking of the Spouse of the great and Heavenly SOLOMON: what can you epsy in
the Sulamite but troops of Soldiers well ordered, whence she is terrible as an
Army put into Battle array. And though the Elect, Associates of the
felicity of Angels, as being their brothers, be disposed of, according to the
diverse degrees of their Quires: yet shall they keep their own particular
titles, by which they shall be distinguished from one another, and known for
such as they were in the service of God in his Church Militant. Thus shall the
Quires of PATRIARCHS, PROPHETS, APOSTLES, EVANGELISTS, MARTIRS, VIRGINS,
CONFESSORS, and all the rest of the Faithful, who even in the world, overcame
the world, be seen in a goodly order.

Other excellencies.
LX.
THis multitude and Order is accompained with another excellency, which
consistes of an admirable union and correspondancie, proceeding from one and
the same spirit, to wit the spirit of God, which does animate and govern this
heavenly company. There, DAVID would have iuster reason then here below, to
sing. o how good and pleasant a thing it is; to see brothers live unanimously
together. Their accord and union does resemble the oil of the high Priest
AARON, which running down from his head, spredd it self upon his beard, and
from thence fell upon his collar, or as others say, to the hemme of his
garments. The sweet and peaceable Society of Doves, Bees, Pismires, sheep,
and of Cities and Common wealths well governed, is but a weak and unworthy
draught of the agreeable intelligence which pass betwixt those heavenly
inhabitants. No, for all their pretentions being one, and their employments
being wholly about that one necessary thing, of that Marie's best Part which
shall never be taken from her, their connection is rather to be termed an
unity then an union, since in them is accomplished that excellent word of our
Saviors, beseeching his heavenly Father, that such as follow and believe in
him, should be one, as he and his eternal Father is one. So shall all their
desires be filled with perfect unity, which is God: and all their thoughts
meeting in that unity, the Divine Spouse by good reason may say to that holy
assembly, his own mystical body: My Sister my Spouse, thou have wounded,
and borne away my Heart in one only of thy heirs. For as a woman that does
graspe and gather together in her hand, her long tresses, makes them all end in
one only hair: so all those elected troops, having but one only desire,
which is to please God, the loving heart of this God all of fire, and which is
Charity it self, can it possibly but be pleased in this their preparation of
mind? From this perfect union does arise the excellency of a complete
Community, which is the true and consummated Communion of Saints. A Communion
by which each one in his own person, does possess God and his Kingdom, with
such peace, and so exquisite a Charity, that not the least apprehension of any
partiality can enter into their hearts. There shall all propriety be left,
and of the contrary side, there shall be so bountiful a communication, that
those that are highest seated in glory, are full of affection toward the
lowest, and as far forth as they are able, make them participant of their
abundance; and the lowest again, shall as much rejoice in the exaltation of
the highest, as in their own; for in this perfect Community mine and thine
shall be given over, each ones particular good belonging to all, and the goods
of all, belonging to each one in particular, each one rejoicing as much in an
others good as in his own, by reason of the great Charity which shall be
infused into their hearts by the holy Ghost. Hence they are all continually
set at one table, fedd with the same substance, the Divinity; drinking in the
same cup eternal delights; employed in the same exercises, serving one and
the same Master, and that, with the same spirit, who being in all, and being
all in all, he unites them all together, by uniting them all to himself. This
sacred band of the Divinity, and this Charity of God tying and uniting them
together, adornes this happy Society with another excellency, which is that
of Peace and Concord: Peace of God which passes all understanding, and which
does connect them together like unto the grains of a Pungranade which appear
when it is cut open, to which the holy Spouse in the Canticles co^pares the red cheeks of the Church his Spouse. And if the word, concord come from the
union or agreement of hearts, how should not they be united who have one only
heart, and that quickened with one only soul, all their hearts being set on
God their only Treasure, and their adhering to that only principle of all
Good, making them one very spirit with God? As concerning the Peace which
follows this Concord, as the beams the Sun, it is the very name of this
higher Jerusalem, which signifies VISION OF PEACE, and of which it is written,
that it is bounded with peace. And in ISAIE, that God does visit it in peace,
and in peace which can never be changed, or troubled with any dissension,
because Gods absolute comma^de shall find an absolute submission in all their
hearts. In that heavenly City, says S. AUGUSTINE, CHARITY is the Sovereign
LAW: TRVTH the QVEENE; PEACE the FELICITY; ETERNITY the LIFE thereof. There;
shall be a true peace, and such an one, as shall never be trauersed by any: a
peace which passes all delight. From that Peace springs a serenitie of mind, a
tra^quillitie of heart, a band of Love, a communication of Charity, and a rest
in God which can never be changed. So speaks that Great Doctor, of that
eternal Peace, which the world nether gives, nor indeed knows.

A continuation of the excellencies.
LXI.
But, Athanasia, should I be able to conceal the excellency of the beauty of
that holy compaignie? o, cries out the wiseman, how beautiful is the chaste
and fair generation, truly, the memory thereof shall be immortal before God
and man. If he affirmed this of earthly families who live in honor, what may
be said of the generation of the Blessed which shall be crowned with eternal
benedictions? How should the Angels and Elect choose but be fair, since their
souls shall be decked with all the ornaments of virtues, and their bodies
enriched with the glorious qualities which before we have declared. There can
be no stayne upon them, for nothing that is defiled, or is imperfect, can enter
into this Sanctuary of Eternity. And if MARDOCHEVS little fountain became an
Ocean of light, what beauty can the Elect want, who are united to the
fountain of all that fair or good is, which is he, whose essence is very
Beauty and Goodness: And who rules in heaven by the sweet and delightful
Empire of his incomparable beauty. No, Athanasia, if all the beauties which
do sparkle in the whole world were gathered together (I except nether the
Su^ne nor the Stars) they would be in no sort comparable to the least grace of
the Elect. Judge then what a shine of beauties, must needs arise, from so
innumerable a number of so different beauties, that some Doctors have proceeded
so far, as to say that all the Angels are of a different species. o God what
numberless species of beauties! And as touching the diversity of humane
sisages, it is so visible, even in this world, that it needs no other proof
but experience. And what diversity of beauties shall there be in the diverse
quires of Angels, and the diverse degrees of the Blessed? Let us make an end,
without ending (for who knows not that a Draught, though never so perfect in
the nature of a Draught, is yet but an imperfect picture) and let us give the
last touch to these excellencies, by that, which may be called the excellency
of Excellencies of this Blessed Society; It is, that it shall be endowed with
all the perfectio^s which grace and glory can shewre down upon creatures. For
since Beatitude is a perfect collection of all kind of good things, why shall we
not also affirm, that those that do enjoy it, are, by consequence, possessed
of all the perfections which might in any sort perfect this felicity? Now
though sovereign and essential Beatitude, as well that of this life, as of
the life to come, does not consiste in any created good, and consequently,
nether in Honors, Riches, nor Pleasures, the three Classes to which are
reduced every good, be it honorable, profitable, or delightful; but in the
only fruition of the increated Good, which is God, the essential fountain of
all Goodness. Yet as the most ridged Philosophers, have not denied that Glory,
Reputation, means, and lawful pleasures, do contribute to te^porall
felicity; so Divines are not so strict as to deny that those qualities do
concur in Heaven to the accide^tall Beatitude of the Elect. I dare therefore
as boldly as truly affirm, that besides the virtues which are the beauties of
the soul; and the beauties which are the virtues and graces of the body,
which virtues shall be all together, and that in a high measure in all the
Saints, since that this heavenly City is thereupon called The City of
virtues, the City of God, the City of the God of Virtues, DAVID saying, they
shall go from Virtue to Virtue to see the God of Gods in Sion. Besides the
virtues, I say, the inhabitants of this glorious City, shall be most holy,
most illustirous, most noble, and most emine^t in all kinds of greatness,
qualities, titles, perfections, without all mixture of baseness, abiectnesse
or imperfection. Alas in this poor and miserable world, there are a thousand
weaknesses and miseries mingled with the most prosperous honor in the earth,
and often times they serve only to make the vice and weakness of such as are
advanced unto them, more appearant. The greatness of their fortunes serve
only to aggrauate their fault, and if their qualities do rather move us to
pity then envy, their blameworthy manners do more move to envy then
pity. By how much the place is higher, whither the Ape climes, by so much he
is more ridiculous, and for want of his tail discouers all his infamy: whereas
upon the ground his deformity does less appear. There are certain
great-ones whose scandalous proceedings, which would be covered in the throng,
if they were but of a common condition, seem only to appear in the face of
the Sun, to fasten shame upon their foreheades, to perceive in themselves
such abject mynds, in qualities so high. Certes, says the great Stoicke,
imagine what greatness you please in man, it never passes the limits of
humanity. Though a man be mounted upon a Throne, his stature is no greater for
all that. To take the dimensions of a Statua, one is never to measure the Base:
nor to take the hight of a man, do we measure him with his dignity, of which
he is often unworthy. He that is seated in a high seat, sitts in the same
manner that he would do, being set in a lower place. Stiltes and footstooles
make not a man taller, though he appear higher. A noble outside does not
raise an abject mind; nor does the brightest luster of nobility, always light
upon the greatest head. There is nothing perfect here-below; there are no roses
without thorns, no wheat without cokle, nor corn without chafe. This world
is an Arc, wherein are clean and unclean beasts. A Park where goats and
sheep live together. A nett wherein both good and bad fish are found. The rain
and Sun do equally fall and shine upon the fruitful and fruitless ground.
But in Heaven it fares not so; nothing that is either impure or imperfect can
have entry there. In that fair place, says S. BERNARD, SOLOMON 's wisdom
will appear folly, his knowledge ignorance; ABSALON 's beauty shall be
reputed there deformity. SAMSON 's force shall pass there for feablenesse.
The longest term of life in our foreelders will appear a death; and all the
riches of all the Kings of the earth, shall be there, very poverty. Say the
like of all great place, honors, pleasures and conte^tments of the earth, to
which we asscribe the name of good things. Verily being compared to eternal
things, they shall have the true shape of true evils, such as indeed they are,
when the lawful use thereof is turned to abuse. And if the conversation, and
compaignie of the wise, great, vallourous, understanding, virtuous: and of
personages who are illustrious, either in regard of their quality or merit, is
so witchingly pursued in this world; where there is no gold without dross,
where nothing is complete; what a bless shall it be to a soul to perceive
her self associated for ever with so many Angels and Elect, all filled, by
the King of immortal ages, with all desirable and imaginable perfectio^s?

A flight of the mind toward this happy compaignie.
LXII.
But o my soul who will bestow upon thee the wings of a dove to fly up into
this eternal repose? Who will grant thee the wing of an Eagle, to take a
strong flight, and not to fall from the wing? What prosperous gale, save that
of grace, shall fill the sails of thy desires, to make them sail upon the Sea
of this world, to that Harbor of salvation? Why do we not make haste, o my
soul, to enter into this happy tranquillity, amongst this holy nation, this
people of acquisition, who is set in an abu^dant peace, a rich and magnificent
repose? What do thou do in this Land of Egypt, where thou drinkest nothing
but troubled and durtie waters, leaving the pursuit of that stream of water
of life, which springs toward Eternity? Alas! do thou not sigh upon the
protraction of thy mortal pilgrinage? does it not vex thee to be so long
detayned amongst the inhabitants of darkness? Can thou be in peace amongst
such as hate Peace, and take a malicious pleasure in crossing thee? Go to
the^, and sleep not between the two paths of the two Eternities. Take the
siluerd wings of the white dove, which are guilt in their extremities; and full
of innocence, purity of heart and Charity (qualities which make passage into
the Tabernacles of the heavenly Hill) fly into the porche of that celestial
douecote, whether the Sacred Spouse calls thee. S. GREGORY THE GREAT, whom
PETER his DEACON did see so often accompained with a dove, which witnesses
that the holy Ghost spoke by the mouth of that holy Pope, and flowed out of his
pen, will lend thee the flight of a dove, to bear thee up to this Society of
Saints, by his holy words. As often as we consider the great reward which is
promised us in Heaven, how vile does all earthly things appear in our sight.
For what tongue is able to speak, or understanding to comprehend the
incomparable delights of the heavenly Jerusalem? the happiness to be rancked
amongst the Quires of Angels? to assiste before the Throne of Glory of the
Highest, and the compaignie of those blessed spirits? the felicity which is
tasted in beholding the splendor of the Divine face? the contentment of being
freed from the fear of death; and the pleasure to have assurance of a
perpetual incorruption? What mind is so far benumbed and frosen, as will not
take heat and fealing from the desire of so great a good; and wish speedily to
be transported to the place where he hopes to enjoy an endless joy? But none
comes without labor to so excellent a reward, whence S. PAVLE says, that none
shall be crowned but such as have lawfully fought. And if we be taken with the
greatness of the reward, let us not be amaysed with the pains we are to
undergo in obtaining it. We must still go forward, and without looking back
over our shoulders, we must persevere in the way. If the roughness of the way
affright us, let the consideration of Eternity, our end, and contrie,
encourage and comfort us.

Another flight of mind.
LXIII.
IF after the wings of a dove, which the successor of the Son of a dove, S.
PETER, has now lent thee, thou will take those of the Eagle, who builds his
nest in high places, but of an Eagle which is able fixedly to behold the Son,
and who never stoopes from his winge, of whom can you better borrow them, o my
soul, then of that great Doctor, who holds the same rank amongst the Fathers
of the Church, that S. JOHN holds amongst the Evangelists, and who is that
great Eagle which is nourished with the sap of the Cedars of Libanus. You
will easily imagine that I speak of S. AUGUSTINE. Let us borrow then this
second flight of that superlatiue wit in these no less affectionate, then
sublime terms. If you were, says he, every day to suffer extreme torments,
yea even for a long space to support the tortures of Hell, to behold JESUS
CHRIST in his glory, and to be admitted into the Society of his Saints, for
so great a good, were not all sufferances, I will not say supportable, but even
desirable? Let then the Devil lay Ambush for us, let him provide temptations,
let fasting break our body, let our flesh be ouercharged with austerities,
let labors oppress us, let watchings dry us up, let this man torment me, let
that man persequute me, let me be frosen with cold, scorched with heat: let
head break in pieces, heart ache, contena^ce wax wa^ne; let me become wholly
abject, let my life pine away with grief, and the years of my life in
gronings: let my bones rott, it imports not, so I find repose in the day of
tribulation (he understands the day of general judgment) and that I may rise
again amongst the Elect. For who can conceive what shall be the glory of the
just, how great the joy of Saints, when their faces shall shine like the
Sun? when the Savior of the world shall number his people of acquisition,
and shall range them into diverse orders in the house of his eternal Father,
re^dring to every one according to their merits, and giving heavenly things for
terreane things, eternal for temporal. There, says the same Doctor in auther
place, the Angelical troops make a rauishing music; there, is keep a feast
of a perpetual solemnity with such as do daily arrive, departing out of
their mortal pilgrimage. There are seen the Compainie of PROPHETS, the
assembly of the APOSTLES is manifested there; there the invincible Armies of
MARTIRES are discovered. There is the holy congregation of CONFESSORS: there,
the Quire of venerable MVNKES, there that of DEVOVTE WOMEN who at once overcame
the weakness of their own sex, and the delights of the world. There the
young VIRGINS elder in virtue then in years; there are the sheep and tender
lambs, that have escaped out of the jaws of the wolves, and from the
inueigling snares of this life, whence they do now celebrate a perpetual
feast, and though their glory be different, yet is their joy common. There,
Charity reigns in her full perfection: for unto them God is all in all, whom
they behold and love without end or intermission, whom in loving they do
praise, and in praising do love, and all this without weariness or travail
at all. O my soul how happy thou should be, if being delivered out of the
prison of this wretched body, thou might be thought worthy to hear the
sacred songs of that celestial harmony, and the praises of the eternal King
of that glorious Empire, sung in an admirable air! O how accomplished should
thy honor and glory be? for so it would come to thy turn to entone that
gracious Alleluia which is in the mouth of all the Elect. Let us yet add that
iert of the wing, or rather stroke of the same Fathers Pen, before we conclude
these flightes and eiaculations of mind. From this sacred Residence all fear
of poverty is banished, all weakness, misery, infirmity; none there is
angerie; none does envy his neighbors happiness; none stands in need of
eating or drinking; There is no ambition, nor desire to be great: There is no
apprehension nor of Hell nor Devil, nor yet of death of body or soul.
Contrariwise there is a life full of alacrity through the assurance they have
of immortality. Disorder can have no footing there, where all things are
maintained in a constant Peace, and conserved in a perfect concord. Join to
all this the pleasure there is to live in the compaignie of ANGELS, to enjoy
the grateful conversation of all those excellent and sublime SPIRITS, and to
behold the Armies of Saints, more bright the^ the stars of Heaven. To
contemplate the Sanctity of PATRIARCHS, the Hope of PROPHETS, the Crown of
MARTYRS, the white and flowrie Garland of VIRGINS. And as for the SOVEREIGN
KING who keeps his Residence in the midst of that glorious people, what tongue
is able to speak his praise? That bird of Paridice which ha^gs still in the
air, does she not intimate unto us by her ingenious hanging, the
inco^ceaueable greatness of that glory?

Eternity is the fullness of Beatitude.
LXIV.
But in fine, Athanasia, if you wilt see the garla^d and crown of this glory,
adorned with so many bright precious stones, you must fix your eyes upon its
Eternity: for if all those glorious advantages could end, amidst all those
felicities, one would be accompaigned with a misfortune; which would distaste
all his joy, and would make him resemble the great-ones of the earth, who
amidst all the honors which Politic Idolatry does sacrifice unto them, are
continually stung with the thought of death, which shall in the end mow them
down, even like unto other men; and burying them in dust, shall equalize their
Scepters with hatchets. Kings with all their Power escape not its dart; nor do
Giants with all their force avoid it. Herein appears Origen's error, who
walking upon the wings of the wind, perished (like to that old Milo
Crotoniensis) by his own strength, while he was of opinion, that the Elect
after a long residence in Heaven, should fall at length from that felicity,
like as he had held before that the pains of the damned should not be
eternal, one absurdity drawing on another. An error excellently well refuted
by S. AUGUSTINE in his books of the City of God, as also by the Angel of the
School. An error in fine, which aims at the ruin of the immortality of the
soul, which is more then a bestiall blindness. And certes, besides that in a
thousand places of holy Scriptures, the life of the Elect in Heaven is said to
be eternal, and death to be defeated for ever; as also the fire which shall
torment the damned, is named eternal; it is also clear in right reason, that
Beatitude, which is a sufficient good, or rather the collection of all good,
would not be complete unless it did exclude all evil and misery, especially
the misery of miseries which is death, or annihilation. For take away the
perpetuity of the life of the Blessed, and they would be afflicted with a
continual sorrow for the loss of the beloved felicity, and a most
distastefull bitterness, would disturb the sweetness of the peaceable
fruition. Add that Beatitude cannot be imperfect on the part of the Object,
which is God, all whose works are perfect, and his guiftes without repentance,
which he never reuokes but for sin, which can never have access to the
Blessed, confirmed in grace by Glory; And unchangeably united to God, whose
nature is goodness, his works mercy. And who can nether will, nor can abide
iniquity. Again that word of our Saviors to his Disciples, is an Oracle of
infallible truth, and a promise which shall remain for ever; Your joy, says
he, shall not be taken from you. God's servants, the Elect, shall adore him in
beholding his face, and they shall reign for ever and ever, that is eternally,
says S. JOHN in his Revelations. And S. BERNARD explicating that of the
Psalmist, I will fill my friends with the length of days, and will show them
my SALVATION: what is longer, says he, then that which is eternal; what
continuance more long then that which has no end? O how good an end is
eternal life, how good is that end which is infinite! How fair is the day
which has no Sunne-setting, nor is followed out by night? and what is this
day, but the eternal VERITY, the true ETERNITY. O Society of the Blessed
eternally true, and truly eternal, those are they only, who may be truly
said to be living, and enjoying a life truly long in heaven, which knows no
end; as they are truly dead, and that of a long death, who continually die in
Hell, where they continually live without tasteing the fruit of life. S.
BERNARD's meditation, shall make way to S. AVCVSTINE's, touching the Eternity
of that blessed life. O life, says he, which God has prepared for his
friends, thou art a life full of happiness, crowned with assurance: a quiet
life, and excellent life, a pure life, a chaste life, a holy life, a life that
knows no death, a life without sorrow, without labor, without grief, without
vexation, without corruption, without variety or change, a life adorned with
every beauty, accomplished with honor: a life that is not labored with
envy, nor subject to anger, where Love reigns in its perfection, and from
whence fear is banished; where the day is eternal, and the hearts of all is
but one; where God is seen face to face, and this vision is food to those
that behold him with an ardent affection. O how thy shineing brightness does
delight me! and how aggreable are thy felicities to the desires of my heart!
The more I consider thee, the more I love thee, I swoone with desire in
contemplating thee, yet that desire insteede of afflicting me, affords me an
extreme content, and thy memory is more sweet unto me then the honie-combe.
O happy life! o Empire of eternal felicity, (where death has no
jurisdiction) which shall never have end. Where the succession of time has no
reign, nor vicissitude, where the day has no night, where change can get no
footing, where the victorious Champion acco^paigned with the troops of
Angels, his head being environed with a crown of glory, incessantly sings
to God the Song of the heavenly Sion. How happy shall my soul be if after her
departure out of this mortal pilgrinage, she may have the happiness to see
thee, and to contemplate thy beauty, thy walls, thy gates, thy Palaces, thy
places, thy noble citizens, and thine omnipotent King seated in his admirable
Throne of Majesty. Thy walls are built of precious stones of an inestimable
value; thy Gates are enriched with peerlesse gemmes. Thy streets are paued
with purest gold, and in them the Divine praises do continually resound. Thy
houses are made of fouresquare stones, beautified with Saphires, wrought with
vinebranches and grapes of gold. None enters within thy confines, who are not
pure, for all that is defiled, is repulsed. The light which does enlighten
thee, is nether from Lamp nor torch, nor Sun, Moon nor stars, it is God
alone proceeding from God, that light which does spring from light, who is
thine eternal and universal light. The King of Kings resides continually in
the midst of thee, waited upon with a numberless number of Courtiers and
Officiers, more resplendant then the lightning, more bright then the flame.
Will you yet further give ear to the same Saint, hear then what he says of
that lively Eternity, that eternal life. The wicked, says he, shall go into
eternal fires, but the just into eternal felicities. That is, the eternal
life which is promised us. And whereas men take no greater content here below
then to live, behold how life is promised them; and whereas they dread nothing
so much as death, see how an Eternity of life is proposed unto them. What do
thou love o man? To live. Thou shall enjoy this great benefit. What do thou
fear? To die. Thou shall be exempt from it. Yet is it not all, to live long, to
live for ever, but the top of felicity is to live happy for ever. What can
we add to this Oracle of truth delivered in so good terms by that
incomparable wit, but fruitless words in a subject so fruitful, that the
abundance thereof does oppress him that handles it?

Means whereby to arrive at this happy Eternity.
LXV.
But we are rather, Athanasia, to search out the means to attain to this
great happiness, then to enlarge our selves upon curiosities to know it, or
loose our selves in the admiration thereof, since it is written, that not all
that shall say Lord Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but those
that do the will of our Lord, that is, such as shall live according to his
law, and shall make force against his holy city. Do thou desire to enter
into true life, said our Savior to the young man, who asked his counsel which
way he was to hold, keep the Commandments. Of all the ways which are taught
us by the holy scripture, and the writings of Doctors to work our salvation in
fear and trembling, I will only touch two, which, next unto God's grace
(without which we are able to do nothing) I find very necessary. The
Philosopher Epictetes made all his philosophical Precepts turn upon these two
poles or pinnes. SVSTAYNE and ABSTAIN. I am persuaded that all moral
Christianity may turn upon the same pinnes. The one does teach us to suffer
difficulties, labors, and pains; the other, the perfect contempt of worldly
vanities, pleasures and riches. If we have these two wings, nothing shall be
able to hinder our flight toward the blessed Eternity, the heavenly
Jerusalem, the mother of the living. Water shut up in a narrow pipe, does
spirte up so much the higher. The narrow way of sufferances is that which does
make spring up in us the fountain of life, which does run toward Eternity.
All the scripture cries out this truth unto us, who so ever will come after me,
to wit to glory, let him take up his Cross, and follow me, says our
Savior. Happy is he who suffers tribulation, for being once tried, he shall
receive the crown of life, which God has promised to those that love him. And
who are those that love him, but whom he does chastise, and whom he does clothe
with the liuerie of sufferances. Because thou wast agreeable in Gods sight, it
was necessary that affliction should try thee, was it said to the good TOBIE.
Are not the Just tried like gold in the furnace, to discover whether they be
worthy of God. What Christians can be ignorant of this decree which was written
with the blood of the Lamb, upon the threshwood of their doors. That we are to
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven through many tribulations. And that all those
that would live piously in JESUS CHRIST, must endure the scourge of
persecutions, to be found wheat worthy to be laid up in the Granarie of
Eternity. For which cause S. JAMES does exhort the faithful to rejoice in
their afflictions, knowing that patience is the proof of their Faith, and that
the work of Patience is perfect, that is, does perfect him that does it.
Tribulation, says the Apostle, works patience, and Patience probation, and
probation Hope, and such a hope, as confounds not in its expectation. Though
we are now for a small time to be afflicted with many tribulations, yet it is,
that the trial of our Faith may appear more precious then gold before the
face of God, who according to his great mercy does regenerate us by a lively
hope to possess the heavenly inheritance, which cannot be corrupted nor
changed. Then we shall behold, we shall admire; and the plenty of good things
shall dilate our heart. Then with an incredible joy we shall be drunk up in
God our SALVATION. Then the tears shall be wiped from the eyes of the Elect,
they shall weep no more, grief and pain shall no more torment them, because
all that, is blown over, that is to say, they entered not into those eternal
Bowres but through the fires and waters of tribulation. Truly he were justly
reputed an unworthy soldier, who would desire to gain victory better cheap
then his Captain: and how did our Captain and Law giver JESUS CHRIST enter
into the glory which was due unto him by nature? was it not by sufferance? Let
us behold then the Exemplaire of the mountain, but the mountain of Caluarie,
before we take into our consideration, that of Thabor. Let us look upon the
Author and Comsummatour of our faith, JESUS CHRIST, who choosed to undergo
the Cross, while glory was proposed unto him. Let us imitate the Apostle who
was so loyal to his Master, that he bore in his body the stigmates and
marks of his crucified Lord. O how joyful the Apostles were, when it happened
that they were to endure something for the love of CHRIST, knowing what an
eternal weight of glory, that sufferance treasured up in heaven for them. And
if the Asserians upon the sight of IVDITH's beauty, did comfort themselves in
the extreamities of that seige, with the hope they had to enjoy the fair
creatures, who were in the City. What extreamities of miseries were we not
willingly to endure, to be possessed of the inestimable felicities, which we
have represented? If by labors, says S. AUGUSTINE, it must be atchiued, from
this instant I inuoke you, o all ye torments of the world, I conjure you to
burst out upon my head, and shewre down a main upon me. Let tribulations be
multiplied, and press in troops upon me; let infirmities, vexations,
poverty, want, adversity make head against and oppress me. Let every one
persecute me, let all creatures bandie against me; let me be the Butt of all
their arrows, let me be the scorn of men, and the reproach of people, let my
days be ended in pinching pains, yet will I be too content, so that after
this sharp winter I may gather the flowers of the eternal Spring, and that I
may be rancked amongst the Elect who are bright with beams of Glory. I cannot
be weaned from the plentiful and yndraynable dugges of this great and
fruitful Doctor, without suckinge a long draught, to give some color and
life to this Draught of mine. Mark then, how he does encourage us to
sufferances for the attayning of Eternity. If we diligently ponder the reward
that is proposed unto us, all that we suffer will seem little and light, and we
shall repute our pains unworthy of so great a recompense. For is it not true
that we should buy eternal rest at a just Rate, though we were to pay a
perpetual labor for it; and to purchase an eternal felicity at the price of
an eternal sufferance, Marry if you were employed in an eternal labor, when
would you come to an eternal reward? O the eternal Goodness! who has made
our tribulation temporal, and yet to this passing pain, he has allotted an
endless pleasure. Place a thousand thousand years before-Eternitie, and yet
what do you do, but compare a limited with an illimited thing? Add to this,
that God did not only prefixe a certain term to our labors, but that a
short one to; for what is the life of man, but the continuance of a few days?
Though a man therefore were oppressed for the whole course of his life, with all
sorts of torments, labors, greeues; though prisons, hungar, thirst, and
irksome ulcers should accompaignie him to his grave; were it not yet an
affliction of a short standing: the days of man are few in number, his labors
short and light, and yet are followed with an endless Kingdom, with an
eternal Beatitude. After these short sufferances, we shall be possessed of the
Society of Angels and Saints, the inheritance of JESUS CHRIST, God him
self, an inestimable price for so small a labor! Wherefore, says he in
another place, let us love eternal life, and let us learn how much we are to
labor for it, by the exemple of those who do passionately love this mortal
life fearing to loose it: for when any sickness begins to threaten them death,
what do they not do, I do not say to escape it, for that, is not possible,
but only for a time to protract deaths fatal blow? How much does a man
strugle when death does catch him by the neck, to escape out of its claws, he
flies, he hides him self, and gives all that does possess, to keep his body
in possession of his soul. At the price of all his fortunes he is ready to
ransom his life. If he be feircely sick, he freely endures all the pains
that the Surgeons putt him to; he obeyes the Doctors order; takes down the
bitterest pill in the Apothecaries shope; he nether grugheth price nor pain,
so he may escape the grave: he is willing to consume all his substance, to
prolonge for some few moments more, his consumeing life; and yet to live
eternally how few are willing to endure a little discommoditie? But if
worldlings prolonge their miserable days, with so much instance, vigilancie,
precausion, prodigality, pain, and torment, what ought not they to do, whose
brave and generous minds, eye nothing that is less then Eternity? And if
they be esteemed prudent who spare nothing to conserve a miserable mortal
life, how imprude^t must they needs be, who for an immortal one, will use no
sort of violence nether against their body nor soul?

A continuation of the former discourse.
LXVI.
VErily, unless the grain of wheat falling into the ground, die: it self
remains alone and fruitless. And unless we do mortify our selves here
below, there is little appearance, and yet less hope, that we shall live
everlastingly in Heaven. In the building of SALOMONS Temple there was no noise
heard of hammars, nor saw because the timber was disposed and fitted by
Carpenters in the Forest; and the stones were cut and pollished in the
Quarries, so that being led unto the Mount-Sion, it rested only to apply
them. It is the like of the united stones whereof the heavenly Jerusalem is
built, to wit the Elect, out of the Quarrie of this world they were to be sent
ready, and so to be disposed in their places in that TEMPLE OF PEACE. For
which cause, some of them have been sawen, cut, carved, holed, burnt, wounded
with swords, that they might be applied to that eternal building; for they are
the structure and building of God, says the Apostle. No, there is no other
passage to this TEMPLE of VERTVE, but through the GATE OF LABOUR. And the
Kingdom of Heaven is promised only, in the Sermon which our Savior made of
Beatitude, to the humble of heart and persecuted, that is, to such as suffer
tribulations. The Kings coin, with which letters of exchange are paid in that
Contrie, are Labors; and the Saints do repose in their labors, for there,
their works do sollow them. And if a woman with child, says the holy
Gospel, do patiently endure the panges of childbirth which are so extremely
violent, for the joy she has to bring forth a reasonable creature into this
miserable world: what pains then ought we to fear, so our body be happily
delivered of our soul to Eternity; and that when our house of clay shall be
demolished, we may find one in heaven build, not with the hand of man, but with
God's own hand, wherein we shall live, inhabit and be for ever. And if the
labors of winter and summer, and the length of a plainefull service, was
reputed as nothing of JACOB, being pricked on by the love be bore to RACHEL;
who will not to be impatient at the short and light labors of this life, while
he has Eternity before his eyes? Go to then, says a Prophet, lets take
courage, and let not our arms repose, for a great reward is promised to good
actions. Work faithfully what thou art able while time is lent thee to labor.
Behold the reward, and nothing will seem painful unto thee. I have given my
heart to the Divine iustificatio^s, says the Psalmist, in respect of the
reward promised them. For the reward of such as keep Gods law is great. Know
you not, says the great Apostle, that many run in the race, all run
indeed, but one receaueth the Price. And they certes, that they may receive a
corruptible crown, but we run in the race of virtue, for an immortal and
incorruptible crown. Lets so run that we may obtain. Those, says the same
Doctor of the Cross, that are afflicted, are disposed thereby to great
rewards, and if they be tried by God, it is to the end, they may be worthy to
have a part with him; and that he may with his own hand bestow upon them, a
Kingdom of honor, and a diadem of beauty. For God crowns his Elect with
glory and honor, and does establish them above all the works of his hands.
Let us not therefore be discouraged, says S. PAVLE, for we have not as yet
resisted sin, nor fought to blood: we that are not ignorant that our Guide
JESUS CHRIST, entered not into the Sanctuary of Eternity, by means of the
blood of sheep and goats but by powreing out his own; at that price
obtaineing for us an eternal redemption. But I here, heap up proofs, in
confirmation of a truth, which even Nouices in Christian discipline cannot
doubt of. Let us therefore stay our stepps, and shut up this first means in
these golden words of S. AUGUSTINE. O soul, what I have is vendible; consider
whether you will buy it. And what have thou to sell, o Lord? Rest, says he,
buy it. At what rate, says the soul? the price thereof is Labor. But what
labor is required for an endless rest? If you will make a just valuation, an
eternal labor is due to an eternal peace. It Is true indeed, yet fear not,
o soul, God is merciful; he knows well, that if thou were eternally to
labor for this pourchase, thou should never attain unto the promissed and
desired rest; and therefore, that thou might attain it, he will not have thy
labor to be eternal: not that the Eternity of glory would not deserve it;
but that thou might be sure to bear it. It is worth an eternal, and yet is
bought for a temporal labor. In an other place, the same Father, does enlarge
and continue this consideration. When eternal life, says he, is promissed us,
let us place before our eyes, a life exempt from all the tormoyles and troubles
which we taste in this, and thou shall more happily find out the calamities and
miseries which are not to be found in that blessed life, then thou can the
infinite bless wherewith it is replenished (he would say, that as God, so it,
is better known by negation then affirmation). And yet, wonderful Mercy! this
inestimable favor is to be sold, If thou will, thou may buy it: nor art thou
to be troubled how to procure wherwithall to pay; It is not worth more then
thou have, or rather, respects not at all, what thou have, but only, what thou
art. This Eternity is worth thyselfe, and yet worth no more then thou art;
give thy self, and it is thine. Why do thou dodge, why do thou stand upon
the price. Do thou apprehend, that to make the payment, thou art to be sold
indeed: no thou art not; pay thy self such as thou art, and the purchase is
made. Alas I am poor and miserable, will thou say, nor shall I be received as
current money. But I dare assure thee, that in freely giving thy self thou will become good coin: for to give ones self in confidence of such a
promise, is to be good. And being once good, thou will become a reasonable
price, and thou shall not only purchase, what I told thee of, salvation,
health, life, and life everlasting; but further, nether weariness, labor,
hungar, thirst, nor any other pain what soever, shall molest thee. All the
good that can be imagined, shall be there: all the evil that can be imagined
shall not be there; and the continuance of that happy state, shall be
eternal. I am able to make no further discovery for nether eye has seen,
nor ear has heard, nor heart has conceived the felicities of that glory;
and how should that fall within the compass of my tongues, or penn's
expression, which never yet entered into my heart?

Another mean.
LXVII.
IF patience in adversity begett the blessed hope (hope, says the Apostle,
which confounds not) of happiness in our hearts: a holy contempt of
transitory toys, is no less forceable to make us take a happy flight
toward the heavenly Sion, and to make us relish celestial things, disdayning
those base and earthly ones. In the balla^ce of man's heart, the fall of the
one scale, is the others rising; and ordinarily, the worldling is deceiptfull
in his waightes, waighing profane dross with the SANCTVARIE waightes; which
the spiritual man, does not, nor those, who (by attending to that which
belongs to their salvation) have all their conversation in Heaven. The first
step, that does separate us from earth, does advance us toward heaven. The
Gods of the earth are seated on high, says the Psalmist, upon which passage, a
Father of the Church says, that those Gods are the high-soaringe souls, which
like to the bird of Paradise, do never stoop to the ground; and who may say
with the Apostles, behold we have forsaken all; and who for this pious
renounceing of all, do hear that Divine promise: you that have left all,
shall receive an hundredfold, herebelow, and life everlasting, after this
mortal life. This earthly trash is a heavy burden, and does exceedingly
hinder those that strive to clime the mountain of God. But if, by a holy
contempt, we tread upon the same burden, it rayseth us thitherward. A
faithful speech, and worthy to be carefully laid up in our heart. Love not
the world, nor yet that which it terms good, for its figure does pass, and
vanish like smoke. ESTHER had good reason to contemn those royal pompes and
magnificences, and to put on mourneing weeds, since she foresaw that she was
about to be a Widow, and that all those, would presently disappeare as
shadows; being far more prudent then that proud Queen whereof mention is made
in the Apocalipse, who being seated in her Throne, and gayzing upon her self
in her ornaments and glory, as a Peacoke in the variety of his glorious
plumes, pronunced with as much vanity as untruth, I reign; nor shall I ever
become a widow, nor yet ever resent the dint of adversity: but she suddenly
fell from her vain hopes: And with damage and confusion she experienced, that
worldly felicity is like to a flower, which florisheth in the morning, but at
night fades; like to grass growing upon the tiles of a house, which withers
away, even before it appear fully green. This was it, which one of the
ancient Sages aimed at, saying; crystal is glittering and glorious to the
eye, marry in use, britle and subject to breaking. But heavenly felicity is
of a more solid temper; for (besides that, according to JOB, the heavens are
build of most solid brass; and are composed of a matter which wears not a
way, being exempt from all corruption or alteration) the Eternity of glory,
which is promised to the Elect, is equal to the continuance of God, who shall
never have end. And therefore, though that, which the wisdom of the world and
Sense, esteems true good (notwithstanding that even its vanity, is a true
sign of the falsitie thereof) should, by its allureme^ts and enchantments, make
a most violent impression upon the most resolute mind; yet the shortness of
its continuance, being compared to an Eternity, shall appear as little bright
or gracious in the ey of a settled judgment, as the lesser stars in the
presence of the Sun. This true esteem made the great Apostle repute all
terreane things as dirt and dung, while he proposed unto himself the Conquest
of Eternity. And the Psalmist, touched with the same apprehension, cried out;
what is to me in Heaven? and besides thee what would I upon the earth, nothing
verily, o the God of my hear and the part of mine inheritance for ever. O when
shall I see the day, the happy day, in which I shall appear before thy
glorious face, the only object of mine eternal bless? Tears are my food
day and night, while my desire does incessantly press upon me, with this
demand, where is thy God? In very deed, even as the Sun which causes the
day, does at his approach drive away the darkness, which in its absence does
cover the earth: so the light of Eternity does no sooner shine in the soul's
Orison, but the thick and foul vapors of terreane affections are dispersed.
It Is in vain, my soul, for thee to search for consolation in transitory
things. Let thy thoughts be only placed upon the Eternal God, and thou shall
be thoroughly replenished with a joy, which shall bereave thee of all sense of
calamity. Rise up, o Lord, and let thine enemies be dispersed. Appear only
before mine eyes, and the world, thine enemy and mine, shall be put to flight:
They shall vanish like smoke, and shall melt away as wax before the fire. This
Dagon shall fall to ruin before the Arc of thine Eternity. He does pass,
together with his concupiscence, but thou shall remain for ever; thy years
run not by, and thou art still the same. What can then an immortal soul do
in this vallie of tears, miseries, and death, who thou touchest with a sense
of the fortunate Islands of Eternity, and with a desire of those eternal
Hills, but sigh and breath in the Egypt of this mortality, after the milk and
honey, which runs in abundance in the Land, which thy Goodness has promised
unto her, taking comfort in this expectation while protracted hope does afflict
her? It is a special grace which God bestows upon his Elect, says S.
GREGORY, in filling their hearts, with a hope, as it were certain, of
attayning the heavenly Contrie, while they wander through the wilderness of
this earth, to th end that they might behold, as it were, below them, and as a
thing unworthy of their consideration all transitory things; and that, for the
love of Eternity, they should tread under their feet, by a holy pride, the
most p^osperous pleasures, riches, honors in the earth. And this is that which
God speaks by the mouth of one of his Prophets to a soul that follows him,
I will raise thee to the highest places of the earth: and what are those high
places, but the abundance of wealth; the hight of honors and dignities, which
have the reputation of things high placed, by those, whose desires are abject,
and crawling upon the ground. But if once man's heart fix its sight upon
Eternity, it then clearly discouers, how abject and base all those things
are, which before he esteemed so high: for as those that are upon the top of
a high mountain, do apprehend the things that seemed great unto them being in
the bottom of the valley, as little points: so those that walk in the ways
of Eternity, do esteem temporal things as nothing, and that which before
seemed to be placed above their head, is now found under their feet. The same
Doctor says in another place, nothing makes the calamities which we suffer in
this transitory life more sharp and bitter unto us, then the inconsideration
of the eternal rewards which are promissed us. But if a soul be once so
happy, as constantly to turn her eyes toward those eternal riches, which
cannot perish, all that is transitory shall be to her as nothing. The same
Pope, explicating that passage of the Divine Epithalamion, where the Spouse
says that her Spouse, had ledd her into his wine-cellar; what do you think,
says he, did that Lover, understand by the wine-cellar, but a secret and
profound contemplation of Eternity? A contemplation which does so ouersett the
soul, which takes it in abundance, that she is made, as it were, drunk there
with all: but with a drunkenesse of good pourposes, and which by a laudable
change of life, and a wholesome amendment of manners, tends to the heavenly
Contrie, and eternal delights. S. AUGUSTINE upon the same subject is of the
same advise, when he counsels the devout soul, nether to swell in
prosperity, nor to be dejected in adversity, grownding upon the faithful
promise which God has given her of Eternity: a promise which will make her
conte^ne temporal felicities, yea even the calamities of this life, if she
take the eternal fire into her consideration. And if one of the Auncie^ts,
speaking of the vain ambition of humane pretentions, knew, and following his
knowledge, could say, that, what goodly fortune soever one were possessed of, did
but yet appear vile and worthless, to him that hoped for a better and larger;
who would not judge, that he, who should lodge his hopes in Eternity, should
find no more rest in these short mome^ts, then the dove of the deluge upon the
waters, which covered the face of the earth. And if the children of Egypt upon
the tasting of the heavenly Manna, that admirable bread of the desert, did no
more plain the loss of their flesh-potts and onions: So after a sound
judgment, have once relished, by a settled purpose, the delights of the
blessed Eternity, earthly pleasures do but loath and disgust him. He does
easily weane himself from the impoysoned milk of the Serpe^ts of this world,
haueing once tasted that solid meat, which does nourish for an Eternity.

That this thought of Eternity is the abridgement of all spiritual life.
LXVIII.
I Could here express many wholesome effects, which this thought of Eternity
causes in those, who do frequently, and seriously ruminate it in their
hearts. But I conceive, Athanasia, that they are all comprised in this
proposition, to wit, that all spiritual life is comprehended in this so
profitable and and necessary consideration. For what archer can hitt a mark,
without aiming at it; and since all this life is but an introduction to
Eternity, how should one possibly arrive there, unless he begin tymely to
tend toward it, and address all his stepps and actions to that end. If every
Agent do work for some end; and if our principal and sovereign end consiste
in our eternal union with God in glory, ought we not in this mortal life to
take the path, which does conduct us to this end? If then (as I have shown in
the first strokes of this Draught) all the good and evil which is done in the
world, proceed from the neglect, or use of this thought of Eternity: does it
not follow, that this thought is the very thread, which must direct us in the
windings of the true life, that is, the spiritual life? All those that do
handle spiritual matters, do divide such as peculiarly addict themselves to
the practice of piety, into three Classes or ranckes; Beginners, Proficiants,
and the more perfect; making the first walk in the way which they call
Purgative; the second in the Illuminatiue; the third, in the Unitive. In the
Purgative they rank those, who like unto new Champions, do crucify their
flesh with its concupiscence; mortify the motions of their sensuality, by the
vigor, and holy rigor of mind; who chastise their body and bring it into
subjection; renounceing world, blood and Hell; in a word, laboring to spoil
themselves of the old man, with his wicked inclinations, and vicious habites.
Walking in the ways of penance, and mortification; and making head against
vice, least Sin might reign in us; and least that Dagon might prevail
against the Arc. Now nothing does so effectually plane and smouth the rough
and rugged ways; nothing does so forceably press the Sinner to depart out of
the Egypt of his iniquity; and to forsake that accursed land of the shadow of
death, as the apprehension of eternal pains, according to that of the
Prophet, Lord through thy fear we have conceived the spirit of Salvation. And
the Psalmist, I have done Judgment and Justice, because I dreaded the
irreuocable sentence of the Almighty. And indeed, as there is nothing which
does so speedily free a field of roots and rubbidge, as the application of
fire to the brambles and vndergroth, whereby it becomes thornie and wild; so
nothing does cause a man more quickly to renounce vice; nor more efficaciously
purge the soul, then the horror of eternal fire, prepared for the devil and
his Angels. This is to put the hatchet to the root of the bad tree, least it
might bring forth the fruits of corruption. Let not therefore the thought of
the accursed Eternity, depart out of our memory: and we shall see the Divine
truth, which issued from the mouth of the wisman, fulfilled in us, that we
shall never offend: for it would be to us, as a buckler against the fiery darts
of temptations: and if we chance to fall into sin, it would be as a sharp
spur, to make us spring out of the ditch of so dangerous and deplorable an
estate. There is no remedy so sharp and bitter, that does not seem sweet
unto us, if we compare it to those consuming and eternal flames. There is no
passion so irregular, but it becomes orderly, and subject to reason, when an
eternal pain represents it self unto us. There is no temptation that does
not vanish, nor vice that does not depart, when he that is assaulted with it,
does setledly ponder, that that which does delight, is but momentarie, but the
torments due thereunto, are eternal. This is the effect of the consideration of
Eternity, in the Purgative way, and the force which it has to reclayme us
from wickedness.

A continuation of the formar discourse.
LXIX.
AS for the Illuminatiue way, whose property it is to incite us to goodness and
virtue: what difficulty is incident to the pursuit of virtue, which is not
surmounted by the price of so great glory, which is proposed unto us in
Eternity, as I have already at large declared. For the words of thy lips o
Lord, says the Divine Psalmist, that is, upon the hope of thy promises, I
have kept the hard ways. JACOB having espied that misterious ladder (a figure
of Beatitude) durst close with an Angel, and never leave wrestling with him,
till he had wrested a benediction from him. And was not MICHOL with SAVLS
crown (being proposed for his guerdon who should vanquish the Giant) the
motife, which did so generously incite DAVID to so glorious an enterprise? O
Lord, sings the Divine Psalmist; I ran in the way of thy Commandments, when
thou did opene and dilate my heart; And yet what is able to dilate it more
then the thought of Eternity? O how fair are the feet, that is, the
affections, of a foul which directes her stepps, toward those eternal Hills,
through the paths of piety, erecting stares in her heart, to ascend up to the
heavenly Sion, by the stepps of virtues. This is she which does ravish the
Angels with admiration, when they discover her ascending out of the desert of
the world, as a little rod of smoke composed of all the aromaticall spices. It
is written in the Apocalipse that the first fundation of the holy City
Jerusalem is made of Jasper, a stone marked with all the several colors
which are dispersed amongst the other stones; whereby is intimated unto us, that
the eternal Sion has its fundation upon all the virtues: and that he who
pretends the attayning of it, must resolve to embrace them all; otherwise he
will not be permitted access. Now what virtue is not acquired by this
consideration, what good habit is not contained therein? Let us cast an ey upon
those which are the principal, and, as it were, the root of all the rest; and
we shall find Eternity to be the Sea, whither all these little brooks run.
What is FAITH but the argument of things not appeareing. And are not eternal
things, those which do not appear? for so the great Apostle does teach us.
What is HOPE but an expectation of eternal bless, and the coming of the
glory of the great God? In thee, o Lord, have I put my hoped, says DAVID, and
I shall not be confounded for ever. What is CHARITY, but a Virtue, which,
according to the Apostle, remaynes for ever? even when FAITH and HOPE shall
cease to be, and Prophecies shall be made void: and such as are rooted, and
founded in this Virtue, do in some measure comprehend the length, breadth,
hight, and depth, of Eternity. What is PRVDENCE, but a wise foresight of
future things, and principally of the next life? for the life which ends in
this world, is called a Death by the Apostle; yea yet in sharper terms, a
sensual, terreane, malignant life. And it was this prudent thought of
Eternity, which MOSES perceived to be awanting in Israel, while he termed it
a Nation deuoyd of Council and judgment and wished from his heart, that that
people would become wise, understanding, and foreseeing the time to come.
Touching FORCE and TEMPERANCE, we have shown in the formar stroke that this
thought makes one abstain from, and contemn earthly things; and does in
courage the heart to all kinds of sufferances and crosses for the Conquest of
Eternity. Concerning JUSTICE (since eternal Glory is termed the crown of
Justice, and that no injustice can be permitted to make entry there) who can
deney but the fruits of the thoughts of Eternity, are the very same with
those whereof DANIEL speaks, which is, to free the soul from sin, and to
lodge eternal Justice in its place. And does not the Psalmist say, that the
just shall live for ever. PATIENCE also does spring from this thought, since
the Kingdom of Heaven is promissed to such as do practice it in persecution.
And who will not become HVMBLE under the powrefull hand of God, when he shall
seriously consider, that the Kingdom of heaven belongs to the poor in spirit;
and that the humble shall be saved, and advanced: and that the proud of heart
are cast headlong down, with Lucifer, into perpetual flames. And who will not
turn MEEK and mild, when he shall reflect, that the promised Land of
Eternity, is their inheritance? Who will not be devout and fervent in all the
exercices of piety, whether it be prayer, fasting, Almes-deedes; or in the
practice of interior or exterior mortifications, if he fall duly to
consider, that the violent do bear away the Kingdom of Heaven. Who will not
embrace, or at least, who will not love and honor the Evangelical Counsels,
when he reads what great rewards are promised, to the Continent, obedient, and
voluntariepoore? Run in this sort over all the virtues, whose pursuit and
practice, is the proper employment of the Illuminatiue way, and you shall find,
that whether they be Theological, or moral infused, they have all for their
Object a supernatural end, as faith the Angel of the school; and
consequently, all of them aim at Eternity, as all the lines of the
circu^ference at the unity of the Ce^ter. As for the unitive way, which
consistes in a certain adhearing to the sovereign Good, which is God, the
very essential Eternity: we will show in the ensuing stroke, that the
essential Eternity, being no other thing, properly speaking, then God
himself, there is no thought at all, which does more immediately, nor more
generally unite us unto him, then that of Eternity. Whence I draw this
Conclusion, that the consideration of Eternity, is truly that one necessary
thing, which is so highly commended in the Gospel, even from the mouth of the
son of God, and called, MARIE'S BEST PART which shall never be taken from
her. Judge you then, Athanasia, of what importance it is, to think frequently,
yea incessantly of Eternity, since it is, as it were, the pin, whereupon all
spiritual life does turn.

Of the essential Eternity.
LXX.
HItherto, Athanasia, we have not given thee a straight and clear, but an
indirect view of Eternity; we have shown it thee only sideling, as BALAAM
beheld the army of Israel: we have only pondered the two arms thereof, not
the body: It Is effects only, not it is cause; and, as one would say, we have
seen the shouldiers only, not the face; the accidents, not the substance
thereof. For albeit the Divines teach us, that it is a whole and perfect
possession, of an endless life, yet does not this description quiet my
understanding, in that it does not represe^t Eternity as a thing created, and
out of God; and which being applied to creatures, will indeed have no end, yet
presupposes a beginning; God alone being truly eternal; that is, without
beginning or end: he being the beginning and end, of all that has being by
participation of his. But now, Athanasia, I will propose unto you the
essential Eternity, which is no other thing then God himself. And God too,
not as punishing in the Eternity accursed, nor as rewarding in the blessed
Eternity, but as being in himself, as his own essence, to his own
Eternity: and that true increated and essential Eternity, in which this
created Eternity consists, whereof we have shown some strokes before. O what
an Eternity is this, Athanasia, and whither is the flight of my thoughts
carried, since it touches upon the glory of the Divine Majesty, in the
highest regions? Here it is, that the winge and sight of an Eagle, were
required, to raise ones self up into the highness of the riches, and wisdom
of God, who is incomprehensible in all his ways. And to behold this Sun of
the East, which is the fountain of all light, and which cannot be obscured.
And here, not the black and dark lines of a first Draught, but even the
bright rayses of the Sun, were more then requisite, to bring light and life
to the deciphering of him, who from all Eternity, does inhabit an
inaccessable light, and who could not be sustained by a created understanding,
unless it were fortified with the light of Glory. All those Divine
perfections, which Divinity considers in God, under the name of Attributes,
are in him, his own only and incomposed Essence: for being a pure Act, he
does not admit in himself any composition at all; or multiplicitie of
qualities, being all Essence, all substance. But we are constrained by our own
infirmity to speak so of God, according to our ordinary manner of
co^ceaueing and discourseing: calling him Good, Just, Merciful, Infinite,
Eternal, Omnipotent, as we do diversely cast our thoughts upon his works,
rather then upon himself, who in his one and only being, does comprehend, by
way of eminency, all the perfections which are found in Goodness, Justice,
Mercy. So that he is not only essentially good, but he is even essential
Goodness, all that is good being good by the only communication and
participation of this essential Goodness. Now to give a name to this supreme
excellency, is a work proper to the same excellency, which as it alone does
perfectly know it self, so it only is able to name it self. Whereupon the
Angel speaking unto SAMSON's Father, and representing unto him the Divine
Majesty, said: why do thou inquire my name which is ADMIRABLE, that is,
which thou can not conceive, but by admiration. Howbeit, amongst the
multitude of Divine names, wherewith the holy Scripture is full; and which the
books of the Doctors of the Church propose unto us, there is none more
generally received, then that, which God by his own mouth imparted unto
MOSES, who demanded his name, that he might denounce it to such as should
inquire after it. I AM WHO AM, said our Lord; and if they ask thee who sent
thee unto them, tell them, he that IS commanded me to come unto you. This name,
IS, says the Angel of the school, is the most proper of all the Divine
names, as being the most significatiue; for it does not express any form at
all, but only a simple being; or rather the being of beeings, as that great
Genius of nature termed it. And God being his own Essence and Being, cannot
be more properly named then by the name IS: which caused S. JOHN DAMASCENE to
say, that the principal name of the Divine names, is, He who IS, because he is
as an infinite Ocean, an illimited substance. Again, this name suits well with
God, in that, it does express a continual present time, which does show the
essential Eternity of God, in whom, says S. AUGUSTINE, in his books of the
Trinity, there is nether time past, nor time to come. Now this Eternity is so
essential to God, that if he were not eternal, he would cease to be God: and
that created Eternity, whereof Divines speak, does only subsiste in the
increated Eternity of God himself, and, if we may so say, it is imperfect;
for though it shall never have end, being a continual present without any
measure of time; yet had it a beginning, since God alone, of all the things
which have being, has no beginning. Nor do we see any title in holy Scripture
more frequently attributed unto God, then that he is Eternal. I live eternally
says our Lord. The Kingdom of heaven is eternal. Our Lord is great
eternally. Our Lord is seated in an eternal Throne. God is not moved
eternally. Those that hope in him shall not be confounded eternally. The name
of his Majesty is Eternal. He is his Elect's eternal part. Mercy is
established eternally in Heaven. His Word and Truth shall dure eternally. He
has made an eternal Testament. God is living and Eternal for ever and ever.
He is an Eternal Dominatour. He does inhabit the eternal Jerusalem. His
power is an eternal power, and his Kingdom in generation and generation. And
many the like passages all through the holy Scripture. Now, he is not only
eternal, but is even the very eternal Essence, or the ESSENTIAL ETERNITY.
So that to think of Eternity, is to have God for the only object of our
thoughts. And to apply the essence of our immortal soul, to his essence,
who alone of himself has immortality, is it not the perfection and fullness
of our essential Beatitude? If therefore, I extolle the thought of Eternity
above all other thoughts, by reason of that great and infinite Object, am I
not grounded upon a solid reason? Is not the immensitie, and incomparable
perfection thereof able to ravish and drink up all our interior and exterior
faculties? following that of the Psalmist, My heart and my flesh have rejoiced
toward the living God.

That this essential Eternity is all things.
LXXI.
AS God is eternal, Athanasia, or rather Eternity it self, so is he also
infinite, or rather infinity it self. Infinite according to his essential
greatness which is immense and boundless: Infinite also in his continuance
which is without limitation too, to speak with the Prince of Schoolmen. He is
every where by his existence, and does existe in every thing, filling Heaven
and earth, and all that is therein. In a word, he is in every place, and beyond
all place, by his essence, presence, and power. But he is in the Blessed
Eternity after an admirable manner: for the Scripture does assure us, that he
is all things in all his Elect. There, says S. AUGUSTINE, God is the
universal good of all the Saints, and the perfect Beatitude of all their
desires: there, he is light and color to their eyes: music to their ears,
honey to their taste, or rather a hidden Manna; and a delicious baulme to their
smell. In him they have the diversity and beauty of sundry seasons, the
freshness of the Spring; the brightness of the Summer: the fruitfulness of
the fall of the leaf; the rest and repose of winter: In fine all that which
may delight their senses, or solace the faculties of their soul. There, says
S. BERNARD, God is plenitude of light to the UNDERSTANDING: multitude of Peace
to the WILL: and eternal consolation to the MEMORY. To be short, those
shadows of good, which are scattered over terreane things, as drops of dew,
and are distributed rarely and only by parcells, are eminently in God, and as
it were in an infinite Ocean. If fleeting toys do so desperately delight such
as are taken with the^, that their reason is enchanted, and their wisdom
drunk up therein: how shall they be taken with him, whose hands are filled with
infinite delights? If this mortal and created life be so precious, how
precious shall he be, who has not only life in himself, but who is life it
self, and in whom we live and are. If the acquaintance of perfect creatures be
so pleasing a thing: how much more sweet is the perfection of the Creator,
which is so complete, and the very model of all perfection? If these fading
earthly beauties be so gayning and engaging: how rauishing shall his beauty
be, which is admired by the Sun and Moon, and in whose presence the stars
are not bright? If the antiquity of nobility have such a rate put upon it, by
the vanity of those that do adore it; how much more is his to be prised, who
is the old of days, whose begininge is without beginning? If worldly honors
and fortunes be courted by so many, how much more is he to be sued for and
pursued, whose house is replenished with glory and riches. For if it be he who
made all things good, and communicated unto them, all that is delightful or
wishfull in them, must we not infallibly persuade our selves, that he reserved
the excellency thereof for himself, but an excellency which does infinitely
surpass all that we are able to imagine. What happiness, says S. AUGUSTINE,
shall their be in the Blessed Eternity, where there shall be no evil at all;
nor any thing awanting that is good. There our labor shall be to praise God,
who shall be all in all: Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, o Lord, for
ever and ever they shall praise thee. He who gave the virtue, shall be the
reward thereof; promising himself as an inestimable price, by the mouth of the
Prophet, saying, I will be their God, and they shall be my people; I will be
all things to them which they can honestly desire, life, salvation, food,
abundance, Glory, Honor, Peace, and all kinds of felicity: for so is that
sacred word to be understood; God shall be all in all, that is, he shall be the
fullness of all their desires. There, the Elect peaceably enjoying a sacred
repose, and an eternal Saboath, shall see how sweet our Lord is, being filld
with him, who shall be in them all that can be desired. O my God, thou art my
dear Truth, my true Eternity, my eternal felicity! The same Doctor
speaking of this essential Eternity, which is God himself, comprehending in
himself all goodness, discourses of it in this sort: There is nether
corruption, defect; old age, nor frowardness in thee; but contrariwise a
perpetual peace, a solemn glory, a joy without end, a continual solemnity.
Thou art true alacrity, and a flower of peerlesse beauty, of youth, and
perfect health: There, is nether yesterday nor to morrow in thee, but a
perpetual TODAY: thine is salvation, life, and peace; o great God who art all
things! what glorious things are spoken of thee, since in thee is the true
Abode of all those who live in true joy! In thee, there is no fear, no sorrow;
desire passes presently into satisfaction, being answered with a speedy and
plentuous possession of all that is desired. O God thou do inebriate thine
Elect with the plenty of thy house, and with the torrent of thy pleasure thou
shall make them drink; because with thee is the fountain of life, and in thy
light we shall see light, when they shall see thee in thy self, and all things
in thee, and thee in all things, with a sight, that shall not be interrupted,
which is the top of their eternal felicity. And in another place he says
upon the same subject. Love Eternity and thou shall reign for ever with JESUS
CHRIST, if JESUS CHRIST be thine only end: And again. Unite thy heart to
God's Eternity, and thou shall be eternal with God. It was an apprehension
and feeling of this, which drew that asperation so frequently from the mouth
and heart of S. FRANCIS. O my God thou art mine ALL. And does not that passage
of the heavenly harmony which S. JOHN heard in his Revelations allude to this?
Benediction, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, honor, and power, and
strength to our God for ever and ever. AMEN.

An application of the Heart to this essential Eternity.
LXXII.
But that which most imports, Athanasia, is to know, how we ought to apply
our thoughts to this essential Eternity, which is the very Divinity. This
is rather to be done by a prone and loving humility, then by a haughty and
swelling knowledge; Lord my heart is not exalted, nether are mine eyes
loftie^nether have I walked in great matters, nor in marvelous things above me,
cried out the Royal Psalmist. My thoughts have been humble, knowing that thou
love the humble heart, and that he that extolles himself, makes thee ascend
yet higher, and put thy self in a greater distance from him. Be thou praised o
Lord for ever, in that thou hidest thy self from the wise, and great wits,
and reuealest thy self to thy little humble ones. I have given you some
directions, Athanasia, to avoid the accursed Eternity, and to attain the
Blessed: yet I must here tell you, with the great Apostle: behold I teach you a
way far more excellent, more short, noble and efficacious. Consider an Archer
that shutts at a Butt, he takes his aim nether too high, nor too low; nether
of this nor that side; but setts his ey and arrow just upon the midst of the
white. Will you believe me, Athanasia, upon this subject, you shall imitate his
manner and aim; and without looking either to the right or left hand, that is,
without either considering the powrefull hand of God in the accursed Eternity,
or that which distributes crowns and rewards in the Blessed, you shall fix the
ey of your contemplation upon the eternal God, and upon his essential
Eternity; and approaching unto him in an humble confidence, you shall be
illuminated, and your face shall not be confounded. No no, Athanasia, fear not
it is he; be confident he has overcome the world. Fear not to be oppressed
with the glory of so high a Majesty. His delights are to be with the
children of men. He is still at their Gate, and knockes to have entry, and to
make his abode with them, and to enrich them with good things. He does not
only not disdain that we should love him, but he disdaynes that we love him
not; and complaynes that he is made a solitude in Israel, and that he is not
beloved: and that the ways of the eternal Sion weep, that none do frequent
their solemnities. Let us therefore go with confidence to the Throne of his
Grace, if we desire to have part in his Glory. Let us permit him to wash the
feet of our affections, if we will with S. PETER, have Society with him. This
God then who is an essential Charity, does not only permit us to love him,
but even commands it, and that under pain of death, death everlasting. The
first and greatest of his Commandments, is all of the Love we owe him. This
love did once unite the Divine and humane nature in the Person of the WORD; and
did so far exinanite the eternal Son of the eternal Father, as to become
man, to take upon him the form of a servant; to appear in earth, and to be
conversant with men. A love which may well raise man toward God, since it
could bring God down to man. A love, the band of perfection, which unites the
equal, and does equalize such as it does unite; A Love, which having once
personally united, as S. AUGUSTINE says, the light of the Divinity, to the
clay of our mortality, is able to eleuate our desires even unto God, and make
us participant of the Divine nature, which is done by Charity, infused into
our hearts by the Holy Ghost. It is this Divine Love, which separating our
affections, not only from dangerous and superfluous things, but even from
things which are not evil, yet are subject to be loved with excess, and with
too strong and inordinate a passion, shall make us behold all created things in
God; and will so govern our inclinatio^s, that we shall affect no creature but
in God, for God, and according to God: wherein consists the perfect practice
of that Divine Commandment, which commands us to love God with all our heart,
with all our soul, with all our spirit, with all our strength, and even above
all things. For a soul that is come to this degree of perfection, that she
loves nothing but in God, and God in all things: in proper speech, loves not
many things, nor is not in the folicitude inseparable from the multiplicitie of
lovely objects, but she loves but one only thing, which is God, the one true
necessary thing, and out of whom all is but misery and affliction of spirit.
And because in all that which the order of Charity proposes unto her to be
loved, she loves God alone, she loves him equally in all, and as courageously
in her enemy, as te^derly in her friend; because she loves him only out of all
other things, and without all other things, but nothing at all without him, or
out of him. If it be ESTHER alone that ASSVERVS loves, says my blessed Father
in his Theotime, why should he love her more when she is parfumed and adorned,
then when she is in her common attire? If it be our Savior only that a soul
loves, why should she not as well love the Mount-Caluarie, as Thabor, since he
is as truly in the one as the other: and why should she not pronounce as
cordially in the one as in the other; It is Good for us to be here. She can
love our Savior in Egypt without loving Egypt; why then shall she not love him
in the banquet of SIMON the LEPROVS, without loving the banquet? And if she
love him amidst the blasphemies which are vomited out against him without
loving the blasphemies, why shall she not love him parfumed with MAGDELAINES
precious ointments; without loving the parfumes or smells? It is a true sign
that one loves God only in all things, when one loves him equally in all
things, since he being always equal to himself, the inequallitie of love
toward him, must needs spring from some thing which is not he. Whence the
soul that loves God purely and singulary, loves him no more with the whole
universe to boot, then all alone without the universe, because all that which
is out of God, and is not God, is as nothing to her. O pure soul! who loves
not even Paradise it self, but because God is there loved: and is so
soueraignely loved in his Paradise, as, that if he had not a Paradise to
bestow, yet would he nether be less loulie, or less beloved of this generous
soul, who knows not how to love the Paradise of her God, but only her God of
Paradise, and who puts no less rate upon the Caluarie where her Savior was
crucified, then the Heaven where he is glorified. O how well does this saintly
Bishope speak, my Athanasia, whose terms I durst not paraphrase; nor
disguise or change his venerable words, least I might loose his devout sense,
expressed in words of so great energie, and so full of spirit and virtue, that
all the flanting terms of worldly wisdom, seem to me far less persuasiue
and powrefull. How forcibly and sweetly does he teach us in this discourse not
to look upon the two hands of God, that of Justice and vengance, and that
other of Mercy and reward, but to search after his face alone; and to fear and
love him for himself, not for the punishments which he threatens vice; nor for
the reward, which he proposes to virtue: because he is altogether to be
honored, worshipped and served for the love of him self, yea although he had
nether Paradise for reward, nor yet Hell for Punishment. The blessed and
accursed Eternity, are only to be considered as things accessorie. Our prime
intention, and chief attention are to be set upon the Divine Eternity, or the
eternal Divinity, unless we would loose the title of the children of God,
and through fear of eternal punishments, or desire of eternal rewards
beesteemed slaves and hirelings. Let Us love God, Athanasia, and let him dispose
of us as he pleases. Let us be in his hands, as clay in the hand of the
Potter. Let him make of us vessels of honor or ignominy. Be it nobly or
ignobly, so we be his, it suffices. Lets turn our eyes from rewards or
punishments, and let us fix them upon our Lord. Let us behold his amiable
face. Let us set our view upon his hands, but as a faithful hand-maide upon
those of her Mistrisse. Let us receive indifferently that which comes from the
right hand of prosperity, and the left of adversity. Although he should even
kill us, lets hope in him. And let us hope without hope, yea even against all
appearance, that nothing shall separate us from his Charity. Let us cast all
our thoughts upon him. And in steed of staying our thoughts upon the created,
and as it were, the accidental Eternity, of Heaven or Hell, let us only be
fastened upon the essential Eternity which is God himself, who has in his
hand the extreamities of the earth. And who keeps the keys of eternal life
and death. Let us not so dwell upon the thought of Heaven or Hell's Eternity,
as that we do not more think of his Eternity who made them both; this, for
the Devils and their associates; that, for the Angels and the Elect. O
eternal Divinity! o Divine Eternity! thou art he whom I consider, and whom I
seake for; to thee only it is that I aspire: for without thee, the created
Eternity would not be, since it does not subsiste but by the eternal essence
of the essential Eternity, which is no other the^ God himself. And yet
further to purisie mine affection, and bring it to its full perfection,
henceforth I will not so much love the Eternity of God, as the God of
Eternity, though God be that same Eternity, and that same. Eternity be God
himself. And if, by the imagination of an impossible thing, one could be in
Hell with his grace, his accursed Eternity would not be dreadful: nor is the
Blessed Eternity to be desired, but that eternal life is to see God
eternally, eternally to depend upon him. O eternal God! who is like unto thee,
who is like unto thee; who is like unto our Lord God, who inhabites in the
places above! And what Eternity can be compared unto his, from whom proceeds
all Eternity, seeing he has made the ages of ages! O Great God, direct my
ways in thy presence, and make me walk before thee in perfection, that is,
perfect, in such sort, my intentions, that forgetting mine own interest, and
nether staying my self in the blessed or accursed Eternity, I may only look
after thine essential Eternity, which is thy self, to whom be honor and
glory from generation to generation, for ever and ever, in the Eternity of
Eternities. Amen.

An aspiration of Hope.
LXXIII.
But o Lord will it not be too great a presumption for a worm of the earth, to
raise it self toward thine infinite Eternity, and promise himself one day
in thy glory, to be united thereunto? Yea verily it were a manifest vanity, if
a soul should persuade her self, that of her self, and by the strength of
her own winge she could wind her self thither. But as of her self she can
do nothing; so together with thee, being fortified by thee, what can she not
perform o great God, since she holds her whole being of thy Grace? What may
she not, what ought she not to expect from thy grace, since it is written, that
thy grace is eternal life? And again with what confidence must not her heart
needs be encouraged, when she shall cast the eyes of her consideration upon the
great price, and infinite merits of thine eternal Son, o eternal Father a
Son, who has laid her open the way to Eternity, not by the blood of gotes
or calves, but acquiring unto her by his own blood an eternal and plentuous
redemption. O my soul what are we not to hope from the Mercy of so good a God,
and who has loved us with an eternal and excessive Charity; a Charity so
excessive, that he bestowed his own Son, to be the propitiation for our
Sins. When we were dead by our crimes, his grace restored us to life. Our
Savior dying upon the Cross, did quicken us by his death, and the same
reuiuour does promise us a like resurrection; and ascending unto heaven, he
goes to prepare us a place before the Throne of his glory. Which made the
great Apostle writing to the Ephesians, say, that God who is rich in mercy, for
his exceeding Charity wherewith he loved us even while we were dead by sins,
quickened us together in CHRIST, by whose grace we are salued: and has raised
us up with him self, making us sit with him in the celestials in JESUS CHRIST
showing to future ages the abundant riches of his grace, through his benignity
toward us in JESUS CHRIST. And the Prince of the Apostles S. PETER: Blessed be
God, and the Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, who according to his great Mercy
has regenerated us unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of JESUS CHRIST
from the dead, unto an inheritance incorruptible, and incontaminate, and that
cannot fade conserved in the Heavens in you. For what ought not, those to hope
for, who are inrowled, as members, in the mystical body of the Holy Church,
whose head he is, being most reasonable, that the Champions should follow
their Commander in his triumph, if they did accompany him in his Combats under
the Banner of the Cross. You that have followed me, said he to his Apostles,
you shall be set upon seats, in the Kingdom which my Father has prepared for
you in Eternity. There it is, that the Elect like unto Eagles, shall flock
about the body of the glorious humanity of our Redeemour; and where, crowned
with the crown of Justice, they shall lay them down at the feet of this La^be
Conqueror of the earth, and who vanquished the world. And if the eternal
Father has given us his Son, how will not he give us all things with him;
especially since this Son has the key of DAVID (key, Scepter of his Empire)
upon his shouldiers. A key with which he opens and none can shut. Behold, says
S. JOHN, what Charity the eternal Father has communicated unto us, that we
should be named and be his Sons: and if his Sons, his Heirs also, Heirs
truly of God, and Coheires of CHRIST. It was this holy hope, that moved the
Psalmists heart so generously to lanch out, as by so many flightes, toward the
blessed Eternity. Come let us ascend into the Hill of our Lord, and into the
house of the God of JACOB. Hope in him all ye congregations of the faithful:
for those that hope in him understand the truth of his promises, and those that
are faithful in his love, do place their confidence therein. Those that hope
in him shall not be confounded for ever: for such as put their confidence in
him shall be no more shaken then the Mountain of Sion; but replenished with
joy in the expectation of the eternal felicity, they cried out; I rejoiced
when I was told, that we were to go into the house of our Lord. And indeed
what is not a man to hope, of an infinite Bounty? what ought not one to expect
from so solemn promises, and whose truth remaynes for ever? No Lord, never,
never will I forget thy iustifications; for it is by them that thou have given
me life. I do firmly believe, that, if my soul do constantly adheare unto
thee, thy right hand will receive one, into thy bosom. O how happy are those
whom thou have chosen and taken as thine, for they shall dwell in thine
eternal Court for ever and ever. Let Us make no doubt of it my soul, he that
by his grace moves us to tend to this goal, will not forsake us in the midst
of our course and in so fair a way, but, since his works are perfect, he will
heap grace upon grace, and will make us happily arrive at the Port and point
of all consummation. O God draw us after thee, (since it is thee alone whom we
search, and whom we covet in the night of this life) and we will run in the
odor of thy parfumes. Receive us according to thy word, to the end we may live
in thee, and of thee, and confound us not in our expectation, which is wholly in
thee, our unchangeable felicity, and only Eternity.

A practice to engraue in our heart the memory of Eternity.
LXXIV.
IT is not all to sow, Athanasia, but the principale thing is to reap the
crope. The Theorie is fair, like unto RACHEL, but yet barraine: but the
Practice is fertile, like LIA, though less agreeable in the eye. It is not
enough to make specious speculations: unless our actions do answer unto
them, all is worth nothing: yea they serve paraduentures to lead us into
ruin; for the servant that knows the will of his Master, and does it not,
shall be bett with many stripes. All that say Lord, Lord, shall not enter into
glory, but those that shall observe the heavenly Fathers Commandments. To
enter into the Marriage of the Lamb, it is not enough to have the Lamps
lighted, but there must be oil in them too. Hell is full of the chafe of good
desires: but the Granarie of Heaven, receaues only the wheat of good works.
Let us descend therefore to the Practice, before we sound the retreat; and let
us put the last singer to this DRAVGHT by spiritual endeauours, whereby to
imprint deeply in our hearts, this wholesome memory of Eternity, be it the
Blessed, accursed, or Essential. It is reported that the great TAMERLANE, who
in his time was the scourge of God, and the terror of the world, was wont in
Camping himself before a Town (which shut the Gates, and resolved to
withstand the dreadful forces of his troops) to put out the first day of the
Seige a white Bannar, in sign of pardon, mildness and mercy, in case they
should freely render themselves up into his hands. The second day he caused a
read one be hung out, to signify that in the composition, some of them should
pay for it. But the third day he set out a black one, as a sign of his
indignation, and to protest unto them, that there was no place left to
Clemency; but that taking the Town by force, he would offer up all the
inhabitants victimes to DEATH, without all respect to age or sex. These three
colors, Athanasia, wherewith DRAVGHTES are made (for ordinarily they are
minuted upon white paper with vermillion and black) do represe^t unto us,
those three standarts, and the reference which they have to the three sorts of
Eternities, which I have deciphered unto you. The white, as the ground, does
put before your eyes the Essential Eternity, which is the proper essence of
God, the eternal fundation of all created Eternity. If we deliver our selves
up to his love and mild Clemency, we may confidently expect from this so
sweet a God to them that seek him, that white stone promised to the Elect in
the Apocalipse, which shall be a better mark of the reward of eternal
salvation, to such as have whitened their soul in the blood of the Lamb. The
read color, which conteynes light in it, and is the color of the Rose, does
prefigure unto us the Blessed Eternity, where the Roses do never fade; and
where the Elect behold the light of the Divinity in the light of Glory. But
withal this bloody color does intimate, that none arriues at this Felicity,
but by the price of the blood of the Lamb; and that through the fire and water
of many tribulations and sufferances, They shall be saved, according to the
Apostle, yet as by the fire, of anguishes and labors. But alas how nakedly
does the black color, a color of mourning, sadness, and night, represent,
that accursed Eternity; wherein, are exterior darkness, without all hope of
day; where are gnashings of teeth, and the rest of the Calamities, which rudely
and weakly we have drawn. O Athanasia, to the end that those bannars, no less
daunting then the Archangell's trumpet; or rather, to the end that that which
they represent, may never depart out of our view: and that this thought may not
be blotted out of our soul, make a full resolution to exercise your self in
the ensuing Practices. Since Habits are not begotten in us, according to all
Philosophy, but by often iterated Acts. If your heart be truly touched with
a desire of eternal salvation, it will be like unto the Sailors needle touched
with a Loadstone, which turns continually toward the North, so your thoughts
will incessantly direct themselves toward Eternity; now, toward the Blessed;
now, toward the Accursed; now, toward the essential, this last embracing the
two former, as the Firmament the inferior Spheres. And though the method
which I am about to propose unto you, to help to stay your mind upon this
Object, may seem at the first sight very simple, I would advise you, not to
despise it for all that, as did NAAMAN at first the advice of the Prophet, to
wash himself seven times in Jorden, if he would be delivered of his leprosy.
Call to mind, that the matter of the Sacraments, which are the instruments of
Divine graces, is very simple and common, yet under the veil of so slender
appearances, ly hid, the infinite treasures of wisdom and Goodness. Why, even
the Scripture it self sends us to Pismires, little birds and flowers to gather
from them profitable lessons and instructions. Take then for your first
PRACTICE (if I may have belief with you, that which has brought a wonderful
profit to some souls of mine acquaintance) to think as often of Eternity, as
you hear the cloak strike, night or day. Let this sound put you in mind, that
stepp by stepp you do so approach to your end, that by an insensible progress
you draw near your grave; which ought to be the Gate of Eternity. And then
soaring in spirit beyond transitory things, which do vanish as a shade,
aspire to that blessed Eternity, not subject to the measure of time, which is
the course of the Sun or the PRIMVM MOBILE, and say: when shall my feet be
established upon the lively Rock, that my stepps may no more slide, and that
the firmament being as a pauement, I may walk upon the face of the stars.
This will come to pass, my Athanasia, if you do carefully, and duly, manage
the hours and moments, of which we are about to speak: and if, while time
serves, you will do good deeds, which do address and bring us to Eternity.

For the second PRACTICE take those three times, The morning, Noonetyde, and
Evening, whereof DAVID makes mention, saying: In the evening, morning, and the
midst of the day, I was myndfull of God. And to help your memory, be
attentive to the ANGELVS DOMINI BELL, which does admonish us to recite three
times the Salutation of the Angel, in honor of the Mystery of the
Incarnation of the Son of God: and join to this pious custom the memory of
Eternity, by thinking, that the Immortal became mortal, and the Eternal for
your salvation did subject himself to Time, in uniting his Divinity to our
humanity. How good occasion does this descent of the Son of God into earth
administer unto you, to raise up your self to Heaven, and there to seek a
permanent City for ever, in the holy Sion. Undertake this holy exercise by
task, and for the space of some days; to the end that custom may beget in you
a habit, frequently to think of Eternity.

For the third PRACTICE: oblige your self by a firm purpose (yet without
vow) to say every day at some hour most comodious for you, three PATER
NOSTER's. And in reciting them, to think of the Blessed, accursed, and
essential Eternity, which is God. Uniting your self to the last by Love: by
desire to the Blessed: detesting the accursed, rather by the correction of your
manners, and amendment of life, then by empty words. For as we come not to the
celestial Eternity without doing good; so we avoid not the accursed, but by
flying evil.

When you recite your beads, or the Crown of our Blessed Lady, a prayer very
familiar to all those who make profession of piety. Let this crown of
flowers, put you in mind of the flowers, which never fade, whereof the Garland
of Eternity is wrought. Let the round form of this Crown make you myndfull,
that the Sphearicall figure which has nether beginning nor end, is the Symbol
of the essential Eternity, which never had beginning, nor shall ever have end.
This you may use as a fourth PRACTICE.

None can live like a good Christian, who does not twice a day, at least, wind
up the Cloak of his heart, and think of his ways, to wit, in the morning and
evening: These are two times, which he that desires to live according to God,
and to direct his footsteps in the paths of Peace, ought never to omit. Take
then some little part of that time, to cast a look upon Eternity, that total
continuance, which is never followed with evening nor morning. And beseech God
Almighty, that you may so pass through temporal, that you may not loose
eternal things. This shall be a fifth PRACTICE for you. Lets pass to

Other endeavors.
LXXV.
THere is nothing so frequent in the mouth of Christians, Athanasia, as the
Prayer which our Lord and Master made to direct us to his heavenly Father,
according to his words and spirit, to thend that having his will in our mouth,
we might be heard for the reverence of it. If you will believe me, as often as
this holy Prayer shall pass through your lips, you shall call to mind the
Essential Eternity by apprehending that you speak to the Eternal God. You
shall think of the Blessed Eternity, in making this petition: Thy Kingdom
come: and of the accursed Eternity in pronunceing that other: Deliver us from
evil, since it is the collection and fullness of all evils. And let this advise
pass for THE SIXTH ENDEVOVR OR PRACTICE.

You may do the like when piety shall move you to salute the Blessed virgin
in the words of the Angel, and the Church. And when as you shall beseech her
to assiste you, by her intercession in the hour of your departure out of this
life, call to mind that this hour shall be the time, and instant, which shall
decide your Eternity. A moment, in which you will stand in great need of her
assistance, to avoid the perils of Hell, and to acchiue the Land of the
^ueing. Let this be the SEVENTH PRACTICE.

I say the same of the Apostles Creed. When you recite it, weigh the Articles
thereof in the waights of the Sanctuary. The Communion of Saints of the
Triumphant Church, with those of the Militant, And Life everlasting, and they
will serve you as MEMORIALLS to engraue in your soul the Memory of Eternity.
Behold the EIGHT PRACTICE.

Whether you assiste in the solemn song of the Divine Office; or you recite
your boures apart. Remember, that for diverse reasons the holy Church has
ordained, that these two versicles should be added to the end of every Psalm,
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. Even as it
was in the beginning, and now and ever, etc. And that amongst the others, this
is not the least prowrefull, to imprint the memory of Eternity in the mynds
of the Faithful. Take this for a NINGHT PRACTICE.

The Jews, that they might continually remember Gods law, carried it about
with them; yea wore it even before their eyes written upon Phylacteries or
pieces of parchement: Understanding literally certain passages of the ancient
Covenant; whereby it is commanded, that one should always behold them, that
is, that one should have them as rules of their actions. I would to God, that
Christians were as careful to have still before their eyes the eternal
Gospel, and to that effect, they had painted Tables in their houses, to renew
the memory thereof. I know some personages, who to this purpose, caused the
words of a Prophet, to be written upon the chimney of their chambers in
letters of Gold. WHO IS ABLE TO LIVE FOR EVER IN A CONSVMING FIRE, AND AMIDST
ETERNAL FLAMES? This is facile and Fruitful, and shall be counted for the
TENTH PRACTICE.

An other memorial of Eternity.
LXXVI.
BEsides these former PRACTICES which are very familiar, I will yet bestow upon
you, Athanasia, a very facile Memorial, to make you think of Eternity upon
every occasion. It is the use of Aspirations, or Reflections, which the
Doctors of spiritual life do so highly recommend, to such as desire to live
piously, and according to God. If you will please to make use of it, you will
shortly find by experience, that all things will raise you toward God, who is
the essential Eternity, wherein you will represent unto your self the
different Idea's of the Blessed or accursed Eternity. All the creatures being
as so many Mirrours unto you, shall discover the Image of the Eternal God. And
which way so ever you turn your self, the invisible and eternal God shall
appear in visible and temporal things. All that can fall within the knowledge
of your senses, shall bear you above your self to him that passes all
understanding. Or at the least, you may make reflection upon the eternal
delights or colors, which do attend you in the blessed or accursed
Eternity, according to your comportment in this life. And to afford you some
small scantling of that so familiar an exercise to those that are conversant in
the knowledge of Saints: As often as you shall behold this universal object of
heaven and earth, which was S. ANTONIE's great book, wherein he read in
capital letters the Author's greatness, whom all this admirable fabrike cost
but one small word, what will hinder you to say with DAVID, o Lord how
wonderful is thy name through all the world: thy magnificence is extolled
beyond the Heavens; Heavens which are but the works of thy hands: Heavens
which shall pass, while thou shall still remaync thy self, since thy being
is Eternity it self.

In contemplating the sundry beauties which God has disper^^^ in the world,
rauishing the beholders eyes with admiration, let us say with an ancient
Father, if God permit the ^se of so many goodly things even to his enemies,
what will he reserve for his friends in the life to come?

In beholding the Sun, the world's only eye, the fountain of light, from
whence all the other stars borrow their brightness, does not occasion present
it self, in which we may consider the increated light of that God, who is all
light, and whom darkness cannot obscure, who does inhabit an inaccessible
light; who is the Sun of Justice: who is the true light, by which every one
coming into this world is enlightened. And to lift up our thoughts toward the
Sun of Justice, the Orient from above, toward that heavenly City which
stands in need of no Sun nor Moon, because Gods brightness does lighten it,
and its Lamp is the Lamb.

When the day does enlighten us, and discover unto us so many beauties which
the nightly veil does hide from our eyes: Alas, may we say, when shall the
fair day of Eternity appear, which shall be followed by no night, and where
we shall see the light of the Divinity in the light of Glory?

And when the night, mother of sleep and rest, shall spread her dark mantle,
all besett with stars, over the face of the earth, if we desire to withdraw
our thoughts from the sad night, of the accursed Eternity, marked in the
Scripture with the name of exterior darkness, a night which shall never see the
day of Grace or Glory, what shall hinder us, in beholding so many torches
which sparkle in those celestial vaultes, upon a clear night, to propose unto
our selves the Blessed, who shine as stars for perpetual Eternities,
differing in bless and brightness, as one star differs from another. Why may
we not also contemplate the essential Eternity of God under this Symbol,
since it is written, he set his signet upon the darkness. That his night is as
bright as day; and his darkness shines like light. So shall the night afford us
a grateful light. And during the obscurities we shall lift up our hands
toward the holy places, blessing our Lord, till our change shall draw near,
and that we shall see him no more after a dark manner but face to face.

If the Sunn's course within his annual circle, show unto us the diversity
of seasons, the flowers of the Spring, and the fruits of the fall; may not
these things bring him unto our consideration, who is the flower of the field,
and the lilie of the valley, whose lilie is most flourishing; him, in a word, who
is the fruit of life, the fruit of the blessed virgins womb, the Son of the
Eternal God; whose flowers are fruits of honor and honesty. And the seasons
of Summer and winter in the distempered excess of their heates and cold, are
they not figures of that unfortunate Eternity, where the damned pass out of
icie waters into flames?

If we look upon the Elements whereof all the mixed bodies are composed, do not
earth and Fire prefigure unto us the accursed Eternity, since the earth
conteynes the fire of Hell with in its Center, which shall never be
extinguished. And are not the Air and Water a picture of Paradise where the
Blessed do fly and swim as fool and fish in the essential Eternity? Is
it not written, that the Elect, after the Doom of the last Assizes shall be
taken up into the air after JESUS CHRIST? and that in heaven they shall drink
of the torrent of pleasures eternally, and swime in those impetuous floodes,
which do make the City of God joyful?

Whether we make reflection upon our own or other men's lives; or whether we
consider in an others death, the picture of our own, which we cannot escape:
is it not a just occasion to think of the life which shall never dye, and of
that second death, which shall never live, although indeed it can never die
nether?

If, according to the Apostle, we may eat and drink to God's glory; why may
not we also in taking our repast think of the sacietie, which we hope for in
his glory, when, as most happy children of the Deity, we shall be set at our
heavenly Fathers table, fed with the same food with himself, because we shall
enjoy the same Beatitude, by which God is happy: for being happy of himself,
in himself shall be our eternal happiness, when we shall be made partakers of
him, made like unto him, comfortable to his Image, and (to use the term of
the holy Scripture) partakers of his Divine nature.

While we take our repose in our bed, why may we not think of him that is
eternal? and reflect upon the repose which he prepares for us in Eternity, if
in the time of this mortal course we fight lawfully for him. O God, thou art
my repose for ever and ever, I have made choice of the bosom of thy goodness to
remain therein eternally. Who will give me the wings of a Dove to fly up to
that assured repose; and to pass into the place of the admirable Tabernacle
even unto the house of God?

We may intertaine our selves with the same thoughts upon Sunday, the day of
rest and repose: seeing we are commanded to cease from corporal labors, to be
free to contemplate the Divine Goodness, and that delicate Saboath, which the
Saints enjoy in Eternity; for there it is, says the holy Ghost, that they
rest from labors, and where they reap in joy, what they had sown in tears.

Upon festival days, whether it be of the mysteries of our holy Faith, or of
the solemnities of our Savior JESUS, of his holy mother, or of Saints, can we
be employed in a better thought, then with the desire of imitating them, to
meet them in Eternity, by walking in the paths which they have marked us out?
For in vain should we boast that we are members of JESUS CHRIST, and children
of Saints, if we refuse to walk as they have walked; that so following their
example, we may come to be made worthy unto the part of the lot of Saints in
the light of eternal felicity. Upon work days, which the Church Office
calls ferialls, we are to think, that none comes to the eternal Ferialls but
by labors and suffera^ces. Whereupon the Scripture councelleth us to walk
toward goodness while the day lasts, and carefully to put our hand to the
work, while time is favorable, and the day proper to work our salvation in.

Whether we be sitting, standing, or walking, every posture of our body
represents Eternity. Sitting should reduce unto our memory the empty Seats
of the Angels fallen from Heaven, which remain for us to fill and repair
their ruins. And the Seats also prepared for those who are to judge the world
together with our Savior. If we stand, let us think of that which the
Psalmist says, we were straight upon our feet in thy porches o Jerusalem. If
we walk, at every step we are to be myndfull to advance in the way of
Jerusalem. And that not to go forward in the way of God is to go backward.

In attireing our selves let us think of the Blessed, who are invested with
light, as with a garment: and of those pure creatures, which in Heaven follow
the Lamb where ever he goes, in habites which put down the snow in
whiteness. O God may we sigh out, when shall we be clad with thy self,
invested with JESUS CHRIST, adorned with the wedding garment, and be admitted
to the eternal banquet of the marriages of the Lamb.

When we hear the word of God preached unto us by the mouth of the Preacher,
why should not that word of God, stir up our hearts to that God WORD, to that
word eternal, an essential WORD eternally uttered by the Father, the
Splendor of his Father-hoode, Light of Light, Image of his substance, toward
that WORD in whom all things were made, and who has truly the words of life,
and life everlasting. O Divine, sacred, and essentially eternal WORD, it is of
thee as of their true bread, that the Elect do feed in Heaven, thou art he,
whom they preciously conserve in their hearts. O Truth of God, o God of TRVTH
thou remaynst for ever. Heaven and earth shall pass, but this eternal WORD
shall never pass.

When we assiste in the Divine Office, and praise God in the midst of his
Temple, why may not we excite our hearts toward that perfect praise, which
God himself does give unto himself in Eternity: or to that which the Angels
and Elect do render unto him in Heaven, when they call him thrice, HOLY, in so
grave a tune, and so full a music, that the gates of Heaven are moved in it.
Benediction, praise, and virtue be to him who is seated upon the Throne, and to
the Lamb, who has redeemed us in his blood, from every Tribe, people, and
nation, and has placed us in his eternal Kingdom. But principally when we
are present at the CATHOLIC SACRYFICE, wherein the Lamb without spote who
takes away the sins of the world, is offered to his heavenly Father, in an
unbloody manner. o God then it is, that we ought with all the Court of the
Church Triu^phant, to incens the holy Alter, with ince^se everlasting in an
humbly loving adoration, which ryseth up as an incense burnt before the face of
God. Then it is, that we are to do our duties to him, who is Priest for ever
according to the Order of MELCHISEDECH: and who being an eternal Bishope, not
needing to pray for himself, yet made his entry into the Sanctuary of
Eternity, not by the blood of beasts, but by his own, offering himself up
to his Father an oblation for the sins of all mankind.

Like as all things seem yellow to such as are sick of the ganders; and as
that which is seen through a colored glass, does appear to be of the same
color: So when a soul has accustomed it self by frequent aspirations to
think of Eternity, every thing, be it what it will, recalls this Object to
her memory. The beauty of Towns and Palaces does presently represent unto
her the riches of the incomparable Jerusalem, such as it is described in the
Apocalipse; and that Palace of the Divinity far other then that of DAVID and
SOLOMON, which the Scripture does so richly describe. An old Hermit beholding
the Roman TRIVMPHES in their magnificall Pomp: what shall the triumphant
Jerusalem be, quoth he, if such splendor and glory be seen even in earth? O
Lord, will we say with the Psalmist, how happy are they that live in thy
house, far beyond those that live in the Tabernacles of Sinners! O how goodly
are the Tents of JACOB for ever! how the Mansions in the house of the Heavenly
Father, are diuersified, and desirable! How amiable are thy Porches, o Lord
God of Virtue's my soul is transported in consideration thereof!

These worldly magnificencies which we daily see, ought to be so many ladders
to a good soul, to ascend to those that are eternal, which are only to be
found in his Abode, who is great and laudible in his holy City, and his
eternal Hill, whose greatness is infinite. The sight of humane miseries will
make the like impressio^ in her by sending her down to Hell alive, to behold
there, calamities incomparably greater, in their extremity, and eternal
continuance. Yea if she behold malefactors led to execution by humane Justice,
it makes her think of the eternal Justice of God, which is inflicted upon the
damned, without all hope of ease or delivery. Nay if she do but see a beast
die, she is moved to pity those poor creatures, whose Felicity expires with
their life.

If she take into her consideration the great ones of this world, that which is
written occurs unto her mind, that the Powrefull shall be powrefully tormented.
In beholding Kings and Princes she does rather pity then envy their
condition, when she calls to mind, that they shall die like other men. That all
their glory shall pass as the flower of the field; and that their Diademes
and honors of so short standing, has nothing comparable to that Kingdom,
where the King of Kings reigns with his Elect, whom he makes participant of
his Royalty, but a Royalty that is everlasting, a Kingdom that knows no end.

If she cast her ey down upon the poor and little ones, who are here below the
refuse of the world, and the scorn of men, she apprehe^ds them happy, because
to them, as to a poor LAZARUS, an eternal Kingdom is promised.

If war and peace occur unto her thoughts, they do forthwith draw with
them the memory of both the Eternities. The accursed, where there is a
continual war without Peace: The Blessed, where there raynes a happy Peace
without all fear of war. Yea hereby, she falls upon the Essence of that
eternally great God, who in the Scriptures, is sometimes styled the God of
Peace, sometimes the God of armies, and revenge.

The sight of the Sea, floodes, rivers, and fountains, make her remember the
same: for she thinks of the fountain of Paradise, of the source of life
springing toward Eternity; she thinks of the flood of the City of God, and
of the infinite Ocean of the essential Eternity, of the eternal essence:
whose is the Sea, says DAVID, and who made this vaste receptacle of waters.

In what estate soever, a soul that is seasoned with this holy exercise, be,
whether in prosperity or adversity, in joy or grief, in consolation or
desolation, in privation or fruition, in pleasure or pain, in sickness or
health be she in grace or disgrace with the world, in plenty or want, be it
amidst riches, or in the press of poverty, all does cooperate to good. And
all this places Eternity before her eyes, beholding the accursed, in
afflictions; the blessed, in contentment: and the eternal God in every thing,
and every thing in the eternal God. To whom keeping an inuariable fidelity,
in the various change of things, she pronounces courageously with the Apostle,
whether we live or die we are our Lord's. I will bless him at all times, his
praise shall be continually in my mouth. Whether he draw us up to Heaven, or he
depresse us down into the Abisses below; whether he do mortify, or quicken
us, his love shall be so strong unto me (love which is more strong then death
or Hell) that nothing shall ever be able to separate me from his charity. Yea
she will rather be unmindful of her self, then forget this dear Jerusalem
of that Eternity, wherein she has cast the Ankre of all her hopes, and of her
salvation. Exercise your self therefore frequently and faithfully in this
Practice of Aspirations and Iaculatorie Prayers, which are so familiar to all
those that profess true piety: and you will find by experience, that as by
means thereof you come to see God in all things, so shall you easily discover
thereby in every thing the Blessed or accursed Eternity (since Fortune and
misfortune are the two basins, or rather the two Poles of this life, and the
two Caskes or tunns, of Providence, according to that ancient Philosophers
conceit) or at least to contemplate therein the essential Eternity, which is
God, the Center wherein all our desires and asperations do end.

The moments where upon Eternity does depend.
LXXVII.
O God, Athanasia, what am I about to say, this Eternity which shall never
have end, is not yet, in respect of us, without beginning, and it is that which
the Divines call Euiternitie; for God alone, being his own Eternity, is
without beginning or end. But all other creatures who were made in TIME had a
beginning; yet true it is that both Angels and men shall be eternal, marry,
in the time to come, for they had a beginning, and were not from all Eternity.
Now as we have had a beginning, and shall have no end, (whether our wicked life
do precipitate us into eternal punishments; or our good endeauours, assisted
by God's grace, make us a way to eternal life.) So our passage to the blessed
or accursed Eternity, depends of a moment as of its principle. O Athanasia,
how atte^tiue ought we to be to understand that dreadful moment whereupon
depends our Eternity. If you ask me which it is, I will discover unto you, in
the next stroke, that it comprehends all the moments of this mortal life. But
as in a plentious heruist, there are always some ears of come more notable
then the rest; and amongst the stars, those which are nearest the two Poles
are the most remarkable; so amongst the moments of which our mortal life are
composed, I would wish that we should have a principal care of the two, of
which I am about to speak. The first is the precious moment in which the
Divine grace does touch our hearts, called by the Scripture the time of our
visitation, a moment of such importance, that being rightly received, it is the
blosome of our blessed Eternity, but being ill managed, it is the beginning of
our accursed Eternity. Woe be to thee, said our Savior weeping, o Jerusalem,
because thou have not decerned the time of thy visitation. O God, Athanasia,
how we shall be astonished, when before the Tribunal of the just Judge, where
we must all appear, we shall hear our selves accused of so many negligences,
for that we have either despised the Divine inspirations, or that we have abused
so many heavenly graces which could have given us life, if we had been dead by
sin; or life more abundantly, if we were already in grace; according as it
is written. How much was that slothful lover of the Canticles grieved, when
she perceived that her Spouse was past by, who had stood at her Chamber door
quaking with cold and beseeching entry by so many loving inuitatio^s, and
aduantagous promises? She rises, but to late; she runs full of desolation
into diverse places, but fines him not, till after a thousand and a thousand
labors, affrontes, and reproaches. But what a heart break shall it be to the
reprobate soul, when after her condemnation she shall clearly see, how many
occasions of working her salvation she had neglected; and how many means she
had to free her self from the torments to which she shall see her self
adjudged for ever? We se^nselesse, say the damned speaking of the Elect,
esteemed their life (who wrought their own salvation) madness, themselves,
dasterous and dishonorable, but now we see, their lot is in the inheritance of
Saints. On the other side, what a consolation shall it be to thee Blessed,
when they shall consider, that their well employed moments of affliction in
earth, had wrought in them an eternal weight of Glory. Let us, therefore be
careful of our selves, Athanasia, Let us mark what our Savior speaks in our
hearts, and doubtless we shall understand words of Peace, and reconcilement.
Blessed is the man that hears him, and watches at his doors daily, which we
do, when we are earefull to gather up his inspiratio^s, as the dropes of a
heavenly dew which begets precious Pearls in our hearts, and the holy unions
of our soul with God. Let Us still be on foot, and as it were, stand Sentinel
upon our ways; let us think in what sort we walk; let us turn our feet
into the Paths of the Divine Law. The SECOND MOMENT is that which makes a
separation betwixt our soul and our body, that is, the instant of our
departure out of this life, a moment which is our last, and is to be judge of
all those that went before. For as the Tree remaynes for ever where it falls;
so shall we continue for ever in the, state in which we are found in the
instant of our death. And such as God shall find us then, such will he judge
us. For if all this life be but a waying to Eternity, death is to be termed
the door of Eternity, yet a double door, passing the good to felicity; the
wicked to eternal miseries. And if PHILIPPE MACEDO, to conteyne himself
within the bounds of temperance and modesty in his Kinglike greatness, made a
Page advertise him every morning that he was a Man, and consequently, mortal,
least he might have framed some immortal co^ceipt of himself: How much more
ought a Christian, continually to call to mind that double Eternity, which
attends him after death.

The present moment.
LXXVIII.
But besides these two moments which I have proposed unto you, Athanasia, I do
so much desire that you would attend, and apply your self to the
consideration of Eternity, that I would wish from my heart, that all the
moments of your life were employed in that exercise; that I might apply to you
that of the Prophet, you are a nightly Sentinel of this life, and might one
day see you, amongst the wise Virgins in the eternal banquet of the marriage
of the Lamb. I could wish that at every breathing, you would cast an ey
toward Eternity; that at every beating of a pulse, every thought, word,
action, you would make some reflection upon a subject of such importance. It is
said that the weakness of Antipheron his sight, making the air become as
thick as a mirror unto him, made him continually see his own shape: and I
wish to God, that the force of your fight were so persing, that in all things
you might behold the picture of Eternity, according to the method I have
proposed unto you. For when all is said, if you desire indeed to know, the
moment whereupon the good or bad success of your Eternity depends, I will
assure you, it is THE PRESENT MOMENT. Enter therefore into your self by a
wholesome inuersion, return into your own heart, make a visit in the
Jerusalem of your interior man with the lamp of a sincere examen. Consider
in what state you stand. Whether you are not in the state of disgrace, and set
in the chair of pestilence, and in the region of the shadow of death and
darkness of sin. Give ear unto the voice of grace which cries out unto you,
rise thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and CHRIST will illuminate
thee: he is the true light which does illuminate every man that comes into this
world, and he that follows him walks not in darkness. This Su^ne of Justice
makes his beams shine upon the good and bad. Open thine eyes, and receive his
splendor, and be not rebellions against the light. Why will thou perish o
house of Israel? approach unto him who is the light of the world, and thou
shall be enlightened, and thy face shall not he confounded. He shines in every
time and place, and none is able to hide himself from his heat, or light. He
is a Sun that does continually send out his rayses, we need only to open our
eyes, and every moment they shall be filled with light. I stand at the gate,
and knoke, says he, and if any one open unto me, I will come unto him, and
will take my repose and repast with him, for I will suppe with him, a repast,
Athanasia, to which repose does immediately follow. In every instant of your
life, these words are spoken to your heart. The night is past, the day is come,
lets us cast of then the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of
light, that we may honestly walk in the light of Grace. You know what the
Poets learned fables, teach, touching OCCASION, and how one is to lay hold
upon her, she passes like lightning, in the twinkling of an eye, and being
past, in vain do you call, or endeavor to stope her, since she is balde and
affords no hold; and withal deaf and inexorable to such as recall her. If you
hear me, says our Lord by a Prophet, you shall eat the pleasant fruits of
the earth, but if you hear me not, I will destroy you, and will laugh at your
destruction; for I am a strong and jealous God, and make such disdaynefull as
disdain me. When I come to a soul I will be received; and when I come in
quality of Spouse, I desire to be met; and that my grace be not received in
vain. My spirit shall fly the dissembler, and such as do not receive him; so
as is beseeming that sweet guest of the soul. And though I operate all the
good which is in the soul, yet will I that she cooperate, performing a part
of the way, or at least admitting my favors into the bosom of her consent,
and remembrance. I will give sight to the blind, but I will also have them to
demand it. I will willingly cleanse the unclean, yet will I have her endeavors
in recurring to my Goodness. I will willingly give the pappe, marry upon
condition that she shall suck it. I will freely enlighten, yet will I have her
to receive my light. I hate those remiss and drowsy souls who prolong their
conversion from day to day, and who of their own part will do nothing: for
though I created them without them, yet without them will I not save them. I
will create in them a clean heart, and renew a right spirit in their bowels.
I will render unto them the joy of my salvation, and confirm them with my
principal Spirit, yet of their part I will have them to put of their old ADAM,
with his ill customs, and put on the new, accompaigned with Justice,
Sa^ctitie, and Truth. Thus it is, Athanasia, that our Savior speaks to the
souls, which seriously and duly think of their conversion, and Eternity.
Every moment he uses these kind of discourses in the botome of our heart. Lets
be good husbands thereof. If this day his voice sound in your ears, wax not
hard hearted, for otherwise, if you will not accnowledge his ways, he will
swear in his wroth, that you shall never enter into his eternal Rest.
Sluggard how long will thou sleep? how long, o ye heavy hearted, Will you be
in love with vanity, and seake after a Lie. Are you ignorant that the Goodness
of God, has long enough expected your repentance; do you not know what an
ancient Father says, that the Holy Ghost is an enemy to slothfulness and
delays? Do not delay your conversion, says the wiseman, nor defer it from
day to day, least you be prevented by a soudaine death, and wishing for time of
repentance, you find it not. Who is not to day fit for his conversion shall be
less fit to morrow, because one sin, says S. GREGORY, by its own weight,
waighes us down to another, one Abisse inuoking another. Know then, Athanasia,
that every moment is proper to convert our selves unto God. And what is a true
conversion, but an auersion from the Creature, and a returning toward the
Creator, that is, a contempt of the world which passes with its
concupiscences, and an application of the Spirit to eternal things. So shall
every present moment serve you for a gate, by which you may pass from TIMES
and MOMENTS to ETERNITY.

The eternal doom.
LXXIX.
ANd here it is, my Athanasia, where I am to imitate the torch, which being
upon the point of dying out, casts the greatest light: for before I finish,
and put the last fingar to this Draught, I must send out fire and flames: which
I will do, by proposing unto you, the most forcible and efficacious motive
that ca^ be imagined, to cause you to think continually of Eternity. And what
is this sharp spur, Athanasia, but the definitiuely eternal Sentence, which
the just Judge of the liueing and the dead, shall pronounce in his general
Judgment at Doomes day, when he shall make an eternal separation betwixt
goats and the Lambs; the choice wheat and darnell; the wicked and the just?
And if S. HIEROME had so deeply engraven, in his heart, the memory of the
resurrection of the dead, which shall be performed upon the sound of the last
Trumpet, that at every moment, whether he waked or slept, he apprehended that
he heard that voice of terror: Rise o ye dead, and appear before the
Tribunal of the liueing God: how much more reason have we to think of the
issue and conclusion, then the preparation of this solemn Judgment, since the
sentence does irreuocably decree what shall become of us for all Eternity?
Before and above all things, said PACOMIVS, let us keep before our eyes the
last of all the days: and all the moments of our life, let us think, and
thoroughly think of Eternity. A remarkable Sentence, and even worthy to be
engraven with an iron pen, not only, in a plate of lead, but in the hardest
marble and flinte stone, as said the good JOB. The mother of Simphorian said
unto her son while he was haled unto Martyrdom, my dear child, the fruit
of my womb, the beloved of my vows, turn thine eyes toward Heaven, consider
him that reigns there for ever: renounce him not for a moment of life: the
pains of death will quickly be past; but the reward shall never end. And S.
FRANCIS, to encourage his Religions to the lingering martyrdom of a religions
life, said unto them; Brethren, great are the things which we have promised
unto God; yet infinitely greater things, God has promised unto us: The labor
is short: the reward is eternal. The pleasure does post by; the pain is
permanent. Many are called, few are elected, and every one receaues according
to his works. But especially at that great day, which is the judge of all the
rest, every one shall be rewarded according to his works; and God shall
reveal that which is shut up in darkness, and shall manifest the secrets of
hearts. A day so dreadful, that the powers of Heaven shall be moved; the
Angels shall quake with fear, when the Almighty shall come to judge the
world. It is not my purpose, Athanasia, to entertayne you with the horrors of
that day, which would require a whole volume. I will only place before your
eyes the eternal Gospel, or rather the irreuocable sentence, which shall
proceed from his mouth, who shall judge the people in equity, who shall judge
nations; and to whom his Father has given all judgment in heaven and in
earth, and which shall issue from thence like lightning and thunder, far more
dreadful then that which did appear upon the top of the mount Sina, when
our Lord delivered his law unto Israel, by the hand of MOSES Mediator
between God and the people. O Savior of the world, thou shall be then a lamb
Dominatour of the earth, to the good; but to the reprobate a roaring Lion. When
the Lion begins to roar in the Forest, there is nether passinger, nor yet
wildebeasts, that do not quake, and hide themselves. O how shall the damned
dread thy voice resembling that of thy thunder in the wheel of thy fury,
since they shall inuoke the mountains to fall down upon them, to hide them
before the face of thy wroth; for who knows the force of thine indignation: or
who is able to sum up the effects thereof. How penetrating shall the two
edged sword be, which shall proceed from thy mouth, whilst thou shall thunder
out against the^ that eternal doom, which shall reach even unto the division
of their soul and their spirit, of their joints also and their marowes. GO
YE ACCVRSED INTO ETERNAL FIRE. O, Athanasia, who is able without astonishment
to utter, without swonding to understand, so dismaying and dreadful words? Be
gone. Alas dread Lord whither shall they go, to avoid the encounter of thy
spirit, and to convey themselves from before thy wrothfull countenance? art
thou not in Heaven, in Hell, and every where? do thou not even fill heaven
and earth? do thou not hold the universe in thy hand? and does not thy power
comprehend all things? Be gone. But to whom shall they betake themselves? art
not thou he, who has the words of eternal life, who art even thy self life
everlasting? Be gone. Whither will thou have those Prodigalls to retire
themselves? do what they can, they cannot go out of thee, since in thee, all
things have motion, being, and life. Be gone. But whither shall those
ABSALON's resort for succor, being eternally banished from the Court of the
eternal DAVID, King of ages, immortal and invisible? Be gone. O what a word!
or rather what a Thunder bolt, able to strike Lucifer down into the Abisse of
Hell! oh Savior JESUS! in the day of thy flesh, in the time of thy
sufferances, when, like an innocent Lamb thou wast lead to be sacryficed, if
this word. It is I, was able to prostrate upon the ground the troops of
Soldiers: How shall that word of reprobation precipitate them, whom thou
driuest eternally from the Paradise of thy presence? Be gone. o banishing sword
of the Angel of the high Council: who do banish for an Eternity the
Betrayers of the heavenly inheritance! Be gone. o! Athanasia, if the Ancient
prophets were struke with such astonishme^t, while God, appearing unto them
under diverse forms, did impart unto them his will and pleasure, as to his
friends, and Ambassadors, to be the Interpreters of the same to the people:
and if the only vision of the Angels of light put them into a trance, as we
read even of S. JOHN in his Apocalipse, falling prostrate at the feet of the
Angel, as though he had fallen down dead. If Israel, while he heard God
thunder and lighten upon the Mount-Sina, said unto MOSES, speak thou unto us,
and we will understand thee, but let not our Lord speak, least we may dye, and
continuing in his apprehension, if we hear any more, said he, the voice of our
Lord God, infallibly we are dead (for what flesh is able to sustain the word
of the living God, speaking out of the midst of flames, as we hear him?) how
dreadful I pray you must the condemning voice of the inexorable Judge needs
be? The Prophet ISAYE, seeing, in spirit only, the destruction of Babylone,
was touched with so deep a compassion, that he affirmed, that his reins were
filled with dolor, and his anguish was like to that of a woman in childbirth,
that he fell backward in hearing its Condemnation, was troubled in beholding
it, withered away with apprehension, and was inuolued in darkness through
amaysement thereof. Then, says the same Prophet, speaking of the last
judgment; the day of the fury of the God of Hosts, shall be terrible to the
proud, arrogant, and haughty. Then, says IEROMIE, they shall be confounded
who not have considered that eternal reproach. Then, goes on ISAYE, The
Almighty will make the Majesty of his voice be heard, and will manifest the
fearful force of his arm, in the consummation of his wroth, and in the flame
of devouring fire. For even as a fire, says the Psalmist, which burns a
wood, and as a flame that burns the mountains; so shall thou pursue them in
thy tempest, who shall be the object of thy wrath. Then, the Almighty, says
the wiseman, by his own virtue, shall trample under his feet the neck of the
proud and powrefull. Be gone accursed. O God! what a second thunder bolt shall
fall upon the heads of the Reprobate, by this eternal curse: a curse, which
does comprehend in it self, in an emine^t manner, all the torments, which
everlastingly they are to endure in Hell. Be gone thou accursed figue tree. Be
gone barre^ trees, twice dead, rooted out of the blessed earth, and are only
fit to be cast into the fire. Be gone, you are not worthy to take up place, in
the garden of my delights: where I plant none but trees that bear good
fruit. Go you accursed into eternal fire. Go into deuoureing flames: take
up your Abode in eternal fires. The blast of my wroth shall kindle the
brimstone of the furnace, wherein you burn, as long as I shall be God.
Athanasia, I leave to your meditation, the rest of this horrible sentence,
which in the twinkling of an eye shall be put in execution, ingeniously
confessing unto you, that my quakeing pen does fall from its flight; as did the
birds of old, which flew over the accursed lake of Pentapolis. But lets turn
our eyes from this tragical spectacle, let us give an attentive ear to the
sweet voice of the Spouse of the elected foul. o how delightful shall this
voice be, and how justly may the Elect say with the Psalmist, o how sweet is
thy word, o Lord, to our taste, yea, it is more sweet then the honey comb.
Lo here the sentence of their eternal felicity. Come o what an actractiue
word is this, able even to draw out of the Abisse of nothing, that which yet
has no being, since God does call that which is not as that which is, giueing
being to that which is not, by his powerful word. Come. With what promptitude
shall the Elect spring up into the air, to present themselves before their
Spouse, and to obey his blisfull commands, wholly to be desired, yea the crown
and accomplishment of all their desires. Though they were as insensible as
iron, this lodestone will draw them, II, it will draw them after it self in
the sweet odor of this inuitation. Come. This word does intimate a perfect
union of grace and Glory, which shall transform the Blessed into God,
participating of his felicity, and shall translate them into the inheritance
of the children of the eternal Father. Come ye blessed, o benediction far
passing that of the old Patriarchs, and which conteynes in it the fatnes of the
wishfull soil, and all the dew of Heaven, quite putting down the dew of
Hermo^, which does disperse it self all over the Mountain of Sion. O how
blessed are they who are blessed by our Lord who made Heaven and earth: They
shall dwell for ever in the Land of Promise, a Land of benediction, freed from
all captivity by the presence of our Lord. A Land which does flow with the
milk and honey of Divine blessings; a Land abu^ding with the bread of Angels,
with heavenly Manna, where the Elect possessed of a constant peace, shall enjoy a
plentuous repose. In this happy day, alloted for Justice and Mercy, an
inuariable plenty of Peace shall befall the Just, and the Moon of change
shall be taken away. Here it is, Athanasia, that I would inuit you to ruminate
with me, that Divine sallie of love and desire of the great S. AUGUSTINE.
Bring to pass that I may love thee o Lord, and if I love thee not yet enough,
effect that I may love thee more. Certes, it is not possible for me to know, in
what measure I want necessary love; this only I know, that all plenty which
is not my God, is to me mere misery and want. O how happy is he, says the
Psalmist, who has his desires filled with him. And who indeed can be said to
be completely rich, but he that is saciated with his glory, and inebriated
with the abundance of the delights of his house. Come ye blessed of my Father
and receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. O
what a Kingdom! o what a crown! Crown of gold, beset with signs of
sanctity, glory, and honor, liueries of valor! Come my beloved, says he
to those elect souls, come and you shall be crowned. This eternal and
infinitely happy Kingdom, says S. ISIDORVS, in what ever respect it be
considered, is promised to all kind of people; and yet, (o humane blindness!)
few speak of it, few think of it, and that but rarely too. Worldly
entertayneme^ts are stuffed with frivolous and impertinent discourses: rarely
do we hear any news of Heaven and that heavenly life which shall never have
end. This is a miserable straying from the right way. Our life is lent us to
breath after Eternity. Nor it is suitable to the condition of a Christian to
hope for any glory or felicity which is not eternal. Those that do
undertake any long voyage, or famous pilgrimage, as that of the Holy La^d, do
entertayne themselves in the way with on other thought, then that of the place
whither they tend, solacing their weariness with the sweet memory of that
which they hope to see there. O Athanasia, what ought we to do in this sade
exile (where we are Pilgrims and Passingers, after the manner of our
forefathers, where we wander and stray from God) but to place our thoughts
upon the Contrie whither we travel, upon the City of permanent abode, whither
we breath, and to refresh our labors by the blessed hope of the wished period
of our pilgrimage: and withal to imitate the Traveler (who conte^ting him
self upon the way with pure necessaries, holds on without stop or stay, or
looking backward) making use of temporal things only, to advance us in our
way to Eternity. O how full of glory is this Kingdom, sings the holy Church,
where all the Saints do reign with God. And who will give force to the wings
of our desires, to aim and fly toward this mark, during the whole course of
our mortal life: a happy course, if it arrive at so wishfull an end. But now
it is high time, that to free our pencill we give the last touch to this
Draught by an

Adoration of the essential Eternity.
LXXX.
O Great God! Eternal Essence! ESSENTIAL ETERNITY! why, it is thee in fine,
which before and above all things, I desire, and seek for. And if I aspire
after the Blessed Eternity, the reason is, because it is no other thing then
thy self, who art, and who does make eternal life, which without thee and out
of thee, would nether be desirable nor estimable. Behold all my desire is
before thee, and I power out my prayer in thy presence, which has no other
aim but inseparably and eternally to unite my self unto thy Goodness, to
hold it, and never to be separated from it, to seek thy face, to search for
thy fair countenance, the only Object of mine eternal felicity. Give thy
self unto me, o my God: behold I love thee, and give thee my whole heart. Thou
desire not the man but for his heart; nor the heart but for love; nor love,
but to communicate thy goodness to a reasonable creature, and by such
communication to make it eternally happy. Thou would, o Lord, have me aspire
after this communication, the top of our sovereign Beatitude, when thou
commandst me to pray unto thee that thy Kingdom come. It is this only thing,
which I beg of thy bounty, that I may dwell with thee, that is to say, in
thee, for all Eternity. I love the beauty of thy house which is no other then
thine own essence, and the sole aim of my desires, is the place of thy
glory. Let me rest therein for ever and ever, and according to my election and
dilection let me dwell there everlastingly. Yet that I may enter thither
according to thy pleasure o my GLORY, o my MERCY, o my God, my Light, my
Salvation! Lo how I lay down all my pretentio^s and proper interests at the
Gate of thy holy Sion, renouncing from my very heart the spirit of bondage and
servile fear, which would make me fly the accursed Eternity for no other
reason, (o disaster!) then that I should be there the eternal Object of thy
wroth, and hatred: renou^cing also that mercenarie spirit, which would make me
wish for the Blessed Eternity for other ends, then to love, bless and praise
thee therein for ever. No Lord, I will have no other motive to love, and look
after thee, then thy self, who art soueraignely amiable and desirable. I will
behold thee directly in thy self, and apply my self entirely unto thee,
because thou art my God, and because o my dear God, thou art what thou art.
Thou art all my riches, all my pretentions; for that I know in seeing thee, I
shall see, and possess in thee all good things. Thou thy self art the reward
of every good work: and he is unworthy of all laurells, who seeks for any
other but thy self; for thou art a far more ample recompense to those that
love thee, then man is able to conceive. It is to thee then alone, o Divine
Eternity, o eternal Divinity, that I consecrate all my desires, all my
thoughts. It is to thee, o eternal Being, that I consecrate all my being,
in time and Eternity. It is to the Trinity of thy Divine Persons, to whom I
dedicate the three powers of my soul. To the ADORATION of thy powrefull
fecunditie I consecrate my MEMORY o eternal Father. To thy WISDOM, o
eternal Son, begotten of the Father by his understanding, I dedicate my
UNDERSTANDING. To thee, o HOLY GHOST, the reciprocal Love of the Father and
the Son proceeding from their one will, I offer up my will. O Father of
light, grant me the LIGHT of thy Glory, that one day I may clearly see, that
which I now believe by the light of FAITH. O eternal WORD bestow thy self
upon me, that I may possess in Heaven, that which I seek by HOPE. O Holy
Ghost, make me partaker of thine infinite BEAVTIE, to the end I may one day
enjoy that which now I embrace by CHARITY. Yes Lord I am wholly thine, be thou
also wholly mine, and receive me according to thy word, and let me not be
confounded in my expectation. Thou art mine Eternity, like as thou art my
salvation and my hope. Thou art the only Eternity which I pretend; grant that
I may praise thee everlastingly, and according to thy word, espouse my soul in
a lively Faith, espouse it for ever: For with all the sincerity of heart, and
purity of intention, that I can possibly conceive and speak, I give thee this
assurance of my fidelity by a solemn protestation in the words of the Divine
Psalmist. No Lord I will nothing nether in Heaven nor earth but thy self: for
thou art the God of my heart, and the only part which I pretend in the
Eternity of Eternities.

FINIS.

