A PLEASANT description of the fortunate Islands, called the Islands of CANARIA,
with their strange fruits and commodities.

VERY DELECTAble to read, to the praise of God.

Composed by the poor Pilgrim.

Imprinted at London by Thomas East. 1583.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Master Ihon Woolley Esquire, one of the Secretaries
to the Queens most excellent Majesty.
POre Pilgrims use, Right worshipful sir, that after their weary iournies,
and return into their native soil, to communicate the troth, of any thing
worthy to be known and of them seen, among their especial friends which are
learned, and also lovers of such kind of vocation. The holy scripture shows
us, that when the wise men called Magi, being led by a strange star, to the
place where Christ our Savior was borne, at which place the star did not only
stay, but also gave a wonderful brightness with shining beams, to assure them
that there the Savior was. Undoubtedly these men let not to declare these
maruailous things and visions, at their return, as appears at this present,
that in Aethiopia and the East Countries, are an infinite number of Christians*
Likewise the Eunuch, messenger to the Queen of Candace, let not to manifest
in his Country, the miraculous things that he had seen in Jerusalem when
Christ our Redeemer suffered the most bitter death of the cross. Nor yet the
Queen of Sabba, kept in secret the wisdom of Solomon.

But the cause Right worshipful, that I took this little Pamphlet in hand,
was thorough the writing of Andrewe Theuet a Frenchman, who wrote of the
Fortunate Islands by hearesay: But I poor Pilgrim may call those Islands
unfortunate: for there was I apprehended for an heretic and an open enemy to
the Romish Church, and there deteyned in that bloody Inquisition, the space
of five years, and now come home to offer this little work to your worship,
because your helping hand is always ready to favor and further any virtuous
or good attempt. Beseeching your worship to accept it, and to consider that
poor Pilgrims have not any other thing to give, and the Almighty grant your
hearts desire.

At commandment: The P.P.

A DESCRIPTIon of the fortunate Islands, now called the Islands of Canaria,
with their particular Commodities.
PLATO in his Thimeo, writes, that about 750. years past, there was a great
Island lieng in the Ocean Sea, in Front of Hercules Pillars, which stood at
that time in the Island of Cadez, this Island was called Atlantica, which land
by Gods permission sonke, saving certain Islands which yet remain called the
Islands of Cabo Verde, the Islands of Canaria, and the Islands of Azores and
others.

The opinion of Plato seems to be true, because the Coast of Grunea has
sands and shallowes lying out a great way into the maine Ocean, which agrees
as parcel appertayning to the other Islands before rehearsed. Some of the
Canaria Islands as the I Will of Fortauentura by name, lies 50. leagues distaunt
from the continent land of Africa, and the Islands of Azores near 300. leagues.

The opinion of Plato shall serve for this purpose, to the which I remit me.
Because mine intent is, particularly to speak of the Canaria Islands, which are
seven in number, wherein I dwelt the space of vij. years and more, because I
find such variety in sundry writers, and especially great vntrothes, in a
book called the new found world Antartike, set out by a French man called
Andrew Theuet, the which his book he dedicated to the Cardinal of Sens,
keeper of the gteat seal of France.

It appears by the said book that he had read ye works of sundry
philosophers, Astronomers, and Cosmographers, whose opinions he gathered
together. But touching his own travail which he affirms, I refer to the
judgment of the experient in our days, and therefore for mine own part I
write of these Canaria Islands, as time has taught me in many years.

The Island of Canaria.
THE Island of Canaria is almost comparable in length to breadth, containing 12.
leagues in length, touching the which as principal and the residue, the
Spaniards hold opinion, yt they discovered it in their navigations toward
America, but the Portingals say, that their nation first found the said
Islands, in their Navigations toward Aethiopia and East India.

But truth it is that the Spaniards first conquered these Islands, with diverse
English Gentlemen in their company, whose descendents this present day
inioyeth the^. Some write that this Island was named Canaria by mean of the
number of dogs which there were found. As for example, Andrew Theuet says, ye
one Iuba carried two dogs from thence: but that opinion could I never learn
by any of the natural people of the Country, although I have talked with
many in my time, and with many of their children. For truth it is, that there
were dogs, but such as are in all the Norwest lands, and some part of ye
West India, which served the people in steed of sheep for victual. But of
some of the conquerours of those Islands I have heard say, that the reason why
they were called Canaria Islands, is, there grows generally in them all, a
four square cane in great multitude together, which in touching them will cast
out a liquor as white as milk, which liquor is rank poison, and at the first
entry into these Islands, some of the discouerers were therewith poisoned: for
many years after that conquest, the inhabitants began to plant both wine and
Sugar, so that Canaria was not so called by Sugar canes.

The people which first inhabited this land were called Canaries by the
conquerours, they were clothed in goat skins made like unto a loose
cassocke, they dwelt in caves in the Rocks, in great amity and brotherly
love. They spoke all one language, their chief feeding was gelt dogs, goats,
and goats milk, their bread was made of Barlie meal and Goats milk, called
Gofia, which they use at this day, and thereof I have eaten diverse times, for
it is accounted exceeding wholesome.

Touching the original of these people, some hold opinion, yt the Romans
which dwelt in Africa exiled them thither, as well men as women, their tongues
being cut out of their heads, for blasphemy against the Roman Gods. But
howsoever it were, their language was special, and not mixed with Roman
speech or Arabian.

This Island is now the principallest of all the rest, not in fertility, but by
reason it is the seat of Justice and government of all the residue. This
Island has a special Governor for the Island only, yet notwithstanding there
are three Judges called Auditors, who are superior Judges, and all in one
jointly proceed as the Lord Chanceller of any realm.

To this City from all the other Islands come al such by appeal, as have
sustained any wrong, and these good Judges do remedy the same. The City is
called Ciuitas Palmarum, it has a beautiful Cathedral Church, with all
dignities thereunto pertaining. For the public weal of the Island there are
sundry Aldermen of great authority, who have a counsel house by themselves.
The City is not only beautiful, but the citizens curious and gallant in
apparel. And after any rain or foul weather a man may go clean in Velvet
slippers, because ye ground is sandy, the air very temperate, without
extreme heat or cold.

They reap wheat in February, and again in May, which is excellent good,
and makes bread as white as snow. This Island has in it other three fair
towns, the one called Telde, and ye second Galder the third Guia. It has also
12. Sugar houses called Iugenios, in which they make great quantity of good
sugar.

The manner of the growth of Sugar is in this sort, a good ground gives soorth
fruit nine times in 18. year. That is to say, the first is called Planta
which is laid a long in a vorrowe, so that the water of a sluice may come over
every root being covered with earth: this root brings forth sundry canes,
and so consequently all the rest. It grows two years before the yielding of
profit, and not six months, as Andrew Theuet the French man writes.

Then are they cut even with the ground, and the tops and leaves called Coholia
cut off, and the canes bound into bundels like faggets, and so are carried to
the sugar house called Iugenio, where they are ground in a mill, and the juice
thereof conuayed by conduct to a great vessel made for the purpose, where it
is boiled till it wax thick, and then is it put into a fornaice or earthen
pots of the moulde of a Sugar loaf, and then is it carried to another house,
called a purging house, where it is placed to purge the blacknes with a certain
clay that is laid thereon. Of the remainder in the cauldron is made a second
sort called Escumas, and of the purging liquor that droppeth from the white
Sugar is made a third sort, and the remainder is called Panela or Netas, the
refuse of all the purging is called Remiel or Mallasses: and thereof is made
another sort called Refinnado.

When this first fruit is in this sort gathered called Planta, then the Cane
field where it grew, is burned over with Sugar straw to the stumps of the first
canes, and being husbanded, watered and trimmed, at ye end of other two years,
it yields the second fruit called Zoca. The third fruit is called Tercia
Zoca, the fourth Quarta Zoca, and so orderly the rest till age causes the old
Canes to be planted again.

This Island has singular good wine, especially in the town of Telde, and
sundry sorts of good fruits, as Batata, Mellons, pears, Apples, Orenges,
Lemmons. Pomegranads, Figs, Peaches of diverse sorts, and many other fruits:
but especially the Plantano which grows near brook sides, it is a tree
that has no Timber in it, but grows directly upward with ye body having
maruailous thick leaves, and every leaf at the top of two yeardes long and
almost half a yearde broad.

The Tree never yields fruit but once, and then is cut down, in whose place
springs another, and so still continues. The fruit grows on a branch, and
every tree yields two or three of those branches, which bears some more
and some less, as some 40. and some 30. the fruit is like a Cowcumber, and
when it is ripe it is black, and in eating more delicate then any conserve.
This Island is sufficientlye provided of Oxen Kine, Camelles, Goats, sheep,
Capons, Hens, Ducks, and Pigeons, and great Partridges. Wood is the thing
that most wants: and because I have perticularly to deal of the other six
Islands, I leave further enlarging of Canaria, which stands in 27. degrees
distant from the Equator.

The I Will of Tenerif.
THE Island of Tenerif stands in 27. degrees and a half, from the equator,
and is dista^t from Canaria 12. leagues, Northward. This Island contains 17.
leagues in length, and the land lies high in form of a ridge of sown land
in some part of England, and in the midst of the said place stands a
round hill called Pico Deteythe, situated of this sort. The top of this pike
contains of height directly upward 15. leagues and more, which is 45. English
miles, out of the which oftentimes proceeds fire and brimstone, and may be
about half a mile compass: the said top is in form or likeness of a
caldron. But within two miles of ye top is nothing but ashes and pomish stones:
yet beneath that two miles, is the cold region covered all the year with
Snow, and somewhat lower are mighty huge trees growing called Vinatico which
is exceeding heavy, and will not rot in any water, although it lie a thousand
years therein. Also there is a wood called Barbusano, of like virtue, with
many Sauine trees and Pine trees. And beneath this sorts of trees are woods of
Baie trees, of x. and 12. miles long, which is a pleasant thing to travail
through, among ye which are great numbers of small birds, which sing exceeding
sweet: but especially one sort that are very little, and of color in all
respects like a Swallow, saving he has a little black spot on his breast as
broad as a penny. He sings more sweeter then all the rest, but if he be
taken and imprisoned in a cage, he lives but a small while. This Island
brings forth all sorts of fruits as Canaria does, and also all the other
Islands in general, brings forth shrubbes or brushes, out of the which
issues a juice as white as milk, which after a while that it has come out
waxes thick, and is exceeding good Birdlime, the bush is called Taybayba.
This Island also brings forth another tree called Drago, which grows on high
among rocks, and by incission at the foot of the tree issues out a liquor
like blood, and is a common drugge among Apothecaries. Of the wood of this tree
are made targets greatly esteemed, because if any sword or dagger hit thereon,
they stick so fast that it is hard plucking them out.

This is the most fruitfullest Island of all the rest for corn, and in that
respect is a mother or nurse to al ye others in time of need. There grows
also a certain moss upon the high rocks called Orchel, which is bought for
Diars to die withal. There are 12. Ingenios called sugar houses, which make
great quantity of Sugar.

There is also one league of ground which stands between two towns, ye one
called Larotaua, and the other Rialeio, which is thought that the like plot of
ground is not in all the world. The reason is, that this one league of ground
produces sweet water out of the cliffes or rockie mountains, corn of all
sorts, fruits of all sorts, and excellent good silk, flax, wax, and
honnie, and very good wines in abundance, with great store of Sugar and fire
wood. Out of this Island is laden great quantity of wines for the west India,
and other Countries. The best grows on a hill side called the Ramble.

There is in that Island a fair City, standing three leagues from the sea,
near unto a lake called Laguna, wherein are two fair Parish Churches, there
dwells the governor who rules all that Island with justice. There are also
Aldermen for the public weal, who buy their offices of the king: the most of
the whole inhabitants of this City are Gentlemen, Merchants, and husband men.

There are other four Towns called Sancta Crux, Larotaua, Rialeio, and
Garachico?

In this Island before the conquest dwelt seven kings, who with all their
people dwelt in caves, and were clothed in goat skins, as the Canaria people
were, and with such like order of diet as they had. Their order of burial was,
that when any died, he was carried naked to a great cave, where he was
propped up against the wall standing on his feet. But if he were of any
authority among them, then had he a staff in his hand, and a vessel of
milk standing by him. I have seen caves of 300. of these corpse together, the
flesh being dried up, the body remained as light as parchment. These people
were called Gua^ches, by natural name they spoke another language clean
contrary to the Canarians, and so consequently every Island spoke a several
language. Note gentle Reader that the Island of Canaria, the I Will of Tenerif,
and the I Will of Palm appertain to the King of Spain, unto whom they rent
fifty thousand Ducats yearly for custom and other profits. All these
Islands jointly are one Bishopric, which rent to the Bishop is 12. thousand
ducats yearly, and this I conclude of the I Will of Tenerif, which stands 27.
degrees and a half, as I have before declared.

Gomera.
THe Island of Gomera stands Westward from Tenerif, in distaunce six leagues:
this is but a small Island containing 8. leagues in length. It is an Earldom,
and the Lord thereof is called, the Earl of Gomera. But in case of any
controversy the vassalls may appeal to the kings superior Judges which
reside in Canaria.

This Island has one proper town, called Gomera, which has an excellent good
port or harbor for ships, where oftentimes the India Fleet, take refreshing
for their voyage.

There is also sufficient grain and fruit for the maintenance of themselves.

There is one Iugenio or Sugar house, with great plenty of wine and other
sorts of fruits, as Canaria and Tenerif has.

This Island yields no other commodity but only Orchell, it stands in 27.
degrees distant from the Equator toward the pole Articke.

The I Will of Palma.
THe I Will of Palma stands. 12. leagues, distaunt from thy I Will Gomera
Norwestward. This Island is fruitful of wine and Sugar: it has a proper City,
called the City of Palma, where is great contraction for wines, which are
laden for the West India and other places. This city has one fair Church,
and a governor, and Aldermen to mainetaine and execute justice. It has also
another pretty Town, called S. Andrews. It has also four Ingenios which
make excellent sugar, two of the which are called Zauzes, and the other two,
Tassacort.

This Island gathers but little bread corn: but rather is thereof provided
from Tenerif and other places.

Their best wines grow in a soil called the Brenia, where yearly is gathered
12. thousand Buts of wine like unto maulmsies. This Island stands round, and
contains in circuit near 25. leagues. It has plenty of all sorts of
fruits, as Canaria and Tenerif has, it stands in twenty seven degrees and
a half.

The Island of Iron, called Hierro.
THis Island stands 10. leagues distant from ye Island of Palma Weastward: it
is but a little Island, which contains six leagues in circuit, and has but
small peroblation. It appertains to the Earl of Gomera. The chiefest
commodity of this Island is Goats flesh and Orchell. There is no Wine in all
that Island, but only one vineard that an English man of Taunton in the West
Country planted among rocks, his name was John Hill.

This Island has no kind of fresh water but only in the middle of the Island
grows a great tree with leaves like an Olive tree, which has a great
sesterne at the foot of the said tree. This Tree continually is covered with
clouds, and by mean thereof, the leaves of the said Tree does still drop
Water, very sweet into the said Sesterne, which comes to the said tree from
the clouds by attraction. And this water suffices the Island for all
necessity, as well the Cattle, as for the inhabitants. It stands in 27.
degrees.

The Island of Lanzerot.
THe Island of Lanzerot stands xviij. leagues distaunt from Gran Canaria
Southeastward, the only commodity of this Island, is Goats flesh and Orchell.
It is an Earldome, and does appertain to Don Augustine de Herrera, with title of
Earl of Fortauentura and Lanzerot. But the vassalls of these Earledomes, may
in any cause of wrong, appeal to ye Kings Judges, which reside in Canaria, as
I have said before: because although the King has reserved to himself but
only the three fruitful Islands, called Canaria, Tenerif, and Palma, yet he
also reserved the rod of justice to himself, because otherwise the vassals
might be evil entreated of their Lords.

From this Island is weekly brought to Canaria, Tenerif, and Palma, boats laden
with dried Goats flesh, called Tussinetta, which serves in steed of bacon, and
is very good meat. This Island stands in 26. degrees and is in length 12.
leagues.

The I Will of Fortauentura.
THE I Will of Fortauentura stands 50. leagues distant from the Promontorie of
Cabo de Guer, in the firm land of Africa, and 24. leagues distant from Canana
Eastward. This Island does appertain to the Senior of Lanzerot. It is
reasonable fruitful of Wheat and Barley, and also of Kine, Goats, and Orchell:
this I Will is 15. leagues long and 10. leagues broad on the North side. It has a
little Island about one league distant from ye maine Island between both of the
which it is nauegable for any ships, and is called Graciosa.

Both Fortauentura and Lanzerot have very little wine of the growth of those
Islands. It stands in 27. degrees.

Thus much have I written of these 7. Islands by experience, because I was a
dweller there as I have said before, the space of seven years, in the
affairs of Master Thomas Lock, Master Anthony Hikman, and Master Casthin, who
in those days were worthy Merchants, and of great credit in the city of
London.

A description of the Island of Madera.
THE Island of Madera stands in 33. degrees distant from the equinoctinall
line, and 70. leagues from the I Will of Tenerif Northeastward, and Southwest from
Hercules pillars. This Island was discovered, conquered, and inhabited by ye
Portingall nation: it was first called ye Island of Madera, by reason of the
great wilderness of sundry sorts of trees that there did grow, and yet does,
as Ceder, Cipers, Vinatico, Barbuzano, Pine trees, and diverse others, and
therefore the said Island continues still with the same name. Howbeit they hold
opinion that between the said Island and the I Will of Palma is an Island not yet
discovered, which is the true Island Madera called S. Brandon. This Island
renteth a great sum of money to the king of Portingal yearly: it has one
fair city called Fouchall, which has a fair port or harbor for ships, and
a strong Bulwark, and a fair Cathedral Church, with a Bishop and other
dignities thereunto appertaining. There is also justice and government
according to the Portingal use. But causes of appellation are remitted to ye
city of Lisborne in Portingal, to the kings superior Judges there. This Island
has another town called Machico, which has likewise a good rode for ships.
There is also. 16 Sugar houses called Ingenios, which make excellent good Sugar.

There is besides the gooly timber before declared, great store of diverse
sorts of fruits, as pears, apples, plummes, wild dates, peaches of diverse
sorts, Mellons, Batatas, Oringes, Lemons, pomgranads, Cidrons, Figs, and all
manner of garden herbs. There are many Dragon trees, such as grow in ye Canaria
Islands. But chiefly this land produces great quantity of singular good wines
which are laden for many places. On the North side of this land three leagues
distant from the maine Island stands another little Island, called Porto santo:
ye people thereof lives by husbandry, for the Island of Madera gathers but
little corn: but rather is thereof provided out of France and from the Island
of Tenerif. On the East side of the I Will of Madera six leagues distant stands
another little Island called the Desert, which produces only Orchell, and
nourishes a great number of Goats. For the provision of the maine Island,
which may be 30. leagues in circuit, and the land is of great height where
those trees grow. It is wonder to see the conueiance of the water to ye
Ingenios by mines through the mountains.

In the midde way between Tenerif, and the Island of Madera stands a little
solitary Island called the Saluages, which may be about one league in compass,
which has neither tree nor fruit, but only food for Goats.

FINIS.

