REMAINS OF A GREATER WORK, Concerning Britain, the inhabitants thereof,
their Languages, Names, Surnames, Empreses, Wise speeches, Poesies, and
Epitaphes.

AT LONDON Printed by G. E. for Simon Waterson. 1605.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, WORTHY, and Learned Sir Robert Cotton of Connington
Knight.
TEmples (says the ancient Aristides) are to be dedicated to the Gods, and
Books to Good-men. Upon warrant of which words, and long experience of your
goodness, Right worshipful, this silly, pitiful, and poor Treatise was
once unadvisedly forward to have bin dedicated to your good worship. But upon
more advised consideration, whereas Aristides in his wisdom knew nothing but
that which was good, to be seemly and sortable for goodmen, and therefore meant
most certainly, that only good Books are to be dedicated to good men: It
recalled it self in good tine, for that it cannot challenge any such title
either for matter or manner of handling, being only the rude rubble and
outcast rubbis^ (as you know) of a greater and more serious work. Whereas
therefore neither in respect of it self it dare, neither in regard of you it
may present it self by way of Dedication, for that should implie honor unto
you, which it cannot bring, and require patronage from you, which it needs
not, being by the pitiful sillyness thereof secured from envy, only
reaching at eminency. I here send it unto you in lose leaves, as fit to be
Ludibria venti: and withal submit it to your censure, not as he did Sieve legi,
sieve tegi iusseris. Albeit I assure my self that you in your learned judgment
cannot but sentence it, as I have done with this doom.

Tineas pascat taciturnus inertes.

From my Lodging xii. Iunii. 1603.

Your worships assured M. N.

Britain
WHereas I have purposed in all this Treatise to confine my self within the
bounds of this Isle of Britain, it cannot be impertinent, at the very
entrance, to say somewhat of Britain, which is the only subject of all that
is to be said, and well known to be the most flourishing and excellent, most
renowned and famous Isle of the whole world: So rich in commodities, so
beautiful in situation, so resplendent in all glory, that if the most
Omnipotent had fashioned the world round like a ring, as he did like a globe,
it might have been most worthily the only gemme therein. For the air is most
temperate and wholesome, sited in the midst of the temperate Zone, subject to
no storms and tempests as the more Southern and Northern are; but stored
with infinite delicate foul. For water, it is walled and guarded with the Oc^an
most commodious for traffic to all parts of the world, and watered with
pleasant fishfull and navigable rivers, which yield safe havens and roads, and
furnished with shipping and Sailors, that it may rightly be termed the Lady of
the sea. That I may say nothing of healthful Bathes, and of Meares stored both
with fish and foul; The earth fertile of all kind of grain, manured with
good husbandry, rich in mineral of coals, tin, lead, copper, not without
gold and silver, abundant in pasture, replenished with cattle both tame and
wild, (for it has more par^es than all Europe besides,) plentifully wooded,
provided with all complete provisions of War, beautified with many populous
Cities, fair Borroughs, good Towns, and well built Villages, strong
Munitions, magnificent Palaces of the Prince, stately houses of the Nobility,
frequent Hospitals, beautiful Churches, fair Colleges, as well in other
places, as in the two Universities, which are comparable to all the rest in
Christendom, not only in antiquity, but also in learning, building, and
endowments. As for government Ecclesiastical and Civil, which is the very
soul of a kingdom, I need to say nothing, whenas I write to home-borne, and
not to strangers.

But to praise Britain according as the dignity thereof requires is a matter
which may exercise, if not tier the happiest wit furnished with the greatest
variety of learning; and some already have busied their brains and pens
herein with no sma^l labor and travel: let therefore these few lines in this
behalf suffice, out of an ancient Writer. Britain, thou art a gloriou^^sle,
extolled and renowned among all Nations; the navies of Tharsis can not be
compared to thy shipping bringing in all precious commodities of the world: the
Sea is thy wall, and strong fortifications do secure thy Ports: Chivalrie,
Clergy, and Merchandise do flourish in thee. The P^sans, Genoveses, and
Venetians do bring thee Saphires, Emeraldes and Carbuncles from the East: Asia
serves thee with Silk and Purple, Africa with Cinnamon and Balm, Spain with
Gold, and Germany with Silver: Thy Weaver Flaunders does drape Cloth for
thee of thine own Wool; Thy Gascoigne does send thee Wine: Gascoigne then
under the crown of England.
Bucke and Do are plentiful in thy Forests: Droves of Cattle, and Flocks of
Sheep are upon thy Hills: All the perfection of the goodiust ^and is in thee:
Thou have all the Foul of the air. In plenty of Fish thou do surpass all
Regions. And albeit thou art not stretched out with large limits, yet
bordering Nations clothed with thy Fleeces, do wonder at thee for thy blessed
plenty. Thy Swords have been turned into Plow-shares: Peace and Religion
flourish in thee; so that thou art a Mirror to all Christian Kingdoms.

Add hereunto (if you please) these few lines out of a far more ancient
Panegyrist in the time of Constantine the Great. O happy Britain and more
blisfull then all other Regions: Nature has enriched thee with all commodities
of heaven and earth, wherein there is neither extreme cold in Winter, nor
scorching heat in Summer; wherein there is such abundant plenty of Corn, as
may suffice both for Bread and Wine: wherein are Woods without wild Beasts,
and the Fields without noisome Serpents; but infinite numbers of milch Cattle,
and Sheep weighed down with rich Fleeces: And that which is most comfortable,
long days, and lightsome nights.

So that, not without cause, it was accounted one of the fairest and most
glorious Plumes in the triumphant Diadem of the Roman Empire, while it was a
Province under the same; Alfred^ (...).
and was truly called by Charles the Great, The Storehouse, and Granary of
the whole western world.

But whereas the said Panegyrist falls into a gladsome admiration, how from
hence there has risen gracious princes, As good gods honored throughout the
whole world. That if ever, as it was lately to our glorious joy evidently, and
effectually verified in our late Sovereign, of most dear, sacred and
ever-glorious memory QV^ENE ELIZABETH, the honor of her time, and the mirror
of succeeding ages: so with an assured confidence, we hope it will likewise
be prooved true in her undoubted and rightful successor, our dread Lord and
Sovereign. That to his endless honor MERCY and TRVTH, RIGHTEOUSNESS and
PEACE may here kiss together; and true RELIGION, with her attendants JOY,
HAPPINESS, and GLORY, may here for ever seat themselves under him; in whose
person the two mighty kingdoms of England and Scotland hitherto severed, are
now conjoined, and begin to close together into one, in their most ancient
name of BRITAIN.

If any would undertake the honor and precedence of Britain before other
Realms in serious manner (for here I protest once for all, I will pass over
each thing lightly and slightly) a world of matter at the first view would
present it self unto him. As that the true Christian Religion was planted
here most auntiently by Joseph of Arimathia, Simon Zelotes, Aristobulus, yea
by saint Peter, and saint Paul, as may be prooved by Dorotheus, Theod^^^,
Sophronius, and before the year of Christ 200. it was propagated, as Tertullian
writes to places of Britain ^accessa Ro^anis, whither the Romans never
reached, which can not be understood, but of that part which was afterward
called Scotland. The kingdoms also are most ancient, held of God alone,
acknowledging no superiors, in no vassalage to Emperor or Pope. Tho* Moore in
the Debellation Parl. 43. Edw. 3.
The power of the Kings more absolute, than in most other kingdoms, their
territories very large; for the Kings of England, beside Ireland, have
commanded from the Isles of Orkenay, to the Pyrene Mountains, and are de
iure, Kings of all France by descent. The Kings of Scotland, beside the ample
realm of Scotland commands the 300 Western Isles, the 30. of Orkney and
Schetland. Also, which was accounted a special note of majesty in former ages,
the Kings of England, with them of France, Jerusalem, Naples, and afterward
Scotland, were anciently the only anointed Kings of Christendom: which
manner began among the Jews, was recontinued at length by the Christian
Emperors of Constantinople, with this word at the annoynting, (...),
Curopalares.
that is, Be holy; and (...), Be worthy; and from thence was that sacred
ceremony brought to us and the other kingdoms.

As for that admirable gift hereditary to the anointed Princes of this Realm,
Charisma of doctor Tooker.
in curing the Kings Evil, I refer you to the learned Discourse thereof
lately written. Neither would it be forgotten, that England in the opinion of
the Popes (when they swayd the world, and their authority was held sacred) was
preferred, because it contained in the Ecclesiastical Division, two large
Provinces, which had their several Legatinati, whereas France had scantly
one, That Scotland was by them accounted an exempt kingdom, Epist. Bonif.
sept. ad ^ d. 1. reg. Angl^^.
and a Peculiar properly appertaining to the Roman Chapel. And which was
accounted in that age a matter of honor, when all Christianity in the
Counsel Constance was divided into Nations, Anglicana Natio was one of the
principal and no sub alterne. As also, that in times past, the Emperor was
accounted Mayor filius Ecclesiae, the King of France, Filius Minor, and the
King of England, Filius Tertius, and Adoptivus. And so in general Counsels,
as the King of France had place next the Emperor on the right hand, so the
King of England on the left; and the Kings of Scotland, as appears in an
ancient Roman Provincial, had next place before Castil^. The Archbishops of
Canterbury, who were anciently styled Archbishoppes of Britain, were adjudged
by the Popes, tanquam alterius orbis Pontifices Maximi, and they had their
place in all general Counsels, at the Popes right foot. The Title also of
Defensor fidei, is as honorable, and more justly conferred upon the Kings of
England, than, either Christianissimus upon the French, or Catholicus upon the
Spaniard. Neither is it to be omitted, which is so often recorded in our
Histories, when Brithwald the Monk, not long before the Conquest busied his
brain much about the succession of the Crown, because the blood Royal was
almost extinguished, he had a strange vision, and heard a voice, which forbade
him to be inquisitive of such matters, resounding in his ears. The kingdom of
England is Gods own kingdom, and for it God himself will provide. But these,
and such like are more fit for a graver Treatise than this. I will perform
that I promised, in handling nothing seriously, and therefore I will bring you
in some Poets, to speak in this behalf for me, and will begin with old
Alfred of Beverlie, who made this for Britain in general, which you must not
read with a censorious eye; for it is, as the rest I will cite, of the middle
age, having heretofore used all of more ancient and better times in an other
work. But thus said he of Britain.

Insula praedives quae toto vix eget orb,
Et cuius totus indiget orbis open.
Insula praedives, cuius miretur, and optet,
Delicias Solomon, Octavianus opes.
For Scotland, one lately in a far higher strain, and more Poetically, sung
these; Quis tibi frugifera (...),
Aut aris gravides, and (...) p^^dere (...),
Et nitidos auro monces, ferr^que rigent^^
Deque met all^feris manantia (...):
Quaeque bea^t alias communia commoda g^^tes^


For England a very old Epigr^^^tist made these with a Prosopopoeia of Nature,
the indulgent mother to England, which does comprise as much as the best wits
can now conceive in that behalf.

Anglia terra ferax, tibi pax secura quietem,
Multiplicem luxum merx opulenta dedit.
Tu nimio nec stricta gelu, nec sydere fervens.
Clementi coelo, temperieque places.
Cum pareret Natura parens, varioque favore,
Divideret dotes omnibus vna locis:
Seposuit potiora tibi, matremque professa
Insula fis ^oelix, plenaque pacis, ^^t.
Quicquid amat luxus, quicquid desiderat vsus,
Ex t^ proveniet, vel aliunde tibi.
Accordingly it is written in the Black book of the Exchequer, that our
Ancestors termed England, a Storehouse of Treasure, and a Paradise of
Pleasure, in this verse; Divitijsque sinum, delicijsque larem.


So that not without cause Pope Innocentius the fourth, Matthew Paris.
most willingly, and especially desired to see Divitias Londini, and delicias
Westmonasterij. In these respects, to conclude, most truly our Lucan sings
of this our country; Samuel Daniel.
The fairest Land, that from her thrusts the rest,
As if she cared not for the world beside,
A world within herself with wonders blessed.


The inhabitants of Britain
AS all the Regions with the whole worlds frame, and all therein was created by
the Almighty, Cicero.
for his last and most perfect work, that goodly, upright, provident, subtle,
witty, and reasonable creature, which the Greeks call (...), for his upright
look; the Latins Homo, for that he was made of Molde; Petrus Nanuius.
and we with the Germains, call Man of his principal part, the mind, being the
very image of God, and a petty world within himself: so he assigned in his
divine providence, this so happy and worthy a region to men of answerable
worth, if not surpassing, yet equalling the most excellent inhabitants of the
earth, both in the endowments of mind, lineaments of body, and their
deportment both in peace and war, as if I would enter into discourse I could
very easily show.

But overpassing their natural inclination by heavenly influence, P^ol. in
Quad^^^.
answerable to the disposition of Aries, Leo, and Sagittary, and Jupiter, with
Mars Dominators for this Northwest part of the world, which makes them
impatient of servitude, lovers of liberty, martial and courageous. I will
only in particular note somewhat, and that summarily of the Britains,
Scottish, and English, the three principal inhabitants.

The Britains, Britains
the most ancient people of this Isle anciently inhabited the same from sea to
sea, whose valor and prowes is renowned both in Latin and Greek monuments,
and may appear in these two points which I will here only note. First that
the most p^^ssant Roman forces, when they were at the highest, could not gain
of them, being but then a halfe-naked people, Plinius.
in thirty whole years the countries from the Thames to Str^^ling. And when
they had gained them, and brought them into form of a province, they found
them so warlike a people, that the Romans levied as many Cohorts, Notitia
provin^^arum.
companies, and ensigns of Britans from hence for the service of Armenia,
Egypt, Illyricum, their frontire Countries, as from any other of their
Provinces whatsoever. Pict-Britans.
As for those Britane which were farther North, and after as is most probable,
called Pictes, (for that they still painted themselves when the Southern parts
were brought to civilitie,) they not only most courageously defended their
liberty, but offended the Romans with continual and most dangerous
incursions. The other remainder of the Britans, which retired themselves to
west parts, now called W^^es, with like honor of fortitude, for many hundred
years repelled the yoke both of the English and Norman slaverie. But since
they were ^^ted to the imperial Crown of England, Welsh-Britans.
they have, to their just praise, performed all parts of dutiful loyalty and
allegiance most faithfully thereunto.] Great also is the glory of those
Britans, American or French Britans.
which in most doleful time of the English invasion, withdrew themselves into
the West parts of Gallia, then called Armorica: For they not only seated
themselves, there maugre the Romans, (then indeed low, and near setting,) and
the French: but also imposed their name to the country, held and defended the
same against the French, until in our grandfathers memory, it was united to
France by the sacred bonds of matrimony.]

Next after the Britans, Scottishmen. ^
the Scottishmen coming out of Ireland, planted themselves in this Islco^ the
North side of Cluid, B^^a lib. ^.
partly by force, partly by favor of the Pictes, with whom a long time they
annoyed the Southern parts, but after many blody battles amongst themselves,
the Scottishmen subdued them, and established a kingdom in those parts, which
with (...) courag^ and warlike prowess, they have not only maintained at
home, but also has purchased great honor abroad. For the French cannot but
acknowledge they have seldom achieved any honorable acts without Scottish
hands, who therefore are deservedly to participate the glory with them. As
also diverse parts of France, Germany, and Suitzerland, cannot but confess,
that they owe to the Scottish Nation, the propagation of good letters and
Christian religion amongst them.

After the Scottishmen, the Angles, Englishmen or Saxons, by Gods wonderful
providence were transplanted hither out of Germany. Englishm^^
A people composed of the valiant Angles, Iutes, and Saxons, then inhabiting
Iutland, ^olsten, and the sea coasts along to the river Rhene, who in short
time subduing the Britans, and driving them into the mountanous Western parts,
made themselves by a most complete conquest, absolute Lords of all the better
soil thereof, as far as Orkeney. Which cannot be doubted of, when their
English tongue reaches so far along the East coast, unto the farthest parts
of Scotland, and the people thereof are called by the Highland-men, which are
the true Scots, by no other name then Saxons, by which they also call us the
English.

This warlike, victorious, stiff, stowt, and rigorous Nation, after it had as
it were taken root here about one hundred and sixty years, and spread his
branches far and wide, being mellowed and mollified by the mildenes of the
soil and sweet air, was prepared in fulness of time for the first spiritual
blessing of God, I mean our regeneration in Christ, and our ingrafting into
his mystical body by holy baptism. Which Beda our Ecclesiastical Historian
recounteth in this manner, and I hope you will give it the reading. Gregory
the Great Bishop of Rome, on a time saw beautiful boys to befold in the
market at Rome, and demanded from whence they were* answer was made him out of
the Isle of Britain Then asked he again, whither they were Christians or no^
they said no. Alas for pity said Gregory, that the soul (...) be Lord of
such fair folks* and that they which carry such grace in their (...) in
their hearts. Then he would know of them by what name their Nation was called,
and they told him (...), And justly be they so called (quoth he,) for they have
Angelike faces, and seem meet to be made cohair^^ with the Angels in heaven.

Since which time, they made such happy progress in the Christian profession
both of faith and works, that if I should but enter into consideration thereof,
I should be overwhelmed with mayn tides of matter. Many and admirable
monuments thereof, do every where, at home present themselves to your view,
erected informer times, (and no small number in our age, although few men note
them,) not for affectation of ^ame, or ostentation of wealth, but to the glory
of God, increase of faith, of learning and to maintenance of the poor. As for
abroad, the world ca^ testify that four Englishmen have converted to
Christianity, eight Nations of Europe, Wi^frid alias Boniface, the
D^^shire-man converted the German Saxons, Franc^^^ns Hossians, and Thuringians,
Willebred the Northern man, the Frisians and Hollanders. Nicholas Braksp^^ of
Middlesex, who was after called Pope Hadrian the Normegians, and not long
since, Thomas of W^lden of Essex, the Lit^^^ians. Neither will I here note
which strangers have noted, that England has bred more Princes renowned for
sanctity, then any Christian Nation whatsoever. It does also redound to the
eternal honor of England, that our countrymen have twice been schoolemaist
(...) France. First when they taught the Gauls the discipline of the (...) and
after, when they and the Scottishmen first taught the French the liberal Arts,
and persuaded Carelus Magnus to found the University of Paris. They also
brought into France the best laws which the Parl^ament of (...) and Bordeaux
have now in use. (...).
They at the lowest ebb of learning, amazed the world with their excellent
knowledge in Philosophy, and Divinity: for that I may not (...) of Alexander
of Hales, the (...) Schoolmaster to the (...) Doctor Thomas Aq^^^, one
College in Oxford brought forth in one age those four lights of learning:
(...) college
Sco^us the Subtle, Bradward^ne the Profound, Okham the Invincible, and Burley
the Perspicuous, and as some say, Baconthorpe the Resolute; which Titles they
had by the common consent of the judicial and learned of that and the
succeeding ages. Yet their military glory has surpassed all, for they have
terrified the whole world with their Arms in Syria, Egypt, Cyprus, Spain,
Sicill, and India.

They have traversed with most happy victories both France and Scotland,
brought away their Kings captives, conquered Ireland and the Isle of Cypres,
which King Richard the first gave frankly to Guie of Lusigni^^, and lately with
a maidens hand, mated the mightiest Monarch in his own Countries. They beside
many other notable discoveries, twice compassed the whole globe of the earth
with admirable success, which the Spaniards have yet but once performed. Good
Lord, how spaciously might a learned pen walk in this argument! But lest I
should seem over prodigal in the praise of my countrymen, I will only
present you with some few verses in this behalf, and first this Latin Rythme
of the middle time in praise of the English Nation, with some close cautions.
Its quilted as ^t were out of shreds of diverse Poets, such as Scholars do call
a Cento.

Quo versu Anglorum possim describere gentem,
Saepe mihi dubiam traxit sententia mentem.
Sunt in amicitia percusso foedere very.
Mayor at est virtus, quam quarere, parta tu^^i.
Su^^ bello fortes, al^res, validique duel^^s,
Aspera se^ po^^tis ^^^^scant secula bellis.
Sunt (...), florent virtutis (...),
S^d nihil est virtus, nisi cum (...).
Quid fit avaritia pestis gens Anglicanescit,
Cr^scit amor dandi, quantum ipsa (...)
(...) prima (...), dare large, (...) virescit,
Vas nisi syncerum quodcunque infundis acescit.
L^uti^r est ill^s cum mensa divite cu^^us,
Accedunt hilares semper super (...).
Non ibi Damaetas pauper dicit Melyb^^,
In cratere meo Thetis est sociata Ly^^.
Gratius ingenium datur his, and gratia m^rum,
Sic norunt quam sit du^cis ^^xtura bonorum.
Anglorum cur est gens quaevis invida genti?
Summa petit livor, perflant altissima venti.
And for the Scottish nation this of their own Poet:
Illa pharetratis est propria gloria Scotis,
Cingere venatu saltus, superare natand^
Flumina, far famem, contemnere frigora and ^stus:
Nec fossa and muris patriam, sed Mart tueri,
Et spreta incolumem vita defendere fam^^,
Polliciti servare fidem, sanctumque vereri
Numen amicitia, mores non munus amare.
The Languages.
FRom the people we will now proceed to the languages. Here would Scholars
show you the first confusion of languages out of Moses, that the gods had their
peculiar tongue out of H^^er, that brute beasts, birds, and fishes, had their
own proper languages out of Clemens Alexandri^^^. They would teach you out of
Euphorus, that there were but 52. tongues in the world, because so many souls
out of Jacob descended into Egypt, In Psalm. 104.
and out of Arnobius, that there were seaventie and two: Albeit Timosthenes
reports that in Dioscurias a mart town of Colchis, their trafficked 300.
Nations of diverse languages: And howsoever our Indian or American discouerers
say, that in every fourscore mile in America, and in every valley almost of
Peru you shall find a new language. Neither would they omit the Island where
the people have cloven tongues out of the fabulous Narrations of Diodorus
Siculus: yea, they would lash out of the Vtopian language with Volvola Barchin
hema^^, la lalvola drame pagloni. whenas it is a greater glory now to be a
Linguist, then a Realist. They would moreover discourse at large, which I will
tell you in a word. First the British tongue or Welsh (as we now call it) was
in use only in this Island, Britania Camdem.
having great affinity with the old Galliqua of Gaul, now France, from
whence the first inhabitants in all probability came hither. Afterward the
Latin was taken up when it was brought into the form of a Proviner, about the
time of Domitian, according to that notable place of Tacitus, where he
reportteth that Julius Agricola Governor here for the Romans, preferred the
Britans, as able to do more by wit, then the Gauls by study: Vt qui
(says he) modo linguam Romanam abnuebant, eloquentiam concupiscerent. Inde
etiam habitus nostri honor and frequens toga. But the British overgrewe the
Latin, and continues yet in Wales, and some villages of Cornwall intermingled
with some Provincial Latin. After the Irish tongue was brought into the
Northwest parts of the Isle, out of Ireland by the ancient Scottishmen, and
there yet remains. Lastly, the English-Saxon tongue came in by the
English-Saxons ont of Germany, who valiantly and wisely performed here all the
three things, which implie a full conquest, viz. the alteration of laws,
language, and attire.

This English tongue extracted out of the old German, as most other from
Island to the Alps, is mixed as it is now, of the old English-Saxon and
N^^^^^ of Latin, German, and the old (...) the (...) Latin and
German-Gotish, and the Spanish of Latin, Gotish-German and Arabique, Saracen,
or M^r^sq^^. And to the honor of our progenitors the English-Saxons be it
spoken, their conquest was more absolute here over the Brita^^s, than either
of the Francs in Fran^c^ over the G^^l^s, or the Goths and Lombardes in Italy
over the K(...), or of the Goths, Vandales, and Moors over the ancient
Spaniards in Spain. For in these nations much of the provincial Latin (I
mean the Latin used whilst they were Provinces of the Romans) remains,
which they politi^ely had spread over their Empire, by planting of Colonies and
enfranchising all Nations subject unto them. But the English-Saxon conquerors,
altered the tongue which they found here wholly: so that no British words, or
provincial Latin appeared therein at the first: and in short time they spread
it over this whole Island, from the Orcades to Isle of Wight, except a few
barren corners in the Western^ parts, whereunto the relics of the Britans and
Scots retired, reserving in them both their life and their language. For
certainly it is that the greatest and best parts, the East and South of
Scotland, which call themselves the Lawland-men, speak the English tongue
varied only in Dialect, as descended from the English-Saxons: and the old
Scottish, which is the very Irish, is used only by them of the West, called
the Hechtland-men, who call the other as the Welsh call us Sassons, Saxons,
both in respect of language and original, as I showed before.

I dare not yet here affirm for the antiquity of our language, that our
great-great-great-grandsires tongue came out of Persia, albeit the wonderful
Linguist Joseph Scaliger has observed, Fader; Mother, Bruder, (...) etc. in the
Pers(...) tongue in the very sense as we now use th(...).

It will not be improper I hope to this purpose, if I note out of the epistles
of that learned Ambassador Busbeq(...), how the inhabitants of
Taurica-Ch^rson^ssus, in the vtter-most part of Europe eastward, have these
words, Wind, Silver, Kor^^, Sak, Fish, Son, Apple, Waggen, Singen, (...),
Beard, with many other in the very same sense and signification, as they now
are in use with us, whereat I mervailed not a little when I first read it. But
nothing can be gathered thereby, but that the Saxons our progenitors, which
planted themselves here in the West, did also to their glory place Colonies
likewise there in the east.

As in the Latin tongue, the learned make in respect of time, four Idioms,
the Ancient, the Latin, the Roman, the Mixed: so we in ours may make the
Ancient English-Saxon, and the Mixed. But that you may seem how powerable time
is in altering tongues as all things else, I will set down the Lords prayer as
it was translated in sundry ages, that you may see by what degrees our tongue
is risen, and thereby conjecture how in time it may alter and fall again.

If we could set it down in the ancient Saxon, I mean in the tongue which the
English used at their first arrival here, about 420. years after Christ's
birth, it would seem most strange and harsh Dutch or Gebrish, as women call
it; or when they first embraced Christianity, about the year of Christ 600.
But the antientst that I can find, was about 900. year since, about the year
of Christ 700. found in an ancient Saxon, glossed Evangelists in the hands of
my good friend M. Robert Bowyer, written by Eadfride the eight Bishop of
Lindiffar^^, Holy-Iland.
(which after was translated to Durrham,) and divided according to the ancient
Canon of Eusebius, not into chapters, for Stephen Langton, Archbishop of
Canturburie, first divided the holy Scriptures into chapters, as Robert Stephan
did lately into verse; and thus it is.

Vren Our Fader Father thic which arth art in in heofnas heaven, be gehalgud
hallowed thin thin noma name., to cymeth come thy ric kingdom.. Sie Be thin thy
willa will sue so is as in in heofnas heaven, and and in in eortho earth.. Vren
Our hlaf lofe Super- wirtlic substantial sell give us us to to daeg day,, and
and forgive us us scylda debts urna eu^es, sue so we we for for. give scyldgum
debts vrum ours,, and and no do inlead not led us in into custnung
temptation., Ah But gefrig deliver vrich every one from ifle evil.. Amen.

Some two hundred years after, I find this somewhat varied in two
translations.

Thu ure fader the eart on heofenum Gewurthe thin willa.
Si thin willa on eorthan, swa swa on heofo daily hlaf. trespasses swa, swa we
for Vrum gyltendum.
tham the with against us us agyltath have trespassed. And ne Sothlice.
Si Be it it swa. so.

About an hundred and three score years after, in the time of king. Henry the
second, I find this in time sent from Rome by Pope Adrian an Englishman, to be
taught to the people.

Ure fadyr in heaven rich,
Thy name be halyed everlich:
Thou bring us thy michell bliss,
Als hit in heaveny-doe,
Evar in earth been it also:
That holy bread that lasts ay,
Thou send it ou^ this ilke day.
Forgive ous all that we havith don,
As we forgivet vch other mon:
Ne let ous fall into no founding,
Ac shield ous fro the foul thing. Amen.
Neither was there any great variation in the time of king Henry the third, as
appears in this of that age, as I conjecture by the Character; Fader that art
in heavin bliss,
Thin helge nam it wurth the bliss.
Cumen and mot thy kingdom,
Thin holy will it be all don,
In heaven and in erdh also,
So it shall bin full well Ic tr^.
Gif us all bread on this day,
And forgif us ure sins,
Ai we do ure wider winnes:
Let us not in fonding fall,
O ac fro evil thu syld us all. Amen.


In the time of king Richard the second about a hundred and odd years after,
it was so mollified, that it came to be thus, as it is in the Translation of
Wickliffe, with some Latin words now inserted, whereas there was not one
before.

Our fadyr, that art in heaven, halloed be thy name, thy kingdom com to, be thy
will done, so in heaven, and in earth: gif to us this day our bread over other
substance: and forgif to us our dettis, as we forgeven to our detter^, and leed
us not into temptation, but deliver us fro evil. Amen. Hitherto will our
sparkefull Youth laugh at their great grandfathers English, who had more care
to do well, than to speak minion-like, and l^ft m^re glory to us by their
exploiting of great acts, than we shall do by our sonnetting.

Great verily was the glory of our tongue before the Norman Conquest in this,
that the old English could express most aptly, all the conceiptes of the
mind in their own tongue without borrowing from any. As for example:

The holy service of God, which the Latins called Religion, because it knitted
the minds of men together, and most people of Europe have borrowed the same
from them, they called most significantly Fan-fastnes, as the one and only
assurance and fast anker-holde of our souls health.

The gladsome tidings of our salvation, which the Greeks called Evangelion,
and other Nations in the same word, they called Godspel, that is, God speech.

For our Savior, which we borrowed from the French, and they from the Latin
Salvator, they called in their own word, Haelend from Hael, that is, Salus,
safety, which we ^^tame still in Al-hael, and Was-hael, that is, Ave, Salve,
Sis salvus.

They could call the disciples of Christ, Leorning
Leorning Cnibtas, that is, Learning Servitours. For (...) which is now a name
of worship, signified with them an Attendant, or servitour.

They could name the Pharisees according to the Hebrew, Sunder-halgens, as holy
religious men which had sundred and severed themselves from other.

The Scribes they could call in their proper signification, as Booke-men,
Bocer. So they called parchment which we have caught from the Latin
Pergamenum, Boc-fell in respect of the use.

So they could call the sacrament Haligdome, as holy judgment. For so it is
according as we receive it.

They could call Fortilitie and fruitfulness of land significatively
Eordes-wela, as wealth of the earth.

They could call a Comet, a Faxed star; which is all one with Stella Crinita,
or Cometa. So they did call the judgment seat Domesettle.

That which we call the Parliament of the French Parier to speak, they called a
Witten mot, as the meeting and assembly of wise men.

The certain and inward knowledge of that which is in our mind, be it good or
bad, which in the Latin word we call Conscience, they called Inwit, as that
which they did inwardly wit and wot, that is, know certainly.

That in a river which the Latins call Alveus, and Cana^is, and from thence
most nations of Europe name the Chanel, Kanel, Canale, etc. they properly
called the Streamerace.

Neither in the degrees of kindred they were destitute of significative words;
for he whom we of a French and English compound word call Grandfather, they
called Eald-fader, whom we call Great Grandfather, they called Thirdafader. So
Proavus, which we call Great Great Grandfather, they called Fortha-fader, as
Abavus, Fiftha-fader.

An Eunuch, for whom we have no name, but from the Greeks, they could aptly
name Vnstana, that is, without stones, as we use Unspotted for without spotte,
Unlearned, for, without learning.

A Covetous man whom we so call of the French Convoitise, they truly called
Git-sor, as a fore and eagre Getter, and Gatherer.

That which the Latins call Abortus, and we in many words, Untimely Birth,
or, Borne before the full time, they called Miss-borne.

A Porter, which we have received from the French, they could in their own
word as significatively call A Doreward.

I could particulate in many more, but this would appear most plentifully, if
the labors of the learned Gentlemen Master Laurence Nowell of Lincolnes Inn,
who first in our time recalled the study hereof, Master William Lambert,
Master I: Ioscelin, Master Fr: Tate were once published. Otherwise it is to
be feared, that devouring Time, in few years will utterly swallow it, without
hope of recoverie.

The alteration and innovation in our tongue as in all others, has been
brought in by entrance of Strangers, as Danes, Normans, and others which have
swarmed hither, by traffic, for new words as well as for new wares, have
always come in by the tyranne Time, which alters all under heaven, by Use,
which swayeth most, and has an absolute command in words, and by Pregnant
wits: specially since that learning after long banishment, was recalled in the
time of King Henry the eight, it has been beautified and enriched out of
other good tongues, partly by enfranchising and endenizing strange words,
partly by refining and mollifying old words, partly by implanting new words
with artificial composition, happily containing themselves within the bounds
prescribed by Horace. So that our long is (and I doubt not but has been) as
copious, pithie, and significative, as any other tongue in Europe: and I hope
we are not yet and shall not hereafter come to that which Seneca saw in his
time, I^ Epistolis.
When men's minds begin once to iniure themselves to dislike whatsoever is
usual, is disdained. They affect noveltie in speech, they recall forworne and
vncuth words, they forge new phrases, and that which is newest, is best liked;
there is presumptuous and far fetching of words. And some there are which
think it a grace if their speech do hover, and thereby hold the hearer in
suspense: you know what follows.

Omitting this, pardon me and think me not overballanced with affection, if I
think that our English tongue is (I will not say as sacred as the Hebrew, or
as learned as the Greek,) but as fluent as the Latin, as courteous as the
Spanish, as courtlike as the French, and as amorous as the Italian, as some
Italianated amorous have confessed. Neither has any thing detracted more from
the dignity of our tongue, than our own affection of foreign tongues, by
admiring, praising, and studying them above measure: whereas the wise Romans
thought no small part of their honor to consist in the honor of their
language, esteeming it a dishonor to answer any foreign in his own language.
As for a long time the English placed in the Borrough towns of Ireland and
Wales, would admit neither Irish nor Welsh among them. And not long since for
the honor of our native tongue, Henry Fitz-Allan Earl of Arundell, in his
travail into Italy, and the Lord William Howard of Effingham, in his
government of Calice, albeit they were not ignorant of other foreign tongues,
would answer no strangers by word or writing, but only in English. As in this
consideration also before them Cardinal Wolsey in his embassage into France,
commanded all his servaunts to use no French, but mere English to the French,
in all communication whatsoever.

As for the Monosyllables so rife in our tongue which were not so originally,
although they are unfitting for verses and measures, yet are they most fit for
expressing briefly the first conceits of the mind, or Intentionalia as they
call them in schools: so that we can set down more matter in fewer lines,
than any other language. Neither do we or the Welsh so curtall Latin, that we
make all therein Monosyllables, as Joseph Scaliger charge us; In Catalecti^.
who in the mean time forgets that his Frenchmen have put in their Proviso
in the edict of Pacification in the Grammatical war, that they might not
pronounce Latin distinctly, as the English common Lawyers obtained then a
Reservation that they might write false Latin, and the Irish not to observe
quantity of syllables. I cannot yet but confess that we have corruptly
contracted most names both of men and places, if they were of more then two
sillables, and thereby has ensued no little obscurity.

Whereas our tongue is mixed, it is no disgrace, whe^^as all the tongues of
Europe do participate interchangeably the one of the other, and in the learned
tongues, there has been like borrowing one from another. In Mithridat^.
Yet is it false which Gesner affirms, that our tongue is the most mixed and
corrupt of all other. For if it may please any to compare but the Lords Prayer
in other languages, he shall find as few Latin and borrowed foreign words in
ours, as in any other whatsoever. Notwithstanding the diversiue of Nations
which have swarmed hither, and the practice of the Normans, who as a monument
of their Conquest, would have yoaked the English under their tongue, as they
did under their command, by compelling them to teach their children in schools
nothing but French, by setting down their laws in the Norman-French, and
enforcing them most rigorously to plead and to be impleaded in that tongue
only, for the space of three hundred years, until K. Edward the third
enlarged them first from that bondage. Since which time, our language has
risen by little, and the proverb proved untrue, which so long had been used,
Jack would be a gentleman, if he could speak any French.

Herein is a notable argument of our Ancestors stedfastnes in esteeming and
retaining their own tongue. For as before the Conquest they misliked nothing
more in K. Edward the Confessor, than that he was Frenchified, and accounted
the desire of foreign language, then to be a foretoken of the bringing in of
foreign powers, which indeed happened. In like manner after the Conquest,
notwithstanding those enforcements of the Normans in supplanting it, and the
nature of men, which is most pliable with a curious iolitie to fashion and
frame themselves according to the manners, attire, and language of the
Conquerours. Yet in all that long space of 300. years, they intermingled very
few French-Norman words, except some terms of law, hunting, hawking, and
dicing, whenas we within these 60. years, have incorporated so many Latin
and French, as the third part of our tongue consists now in them. But like
themselves, continue still those old Englishmen which were planted in Ireland,
in Fingall, and the Country of Weysford, in the time of K. Henry the second,
who yet still continue their ancient attire and tongue, in so much that an
English gentleman not long since, sent thither in Commssion among them, said
that he would quickly understand the Irish, when they spoke the ancient
English. So that our Ancestors seemed in part as jealous of their native
language, as those B^itans which passed hence into Armorica in France, Ne^nius.
and marrying strange women there, did cut out their tongs, lest their children
should corrupt their language with their motters tongues, or as the Germans
which have most of all Nations opposed themselves against all innovations in
habit, and language.

Whereas the Hebrew Rabbines say, and that truly, that Nature has given man
five instruments for the pronouncing of all letters, the lips, the teeth, the
tongue, the palate, and throat; I will not deny but some among us do
pronounce more fully, some flatly, some broadly, and no few mincingly,
offending in defect, excess, or change of letters, which is rather to be
imputed to the persons and their education, than to the language. Whenas
generally we pronounce by the confession of strangers, as sweetly, smoothly,
and moderately, as any of the Northern Nations of the world, who are noted to
soupe their words out of the throat with fat and full spirits.

This variety of pronuntiation has brought in some diversity of Orthographie,
and heere-vpon Sir John Price, to the derogation of our tongue, and glory of
his Welsh, reports that a sentence spoken by him in English, and penned out
of his mouth by four good Secretaries, severally, for trial of our
Orthography, was so set down by them, that they all differed one from the
other in many letters: whereas so many Welsh writing the same likewise in their
tongue varied not in any one letter at all. Well, I will not derogate from the
good Knights credit; yet it has been seen where ten English writing the
same sentence, have all so concurred, that among them all there has been no
other difference, than the adding, or omitting once or twice of our silent E,
in the end of some words. As for the Welsh, I could never happen on two of
that Nation together, that would acknowledge that they could write their own
language.

Sir Thomas Smith her Majesty's secretary not long since, a man of great
learning and judgment, occasioned by some uncertainty of our Orthographie,
though it seem grounded upon Sound, Reason, and Custom, labored to reduce it
to certain heads; Seeing that whereas of Necessity there must be so many
letters in every tongue, as there are simple and single sounds, that the Latin
letters were not sufficient to express all our simple sounds. Therefore he
wished that we should have A short, and A long, because a in Man, and in Man of
horse has different sounds; E long as in Men moderate, and e short as in Men,
and an English e as in we, thee, he, me: I long, and I short, as in By, per,
and By, emere: O short, and O long, as in smo^k of a woman, and smok of the
fire: V long, as in But, Ocrea, and V short, as in Bu^t, Sed: and v or y
Greek, as slu, nu, true. For consonants he would have C be never used but for
Ch, as it was among the old English, and K in all other words; for Th, he
would have the Saxon letter Thorn, which was a D with a dash through the head,
or ^; for I consonant the Saxon ^, as ^et, not Ieat for Ieat-stone, ^ay for
Iay: Q, if he were king of the A, B, C, should be put to the horn, and
banished; and Ku in his place, as Kuik, not quik, Kuarel, not Quarrel: Z; he
would have used for the softer S, or eth, and es, as diz for dies, liz for
lies, and the same S inverted for sh, as Sal for shall, fler for flesh. This
briefly I have set you down his devise, which albeit Sound and Reason seemed
to countenance, yet that Tyranne Custom has so confronted, that it will never
be admitted.

If it be any glory which the French and Dutch do brag of, that many words in
their tongues do not differ from the Greek, I can show you as many in the
English; whereof I will give you a few for a taste, as they have offered
themselves in reading; but withal, I trust you will not gather by consequence,
that we are descanded from the Graecians. Who does not see an identitie in
these words, as if the one descended from the other.

(...), to call. (...), a path. (...), to lap. (...), rain (...), to rappe.
(...), last. (...), to seethe. (...), rash. (...), new. (...), grass. (...),
an Orchard. (...), to creake. (...), a star. (...), whole. (...), foul.
(...), a Dear. (...), a rod. (...), rest. (...), the Moon. (...), a mill.
(...), a treat. (...), a ship. (...), a rope. (...), to galloppe. (...),
ache. (...), a ragge. (...), a climbing. (...), an vdder. (...), whoorish
sport. (...), to kiss. (...), to hang. (...), earth. (...), a crabbe. (...),
a phoale. (...), a li^ke. (...), to cut. (...), to raze out. (...), oker.
(...), to mock. (...), less. (...), an axe. (...), to scoff. (...), to
strowe. (...), a skirmish. (...), a Church. (...), a pot. (...), Mustaches.
(...), a door. (...), a hulke. (...), to you know what. With many more if a
man would be so idle to gather them with Budans, Baifius, Iunius, Pichardus,
and others.
Hereby may be seen the original of some english words, and the Etymology or
reason whence many other are derived, beside them already specified may as
well be found in our tongue, as in the learned tongues, although hardly; for
that herein as in other tongues, the truth heth hidden and is not easily
found, as both Varro and Isidor do acknowledge. But an indifferent man may
judge that our name of the most divine power, God, is better derived from Good,
the chief attribute of God, than Deus from (...), because God is to be feared.
So Winter from Wind, So^^er from the Son, Lent from springing, because it
falls in the spring, for which our Progenitors the Germans, use Glent. The
feast of Christ's Rising, Easter, from the old world East, which we now use for
the place of the rising of the Sun, Sail as the Sea-haile, Windor or
Window, as a door against the wind, King from Conning, for so our Great
grandfathers called them, which one word imployeth two most important matters
in a Governor, Power and Skill, and many other better answering in sound and
sense, then those of the Latins, Frater quasi fere alter, Tempestas quasi
Tempus pestis, Caput a capiendo, Digiti quia decenter iuncti, Cura quia cor
vrit, Peccare quasi pedam capere.

Dionysius a Greek coyner of Etymologyes is commended by Athenaeus, in his
supper-gulls, table-talkers, or Deipnos^phistae, for making mowse-traps of
Musteria: and verily if that be commendable, the Mint-masters of our
Etymilogies, deserve no less commendation: for they have merrily forged Money
from My-hony, Flatter from flie-at-her, Shovell from shove-full, Maid as my aid
Mastiefe as Mase-thiefe, Staff as Stay of, Beer, Be-heere, Symony See-mony,
Stirrup, a Sayre-vp, etc.

This merry playing with words too much used by some has occasioned a great
and high personage, to say, that as the Italian tongue is fit for courting, the
Spanish for treating, the French for traffic; so the English is most fit for
trifling and toying. And so does Giraldus Cambrensis seem to think whenas in
his time he says, the English and Welsh delighted much in licking the letter
and clapping together of Agnominations. But now will I conclude this trifling
discourse with a true tale out of an ancient Historian.

Of the effectual power of words, great disputes have been of great wits in
all ages; the Pithagoreans extolled it, the impious Jews ascribed all miracles
to a name which was ingravened in the revestiarie of the Temple, watched by two
brazen dogs, which one stale away and enseamed it in his thigh, as you may
read in Osorius de Sapientia, and the like in Rabi Hamas Speculation: and
strange it is what Samonicus Serenus ascribed to the word ABRADACABRA, against
agues. But there was one true English word of as great, if not greater force
than them all, now out of all use and will be thought for sound barbarous; but
therefore of more efficacy (as it pleases Porphyrie) and in signification it
signifies as it seems, no more then abject, base minded, false hearted,
coward, or nidget. Yet it has levied Armies, and subdued rebellious enemies;
and that I may hold you no longer, it is Niding. William Malmsbury.
For when there was a dangerous rebellion against King William Rufus, and
Rochester Castle then the most important and strongest fort of this Realm was
stowtly kept against him, after that he had but proclaimed that his subjects
should repair thither to his Camp, upon no other penalty, but that whosoever
refused to come, should be reputed a Niding: they swarmed to him immediately
from all sides in such numbers, that he had in few days an infinite Army, and
the rebels therewith weere so terrified, that they forthwith yielded. While I
run on in this course of English tongue, rather respecting matter then words,
I forget that I may be charged by the mi^^ion refiners of English, neither to
write State-English, Court-English, nor Secretarie-English, and verily I
acknowledge it. Sufficient it is for me, if I have waded hither-vnto in the
fourth kind, which is plain English, leaving to such as are complete in all,
to supply whatsoever remains.

Christian Names.
NAmes called in Latin Nomina quas^ Notamina, were first imposed for the
distinction of persons, which we call now Christian names: After for
difference of families which we call Surnames, and have been especially
respected as whereon the glory and credit of men is grounded, and by which
the same is convayed to the knowledge of posterity.

Every person had in the beginning one only proper name, as among the Jews,
Adam, Joseph, Solomon; among the Aegiptians, Anubis, Amasis, Busuris; among the
Chaldaeans, Ninus, V^^to Julius. Paris Viglius.
Ninias, Semira^^; among the Medians, Astiages, Bardanes, Arbaces; among the
Grecians, Diomedes, Ulysses, Orestes; among the Romans, Romulus, Remus,
Faustulus; among the old Gauls, Litavicus, Cavarilus, Divitiacus; among the
Germans, Ariovistus, Arminius, Nassua; among the Britans, Cassibellin, Caratac,
Calgac; among the ancient English, Hengest, Plinius Marcellin^^.
Aella, Kenrie, likewise among all other Nations, except the savages of Mount
Atlas in Barbary, which were reported to be both namelesse and dreamelesse.

The most ancient Nation of the Jews gave the name at the Circumcision the
eight day after the nativitie; the Romans to females the same day, to males the
ninth day, which they called Dies lustricus, as it were the cleansing day; upon
which day they solemnized a feast called Nominalia, De Anima ca. 19.
and as Tertulian notes, Fata scribenda advocabantur, that is, as I conceive,
their nativitie was set. At what time other Nations in ancient times gave
names I have not read: but since Christianity, most Nations for the time
followed the Jews, celebrating baptism the eight day after the birth, only
our Ancestors in this Realm, until latter time baptized, and gave name the
very birth day, or next day after, following therein the counsel of S.
Cyprian, in his third Epistle Ad Fidum. But the Polonians gave name in the
seventh year, Mart. Crom^^.
at which time they did first cut their childrens hair.

The first imposition of Names was grounded upon so many occasions, as were
hard to be specified, but the most common in most ancient times among all
nations, as well as the Hebrews, was upon future good hope conceived by
parents of their children, in which you might see their first and principal
wishes toward them. Whereupon Saint Hierome says, Votiva and quasi ob virtutis
auspicium imponuntur vocabula hominibus, and appellativa vertuntur inpropria,
sicut apud Latins, Victor, Probus, Castus, etc. And such hopeful luckie names
called by Cicero, Cic de Divinatione.
Bona nomina, by Tacitus, Fansta nomina were ever first enrolled and ^anged in
the Roman Musters; first called out to serve at the first sacrifices, in the
foundation of Colonies, as Statorius, Faustus, Valerius, which implied the
persons to be stowt, happy, and valorous. As contrariwise Atrius V^^ber is
accounted in I^vie, abominandi ominis nomen, an abominable name, for that it
participated in signification with dismal darkness, dead ghosts, and shadows.
And you remember what Plautus says of one whose name was Lyco, that is, a
Greedy Woolfe; Vosmet nunc facit^ coniectur (...) caeterum
Quid id sit hominis, cui Lyco nomen siet.


Yea such names were thought so happy and so fortunate, that in the time of
Galienus one Regilianus, See Herodot. lib. ^. de Hegesistrato. Trebellius.
Polli^.
which commanded in Illyricum, got the Empire there, only in favor of of his
name. For when it was demanded at a supper from whence Regilianus was derived,
one answered, a Regno, another began to decline Rex, Regis, Regi, Regilianus;
whereat the soldiers (which in all actions are forward.) began with
acclamation, Ergo potest Rex esse, Ergo potest regere, Deus tibi regis nomen
imposuit: and so invested him with imperial roabes. In this Isle also at
Silcaster in Hamshire, Constantinus a military man of some reputation, in hope
of his luckie name, and that he would prove another Constantinus Magnus to the
good of the people, was by the Britan Army proclaimed emperor against
Henorius: who exployted great matters in his own person in Gallia, and by his
son in Spain. Lampridiu^.
So in former times the name of Antoninus in remembrance of Antoninus Pius, was
so amiable among the Romans, as he was supposed unfit for the empire, who bare
not that name, until Antoninus Elagabalus with his filthy vices distained the
same. We read also that two Ambassadors were sent out of France into Spain,
to King Alphonse the 9, to d^mand one of the daughters that he begat of the
daughter of King Henry the second of England, to be married to their
Sovereign, King Jews the eight: one of these Ladies was very beautiful
called Vrraca, the other not so beautiful, but named Blanch. When they were
presented to the Ambassadors, all men held it as a matter resolved that the
choice would light upon Vrraca, as the elder and fairer: But the Ambassadors
enquiring each of their names, took offense at Vrraca, and made choice of the
Lady Blanch, saying, That her name would be better received in France than the
other, as signifying fair and beautiful, according to the verse made to her
honor.

Candida, candescens candore, and cordis, and oris.
So that the greatest Philosopher Plato might seem, not without cause, to
advise men to be careful in giving fair and happy names: as the Pythagoreans
affirmed the minds, actions, and successes of men to be according to their
Fate, Genius, and Name. One also well observes that these seven things;
Virtue, good Parentage, Wealth, Dignity or Office, good Presence, a good
Christian name, with a gracious Surname, and seemly attire, do especially
grace and adorn a man. And accordingly says Panormitan; Ex bono nomine
oritur bona presumptio. As the common Proverb, Bonum nomen, bonum omen.

The devil nevertheless who always maligneth God and goodness, Ammianus
Macellinus lib 19.
wrought by the cruelty of Valens the emperor the destruction of many men of
worth, who had happy names beginning with Theo signifying God, as Theodorus,
Theodubis, Theodoretus, Theodosius, etc. For that diverse curious companions
had found by the falling of a ring magically prepared, upon those letters only
of all the Alphab^t, graven in a Charger of sundry metals, and set upon a
Laurel trivet; that one who had his name beginning with Theod, should succeed
in the empire, which was verified in Theodosius not long after.

In times of Christianity the names of most holy and virtuous persons, and of
their most worthy progenitors were given to stir up men to the imitation of
them, whose names they bare. But succeeding ages (little regarding saint
Chrysostoms admonition to the contrary, have recalled profane names, so as now
(...), names of unhappy disastre are as (...) some (...) they were in
Paga^^sm^s* Albeit in our late (...) of good consideration have brought in
(...) Josias, etc. as better agreeing with our says, but without contempt of
our country names (as I hope) which have both good and gracious
significations, as shall appear hereafter.

Whereas in late years Surnames have been given for Christian names, among
us, and no where else in Christendom; although many dislike it, for that great
inconvenience will ensue: nevertheless it seems to proceed from hearty
good will and affection of the Godfathers to show their love, or from a desire
to continue and propagate their own names to succeeding ages. And is in no
wise to be disliked, but rather approoved in those which matching with heirs
general of worshipful ancient families have given those names to their heirs,
with a mindful and thankful regard of them, as we have now, Pickering
Wott^n, Grevill Varney, Bassingburne Ga^^dy, Culthorp Parker, Pees^ll Brac^^,
Fuz-Raulfe Chamberlain, who are the hei^^s of Pickering, (...) Bassingburn,
Grevill, Calthorp, etc. For beside the continuation of the name, we see that
the self name, yea and sometime the similitude of names does kindle sparkles of
love and liking among mere strangers.

Neither can I believe a waiward old man, which would say, that the giving of
Surnames for Christian names first began in the time of king Edward the sixth,
by such as would be Godfathers, when they were more then half fathers, and
thereupon would have persuaded some to change such names at the Confirmation.
Which (that I may note by the way) is usual in other countries, as we
remember two sons of king Henry the second of France, christ^^ed by the names
of Alexander and Hercules, ch^^^ged them at their Confirmation into (...) and
Francis.

But two Christian names are rare in England, and I only remember now his
Majesty who was named Charles James, as the Prince (...) and among private men,
Thomas Maria Wingfield, and sir Thomas P^sth^^^us Hobby. Although it is common
in Ita^^e, to adioyne the name of some Saint, in a kind of devotion to the
Christian name, as (...) Baptista Spinalu, Johannes Franciscns Bor^omeus,
Marcus Antonius (...): and in Spain to add the name of the Saint on whose day
the child was borne.

If that any among us have named their children Remedian (...), Imago s^eu^, or
with such like names, I know some will think it more then a vanity, as they
do but little better of the new names, Free-gift, Reformation, Earth, Dust,
Ashes, Delivery, More fruit, Tribulation, The Lord is near, More trial,
Discipline, Joy again, From above: which have lately been given by some to
their children with no evil meaning, but upon some singular and precise
conceit. That I may omit another more vain absurdity, in giving names and
surnames of ruen, Suetonius in Domit. cap. 10
yea and of the best families to dogs, bears, and horses. Whenas we read
it was thought a capital crime in Pomposiamas for calling his base bondslaves
by the name of grand captains. Here I might remember how some mislike the
giving of parents names successively to their heirs, Se Demosthenes contra
Boetua^, de Nomine.
for that if they should be forced to prove descent, it will be hard to prove
the Doner and the Done in Formedon, and to distinguish the one from the other.

It were impertinent to note here, that destinies were superstitiously by
Onomantin desciphered out of names, as though the names and natures of men were
suitable, and fatal necessity concurred herein with voluntary motion, in
giving the name, according to that of Ausonius to Probus.

Qualem cravit moribus,
Iussit vocari nomine.
Mundi supremus arbitar.
And after, where he plays with bibbing mother Mere^, as though she were so
named, because she would to drink mere wine without water, or as he pleasantly
(...) it ^^rum Merum; for as he says; Qui primus Mere^ (...) tibi (...)
Thesida nomen condidit Hippolit^.
Nam divinare est, nomen componere, quod (...)
Fortuna, morum, vel nocis indici^^.


For Hyppolitus the son of Theseus was torn in (...) by his coach horses,
according to his name. So (...), signified he should linger long before Trey.
(...) that he should be redeemed out of bondage in his childehoode, Tantalus,
that he should be most wretched, because (...) in the one, and (...), in the
other, and (...) in the third implies such accidents unto them. Hither also
may be referred that of Claudius Rutilius.

Nominibus certis credam decurrere mores?
Moribus aut potius nomina certa dari^
But to confront Poet with Poet, our good Epigr (...) Poet, old Godfrey of
Winchester thinks no ominous forspeaking to lie in names, in that to Faustus:
Multum Fauste tua de nobilitate superbis,
Quodq, bone Faustus omine nomen habes,
Sed nullum nomen nomenti, sit licet omen.


Memorable is that which may be observed out of histories, how that men of the
self same name have begun and ended great states and empires: as Cyrus the
son of Cambises began the Persian Monarchy, Cyrus ^he son of Darius
ruinated the same. Darius the son of Histaspes restored it. And again,
Darius the son of Ars^^is utterly overthrew it. Philip the son of Ami^^^tas
especially enlarged the kingdom of Macedonia, Philip the son of Antigonus
wholly lost the same. Augustus was the first established emperor of Rome,
Augustulus the last. Constantinus Magnus borne in this Isle first began the
Empire of Constantinople, Constantinus the last left it to the Turks, and
utterly lost the same, etc.

Such (...) curions observations bred the superstitious kind of Divination
called (...), condemned by the last general Counsel, (...).
by which the Pithagoreans judged the even number of vowells in names to
signify imperfections in the left sides of men, and the odd number in the
right. By this Augustus the emperor encouraged himself, and conceived good
hope of victory, (...).
whenas the night before the sea-battell at Actium, the first man he met was
a poor waysa^ing man driving his ass before him, whose name when he
demanded, he answered, Eutyches, that is, Happyman; and that his asses name
was Nicon, that is, Victor. In which place when he accordingly had obtained the
victory, he builded the City Nicopolis, that is, the city of Victory, and
there erected brazen Images of the man and his ass. C^^. Rodog^^^ lib. 13 cap.
35.
By this Theodatus king of the Goths, when he was curious to know the
success of his wars against the Romans, an On^manticall or Name-wisard Jew
willed him to shut up a number of swine in little hog-sties, and to give some
of them Roman names, to other Gotish names, with several marks, and there to
leave them to a certain day; At the day appointed, the king with the Jew
repaired to the hog-sties, where they found them only dead to whom they had
given the Gotish names, and those alive to whom they had given the Roman names,
but yet with their brissels more then half shed. Whereupon the Jew foretold,
that the Goths should wholly be discomfited, and the Romans should loose a
great part of their forces. Tackes 4 (...).
By this Vespasian was encouraged to take upon him the empire, when coming to
the Temple of Serapi^ at Alexandria, and being there alone at his devotion, he
suddenly saw in a vision, one Basilides, a noble man of Egypt, who was then
four score miles off. Upon which name of Basilides derived from Basileus,
signifying a King, he assured himself of royalty, and the empire which he
then complotted for. As concerning this On^mantia a German lately set forth a
Table, which I wish had been suppressed, for that the devil by such vanities,
does abuse the credulity of youth to greater matters, and sometimes to their
(...).

I can not tell how you would like it if I should (...) remember how the
Greeks superstitiously judged them more happy, in whose names the numerall
letters added together made the greater sum, and therefore Achilles forsooth
must needs vanquish Hector, because the numerall Greek letters rose to a
greater number in his name then in the others. Or how the amorous Romans kissed
the Cup with a health so often at their meetings, as there were letters in
their Mistress names, according to that of merry Martial of his two wenches,
Navia which had six letters, and Iustina that had seven in her name; Navia sex
cyathis, septem Iustina ^ibatur.

Our Nation was far from those and such curious (...) therefore here will I
overpasse them, and set down Alph^betically the names which we now call
Christian names, most usual to the English Nation, with their significations.
For this is to be taken as a granted verity, that names among all nations and
tongues (as I partly noted before) as significative and not vain senseless
sounds. Among the Hobrew^s it is certain out of sacred Scriptures, S. Hicrome,
and Philo likewise among the Greeks, Romans, German, French, etc. yea among
the barbarous Turks, for with them M^^emet signifies glorified or laudable,
Bell forest.
H^mar lively, Abdall^ Gods servant, Seliman peaceable, Agm^^ good, Ha^iza
ready. Neam^ pl^asant. Joseph Acosta.
And the savages of Hispa^^la and all America, name their children in their
own languages, Glistering light, Sun bright, Gold-bright, Fine gold, Sweet,
Rich feather, etc. as they of Congo, by names of birds, precious stones
flowers, etc.

So that it were gross ignorance and to no ^mall reproach, of our
Progenitors, to think their names only nothing significative, because that
in the daily alteration of our ^ong, the signification of them is lost, or not
commonly known, which yet I hope to recover, and to make in some part known,
albeit they cannot easily and happily be (...), because as (...) notes;
Barberous name^ (as he term the them,) Theolo^^^ Ph^nicum.
were very emphaticall and very short. But in all the significations of these
names, you shall see the good and hopeful respects which the devisers of the
names had, that there is an Orthetes or certitude of names among all Nations
according to Plate, In Cratyl^,
and thereby perceive that many were translated out of the Greek and Latin.
With all we may make this fruit by consideration of our names, which have good,
hopeful, and luckie significations, that accordingly we do carry and conform
our selves; so that we fail not to be answerable to them, but be Nostri
nominis homines, and (...), as Severus, Preb^s, and Aur^^lus are called Sui
nominis imporatores. And accordingly it seems to have been the manner at
giving of names, to wish the children might perform and discharge their names,
as when Gunthr^^ King of the French, named Clatharius at the font, he said;
Crescat puer, and huius sit nominis executer.

But before I proceed farther, this is to be noted. In most ancient times the
Britans had here their peculiar names, for the most part taken from colors,
(for they used to pain^ themselves) which are now lost or remain among the
Welsh. Afterward they took Roman names when they were Provincialls, which
either remain corrupted among them, or were extinguished in the greatest part
of the Realm, after the entrance of the English Saxons, who brought in their
German names, as Cridda, Ponda, Oswald, Edward, Vchtred, Edmund, etc. Then to
say nothing of the Danes, who no doubt brought in their names, as Suayn,
Harold, Knute, etc. The Normans conquest brought in other German names, for
they originally used the German tongue, as William, Henry, Richard, Robert,
Hughe, Roger, etc. as the Greek names, Olden dorplu^.
A^labius, i. Innocent, Aspasious i. Delightful, Beethius, Symmachus. i.
Helper, Texetius. i. Archer, etc. were brought into Italy after the division of
the Empire. After the Conquest, our Nation (who before would not admit
st^^nge and unknown names, but avoided them therefore as unlucky) by little
and little began to use Hebrew and sacred names, as Matthew, David, Sampson,
Luke, (...), etc. which were never received in Germany, (...).
(...) the (...) of Frederick the second, about some 300. years since.

So that the Saxons, Danish, Norman, and British tongues. are the fittest keys
to open the entrance for searching out of our ancient names yet in use. For the
Hebrew I will follow the common tables of the Bible, which every one may do as
well, and Philo Do nominibus mutatis. For the Greek the best Glossaries with
mine own little skill. For the Welsh, I will sparingly touch them, or leave
them to the learned of that Nation. But for old English names, which here are
the scope of my care, I must sift them as I may out of old English- Saxon
treatises, as I have happened upon here and there: and some coniecturally,
referring all to the judgment of such, as shall be more happy in finding out
the truth, hoping that probability may either please, or be pardoned by such as
are modestly learned in histories and languages; to whose judgment in all
humility, I commit all that is to be said. For that they cannot but observe
the diversity of names, from the original in diverse languages, as how the
French have changed Petrus into Pierre, Iohaunes to (...), Benedictus to
Beneist, Stephanus to Esti^n, Radulphus to R^^l: how the Italians have changed
Johannes into Giovanni, Constans into Gostante, Christopherus into
Christophan^, Iacobus into Iacope, Radulphus into Ridulpho, Laurentius into
Lorenz. How the Welsh have altered Ioannes into Even, Aegidius into Silim,
George into Sior, Lawrence into Lowris, Constantinus into Custenith. How the
English have changed Gerrard into Garret, Albric into Aubry, Alexander into
Sanders, Constantin into Custance, Benedict into Bennet. How the English and
Scottish borderers do use Roby and Rob for Robert, L^kky for Luke, Io^ie and
Ionie for John, Cristie for Christopher, etc. That I may omit the Spaniard
which have turned John into Iuan, and Iacobus into Iago and Diego: as the
Germans which have contracted Johannes into House, and Theodoric into Doric.
These and the like, whosoever will learnedly consider, will not think any
thing strange which shall hereafter follows; howsoever the unlearned will boldly
censure it. I had purposed here, lest I might seem hereafter to lay my
foundations in the sands of conjecture, and not on grounds of truth and
authority, to have given you the signification of such words as offer
themselves most frequent in the compositions of our meers English names, viz.

Ael Al Aelf Ard Ar Bert Bald Cin Cuth Ead Fred Gisle Gund Hold Helm Hulph Hare
Here Leod Leof Mer Mund Rad Red Rod Ric Sig Stan Theod Ward Wald Weld Wi Will
Win, etc.
And these not out of suppositive conjectures, but out of Alfricus Grammar, who
was a learned Archbishop of Canterbury, well near six hundred year since, and
therefore not to be supposed ignorant of the English tongue, out of the
English-Saxon Testament, Psalter, and Laws, out of Willeramus Paraphrasis upon
the Canticles, and the learned Notes thereon by a man skillful in the Northern
tongues, as also out of Beatus Rhonanus, M. Luther, Dasipodius, Killianus, who
have labored in illustration of the old German tongue, which undoubtedly is
the matrix and mother of our English. But I think it most fitting to this
purpose, to show those my grounds in their proper places hereafter.

In the Table following. Gre. notes the name to be Greek; Germ. German, Lat.
Latin, Fre. French, Hebr. Hebrew, Brit. Welsh, Sax. Saxon, or old English.

Usual Christian names.
ARAON, Heb. a Teacher, or Mountain of sortitude.

ABEL, Heb. Just.

ADAM, Heb. Man, (...), or red.

ADOLPH, s^e Eadulph.

ADRIAN, (...) Hadrian.

ALAN, is thought by Iuhas Scaliger (some of whose progenitors bare that name)
to signify an hownd in the Sclavonian tongue, and Chancer uses (...) in the
same sense: neither may it seem strange to take names from beasts. The Romans
had their Caninius, Apur, Asinus, etc. and (...), Lup^^ Vrsula. But whereas
(...) into England with Alan earl of Britain, to whom the Conqueror gave the
greatest part of (...), and has (...) most common since that time in the
Northern parts, in the younger children of the noble house of Percies, and the
family of Zouch, descended from the Earls of Britain; I would feels it
rather out of the British, than (...) tongue, and will believe with an (...)
from Aeliamus, that is, Sunne-bright, as they (...) into Guida^.

(...) and hope (...), wealth and might, as Plutarchus, Architas, Crates,
Craterus, Polycrates, Pancratius, with the Greeks, Regulus Opimius, etc. with
the Latins. The king of the Goths, which sacked Rome bearing his name, was
called by the Romans Allaricus, the old Englishmen turned it into Alric, the
Normans into Aiberic. Rye.
That Ric, as it signified a kingdom, so also it signified, rich, wealthy,
mighty, able powerful, attributes to a kingdom; the word yet remains in that
sense among all the German nations dispersed in Europe, and little mollisied
does sufficiently prove. The Italians receiving it from the Longobardes, have
turned it into Ricco, the Spaniards from the Goths into Rico, the French from
the Frankes into Richo, we from the Saxons into Rich, etc. Fortunatus
Venantius, who lived about a thousand years since, translated it by Potens,
and Fortis in these verses to Hilperic king of France: Hilperice potens, si
interpres barbarus adsit,
Adiutor fortis hoc quoq, nomen habet.
Nec fuit in vanum sic te vocitare parents,
Praesagum hoc totum laudis, and omen erat.


As that Hilperic did signify, puissant and mighty helper. This name is
usually written Chilperic, but the C was set before the Coning, that is, King,
as in Clotharius, Clodovens, Cheribertus, for Lotharius, Lodovaeus, Heribertus.
Aubry has been a most common name in the honorable family of Vere earls of
Oxford.

ALBAN, Lat. White, or High, as it pleases other. The name of our Stephen and
first Martyr of Britain.

ALVVIN, Sax. All victorious, or Winning all, as Victor and Vincontius, in
Latin Nicetas and Nicophorus. The Yorkeshireman, which was Schoolemaister to
Carolus Magnus, and persuaded him to found the University of Paris, is in an
English-Saxon treatise called Alwin. But the French, as it seems, not able to
pronounce the w, called him Alcumus, and Albinus.

ALBERT, Germ. All-bright, as Epiphanius, Phaedrus, Eudoxus with the ^racians:
Lucilius, Illustrius, Fulgentius, with the Latins, Beert and Bert, Bert.
as Alfricus, and Rhenamus do translate it, is famous, fair, and clear. Which
the rather I believe, for that Bertha a German Lady sent into Greece, was there
called Eudoxia in the same sense, as Luitprandus reports. They moreover that
in ancient Books are written Ecbert, Sebert, Ethelbert, in the latter are
written Echright, Sebright, Ethelbright: So that, Bert in composition of names
does not signify Beard, as some translate it.

AELFRED, Ealand Ael.
Sax. All peace, not varying much in signification from Irenans. Eal, Ail, Ael
in old English compound names is answerable to Pan and Pam in Greek names, as
Pamphilus, Pammachius, Panaetius, Pantalcon, etc.

ALDRED, Sax. All reverent fear.

ALEXANDER, Gre. Succour-man, or Helper of men.

ALPHONS, if it be a German name, and came into Spain with the Goths, a
German nation, it is as much as Holfa^s, that is, Our help, and probable it is
to be a Gotish name, for Alphens the first king of Spain of that name Anno 740
was descended from the Goths.

AMERY, in Latin Almaricus, from the German Emerich, that is, always rich,
able, and powerful, according to Luther: the French write it Aumery, as they
of Theoderic, Henric, Frederic, make Terrey, Henry, Frery.

AMBROSE, gr^^ Divine, Immortal.

AMIE, from the French Amie, that is, Beloved, and that from Amatus, as Rene
from Renatus. The earls and dukes of Savoy which be commonly called Aim, were
in Latin called Amadeus, that is, Loving God, as Theophilus, and so was that
earl of Savoy called, which did homage to king Henry the third of England for
Bourg in Bresse, Math. Paris
Saint Maurice in Chablais, Chasteau Bard, etc. which I note for the honor of
England. We do use now Amias for this in difference from Amie the women's name.
Some deduce Amias from Aemilius the Roman name, which was deduced from the
Greek Aimulios, Fair spoken.

ANANIAS, heb. The grace of the Lord.

ANDREW, gre: Manly, or Manfull Freculphus turns it Decorus, Comely and
Decent; I know not upon what ground. See Charles.

ANARAVD, brit. corrupted from Honoratus, that is, Honorable.

ANGEL, gre: a Messenger.

ANTHONY, gre: as Anthoros, flourishing, from the greek Anthos a flower, as
Florens and Florentius with the Latins, and Thales, Euthalius with the
Greeks. There are yet some that draw it from Anton a companion of Hercules,

ANSELM, germ: Defense of Authority, according to Luther. Whether this name
came from the Gotish word Anses, Iornandes cap. 13.
by which the Goths called their victorious Capitaines as Demigods, I dare not
determine: yet Ansbert, Ansegis, Answ^ld, Germane names, and Ansketel used much
in the ancient house of the Mallories seem to descend from one head.

ARCHEBALD, vide Erchenbald.

ARFAST, Sax. Goodly-man [ Alfricus.]

ARNOLD, ger: Honest, but the Germans write Ernold. Probus in Latin [ Luther.]
It has been common in the old family of the Boyses.

ARTHVR, a Latin name in Iuvenal drawn from the goodly fixed star Arcturus,
and that from Arctus is the Bear, as Vrsicinus amongst the Romans. The famous
Arthur made this name first famous amongst the Britains.

AUGUSTINE, Latin, ^ncreasing, or Maiesticall from Augustus, as Victorinus,
Justinius, Constantinus diminutives from Victor, Iustus, Constans, according to
Molinaeus. One observes that adoptive names do end in anus, as Aemilianus,
Domitianus, Iustinianus, adopted by Aemilius, Domitius, Justinius [Lilius
Giraldus.]

B
BALDVVIN, Ger. if we believe Luther, Speedy Conqueror, if Rhenanus, and
Lipsius, Victorious power. But whereas Iornandes, cap. 29. shows that king
Alaric was surnamed Baldh id est, (...).
Audax: for that he was bold and adventurous, and both Kilianus, and Lipsius
him self does confess, Epist. 43. Cent 3.
that it was anciently in use, for Bold and confident, Baldwin must signify
Bold victor, as Winbald, the same name inverted, Ethelbald nobly bold,
Willibald very bold and confident, concurring somewhat in signification with
Thraseas, Thrasimachus, Thrasibulus, Win.
Thrasillus of the Graecians. So all the names wherein Win is found, seem to
imply victory, as Tatewin, Learned victor, Bertwin, Famous victor, Earlewin,
Glorions or honorable victor, and Vnwin, yet amongst the Danes for invincible
[ Jonas Turson] as Anicetus in Greek. Accordingly we may judge that most names
wherein Win is found, to resemble the Greek names, Nicetes, Nicocles,
Nichomachus, Nicander, Polynices, etc. which have Nice in them.

BAPTIST, gre: A name given to S. John, for that he first baptized, and to many
since in honor of him. Vlph. Wolph.


BARDVLPH, Hulf. Aelf.
Ger. from Bertulph.i. fair help, Viph, Hilp. Helf.
Wolf, Hulf, Aelf, Hilp, Helf, signify Help, as Luther and others assure us.
So Aelfwin-Victorious help, Aeelfric Rich or powerful help, Aelfwold Helping
Governor, Aelfgiva Helpe-giver. Names conformable to Boethius, Symmachus, etc.

BARTHOLMEVV, Hebr. the son of him that makes the waters to mount, that is,
of God which lifts up the mind of his teachers, and drops down water [
Szegedinus.]

BARNABAS, or Barnabie, Heb. son of the Master, or Son of Comfort.

BARVCH, Hebr. the same which Bennet, blessed.

BASIL, Gre. Royal, Kingly, or Princely.

BID, Sax. He that prays, or a devout man, as Eucherius, or Eusebius in
Greek. We retain still Bedman in the same sense, and to say our bedes, is but
to say our prayers.

BEAVIS, may seem probably to be corrupted from the name of the famous
Celtique King Bellovesus. Wher^as the French have made in like sort Beavois of
the old City Bellovacum. In both these is a significancie of beauty. In
latter times Boge has been used in Latin for Beavis.

BENET, Lat. contracted from Benedictus. i. Blessed.

BENJAMIN, He. The son of the right hand, or Filius dierum, [Phil^:] See
Joseph. li. 1. Archaielogias.

BERNARD, Germ. Saint Bernardes Cluniac Monks drew it from Bona Nardus, by
allusion, some turn it Hard child, in which sense Barn is yet retained with
us in the North. If it be derived as the Germans will have it from Bearne, Bern
or Barn.
which signifies a Bear, it is answerable to Arthur. Others yet more
iudicially translate Bernard, into Filialis indoles, Childelike disposition
toward parents, as Bernher, Lord of many children. It has been most common in
the house of Brus of Connigton and Exton. Out of the which the Lord Harrington
of Exton, and Sir Robert Cotton of Connington are descended, as his most
excellent Majesty from Robert Brus, eldest brother to the first Bernard

BERTRAN, for Bertrand, Fair and pure; some think that the Spaniards have
with sweeter sound drawn hence their Fernando and Ferdinando.

BLASH, Gr. Budding forth, or Sprewting with increase.

BONIFACE, Lat. Well doer, or Good and sweet face: See Winefrid.

BONAVENTVRE, Lat. Good adventure, as Eutychius among the Greeks, Paustus and
Portunatus among the Latins,

BOTOLPH, Sax. contracted into Botall, Help ship, as Sailors in that age
were called Botescarles. In part it is answereable to the Greek names,
Nauplins, Naumachius. etc.

BRIAN, Fre. written in old books, Briant and Brient, Shrill voice as among
the Romans Voconins, [Nicotius]

BALTHAZAR, heb. Searcher of Treasure, or without treasure.

C
CALER, Heb. Hearty, Philo.

CALISTHENES, Gre. Beautiful and strong.

CARADOC, Bri. Dearly beloved. Quaere.

CEASAR, This came a late to be a Christian name among us. Spartianus says it
was first given for killing of an Elephant, which in the Moors language is
called Caesar, or that he was cut out of his mothers woombe, or borne with a
bush of hair, or gray eyes. Such variety of opinions is concerning a name,
which as he says, Cum ^ternitate mundi duratur^^^.

CHARLES, Germ. according to I. Du Tillet, from Carl, that is, strong, stowt,
courageous, and valiant, as Virius, Valerius, Valeus, etc. with the Romans,
Craterus, etc. with the Greeks; not from the Greek Charilans, which
signifies Publicola, the Claw-backe of the people. The Hungarians call a king
by a general name Carl [Aventinus.]. And Carl is only in the coins of
Carolus Magnus, Full. Scaliger makes Caellman Carlman answerable to the Greek
Andreas.

CHRISTOPHER, Gre. Christe-carrier, a name, as learned men think, devised, and
a picture thereunto mystically applied as a representation of the duties of a
true Christian, Gastius Brisacensis.
and was as their Nosce teipsum. Of such mystical Symboles of the Primitive
Christians; See Joseph Scaliger ad Freherum.

CHRYSOSTOM, gre: Golden-mouth.

CLEMENS, lat: Meek, Mild and Gentle.

CONSTANTIN, Lat: Fast, or Firm, for which in some parts of the realm we use
Custance.

CONRAD, germ: Able-counsell, or Advised valor, as Julius Scaliger will
Exercitat. Rad, Red, Rod.
256. But here is to be noted, that Rad, Red, and Rod signify counsel and
advise. [Luther, Alfricus, Killian] and differ only in Dialect, as Stan, Sten,
Stone. And this appears by that which the Northern men cried when they
killed Walter bishop of Duresme, Short Rad, good Rade, quell ye the Bishop,
that is, Short council, Good council, etc. [M. Paris.]

CORNELIUS, Lat: All draw it from Cornis an horn.

CVTHBERT, Sax. Not Cut-beard, as some fable, but famous, bright, and clear
skill or knowledge, according to the old verse; Quique gerit certum Cuthbert
de luce vocamen. No man doubts but Cuth signified knowledge, as vncuth
unknown; So Cuthwin skillful victor, Cuthred, skillful in counsel.

CYPRIAN, gre: from Cypria, a name of Venus, so named of the Isle of Cyprus,
where she was especially honored.

CADVVALLADER, Brit: A warrelike name, deduced from Cad, that is, Battle, as
it seems: but I refer it to the learned Britans.

CRESCENS, Lat: Increasing.

D
DANIEL, Hebr. Judgment of God.

DAVID, Hebr. Beloved.

DEMETRIUS, Ger. belonging to Ceres.

DENIS, Gr. for Dronisius, which some fetch from Dios nous, s. divine mind. It
is one of the names of the drunkard Bacehus, and derived by Nonnus in his
Dionysiacis, from Jupiter his lame leg, for Nises signifies, says he, lame in
the Syrian tongue: and we will imagine that Jupiter halted when Bacehus was
enseamed in his thigh But Saint Denis of France has most graced this name.

DRV, in Lat Drugo, or Dr^g^ Subtle, as Callidius in Latin if it come from the
Saxon or German; but if it be French, Lively and Lusty [Ni cetius]

DVNSTAN, Sax. One that writes S. Dunstans life, says the name is answerable
to Aaron^s. Mountain of fortitude. That Dun with the old English signified a
mountain or high hill, is apparent that they called mountain man Dunlettan,
and Down continues in the like sense with us. Stan.
Others suppose it to signify Most high, as among our Ancestors Leofstan
signified Most beleved, Betstan, Best of al, Fridstan, most peaceful, etc.
Stan being the most usual termination of the Superlative degree.

E
EADGAR, Ead.
Sax for Eadig^ar, Happy, or blessed honor, or power, for I find it interpreted
in an old history Faelix potestas The last verse of Ethelwardus history
seems to prove the same, and Eadigi (for the which Ead was used in
composition,) is the word in the c. of saint Math. in the English Saxon
testament, so often ^terated, for Blessed in the Beatitudes. That Ear, or Ar,
signify Honor, it appears in the Saxon laws, Ar.
and in Jonas Turson Danish Vocabulary, as Artic and Earlic, Ear.
Honorable. And from honor comes our honorable name of Earls, which came
hither with the Danes, as may be gathered out of Ethetwerdus.

EDMUND, Sax. for Eadmund, Happy, or blessed, peace: Our Lawyers yet do
acknowledge Muna for Peace. in their word Mundbzeck, for breach of Peace. Mund.
So Aelmund all peace, Kinmund, Peace to his kindred, Ethelmund noble peace; yet
I know that some translate Mund by Mouth, as Pharamund, True Mouth.

EADVLPH, Sax. Happy help.

EADVVIN, Happy victor.

EDWARD, in Sax. coins Eadward, happy keeper. The Christian humility of King
Edward the Confessor, brought such a credit to this name, that since that time
it has been most usual in all estates. Ward.
That Ward signifies a Keeper, is apparent by Wood ward. Mill-wara, etc.

EALDRED, Sax. All reverent fear.

EALRED, Sax All Council.

EBVLO, See Thell.

EGBERT, or rather Ecbert, Sax. Always bright, famous for ever, as the old
English called Everlasting life, Ec-life.

ELLIS, Heb. corruptly for Elias, Lord God.

ELMER, Sax. Contracted from Ethelmer, Noble and renowened: For Willeranus
translateth (...), by Celebris and Famosus. So Merwin renowned Victor, Mer.
Merwald renowned Governor. Yet I know B. Metr.
(...) turns Mier and Mere by Governor. Cap. vlt. Rer. Ger.

EMANVEL, Heb. God with us.

EMERY, See Amery.

ENION, Brit. From Aen^^s as some think, but the British Glossarie translateth
it Iustus.i. Just and upright.

ENGELBERT, Germ. Bright Angel.

ERASMUS, Gr. Amiable, or to be beloved.

ERCHENBALD, Ger. Powerful, bold, and speedy learner, or observer [
Dasypodius.]

ERNEST, Germ. in Casar Ariovistus, Severe [ A^entinus.] in the (...) sense we
still retain it.

ESAIAS, Heb. Reward of the Lord.

ETHELBERT, or Edlebert, Noble bright, or nobly renowned, Ethel. Adel.
for Ethel or Adel, signify in Germany, Noble. From whence happily Athalric
King of the Goths had his name. From hence it was that the heirs apparent of
the Crown of England, were surnamed Etheling.i. Noble borne, and Clito.i.
Inclitus; as in the declining estate of the Roman Empire, the heirs of
Emperors were called Nobilisssimi: hence also the Spaniards which descended
from the German Goths, may seem to have partly borrowed their Idal-guie, by
which word they signify their noblest gentlemen.

ETHELRED, Sax. Noble advise and Council.

ETHELARD, Sax. For which we now use Adelard, Noble disposition.

E^HEL^^AN, Sax. Noble jewel, (...), or, most noble.

ETHELVVARD, Sax. Now Ae^ward, Noble Keeper.

ETHELVVOLD, Would and Wald.
Sax. Noble Governor, for the old book of S. Augustines in Canterbury.
Wileranus and Luther do agree that Would and Wald does signify Praefectus a
Governor. So Bertwold and Brightwold Famous Governor, Kinwald, Governor of
his kindred.

ETHELVVOLPH, Sax. Noble helper.

EVERARD, ger. Well reported, as Gesnerus writes, like to Eudoxus of the
Greeks: but other with more probability deduce it from Eberard.i. excellent
or supreme towardnes. A name most usual in the ancient family of the Digbyes.

EVSEBIVS, gre. Pious and religious godly-man.

EVSTACE, gre. Seems to be drawn from the Greek (...), which signifies
Constant, as Constantinus* but the former ages turned it into Eustachius in
Latin.

EVAN, See Ivon.

EVTROPIVS. gr. Well mannered.

EZECHIAS, Heb. Strength of the Lord.

EZECHIEL, Heb. Seeing the Lord.

F
FABIAN, from Fabius, who had his name from beans, as Valerian from Valerius
Fabianus bishop of Rome, martyred under Decius, first gave reputation to this
name.

FOELIX, Lat: Happy, the same with Macarius among the Graecians.

FLORENCE, Lat: Flourishing, as Thales with the Greeks, Antonius with the
Latins.

FRANCIS, g^rm: from Franc, that is, Free, not servile, or bond. The same with
the Greek Eleutherius, and the Latin Liberius.

FREDERIC, germ: Rich peace, or as the Monk which made this allusion, Peaceable
reign.

Est ^^ibenda fides rationi nominis huius
Composit^ Frederic, (...) componentia cuius.
S^^t FRIDERIC, Frith, quod nisi pax, Ric quod nisi regnu^.
Sic per (...) Fredericus, quid nisi vel rex,
Pacificus vel regia pax? pax, pacificusque.
For (...), The English have commonly used Frery and Fery, which has been now
a long time a christian name in the ancient family of Tilney, and luckie to
their house, as they report.

FREMVND, Sax: Free-peace.

FOVLK, or FVLKE, germ: Some derive it from the German Vollg, Noble and
Gallant. But I from Folc, the English-Saxon word for people, as though it
were the same with Publius of the Romans, and only translated from Publius,
as, beloved of the people and commons.

FVLBERT, Sax: Full bright.

FVLCHER, Sax: Lord of people.

FERDINANDO, See Beriram. This name is so variable, that I can not resolve what
to say: for the Spaniards make it Hernand, and Hernan, the Italians Ferando,
and Ferante, the French Ferrant, which is now become a surname with us, and the
Latins Ferdinandus: unless we may think it is fetched by transposition from
Fred, and Rand, that is, Pure peace.

G
GA^RIEL, ^ebr. Man of God, or Strength of God.

GAMALIEL, hebr. Gods reward, as Deodatus, Theodorus, and Theodosiu^.

GARRET, for GERARD, and GERALD: See Everard, for from thence they are
de^^rted, if we believe Ges^erus. But rather Gerard may seem to signify, Ger.
Gar. Althamerus
All (...), as (...), All truth, Gerwin, All victorious, and the German nation
is so named, as All and fully men.

GAVVEN, a name devised by the author of king Arthurs fable, if it be not
Walwin: See Walwin.

GEORGE, gre: Husbandman, the same with Agricola, a name of special respect in
England, since the victorious King Edward the third chose Saint George for his
Patro^^c, and the English in all encounters, and batt^^les, used the name of
Saint George in their cries, as the French did, M^^ti^y S. Denis.

GEDEON, Heb: A Breaker, or Destroyer.

GERMAN, Lat: of the same stock, Tr^e, no counterfeit, or a natural brother.
S. German, who suppressed the Pelagian heresy in Britain, about the year
430. adva^^ced this name in this Isle.

GERVAS, Ger^^sius in Latin, for Gerfast, (as some Germans conjecture) that
is, All sure, firm, or fast. If ^^ be so, it is only C^^stans translated. But
it is the name of a (...) who suffered under Nero at Ma^lai^^, who if he were
a (...) was, it may signify Grave and Ancient, or Honorable, as wrested from
Gero^sius.

GEFFREY, Ger. from Gaufred, Joyful peace. Kilianus translateth Gaw. Frid.
Fred.
Joyful, as the French do Gay. That Fred and Frid, do signify peace, is
most certain, as Fred-stole. i. Pacis cathedra. See Frederic.

GILBERT germ. I supposed heretofore to signify Gold-like-bright, as Aurelius
or Aurelianus: or yellow bright, as Fl^vius with the Romans. For Geele is
yellow in old Saxon, and still in Dutch, as Gilvus according to some in L^tin.
But because it is written in Doomsday book* G^sl^bert. I judge it rather to
signify Bright or brave pledge; for in old Saxon, Gisle signifies a pledge,
and in the old English book of S. Augustines of Canterbury, sureties and
pledges for keeping the peace are called Fredgisles. So it is a well fitting
name for children which are the only sweet pledges and pawns of love between
man and wife, and accordingly called Dulcia pignora and Pignora amoris.

GILES, is miserably disjoynted from Aegidius, as Gillet from Aegidia, by the
French, as appears in lustories by the name of Duke of Rollos wife. It may
seem a Greek name, for that S. G^^es, the first that I have read so named,
was an Athenian, and so drawn from Aigidion, that is, Little Kid, as we know
Martia^us Capell. had his name in like sense; ^or some no^^sse probably fetch
Giles from Julius, as G^^ha^ from Iuliana.

GODFREY, ger. From Godfred, Gods-peace, or god^v; for the D^nes call godliness
Gudfreidhed. [Ionas Turson]

GODARD ger. Strength of God, or Gods-man as Gabriel according to Luther. But I
think it rather to signify Godly disposition or toward^es, for Ard and Art in
the German tongue, Ard.
do signify Towardnes, aptnes or disposition. As Mainard, Iunius. Lipfius.
Kilianus.
powerful disposition, Giffard, Liberal disposition, as Largus; Bernard,
Childlike disposition, Leonard Lionlike disposition, as Leoninus; Re^^ard, pure
disposition, as Syncerus.

GODVVIN, ger. for Win-God, converted, or Victorious in God.

GODRICH. ger. Rich, or powerful in God.

GREGORY gre. Watching, watchful, as Vigilantius, and V^gilius in Latin.

GRYFFITH, Brit. Some Britans interpret it, Strong-faithed.

GRVFFIN, Brit. If it be not the same with Griffith, some do fetch from
Rufinus, Red. as many other Welsh names are derived f^o^ colors.

GRIM^ALD, ger. But truly Grim^ald, power over anger, as Rodoala power of
council [ ^uther] a name most usual in the old family of Pa^^cefoote.

GVVISCHARD, See Wischard.

GVY, In Latin, Guide from the French Guide. A guide, leader, or director to
other.

H
HADRIAN, Lat. deduced from the city Hadria, Ael Spartia^^s
whence Hadrian the emperor had his orig^nall. (...) in libr. v^^ae suae.
Gesner brings it from the Greek (...), Gross or weal^hie.

HAMON, Heb. Faithful.

HANIBALL, A^ unick name. Gracious Lord.

HECTOR gr. Defendour, according to ^lat^.

HENRY, ger. in Latin Henricus. A name so famous since the year 920. when
Henry the first was Emperor, that there have been 7. Emperors, 8. Kings of
England, 4. Kings of France, as many of Spain of that name. If Einric be the
original, it signifies Ever rich or powerful. If it be deduced from Herric,
which the Germans use now, it is as much as Rich-Lord. I once supposed, not
without some probability, that it was contracted from Honoricus, of which
name, as Procopius mention^th, there was a Prince of the Vandales, in the time
of Honorius, and therefore likely to take name of him, as he did from Honor.
And lately I have found that Fr. Philelphus is of the same opinion. In
^pis^oli^.
Howsoever it has been an ominous good name in all respects of signification.

HENGEST, Sax. Horse man, the name of him which led the first Englishmen into
this Isle, somewhat answerable to the Greek names, Philippe, Speusiprus,
Ctesippus, his brother in like sort was called Horsa.

HARHOLD, Sax. Luther interprets it Governor or General of an Army, and so
would I if it were Harwold. But being written Harhold and Herold, I rather
turn it love of the Army. For Hold see Rheinhold. Hare. Here.
For Hare and Here that they signify both an Army, and a Lord, it is taken
for granted: Yet I suspect this Here, for a Lord to come from the Latin Herus.
See Ethelwold.

HERBERT, Germ. Famous Lord, bright Lord, or Glory of the Army.

HERVVIN, ger. Victorious Lord, or Victor in the Army.

HARMAN, or Hermon, ger. General of an Army, the same which Strato or
Polemarchus in Greek Caesar turned it into Arminius [Tscudus,] Hence the
German Dukes are called Hertogen, as Leaders of Armies.

HERCULES, gr. Glory or illumination of the air, as it pleases Macrobius,
who affirms it to be proper to the Sun, but has bin given to valiant men
for their glory.

HIEROME, gr. Holy name.

HILDEBERT, germ. Bright, or famous Lord. See Maud.

HILARY, Lat. Merry and pleasant.

HOVVEL, A British name, the original whereof some Britan may find. Goropius
turns it Sound or whole, as wisely as he says, Englishmen were called Angli,
because they were good Anglers. I rather would fetch Hoel from Haelius, that
is, Sunne-bright, as Coel from Caelius.

HV^H, Aventinus deriveth it from the German word Hougen, that is, slasher or
cutter. But whereas the name Hugh, was first in use among the French, and
O^frid in the year 900. used Hugh for Comfort, I judge this name to be
borrowed thence, and so it is correspondent to the Greek names Elpidius, and
Elpis.

HVMFREY, ger. for Humfred, House-peace, a lovely and happy name, if it could
turn home-warres between man and wife into peace. The Italians have made
Onuphrius of it in Latin.

HVBERT, Sax. Bright form, fair shape, or fair hope.

HORATIO, I know not the Etymology, unless you will derive from the Greek
(...), that is, well sighted.

J
IACO^, Heb. A tripper, or supplanter. Whose name because he had power with
God, that he might also prevail with men, was changed into Israel by God. See
Genes. ca. 32. Philo de nominibus mutatis.

JAMES, Wrested from Jacob, the same. Iago in Spanish, Jacques in French, which
some frenchified English, to their disgrace, have too much affected.

JASPER.

I^EL, See Ybel.

IOACHIM, Heb. Preparation of the Lord.

JEREMY, Heb: High of the Lord.

IOAB, Heb: Fatherhood.

JOHN, Heb: Gracious, yet though so unfortunate in Kings; for that John of
England well near, lost his Kingdom; and John of France was long captive in
England; and John Balioll was lifted out of his Kingdom of Scotland; that John
Steward when the Kingdom of Scotland came unto him, renouncing that name,
would be proclaimed King Robert. See Iuon.

JOB, Heb. Sighing or sorrowing.

JORDAN, Heb: The river of judgment.

IOSVAH, Heb: As Iesuiah Savior.

IOSC^LIN, A diminitive from I^st or Iustus, as Iustulus according to Islebius,
but molefied from Iostelin, in the old Netherland language, from whence it came
with Ioscelin of Lovan, younger son of Godfrey Duke of Brabant, Progenitour of
the honorable Percyes, if not the first, yet the most noble of that name in
this Realm. Nicotius makes it a diminitive from Iost Iudocus.

JOSEPH, Heb. Increasing [ Phil^] or increase of the Lord.

JOSIAS, Heb. Fire of the Lord.

IOSVAH, Heb: The Lord Savior.

INGEIBERT, See Engelbert.

INGRAM, Germ: Engelramus in Latin, deduced from Engell which signifies an
Angel, as Angelo is common in Italy, so Engelbert seems to signify bright
Angel.

ISAAC, Heb: Laughter, the same which Gelasius among the Greeks.

ISRAEL, Heb. Seeing the Lord, or prevailing in the Lord: See Jacob.

JULIUS, gr: Soft haired or mossie bearded, so does Iulus signify in Greek.
It was the name of Aeneas son, who was first called Ilus.

Ilus erat dum res stetit Ilia regno.
The old Englishmen in the North parts turned Julius into Ioly, and the
unlearned Scribes of that time may seem to have turned Iulianus, into Iolanus,
for that name does often occur in old evidences.

IVON, is the same with John, and used by the Welsh, and Sclav^nians for John;
and in this Realm about the Conquerours time John was rarely found, but Iuon
as I have observed.

JONATHAN, Heb. The same with Theodorus, and Theodosius, that is, Gods gift.

K
KENHELME, Sax. Defense of his kindred. H^^m, ^e^m.
Defense, [ Luther:] so (...) Happy defense, Bright-helme, Fair defense,
Sig-^elme, Victorious defense.

KENARD, Sax. Kind disposition, and affection his kindred.

L
LAMBERT, Sax: As some think, Faire-lamb Luther turns it Far famous.

LANCELOT seems a Spanish name, and may signify a Lance, as the military
men, use the word now for an horseman. Some think it to be no ancient name,
but forged by the writer of king Arthurs history for one of his doubtie
knights.

LAVRENCE, Lat: Flourishing like a Baie tree: the same that Daphnis in Greek.

LAZARUS, Hebr: Lords-help.

LEOFSTAN, Sax: most beloved.

LEOFVVIN, Sax: Winlove, or to be loved, as Agapetus, and Erasmus with the
Greeks, and Amandus with the Latins.

LEONARD, ger: Lion-like disposition, as Thymoleon with the Greeks, or
Popularis indoles, as it pleases Lips^^s, that is, People pleasing disposition.

LEWIS, Wrenched from L^dowike, which Tilius interprets, Refuge of the
people.

LEVVLIN, Brit. Lion-like, the same with Leominus, and Leontius.

LIONELL, Lat: Leonellus, that is, Little-lyon.

LVKE, Hebr: Rising or lifting up.

LEODEGAR, or LEDGER, ge^m: Gatherer, of people, Leod. Aimonius li 3. c. ^ M.
Wel^erus re^um Boi^carum page 118.
Lipsius in. Poliorceticis, or, Altogether popular.

LEODPOLD, ger: Defender of people, corruptly Leopold. In our ancient tongue
Leod signified people of one City, as Leodscip, was to them Respublica, The
northern Germans have yet Lewd in the same sense. So Luti, Li^di, Leuti, and
Leudi, as the Dialect varieth, signifies people. In which sense, the Normans in
the life of Carolus Magnus were called Nortleud. The names wherein Leod are
found, seem translated from those Greek names wherein you shall find D^m^s
and L^^s, as Demosthenes, that is, Strength of the people. Dimochares, that is,
Gracious to the people, Demophilus, that is, Lover of the people. Nicodemus,
that is, Conqueror of people. L^^medon, that is, Ruler of people. L^od^mas,
that is, Tamer of people, etc.

LIVIN, germ. The same with Amatus, that is, Beloved [ Kilianus]

M
MADOC, Brit: from Mad, that is, Good in the Welsh, as Caradoc, from C^^^, that
is, Beloved. The same with Agathias in Greek [ Dict: Walicum]

MALACHIAS, hebr: My messenger.

MANAS^^ hebr: not forgotten.

MARC^LLV^, lat: Plutarch out of P^ssido^ius do^^vet^ it from Mars, as martial
and warlike, other from Marculus, that is, an Hammer. The latter times turned
it to Martell and Mallet, which diverse took for a surname, because they
valiantly did hammer and beat down their adversaries, See Malmes. page 54.

MARMADVC, germ: Mermachtig as some conjecture, which in old Saxon signifies
More mighty, being sweetened in sound by process of time. A name usual in
the North, but most in former times in the noble families of Tweng, Lumley, and
Constable, and thought to be Val^ntinianus translated.

MARK In Hebrew signifies High, but in Latin, according to Varr^, it was a
name at the first given to them that were borne in the month of March; but
according to Festus Pompeius it signifies a Hammer or Mallet, given in hope
the person should be martial.

MATTHEW, hebr. Gods-gift.

MARTIN, Lat: from Martius, as Antoninus from Antonius. Saint Martin the
military Saint, bishop of Toures first made this name famous among the
Christians by his admirable piety.

MERCVRIE, Lat: Quasi medius currens inter deos and homines, as the Gramarians
Etymologize it, A mediate coursi^or between gods and men.

MEREDITH, Brit: in Latin Mereducius.

MERRIC, Brit: in Latin Meuricus, I know not whether it be corrupted from
Maurice.

MICHAEL, Hebr. Who is perfect? or, Who is like God? The French contract it
into Miel.

MAXIMILIAN, A new name, first devised by Frederic the third Emperor, who
doubting what name to give to his son and heir, composed this name of two
worthy Romans names, whom he most admired, Q. Fabius Max^^us, and Scipio
Aemili^^^, with hope, that his son would immitate their virtues. [ Hieronymus
Gebviterius de f^milia Austriaca.

MILES, Lat: Mile, which some fetch from Milium, a kind of grain called
Millet, as probably as Plime draws Fab^^, Le^tulus, C^eer^ from Faba, Lens,
Cicer, that is, beans, lentill, and chich pease. But whereas the French
contract Michael into Miel: some suppose our Miles to come from thence.

MOSES, hebr* Drawn up.

MORGAN, Brit* the same with Pelagius, that is, Se^man, if we may believe an
old fragment, and Mor signifies the Sea among the Welsh: So Marius, Marinus,
Marianus, and Pontius among the Latins have their name from Mare and Pontus
the Sea. Qu^re.

MAVGER, a name eftsoons used in the worshipful family of Vavasors.
Malgerius, in old histories. Quare.

MORICE, from the Latin M^^^itius, and that from Maurus, A Moore, as Syritius
from Syus a Sy^ian. The name not of any worth in his own signification, but in
respect of Saint Maurice a Commander in the Thebane Legion martyred for the
Christian profession under Maximianus.

N
NATHANIEL, Hebr: The gift of God, as Theod^sius, etc.

NEALE, Fre: Blackish, or swart, for it is abridged from Nigel, and so always
written, in Latin records Nigellus, consonant to Nigrinus, and Atrius of the
Latins, Melanius and Melauthus of the Graecians.

NICHOLAS, gre: Conqueror of the people,

NORMAN, drawn from the Norman nation, as Northerne-man, usual anciently in
the family of Darcy.

NOEL, Fre: the same with the Latin Natalis, given first in honor of the
feast of Christ's birth, to such as were then borne.

O
ODo, See Oaths.

OLIVER, A name fetched from the peacebringing Olive, as Daphnis, and Laurence,
from the triumphant Lar^rell.

OSBERN, Sax. House-childe, as Filius familias, [Luther.]

OSBERT, Sax. Domestical brightness, or light of the family.

OSMVND, Sax. House-peace.

OSVVOLD, Ger. House-ruler or Steward: for Would in old English and high Dutch,
is a Ruler: but for this the Normans brought in Ledespencer now Spencer. The
holy life of S. Oswald King of Northumberland, who was incessantly in prayer
has given much honor to this name. See Ethelwold.

OATHS, An old name in England, drawn from Otho, written by some Odo, and by
others, Eudo, in English-Saxon Odan, and after the original, Hood.
whereof when (...) could not find, I will not seek. Av^nt^^s makes it Hud,
that is, Keeper: but Petr^^ Bles^^sis Epist. 126. makes it to signify a
Faithful reconciler; for he writes, Od^ in Episc^pum Parisionsem consecratus
nomen s^is operibus interpret^^i non cessat, fidelis sequester inter deum and
(...). Ottwell and Ottey seem to be nursenames drawn from Oaths.

OWN, Lat. Audoenus, if it be the same with S. Owen of France. But the
Britans will have it from old King Oenus father in law to Hercules; others from
Eugenius, that is, Noble or well borne. Certain it is that the Country of
Ireland called Tir-Oen, is in Latin Records, Terra Eugenij; and the Irish
Priests know no Lat^ne for their Oen but Eugenius, as Rothericus for Rorke. And
Sir Owen Ogle in Latin Records, as I have been informed, was written Eugenius
Ogle.

ORIGINAL, May seem to be deducted from the Greek Origenos, that is, Borne
in good time.

P
PASCAL, Deduced from Pascha, the Passover.

PATRIK, Lat. From Patricius, Quasi Patram cians, A Peer or State, he which
could cite his father as a man of honor. A name given first to Senators
sons, but it grew to reputation when Constantin^ the Greek made a new state
of Patricij, who had place before the Praefectus Praet^ri^, or Lord great Master
of the house, if it may be so translated [ Zosim^s.]

PAVL, Heb. Wonderful or rest: But the learned Baronius drawing it from the
Latin, makes it Little, or Humble.

PAVLIN, From Paul, at Nigrinus from Niger.

PERCIVAL, Is thought at first to have bin a surname, and after (as many other)
a Christian n^me: fetched from P^rcheval, a place in Normandy. One by allusion
made this Percival, Per se valens.

PAIN, in Lat. Paganus, exempt from military service, a name now out of use,
but having an opposite signification to a millitarie man, as Scaliger observes
upon Ansdnius.

PETRE, For which as the French used Pierre: so our Ancestors used Pierce, a
name of high esteem among the Christians, since our Savior named Simon, the
son of Iona, Cephas, which is by interpretation a stone, Joan. 5. 42. But
fole-wisely have some Petres, called themselves Pierius.

PEREGRINE, Lat. Strange, or outlandish.

PHILEBERT, Ger. Much bright fame, or very bright and famous, as Polyphemus in
Greek [ Rhenanus.]

PHILIPPE, Gr. A lover of horses, Philip B^roald conceiting this his name, very
clerckly proves that Phillippe is an Apostolical name by Saint Philip the
Apostle, a royal name by King Philip King of Macedonia, and an imperial name
by Philip the first Christian Emperor.

POSTHVMVS, Lat. Borne after his fathers death.

Q
QVINTIN, Lat. From Quintus, the fifth borne, a man dignified by Saint Qu^tin
of France.

R
RALFE, Germ. Contracted from Radulph, which as Rodulph signifies
Help-councell, not differing much from the Greek Eubulus.

RAYMVND, Germ. Quiet peace, as Hesichius in Greek.

RANDAL, Sax. Corrupted from Ra^ulph, that is, Fair help.

RAPHAEL, Heb: The Physic of God.

REINHOLD, Sax. Sincere or pure love: for the Germans call their greatest and
goodliest river for pureness Rheine, Rein, and Ran.
and the old English used Hold for love, Holdlic, for lovely, as Vnhold,
without love: Hold.
Willeranus uses Hold for favor, which is answerable to love. I have also
observed Hold for Firm, and once for a General of an army.

RHESE, A British name, deduced as they think from Rh^sus the Thracian King,
who was (as Homer describes him by his Armor,) of a Giantlike stature. But I
dare not say the wordimplieth so much in signification: yet Rhesi, signifies a
Giant in the German tongue.

RICHARD, Sax. Powerful and rich disposition, as Richer, an ancient Christian
name, signified Powerful in the Army, or Rich Lord, and was but Herr^^
reversed, Aventinus turns it, Treasure of the kingdom. See Aubry.

ROBERT, Germ. Famous in Council, for it is written most anciently Rodbert.
Rod, Red, and Rod, Rad, Red, Rod.
do signify council, See Conrad and Albert. This name was given to Rollo,
first Duke of Normandy, an original Ancestour of the Kings of England, who was
called first by the Normans and French Rou, whereunto, some without ground
think that Bert was added: so that it should signify Rou, the renowned.
Others untruly turn it Red-^eard, as though it were al one with Aenobarbus of
the Latins, or Barbarossa of the Italians, John Bodin (or Pudding,) that I may
give him his true English name, makes it full wisely Red-bara; but I think no
Robert which knows what Bardus means, will like of it.

ROGER, Frodo^rdi. Romensis chronic.
Ger. Ruger, Quiet, the same with Tranquilles in Latin, Frodoard writes it
always Rottgarius, or Rodgarus, so it seems to signify All council, or
strong council.

ROLLAND, Ger. Whereas it was anciently written Rod, land, it may seem to
signify Council for the Land. And the first that I find so named, was
land-warde^ in France, under Carolus Magn^s, against the Piracies of the
Normans. The Italians use Orland for Rowland by Metathesis.

ROMAN, Lat. Strong, from the Greek (...) answerable to Valens.

RVBEN, Heb. The son of visions, or a quickseeing son. [ Philo.]

REINFRED, Sax. Pure peace.

S
SOLOMON, hebr: Peaceabi^.

SAMPSON, hebr: There the second (...).

SAMV^L, hebr: Place of God.

SAVLE, Hebr: Lent of the Lord, or ^^ some will, Fox.

S^^ASTIAN, gre: Honorable or (...), as Augustus or Augustinus among the Romans.

SIG^SMVND, germ: Victo^^^^ peace, (...) victory with peace; Sig, and Seg.
That Sig signifies Victory, A^frie, Das^podius, and Luther do all agree, yet
Hadr: (...) turns it Victorious or prevailing speech. So Sigward, now Seward,
victorious preserver, Sigh^m, victorious defense, Sighere, Conqueror of an
army, or victorious Lord: and Sigbert, now Sebright, victorious fame, or fame
by victory.

SILVESTER, Iat: Woodman.

SYLVANVS, Lat: Woodman, or rather Woodgod. See Walter.

SIMON, Hebr: Obedientlistening [ Phil^]

STEPHEN, gre: A Crown.

SVVITHIN, Sax: From the old English Swithea^n, that is, Very high, as Ce^^^s
or Ex^periu^ with the Romans. This name has bin taken up in honor of Saint
Swithin the holy Bishop of W^nchester about the y^^re 860. and called the
Weeping saint (...), for that about his feast Praesepe and Aselli, (...)
constellanons do (...) Cosmic^^y, and commonly cause rain.

T
THEOBALD, ^^mmonly Tibald, and Thibald, Gods power, as B: Rhenanius notes.
But certain it is, that in our Saxon Psalter Gentes is always translated by
Theod, Theod.
and in the English-Saxon old Annals, the English nation is often called
Engl^-th^^d. The same Lips^^^ in Poli^^ceticis affirms to be in the ancient
German Psalters. So that Theobald seems in his opinion to signify Powerful,
or bold over people. It was the common name in the family of the Gorges; and
of the Lord Verdons, of whom the Earls of Shr^wsburie, and Essex are descended.

THEODORE, gre: Gods gift, now corruptly by the Welsh-Britans called Tydder.

THEODOSIUS, gre: the same with Theodore.

THEODERIC, ger: contractly Deric and Torry with the French, Powerable, or Rich
in people according to Lipsius.

THEOPHILUS, gre: A lover of God.

THOMAS, hebr: Bottomless deep, or Twinne.

TIMOTHY, gre: from Timotheus, Honou^ing God.

TOBIAS, hebr: The Lord is good.

TRISTRAM, I know not whether the first of this name was christened by king
Arthurs fabl^r. If it be the same which the French ^all Trist^^, it comes
from sorrow: for P. Aemi^ius notes that the son of Saint Jews of France,
horn in the heavy sorrowful time of his fathers imprisonment under the
Saracens, was named Tristan in the same respect.

TVRSTAN, Sax: for Trustan, most true and trusty, as it seems.

V
VALENS, Lat: Puissant.

VALENTINE, Lat: The same.

VCHTRED, ger: High counsel, used in the old family of Raby. From whence the
Nevilles.

VINCENT, Lat: Victorious.

VITAL, Lat: He that may live a long life, like to Macrobius; or Lively, the
same that Zosimus in Greek.

VIVIAN, Lat: the same.

VRBANVS, Lat: Courteous, civil.

VRIAN, The same with George, as I have heard of some learned Danes. It has
been a common name in the family of Saint Pier of Chesshire, now extinguished.

W
WALTER, ger: from Waldher, for so it is most auntiently written, a Pilgrim
according to Reneccius; other make it a Wod-Lorde, or a Wood-man, aunswerable
to the name of Silvius, W^ld.
Silvanus, or Sylvester. The old English called a wood, Wald, and an hermit
living in the woods, a Waldbro^der. But if I may cast in my conceit, I take it
to be Herwald inverted, as Herric and Richer, Winbald and Baldwin. And so it
signifies Governor or General of an Arm^e, as Hegesistratus, See Herman and
Harold:

WALVVIN, Some have interpreted out of the German tongue, a Conqueror, as
Nicholaus and Nicodemus, Victor in Latin; but we now use Gawen insteede of
Walwyn, Architrenius makes it Walganus in Latin. But if Walwin was a Britan,
and king Arthurs nephew, as W: Malmesbury notes, where he speaks of his
giant-like bones found in Wales, I refer the signification to the Britans.

WARIN, Iovianus libr. 1. de Aspiratione draws it from ^^rro. But whereas it
is written in all Records. Guarinus: It may seem mollified from the Dutch
Gerwm, that is, All-victorious. See Gertrud.

WILLIAM, ge: For sweeter sound drawn from Wilhelm, which is interpreted by
Luther, Much Defense, or, Defense to many, as Wilwald, Ruling many. Wildred,
Much reverent fear, or Awful. Wilfred, Much peace. Willibert, Much
brightness, or Very bright. Willibrod Much increase. So the French that cannot
pronounce W have turned it into Philli, as Phillibert, for Willibert, Much
brightness. Many names wherein we have Will, seem translated from the Greek
names composed of (...), as Polydamas, Polybius, Polyxenus, etc. Helm yet
remains with us, Helm Will and Willi.
and Villi, Willi, and Bills yet with the Germans for Many. Other turn
William, a Willing Defender, and so it answers the Roman Titus, if it come
from Tuendo, as some will have it. The Italians that liked the name, but could
not pronounce the W if we may believe Gesner, turned it into Galeazo,
retaining the sense in part for Helm. But the Italians report, that Galeazo
the first Viscount of Mill^^^^ was so called, for that many Cocks crew lustily
at his birth. This name has been most common in England since king William
the Conqueror, insomuch that upon a festival day in the Court of king Henry
the second, when Sir William Saint-Iohn, and Sir William Fitz-Hamon especial
Officers had commanded that none but of the name of William should d^^e in the
great Chamber with them, they were accompanied with an hundred and twenty
Williams, all Knights, as Robert Moutensis records Anno 1173.

WILLFRED, Sax: Much peace.

WIMVND, Sax: Sacred peace, or holy peace, as Wibert, Holy and Bright; for Wi,
in Willeramus is translated Sacer.

WISCHARD, or GVI^CARD, Norm: Wily, and crafty shifter: [ W: Gemiticensis]
Falcandus the Italian interprets it Erro, that is, Wanderer. But in a Norman
name I rather believe the Norman Writer.

WOLSTAN, Sax: Comely, decent, as Decentius, [Dasipodius.]

WVLPHER, Sax: Helper, the Saxon name of a King of Middle- England, answering
to the Greek name Alexias, or rather Epicurus. The most famous of which name
was a hurtefull man, albeit he had a helpefull name.

Y
YBELL, Brit: Contracted from Eubulus, good Councellor.

YTHELL, Brit: Likewise contracted from Euthalius, very flourishing.

Z
ZACHARY, Hebr: The memory of the Lord.

Christian Names of Women.
Lest Women, the most kind sex, should conceive unkindness if they were
omitted, somewhat of necessity must be said of their names.
ABIGAEL, Heb. The fathers joy.

AGATHA, Gr. Good, Guth in old Saxon.

AGNES, Gr. Chaste, the French write Ignatia, but I know not why*

ALETHEIA, Gre. Verity, or ^uth.

ALICE, Ger. Abridged from Adesiz, Noble. See Ethelbert. But the French make it
defendresse, turning it into Alexia.

ANNA, Heb. Gracious, or merciful.

ARBELA, Heb. God has revenged, as some translations have it. [ Index
Bibliorum.]

ADELIN, Ge. Noble, or descending from nobles.

AVDRY, Sax. It seems to be the same with Etheldred* for the first foundresse
of Ely church is so called in Latin histories, but by the people in those
parts, S. Audry. See Etheldred.

AMIE, Fr. Beloved, in Latin Amata, the name of the ancient King, Latinus
wife. It is written in the like sense Amicia, in old Records.

ANCHORET, Gr. for Anachoreta, Solitary live^, which retired her self from
the world to serve God.

AVICE, Some observe that as it is written now Avice, so in former times
Hawisia, and in elder ages Helwisa: whereupon they think it detorted from
Hildevig, that is, Lady-defence, as Lewis is wrested from Lodovicus and Ludwig.

AVREOLA, Lat. Pretty-little golden dame.

ANSTASE, Gr. Anastasia, and that from Anastasis, as Anastasius, given in
remembrance of christ's glorious resurrection and ours in Christ.

B
BARBARA, Gr. Strange; of unknown language, but the name respected in honor
of S. Barbara, martyred for the true profession of Christian religion, under
the Tyranne Maximian.

BEATRICE, Lat. From Beatrix, Blessed.

BLANCH, Fr. White, or fair.

BRIGID, Contracted into Bride, an Irish name as it seems, for that the
ancient S. Brigid, was of that Nation: the other of Suetia was lately Canonized
about 1400. Quaere.

BERTHA, Ger. Bright and famous. See Albert.

BONA, Lat. Good.

BENEDICTA, Lat: Blessed.

BENIGNA, Lat: Mild and gentle.

C
CASSANDRA, Gr. Inflaming men with love.

CATHERIN, Gr: Pure, Chaste.

CHRISTIAN, A name from our Christian profession, which the Pagans most
tyrannically persecuted, hating as Tertullian writes in his Apologetico, a
harmless name in harmless people

CLARA, Lat: Bright, the same with Berta, and Claricia in latter times.

CICELY, From the Latin Caecilia, Grey-eyed.

D
DENIS, See before among the name of men.

DIANA, From the Greek Di^s, that is, Jove, as Iovina, or Jove's daughter, or
Gods daughter.

DIONYE, From Diana.

DIDO, A Phaenician name, signifying a manlike woman. [ Servius Hon^ratus.]

DOROTHYE, Gr: The gift of God, or given of God.

DORCAS, Gr: A Roe-bucke, Lu^retius lib. 4. notes, that by this name, the
Amorous Knights were wont to salute freckled, wartie, and wodden-faced wenches,
where he says,

Caes^a Palladi^n; naevosa and ^ignea Dorcas.
DOVZE, From the Latin Dulcia, that is, sweetewench.

DOVSABEL, Fr: Sweet and fair, somewhat like Glycerium.

DOVGLAS, of the Scottish surname, taken from the river Douglas, not long since
made a Christian name in England, as Jordan from the river of that name in the
holy Land, was made a Christian name for men.

E
ETH^LDRED, Noble advise: See Audrey.

ELA, See Alice.

ELEANOR, Deduced from Helena, Pitiful.

ELIZA, Heb. God saves.

ELIZABETH, Heb. Peace of the Lord, or Quiet rest of the Lord, the which
England has found verified in the most honored name of our late Sovereign.
Mantuan playing with it, makes it Eliza-bella.

EADE, Sax. Drawn from Eadith, in which there is signification of happiness. In
latter time it was written Auda, Ada, Ida, and by some Id^nea in Latin.

EMME, Some will have to be the same with Amie, in Latin Amata. Paulus Merula
says it signifies a good nurse, and so is the same with Eutrophime among the
Greeks, Rog: Hoveden page 246. notes that Emma daughter to Richard the first
Duke of Normandy, was called in Saxon Elfgiva, that is as it seems,
Helpegiver.

EMMET, A diminitive from Emme.

EVA, Heb. Giving life.

F
FAITH.

FORTUNE, The signification well known.

FREDISVVID, Sax. Very free, truly free.

FRANCIS, See Francis before.

FAELICE, Lat. Happy.

FORTITVD, Lat.

FLORENCE, Lat. Flourishing.

G
GERTRVD, gr: All true, and amiable; if German signifies All-man, as most
learned consent, and so Gerard may signify All-hardy. [Althamerus.]

GRACE, the signification is well known.

GRISHILD, Gray Lady, as Caesia, see Maud.

GLADVSE, Brit: from Claudia.

GOODITH, Sax: Contracted from Goodwife, as we now use Goody: by which name
king Henry the first was nicked in contempt, as William of Ma^nesbury notes.

H
HELENA, gre: Pitiful: A name much used in the honor of Helena mother to
Constantine the Great, and native of this Isle^ although one on ^he Author
ma^eth her a Bithini^n, but Baronius and our Historian^ will have her a
Britain.

HAVVIS, See Avice.

J
JANE, See Ioane; for 32. Eliz: Reg^^a ^t was agreed by the court of the Kings
Bench to be all one with Ioane.

IVDITH, Hebr. Praising, Confessing* our ancestors turned it into Iuet.

JOYCE, in Latin Ioco^a, M^rry, pleasant.

IAQVET, Fr: from Iacoba, See James.

IENET, a diminitive from Joan, as little and pretty Ihoan.

IOANE, See John. In latter years, some of the better and nicer sort
misliking Ioane, have mollified the name of Ioane into Jane, as it may seem,
for that Jane is never found in old Records: and as some will, never before
the time of king Henry the eight. Lately in like sort some learned John's and
Hanses beyond the sea, have new christened themselves by the name of Ianus.

ISABELL, The same with Elizabeth; if the Spaniardes do not mistake, which
always translate Elizabeth into Isabel; and the French into Isabeau.

IVLIAN, from Julius, Gilian commonly, yet our Lawyers libr. Assis. 26. pa. 7.
make them distinct names, I doubt not but upon some good ground.

K
KATHARIN, See Catharin.

KINBVRG, Sax: Strength and defense of her kindred; as Kinulf, help of her
kindred.

L
LETICE, Lat: Ioyfulnesse, mirth.

LYDIA, gre: Borne in that region of Asia.

LORA, Sax: Discipline, or Learning: but I suppose rather it is corrupted from
Laura, that is, Bay, and is agreeable to the Greek name Daphne.

LVCIA, Lat: Lightsome, Bright: A name given first to them that were borne when
daielight first appeared.

LVCRETIA, Lat: An honorable name in respect of the chaste Lady Lucretia; if
it as Lucretius do not come from Lucrum, gain, as a good huswife, I leave it
to Grammarians. Lucris, a wench in Plautus seemed to have her name from thence,
when as he says it was Nomen and omen quantivis pretij.

M
MAEEI. Some will have it to be a contraction of the Italians from Mabella,
that is, my fair daughter, or maid. But whereas it is written in Deeds,
Amabilia and Mabilia, I think it comes from Amabilis, that is, Loveable, or
lovely.

MAGDALEN, Hebr: Maiesticall.

MARGARET, gre: commonly Marget, pearl or precious.

MARGERIE, Some think to be the same with Margaret: others fetch it from
Marioria, I know not what flower.

MARIE, Hebr: Exalted. The name of the blessed Virgin, who was blessed among
women, because of the fruit of her womb.

MAVD for MATILD, ger: Matildis, Mathilidis, and Matilda in Latin, Noble or
honorable Lady of Maids. Alfric turns Heroina by Hild. So Hildebert was
heroically famous, Hildegard, heroical preserver: and Hilda was the name of a
religious Lady in the Primitive church of England.

MELICENT, Fr: Hony-sweete.

MERAVD: Used anciently in Cornwall, from the precious stone called the
Emeraud.

MVRIEL from the Greek Muron, Sweet perfume.

N
NEST, Used in Wales for Agnes, See Agnes.

NICHOLA, See Nicholas.

NICIA, gre: Victorious.

O
OLYMPIAS, gre: Heavenly.

ORABILIS, Lat: Easily entreated.

P
PENELOPE, gre: The name of the most patient, true, constant and chaste wife of
Ulysses, which was given to her, for that she carefully loved and fed those
birds with purpre necks called Penelopes.

PERNE^L, from Petronilla, Pretty-stone, as ^iere and Perkin strained out of
Petre. The first of this name was the daughter of Saint Petre.

PRISCA, Lat: Ancient.

PRISCILLA, A diminutive from Prisca.

PRVDENCE, Lat: whom the Greeks call Sophia, that is, Wisdom.

PHILIPPA, See Philip.

PHILADELPHIA, gre: A lover of her sisters, or brethren.

PHILLIS, gre: Lovely, as Amie in Latin.

POLYXENA, gre: She that will entertain many guests, and strangers.

R
RADEGVND, Sax: Favorable council. Hadrianus Iunius translateth Gund Favor,
Gund.
so Gunther Favorable Lord, Gunderic, Rich, or mighty in favor, etc.

RACHEL, Hebr: A sheep.

REBECCA, Hebr: Fat and full.

ROSAMVND, Rose of the world, or Rose of peace: See in the Epitaphs.

ROSE, Of that fair flower, as Susan in Hebrew.

S
SAEINA, As chaste and religious as a Sabine, who had their name from their
worshipping of God.

SANCHIA, Lat: from Sancta, that is, Holy.

SARAH, Hebr: Lady, Mistress, or Dame.

SCHOLASTICA, gre: Leisure from business.

SVSAN, Hebr: Lilly, or Rose.

SISLEY: See Caeselia.

SOPHRONIA, gre: Modest, and temperate.

SYBILL, gre: Gods council, other draw it from Hebrew, and will have it to
signify Divine Doctrine. [ Peucerus.]

SOPHIA, gre: Wisdom; a name peculiarly applied by the Primitive Christians
to our most blessed Savior, who is the wisdom of his Father, [Epistle to the
Hebrewes] by whom all things were made. And therefore some godly men do more
than dislike it as irreligious, that it should be communicated to any other.

T
TABITHA, Hebr: Roe-bucke.

TAMESIN, or THOMASIN: See Thomas.

THEODOSIA, gre: Gods-gift.

TACE, Be silent, a fit name to admonish that sex of silence.

TEMPERANCE, Lat. The signification known to all.

V
VENUS, Lat. Coming to all, as Cicero derived it a Veniendo, a fit name for a
good wench. But for shame it is turned of some to Venice. In Greek Venus was
called Aphrodite, not from the foame of the Sea, but as Enripides says, from
Aphrosune, that is, Maddefollie.

VRSVLA, Lat. A little Bear. A name heretofore of great reputation in honor
of Vrsula the Britan Virgin-Saint, martyred under Gods-scourge Attila.

W
VVALBVRG, Gracious; the same with Eucharia in Greek [ Luther] We have turned
it into Warburg.

WINEFRID, Sax. Win, or get peace. If it be a Britain word, as some think it
to be and written Guinfrid, it signifies Fair and Beautiful countenance.
Verily Winifred a native of this Isle, which preached the Gospel in Germany,
was called Boniface; for his good face, or good deeds, judge you.

OTher usual names of women I do not call to remembrance at this time, yet I
know many other have been in use in former ages among us, as Derv^rgild, Since,
Amphilas, etc: And also Nicholea, Laurentia, Richarda, Guilielma, Wilmetta,
drawn from the names of men, in which number we yet retain Philippa, Philip,
Francisca, Francis, Ioanna, Iana, etc.

These English-Saxon, German and other names may be thought as fair, and as
fit for men and women, as those most usual Praenomina among the Romans, (...)
for that he was nourished of the gods: Luciu^ for him that was borne in the
dawning of the day: Marcus, for him that was borne in March: Manius for him
that was borne in the morning: Cneus for him that had a wart: Servius for him
that was borne a slave, Quinctius for him that was fifth borne, etc. And our
women's names more gracious than their Rutilia, that is, Red-head: Caesilia,
that is, Grey-eyed, and Caia^ the most common name of all among them
(signifying ^oy:) for that Caia Caesilia the wife of King Tarquinius Priscus
was the best distasse-wife and spinster among them.

Neither do I think in this comparison of Names, that any will prove like
the Gentleman, who distasting our names, preferred King Arthurs age before
ours, for the gallant, brave, and stately names then used, as sir Orson, sir
Tor, sir Quadragan, sir Dinadan, sir Lancelot, etc. which came out of that
forge, out of the which the Spaniard forged the haughty and lofty name
Traquitantos for his Giant, which he so highly admired, when he had studied
many days and odd hours, before he could hammer out a name so conformable
to such a person as he in imagination then conceited.

Surnames.
SVrnames given for difference of ^amilies, and continued as hereditary in
families, were used in no nation anciently but among the Romans, (and that
after the league with the Sabines) which called the^ Nomina, and Nomina
Gentilitia, as the former were called Praenomina. But the French and we termed
them Surnames, not because they are names of the sire, or the father, but
because they are super-added to Christian names, as the Spaniards call them
Renombres, as Renames.

The Hebrews keeping memory of their Tribe, used in their Genealogies in
steed of Surnames, the name of their father with Ben, that is, Son, as
Melchi Ben-Addi, Addi Ben-Cosam, Cosam Ben-E^^adam, etc. So the Graecians,
(...), Icarus the son of Dedalus, Dedalus the son of Eupalmus, Eupalmus the
son of Metion.

The like was used amongst our ancestors the English, as C^oured Ceolwalding,
Ceolwald Cuthing, Cuth Cuthwining, that is, Ceonred son of Ceolwald, Ceolwald
son of Cuth, Cuthe son of Cuthwin, etc. And to this is observed by William of
Malmesbury, where he notes that the son of Eadgar was called Eadgaring,
Libr. primo.
and the son of Edmund, Edmunding.

The Britans in the same sense with Ap for Mab, as Ap Owen, Owen Ap Harry,
Harry Ap Rhese, as the Irish with their Mac, as Donald Mac Neale, Neale Mac
Con, Con Mac D^rm^tt, etc. And the old Normans with Fitz for Filz, as John
Fitz-Robert, Robert Fitz-Richard, Richard Fitz-Ralph, etc. Scaliger de c^nsis
linguae Lat:
The Arabians only as one learned notes, used their fathers names without
their own forename, as Aven-Pace, Aven Rois, Aven-Z^ar, that is, the son of
Pace, Rois and Zoar; As if Pace had a son at his circumcision named Haly, he
would be called Aven Pace, concealing Haly, but his son, howsoever he were
named, would be called Aven-Haly, etc. So Surnames passing from father to
son, and continuing to their issue, was not anciently in use among any people
in the world.

Yet to these single Names were adjoined oftentimes other names, as Cognomina,
or Sobriquetts, as the French call them, and By-names, or Nicke-names, as we
term them, if that word be indifferent to good and bad, which still did die
with the bearer, and never descended to posterity. That we may not exemplify
in other nations (which would afforde great plenty,) but in our own. King
Eadgar was called the Peaceable, king Ethelred the Unready, king Edmund for
his Valor, Iron-side; king Harold the Hare-foote, Eadric the Streona, that is,
the Getter or Streiner, Siward the Degera, that is, the Valiant, King William
the first, Bastard, king William the second Rouse, that is, the Red, king Henry
the first Beauclarke, that is, Fine Scholar: so in the house of Aniou which
obtained the Crown of England, Geffrey the first Earl of Aniou was surnamed
Grisogonel, that is, Grey-cloake, Fulco his son Nerra, his grandchild
Rechi^, for his extortion. Again, his grandchild Plantagenet, for that he
ware commonly a broome-stalke in his bonnet. His son Henry the second, king
of England, Fitz-Empresse, because his mother was Empress, his son king
Richard had for surname Corde-Lion, for his lion-like courage, as John was
called Sans-terre, that is, Without land: So that whereas these names were never
taken up by the son, I know not why any should think Plantagenet to be the
surname of the royal house of England, albeit in late years many have so
accounted it. Neither is it less strange, why so many should think Theodore
or Tydur, as they contract it, to be the surname of the Princes of this Realm
since king Henry the seventh. For albeit Owen ap Mer^dith Tydur, which married
Katharine the daughter of Charles the sixth king of France, was grandfather to
king Henry the seventh, yet that Tydur, or Theodore was but the Christian name
of Owens grandfather. For Owens father was Meredith ap Tydur, Ap Groan, Ap
Tydur, who all without Surnames iterated Christian names, after the old manner
of the Britains, and other nations heretofore noted, and so lineally deduced
his pedigree from Cadwallader king of the Britans, as was found by Commission
directed to Griffin ap Lewellin; Gitteu Owen, John King, and other learned men
both English and Welsh in the seventh year of the said king Henry the seventh.

Likewise in the line Royal of Scotland, Milcolme, or Malcolme was surnamed
Canmore, that is, Great head, and his brother, Donald, Ban, that is, White:
Alexander the first, the Proud, Malcolme the fourth, the Virgin, William his
brother the Lion. As amongst the Princes of Wales, Brochvail Schitrauc, that
is, Gaggtothed, Gurind, Barmbtruch, that is, Spade-bearded, Elidir Coscorvaur,
that is, Heliodor the Great housekeeper, and so in Ireland Murough Duff. that
is, Black: (...) Roo. that is, Red: Nemoliah, that is, full of wounds: Patric
Ban, that is, White: Gavelc^, that is, Fetters.

To seek therefore the ancient Surnames of the royal, and most ancient
families of Europe, is to seek that which never was. And, therefore greatly
are they deceived which think Valoys to have been the surname of the late
French kings, or Borbon of this present king, or Habsburg, or Austriac of the
Spanish king, or Steward of the late kings of Scotland, and now of BRITAIN, or
Oldenburg of the Danish; For (as all know that have but sipped of Histories)
Valoys was but the Apponage and Earldom of Charles younger son to Philip*
the second, from whom the late kings descended: so Borbon was the inheritance
of Robert a younger son to saint Jews, of whom this king is descended:
Habsburg and Austria were but the old possessions of the Emperors and Spanish
Kings progenitors. Steward was but the name of office to Walter, who was high
Steward of Scotland, the progenitour of Robert first King of Scots of that
family, and of the King our Sovereign. And Oldenburg was but the Erledome of
Christian the first Danish king of this family, elected about 1448. But yet
Pl^^tagenet, Steward, Valois, Borbon, Habsburg, etc. by prescription of time
have prevailed so far, as they are now accounted surnames. But for surnames
of Princes, well said the learned Marcus, (...) consti^^^^.
Salon de Pace. Reges cognomiue now vt^ntur, q^^ia vt Regum familiae, and
agnationes, and memoriae conserventur, (...) cognomina non sunt necessaria
prout in alijs inferioribus, quorum ipsa cognomina agnationum ac familiarum
memori^^ tutantur.

About the year of our Lord 1000. (that we may not minute out the time)
surnames began to be taken up in France, and in England about the time of the
Conquest, or else a very little before, under King Edward the Confessor, who
was all Frenchified. And to this time do the Scottishmen refer the
antiquity of their surnames, Vit^ Milcolumb^.
although Buchanan supposes that they were not in use in Scotland many years
after.

But in England certain it is, that as the better sort, even from the Conquest
by little and little took surnames, so they were not settled among the common
people fully, until about the time of King Edward the second: but still varied
according to the fathers name, as Richardson, if his father were Richard,
Hodgeson, if his father were Roger, or in some other respect, and from
thenceforth began to be established, (some say by statute,) in their
posterity.

This will seem strange to some Englishmen and Scotishmen, which like the
Arcadians think their surnames as ancient as the Moon, or at the least to
reach many an age beyond the Conquest. But they which think it most strange,
(I speak under correction,) I doubt they will hardly find any surname which
descended to posterity before that time: Neither have they seen (I fear) any
deed or donation before the Conquest, but subsigned with crosses and single
names, without surnames in this manner in England; Ego Eadredus confirmavi. Ego
Edmundus corroboravi. Ego Sigarius conclusi. Ego Olfstanus consolidavi, etc.
Likewise for Scotland, in an old book of Duresme in the Charter, whereby
Edgare son of King Malcolme, gave lands near Coldingham to that Church, in
the year 1097. the Scottish Noblemen witnesses thereunto, had no other
surnames than the Christian names of their fathers. For thus they signed S.
Signu^.
Gulfi filij M^niani, S Culverti filij Donecani, S Olavi filij Oghe, etc. As
for my self, I never hitherto found any hereditarie Surname before the
Conquest, neither any that I know: and yet both I my self and diverse whom I
know, have pored and pusled upon many an old Record and Evidence to satisfy
our selves herein: and for my part I will acknowledge my self greatly
indebted to them that will clear me this doubt.

But about the time of the Conquest, I observed the very primary beginnings as
it were of many surnames, which are thought very ancient, when as it may be
proved that their very lineall Progenitors bare other names within these six
hundred years. Mortimer and Warren are accounted names of great antiquity,
Rob. de Mon ^^ de sundat. Monast. (...).
yet the father of them (for they were brethren) who first bare those names,
was Walterus de sancto Martino. He that first took the name of Clifford from
his habitation, was the son of Richard, son of Puntz a noble Norman, Lib.
Dunelmen.
who had no other name. The first Lumley was son of an ancient English man
called Liwulph. The first Gifford, Ge^itieg^^.
from whom they of Buckingham, the Lords of Brimesfeld, and others descended,
was the son of a Norman called Osbert de Belebe^. The first Windsor descended
from Walter the son of Other Castellan of Windsor. The first who took the
name of Shirley was the son of Sewall, descended from Fulcher without any
other name. The first Nevill of them which are now, from Robert the son of
Maldred, a branch of an old English family who married Isabel the daughter
and heir of the Nevills which came out of Normandy. The first Level came from
(...) de Perce^^^ll. The first Montacute was the son of Drogo ^^venis, as it
is in Record. The first Stanley of them now Earls of Derby was likewise son
to Ad^vn de Aldeleigh, or Audley, as it is in the old Pedigree in the Eagle
tower of Latham. And to omit others, the first that took the name of de Burgo,
or Burks in Ireland was the son of an English man called William Fitz
Aldelni^; Record. regul Hibe^^iae.
as the first of the Girald^^es also in that Country was the son of an
Englishman called Girald of Windsor. In many more could I exemplify, which
shortly after the conquest, took these surnames, when either their fathers had
none at all, or else most different, whatsoever some of their posterity do
overweene of the antiquity of their names, as though in the continual
mutabilitie of the world, conversions of States, and fatal periods of
families, five hundred years were not sufficient antiquity for a family or
name, whenas but very few have reached thereunto.

In the autentical Record of the Exchequer called Domesday, Surnames are first
found, brought in then by the Normans, who not long before first took them:
but most noted with de, such a place as Godefridus de Mannevilla; A. de Gray.
Walterus de Vernon; Robert de Oily, now Doyley; Albericus de Vere; Radulphus de
Pomerey; Goscelinus de Dive. Robertus de Busl^^ Guilielmus de Moiun; R. de
Brai^se; Rogerus de Lacy; Gislebertus de Venables, or with Filius, as
Ranulphus, Asculphi, Guilielmis; filius Osbernie, Richardus filius Gisleberti;
or else with the name of their office, as Eudo Depifer: Guil: Camerarius,
Hervaeus Legatus, Gislebertus Cocus, Radulphus Venator: but very many with
their Christian names only, as Olaff, Nigellus, Eustachius, Baldricus, with
single names are noted last in every shire, as men of least account, and as
all, or most vnderholders specified in that Book. But shortly after, as the
Romans of better sort had three names according to that of Iuvenal, Tanquam
habeas trianomina, and that of Ausonius, Vide Politian^^ (...) libr. 3.
Tria nomina nobiliorum. So it seemed a disgrace for a Gentleman to have but
one single name, a^ the meaner sort and bastards had. For the daughter and
(...) of Fitz-(...) a great Lord, as Robert of Gloucester in the Library of
the industrious Antiquary master John Stowe writes, when king Henry the first
would have married her to his base son Robert, she first refusing answered;

It were to me a great shame,
To have a Lord without'n his two name.
whereupon the king his father gave him the name of Fitz-Roy, who after was
earl of Gloucester, and the only Worthy of his age.

To reduce surnames to a Method, is matter for a Ramist, who should happly
find it to be a Typocosmie: I will plainly set down from whence the most
have been deduced, as far as I can conceive, hoping to incur no offense
herein with any person, when I protest in all sincerity, that I purpose
nothing less than to wrong any man in any respect, or to make the least
aspersion upon any whosoever. The end of this scribbling labor tending only to
maintain the honor of our names against some Italianated, who admiring strange
names, do disdainefully contemn their own country names: which I doubt not
but I shall effect with the learned and judicious, to whom I submit all that I
shall write.

The most surnames in number, the most ancient, and of best account, have been
local, deduced from places in Normandy and the countries confining, being
either the patrimonaill possessions or native places of such as served the
Conqueror, or came in after out of Normandy; as Aulbeny, or Mortimer, Warren,
Albigny, Percy, Gournay, Devreux, Tankervil, Saint-Lo, Argenton, Marmion, Saint
Maure, Bracy, Maigny, Nevill, Ferrers, Harecourt, Baskervile, Mortaigne, Tracy,
Beufoe, Valoyns, Cayly, Lucy, Montfort, Bonvile, Bovil, Auranch, etc. Neither
is there any village in Normandy, that gave not denomination to some family in
England; in which number are all names, having the French De, Du, Des, De-la
prefixed, and beginning or ending with Font, Fant, Beau, Saint Mont, Bois, Aux,
Eux, Vall, Vaux, Cort, Court, Fort, Champ, Vil, which is corruptly turned in
some into ^eld, as in Ba^kerfeld, Somerfeld, Dangerfeld, Trubl^feld, Gr^^feld,
(...), for B^^kervil, Somervil, Dangervil, Turbervil, Gree^^vil, (...) vil; and
in others into Well, as Boswell for B^ssevil, (...) for Freschevil. Mart.
Cro^ar^^.
As that I may note in passage, the (...) Nobility take their names from
places adding Ski or Ki thereunto.

Out of places in Britain came the families of Saint Aubin, Mor^ey, D^nant,
lately called Denham, D^le, Bal^^, Conquest, Valtort, Lascells, Bluet, etc.

Out of other parts of France from places of the same names came, Courtney,
Corby, B^ll^in, Crevecuer, Sai^t-Leger, Bohun, Saint George, Saint Andrew,
Chaworth, Saint Qu^^ti^, Gorges, Villiers, Cromar, Paris, Reims, Cressy,
Fines, (...), Coignac, Lions, Chalons, Chaloner, Estampes, or Stampes, and many
more.

Out of the Netherlands came the names of Levayne, Gaunt, Ipres, Bruges,
Malines, Odingsells, Tournay, Doway, Buers, Beke; and in latter ages
Dabridgecourt, Robsert, M^^y, Grand^son, etc.

From places in England and Scotland infinite likewise. For every town,
village, or hamlet has made names to families, as Darbyshire, Lancaster, ( do
not look that I should as the Nomenclators in old time marshall every name
according to his place) Essex, Murray, Clifford, Stafford, Barkley, Leigh, Lea,
Hasting, Hamleton, Gordon, Lumley. Douglas, Booths, Clinton, Heydon, Cleydon,
Hicham, Henningham, Popham, Ratcliffe, Markham, Seaton, Framingham, Pagrave,
Cotton, Cari^, Hume, Poinings, Goring, Prideaux, Windsor, Hardes, Stanhope,
Sydenham, Needehaus, Dimoc, Wi^nington, Allington, D^cre, Thaxton, Whitney,
Willoughby, Apseley, Crew, Kniveton, Wentworth, Fa^shaw, Woderington, Manwood,
Fetherston, Penrudock, Tremaine, Trevoire, Killigrew, Roscarroc, Carminow, and
most families in Cornwall, of whom I have heard this Rythme: By Tree, Ros,
Pol, Lan, Caer and Pen,
You may know the most Cornish men.
Which signify a town, a health, a poole, a church, a castle, or city, and
a foreland, or promontory.

In like sort many names among the Romans were taken from places, as
Tarquinius, Gabinus, Volscius, Vatinius, Norbanus, from Tarquini, Gabij,
Volic^, Vatia, Norba, towns in Italy, Sigo^ius and other before him have
observed; and likewise Amerinus, Carrinas, Macenas as Varre notes. So
Ruric^us, Fonteius, Fundanus, Agellius, etc. Generally, all these following are
local names, and all which have their beginning or termination in them, the
significations whereof, for the most part, are commonly known. To the rest
now unknown, I will adioyne somewhat briefly out of A^fricus and others,
reserving a more ample explication to his proper place.

AKER, drawn from the Latin Ager. AY, vide Eye. BAC, Fre: A Ferry. BACH, the
same which Be a river, [ Munster.] BANCKE. BARN. BARROVV, vide Burrow. BATHE.
BEACHE. BEAM, a Trunck, or stock of a tree. BEAK or Bec, (as Bach) used in
the North. BEGIN, a building. Alfricus. BENT, A place where rushes grow.
BEARNE, A wood. Beda lib. 4. cap. 2. BERTON or Barton. BERRY, a Court. Others
make it a hill from the Dutch word Berg, some take it to be the same with
Burrow, and only varied in dialect. BEORH, Adceruus, as Stane Beorh, Lapidum
accruus [Glossarium vetus.] BOLD, from the Dutch Bol, a Fe^ne. BYE, From the
Hebrew Beth, an habitation. [ Alfricus] BOIS, Fr: A wood. BORROVGH, from the
Latin Burgu^, a fortified place or defense, pronounced in the South parts
Bury, in other Burgh and Brough, and often Berry and Barrow. Alfricus. BORNE,
or Burn, a river. BOTTLE, An house in the North parts. Alfricus turns it
Aedes, and Aedilis, Bottleward. BOOTH. BRIDGE. BROME-FIELD. BRVNN, A fountain
from Burn. BRIEVVR, Fr: An Heath. BROVGH, See Burrowgh. BVRY, See Burrow.
BVRGH, See Burrowgh. BVRNE, Vide Borne. BVSH. BVTS. CAER, But a fortefied
place, or City. CAMPH. CAPELL, the same with Chapel. CAR, A low waterie place
where Alders do grow, or a poole. CARNES, the same with stones. CASTLE.
CASTER, Chester, Cester, Chaster, the same varied in Dialect, a City or walled
place derived from Castrum. CAVE. CHVRCH. CASTER, See Chester. CHANNEL.
CHAPEL. CHASE. CLEY, or Clay. COVE, A small creek. CLIFF, and Cleve. CLOVGH,
A deep descent between hills. COB, A forced harborow for ships, as the Cob of
Linne in Dorsetshire. COPE, The top of a high hill. COMER, a word in use both
in France and England for a valley between two high hills. Nicotius. COTE.
COVRTE. COVERT, Fr: A shadowed place or shade. CRAGGE. CREEK. CROFT, Translated
by Abbo Floriacencis in Praedium a Farm. Our Ancestors would say prover.
bially of a very poor man, that He had ne Toft, ne Croft. CROSS. DALE. DELLE,
A dike. DENE, A small valley contrary to Down. DEEPES. DERNE, See Terne. DICH,
or Dish. DIKE. DOCK. DON, corruptly sometime for Ton or Town. DON, and Down,
all one, varied in pronuntiation, a high hill or Mont. [ Alfricus.] END. EY, a
watery place as the Germans use now Aw, Ortelius. Alfricus translateth Amnis
into Ea or Eye. FARM. FIELD. FELL, Sax: Cragges, barren and stony hills. FENN.
FLEET, a small stream. FOLD. FORD. FOREST. FOOT. FONT, or Funt, a spring.
FRITH, A plain amiddest woods: but in Scotland a straight between two lands,
from the Latin Fretum. GARNET, a great granary. GARDEN. GARTH, A yard. GATE.
GILL, A small water. GLIN, Welsh, A dale. GORST, Bushes. GRANGE, Fr: A barn (
Nicotius.) GRAVE, A dich or trench, or rather a wood, for in that sense I have
read Grava in old deeds. GRAVET, The same with ^rove. GREEN. GROVE. HALE, or
Haule, from the Latin Aula, in some names turned into All. HAM, Mansio [Beda]
which we call now Home, or house often abridged into Am. HATCH* HAVVGH, or
Ho^gh, A green plot in a valley, as they use it in the North. HAY, Fr: A
hedge. HEAD, and Heveth, a Foreland* Promo^tory, or high place. HEADGE. HEATH.
HERST, See Hurst. HERN^, Sax: A house Beda, who translateth Whatbern, Candida
casa. HITH, A Haven. [ Alfricus. HIDE, So much land as one plough can plow in a
year. HILL, Often in composition changed into Hull and Ell. HOLME, Plain
grassie ground upon water sides, or in the water. [ Buchanan] HOLT, A wood,
Nemus, [Alfricus. HOLD, A tenement, or the same with Holl* HOPE. The side of a^
hill, but in the North, a low ground amidst the tops of hills. HOW, or H^^, An
high place. HORN. See Hurn. HOUSE. HVLL, See Hill, HVNT. HVRNE, or Horn, A
corner Alfricu^. HVRST, or Herst, A wood ING, A meadow or low ground,
Ignulphus, and the Danes still keep it. ISLE, or I Will. KAY, A landing place, a
wharfe, the old Glossary Kaij, Cancelli. KNAP. KNOLL, The top of a hill. KYRK,
A Church, from the Greek Kuriace, that is, the Lords house. LADE, Passage of
waters, Aquaeductus in the old glossarie is translated Water-lada. LAKE. LAND.
LANE. LATH, A Barn among them of Lincolnshire. LAVND, A plain among trees.
LAW, A hill in use among the hither Scottishmen. LE, Brit: A place. LEY, and
Leigh, the same, or a pasture. L'LYS, Brit: A place. LOD, See Lad. LOCK, A
place where rivers are unstopped, or a lake, as the word is used in the North
parts. LOPPE, Salebra, An uneven place which cannot be passed without leaping.
LOVND, the same with Laund. MARCH, A limit, or confines. MARKET. MEAD^. MEDOVV.
MERE. MESNILL, or Menill, in Norman French, A mansion house. MERSH. MILL. MINE.
MINSTER, contracted from Monastery, in the north, Mouster, in the South Mister.
MORE. MOSSR. MOTE. MOUTH, Where a river falls into the sea, or into another
water. NESS, A promontory, for that it runs into the sea as a nose. NORE,
The same with North. ORCHARD OVER, and contractly, Ore. PACE PARK PEN, brit:
the top of an hill, or mountain PITTS PLACE PLAT, Fr: Plain ground PLAIN POLE
POND PORT POVVND PRAT, Fre: A meddow PRINDLE, The same with Crossed QVARRY REYKE
RIDGE, and RIG RING, An enclosure ROAD ROW, Fre: A street Raw in the north.
ROS, brit: A heath RY, Fr: from Rive, a shore, coast, or bancke RILL, A small
brook RITHY, brit: from Rith a forde SALE, Fre: a Hall, an entrance [ Iunius]
SAND, or SANDS SCARR, a craggy stony hill SET, Habitation or seat, Ortelius
SCHELL, a spring: See Skell SHAVV, Many trees near together, or shadow of
trees. SHALLOVVE SHEAL, A cottage, or shelter, the word is usual in the wastes
of Northumberland and Cumberland. SHORE SHOT, or SHVT, A Keep [ Munster]
SKELL, a Well in the old northern English SLADE SLOVVE, A mi^y foul place
SMETH, a smoothe plain field, a word usual in Norffolke and Suffolk SPIR,
PYRAMID: A shaft to the old English, or spire steeple. SPRING STAKE STRAND, A
bank of a river STRET STROAD, STROVD: as some do think, the same with
Strand. STABLE, as STALE. STALE and STAPLE, the same: A storehouse. STAPLE
STED, from the Dutch Stadt, a standing place, a station. STEEPLE STE^, A bank
[ Alfricus] STYLE, STOCK STOKE, the same with Stow STONE, or STANE STOW, a
place. Alfricus STRAITH, a vale along a river SIDE TEMPLE TERN, or DERN, a
standing poole, a word usual in the North. THORN THORP, from the Dutch: Dorpe,
a village THVRN, a tower: Ortelius THVVAIT, a word only used in the north, in
addition of Towns: some take it for a pasture from the Dutch Hwoit TOFT, a
parcel of ground where there has been a house: but for Toft and Croft,
enquire of Lawyers. TOR, a high place or tower TREY, british from Tref a Town
TRENCH TREE Vale VAVLX, the same in french UP UNDER WALD, a Wood; the same
with Wild. WALL WARE, or WEAR WARK, or WERK, a work or building WARREN WAST, A
desert or solitary place. WASH WATH, a foorde; a word usual in Yorkshire
WATER WAY WICK, and WHICH, i^ short, the curving or rech of a River, or the Sea:
Iunius, Rhenanus: But our Alfric, and so Tillius makes it a Castle, or little
Port. WHICH, i^ Long, a salt spring. WELL WILD WOULD, hills without wood WOOD
WORTH, auntiently Worth and Woorthid: Alfricus makes it Praedium, a possession
or Farm: Abbo translateth it a court or place: Ki^^anus a Fort and an Isle.
YARD YATE, or YATES
At a word, all which in English had Of set before them, which in Cheshire and
the North was contracted into A, as Thomas a Dutton, John a Standish, Adam a
Kirkby, and all which in La^ine old ^vi^ences have had De praefixed, as all
heretofore sp^cified, were borrowed from places. As those which had Le set
before them, were not ^^call, but given in other respects. As I^ Marshall, Le
L^^ner, Le Despencer, Le Scroope. Le Sav^^e, Le ^av^sour. Le Strange. Le
Norice, Le Fscriva^, Le Bl^^d, Le Molineux, Le Bret. As they also which were
never noted with De or Le, in which number I have observed, Gifford B^sset,
Arundel, Howard, Talb^^, Bellot, Bigot, Bagot, Ta^leboise, Tale^^ch, Gern^^,
L^vell, Lovet, Fortescu, Pancevolt, Tirell, Biund or Blunt, Bisset, Bacun, etc.
And these distinctions of local names with De, and other with Le, or simply,
were religiously observed in Records until about the time of king Edward the
fourth.

Neither was there, as I said before, or is there any town, village, hamlet,
or place in England, but has made names to families, and so many names are
local which do not seem so, because the places are unknown to most men, and
all known to no one man: as who would imagine Whitegift, Powlet, Bacon,
Creping, Alshop, Tirwhit, Antrobus, Heather, Hartshorne, and many such like to
be local names, and yet most certainly they are.

Many also are so changed by corruption of speech, and altered, so strangely to
significative words by the common sort, who desire to make all to be
significative, as they seem nothing less than local names; as Wormwood,
Inkepen, Tiptow, Moon, Manners, Drinkewater, Cuckold, Goddolphin, Harlestone,
Waits, Smalbacke, Loscotte, Devil. Neithe^mill, Bellows, Filpot, Wod^l, etc.
for Ormund, Ingepen, Tiptoft, Mahune, Manors, Derwentwater, Cuckswold,
Godolchan, Hudleston. Th^^ts, Smalbach, ^^scot, Davill, or D'Eivill, Nettervil,
Bell-house, Phillipot, Wahul, etc.

Neither is it to be omitted, that many local names had At prefixed before
them in old Evidences, as At More, A^ Stow, At Ho, At Bower, At Wood, At
^owne, etc. which A^, as it has been removed from some, so has it been
conjoined to other, as Atwood, Atslowe, Atho, Atwell, Atmor. As S also is
joined to most now, as Manors, Kn^les, Crofts, Yates, Gates, Thorns, Groves,
Hills, Combs, Holmes, Stokes, etc.

Rivers also have imposed names to some men, as they have to Towns situated on
them; as that old Ba^on ^ur-Teys, that is, on the river Teys running between
Yorkshire and the Bishoppricke of Duresine, Derwent-water, I de^, Troutbecke,
Hartgill, Esgill, Wampull, Swale, Stoure, Temes, Trent, Tamar, Grant, Tine,
Croc, Lone, Lun, Calder, etc. as some at Rome were called Tiberij, An^eni,
Aufidij, etc, because they were borne near the rivers Tibris, Anten, Ausidus,
as Julius Paris notes.

Diverse also had names from trees near their habitations, as Oak, Aspe, Box,
Alder, El^^e, Elder, Beach, Coigniers, that is, Q^ince, Zouch, that is, the
trunk of a tree, Cursy and Curson, the stock of a Vine, Pine, Plumme, Chesney
or Cheyney, that is, Oak, Dauney, that is, Alder, Foulgiers, that is, Fearne,
Vine, Ash, Hawthorne, Turres, Bush, Hasle, Coularay, that is, Has^ewood,
Bucke, that is, `Beech, Willowes, Thorn, Broom, Block, etc. which in former
time had at praefixed, as at Beech, at Furs, at Ash, at ^lme. And here is
to be noted, that diverse of this sort have been strangely contracted, as at
Ash into Tash, at Oak into Took, at Abbey into Tabbey; at the End into Thend;
As in Saints names, Saint Olye into Tolye, Saint Ebb into Saint Tabbe, Saint
Osyth into Saint Tows.

Many strangers also coming hither, and residing here, were named of their
Countries, as Picard, Scot, Lombard, Flemming, French, Bigod, that is,
superstitious, or Norman. (For so the Frenchmen called the Normans, because at
every other word they would swear,) By God; Bretton, Britain, Bret, Burgoin,
Germain, Westphaling, Dane, Daneis, Man, Gascoigne, Welsh, Walsh, Walleys,
Irish, Cornish, Cornwallis, Fasterling, Maigne, Champneis, Poitevin, Angevin.
Loring, that is, de Lotharingia, etc. And these had commonly Le praefixed in
Records and Writings, as Le Fle^^ing, Le Picard, Le Bret, etc. viz. the
Flemming, the Picard.

In respect of situation to other near places rise these usual names, Norrey,
North* South, East, Weast* and likewise Northcote, Southcote, Estcote,
Westcote; which also had originally At set before them. Yea the names of
Kitchen, Hall, Sellar, Parler, Church, Lodge etc. may seem to have been
borrowed from the places of birth, or most frequent abode; as among the
Greeks, Anato^^us. i. East Zephirius, i. Weast, etc.

Whereas therefore these local denominations of families are of no great
antiquity, I can not yet see why men should think that their Ancestors gave
names to places, when the places bare those very names, before any men did
their Surnames. Yea the very terminations of the names are such as are only
proper and appliable to places, and not to persons in their significations, if
any will mark the Local ^erminations which I lately specified. Who would
suppose Hill, Wood, Field, Ford, Ditch, Pole, Pond, Town, or Ton, and such like
terminations to be convenient for men to bear in their n^mes, unless they
could also dream Hills, Woods, Fields, Fordes, Ponds, Pounds etc. to have
been m^tamorphosed into men by some supernatural transformation.

And I doubt not but they will confess that Towns stand longer then families
continue.

It may also be prooved that many places which now have Lords denominated of
them, had Lords and owners of other Surnames, and families not many hundred
years since. But a sufficient proof it is of anti^nt descent where the
inhabitant had his Surname of the place where he inhabiteth, as Compton of
Compton, Terringham of Terringham, Egerton of Egerton, Portington of
Portington, Skeffington of Skeffington, Beeston of Beeston, etc.

I know nevertheless, that albeit most Towns have borrowed their names from
their situation, and other respects; yet some with apt terminations have their
names from men, as Edwarston, Alfredston, Vbsford, Malmesbury, corruptly for
Maidu^p^sbury. But these names were from fore-names or Christian names, and not
from Surnames. For Ingulphus plainly shows, that W^burton* and Leffrington
were so named, page 491.
because two knights, Wiburt, and Leofric there sometimes inhabited. But if any
should affirm that the Gentlemen named Le^frington, Wiburton, Lancaster, or
Leicester, Bossevill, or Shordich, gave the names to the places so named, I
would humbly, without prejudice, crave respite for a further day before I
believed them. And to say as I think, verily when they shall better advise
themselves, and mark well the terminations of these, and such like Local
names, they will not press me ov^r eagrely herein.

Notwithstanding, certain it is that Surnames of families have been adjoined
to the names of places for distinction, or to notify the owner, as Melton
Mowbray, Higham Ferrers, Minster-L^vel, Stansted Rivers, Drayton-Basset,
Drayton-Beauchamp, etc. for that they were the possessions of Mowbray, Ferrers,
Level, etc. Neither do I deny, but some among us in former time, as well as
now, dreaming of immortality of their names, have named their houses after
their own names, as Camois-Court, Hamons, Bretts, Bailies, Theobaldes, whenas
now they have possessors of other names. And the old verse is, and always
will be verified of them, which a right worshipful friend of mine not long
since writ upon his new house: Nunc mea, mox ^uius, sed postea nescio cuius.

Neither must all, having their names from places, suppose that their
Ancestors were either Lords, or possessors of them; but may assure
themselves, that they originally came from them, or were borne at them. But the
Germans and Polonians do clear this error by placing In before the Local
names, if they are possessours of the place, or Of, if they only were borne
at them, as Martinus Cromerus notes. The like also seems to be in use in the
Marches of Scotland, for there you shall have Trotter of Folshaw, and Trotter
in Fogo, Haitly of Haitly, and H^^ly in Haitly.

Whereas since the time of king Henry the third the Princes children took
names from their natall places, as Edward of Carnarvon, Thomas of Brotherton,
Ioann^ of Acres, ^^dmund of Woodstocke, John of Gaunt, who named his children
by Cath. Swinford, Beaufort of the place where they were born^ u^ nothing to our
purpose, to make further mention of the^ whenas they never desc^nded to their
posterity.

After this local names, the most names in number have been derived from
Occupations, or Professions, as Tailor, Potter, Smith, Sadler, Arblaster, that
is, Balistarius, Archer, Taverner, Chauser, i. Hosier, Weaver, Pointer,
Painter, Walker, ^d est, Fuller in old English, Baker, Baxter, Boulengem, all
one in signification, Collier, Carpenter, Ioyner, Salter, Armorer, Spicer,
Grocer, Monger, id est, Chapman, Brower. Brasier, Webster, Wh^eler, Wright,
Cartwright, Shipwright, Banister, id est, Balneator, Forbisher, Farrar, Goff,
id est, Smyth in Welsh. And most which end in Er in our tongue, as among the
Latins, Artifice^s names have arius, as lu^tcariarius, vestiarius, calcearius,
etc. or eo, or ^o for their termi^ations, as Linteo, Pellio Phrygio. Neither
was there any trade, craft, art, profession, occupation never so mean, but
had a name among us commonly ending in Er, and men accordingly denominated, but
some ^re worn out of use, and therefore the significatio^^ unknown, and other
have been mollified ridiculously by the bearers, lest they should seem
vilified by them. And yet the like names were among the noblest Romans, as
Figul^s, Pictor, Fabritius, Scribon^^s, Sal^^tor, Rusticus, Agricola, Carbo,
^unarius, etc. And who can deny but they so named may be Gentlemen, if Virtue
which is the soul of Gentry shall ennoble them, and Virtus (as one says)
Nulli pralusa est omnibus patet. Albeit Doctor Turner in a Book against
Stephan Cardiner says the contrary, exemplifying of their own names. At
which time wise was the man that told my Lord Bishop that his name was not
Gardener, as the English pronounce it, but Gardener with the French accent,
and therefore a Gentleman.

Hitherto may be referred many that end in Man, as, Tubman, Carreman, Coachman,
F^rriman, Clothman, Chapman, Spelman, id est, Learned man, Palf^iman, Horsman,
etc.

Many have been assumed from offices, as, Chambers, Chamberlain, Cook,
Spenser, that is, Steward, Marshall, Latimer, that is, Interpretour, Staller,
that is, Constable or Standard Bearer, Reeve, Wo^dreeve, Sherif^, Sergeant,
Parker, Foster, that is, Nourisher, Forraster, contractly Forster, Hunter,
Kempe, that is, Soldier in old English; (for Alfricus translateth T^ro,
Yong-Kempe) Faulconer, Fowler, Page, Butler, Clarke, Proctor, Abbot, Friar,
Monk, Priest, Bishop, Spigurnell, that is, a sealer of Writs, which office was
hereditarie for a time to the Bohunes of Midherst. Deacon, Deane, Bailive,
Franklin, Leach, Warder, i. Keeper; and from th^nce Woodward, Millward,
Steward, Dooreward, tha^^, Porter, Beareward, Heyward, Hereward, that is,
Conserver of the army, Bond, that is, Paterfamilias, as it is in the book of
old terms belonging sometimes to Saint Augustine in Canterbury, and we
retain it in the compound Husb^nd. In which book also Horden is interpreted a
Steward.

Names also have been taken of honors, dignities, or estate, as King, Duke,
Prince, Lord, Baron, Knight, Valuasor, or Vavasor, Squire, Castellan, partly
for that their ancestors were such, served such, acted such parts, or were
Kings of the Bean, Christmas Lords, etc. And the like names we read among the
Greeks and Romans, as Basi^us, Archias, Archel^^, Regulus, Servius, Flaminius,
Caesarius, Augustulus: who notwithstanding were neither Kings, Priests, Dukes,
or Caesar's. Others from the qualities of the mind, as Good, Through good,
Goodman, Goodchild, Wise, Hardy, Plain, Light, Meek, Bold, Best, Proud,
Sharp, Still, Sweet, Speed, Quick, Sure, etc. As those old Saxon names,
Shire, that is, Clear, Dyre, that is, Welbeloved, Blithe, Chauces.
that is, merry, Drury, that is, jewel. Also these French names, Galliard,
that is, Frolic, Musard, that is, Delayer, Bland, that is, Fairespoken,
Coigne, that is, Valiant, Baud, that is, Pleasant, Barrat; Kus, Rush, that is,
Subtle, and so is Prat in the old book of Petreborrough, Huttin, that is,
Mutiner. As among the Grecians, Agathias, A^dragathius, Sophocles, Eubulus,
Eumenius; Thraseas. Among the Romans, Prudentius, Lepidus, Cato, `Pius, Valeus,
Constans, Asper, Tacitus, Dulcitius, etc. And accordingly names were borrowed,
as Plutarch says, from the nature of the man, Plutarch. in Matio and Sylla.
from his actions, from some mark, form or deformity of his body, as
Macrinus, that is, Long, Torquatus, that is, Chained, Sulla that is, White and
Red: And in like sort, Mnemon, that is, Mindful, Grypus, that is, Hawkesnose,
Callinicus, that is, Fair Victor. From the habit^des of body, and the
perfections or imperfections thereof, many names have been imposed, as Strong,
Ar^^strong, Long, Low, Short, Broad, Big, Little, Speed, Fair, Goodbody,
Free body, ^^ll, that is, Fair, Bell^t, that is, Bel^ulus, proper in French:
Helder, that is, Thin, Heile, that is, Healthful, Fairfax, that is,
Faire-lockes, in ancient English Whitlocks. As those British names still in use
amongst us, Vachan, that is, Little, Mool, that is, Bald, Gam, that is,
Crooked, Fane, that is, S^lender, Grim, that is, Strong, Krich, that is,
Curlepate, Grig, or Krig, that is, Hoarse. No more to be disliked than this
Greek and Roman names, Ner^, that is, Strong, as also Romulu^; Longus,
Longinus, Minut^^s, Macros, Megasthenes, Calistus, Callisthenes, Paulus,
Cincinnatus, Crispus, Caluus, Terentius, that is, tender according to Varr^.
Gracchus, that is, Thin, Bassus, that is, Fat, Salus^^us, that is,
Healthful, and Cocles one-eye. As Pap^rius Masonius reports that Philippus
Augustus King of France, was surnamed Borgne for his blinking with one eye.

Others in respect of age have received names, as Young, Old, Baby, Child
Stripling, as with the Romau^* Senec^^, Priscus, Iuvenalis, Iunius, Virginius,
etc.

Some from the time wherein they were borne, as Winter, Summer, Christmas, Day,
May, Sunday, Holiday, Monday, Pascall, Noel* Penticost: as with the ancient
Romans, Ianuarius, Martius, Manius, Lucius, F^stus, and Vergilius borne at the
rising of the Vergiliae, or seven stars, as Pontanus learnedly writes
against them which write his name Virgilius.

Some from that which they commonly carried, Claud. ^a^cher.
as Palmer, that is, Pilgrim, for that they carried Palm when they returned
from Jerusalem. Long-sword, Broad-speare, Fortescu, that is, Strong-shield,
and in some such respect, Breake-speare, Shake-Speare, Shotbolt, Wagstaffe,
Bagot, in the old Norman, the same with Scipio, that is, a stay or walking
staff with the Latins, which became a surname, for that Cornelius served as a
stay to his Blind father. Likewise Biliman, Hookeman, Talevas, of a shield so
called, whereof William son of Robert de Belisme Earl of Shrewsbury had his
name.

Some from parts of the body, as Head, Redhead, Whitehead, Leg, Foot,
Pollard, Arm, Hand, Lips, Heart, as Corculum, Capito, Pedo, Labeo, Naso, among
the Romans.

Garments have also occasioned names, as Hos, Hosatus, Hat, Cap, Frocke,
Petycote, Gaicoat: as with the Romans, Caligula, Caracalla, Fimbria, and Hugh
Capet, from whom this last house of France descended, was so called, for that
he used when he was young to snatch off his fellows caps, if we believe Du
Tillet.

Not a few from colors of their complexions, garments, or otherwise have
gotten names, as White, Black, Brown, Red, Green, and those Norman names:
Rous, that is, Red, Blunt or Blund, that is, Flaxen hair, and from these
Russell and Blundell, Gris, that is, Gray, Pigot, that is, Speckled, Blanch and
Blanc, that is, White, with those British or Welsh names, who whereas they were
wont to depaint themselves with sundry colors, have also borrowed many names
from the said colors, as Gogh, that is, Red, Gwin, that is, White, Dee, that
is, Black, L^uid or ^lud, that is, R^sset: Names to be no more disliked than
Albinus, Candidus, Flavius, Fulvius, Fusc^^, (...), C^cc^^us, Rutilius, Rufus,
Niger, Nigrinus, among the Roman^ and Pyrrhus, Chlorus, Le^cagus, Chryses,
(...), etc. among the Graecians.

Some from flowers and fruits, as Lilly, Li^, Rose, Pear, Nut, F^lbert, Peach,
Pescod, Vetch, as fair names, as Lentu^us, Pis^, Fabius, among the Romans.
Others from beasts, as Lamb, Lion, Boar, Bear, Bucke, Hind, Hound, Fox,
Wolph, Hare, Hog, Roc, Broc, Badger, etc. Neither are these and such like to be
disliked, whenas among the noblest Romans, Leo, Vrsicinus, Catulus, Lupus,
Leporius, Aper, Apronius, Canimus, Cast^r, etc. and Cyrus, that is, Dog, with
the Persians were very usual.

From fishes likewise, as Playce, Salmon, Trowt, Cub, Gurnard, Herring, Pike,
Pikerill, Breme, Burt, Whiting, Crab, Sole, Mullet, Base, etc. nothing
inferior to the Roman names, Murena, Phocas, Orata, that is, Gilihed, etc. for
that happily they loved those fishes more than other.

Many have been derived from birds, as Corbet, that is, Raven, Arondell, that
is, Swallow: the Gentlemen of which name, do bear those birds in their
Coat-armours, Bisset,.i. Dove, Lark, Tisson, Chaffinch, Nitingall, Iay-Cocke,
Peacocke, Sparrow, Swanne, Crow, Woodcocke, Eagle, Alecocke, Wilcocke,
Handecocke, Hulet or Howlet, Wren, Gosling, Parret, Wild goose, Finch, Kite,
etc. As good names as these, Corvinus, Aquilius, Milvius, Gallus, Picus, Falco,
Livia,.i. Stockedove, etc Therefore I cannot but mervaile why one should so
sadly mervaile such names of beasts and birds to be in use in Congo in Africa,
when they are and have been common in other Nations, as well as they were
among the Troglodites inhabiting near Congo in former times.

Of Christian names as they have been without change, many more have been
made, as Francis, Herbert, Guy, Giles, Leonard, Michael, Lewis, Lambert, Owen,
H^wel, Ioscelin, Humfry, Gilbert, Griffith, Griffin, Constantine, James,
Thomas, (...) Godfrey, G^rvas, Randall, Alexander, Charles, Daniel, etc.

Beside these and such like, many surnames are derived from those Christian
names which were in use about the time of the Conquest, and are found in the
Record called Doomesday book, and else where; as Achard, Alan, Alpheg, Aldelme,
Aucher, A^sel^, A^selm, A^sger, Askaeth, Hascuith, Alberic, Bagot, Baldric,
Bardolph, Belchard, Berenger, Berner, Biso, Brient, Ca^^t, Knout or C^ute,
Carbonell, Chettell, Colf, Corbet Corven, Crouch, Degory, Dod, Done, Donet, as
it seems from Donatus, Dru, Duncan, Durand, Eadid, Edolph, Egenulph, El^er,
Eud^ or Fde, Fabian, Fulcher, Gamelin, Gernegan, Girth, Goodwin, Godwin,
Goodrich, Goodlucke, Grime, Grimbald, Guncelin, Guthlake, Haco or Hake, Hamon,
Hamelin, Harding, Hasting, Brand, a stirring up, Iunius.
Herebrand, and many ending in Brand, Herman, Hervye Herward, Howard, Heward,
Hubald, Hubert, Huldrich, Iollan, Ioll, contractly from Julian, Iuo, or Iue,
Kettell, Leofwin, Lewin, Levin, Liming, Macy, Maino, Maynerd, Meiler, Murdac,
Nele, Norman, Oddo or Hode, Oger, Olave, Orso or Vrso, Orme, Osborne, Other,
Pain, Picotte, Pipard, Pontz, Pu^tz, Reyner, Remy, Rolph, Rotroc, Saer,
Searle, Semar, Sewal, Sanchet, Siwald, Siward, Staverd, Star, calf, Swain,
Sperwicke, Talbot, Toly, Tovy, Turgod, Turrold, Turstan, Turchill, Vctred, or
Oughtred, Vde, Vivian, Voner, Wade, Walarand, Wistan, Winoc, Walklin, Warner,
Winebald, Wigod, Wigan, Wi^^arc, Woodnot, etc.

And not only these from the Saxons and Normans, but also many Britan or Welsh
Christian names, as well in ancient time, as lately has been taken up for
Surnames, when they came into England, as Chun, Blethin, Kenham, from Cynan or
Conanus, Gittin-Mervin, Belly, Sitsil, or Cesil, Caradoc, Madoc, Rhud, Ithell,
Meric, Meredith, Edern, Bedow, from the English Bid,.i. A devout prayer,
beside the Welsh Christian names usual and known to all As in like manner
many names were made from the Praenomina among the Romans, as Spurilius,
Statilius, Titius, from Spurius, Statius, Titus, And as Qu^itilian says,
Agnom^^ and cognomina (...).

By contracting or rather corrupting of Christian names, we have Terry from
Theodorie, Tillius.
Frerry from Frederic, Collin and Cole from Nicholas, Tebald from Theobald,
Iessop, from Joseph, Aubry, from Alberic, Amery, from Almeric, Garret, from
Gerrard, Nele, from Nigel, Elis, from Elias, Bets, from Beatus, as Bennet, from
Benedict, etc.

By addition of S to Christian names, many have been taken, as Williams,
Rogers, Peter's, Peirs, Davies, Harris, Roberts, Simonds, Guyes, Stevens,
Richards, Hughes, Jones, etc.

From Nicknames or Nursenames, came these (pardon me if it offend any, for it
is but my conjecture,) Bill for William, Clem for Clement, Not for Nathaniel,
Mab for Abraham, Kit for Christopher, Mund for Edmund, Hall for Harry, At and
Atty for Arthur, Cut for Cuthberd, Mill for Miles, Baul and Bald for Baldwin,
Ran for Randal, Crips for Crispin, Turk for Turktetill, Sam for Sampson or
Samuel, Pipe for Pipard, Gib for Gilbert. Dan for Daniel, Greg for Gregory,
Bat for Barthobnewe, Law for Lawrence, (...) for Timothy, Roll for Rolland, Ieff
for Ieffrey, Dun for Duncan or Dunstan, Duke for Marmaduke, Day for David,
God. For Godfrey or Godard, for otherwise I cannot imagine how that most holy
name unfit for a man, and not to be tolerated, should be appropriate to any
man: and many such like which you may learn of Nurses.

By adding of S to these Nicknames or Nursenames, in all probability we have
Robins, Nicks, Nicolls, Tho^s, Dickes, Hickes, Wills, Sims, Sams, Iecks, Iucks,
Collins, Ienks, Munds, Hodges, Hobs, Dobi, Saunders from Alexander, Gibs from
Gilbert, Cuts from Cuthberd, Bats from Barthol^^we Wats from Walter, Philips
from Philip, Hai^es from Anulphus, as some will, for Ainulphesbury in
Cambridgshire is contracted to Aiusbury, and such like.

Many likewise have been made by adjoining Ki^^ and Ius to those nursenames,
making them in Ki^s as it were diminutives, and those in Ius, as Patronymica.
For so Alfric Archbishop of Canterbury, and the most ancient Saxon Grammarian
of our Nation, notes that names taken from Progenitors, do end in Ins; so
Dickins, that is, little Dick, Perkins from Peir or Peter, little Petre; so
Tomkins, Wilkins, Hutchins, Huggins, Higgins, Hitchins; from Hughe, Lambkins,
Hopkins, Hobkins; from Hob, Dobbin^, Robbins, Atkins; from Arthur, Gibbins,
Simkins, Hodgekins, Hoskins, Watkins, Ienkins, Iennings, Tipkins; from Tibald,
Daukins; from Davy, Rawlins from Ra^ul, that is, Rafe, and Hankin for Rand^ll
in Cheshire. In this manner did the Romans very names, as Constans,
Constantius, Constantinus; Iustus, Iustulus, Justinius, Iustinianus: Aurelius,
Aureolus, Aurelianus, Augustus, Augustinus, Augustinianus, Augustulus, etc,

Beside these, there are also other diminitive names after the French Analogy
in Et or Ot, as Willet; from Will, Haket; from Hake, Bartlet; from Bartholmew,
Millet from Miles, Huet from Hughe, Allet from Allan, Collet from Cole, Guyet
from Guy, Eliot from Elias and Beckvet, that is, Little Sharp nose.

But many more by addition of Son, to the Christian or Nickname of the father,
as Williamson, Richardson, Dickson, Harryson, Gibson; for Gilbertson, Simson,
Simondson, Stevenson, Dauson; for Davison, Morison, Lawson, id est, Lawrenson,
Robinson, Cutbertson, Nicholson, Tomson, Willson, Leweson, Iobson, Waterson,
Watson, Peerson, and Pierson, Peterson, Ha^son from Hankin, Wilkinson, Danison
for Daniel, Benison, and Benson from Bennet, Denison, Patison; from Patrick,
Ienkinson, Matison; from Matthew, Colson; from Cole, or Nicholl, Rogerson,
Herdson; from Herdingson, Hodgskinson, Hugheson, Hulson; from Huldric, Hodson
from Hod or Odd^, Nelson from Neale or Nigell, Davidson, Saunderson, Johnson,
Raulson; from Raoul or Ralf. So the ancient Romans used Publipor, Marcip^r,
Lucipor; for Publij puer, Marci puer, Lucij puer, according to Varro: As
afterward in the Capitolin Tables, they were wont to note both father and
grandfather for proof of their gentry in abbreviations, as A. Sempronius,
Aulifilius Lucij Nep^s, that is, (...) Se^pronius, son of Aulus, grandchild
or nephew of Lucius, C. Martius, L. F. C. N. etc. Neither is it true which some
say, Omnia nomina in Son sunt boralis generis, whenas it was usual in every
part of the Realm.

Some also have had names from their mothers, as Fitz-parnell, Fitz-Isabell,
Fitz-Mary, Fitz-Emme, Mandle^s, Susans, Mawds, Grace, Emson, etc. As Vespasian
the Emperor, from Vespasia Polla his mother, and Popaea Sabina the Empress,
from her grandmother.

In the same sense it continues yet in them which descended from the Normans,
Fitz-Hughe, Fitz-william, Fitz-Herbert, Fitz-Geffrey, Fitz-Simon, Fitz-Alian,
Fitz-Owen, Fitz-Randoll, being names taken from their Progenitors, as among
the Irish, Mac-william, Mac-Cone, Mac-Dermot, Mac-Mahon, Mac-Donell,
Mac-Arti,.i. the son of Arthur.

So among the Welsh-Britans likewise, Ap-Robert, Ap-Evans, Ab-Yihel, Ap-Hary,
Ap-Hughe, Ap-Rice, Ap-Richard, Ap-Howell, Ap-Enion, Ap-Owen, Ap-Henry, Ap-Rhud,
which be contracted into Probert, Bevans, Bythell, Parry, Pughe, Price,
Prichard, Powell, Benion, B^wen, Peurbye, Prud, etc.

So in the borders of England and Scotland, Gawis I^k, for John the son of
Gawin, Richies Edward, for Edward the son of Richard, Iony Riches Will, for
William the son of John, son of Richard. The like I have heard to be in use
among the meaner sort in Cornwall.

Dainty was the devise of my Host at Grantham, which would wisely make a
difference of degrees in persons, by the terminations of names in this word
Son, as between Robertson, Robinson, Robson, Hobson; Richardson, Dickson, and
Dickinson; Willson, Williamson, and Wilkinson, Iackson, Johnson, Ienkinson, as
though the one were more worshipful than the other by his degrees of comparison.

The names of aliance, have also continued in some for surnames, as where they
of one family being of the same Christian name, were for distinction called R.
Le Friar, Le Fitz, Le Cosm, that is, Brother, the Son, etc. all which passed
in time into Surnames.

Many names also given in merriment for By-names or Nicke-names have continued
to posterity: as Malduit for ill schollership, or ill taught, Mallieure
commonly Mallyvery, i. Malus Leporarins, for ill hunting the hare, Pater noster
for devout praying. The Frenchman, which craftily, and cleanely conveyed
himself and his prisoner, T: Crioll a great Lord in Rent, about the time of
King Edward the second out of France, and had therefore Swinfield given him by
Crioll, as I have read, for his fine conveyance, was then called Fineux, and
left that name to his posterity. So Baldwin le-Pettour, who had his name, and
held his land in Suffolk, Per saltum, sufflum and pettum, sive bumbulum, for
dancing, pout-puffing, and doing that before the King of England in
Christmasse holy days, which the word Pet signifies in French. Inquire if
you understand it not of Cloacinas chaplains, or such as are well read in A^ax.

Upon such like occasions names were given among the Romans, Macrobius.
as Tremellius was called Scropha or Sow, because when he had hid his
neighbors Sow under a padde, and commanded his wife to lie down thereon; he
swear when the owner came in to seek the Sow, that he had no Sow but the
great Sow that lay there, poynting to the padde, and the Sow his wife. So one
Cornelius was surnamed Asina, for that when he was to put in assurance for
payment of certain sums in a purchase, he brought his Ass laden with
money, and made ready payment. So Augustus named his dwarf Sarmentum,
Suetonius.
i. sprigge, and Tiberius called one Tricongius, for carowsing three gallons of
wine. So Servilius was called Ala, for carrying his dagger under his arme-pit,
when he killed Spurius. So Pertinax the Emperor being stubbernly resolute in
his youth to be a wood monger as his father was, Capitolinus.
when he vvoulde have made him a Scholar, was named Pertinax. So the father
of Valens the Emperor, who was Camp-maister here in Britain, for his fast
holding a rope in his youth, which (...) soldiers could not pluck from him,
was called (...). About which time also Paul a Spaniard, a common Informer in
Britain was named Catena, i. the Chain, for that he chained and fettered
many good men here, with linking together false surmises, to their utter
undoing in the time of Constantinus, who also that I may remember it in
passage, named his attendant scholar by no unfitting name, Musonius. But what
names the beastly monster, rather than Emperor Commmodus gave to his
attendants, I dare not mention, lest I should be immodestly offensive to chaste
ears, and modest minds. But hitherto with modesty may be referred this of the
family of Gephyri, i. Bridges in Greece, who took their name from a Bridge;
for when their mother was delivered of nine children at a birth, and in a
foolish fear had privily sent seven of them to be drowned at a bridge, the
father suddenly coming to the bridge, saved them, and thereupon gave them
that name. Of these, and the like, we may say, Propi^ra sunt honori, quam
ignominiae. Infinite are the occasions which in like manner have made names to
persons, I will only report one or two French examples, that thereby you may
imagine of others in other places and former ages.

In the first broils of France, certain companies ranging themselves into
troops, one Captain took new names to himself and his company from the
furniture of an horse. Among these new named gallants, you might have heard of,
Monsieur Saddle, (to english them) Mounsieur Bridle, Le Croupier, Le Girte,
Horsh^^^, Bitte, Trappiers, Hoof, Stirrope, Curb, Musrole, Frontstall, etc.
Most of the which had their pasport, as my Author notes, by Seign^^^ de la
Halter. Another Captain there also gave names to his, according to the places
where he found the^, as Hodge, Hieway, River, Pond, Vine, Stable, Street,
Corner, Gall^ws, Tavern, Tree, etc. And I have heard of a consort in England,
who when they had served at Sea, took names from the equipage of a ship,
when they would serve themselves at land, as, (...), Ball^st, Planke,
F^re-decke, Deck, Loopehole, Pumpe, Rudder, Gable, Anchor, Misen sail,
Capson, Maste, Bolt.. So that is true which Isidore says, Names are not
always given according to Nature, but some after our own will and pleasure,
as we name our lands and servants according to our own liking. And the
Dutchmans saying may be verified, which when he heard of, Englishmen called God
and Devil, said, that the English borrowed names from all things whatsoever,
good or bad.

It might be here questioned, whether these surnames were assumed and taken at
the first by the persons themselves, or imposed and given unto them by others.
It may as well seem that the local names of persons were partly taken up by
themselves, if they were owners of the place, as given by the people, who have
the sovereignty of words and names, as they did in the Nicke-names before
Surnames were in use. For who would have named himself, Peaceable, Unready,
Without-land, Beauclerke, Strongbow, Gagtooth, Blanch-mayne, Bossue, i.
Crook-backe, but the concurrent voice of the people, as the women neighbors
gave the name to Obed in the book of Ruth; and likewise in Surnames. In these
pretty names, as I may term them, from flowers, fishes, birds, habitudes,
etc: it may be thought that they came from Nurses in former times here, as
very many, or rather most in Ireland and Wales do at this present. These
Nicke-names of one syllable turned to surnames, as Dickes, Nickes, Toms,
Hobbes, etc. may also seem to proceed from Nurses, to their Nurslings; or from
fathers and masters to their boys and servants. For, as according to the old
proverb, Omnis herus serv^ Monosyllabus, in respect of their short commands: so
Omnis servus har^ Monosyllabus in respect of the curtolling their names, as
Will, Sim, Hodge, etc. Neither is it improbable, but that many names that seem
unfitting for men, as of brutish beasts, etc. came from the very signs of the
houses where they inhabited; for I have heard of them which said they spoke of
knowledge, that some in late time dwelling at the sign of the Dolphin, Dull,
White-horse, ^^^ket, Peacocke, etc. were commonly called (...) at the Dolphin,
Will at the Bull, George at the White horse, Robin at the Racket, which names
as many other of like sort, with omitting At, became afterward herod^ta^le to
their children.

Hereby some insight may be had in the original of Surnames, yet it is a
matter of great difficulty, to being them all to certain heads, whenas our
language is so greatly altered, so many new names daily brought in by Aliens,
as French, Scots, Irish, Welsh, Dutch, etc. and so many old words worn out of
use. I mean not only in the old English, but also the late Norman, for who
knows now what these names were, Giffard, Basset, Gernon, Mallet, Howard,
Peverell, Paganell, or Paynell, Tail boise, Talb^t, L^vet, Panc^volt, Tirrell,
etc. which are nothing less than local, and certainly significative, for
they are never noted, as I said before in old evidences with De as local
names, (...) always absolutely, as W. Giffard, R. Basset, as Christian names
are, when they are made Surnames; and yet I will not affirm, that all these
here mentioned were at any time Christian names, although doubtless some
were.

For we know the significations of some of them, as Mallet, an Hammer, Bigot,
a Norman, or superstitious Tailebois. Nicotlus.
i. Cutwood, Lovet, Little Woolfe, and Basset, (as some think) Fat; Giffard
is by some interpreted Liberal; and Howard, M. Lambert p^^amb, Cantu, pa. 538.
High Warden, or Guardian (as it seems an office now out of vs^) whenas
Heobeorg signified in old English High defense, and He^h-faeder, Patriarch or
High father. Certain it is, that the first of that right noble family who was
known by the name of H^ward, was the son of William de Wigenhall, as the
honorable Lord William Howard of Naworth, third son to Thomas late Duke of
Norffolke, an especial searcher of Antiquities, who equalleth his high
parentage with his virtues, has lately discovered.

To find out the true original of Surnames, Change of names
is full of difficulty, so it is not easy to search all the causes of
alterations of Surnames, which in former ages have been very common among us,
and have so intricated, or rather, obscured the truth of our Pedegrees, that
it will be no little hard labor to deduce many of them truly from the
Conquest; Somewhat nevertheless shall be said thereof, but more shall be left
for them which will sound deeper into this matter.

To speak of alteration of names, omitting them of Abraham, and Sara, Jacob,
and Israel, in holy Scriptures, I have observed that the change of names, has
most commonly proceeded from a desire to avoid the opinion of baseness. Cre^^as
Guid^^^
So C^d^marus when he succeeded Ochus in the kingdom of Persia, called
himself by the princely name Darius. So new names were given to them which
were deified by the Paganish consecration, as Romulus was called Quirmus,
Melicertus was called Portunus, and Palaemon, Likewise in adoptions into better
families and testament, as the son of L. Aemilius, adopted by Scipio, took
the name of Scipio Africanus. So Augustus who was first named Thureon, took
the name of Octavian by testament: by enfranchising also into new Cities, as
he which first was called Lucumo, when he was infranchised at Rome, took the
name of Lucius Tarquinius Priscus. So Demetrius Mega when he was there made
free of the City, was called Publius Cornelius. Cicero Epist. 36. lib. 13.

Likewise slaves when they were manumised, took often their masters names,
whenas they had but one name in their servile state. As they which have read
Artemidorus, do know, how a slave, who when he dreamed he had tria virilia, was
made free the next morning, and had three names given him.

Neither is it to be forgotten, that men were not forbidden to change name or
surname, by the rescript of Dioclesian L. Vinc. c. de mutat. nom. so be that it
were Sine aliqua fraud, iure licito. As that great Philosopher which was first
called Malchus in the Syrian tongue, took the name of Porphyrius, as Eunapius
reports: as before Suetonius the Historian look to surname (...), whenas his
father was Suetonius L^uis. Those notvvithstanding of strange base parentage
were forbidden L. super (...) c. de quaest. to insert, or inthrust themselves
into noble and honest families by changing their names, which will grow to
inconvenience in England, as it is thought, by reason that Surnames of
honorable and worshipful families are given now to mean men's children for
Christian names, as it is grown now in France, to the confusion of their
Gentry, by taking new names from their purchased lands at their pleasures.
Alex. ab Alexandro Genial. dier. lib. 2. c. 28.
Among the Romans nevertheles they that were called ad Equestrem ordinem,
having base names, were new named nomine ingenuorum veterumque Romanorum, lest
the name should disgrace the dignity, In Philebo.
when according to Plato, comely things should have no uncomely names.

It was usual amongst the Christians in the Primitive church, to change at
Baptism the names of Catechu^e^i, which were in years, as that impious
Renegado, that was before called Lucius, was in his Baptism called Lucianus.
So the Popes use to change their names, when they enter into the Papaci^, which
as Plati^a says, was begun by Pope Sergius the second, who first changed his
name, for that his former name was Hogges-mouth, but other refer the change
of names in Popes to Christ, who changed Simon into Peter, John and James into
Bonarges: Only Marcellus, not long since chosen Pope, refused to change his
name, saying, Marcellus I was, and Marcellus I will be, I will neither change
Name nor Manners. Other religious men also when they entered into some Orders,
changed their name ^n times past, follovving therein, (as they report) the
Apostle, that changed his name from Saul to Paul, after he entered into the
Ministry, borrovving (as some say) that name from Sergius Paulus the Roman
lieutenant, Chrysostomus.
but as other will from his low stature, for he was but three cubits high,
as Saint Chrysostom speaking of him. Tricubitalis ille tamen coelum ascendit.

Of changing also Christian names in Confirmation we have said before; but
overpassing these foreign matters let us say somewhat as concerning change of
names in England.

As among the French in former time, and also now, the heir took the fathers
surname, and the younger sons took names of their lands allotted unto them.
So likewise in times past did they in England; Lib Prioratus de Wroxhall.
and the most common alteration proceeded from place of habitation. As if Hugh
of Suddington gave to his second son his Manor of Frydon, Yvo Catnotensis
in his Epistles complains of th^^.
to his third son his Manor of Pantley, to his fourth his Wood of Albdy;
the sons called themselves De Frydon, De Pantley, De Albdy; and their
posterity removed De. So Hugh Montfortes second son called Richard being
Lord of Hatton in Warwickeshire took the name of Hatton. So the youngest son
of Simon de Montfort Earl of Leicester staying in England, when his father was
slain, and brethren fled, took the name of Welsborne, as some of that name
have reported. So the name of Ever came from the Manor of Ever, near
Vxbridge, to younger sons of L. John Fitz-Robert de Clavering, from whom the
Lord Evers, and sir Peter Evers of Axholme are descended So sir John Cradocke
knight great grandfather of sir Henry Newton of Somersetshire took first the
name of Newton, which was the name of his habitation: as the issue of Huddard
in Cheshire took the name of Dutton.

Bnt for variety and alteration of names in one family upon diverse respects,
I will give you one Cheshire example for all, out of an ancient roll belonging
to sir William Brerton of Brerton knight, which I saw twenty years since. Not
long after the Conquest William Bellward lord of the moietie of Malpasse, had
two sons, Dan-David of Malpasse, surnamed Le Clerk, and Richard; Dan-David
had William his eldest son surnamed De Malpasse, from whom the Baron Dudley
is descended by heir general. His second son was named Philip Gogh, one of
the issue of whose eldest sons took the name of Egerton; a third son took
the name of David (...), and one of his sons the name of Goodm^^. Richard the
other son of the aforesaid William Belward had three sons, who took also
diverse names, viz. Thomas de C^tgrave, William de Overton, and Richard Little,
who had two sons, the one named Ken-clarke, and the other John Richardson.
Herein you may note alteration of names in respect of habitation in Egerton,
Cotgrave, Overton, in respect of color in G^g^, that is, Red, in respect of
quality in him that was called Goodm^n, in respect of stature in Richard
Little, in respect of learning in Ken-clarke, in respect of the fathers
Christian name in Richardson, all descending from William Bellward. And verily
the Gentlemen of those so different names in Cheshire would not easily be
induced to believe they were descended from one house, if it were not warranted
by so ancient a proof.

In respect of stature I could recite to you other examples, but I will only
add this which I have read, that a young Gentleman of the house of Preux, being
of tall stature attending on the Lord Hungerford, Lord Treasourer of England,
was among his fellows called Long H: who after preferred to a good marriage by
his Lord, was called H. Long, that name continued to his posterity, knights
and men of great worship.

Other took their mothers surnames, as A. Audley younger brother to James lord
Audley, marrying the daughter and heir of H. de Stanley left a son William,
that took the name of Stanley, from whom Stanley Earl of Derby, and other of
that name are descended. Geffrey the son of Robert Fitz-Maldred, and Isabel
his wife, heir of the Norman house of the Nevilles, took the name of Nevill,
and left it to his posterity which was spread into very many honorable
families of England. In like manner the son of Ioscelin of Lovan a yoonger
son to the Duke of Brabant, when he had married Agnes the only daughter of
William Lord Percy so named of Percy forest in the county of Maen, from whom
they came, (and not of piercing the king of S^^ts through the (...), as H^ct^r
B^^tius fableth) his son and posterity upon a composition with the same
Lady, took her name of Percy, but retained their old coat armor, to show
from whom they descended; So Adam de Montgomery marrying the daughter and
heir of Carew of Molesford, her son relinquishing his own, left to his
posterity his mothers name Carew, from whom the Barons Carew, the Carews of
Haccomb, of Berry, of Authony, Beddington, etc. have had their names and
original. Likewise Ralph Gernon marrying the daughter of Cavendish, or
Candish, left that name to his issue, as Th: Talbot, a learned Genealogist has
prooved. So Robert Meg the great favorite of king John took the name of
Braybrooke, whereof his mother was one of the heirs. So sir John de Haudlow
marrying the daughter and heir of the Lord Burnell, his posterity took the
name of Burnell. So sir Tibauld Russell took the name of De Gorges to him and
his issue, for that his mother was sister and one of the heirs of Ralfe de
Gorges, as it appears in the controversy between Warbleton and the said
Tibauld de Corges for the coat of Arms Lozengy, Or, and Azure, 21. of Edward
the third, before Henry Earl of Lancaster, and others, at the siege of Saint
Margaret. Not many years since, when James H^rsey had married the daughter of
De-Le-vale of Northumberland, his issue took the name of De-la-vale.

Hereunto may they also be referred who changed their names in remembrance of
their Progenitors being more honorable, as the sons of Geffrey Fitz-Petre,
took the name of Magnavilla or Mandevile, when they came to be Earls of
Essex, because their grandmother Beatrix was of the house of Mandevile, as
appears by the Abbey book of Walden. So Thomas de Molton took the name of
Lucy, and many other, which I omit.

Others also have taken the name of them whose lands they had: As when King
Henry the first gave the lands of the attainted Robert Moubray Earl of
Northumberland, being 120. Knights fees in Normandy, and 140. in England, to
Nigall or N^^le de (...) who in the battle at (...), took Robert Duke of
(...) prisoner: he commanded withal, that his posterity should take the
Surname of Mo^bray, which they accordingly did, and retained the same as long
as the issue male continued, which determined in John Mo^bray Duke of Norfolk,
in the time of King Edward the fourth: whose heirs were married into the
families of Howard and Barkeley.

Remembrance of benefits made others to change their names, as William Mortimer
descended from those of Richards Castle, took the name of La-Zouch, and named
his son Alan de la-Zouch, for some favor received from the Lord Zouch of
Ashby de la-Zouch, as appears by Inquisition. 11. and 21. Ed. 3.

In respect of adoption also, very many in all ages have changed their names: I
need not particulate it, for all know it. Some of their own dislike of their
names, have altered them: for as I have read in the book of Fornesse, William
Fitz-Gilbert Baron of Kendall, obtained license of King Henry the second, to
change his name and call himself and his posterity Lancaster, from whom the
Lancasters in Westm^rlaud etc. are descended.

Heerevpon some think that without the Kings license new names cannot be
taken, or old names given away to others. Yet Tiraquell the great Civilian of
France, in Leg. quin. Conub. Tit. 92. seems to incline, that both name and
Arms may be transferred by will and testament, and produces Augustus, who by
his Testament commanded Tiberius and Livia to bear his name. How in former
times Herevile, ^. Wirl^y.
Dunvile, Clauwowe, gave and granted away their Arms, which are as silent
names, distinctions of families; and the same was thought unlawful afterward,
when the Lord (...) would have done the same, shall be declared in more
convenient place. But the inconvenience of change of names, has been
discovered to be such in France, that it has been pr^pounded in (...) at
(...), that it should not be permitted but in these two respects, either when
one should be made heir to any with especial words, to assume the name of
the testatour; or when any one should have a donation surmounting a thousand
crowns, upon the same condition. But to retire to our purpose.

Not a few have assumed the names of their fathers Baronies, as in former times
the issue of Richard Fitz-Gilbert, took the name of Clare, which was their
Barony: and in late time, since the Suttons came to the Barony of Dudley, all
their issue took the name of Dudleyes: that I may omit others. The dislike of
others has caused also a change of names, for King Edward the first, disliking
the iteration of Fitz, commanded the Lord John Fitz-Robert, a most ancient
Baron, Lib. Monasterii Sibeton.
(whose Ancestors had continued their Surnames by their fathers Christian
names,) to leave that manner, and to be called John Clavering, which was the
capital seat of his Barony. And in this time, many that had followed that
course of naming by Fitz, took them one settled name, and retained it as Fitz
Walter, and others.

Also at that time the names of Thomson, Richardson, Willson, and other of that
form began to be settled, which before had varied according to the name of the
father. Edward the fourth likewise (as I have heard,) loving some whose name
was Picard, would often tell them that he loved them well, but not their
names, whereupon some of them changed their names: and I have heard that one of
them which took the name of Ruddle, being the place of his birth in that
respect. And in late years in the time of King Henry the eight, an ancient
worshipful gentleman of Wales, being called at the panniell of Jury by the
name of Thomas Ap William, Ap Thomas, Ap Richard, Ap Hoel, Ap Evan Vaghan, etc.
was advised by the Judge to leave that old manner. Whereupon he after called
himself Moston, according to the name of his principal house, and left that
Surname to his posterity.

Offices have brought new names to diverse families, as when Edward
Fitz-Th^^bald, of Ireland, the Earls of Ormond and others descended from them,
took the name of Butler. So the distinct families of the Constables in the
County of York, are said to have taken that name, from some of their
Ancestors which bare the office of Constables of some Castles. In Like manner
the Stewards, Marshalls, Spencers. That I may say nothing of such as for well
acting on the stage, have carried away the names of the personages which they
acted, and have lost their own names among the people.

Scholars pride has wrought alteration in some names which have been
sweetened in sound, by drawing them to the Latin Analog^^. As that notable
Non-resident in our fathers time Doctor Magnus, who being a foundling at Newark
upon Trent, where he erected a Grammar school, was called by the people T.
Among us, for that he was found among them: But he profiting in learning,
turned Among us, into Magnus, and was famous by that name, not only here, but
also in foreign places where he was often Ambassador.

It were needelesse to note here again, how many have taken in former times
the Christian name of their father, with prefixing of Fitz or Filz, as
Fitz-bugh, Fitz-alan, Fitz-william, or adding of Son, as Richardson, Tomson,
Johnson, etc. and so altered their Surnames if they had any. Whereas diverse
ancient Gentlemen of England do bear Coats of Arms, which by old roules and
good proofs are known to belong to other names and families, and cannot make
proof that they matched with those families, it is worth observation,
considering how religious they were in elder times in keeping their own Arms:
whether they were not of those ancient houses whose Arms they bear, and have
changed their names in respect of their habitation, or partitions and lands
gotten by their wives. As Pickering of the North, bears Ermin a Lion rampant
Azure crowned, Or, which, as it is in the old Abbey book of Furnesse, was the
coat of Roger de Miyth^rp. In the same book the coat of Dacr^, Gules 3.
Escal^pes Arg. is the coat of R. Ger^^th of Cumberland, and so the three
pillowes Ermin of Redman of Northumberland, is the coat of Ran. de Greystock.
So Vfford E. of Suffolk, and Peit^n, Fetiplace, and Hide, and many other
Gentlemen of the same Arms, may seem to have been of the same stock, and to
have varied their names in diverse respects.

Finally, among the common people which sway all in names, many Surnames have
been changed in respect of occupations, and not a few have been changed in
respect of masters, for in every place we see the youth very commonly called by
the names of their ocupations, as John Baker, Thomas Tailor, Will Butcher, Dic
Barber, and many by their masters names, as John Pickering, Thomas Watkins,
Nicholas French, whenas they served masters of those names, which often were
conveyed to their posterity, and their own Surnames altogether forgotten.
Some other causes of alteration of names may be found, as for crimes committed
when men have been enforced to leave their countries. But hereby it may be
understood that an Alias or double name cannot prejudice the honest: and it is
known that when Judge Catiline took exception at one in this respect, saying,
that no honest man had a double name, and came in with an Alias. The party
asked him what exception his Lordship could take to Jesus Christ, Alias, Jesus
of Nazareth.

I doubt not but some men among us in changing their names, do imitate old
Goffer Simon the Cobbler in Lucian, who when he grew fat in the purse, would
needs be called for Goodman Si^^on. Master Simonides, as some women do follow
the good Greek wench, Melissarton, that is, Pretty honny-Bee, who when of a
Commediant she became a wealthy man's wife, (...)
would be saluted Madam Pithias, or Prudence. And some likewise can change
themselves from she, to he, and consequeetly their name, as Cenis the wench,
into Ceneus the young man, as you may see in Ovid.

Among the alteration of (...) how Kings of Arms, (...), and (...) are new
named with a bole of wine powered upon their heads by the Prince or Earl
Marshall, when they are invested, and the Kings crowned, as Garter, Clerenceux,
N^rrey: L^^caster, York, Richmond, Somerset, etc. which is as ancient as the
time of King Edward the third. For we read, that when news was brought him at
Windsor, by a Pursuvant, of the victory at the battle of Auroy, (...).
he bountifully rewarded him, and immediately created him Herold, by the name
of Windsor.

Here might I note that women with us at their marriage do change their
surnames and pass into their husbands names, and justly for that then Non sunt
du^, sed car^ vna: And yet in France and the Netherlands, the better sort of
women will still retain their own name with their husbands, as if Mary
daughter of Villevill be married to A. Vavin, she will write herself Mary
Vavin Ville vill. But I fear husbands will not like this note, for that some
of their dames may be ambitiously over-pert and too-too forward to imitate it.

Beside these former alterations, the tyran Time which has swallowed many
names, has also in use of speech, changed more by contr^cting syncopating,
cu^telling and mollifying them, as beside them before mentioned. Adr^^y is now
turned into Darcy, Aldethelight into Awdley, Sabrigworth into Sapsford, Sitsil
into Cecil, Mount^^y into Mungey, Dunevet into Knevet, if you bel^eve Leland,
Gr^vile into Greenefeild, Haverington into Harrington, Bourgchier into Bowcer,
Le Dai^erell into Dairell, Ravensford into Rainsford, Mohune into Moon,
Danvers into Davers, Gernegan into Ierningham, Cah^rs into Chaworth, Din^^t
into Dinham, Wooderington into Witherington, Estlegh into Ast^y, Turbervile
into Troublefeild, De Oilei^ into D^iley, P^gli into Polye, De Alanson into
Dalison, Purefoy into Purfrey, Cavend^sh into Cand^sh, Veinour into Fenner,
Harecourt into Harcot, Sanctpaul into Sampol, Fortesen into F^sk^, Ferrers
(...), Culwen into Curwen, P^^tevin into Petsin, Berenger into Be^ger.
Montacute into Montague, Ger^^us into Garnish, Pul^^ston into P^ston,
Cholmondley into Cholmley, Grosvenour into Gravener, Meisuilwarin into
Manwaring, after into Man^ering, Fitz-Gerard into Garret, Ok^ver into Oker,
Vvedale into Vdall, Damprecourt first into Dabrig^court, now into Dabscot,
Leventhrop into Lenthrop, Wilburnhame into Willbram, A^kow from Ascouth, and
that from the old Christian name Ascuith, which in Latin was Hasculphus and
Hastulphus, that is, Speedy help, etc.

It may not seem from this purpose, if I here set down and compare a few names
of ancient good families, as they are written in old Latin Records and
histories, with them now in use: whereof many are as it were so transformed in
common pronunciation from the original, as they will scantly seem to have
been the same.

ASH, De Fraxi^is. BELLEVV, De Bella aqua. BEAVFOE, De Bella fago, BOYS, De
Bosc^. BEAVPRE, `De Bello prato. BOVRCHIER, De Burgo chare, only once.
BEAVMONT, De Bello-monte. BEAVCHAMP, De Bello-campo. BLOVNT, Flavus, sometimes.
BOVVES, De Arcubus. BOVIL, De Bovis Villa. CHAVVORTH, De Cadurcis. CHENEY, De
Casineto, and De Querceto. CHAMPAIGNE, De Campania. CANTLOVV, De Cantelupo.
CHAVVMOND, De Calvo Mont^. CHAMPFLOVR, De Campo-florid^. CAPELL, De Capella.
CREVECVRE, De Crepito cord. CHAMP^RNOVN, De (...). D'EVREVX, De Ebr^i^is.
D'AVTR^Y, De Altaripa. D'AVNEY, De Al^eto. D'AVBENEY, De Albeneie. FRESHMERSH,
De Frisco-Marisco. FERRERS, De Ferrarijs. HVSSEY, De Hosato, and Hosatu^.
LORTY, De Vrtiaco. LOVE, Lupus. LOVET, Lupettus. LOVELL, Lupellus. LISLE, De
Iusula. MALLOVELL, Malus Lupellus. MONTIOY, De Moute Iovis. MANNOVRS, De
Mannerijs. MINORS, De Minerijs. MARSH, De Marisco. MAVLEY, De Mal^-Lacu.
MONTCHENSEY, De Monte Canisio. MORTIMER, De Mortuo Mari. MVSTERS, De
Monasterijs. MEVVS, De Melsa. MONTHERMER. De Monto Hermer^^. MONTFICHET, De
Monte-^ix^. MONTPERSON, De Monte Pessonis. MOLINES, De Molindinis. MOIGNE,
Monachus. NEVVMARCH, De Noue Mercatu. NOVVRES, De Nodorijs. NEVILL, De Nova
Villa. PECHE, De Peccato. PERPOINT, De Petra-Ponte. PVDSEY, De Puteaco. ROCH,
De Rupe. SELLENGER, or Saint LEDGER, De Sancto (...). SYMBER^, De Sancta Barb^^
STRADLING, Easterling, because they first came out of the East part of Germany.
S^NLIS, Sylv^^^ct^^sis, and De Sancto Lizi^. S. FOSTER, De S. Vedasto. SEMARC,
De S. Medardo. SEIMOR, De S. Maur^. SAMPIER, De S. Petro. SAMPOL, De S. Paul^.
SENTLO, De S. Land^. SENTLOVV, De S. Lup^. SYNCLER, De S. Clara. SEMARTON, De
S. Martino. SINGLIS, in Ireland, De S. Gelasio. S. TOMER, De S. Aud^mar^. S.
OWN, De S. Aud^^n^. SAMOND, De S. Amand^. SV^TEYES, Super Teysam. SALTMERSH,
De Salso Marisco. SPENCER, or Le Despencer, Dispensat, or, SCALES, De
Scalarijs. STRAVNGE, Extrancus. VIPOVNT, De Veteri-ponte. DE LA ZOVCH, De
Stipite sicc^.
For William de la Zouch Archbishop of York, is so called in this verse, for
his valor in an encounter against the Scottishmen at Bearparke. 134^.

Est pater invictus sicc^ de stipite dictus, etc. For Zouch signifies the
stock of a tree in the French tongue. And this translation of names into
Greek or Latin, is still in use among the Germans, for he whose name is
Ertswert or Blackland, will be Melancthon; if Newman, Neander; if Holieman,
Osiander; if Brook, Torrenti^s; if Fenne, Paludanus, etc. which some amongst
us began lately to imitate.

To draw to an end, no man whatsoever is to be disliked in respect either of
original, or of signification, for neither the good names do grace the bad,
neither do evil names disgrace the good; if names are to be accounted good or
bad. In all countries both good and bad have bin of the same surnames, which as
they participate one with the other in glory, so sometimes in shame. Therefore
for ancestors, parentage and names (as he said) let every man say Vix ca nostra
voco. Sen^ca.
Time has intermingled and confused all, and we are com al to this present, by
successive variable descents from high and low: or as he says more
plainly, the low are descended from the high, and contrariwise, the high from
low.

If any do vaunt of their names, let them look to it, lest they have inania
nomina; you know who faith, Vestra nomina nunquam sum admiratus, (...) vobis
reliquerunt, magnos arbitrabor. And if they glory in their ancient fai^e
names, and farr^ fetched descents, with contempt of others, happly some such
like as Marius was, may return upon them Marius words; Si iure despiciunt
nos, faciunt idem maioribus suis, quibus vti nobis ex virtu^^ nobilitas caepit.
Invident honori nostro: ergo invideant labori, innocentiae. periculis etiam
nostris, quoniam per haec ill^^ (...). Yea some of these occupation and office
names, which do seem so mean to some, are as ancient in this Realm as most
other. For in that most authentical Register Doomesday book in the Exchequer,
ye shall have C^^us, A^rifaber, ^^tor, Pistor, Accipitrarius, Camera^ius,
Venator, (...) Modicus, ^ Cook, Goldsmith, Painter, Baker, Falconer,
Chamberlain, Huntsman, Fisher, Marshall, Porter, Leach, and others, which then
held land in Capite, and without doubt left these names to their posterity,
albeit happly they are not mentioned in those tables of B^^^aile Abbey, of such
as came in at the Conquest: which whosoever consider well, shall find always
to be forged, and those names to be inserted which the time in every age
favored, and were never mentioned in that authentical Record.

If you please to compare the Roman names that seem so stately, because you
understand them not, you will disdain them in respect of our meanest names;
For what is Front but Beetle-browed? Casius but Cattes-eies? Petus but
Pink-eyed? Cocles One-eye, Naso Bottle-nose, Galba Maggot, as Suetonius
interprets; Sil^ Apes-nose, Ancus Crooked arm, Pausa Broad foot, Strabo
Squint-eye, Suillius Swincheard, Capito Iobbernoll, Calvus Bald-pate, Crispus
Curle-pate, Flaccus Loll-eares, or Flagge-eared, Labeo Blabber-lippe, Scaurus
Knobd heel, Varus Bowlegged, Pedo Long-shankes, Marcellus Hammer, for it
comes from Marculus, Hortensius Gardner, Cilo Petty-long pate, In Orthographi^
Chilo Flap-lippes, or, as Velius Longus says, Impro^^^ribus labris hom^.

Those great names also Fabius, L^ntulus, Cicero, Piso, Stolo, are no more in
our tongue then Bean-man, Lentill, Chich-pease, Lib. 18 c. 3.
Pescod-man, Branch; for as Pliny says, these names were first appropriated
to them, for skill in sowing those grains. Neither those from beasts which
Varro recites in the second de Rustica, Taurus, Vitulus, Ovilius, Por^ius,
Caprilius, were better than Bull, Calfe, Sheep, Hog, Goat, etc.

In respect of these names all the names of England are such as I think few
would take the benefit of Dioclesians rescript, which I lately mentioned. But
in France (where the foul names Marmot, Merd^oyson, Boreau) and in Spain
(where Verdugo, i. Hangman, Putanero, and such like are rife) it is no marvel
that some procure license from the King to change their names: and that a
Gentlewoman, doctor Andreas the great Civilians wife said; ^. Andr. in C^dum
sec^ndum de P^ab.
If fair names were saleable, they would be well bought.

Thus much of Christian names and Surnames, or Praenomina and Nomina. As for
Cognomina and Agnomina, or By-names were rare in our Nation; only I remember
these three, Le Beuf in the family of the Giffardes, of Meuill among the
Darcies, and Bouchard in one house of the Latimers, and some say Algernoun in
the family of Percies: but that as yet is out of the reach of my reading,
unless it be the same that is corruptly in the descent of the Earls of
Belleyn belonging to the late Queen Mother of France, set down Agernouns, for
Alger^^^^s; For so Eustace the second is there by-named, who in other old
Pedegrees is called Eustace with the clear eyes.

As for additions given over and beside names, and surnames in Law causes, that
I may note them out of a Law book, they are either of estate, or degree, or
mystery, or town, or hamlet, or county. Addition of estate are these;
Yeoman, Gentleman, Esquire. Addition of degree are those which we call names
of dignity, as Knight, Earl, Marquess, Duke. Additions of mystery are such,
Scrivener, Carpenter, Smith. Addition of towns, as of Padington, Islington,
Edelmeton. And where a man has household in two places, he shall be said to
dwell in both of them, so that his addition in one of them does suffice.

By the Statute the first year of king Henry the fifth and fifth chapter, it was
ordained, that in suites or in actions where process of Vtary lies, such
addition should be to the name of the Defendant, to show his estate, mystery,
and place where he dwells, and that such Writts shall abate, if they have not
such additions, if the Defendant do take exception thereat, they shall not
abate by the office of the court.

Also, Duke, Marquess, Earl, or Knight be none of that addition, but names of
dignity, which should have been given before the statute. And this was
ordained by the said statnte, made in the first year of king Henry the
seventh chap. 5. to the intent that one man may not be grieved or troubled by
the vtlary of an other, but that by reason of the certain addition every man
might be certainly known, and bear his own burden.

How the names of them which for capital crimes against Majesty, were creazed
out of the public Records, Tables, and Registers, or forbidden to be borne by
their posterity, when their memory was damned. I could show at large, but this
and such like, with Misnomer in our laws, and other Quidities, I leave to the
professors of laws.

Somewhat might be said here of the adjuncts to names or titles, which in most
ancient times were ^^ther none, or most simple. For Augustus was impatient to
be called Domin^^^ yet Domitian liked well to be called Dom ^nus Deusque and
Dominus was taken up by every private man, as appears by Seneca, and the
poor Grecian which refused that title by alluding (...). Nevertheles it was
never used by the Emperors, from Domitian to Dioclesianus, as Victor notes;
but afterward it was continued by the Christian Emperors, yea upon their Coins.

And that which is more strange, they used then as appears in the
Constitutions, for themselves. Aeternitat nostra, Perennitas nostra, Numen
nostrum; and to their principal officers, Vir illustri^, Vi^^spectabilis,
Magnifica cellitudo, Sublimis magnit^do tua, Illustris magnificentia,
Sublim^tas, Miranda sublimitas, Eminentia tua, Excellentia tua, Praecelsa
magnificentia tua, etc. As appears in the Volumes of the Civil Law. So as I
know not wh^e that Spite king Buchanan should envy lesser titles to Princes,
the very Tipes of Gods majesty, yea very Gods in earth, and brand them with
the mark of Seric^^^ nebulones, which honor Princes therewith.

The Romans under the latter Emperors had a very curious and careful
observation, in giving titles to men of reputation, which as I have read were
only five; Illustris was the highest appropriated to the Praefecti Praetorio
of Italy and Gallia, Cod. Theod. and Justinian.
the Prafectus of the City of Rome, Magister Equitum, Magister Peditum,
Quaestor Palatij, Comes Largitania, etc. and all that had voice in the Senate.
Spectabil^^ was the second (...) due to the Lievtenants general, and (...) of
Provinces etc. So in Notitia Provinciarum, Vicarius Britanniarum, Comes
Littoris Saxonici per Britanni^^. Dux Britanniae are st^^ed Viri spectabiles.
Clarissimus was the third title peculiar only to the Consulares, Correctores,
and Praesides of Provinces. Perfectissimus was the fourth. Egregius the fifth.
And as Clarissimus was a title to those great officers above specified, so no
other could have that, as neither of Perfectissimus, and Egregius, but granted
by Patents. And in that age, as it is in the Code of Theodosius, Titulo, Vt
Dignitatem ordo servetur. Si quis indebitum sibi locum vsurpaverit, nulla
seignoratione defendat, sitque plane sacrilegij reus.

Amongst us the Kings had these adjuncts, when they were written and spoken
unto, Gloriosus, Gloriosissimus, Pracellentissimus, Charissimus Dominus, Rex
illustris, lately Potentissimus, Invictissimus, Serenissimus; Our ^ege Lord,
Our Sovereign. Our Dread Sovereign etc.

As for Grace, it began about the time of Henry the fourth. Excellent Grace
under Henry the sixth. High and mighty Prince under Edward the fourth. And
Majesty which first began to the Roman Emperors about the time of
Gallienus, Trebellius Pollio.
came hither in the time of King Henry the eight, as Sacred Majesty lately in
our memory. Whereas among Christians it was appli^ble only in former ages to
God, Ovid. Fast.
as among the old Romans to the Goddess Majesty the daughter of Honor and
Reverence.

Among other men in former ages D^n corrupted from Dominus, was the greatest
attribute both to Spi^ituall and Temporal, and afterward Worshipful, and
Right Worshipful, has been thought convenient among us for the great Dukes
and Fa^les; but we now begin so to overlade men with additions, as
Spaniardes did lately, until they were restrained by the Pragmaticall 1586. At
which time Pasquil at Rome being demanded why Philip of Spain had so taken
away all titles from all sorts of men, answered merrily, albeit not
religiously. That it may be verified of him which is said, Tu solus Do^^inus,
tu solus altissimus, in respect of his voluminous long Title which will ^i^e
the Reader.

Thus far had I proceeded in names, when it was hie time to stay, for I am
advertised that there is one, which by Art Trochilick, will draw all English
surnames of the best families out of the pit of Poetry, as Bourchier from
Busyris the tyrant of Egypt; Percy from flying Perseus; Darcy from Dircaus
Apollo; Lee from Laetus turned into a Swanne in Ovid; Iakeson from Jason: well
he may satisfy them herein, whom I cannot. As for my self, I acknowledge
that I cannot satisfy neither them, nor my self in all particularities: and
well therefore I do like him that said, He does not teach well which teaches
all; leaving nothing to subtle wits to sift out. And sure I am scrupulous
Diligence lies open to Envy. But for such as will not be content with that
which is said, I wish sir John de Bilbao would conjure up William Ockam the
father of the Nominalles (as Appion did Homer,) for their better satisfaction
herein. Mean while I desire no man will take offense at any thing here
spoken, when as I have been so far from giving offense, that I dare protest
it in that solemn ancient form, Superos, and Sydera testor. Hating it in
others, and condemning it in my self, even unto the bottomless pit of hell.

Allusions.
I Will now present unto you a few extracts out of names, (I fear you will
call them foolish foppe^^es,) but call them what you please, I hope a little
folly may be pardonable in this our so wise an age

Out of Names the busy wit of man continually working has wrought upon liking
or dislike Allusions, very common in all ages, and among all men, Rebus, (...)
ages both with learned and unlearned, and Anagramme^ though long since
invented, yet rare in this our refined times. In all which, I will briefly show
our Nation has been no less pregnant, then those Southern which presume of
wits in respect of (...). Afterward somewhat shall be said of Arms, which as
silent names distinguish families.

An Allusion is as it were a d^lliance or playing with words, like in sound,
unlike in sense, by changing, adding, or substracting a letter or two; so that
words nicking and resembling one the other, are appliable to diffrent
significations. As the Almighty (if we may herein use sacred authority,) in
ratification of his promise to the seed of Isaac, changed Abram, High father,
into Abraham, that is, father of many; and Sarai, that is, my Dame, into Sara,
that is, Lady or Dame. The Greeks (to omit infinite others,) nicked Antiochus
Epiphanes, that is, the famous, with Epinanes, that is, the furious. The Romans
likewise played with bibbing Tiberius Nero, calling him Biberius Mero. So Tully
called the extorting Verres, in the actions against him Verrens, as Sweepe-all.
So in Quintilian the sower fellow, Placidus was called Acidus, and of late one
called Scaliger, Aliger.

Excellent is that which our countriman Reverend Beda reports in his
Ecclesiastical History of England, of the cause that moved Gregory the Great
to send Augustine into England. On a time (as I showed before) when he saw
beautiful boys to be sold in the market at Rome, and demanded by what name
their Nation was called; and they told him Englishmen; and justly be they so
called (quoth he,) for they have Angelike faces, and seem meet to be made
Coheirs with the Angels in heaven: After, when it was told him that their
King was called Alla, then said he ought Alleluya to be sung in that Country to
the praise of their Creator: when it was also signified unto him, they were
borne in a part of the Kingdom of Northumberland, called then Deira, now
Holdernesse Deira Dei, (then said he,) sunt liberandi.

Laurens Archbishop, which succeeded that Augustine, was by allusion called
Lauriger, Mellitus, Mellifluus, Brith-wald, Bright-world, Nothelhelme,
Noble-helme, Celnothu^, Caelo natus, all archbishops of Canterbury. And such
like were framed out of the names of many English Confessors, which I omit.

Arletta, the good wench which so kindly entertained Robert Duke of Normandy,
when he begat of her William the Conqueror, (as I had rather you should read
in others then hear of me,) was for his honesty, closely with an aspiration
called Harlot. But the good and learned Recorder would say, that this name
began from her, and in honor of her, was appropriated by the Normans in
England, to all of her kind profession, and so continues.

When Herbert first Bishop of Norwich, and founder of the Cathedral Church
there, had simoniacally procured that Bishopric to himself, and the Abbacy
of Winchester to his father, they were alluded upon by the name of Simon in the
worst sense, in this verse.

Filius est Praesul, pater Abbas, Simon vterque. Strong and sudden was that
Allusion of Gilbert Folioth Bishop of Hereford, Minor hist. M. Paris.
who when he had incurred the hatred of many, for opposing himself against
Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, one c^^ed with a loud voice at his
chamber window at midnight, Folieth, ^olioth, thy god is the goddess
Azaroth. Venu^.
He suddenly and stowtly replied, Thou list foul feind, my God is the God of
Sabbath.

Hitherto may be referred that which Giraldus Cambrensis reports. An
Archdeacon named Pecc^tum or Peche, a rural Deane called De vill, Sin.
and a Jew travailing together in the Marches of Wales, when they came to
Illustrate, the Archdeacon said to his Deane, that their Jurisdiction began
there, and reached to Malpasse: The Jew considering the names of the Deane,
Archdecon, and limits, said by Allusion: Marvel may it be if I escape well out
of this Jurisdiction, where Sin is Archdeacon, the Devil the Deane, and the
bounds Illustrate with Malpasse.

Alexander Nequam, a man of great learning, borne at Saint Albanes, and
desirous to enter into religion there, after he had signified his desire, writ
to the Abot Laconically.

Si vis, veniam, sin autem, tu autem. Who answered as briefly, alluding to his
name.

Si bonus sis, venias, si Nequam, nequaquam. Whereupon he changed his name to
Neckam.

Philip Rependum, Abbot of Leicester, alluded thus upon the name of Neckam,

Es niger and nequam, cum sis cognomine Neckam.
Nigrior esse potes, nequior esse nequis.
But he repaied him with this re-allusion upon the name of Philipp.

Phinota faetoris, lippus malus omnibus horis, etc. A London Poet dallied thus
with the name of Fustachius, when he was preferred from Treasurer of the
Exchequer, to be Bishop of London, 1222. which was thought a great preferment
in that age.

Eustachi nuper been stabas, nunc been stabis.
Ille status valuit, praevalet iste tamen.
Robert Passelve, an especial favorite of Henry the third, afterward by a
court-tempest so shaken as he was glad to be Parson of Derham in Norfolk; was
alluded unto while he was in the Sunshine, by Pass^le-eau, as surpassing the
pure water, the most excellent element of all, if you believe Pindar.

This Allusion was composed to the honor of a religious man called Robertus,
resolving it into Ros, Ver, Thus.

Tu been Robertus quasi Ros, Ver, Thusque vocaris,
Ros sata, ver flores, Thus h^locausta facit.
Sic tu Ros, Ver, Thus, geris haec tria, Ros sata verbi,
Ver floris morum, Thus holocausta precum.
Upon the same, another framed this.

Robertus titulo dotatur triplice, Roris
Temperie, Veris dulcedine, Thuris odore.
Upon the same name and invention I have also found this, Es been Ros, Ver,
Thus, Ros es quod nectare stillas,
Ver, quod flore vires, Thus, quia mente sapis.
Ros (inquam) Ver, Thus: Ros qui dulcedine stillat,
Ver quod flore nitet, Thus quod odore sapit.
Nam quod tu sis Ros, Ver, Thus, perhibet tua Roris,
Temperies, Veris gratia, Thuris odor.


Upon the same name Robertus, an other made Robur, Thus, with this Distiche: Tu
been Robertus quasi Robur, Thus: been Robur,
Nam virtute vig^s, Thus, quia mente sapis.
When Pandulphus the Popes Nuncio came into England, a scholar smoothed him
with this foolish allusion.

Te totum dulcor perfundit, and inde vocaris,
Pandulphus quid Pan nisi totum? Dull nisidulcor!
Phu^ nisi fusus? id est, totus dulcedine fusus.
One in a dedication alluded unto Roger an Ecclesiastical person in this
verse: Qui Cleri Rogere Rosam geris, annno vati.

A poor Poet begging of one, whose name was John, which is in Hebrew, The
grace of God, begged of him by praising his name in this manner.

Nomen habes non immerito Divina, Johannes,
Gratia, voce sua conveniente rei.
Ergo vel gratus summo, vel gratia summi,
Es, pro part mea casus vterque facit.
Si summo gratus, ergo pietatis alumnus,
Ergo pauperibus far teneria apem.
Another played upon the name of Turbervill, when practicing with the French,
he played false with his Sovereign K. Edward the first.

Turbat tranquilla clam Thomas Turbida Vil^a. These may seem over many in so
slight a matter, yet I will in respect of the persons, offer you two or three
more to be regarded. William, Lord Monti^y, famous for his learning, great
Grandfather to the honorable Charles, now Earl of Denshire, who is no less
famous for his virtue and hereditary love of learning; when he was the Queens
Chamberlain, in an Epistle to Erasmus, called king Henry the eight Octavius
for Octavus resembling him thereby to Octavius Augustus the only mirror of
Princely virtues.

Lady Jane Gray daughter to the Duke of Suffolk, who paid the p^^ce of others
ambition with her blood, for her excellency in the Greek tongue was called for
Greia, Graia, and this made to her honor in that respect.

Miraris Ianam Craio sermon valere?
Quo nata est primum tempore Crata fuit.
When the duke of Buckingham was put to death by the practice of cardinal
Wolsey a Butchers son, the Emperor Charles the fifth said, It was great
pity, that so fair and goodly a Bucke should be woried to death by a Buchers
curre; alluding either to the name of Buckingham, or to a Bucke, which was a
badge of honor to that family.

Domingo a Spaniard in the time of Queen Mary, offended with an Englishman
that called him Domingus, told him he was Dominicu^; but he was I assure you
more highly offended, when he after for Dominicus called him D^moniacu^.

In the beginning of her late Majesty's reign one alluded to her name
Elisabetha, with Illasa-Beata, that is, Safe without hurt, and happy. The sense
whereof, as the Almighty by his fatherly mercy performed in her person, so
she by her motherly providence under God effected in this realm in blisfull
peace and plenty, whereas contrariwise other con^ining Regions have been
overwhelmed with all kind of miseries. The cause whereof, one in this last
French broils referred by Allusion to Spania and Mania two Greek words,
signifying Panury and Fury; but implying therein closely the late King of
Spain, and duke du Maine.

Rebus, or Name-devises.
MAny approoved customs, laws, manners, fashions, and phrases have the English
always borrowed of their neighbors the French, especially since the time of
King Edward the Confessor, who resided long in France, and is charged by
Historians of his time, to have returned from thence wholly Frenchified; then by
the Norman Conquest which immediately ensued, after by the honorable aliances
of the Kings of England, with the most renowned families, yea and with the
very royal house of France. But after that the triumphant victorious king
Edward the third had traversed France with his victories, and had planted
English colonies in Calice, Havres and Guynes, our people bordering upon the
pregnant Picardes, began to admire their fooleries in painted Poesies. For
whereas a poesy is a speaking picture, and a picture a speechless Poesy,
they which lackt wit express their conceit in speech, did use to dep^int it
out (as it were) in pictures, which they called Rebus, by a Latin name well
fitting their devise. These were so well liked by our English there, and sent
hither over the straight of Callice with full sail, were so entertained here
(although they were most ridiculous) by all degrees, by the learned and
unlearned, that he was no body that could not hammer out of his name an
invention by this wit-craft, and picture it accordingly: whereupon who did not
busy his brain to hammer his devise out of this forge.

Sir Thomas Cavall, whereas Cavall signifies an horse, engraved a gallopping
horse in his scale with (...) limping verse; Thomae credit, cum cernitis eius
equum.

So John Eagleshead, as it seems, to notify his name, about his Arms, as I
have seen in an old S^ale with an Eagles head, set down this: Hoc aquila
caput est, signumque figura Iohannis.

The Abbot of Ramsey more wisely set in his Seal a Ram in the sea, with
this verse, to show he was a right ram; Cuius signa gero dux gregis est, vt
ego.

William Chaundler Warden of New college in Oxford, playing with his own
name, so filled the hall-windowes with candles, and these words, Fiat lux,
that he darkened the hall. Whereupon the Vidam of Charters when he was
there, said, It should have bin, Fiant tenebrae.

Did not that amorous Youth mystically express his love to Rose Hill, whom
he courted, when in the border of his painted cloth, he caused to be painted
as rudely, as he devised grosely, a rose, an hill, an eye, a loaf, a well,
that is, if you will spell it.

Rose-Hill I love well. You may imagine that Frauncis Corn^field did scratch
his elbow when he had sweetly invented to signify his name, Saint Francis
with his Frierly kowle in a cornefield.

It may seem doubtful whether Bolton Prior of Saint (...) In Smithfield, was
vviser when he invented for his name a bird bolt through a T^nne, or when he
built him an house upon Harrow Hill, for fear of an mundation after a great
conjunction in the watery Triplicitie.

Islip Abbot of Westminster, a man most favored by king Henry the seaven^h, had
a quadruple devise for his single name; for somewhere he s^tte up in his
windows an ^ie with a slip of a t^ee, other places one slipping boughs in a
tree, in other places an I wi^h the said slip; and in some places one slipping
from a t^ee with the word Islip.

Whosoever devised for Thomas Earl of Arundell, a capital A in a Rundle,
wherewith he decked an house which he built, did think I warrant you, that
he did the Nobleman great honor.

No less did he (...) his invention, which for sir Anthony Wingfield, devised^
Wing with these four letters, F, E, L, D, quarterly about it, and over the
Wing a cross, to show he was a Christian, and on the cross a red rose, to
show that the followed the house of Lancaster.

Morton Archbishop of Canterbury, a man of great wisdom, and borne to the
universal good of this realm, was content to use Mor upon a Tun; and
sometime a Mulbery tree called Morus in Latin out of a Tun. So Luton,
Thorneton, Ashton did notify their names with a Lute, a Thorn, an Ash upon a
Tun. So an Ha^^ on a bottle for Harebottle; a Maggot-pie upon a goat for
Pigot, an Hare by a sheafe of ^e in the Sun for Harrison; Med written on a
calfe for Medcalfe; Chester, a chest with a Star over it: Allet a Lot; Lionel
Duckes a Lion with L. on his head, whereas it should have been in his (...).
If the Lion had been eating a ducke, it had been a ra^e devise worth a
duckat, or ducke-egge. And if you require more, I refer you to the witty
inventions of some I ^^doners, but that for Garret Dews is most memorable, two
in agarret casting Dews at dice. This for Rebus may suffice, and yet if there
were more, I think some lips would like such kind of Lettice. In part to
excuse them yet, some of the greatest Romans were alittle blasted with this
fooleri^, if you so censure it. Our great Master Cicero in a dedication of his
to his gods, inscribed Marcus (...), and that (...) pulse less than, (...)
call (I think) a (...) pease, and the Latins Cicer, in steed of Cicero. As
in the coins of Julius Casar we have seen an Elephant, for so Caesar
signifies in the Mauritanian tongue, and the two Mint-maisters in that age, L.
Aquilius Florus, and Voconius Vitulus; the one used a Flower, the other a Calfe
in the reverses of their coins, alluding unto their names.

Anagrammes.
THE only Quint-essence that hitherto the Alchimy of wit could draw out of
names, is Anagrammatisme, or Metagrammatisme, which is a dissolution of a Name
truly written into his Letters, as his Elements, and a new connection of it by
artificial transposition, without addition, substraction, or chang of any
letter into different words, making some perfect (...).

(...) omitting or retaining it, for that it cannot challenge the ^^ght of a
letter. But the licentiats somewhat licentiously lest they should prejudice
poetical liberty, will pardon themselves for doubling or rejecting a letter,
if the sense fall aptly, and think it no injury to use E for AE, V for W, S
for Z, and C for K, and contrariwise.

The French exceedingly admire and celebrate this faculty, for the deep and
far fetched antiquity, the piked fines and the mystical significations
thereby: for that names are divi^e notes, and divine notes do notify future
events; so that events consequently must lurk in names, which only can be
pried into by this mystery. Affirming that each man's fortune is written in his
name, as Astrologians say, all things are written in heaven, if a man could
read them: They exemplify out of the Rabbis; they quote dreaming (...), with
other allegations; they urge particular experiments, and so enforce the matter,
with strong words and weak proofs, that some credulous young men, hovering
between hope and fear, might casily be carried away by them into the
forbidden superstition of Onomantia, or South-saying by names.

But some of the sower sort will say it is nothing but a troublous toy, and
because they cannot attain to it, will condemn it, lest by commending it,
they should discommend themselves. Others more mild will grant it to be a
dainty devise and disport of wit not without pleasure, if it be not wrested
out of the name to the reproach of the person. And such will not deny, but that
as good names may be ominous, so also good Anagrammes, with a delightful
comfort and pleasant motion in honest minds, in no point yielding to many
vain pleasures of the body. They will also afford it some commendations in
respect of the difficulty, ( Diffici^^a quae pulchra,) as also that it is a
whetstone of a patience to them that shall practice it. For some have been
seen to bite their pen, scratch their head, bend their brows, bite their
lips, beat the board, tear the paper when they were fair for somewhat, and
caught nothing herein.

If profound antiquity, or the inventour may commend an invention, this will
not give place to many. For as the great Masters of the Jews testify, Moses
received of God a literal law, written by the finger of God, in the two Tables
of the ten Commandments to be imparted to all, and another Mystical to be
communicated only to seaventy men, which by tradition they should pass to
their posterity, whereof it was called Cabala. Which was divided into Mercana,
concerning only the sacred names of God, and Bresith of other names consisting
of Alphabetary revolution, which they will have to be Anagrammatisme, by which
they say Marie resolved made, Our holy Mistress. But whether this Cabala is more
ancient than the Talmudicall learning, hatched by the curious Jews, (as some
will,) about 200. years after Christ, let the learned consider.

The Greeks refer this invention to Licophron, (as Isaac Tzetzes has in his
preface to his obscure Poem Cassandra, who was one of those Poets which the
Greeks called the Seaven-starres, or Ple^ades, and flourished about the year
380. before Christ, in the time of Ptolomaus Philadelphus, king of Egypt,
whose name he thus anagramatised.

(...).
(...). Made of h^^ny.
And upon Arsinoe his wife, thus;
(...)
(...). Iunes violet.
Afterward as appears by Eustachius there were some Greeks disported
themselves herein, as he which turned Atlas for his heavy burden, in
supporting heaven to Talas, that is, wretched, Aret, Virtue into Erate, that
is, lovely, Ilaros, merry, into Liar^s, that is, warm. But in late years,
when learning revived under Francis the first in France, the French began to
distill their wits herein, for there was made for him.

Francis de Valoys.
DE FACON SVIS ROYAL.
For his son Henry de Valoys.
ROY ES DE NVL HAY.
For Charles of Barbon, the Prince of Conde.
Borbonius.
ORBI BONVS.
For the late Queen of Scotland, his Majesty's mother.
Maria Stevarta.
VERITAS ARMATA.
And that Greek one, which is most excellent, of the sacred name of our sweet
Savior Jesus, according to that of the 53. of Esaias, He is brought as a sheep
to the slaughter, thus: (...).
(...), that is, Thou art that sheep.


The Italians who now admire them, began not 20. years since to use them as
the Bishop of Grassa a professor herein testifies.

In England I know some who 30. years since have bestowed some idle hours
herein with good success, albeit our English names running rough with cragged
consonants, are not so smooth and easy for transposition as the French and
Italian. Yet I will set down some which I have happened upon, framed o^t of
the names of diverse great personages, and others in most of the which in the
sense may seem appliable to their good parts.

To begin with his most Excellent Majesty our d^ead Sovereign, was made this
declaring his undoubted rightful claim to the Monarchy of Britan, as the
successor of the valourous king Arthur. Charles James Steuart.
CLAIMS ARTHVRS SEAT.


As this also truly verified in his person. Iacobus Sextus Stuartus.
VITA CASTVS, EX SE ROBVSTVS.


For our late Queen of happy memory, to whose gracious government under God,
we owe much happiness. I have found the letters of Elizabetha Regina
transposed to signify that happiness, as speaking unto her in this sense. O
Englands Sovereign thou have made us happy: thus

Elizabetha Regina,
ANG^IAE HERA, BEASTI.
And whereas the French compare Anagrames by themselves to gems, but when they
are cast into a distich or Epigram to gems enchased in enameled gold. Thi^
distich was then made thereon with a most humble and (...) wish.

Nos Anglos radijs hera nostra beata beasti,
Sis hera nostro solo, sis Deasera poso.
The same blessedness of her Maiestre to England unspeakable good, and her
joyful reign were noted thus out of Elizabetha Regina,
ANGLIAE ERIS BEATA.
EIA, LETA REGNABIS.


Carolus Vienhovius my good friend made this 30. years since in Greek, when he
attended here upon Monsieur Foix, Ambassador from the French King.

(...),
(...)
that is, The devine dew of her Kingdom.
Likewise out of the Greek was this,
(...),
(...).
that is, A Goddess Queen.
Her most mild government of her subjects, and Lionlike courage against her
Spanish enemies, was thus declared out of

Elizabetha Regina Anglia,
ANGLIS AGNA, HIBERIAE LEA.
Whereas she was as a Sweepnet for the Spanish ships, which (as the Athenians
said of their fortunate Timothye,) happily fell into her net: this was made by
transposing of

Elizabeth Regina Angliae,
GENTI HIBERAE,
ILLA SAGENA.
In respect of her great wars exploited against that mighty Monarch, this was
wrought out of

Elizabetha Anglorum Regina,
MAGNA BELLA TV ^EROINA GERIS.
The good government of her Majesty, was thus noted under the name of the
flourishing Muse Thalia

Elizabetha Regina,
BEEN THALIA REGIS.
In this following was comprised the wish then of all true English, Elizabetha
Regina Anglorum,
GLORIA REGNI SALVA MANEBiT.


Have now some framed upon the names of diverse honorable personages and
others, lovers I hope of good letters, neither let any conceive offensively if
they a^e not here remembered: I have imparted all that came to my hands.

Out of the name of the late right reverend, the Lord Archebishoppe of
Canterbury, the mirror of Praelats in our days was found this, in respect of
his mild proceedings.

Ioannes Whitegiftius.
NON VI EGIT FAVIT ^^ESVS.
For the Lord Chancellor, Lord Ellesmer.
Thomas Egerton,
GEST AT HONOREM.
Oris honor viget, Vt mentis gestat honorem
Iuris Egertonus, dignus honor col^.
For the late Lord Treasurer, a most prudent and honorable Councellor to two
mighty Princes.

Guilielmus Cecisius Baro Burglio.
VIGILI CVM LABOR ILLVCES REGIBVS.
Regibus illuces vigili Gulielme labor,
Nam clare fulget lux tua luce Dei.
For the Earl of Nottingham, Lord Admiral.
Carolus Howarde,
CHARVS, ARDVO LEO.
For the Earl of Northumberland.
Henricus Percius,
HIC PVRE SINCERVS.
Upon which with a relation to the Crescent or silver Moon his Cognizance, was
framed thus:

Percius HIC PVRE SINCERVS, Percia Luna
Candida tota micat, pallet at illa p^lo.
This was made as a wish to the Earl of Shrewsbury, that his name and Talbot
may be as terrible to the French, as it was when the French so feared his
progenitour John, Lord Talbot, first Earl of Shrewsbury of that family.

Gilbert^^ Talbottius.
CALLOS TV TIBI TVRBES
Vt proavi preavus, sic GALLOS TV TIBI TVRBES;
Impreses.
AN Imprese (as the Italians call it) is a devise in picture with his Motte, or
Word, borne by noble and learned personages, to notify some particular conceit
of their own: as Emblemes (that we may omit other differences) do propound
some general instruction to all: As for example: Whereas Cosmi Medici Doke of
Florence had in the ascendent at his nativitie the sign Capricorue, under
which also Augustus and Charles the fifth, two great and good Princes were
borne: he used the celeshall sign Capricorn, with this Moan; FIDEM FATI
VIRTVTE SE QVEMVR for his Imprese, particularly concerning his good hope to
prove like unto them. But a fair woman pictured with an Olive crown
representing Peace, carrying in one hand the horn of Plenty, leading a little
golden boy for Plutus in the other, with, EX PACE RERVM OPVLENTIA, is an
Emblem, and a general document to all, that Peace brings Plenty.

There is required in an Imprese (that we may reduce them to few heads) a
correspondencie of the picture, which is as the body, and the Motte, which as
the soul gives it life. That is, the body must be of fair representation,
and the word in some different language, witty, short, and answerable
thereunto neither too obscur^ (...) too plain, and most comm^nded, when it is
an Hemislich, or parcel of a verse.

According to these prescripts neither the stars with the Moon in Tide^s
shield in Aeschilus, neither Amphiaraus dragon in Pindare, neither the stem
of a ship used for a seal by Pompey, can have here place: Much less the
reverses in Roman coins, which were only historical memorialles of their
acts; as that of Claudius, with a plowman at plow and this COL: CAMALODVN was
to signify that he made Maldon in ^ssex a Colony, Britannia (...).
and that of Hadrian with an Emperor, three soldiers, and EXERC: BRITANNICVS
was in memory of some good service by the three Legions resiant in this Isle
at York, Chester, and Car-leon upon Vske. That also of Severus with a woman
sitting upon Cliffes holding an ensign in one hand, and as it were writing
upon a shield, with VICTORIA BRITANN: was only to show his victories here.

Such also as are set down in Notitia Provinciarum, as a Boore seiant for
Iovij, a circle party per Saltier for Britanniciani, a carbuncle (as Blazoners
term it) for Britannici, etc. cannot be admitted into the number of Impreses,
for they were the several ensigns of several military companies, whereof
the two last seemed to be leavied out of this Isle.

Childish it is to refer hither the shieldes of King Arthurs round-table
Knights, when they were devised, as it is probable, for no other end, but to
teach young men the terms of Blazon.

Neither are Arms to be referred hither, which were devised to distinguish
families, and were most usual among the nobility in wars, tiltes and
tournaments in their coats called Coate-armours, Shields, Standards, Banners,
Pennors, Guydons, until about some hundred years since, when the French and
Italian in the expedition of Naples, under Charles the eight began to leave
Arms, happly for that many of them had none, and to bear the curtains of
their mistresses beds, their mistresses colors, or these Impreses in their
banners, shields, and caparisons: in which the English have (...) and albeit a
few have borrowed somewhat from them, yet many have matched them, and no few
surpassed them in witty conceit, as you shall perceive hereafter, if you will
first give me leave to remember some imperfect Devises in this kind of some
former Kings of England, which you may well say to be livelesse bodies, for
that they have no word adjoined.

Of King William Conqueror I have heard none, neither dare (as Iovius takes
the Sphinx Augustus signet for an Imprese) so set down our Conquerours seal?
which had his own picture on horseback with these verses to notify his
Dominions.

Hoc Normannorum Willelmum nosce patronum:
On the other side;
Hoc Anglis Regem signo fatearis eundem.
As a King of Sicile had about that time this;
Apulus and Calaber, Siculus mihi servit and Afer.
Stephen of Bloys the Vs^^per took the sign Sagutarius, for that he obtained
this kingdom when the Sun was in the said sign.

King Henry the second grievously molested by the disobedience of his four
sons, who entered into actual rebellion against him, caused to be painted in
his great Chamber at his palace in Winchester an Eagle with four young
chickens, whereof three pecked and scratched him, the fourth picked at his
eyes. This his devise had no life, because it had no Motte: but his answer gave
it life, when he said to one demanding his meaning, That they were his sons
which did so pecke him, and that John the youngest whom he loved best,
practiced his death more busily than the rest. [ Giraldus Cambrensis distinct]

King Henry the third as liking well of Remuneration; commanded to be written
in his Chamber at Woodstocke, as it appears in the Records in the Tower, Qui
non dat quod amat; non accipit i^le quod optat.

Edmund Cr^uch-backe his second son first Earl of Lancaster, used a red
Rose, wherewith his Tomb at Westminster is adorned.

Edward the third bare for his devise the rays of the Sun dispersing
themselves out of a cloud, and in other places, a golden truncke of a tree.

The victorious Black Prince his son used sometimes one feather, sometime
three, in token of his speedy execution in all his services, as the Posts in
the Roman times were Pterophori, and wore feathers to signify their flying
post-haste. But the tradition is, that he won them at the battle of
Poitiers, whereunto he adjoined this old English word IC DEN, Thegn.
that is, I serve, according to that of the Apostle, The heir while he is a
child, differs nothing from a servant: These feathers were an an^ent
ornament of military men, as is evident by that of Virgil: Cuius olorina
surgunt de vertice pennae:

And were used by this Prince before the time of Canoy Chan the Tartarian, who
because his life was saved by an Owl, would have his people wear their
feathers: from whom Haithon fableth, that the people of Iurope received first
the use of feathers.

John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, brother to this Prince, took a red Rose to
his devise (as it were by right of his first wise the heir of Lancaster, as
Edmund of Langley, Duke of York, took the white Rose. Before these two
brethren took these two Roses, which the fautors and followers of their heirs
after, bare in that pitiful distraction of England, between the families of
Lancaster and York, a white Rose-tree at Longleete, bare upon one branch a
fair white rose on the one side, and as fair a red rose on the other; which
might as well have been a fore-token of that division, as the white hen with
the bay sprigge lighting in the lap of Livia Augusta, betokened the Empire to
her posterity, which ended in Nero, when both the brood of that hen failed,
and the baies of that sprigge withered.

The said Edmund of Langley, bare also for an Imprese a Faulcon in a
fetter-locke, implying that he was locked up from all hope and possibility of
the Kingdom, when his brethren began to aspire thereunto. Whereupon he asked
on a time his sons when he saw them, beholding this devise set up in a
window, what was Latin for a fetter-locke: Whereat when the young gentleman
studied, the father said, well then you cannot tell me, I will tell you, Hic
haec hoc tacea^s, as advising them to be silent and quiet, and therewithal
said, Yet God knows what may come to pass hereafter. This his great
Grandchilde King Edward the fourth reported, when he commanded that his younger
son Richard Duke of York, should use this devise with the fetter-locke
opened, as Roger Wall an Herald of that time reports.

King Richard the second, whose untrained youth and yielding lenity hastened
his fall, used commonly a white Heart couchant with a crown, and chain about
his ^^cke. For wearing the which, soon after his deposition lost their lives.
He also used a pescod branch with the cods open, but the pease out, as it is
upon his Robe in his Monument at Westminster.

His wife Anne, sister to Wenceslaus the Emperor, bare an Ostrich, with a
nail in his beak.

King Henry the fourth (as it is in Master Garters book,) used only a Fox
tayled pendent, following lysanders advise, if the Lions skin were too short,
to piece it out with a Foxes case.

His half brethren surnamed Beausort, of their natall place, who after were
dukes of S^mmerset, etc. bare a portcullis gold; whereunto not long afterward
was added this word ALTERA SLCVRITAS. And not long since by the Earls of
Worcester, issued from them MVTARE, AVT TIMERE SP^RNO.

His younger son Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, a noble fautor of good letters,
ba^e in that respect a Laurel branch in a golden cup.

That most martial Prince King Henry the fifth, carried a burn^ng Cresset,
sometime a Beacon: and for his word, (but not appropriate thereunto,) VNE SANS
PLUS. One and no more.

King Henry the sixth had two feathers in saltire.

King Edward the fourth, bare his white Rose, the fetterlocke before specified,
and the sun after the battle of Mortimers cross, where three Suns were
seen imm^diately conioyning in one.

King Richard the third bare a white Boar, which gave occ^sion to the ryme
that cost the maker his life.

The Cat, the Rat, and Lovell the Dog,
Rule all England under an Hog.
King Henry the seventh, in respect of his descent from the house of
Summerset, used the Portcullis before mentioned; and in respect of the union of
the two houses of Lancaster and York by his marriage, the white Rose united
with the red, sometime placed in the Sun. And in respect he was crowned in
the field with King Richards crown, found in an hawtherne bush, he bare the
hawthorne bush with the crown in it; and with this he filled the windows at
Richmond, and his Chapel at Westminster.

His wife Queen Elizabeth, had a white and red rose knit together.

His mother Lady Margaret, Countess of Richmond, had three white Dasies
growing upon a turfe.

When king Henry the eight began his reign, the English wits began to
imitate the French and Italian in these devises, adding the Mots. First king
Henry himself at the interview between him and king Francis the first,
whereat also Charles the fifth was present, used for his Impresse, an English
Archer in a green coat, drawing his arrow to the head, with this inscription,
CVI ADHAEREO, PRAEEST: whenas at that time those mighty Princes banding one
against the other, wrought him for their own particular.

His wife Queen Anne, a happy mother of Englands happiness by her most happy
daughter, bare a white crowned Faulcon, holding a Scepter in her right talon,
standing upon a golden truncke, out of the which sprowted both white and red
roses, with MIHI, ET MEAE

To the honor of Queen Jane, who died willingly to save her child King
Edward, was devised after her death a Phaenix in his funeral fire, with this
Motte, NASCATVR VT ALTER.

King Edward the sixth bare (as the Black Prince) three feathers in a crown
while his father survived, as Prince of Wales, with IC DEN.

Queen Mary when she was Princess of Wales, used both a red and white Rose,
and a Pomegranate knitte together, to show her descent from La^caster, York,
and Spain. When she came to the kingdom, by persuasion of her Clergy, she
bare winged Time drawing Truth out of a pit, with VERIT AS TEMPORIS FILIA.

Her Successor of blessed memory Queen Elizabeth; upon occasions, used so many
heroical devises, as would require a volume; but most commonly a Sive without
a Motte, for her words, VIDEO, TACEO, and SEMPER EADEM, which she as truly
and constantly performed.

Cardinal Poole shevvd the terrestrial globe encompassed with a Serpent, adding
this out of Saint Matthew, ESTOTE PRVDENTES.

NOw I will descend from the blood Royal and former time, and present unto you
a few Impreses born by noble, and gentlemen of our nation, in our age, without
commenting upon them, as the Italians use. For the persons names I am to be
pardoned as knowing them not, when I observed them at Titles and elsewhere:
But such as adjoined after the old and most laudable Italian manner, their
Arms withal.

He signified his constancy in adversity, which painted a man swimming and
striving against the stream in a tempestuous sea, with this, ANIMVS TAMEN IDEM.

Desirous was he to rise, but found counterblasts, who figured a man ascending
a Mountain, but repelled with contrary winds, with this Mot, NITENS AD SVMMA,
REPELLOR.

Henry Howard Earl of Surrey, son and heir to Thomas Duke of Norfolk,
devised for himself, I know not upon what consideration, a broken pillar with
this word, SAT SVPEREST. But I read he was charged at his arraignement with
that devise, the impaling of his Arms with the Arms of Saint Edward, and
erecting three banqueting houses, as Bastilions in his garden near Norwich; as
matters of great consequence and high treason, to the loss of his life. This
is that noble Earl of Surrey, who first among the Nobility of England,
conjoined the honor of learning to the honor of high Parentage. Of whom the
learned Hadrianus Iunius gives this testimony in Lattine, which I cannot so
well express in English, H^roicum corporis filium, ingenium velox, and
expromptum, memoria inexhausta, planeque Mythridatica, sermo ob ipsis Gratiis
effictus, linguarum multiplex cognitio, etc.

He would either find a way or make a way to his preferment, which caused to
be pourtrayed, a hand working out a way in a craggie hill with a pickaxe, and
this word, INVENIT AVT FACIT.

Sir Philip Sidney, to note that he persisted always one, depainted out the
Caspian sea surrounded with his shoares, which neither ebbeth nor flows, and
over it: SINE REFLVXV.

He acknowledged his essence to be in his gracious Sovereign, which bare a
Sunne-diall, and the Sun setting, adding OCCASV DESINET ESSE.

He might seem to bear a vindicative mind, but I think it was for some
amorous affection, which bare a she upon an eye, with SIC VLTVS PEREAM.

Upon his Princes favor he wholly (...), which devised the Sun shining upon a
bush, subscrib^^g SI DES^RIS PEREO.

As he which in like sense bare the Sun reflecting his rays from him, with
QVOVS QVE AVERTES*

His devote mind to his Lady he devoutly, though not religiously showed,
which under Venus in ^^^owde changed the usual prayer into, SALVA ME DOMINA.

He showed his affectionate goodwill in height of courage, that showed in his
shield, Atlas bearing heaven with a roll inscribed in Italian, INTENDAM, CHE
PVO.

The force of love was well figured by him that gave an Unicorn (happly the
badge of his family) reposing his head in a Ladies lap, with this word, O
QVANTA POTENTIA.

Excellent was that of the late Earl of Essex, who when he was cast down with
sorrow, and yet to be employed in Arms, bare a black mourning shield without
any figure, but inscribed, PAR NVLLA FIGVRA DOLORI.

A steadfast settled mind was in that gentleman, that devised for himself a
Pyramid open to wind and weather, with NEC FLATV, NEC FLVCTV.

He noted our peaceable times, when having a Martia^l mind, showed an armed
Knight soundly sleeping in a cocke-boate upon a calm Sea, with, AEQVORA TVTA
SILENT.

He played with a Name, and hoped remedy to his Love, which d^vised a Rose,
with that of Ovid, (leaving out the neg^tive) AMOR EST MEDICABILIS HFRBIS.

A Gentleman committed, and after to his great commend^tion enlarged, took to
him for an Imprese, a Ball upon a Racket, sapers^ebing, PERCVSSA RESVR^O.

The Sun declining to the Weast, with Occidens, Occidens, I being short in
the first word, and long in the second, showed that the safety and life both
of the bearer and of others did depend on the light and life of the Sovereign.

A studious lover of good letters framed to himself only the figure of I with
this philosophical principle, OMNIA EX VNO.

Out of Philosophy likewise an other, to notify his greatest impeachment,
drew this principle, EX NIHI^O NIHIL: and inscribed it bend-wise, with his
Arms in a bare shield.

One weighed down with some adverse hap, and yet not altogether hopeless,
painted an heavy stone fastened to a man's arm with, SPES MIHI MAGNA TAMEN.

Neither seemed he void of all hope for his pains, after long service, which
painted a follow field with, AT QVANDO MESSIS.

The Needle in the Sea Compass still moving but to the North point only with
MOVEOR IMMOTVS, notified the respective constancy of the gentleman to one
only.

The ornament of our land was meant by him which placed only the Moon in
heaven in full light with, QVID SINE TE COELVM?

Far was he from Venus service with bare Venus portrayed in a cloud with
NIHIL MINVS.

But whole devoted was he to that goddess, which contrariwise bare the
Astronomicall character of Venus, with NIHIL MAGIS.

The successive variety of wordly affairs, or his own favors, a studious
Gen^leman well noted, which painted in an Hemisphere some stars rising some
setting, with, SVRGVNT QVE CADVNT QVE VICISSIM.

His whole trust reposed that good Divine in God, which after some adversities
set up a Rock beaten with wind and weather, to express his state yet
standing, with DEO IVVANTE, DEO CONSERVANTE.

Heavenly cogitations were in him, who only figured a man kneeling, with ^is
hands lifted up to the heavens, with this inscribede, SVPREMA OPTIMA MVNDI.

A very good invention was that to show his stay and support by a virgin
Prince, who presented in his shield, the Zodiac with the Characters only of
Leo and Virgo, and this word, HIS EGO PRAESIDIIS.

It may be thought that he noted deserts to be every where excluded, and
mere hap to raise most men, who inscribed within a Laurel Garland, FATO,
NON MERITO.

A lavish tongue might seem to have damnified the Gentleman which took for
his device Landscape, as they call it, and solitary Mountains, with TVTI
MONTES, TVTVM SILENTIVM.

He had no great care to exp^esse his conceit in an Imprese, which
nevertheless he did express, which bare a white shield enscribed, NEC CVRA,
NEC CHARACTER.

No Knight of Venus was he, who as triumphing over her force, bare her Son
winged Cupid in a net, with QVI CAPIT, CAPITVR.

The Star called Spica Virginis, one of the fifteen which are accounted to
be of the first magnitude among the Astronomers, with a scrole in written, MIHI
VITA SPICA VIRGINIS, declared thereby happly, that he had that Star in the
ascendent at his Nativitie, or rather, that he lived by the gracious favor of
a virgin Prince.

One in our seafaring age adventuring himself and all he had to the Seas,
proposing no certain arrival to himself, made a Ship with full sails in the
Sea, and superscribed, PORTVS IN IGNOTO.

His mind mounted above the mean, which devised for himself, one that had
clambred much more then half the way of a sleep Mountain, adding this word
near him, DIXERVNT FATVI, omitting the other part of the verse, Medicum
tenuere beati.

Likewise he hoped to attain the height of his desire, which made one climing
to the middle of a Piramis, with HAC SPE, by him, and ILLIC SPES above him.

Another also which climed in his conceyt, but as it seems fearing a fall,
made a man upon the vpp^r degree^ of a Ladder, with this Mot adjoined, NON QVO,
SED VNDE CADO.

He referred Fate, Fortune and all to his Sovereign, which drew for himself
the twelve houses of heaven, in the form which Astrologians use, setting down
neither Sign, nor Planet therein, but only placing over it this word,
DISPONE.

The like reference had he which only used a white Shield, and therein
written, FATVM INSCRIBAT ELIZA.

It may be doubtful whether he affected his Sovereign, or justice more
zealously, which made a man hovering in the air, with FEROR AD ASTAEAM.

You may easily conjecture what he conceived, who in his shield reared an Oar
with a ^aile fastened thereunto, adding. FORS ET VIRTUES MISCENTVR IN VNVM.

Full of loving affection was he to his Lady, which bare a Rose upon his
pricking branch, and ABIGITQVE TRAHITQVE.

With many a blustering blast he seemed to have been tossed, which painted an
Horizon, with all the Cardinal and collateral winds blowing, and in the
midst RAPIVNT QVEFERVNT QVE.

As to the honor of Magellanus (whose ship first passed round about the world,
though he miscarried) was devised the terrestrial Globe, with, TV PRIMVS
CIRCVMDEDISTI ME. So our Sir Francis Drake, who fortunately effected the same,
had devised for him a Globe terrestrial, upon the height whereof in a ship
under sail, trained about the Globe with two golden halsers, by direction of
an hand out of a cloud, and a dragon volant upon the hatches, regarding the
direction with these words, AVXI^IO DIVINO.

An Imprese too perplexed and unfitting for so worthy a man, who as one said to
him most excele^tly in this Distich PLUS VLTRA, Herculeis inscribas Drake (...),
Et magno dicas Hercule mayor (...).


A man ve^^ly worthy to be eternized by some good p^n, as also his servant
John Oxenham, who ariving with 70. men in the straight of Dariena in America*
drew a land his ship* and hiding it with boughs, marched over the l^nd with
his company, guided by Negros, until be came to a river where he cut wood
made him a Pinasse, entered the South sea, went to the Island of Pearls, lay
there ten days, intercepted in two Spanish ships 60. thousand weight of
gol^e, and one hundred thousand in bars of silver, returned safely to the
maine land: but through the mutiny of his soldiers he miscarried, and as the
Poet says, Magnu excidit ausis. In an adventure never attempted by any, and
therefore not to be forgotten, when as the Lopez a Spaniard has recorded it
not without admiration, as you may see in the Discoveries of the lea^ned and
industrious M Rich. Ha^kluit: But pardon this d^gression occasioned by the
memory of Sir Fr. Drake.

It seemed a difficulty unto him to l^^e rightly, either in liberty or in
bondage, w^i^h painted one Greyhound coursing, with, IN LIBERATE LABOR, and
another ^i^d to a tree g^z^ng on the game, with, IN SERVITVTE DOLOR.

I can not imagine what he m^ant, which too^e for his devise a small brook
passing along the lands ^^ldly, till it came to a damme, and there rising and
raging overflowed the lands, with, MAGIS MAGIS QVE, written in the place
ouerflowed: unless he would give us to understand that the more his affections
were stopped, the more they were stirred.

He which took a man armed at all points with, ME, ET MEVM, while he showed a
resolution in his own behalf, forgot God, and that of King Henry the eight,
DIEV ET MON DROIT, God and my right.

In the Impreses of Ruscelli, I find that Sir Ri^hard Shetley, Knight of S:
Ioh^s, used a white Faulcon, with th^s Spanish Motto, FE Y FIDALGVIA. Id est.
Faith and gentleness, which Faulcon he quartered in his arme^ by the name of
Michelgroue, As they say.

Whereas the Laurel sacred to learning is never hurt by lightning, and
therefore the Cock resorteth thereunto in tempests, as natural Historians
testify. He seemed studious of good learning, and fearful of danger, which
caused to be painted for him a Cock under a Laurel, with, SIC EVIT ABILE
FVLMFN. An amorous affection was only noted in him which set down an eye in
an heart, with, VVLNVS ALO.

He also held one course, and levelled at one mark, which made a River in a
long tract disgorging himself into the Sea, with SEMPER AD MARE.

He doubted not to find the right course by indirect means, which did set
down a sphericall crooked pair of Compasses, with PER OBLIQVA RE^TA.

He proposed to himself honor in Martial service, which made a Trophee, or
truncke of a tree, with harness and abillements of war, and a Sepulcher not
far off, adding underneath, AVT SPOLIIS LAETEMVR OPIMIS. Omitting that which
follows in Virg^^l, Aut Laetho insigni.

A wary man would he seem, and careful for his own, which showed a village
on fire, with I AM PROXIMVS ARDET.

Tired might he seem with Law-delayes, or such like suits, which devised for
himself a tottering ship with torn sails driven up and down, with I AM
SEVTIMA PORTAT. You know what follows, Omn^bus errantem terris and fluctibus
astas.

In the beginning of her late Majesty's reign, one upon happy hope conceyved,
made an half of the Zodiake, with Virgo rising, adding I AM REDIT ET VIRGO:
Suppressing the words following, Redeunt Saturma regna.

Variety and vicissitude of humane things he seemed to show, which parted his
shield, Per Pale, Argent, and Sables, and counterchangeably writ in the
Argent, ATER, and in the Sables, ALBVS.

He elegantly showed by whom he was drawn, which depainted the N^^ticall
compass, with, AVT MAGNES, AVI MAGNA.

Another ascribing his life and all to his Lady, pictured at (...) near a
spring, and at the root thereof, QVOD VIVAM TVVM.

He shevved himself to be a Martial, and a Mercuriall man, which bare a
svvorde in one hand, and a Bay in the other, with ARTI ET MARTI.

It might seem a craving Imprese, which set nothing but Ciphers down in a
ro^le, with ADD VEL VNVM.

Likewise he which set down the nine numerall figures* with ADD, VEL ADIME.

His meaning might be perceyved out of the last Eglogue of Virgill, containing
Gallus loving lamentations, which po^^ trayed a tree, and in the bark engraved
E, adding this word, CRES^ETIS.

Studious in Alchimy might he seem, or in some abstruse Art which he could not
find out, which showed for his devise only a golden branch, with LATET ARBORE
OPACA.

He se^med not to respect hopeful tokens without good effects, which made a
ship sinking, and the Rainebow appearing, with QVID TV, SI PEREO.

I know one which overcome with a praedominant humor was so troubled with a
fancifull v^ine cogitation, so that no counsel or company could withdraw him
from it, figured a man with a shadow pro^ected before him, with this word, IT
COMES.

A Gentleman scholar drawn from the University where he was well liked to
the Court, for which in respect of his bashful modesty, he was not so fit;
painted a red coral branch, which while it grew in the sea was green, with
this, NVNC RVBEO, ANTE VIREBAM.

Master Richard Carew of Anthony, when he was in his tender years, devised for
himself an Adamant upon an Anvile, with a hand holding an hammer thereover,
and this Italian Motto, CHE VERACE DVRERA: which also contained his name
Anagranimatically.

He seemed not to be sufficiently warmed, living in the Sunshine of the Court,
which framed for his devise a glass of Parabolicall concavitie, or burning
glass as some call it, with the Sun shining over it, and a combustible
matter kindled under it, with NEC DVM CALESCO.

He doubted not but continual suit would molifie his Mistress heart, which made
an eye-dropping tears upon an heart, SAEPE CADINDO.

He lacked but some gracious hand to effect some matter well forward, which
made more then half a circle with a pair of compasses, the onefoote fixed in
the center, the other in the circumference, placing thereby, ADD MANVM.

His conceit was godly and ^owe spondent to his name, who made an, Heart to his
race to a fountain and over it, VT CFRVVS FONTEM, and under it, SIC ABRAHAMVS
CHRISTVM. The meaning is plain to all which know Scriptures, and I take the
Gentleman's name to be Abraham Hartwell: The same Imprese was used by Boromeo
the best Cardinal which I have heard of, but with this word, VNA SALVS.

When the Spania^ds purposed the invasion 1588, and their Navy was scattered
to their confusion, by a ship fierd and carried among them by direction from
her late Majesty. A Gentleman depainted that Navy in confusion with a fiered
ship approaching, adding to her honor out of Virgil: DVX FAEMINA FACTI.

This calls another to my remembrance, which I have seen cast in silver, as
concerning that matter, A great Navy upon the sea near the South coast of
England, with VENIT, VIDIT, FVGIT: As that of Julius Casar, when he had
overcome Pharmaces, VENI, VIDI, VICI.

About that time, when some dislikes grew between the English and the States
of the united Provinces, they fearing that it might tend to the hurt of both,
caused to be imprinted two pitchers floating on the water upon a Medalia, with
SI COLLIDIMVR, FRANGIMVR.

In the like sense, there were comed pieces with two Oxen drawing the plough,
the one marked with a rose for England, the other with a Lion on the shoulder
for Holland, and written thereby, TRAHITE AE QVO IVGO.

He measured himself with a mean, and seemed to rest content, which made a
To^tois in his shell, with MECVM HABITO.

His conceit was obscure to me which painted a savadge of America pointing
toward the Sun, with TIBI ACCESSV, MIHI DECESSV.

Sir Philip Sidney, who was a long time heir apparent to the Earl of
Leicester, after the said Earl had a son borne to him, used at the next
Tilte-day following SPERAVI, thus dashed through, to show his hope therein was
dashed.

He signified himself to be revived with gracious favor, which made the
Sun-shining upon a^^^hered tree, but new blooming, with this, HIS RADIIS
REDIVIVA VIRESCO.

The late Earl of Essex took a Diamond only amidst his shield, with this
about it, DVM FORMAS MINVIS: Diamonds, as all know, are impaired while they are
fashioned and pointed.

Sir Henry Lea upon some Astrologicall consideration, used to her late
Majesty's he now, the whole constellation of Ariadnes crown, culminant in her
nativitie, with this word: CAELVM QVE SOLVMQVE BE AVIT.

A settled conscience did he show, which made a Haleyon hovering against the
wind with, CONSTANS CONTRARIA SPERNIT. The Fishers do say, that when it is
dead and hanged up, turns the belly always to the wind.

He might seem to be in some hard distress, which carried a Viper upon his
hand, with this word over written, MORS, VEL MORSVS.

He might seem to reach at some of Vulcans order, which made a Bucke casting
his horns, with INERMIS DEFORMIS over him; and under him, CVR DOLENT HABENTES?

It was some loving conceit expressed by him, which bare two Torches, the one
light, the other out, with, EXTINGVOR A SIMILI.

Another presenting himself at the Tilt, to show himself to be but young in
these services, and resolving of no one Imprese, took only a white shield, as
all they did in old time, that had exployted nothing: and in the base point
thereof made a Painters pensill, and a little shell of colors, with this
Spanish word, HAZED ME QVE QVIRES, ^d est, Make of me what you will.

At that time one bare a pair of Scales, with fire in one balance, and smoke
in the other, thereby written, PONDER ARE, ERR ARE.

The same day was borne by an other, many flies about a candle, with, SIC
SPLENDIDIORA PETVNTVR.

In an other shield, (if I am not deceived) drops fell down into a fire, and
there-vnder was written, TAMEN NON EXTINGVENDA.

The Sun in another shield did seem to cast his rays upon a star, partly
over-shadowed with a cloud, and thereby was set down, TANTVM, QVANTVM.

A letter folded and sealed up, superscribed, LEGE ET RELEGE, was borne by
another, and this last I refer to the Readers consideration.

Confident was he in the goodness of his cause, and the Justice of our Land,
who only pictured Iustiti^ with her Balance and Sword, and this being an
Anagramme of his name, DVM ILLA, EVINCAM.

For whom also was devised by his learned friend, Pallas defensive Shield with
G^rg^ns head thereon, in respect of his late Sovereigns most gracious
patronage of him, with this Anagrammaticall word, NIL MALVM, CVI DEA.

Caetera desunt.

Grave Speeches, and witty Apothegmes of worthy Personages of this Realm in
former times.
TWenty years since, while I: Bishop (whose memory for his learning is dear
to me) and my self turned over all our Historians we could then find, for
diverse ends, we began to note aparte the Apothegms or Speeches (call them
what ye will) of our nation. Which since that time I have so far increased, as
our Countrey-Writers spare in this point, have affoorded; and here do offer
them unto you. Albeit I do know they will lie open to the censure of the
youth of our time, who for the most part, are so over-gulled with self-liking,
that they are more then giddy in admiring themselves, and carping whatsoever
has been done or said heretofore, Nevertheless I hope that all are not of
one humor, and doubt not, but that there is diversity of tastes, as was among
Horaces guests; so that which seems unsavory to one, may seemed dainty to
another, and the most witless speech that shall be set down, will seem witty
to some. We know that whereas Dianaes Temple at Ephesus was burned that night
that Alexander the Great was borne; ^^eer. de Not. Deorum lib. 2.
one said, It was no marvel, for she was then absent, as mother Midwise,
Plutarch in Alexand^^.
at so great a childbirth* Tully does commend this for a witty conceit, and
Plutarch condemns it as a witless jest. The like is to be looked for in
these, which nevertheless whatsoever they are in themselves, or in other men's
judgments, I commend them to such indifferent, courteous, modest Readers, as
do not think basely of the former ages, their country, and countriemen;
leaving to other to gather the pregnant Apothegmes of our time, which I know
will find far more favor. And that I may set them in order of time, I will
begin with the ancient Britan Prince, called by the Rom^ns Caratacu^ (happly
in his own tongue Caradoc) who flourished in the parts now called Wales,
about the sixt^eth year after the birth of Christ.

CAratacus a Britain that 9. years withstood the Roman p^^ssance, was at
length vanquished, and in triumphant manner with his wife, daughters, and
brethren, presented to Claudius the Emperor, in the view of the whole city
of Rome. But he nothing appalled with this adversity, delivered this speech;
Had my moderation and carriage in prosperity, been answerable to my Nobility
and Estate, I might have come hither rather a friend than a captive; neither
would you have disdained to have entered amity with me being nobly descended
and sovereign over many people. My present state, as it is reproachful to me,
^o it is honorable to you: I had horsemen, munition and money, what marvel is
it, if I were loath to loose thems If you will be soveraign^ over all, by
consequence all must serve you: Had I yielded at the first, neither my power,
nor your glory had been renewned, and after my execution oblivion bad
ansewed: But if you save my use, I shall be for ever a president and proof of
your clemency. This manly speech purchased pardon for him and his, and the
Senate assembled adjudged the taking of this poor Prince of Wales, as
glorious, as the conquering of Siphax King of Numidia by P. Scipio, or of
Perses King of Macedonia by L. Paulus. [Tacitu^]

When this (...) now enl^rged was carried about to see the state and
magnificence of Rome, Why do you (said he) so greedily desire our poor
cottages, when as you have such stately and magnificall palaces? [Zonaras]

In the time of Nero, when the Britans could no longer bear the injustice
wherewith the Romans both h^re and elsewhere grounded their greatness; Bundica,
called by some Boadicia, Princess then of the parts of Norffolke and
Suffolk, exceedingly iniuried by them, animated the Britan^ to shake off the
Roman bondage, and concluded: Let the Romans which are no better than Hares
and F^xe^ understand that they make a wrong match with Wool^es and Greyhoundes:
And with that word let an Hare o^t of her lap, as a fore-token of the
Romans fearfulness, but the success of the b^ttell prooved otherwise. [
Xiphilinus.]

Calgacus a warrelike Britan commanding in the north part of this Isle, when
he had encouraged his people with a long speech to withstand the Romans ready
to invade them, concluded emphatically with these words, You are now come to
the shocke, think of your ancestors, think of your posterity: for the
Britans before the arivall of the Romans enjoyed happy liberty, and now were in
danger of most heavy slaverie.

Severus the Emperor an absolute Lord of the most part of this Isle, when
from mean estate he had ascended to the highest honor, was wont to say, I
have been all, and am never the better.

When he lay sick of the gowt at York, and the soldiers had saluted his
son there by the name of Augustus as their Sovereign: he got him up,
caused the principal practisers of that fact to be brought before him, and
when they prostrate craved pardon, he laying his hand upon his head, said;
You shall understand, that my head, and not my feet does govern the Empire:
and shortly after ended his life in the city of York with these words; I
found the State troublesome every where, and I leave it quiet even to the
Britans, and the Empire sure and firm to my children, if they be good, but
unsure and weak if they be bad: A man he was very industrious, of mavelous
dispatch, and so invred in continual action, that at the last gasp he said,
And is there any thing for me to do now?

While he ruled, the world was so loose that three thousand were indicted at
Rome of adultery, at which time Iulia the Empress blamed the wife of Argetocox
a northern Britain Lady, that the British women did not according to
womanhoode carry themselves, in accompanying with men, (for then ten or
twelve men had two or three wives common among them.) But she not ignorant
of the Roman incontinencie, replied; We accompany indeed with the best and
bravest men openly, but most vile and base companions do use you secretly.
[Xiphilinus]

At York also died Constantinus Chlorus the Emperor, who being not able to
furnish Dioclesian his consort in the Empire with such a mass of money, as he
required at that instant, said, He thought it better for the commonweal
that many should be in the hands of private men, then shut up in the
Emperors coffers; concurring with Traiane, who compared the treasure of the
Prince unto the spleen, that the greater it grows, the limbs are the lesser.
[ Eusebius.]

His son C^nstantine, invested in the Empire at York, (and a Britan borne as
all Writers consent, beside Nicophorus who lived not long since, and now
Lipsius deceived by the false printed coppie of Iul. Firmicus,) the first
Emperor which advanced the faith of Christ, followed the humility of Christ,
for he used to call the common people, His fellow servants and brethren of the
Church of God.

When a slattering Priest (for in all ages the Clericall will flatter, as well
the Laicall) told him that his godliness and virtues justly deservd to have in
this world the empire of the world, and in the world to come, to reign with
the son of God: The humble Emperor cried, Fie, fie, for shame, let me hear
no more such unseemly speeches: but rather suppliantly pray unto my Almighty
Maker, that in this life, and in the life to come, I may seem worthy to be his
servant.

When he sought by severe edicts to abolish all heathenish superstition, and
labored by godly laws to establish the true religion and service of Christ;
yea, and incessantly endeavored to draw men unto the faith, persuading,
reproving, praying, entreating in time, out of time, publicly and privately:
he one day said merrily, yet truly unto the Bishop, that he had bidden to a
banquet, As ye be Bishops within the Church, so may I also seem to be a Bishop
out of the Church.

He dissuading one from covetousnes, did with his lance draw out the length and
breadth of a man's grave, saying: This is all that thou shall have when thou art
dead, if thou can happily get so much.

He made a law, that no Christian should be bondsman to a Jew, and if that any
Jew did buy any Christian for his slave, he should be fined therefore, and
the Christian enfranchised; adding this reason: That it stood not with
equity, that a Christian should be slave unto the murderers of Christ.

Ethelbert King of Kent, was hardly induced to embrace Christian Religion at
the persuasion of Augustine, sent to convert the English Nation: but at length,
being persuaded and desirous to be baptized, said: Let us come also to the King
of Kings, and giver of Kingdoms: it may redound to our shame, that we which
are first in authority, should come list to Christianity: But I do beseech
that true King, that he would not respect the precedence in time, but devotion
of my m^nde, [Ioscelinus.]

When Paulinus brought unto Edwin king of Northumberland, the glad tidings of
the salvation of mankind by Christ, and preached the Gospel unto the king and
his Nobility, zealously and eloquently, opening unto them the mysteries of our
faith and precepts of Christian Religion; one of the Lords thus spoke unto the
King, (but some now happily will smile at this speech,) We may ^^ely compare
man's state unto this little Robbin-redbrest, that is now in this cold weather
here in the wa^me chamber chirpeng and singing merrily, and as long as she
shall remain here, we shall see and understand how she does: but anon when
she shall be flowne hence abroad into the wide world, and shall be forced to
feel the bitter storms of hard winter, we shall not know what shall become of
her: So likewise we see how men fare as long as they live among us, but after
they be dead, neither we nor our Religion have any knowledge what becomes of
them: Wherefore I do think it wisdom to give care unto this man, who seems
to show us, not only what shall become of us, but also how we may obtain
overlasting life hereafter. Beda.

When Rodoald king of the East Angles, being won with rewards, was shamefully
minded to have delivered unto Edelfride the king of Northumberland, the
innocent Prince Edwin, who had fled unto him to be saved from the bloody hands
of Edelfride, who had unlawfully bereaft him of his kingdom: His wife turned
his intent, by telling him, that It stood not with the high and sacred state
of a King to buy and sell the bodies of men, as it were a peti^chapman: or that
which is more dishonorable, slave-like to sell away his faith, a thing which
he ought to hold more precious then all the gold and gemmes of the whole world
yea and his own life. Beda.

Ina King of West Saxons, had three daughters, of whom upon a time he demanded
whether they did love him, and so would do during their lives above all others;
the two elder swear deeply they would, the youngest, but the wisest told her
father flatly without flattery, That albest she did love, honor, and reverence
him, and so would whilst she lived, as much as nature and daughterly duty at
the uttermost could expect: Yet she did think that one day it would come to
pass, that she should affect another more servently, meaning her husband, when
she were married: Who being made one flesh with her as God by commandment had
told, and nature had taught her she was to cleave fast to, forsaking father and
mother, kiss and kin. [Anonymus.] One refers this to the daughters of
king Leir.

Imperious was that speech of Theodore the Grecian, Archbishop of Canterbury,
in depriving a poor English Bishop, Although we can charge you with nothing,
yet that we w^^l we will: like to that, Sie volo, sic ^ubeo, stat pro ratione
voluntas: But humble was the English Bishops reply: Paul appealed from the
Jews to Caesar, and I from you to Christ. Vita S. Wilfredi.

The reverend Bid, whom we may more easily admire, than sufficiently praise
for his profound learning in a most barbarous age, when he was in the pangs of
death, said to the standers by; I have so lived among you, that I am not
ashamed of my life, neither fear I to die, because I have a most gracious
Redeemer. He yielded up his life with this prayer for the Church; O King of
glory, Lord of Hosts, which have triumphantly ascended into heaven, leave us
not fatherless, but send the promised spirit of thy truth amongst us. Some
write that he went to Rome, and interpreted there S, P, Q, R, in derision of
the Goths swarming to Reme, Stultus Populus Quaerit Roman: and that in his
return he died at Genoa, where they show his toombe: But certain it is that
he was sent for to Rome by Sergius the Pope, and more certain that he died at
Weremouth, and from thence was translated to Durham: And that I may incidently
note that which I have heard: Not many years since a French Bishop returning
out of Scotland, coming to the Church of Durham, and brought to the shrine of
Saint Cu^hbert, kneeled down, and after his devotions, offered a Baubie,
saying; Sancte Cuthberte, si sanctus si^, ora pro me: But afterward, being
brought unto the Toombe of Bed^, saying likewise his Orisons, offered there a
French crown with this alteration, Sancte Beda, quia sanctus es, ora pro me.

Johannes Erigena surnamed Scotus, a man renowned for learning, sitting at the
Table, in respect of his learning, with Charles the bawld Emperor and King of
France, behaved himself as a slovenly Scholar, nothing Courtly; whereupon
the Emperor asked him merrily, Quid interest inter Scotum and Sotum; What is
between a Scot and a Sot? He merrily, but yet malapertly answered, Mensa,
The Table; as though the Emperor were the Sot, and he the Scot. [ Rog:
Hovede^us,]

On an other time the Emperor did serte down unto him a dish with two fair
great fishes, and one little one, willing him to be carver unto two other
Scholars that fate beneath him: Then Master John, who was but a little man,
laid the two great fishes upon his own trencher, and set down the one
little fish unto the other two Scholars, who were big men. Which when the
Emperor saw, he smiling said; In good faith Master John, you are no
indifferent divider: Yes if it like your Highness, very indifferent (said
he) for here (poynting to himself and the two great fishes) be two great
ones, and a little one, and so yonder (reaching his hand toward the
Scholars) are two great ones and a little one. Idem

Wenefridus borne at Kirton in Devonshire, after furnamed Boniface, who
converted Freesel and to Christianity, was wont to say, In old time there
were golden Prelates, and wooden Chalices, but in his time wooden Prelates,
and golden Chalices. [Beatus Rhenanus libr. 2. rerum Germen^arum.]

Ethelwold the Bishop of Winchester in the time of king Edgar, in a great
famine, sold away all the sacred gold and silver vessels of all his church,
to releeve the hungerstarved poor people, saying, That there was no reason
that the senseless temples of God should abound in riches, and living temples
of the holy ghost starve for hunger.

Whenas Kinnad King of Scot^ a vassal to King Eadgar of England, had said at
his Table, That it stood not with the honor of the Princes of this Isle to be
subject to that Dandiprat Eadgar, who was indeed but of small stature, yet
full of courage. He understanding thereof withdrew Kinnad privately into a
wood, as though he had to confer with him of some important secret; where he
offered him the choice of two swords, prepared for that purpose, with these
words, Now we are alone, you may try your manhood: now may it appear who
should be subject to the other: retire not one foot back: It stands not
with the honor of Princes to brave it at the Table, and not to dare it in the
field. But Kinad heere-at dismayed, desired pardon by excuse, and obtained it.
[ Malmesburiensis page 33.]

The same king Eadgar, having brought into his subjection the aforesaid Kinnad
king of Scotts, Malcolm king of Cumberland, Mac cuis the arch pirate lord of
the Isles, with Dufnall, Griffith, Howell, Jacob, Iudethil^ Princes of Wales,
was rowed by them in triumphant manner in his barge upon the river of Dee at
Chester, at which time it is reported he said; Then may my successors the
Kings of England glory, when they shall do the like. [Marianus Scotus Anno
973.

When Hinguar of Denmark came so suddenly upon Edmund the king of the
East Angles, that he was forced to seek his safety by flight, he happened
unhappily on a troop of Danes, who fell to examining of him, whether he knew
where the king of the East Angles was, whom Edmund thus answered; Even now
when I was in the palace, he was there, and when I went from thence, he
departed thence, and whether he shall escape your hands or no, only God
knows. But so soon as they once heard him name God, the godless infidells
pitifully martired him. [ Vita Sancti Edmundi.

When Brithwold a noble Saxon marching against the Danes encamped near Maldon,
was invited by the Abbot of Elie to take his dinner with him, he refusing,
answered; He would not dine from his companies, because he could not fight
without his companies. Liber Eliensis.

King Canutus, commonly called Knute, walking on the sea sands near to
Southampton, was extolled by some of his flattering followers, and told that
he was a king of kings, the mightiest that reigned far and near, that both
sea and land were at his command: But this speech did put the godly King in
mind of the infinite power of God, by whom Kings have and enjoy their power,
and thereupon he made this demonstration to refell their flattery: He took
off his cloak, and wrapping it round together, s^te down upon it near to the
sea, that then began to slow, saying, Sea, I command thee that thou touch
not my feet: (...) he had not so soon spoken the word, but the surg^ng wave
dashed him. He then rising up, and going back, said: Ye see now my Lord,
what good cause you have to call me a King, that am not able by my
commandment to stay one wave: no morta^l man doubtless is worthy of such an
(...) name, no man has such command, but one King, which rules all: Let us
honor him, let us call him King of all kings, and Lord of all nations: Let us
not only confess, but also pr^fesse him to be ruler of the heavens, sea, an^
land. [Polydorus and others.

When Edric the extorte^ was deprived by King C^ute of the government of
Mercia; he impatient of the disgrace, told him he had deserved better, for
that to pleasure him, he had first revolted from his Sovereign king Edmund,
and also dispatched him. Whereat C^ute all appalled, answered; And thou shall
die for thy desert, when^^ thou art a traitor to God and me, in killing thy
king, and my confederate brother; His blood be upon thy head, which have laid
hands upon the Lords anointed. Some report that he said; For his deserts
he should be advaunced above all the Nobility of England, which h^
c^mmediately performed, advauncing his head upon the Tower of London.
[Florilegus.

King Edward the Confessor, one afternoon lying in his bed with the
curtain, drawn round about him, a poor pilfering Courtier came into his
chamber, where finding the Kings Casket open, which Hugoline his chamberlain
had forgotten to shut, going forth to pay money in haste, he took out so
much money as he could^ well carry, and went away. But insatiable desire
brought him again, and so the third time, when the King who lay still all this
while, and would not seem to see, began to speak to him, and bade him
speedily be packing; For he was well if he could see, for if Hugoline came
and took him there, he were not only like to loose all that he had gotten,
but also stretch an halter. The fellow was no sooner gone, but Hugoline came
in; and finding the Casket open, and much money taken away, was greatly moved:
But the King willed him not to he grieved, For (said he) he that has it had
more need of it then we have. This at that time was adjudged Christian
lenity, but I think in our age it will be accounted simplicity in the woorst
sense. [ Vita Sancti Edwardi.

This Edward hasted out of Normandy, whither his expelled father king Ethelred
had fled with him, with a great power to recover the kingdom of England from
the Danes, near unto whose forces he was encamped, ready to give them
battle: But when his Captains promised him assured victory, and that they
would not leave one Dane alive: God forbid (quoth Edward,) that the kingdom
should be recovered for me one man, by the death of so many thousand men: It is
better that I do lead a private and unbloody life, then be a King by such but
chery: And therewithal brake up Camp and retired into Normandy, where he
stayed until God sent opportunity to obtain the kingdom without blood. [
Paulus Aemilius.]

Harold as he waited on the cup of the said king Edward, chanced to stumble
with one foot that he almost kissed the ground, but with the other leg he
recovered himself and saved the wine, whereat his father Godwyn Earl of Kent,
who then dined with the King, smiling sa^d: Now one brother did help another:
At this word, although spoken proverbially, the Kings blood began to rise,
thinking how shamefully they had murdered his brother Alfrede, and angerly
answered: And so might my brother have been a help to me, if it had pleased
you. [VitaS. Edwards.]

The same king Edward passing out of this life, commended his wise to the
Nobility, and said; That she had carried her self as his wife abroad, but as
his sister or daughter at home: Afterward seeing such as were present weeping
and lamenting for him, he said; If you loved me, you would for bear weeping
and rejoice, because I go to my father, with whom I shall receive the joys
promised to the faithful, not through my merits, but by the free mercy of my
Savior, which shows mercy on whom he pleases. [Eilredus Rivallensis]

Sywarde the martial Earl of Northumberland, feeling in his sickness that he
drew toward his end, arose out of his bed and put on hi^ Armor, saying, That
it became not a valiant man to die lying, like a beast: and so he gave up the
Ghost standing: As valiantly both spoken and performed, as it was by Vespasian.

When the said Siward understood that his son whom he had sent in service
against the Scottishmen, was stain, he demanded whether his wound were in
fore part or hinder part of his body, when it was answered in the fore part, he
replied: I am right glad, neither wish any other death to me or mine. [Hen.
Hunt^ngdon.]

In this age when a Bishop living loosely was charged that his conversation was
not according to the Apostles lives, he made a mock at it* and excus^d
himself with this verse, which was after taken up for a common excuse in that
behalf: Nunc aliud tempus, a^^j pro tempere m^res. [Anonymus.]

When the fatal period of the Saxon Empire was now complete, and battles were
marshalled between William Duke of Normandy, and Harold King of England,
Girthe Haroldes younger brother, not holding it best to hazard the kingdom of
England at one cast, signified to the King, that the succ^sse of war was
doubtful, that victory was swayed rather by fortune than by valor, that
advised delay was most important in Martial affairs, and if so be brother
(said he,) You have plighted your faith to the Duke, retire your self, for no
force can serve against a man's own conscience, God will revenge the violation
of an ^the: You may reserve your self to give them a new encounter, which will
be more to their terror: As for me, if you will commit the charge to me, I
will perform both the part of a kind brother, and a courageous Leader. For
being clear in conscience, I shall sell my life, or discomfit your enemy with
more felicity.

But the King not liking his speech, answered: I will never turn my back with
dishonor to the Norman, neither can I in any sort digest the reproach of a
base mind: Well, then be it so, ( said some discontented of the company,) let
him bear the brunt that has given the occasion. [Anonymus.]

William Conqueror when he invaded this Island, chanced at his arrival to be
graveled, and one of his feet stacke so fast in the sand, that he fell to the
ground. Wherewithal one of his attendants caught him by the arm and helped
him up, saying: Stand up my ^iege Lord and be of good cheer, for now you have
taken fast footing in England: and then espying that he brought up sand and
earth in his hand, added: Yea and you have taken livery and seisin of the
Country: For you know that in delivering of livery and seisin, a piece of the
earth is taken. [ Hist. Normanica.]

A Wizard, (or a Wiseman as they then called them,) had foretold William that
he should safely arrive an England with his whole Army, without any
impeachment of Harold: the which after it came it pass, the King sent for the
Wizard to confer further with him. But when it was told him that he was
drowned in that ship which only of all the whole fleet miscarried, The
Conqueror said: He would never make account of that science that profited more
the ignorant then the skillful therein, for he could foresee my good fortune,
but not his own mishap. [Idem.]

That morning that he was to join battle with Harold, his atmorer put on his
backe-peece before, and his breastplate behind, the which being espied by some
that stood by, was taken on them for an ill token, and therefore advised him
not to fight that day; to whom the Duke answered: I force not of such
fooleries, but if I have any skill (...) South-saying, (as in sooth I have
none,) it does prognosticate that I shall change copy from a Duke to a King.
[Idem.]

Magike in the time of Ner^, was discovered to be but a vanity, in the
declining state of the Roman Empire accounted by the Gentiles a verity: in the
time of Hildebrand, (if we believe Authors,) so approoved that it was commonly
practiced: For as in the time of Vale^s, diverse curious men (as has been
said,) by the falling of a ring Magically prepared upon the letters (...),
judged that one Theodorus should succeed in the Empire, when indeed
Theodosius did. So when Hildebrand was Pope, by like curiosities it was found
that Odo should succcede. Whereupon Odo Earl of Kent, and Bishop of Bayeux,
brother to king William the Conqueror, devoured the Papacy in hope, sent money
his persuading messengers to Rome, perchased a palace there, and prepared
thitherward; when king William for his presumption, and other his misdemenours
stayed him, and committed him, saying: Offensive foole-hardines must be timely
restrained [Liber Cadomensis.]

When the same Od^ who was both Bishop of Bai^ux in Normandy, and Earl of
Kent, in former time had so disloyally carried himself against king William
the Conqueror, that he complained of him to his Lords: Lanfranc Archbishop of
Canterbury advised the King to commit him. But what say you^ (quoth the King,)
whenas he is a Clergyman? You may not, said he, commit the Bishop of Baieux,
but you may well (...) the Earl of Kent [ W: Malmsbur] Like unto this was that
distinction of Piramus, Secretary to Charles the fifth in late years, when Pope
Julius the second did combine with the French king, against the Emperor, of
the Popes honesty, and Julius dishonesty.

This King William, by reason of sickness, kept his chamber a long time,
whereat the French King scoffing said: The King of England heth long in
childe-bed. Which when it was reported unto King William, he answered; When I
am churched there shall be a thousand lights in France: (alluding to the lights
that women used to bear when they were churched,) and that he performed
within few days after, wasting the French frontires with fire and sword.

The same King at the time of his death, said; I appoint (...) successor in
the kingdom of England, but I commend it to the eternal God, whose I am, and
in whose hands all things are: happly remembering that of the Monk before
specified, page 5.

This king perceiving his own defects, in some points, for want of learning,
did exhort his children oftentimes to learning with this saying, An unlearned
Prince is a crowned Ass: Which speech took so great impression in his son
Henry, that he obtained by study and learning the surname of Beauclearke, or
fine Scholar. [ Annals Ecclesia Cant. Malmesburiensi^.

William Rufus loved well to keep vacant Bishopriks and Abbeys in his hands,
saying; Christ's bread is sweet, dainty, and most delicate for Kings.

But although this King made most commonly, as it were, port-sale of the
Spiritual livings; yet when two Monks were at drop-vied Bezantines (the
current gold of that age) before him for an Abbey, he espied a third Monk of
their company standing in a corner, whom the King asked, what he would give to
be Abbot? Not one farthing (said he) for I renounced the world and riches,
that I might serve God more sincerely. Then (said the King) thou art most
worthy to be made Abbot, and thou shall have it. [Liber Cantuar.

When news were brought him that the French King had besieged the city of
Constances in Normandy, ^e posted with a few to the sea coast, to take ship.
But because the wind blew very strong from South, the sailers signified, that
it was very dangerous for him to take Sea, but the King replied, Hoise up
sails in Gods name, for I have not heard of a King drowned by tempest: You
shall see both wind and weather serviceable to us. Answerable to that of
Julius Caesar, which enforced a poor Pilote in the like case to launch forth,
and in the rage of the storm comforted him with saying, Caesarem and Caesaris
fortunam vebis. And as courageously as that of Charles the fifth, who in the
battle of Tunis when he was advised by the Marquise of Gu^sto to retire his
person, when the great ordonance began to play, said; Marquess, thou never
heardst that an Emperor was slain with a great shot.

I will here present you with an other speech (or call it what you will) of
the same King William Rufus, out of the good and historical Poet Robert of
Gloucester, that you may compare a Princes pride in that age, with our private
pride, and that our first finest Poets may smile at the verses of that time, as
succeeding ages, after some hundred years will happly smile at theirs: As his
Chamberlain him brought, as he rose on a day.
A morrow for to wear, a pair of hose of Say:
He asked what they costned, three shillings he seid,
Fie a dibles quoth the King, who sey so vile a deed:
King to wear so vile a cloth, but it costned more,
Buy a pair for a mark, or thou shall ha cory f^re.
A worse pair enough, the other swith him brought,
And said they costned a mark, and uneath he them so boght:
Aye bel-amy, quoth the King, these were well bought,
In this manner serve me, other ne serve me not.


Hitherto also may be referred that of this king William, who the morning
before he was slain with an arrow in hunting, told his company he dreamed
the last night before, that an extreme cold wind passed through his sides:
whereupon some dissuaded him to hunt that day, but he resolved to the contrary
answering. They are no good Christians that regard dreams. But he found the
dream too true, being shot through the side by Walter Tirell. [Tragmentum
antiquae historiae Franc. a P. P^th^^ aditum.

OF Henry the first I have read no memorable speech, but what I have read I
will report. He was by common voice of the people commended for his wisdom,
eloquence, and victories, dispraised for covetousnes, cruelty, and lechery: Of
which he left proof by his sixteen bastards. But it seems that his justice
was deemed by the common people to be cruelty, for the learned of that age
surnamed him the Lion of Justice, [Huntingd. Polycraticon, Gemeticensis.

It was the custom of the Court in the time of King Henry the first, that
books, bills, and letters should be drawn, and signed for servitors in the
Court, concerning their own matters, without fee. But at this time Turstane
the kings steward, or Le Despencer, as they then called him, from whom the
family of the L. Spencers came, exhibited to the king a complaint, against Adam
of Yarmouth clarke of the Signet, for that he refused to sign without fee, a
bill passed for him. The king first heard Turstane, commending the old custom
at large, and charging the Clarke for exacting somewhat contrary thereunto, for
passing his book. Then the Clarke was heard, who briefly said, I received the
Book, and sent unto your steward, desiring him only to bestow of me two spice
cakes, Gastellos.
made for your own mouth, who returned answer; He would not, and thereupon I
denied to seal his Book. The King greatly disliked the steward for returning
that negative, and forthwith made Adam sit down upon the bench, with the
seal and Turstanes Book before him, but compelled the steward to put off his
cloak, to fetch two of the best spice cakes for the kings own mouth, to bring
them in a fair white napkin, and wi^h low curtsie to present them to Adam the
C^arke; which being accordingly performed, the King commanded Adam to seal and
delive, him his Book, and made them s^endes, add^ng this speech, Officers of
the Court must gratify, anashew a cast of their office, not only one to
another: but also to all strangers, whenever need shall require. [^ualterus
Mapes. De nugis Curialium.

There was allowed a pottle of wine for livery every night to be served up to
king Henry the first chamber, but because the king did seldom or never use to
drink in the night, Pain Fitz-Iohn his Chamberlain, and the Pages of the
Chamber did carowse the wine among them. On a time it happened the King at
midnight called for wine, but none was to be found: Pain and the Pages
bestured themselves in vain, seeking wine here and there. Pain was called in
to the King, who asked him if there were not allowance for livery: he humbly
answered that there was a pottle allowed every night, but for that he never
called for it (to say the truth in hope of pardon) we drunk it up amongst
v^; Then (quoth the King) have you but one pottle every night? that is too
short for me and you, from henceforth there shall be a whole gallon allowed,
whereof the one pottle shall be for me, the other for you and yours. This I
note, not for any gravi^e, but that the King in that age was commended herein
both for bounty and clemency. [ Cualterus Mapes.

Queen Mawd wife to King Henry the first of England, and daughter to Malcolme
Canmore King of Scotland, was so devoutly religious, that she would go to
church barefoote, and always exercise herself in works of charity, insomuch
that when David her brother came out of Scotland to visit her, he found her in
her privy chamber with a towell about her middle, washing, wiping, and kissing
poor peoples feet, which he disliking said, Verily if the King your husband
knew this, you should never kiss his lips. She replied; That the feet of
the King of heaven are to be preferred before the lips of a King in earth.
[Guil: Malmes: and Math. Paris.

Simon Deane of Lincoln, who for his Courtlike carriage was called to Court,
and became a favorite of this king Henry the first, was wont to say, I am cast
among courtiers, as salt among quick Eeles, for that he salted, powdered, and
made them stir with his salt and sharp quipping speeches. But what says
the Author, who reports this of him; The salt lost his season by the moisture
of the Eeles, and was cast out on the dunghill: For he incurring hatred in
Court, was disgraced, committed, and at last banished. Henr. Huntingdon in
Epistola.

When the Scotts in the time of king Stephen with a great army invaded
England, the Northern people brought to the field the Earl of Albemarle the
only respective heir of those parts in his cradle, and placed him by the
Standard, hoping thereby to animate the people: But Ralph Bishop of Duresme
animated them more with this saying, Assure your selves, that this multitude
not trained by discipline will be combersome to it self in good success, and
in distress easily discomforted. Which proved accordingly, for many
Scottishmen left their carcases in the field. [ Historiola de Standardo.

MAwd the Empress, daughter and heir of this king Henry the first, which
styled her self Lady of the Englishmen, would often say to her son king
Henry the second; Be hasty in nothing; Hawks are made more serviceable, when
ye make fair shows of offering meat often, and yet withold it the longer.
[Cualterus Mapes. Others Maxims of her, In art Reguands proceeding from a
niggish old wife I wittingly omit, as unbefitting a Prince.

Robert Earl of Gloucester base son to king Henry the first, the only
martial man of England in his age, used Stephen Beauchampe with all grace and
countenance, as his only favorite and privado, to the great dislike of all
his followers. Whereupon when he was distressed in a conflict, he called to
some of his company for help, but one bitterly bade him, Call now to your
Stephen. Pardon me, pardon me, replieth the Earl, In matters of Venery I must
use my Stephen, but in Martial affairs I rely who he upon you. [Gualter
Mapes de Nugis Curialium.

HEnry the second caused his eldest son Henry to be crowned king, and that
day served him at the Table, Whereupon the Archbishop of York said unto the
young king, Your Majesty may rejoice, for there is never a Prince in the world
that has this day such a waiter a^ his Table as you have. Wonder you so much
a^ that my Lord (said the young king) and does my father think it an
abasement for him being descended of royal blood, only by his mother, to
serve me at the Table, that have both a King to my father, and a Queen to my
mother? Which proud speech when the unfortunate father heard, he rounded the
Archbishop in the care, and said; I repent me, I repent me of nothing more
than of untimely advauncements. [Anonymus.

Wimund Bishop of the Isle of Man, in the time of King Stephen, a martial
Prelate (as many were in that age) after he had with many an inrode annoyed the
Scots, some English procured by them suddenly apprehended him, put out his
eyes, and gelded him (as my Author says) for the peace of the kingdom, not
for the kingdom of heaven. Who after retiring himself to the Abbey of Biland
in Yorkshire, would often courageously say, Had I but a sparrowe, eye, my
enemies should never carry it away scot-free. [Newbrigensis.]

When king Plenry the second was at S. Davis in Wales, and from the cliffes
there in a clear day discovered the coast of Ireland, that most mighty Monark
of this realm, said; I with my ships am able to make a bridge thither, if
it be no further: which speech of his being related to Murchard king of
Lemster in Ireland; he demanded if he added not to his speech ( with the
grace of God:) when it was answered, that he made no mention of God: Then
said he more cheerfully, I fear him less which trusts more to himself,
than to the help of God. [Giraldus Cambrensis.

Owen of Kevelsoc Prince of Powis admitted to the table of king Henry the
second at Shrewsbury, the king the more to grace him, reached him one of his
own loaves, which he cutting in small pieces, and setting them as far off as
he could reach, did eat very leasurely. When the king demanded what he meant
thereby, he answered, I do as you my Sovereign, meaning that the king in
like manner took the fruition of offices and spiritual preferments, as long
as he might. [ Giraldus.

The same king Henry returning out of Ireland, arrived at saint Davis in Wales,
where it was signified unto him, that the Conqueror of Ireland returning that
way, should die upon a stone called Lech-laver near the churchyard: whereupon
in a great presence he pasted over it, and then reprooving the Welsh-Britans
credulity in Merlins Prophecies, said; Now who will hereafter credit that
liar Merlin? [Giraldus.

Gilbert Foliot Bishop of London disliking Thomas Becket Archbishop of
Canterbury, would say oftentimes, Ad Zachaeum non divertisset Dominus nisi de
sicomoro iam descendisset: That Zachaeus had never entertained and lodged
Christ, unless he had come down from the fig tree: As though Christ could
never like the lofty, until they should humiliate themselves, and come down.
[ Anonymus Ms.

The same king would often say, The whole world is (...) enough for a great
Prince. [Girald. in Distinct.

In the time of this Henry the second, the Sea of Lincoln was so long void,
as a certain Convert of Tame prophesied, that there should be no more
Bishops of Lincoln: But he prooved a truthlesse prophet, for Geffrey the
kings base son was preferred after sixteen years vacancie thereunto, but so
fit a man, as one said of him, That he was skillful in fleecing, but
unskillful in feeding. [Vitae Episcoporum Eboracensium.

This gallant base Bishop would in his protestations and oaths always
protest, By my faith, and the King my father. But Walter Mapes the kings
Chaplan told him, You might do as well to remember sometimes your mothers
honesty, as to mention so often your fathers royalty. [Mapes de Nugis
Curialium. This Bishop Ceffrey in all his Instruments passing from him, used
the style of G. Archiepiscopus Eborum; but in the circumference of his Seal,
to notify his royal parentage, Sigillum Galfredi filij Regis Anglorum, as I
observed in his Seals.

SAvage a Gentleman which amongst the first English, had planted himself in
Vlster in Ireland, advised his son for to build a castle for his better
defense against the Irish enemy, who valiantly answered; that he would not
trust to a castle of stones, but to his castle of bones, Meaning his body. [
Mar^ebrigensis.

Robert B^anchmaines Earl of Leicester was wont to say Sovereign Princes are
the true types or relemblances of Gods true majesty, in which respect, says
mine Author, treason against the Princes person was called Crimen may at is
[Polycraticon.

Pope Adrian the fourth an English man borne, of the family of Breakespeare in
Middlesex, a (...) commended for converting Norway to christianity, before his
Papacy. but noted in his Papacy, for using the Emperor Frederick the second
as his Page, in holding his stirroppe, demanded of John of Sarisbury his
countryman what opinion the world had of the Church of Rome, and of him, who
answered: The Church of Rome which should be a mother, is now a stepmother,
wherein sit both Scribes and Pharisees; and as for your self, whenas you are a
father, why do you exspect pensions from your children? etc. Adrian smiled,
and after some excuses told him this tale, which albeit it may seem long, and
is not unlike that of Menenius Agrippa in Livie, yet give it the reading, and
happly you may learn somewhat by it. All the members of the body conspired
against the stomach, as against the swallowing gulf of all their labors; for
whereas the eyes beheld, the ears heard, the hands labored, the feet
traveled, the tongue spoke, and all parts performeds their functions, only
the stomach lay idle and consumed all. Hereuppon they jointly agreed al to
forbear their labors, and to pine away their lasie and public enemy. One day
passed over, the second followed very tedious, but the third day was so
grievous to them all, that they called a common Counsel; The eyes waxed d^mme,
the feet could not support the body, the arms waxed lasie, the tongue
faltered, and could not lay open the matter; Therefore they all with one accord
desired the advice of the Heart. There Reason laid open before them, that ^ee
against whom they had proclaimed wars, was the cause of all this their
misery: For he as their common steward, when his allowances were withdrawn, of
necessity withdrew theirs fro them, as not receiving that he might allow.
Therefore it were a far better course to supply him, than that the limbs
should faint with hunger. So by the persuasion of Reason, the stomach was
served, the limbs comforted, and peace re-established. Even so it fares with
the bodies of Commonweals; for albeit the Princes gather much, yet not so
much for themselves, as for others: So that if they want, they cannot supply
the want of others; therefore do not repine at Princes herein, but respect the
common good of the whole public estate. [Idem.

Oftentimes would he say, All his preferments never added any one jot to his
happiness or quietness. [Idem.

He also (that I may omit other of his speeches) would say, The Lord has
dilated me by hammering me upon the anvild; but I beseech him he would underlay
his hand to the unsupportable burden which he has laid upon me. [Idem.

When it was signified unto king Richard the first, son to the foresaid King
Henry sitting at supper in his palace at Westminster (which we call the old
palace now) that the French king besieged his town of Vernoil in Normandy:
he in greatness of courage protested in these words, I will never turn my
back until I have confronted the French: For performance of which his princely
word, he caused the wall in his palace at Westminster to be broken down
directly toward the South, posted to the coast, and immediately into
Normandy, where the very report of his sudden arrival, so terrified the
French, that they raised the siege, and retired themselves. [ Ypodigma.

The same king Richard purposing an expedition into the holy land, made money
at all hands, and amongst other things sold unto Hugh Pudsey Bishop of Durham
the Earldom of Northumberland, merrily laughing when he invested him, and
saying; Am not I cunning, and my crafiesmaister, that can make a young Earl of
an old Bishop? But this Prelate was fit to be an Earl, for the world (as
one of that age said of him) was not crucifixus to him, but infixus in him.
[Lib. Dunelm.

One Fulke a Frenchman of great opinion for his holiness told this king
Richard that he kept with him three daughters, that would procure him the
wrath of God, if he did not shortly rid himself of them. Why hypocrite
(quoth the king) all the world knows that I never had child, Yea (said
Fulke) you have as I said, three; and their names are Pride, Covetousness,
and Lechery. (It is so (said the king) you shall see me presently bestow them:
the Knights Templers shall have Pride, the while M^nkes Covetousness, and the
Clergy Lechery; and there have you my three daughters bestowed among you.

When there was a fair opportunity offered unto this king Richard, and to
Hugh duke of Burgundy for the surprise of Jerusalem, they marched forward in
two battalles from Acres. The king of England led the first, the Duke of
Burgundy the other; when they approached, the Duke of Burgundy envying the
glory of the English, signified to the king of England, that he would retire
with his companies, because it should not be said, that the English had taken
Jerusalem. While this message was delivering, and the King grieving that so
glorious an enterprise was so overthwarted by envy; one amongst the English
companies cried alowde to the King and said, Sir, S^r, come hither and I will
show you Jerusalem. But king Richard cast his coat of arms before his face,
and weeping uttered these words with alowde voice; Ah my Lord God, I beseech
thee that I may not see thy holy City Jerusalem, whenas I am not able to
deliver it out of the hands of the enemies. [Ian Sire Signour de Ionville in
the life of Saint Le was. cap. 70. This Author also gives this testimony of
the said king, in the eight chapter of the said Book. This Prince was of
such prowess, that he was more feared and redoubted amongst the Sarazens then
ever was any Prince Christian. Insomuch that when as their little infants
began to cry, their mothers would say to make them hold their peace; King
Richard comes, and will have you, and immediately the little children hearing
him named, would forbear crying: And likewise the Turks and Sarazens, when
their horses at any time started, they would put spur to them and say;
What you iades, you think King Richard is here?

When the same king Richard had fortunately taken in a skirmish, Philippe the
Bishop of Beavoys a deadly enemy of his, he cast him in prison with boltes
upon his heels, which being complained of unto the Pope, he wrote earnestly
unto him, not to detain his dear son, an Ecclesiastical person, and a
shepherd of the Lords, but to send him back unto his flock. Whereupon the
King sent unto the Pope the armor that he was taken in, and willed his
Ambassador to use the words of Jacobs sons unto their father, when they had
sold away their brother Joseph, Hanc invenimus, vide vtrum tunica filij tui
sit, an (...) This we found, see whether it be the coat of thy son, or no.
Nay (quoth the Pope) it is not the coat of my son, nor of my brother, but
some impe of Mars, and let him procure his deliverie of he will, for I will be
no mean for him.

When the French king and king Richard the first began to parlee of peace,
his brother John, who had falsely and unnaturally revolted unto the French
king, fearing himself, came in of his own accord, and suppliantly besought
Richard brotherly to pardon his manifold offenses, that he had unbrotherly
committed against him, he rehearsed the straight league of brotherly piety, he
recounted the many merits of his brother, he bewailed with tears that hitherto
he had been unmindful of them, as an unnatural and unthankful person.
Finally, that he does live, and shall live, he does acknowledge that he
has received it at his hands. The king being mollified with this humble
submission, said: God grant that I may as easily forget your offenses, as you
may remember wherein you have offended.

IN the woeful wars with the Barons, when king John was viewing of the Castle
of Rochester held against him by the Earl of Arundel, he was espied by a very
good Arcubalister, who told the Earl thereof, and said, that he would soon
dispatch the cruel tyrant, if he would but say the word; God forbid, vile
varlet (quoth the Earl) that we should procure the death of the holy one of
God. What (said the soldier) he would not spare you if he had you at the
like advantage. No matter for that (quoth the Earl) Gods good will be done, and
be will dispose, and not the King. [Math: Paris.

When one about him showed him where a noble man, that had rebelliously borne
arms against him, lay very honorably intoombed, and advised the king to
deface the monument, he said; No, no, but I would all the rest of mine enemies
were as honorably buried. [Idem.

When diverse Greeks came hither, and offered to prove that there were
cettaine ^rrours in the Church of England at that time, he rejected them,
saying, I will not suffer our faith established to be called in question with
doubtful disputations. [Fragm: antiquum aeditum a P. Pithaeo.

Yet when the said king John saw a fatie Bucke haunched, he said to the
standers by, See how fair and fat this Bu^ke is, and yet he never heard
Mass all his life long. But this may be forged to his disgrace by the envious.
[ Math. Paris.

IN a solemn conference between king Henry the third of England, and Saint
Jews king of France, the only devout kings of that age, when the French king
said, He had rather hear Sermons, than hear Masses. Our king replied, which
some will smile at now, but according to the learning of that time, That he had
rather see his loving friend (meaning the real presence in the Sacrament) than
to hear never so much good of him, by others in sermons. This I note, because
it was then thought facetious, which I doubt not but some will now condemn as
superstitious [ G^^l: Rishanger.

Pecham that Opticall Archbishop of Canterbury, who writ Perspectiva
Communis, when Pope Gregory the tenth, who had created him Archbishop,
commanded him to pay four thousand marks within four months, under pain
of excommunication, he that came unto the Sea then deeply indebted, said;
Behold, you have created me, and as a creature does desire to be perfected by
his creator, so I do in my oppressions fly unto your Holmesse to be
recreated. Archiep. Cantuar.

Sewall Archbishop of York much agrieved with some practices of the Popes
collectors in England, took all patiently, and said; I will not with Cha^
discover the nakedness of my father, but cover and conceal it with Sem. As
Constantine the Great said, that he would cover the faults of Bishops and
Fathers of the Church with his Imperial robe. [ Mat. Paris.

Pope Innocentius the fourth when he offered the kingdom of Sicil and Naples
to Richard Earl of Cornwall with many impossible conditions, You might as
well (say de the Earls Agent at Rome) say to my Lord and Master, I sell or
give you the Moon, climb up, catch is, and take it. [Anonymus qui incipit.
Rex Pictorum.

Alexander successor to Innocentius sent unto the said Earl Richard to borrow
a great mass of money; but the Earl answered, I will not lend to my superior,
upon whom I cannot distraine for the debts. This Richard is reported by the
said Author, to have had so great treasure, that he was able to dispend for
ten years an hundred marks a day, which according to the Standard of that
time was no small sum. [ Idem.

In the reign of king Henry a Bishop of London sto^^ly withstoode the Popes
Nunci^, that would have levied exactions of the Clergy: Whereupon the N^^ci^
complained unto the king, who shortly menaced the Bishop, and told him he
would cause the Pope to pluck his peacockes toil: but the Bishop boldly
answered the King, that the Pope and he being too strong for him, might bereave
him of his bishopric, by might, but never by, right; and that although they
took away his Mitre, yet they would leave him his Helmet. [ Lib. Cantuar.

Wicked rather than witty is that of a Deane high treasurer of England, that
had demeaned himself so well in his office, that when he died he made this
wicked will; I bequeathe all my goods and possessions unto my liege Lords the
King, my body to the earth, and my soul to the devil. [Idem.

When Edward the first heard of the death of his only son, he took it
grievously as a father, but patiently as a wise man. But when he understood
shortly after of the departure of his father king Henry the third, he was
wholly dejected and comfortlesses whereat when Charles king of Sicile, with
whom he then soiourned in his return from the holy land, greatly marvelled,
He satisfied him with this, God may send more sons, but the death of a father
is irrecoverable. [Wa^singham.

This is that king Edward the first, who as in lineaments of body he surpassed
all his people, being like Saul, higher than any of them; so in prudence
conjoined with valor and industry, he excelled all our Princes, giving there by
sure ankerholde to the government of this realm, waving up and down before
most uncertainly. Which he effected not so much by establishing good laws,
as by giving life unto his laws, by due execution. And as my Author says,
Iudices potissimum iudicans quos constituit indices aliorum. Who adds also
this of him; Nem^ in consilijs illo argutior, in eloqu^^ torrenti^r, in
periculis socurior, in prosperis ^^uti^r, in adversis constanti^r. [Commendatie
lamentabilis in transi^n Regis Edw: pri^^.

Whereas the kings of England, before his time, used to wear their Crown upon
all solemn feast days, he first omitted that custom, saying merrily, That
Crowns do rather ^nerate, than honor Princes. [Idem tractatus.

When a simple religious man seeing him meanly attired, wondering thereat,
asked him, why he being so potent a Prince ware so simple a suit, he
answered, Father, Father, you know how God regards garments, What can I do
more in royal robes, than in this my gabbardine? [Idem.

When the Clergy pretending a discharge by a (...) lately made at the
Council held at Lions in Fra^^^, would contribute nothing to the temporal
necessities of King Edward, he said unto them in parliament, Seeing you do
refuse to help me, I will also refuse to help you, etc. If you deny to pay
tribute to me as unto your Prince, I will refuse to protect you as my subjects;
and therefore if you be spoiled, robbed, mai^^ed, and nurthered, seek for no
succourner defense of me, or mine.

The Pope sent an Iniunction unto the same Edward, the which was delivered unto
him in one of his iornies against the fautors of John Balleal king of Scotland,
the tenor of it was, that he should surcease to disquiet the Scotts, which
were an exempt nation, and properly appertaining to the Roman Chapel,
wherefore the city of Jerusalem could not but defend her Citizens, and help
them that did trust in the Lord, like mount Si^^. He had no sooner read it,
but rapping out an oath, said; I will not hold my peace for Syon nor
Ierusalems rest, as long as there is breath in my body, but will prosecute my
just right known unto all the world, and defend is to the death. [Tho: Walsing
ham.

When John Earl of Ath^ll nobly descended, who had with other murdered John
Co^^in, was apprehended by king Edward the first, and some entreated for him,
The king answered, The higher his calling is, the greater must his fall be; and
as he is of higher parentage, so he shall be the higher hanged: which accordingly
was performed, for he was hanged on a gallows fifty foot high. [ Florilegus.

Whenas in siege of the Castle of Strivelin in Scotland, king Edward the first,
by his over-forwardnesse was often endaungered, some advised him to have more
regard to his person, he answered them with that of David in the Psalm, A
thousand shall fall as my fide, and ten thousand at my right hand, but it
shall not come near me. [Florilegus.

When the learned Lawyers of the realm were consulted in a cause by him, and
after long consultation did not satisfy him, he said, (as kings impatient of
delays may be bold with their Lawyers,) My Lawyers are long advising, and
never advised. [Florilegus. As for other speeches of his I wittingly and
willingly overpasse.

Eleanor wife to king Edward the first, a most virtuous and wise woman, when
he took his long and dangerous voyage into the holy land, would not be
dissuaded to tarry at home, but would needs accompany him, saying; Nothing
must part them whom God has joined, and the way to heaven is as near in the
holy land, (if not nearer) as in England, or Spain.

This worthy Queen makes me remember Eubulus a scoffing Comicall Greek
Poet, which curses himself if ever he opened his mouth against women,
inferring albeit Medea were wicked, yet Penelope was peerless: if
Clytemnestra were naught, yet Alcestes was passing good: if Ph^dra were
damnable, yet there was an other laudable. But here says he I am at a stand,
of good women I find not one more, but of the wicked I remember thousands.
Beshrew this scoffer, ye good wives all, and let his curse fall upon him, for
of your kind may many a million be found, yea of your own country, and that
I may reserve other to a fitter place, I will show unto you a rare example in
this Queen of England, a most loving and kind wife, out of Rodericus Sanctius
not mentioned by our Historians.

When king Edward the first was in the holy land, he was stabbed with a
poisoned dagger, by a Sarazen, and through the rancor of the poison, the wound
was judged incurable by his Physicians. This good Queen Eleanor his wife, who
had accompanied him in that journey, endangering her own life, in loving
affection saved his life, and eternized her own honor. For she daily and
nightly sucked out the rank poison, which love made sweet to her, and thereby
effected that which no Art durst attempt; to his safety, her joy, and the
comfort of all England; So that well worthy was she to be remembered by those
Grosses as monuments, which in stead of Statues were erected by her husband to
her honor at Lincoln, Gr^^tham, Stanford, Goddington, Northampton, St^^y
Straford, Dunstaple, Saint Albanes, Waltham, and Westminster called Charing
cross, all adorned with her Arms of Castile, Leon, and Pontive

Robert Winchelsey the Archbishop of Canterbury was banished by king Edward the
first, but afterward restored again by him, and all the rents that had been
sequestered during his absence, repayed him: whereby he became the richest
Archbishop that had been in that feate before him: Wherefore often recording
his troubles he would say; Adversity never burteth, where no uniquity
over-rule^^. [Liber Cantuar.

William de March Lord Treasourer unto king Edward the first, caused all the
treasure throughout all the land, that was laid up in the Monasteries and
Churches, to be at one iustant violently taken away by military men, saying, It
is better that money should be mooving, and according to the name be current,
and go abroad to the use of the people, than resting in chests without fruits
and occupation: concurring in this last point with a Maxim of the Usurers hall.

Of king Edward the second I find nothing memorable, but that which grief and
great indignity wreasted from him, when Corney and his rascal rabblements
after his deposition, would needs shave him on the way, lest he should be
known and rescewed. They enforced him to sit down upon a mole hill, and the
knave Barber insulting, told him that cold water taken out of the next ditch
should serve for his trimming at that time. He answered, Whether you will or
no, there shall be warm water: and therewithal he shedding tears
plentifully, verified his words. [ Thom: de la More.

After the battle of Poitiers (...) Lord Audley was brought to the Black
Prince in a Litter most grievously wounded, for he had carried himself most
valiantly that day. To whom the Prince with due commendations, gave for his
good service four hundred marks of yearly revenews. The which he returning
to his tent, gave as franckely to his four Esquiers, that attended him in the
battle: whereof when the Prince was advertised, doubting that his gift was
contemned as too little for so great good service: the Lord Audley satisfied
him with this answer; I must do for them who deserved best of me. These my
Esquiers saved my life amiddest the ennemies. And God be thanked, I have
sufficient revenews left by my A^ncestours to maintain me in your service.
Whereupon the Prince praising his prudence and liberality, confirmed his gift
made to his Esquiers, and assigned him moreover six hundred marks of like
land in England. [^rossard.

William Wickham after Bishop of Winchester came into the service, and also
into the great favor of King Edward the third, by being overseer of his great
work at Windesor, whereas before he served as a poor parish priest. Wherefore
he caused to be written in one of his windows, This work made Wickham. Which
being told unto the King, he was offended with Wickham, as though he had
gone about to rob him of the glory of that magnificent work. But when
Wickham told him that his meaning was, that that work had been his making,
and advauncement, the King rested content and satisfied, [ Vita Wiccami.

When the said William Wickham (as it is commonly said) sued unto Edward the
third for the Bishoppricke of Winchester, the King told him that he was
unmeet for it, because he was unlearned, but he said, In recompense thereof
I will make many learned men. The which he performed indeed. For he founded
New College in Oxford and another in Winchester, which houses have affoorded
very many learned men, both to the Church and to the Commonwealth.

When Henry of Lancaster surnamed the Good Earl of Darby had taken 1341.
Bigerac in Gascoigne, he gave and granted to every soldier, the house which
every one should first seize upon, with all therein. A certain soldier of his
br^ke into a Mint-maisters house, where he found so great a mass of money,
that he amazed therewith, as a prey greater than his desert or desire,
signified the same unto the Earl, who with a liberal mind answered, It is
not for my state to play boys play, to give and take; Take thou the money, if
it were thrice as much. [Walsingham.]

When news was b^ought unto king Richard the second, that his uncles of York
and Gloucester, the Earls of Arundell, Warwick, Darby, and Nottingham, with
other of that faction, who sought to reform the misorders of the King, or
rather, of his wicked Counselors, were assembled in a woodde near unto the
Court; after he had asked other men's opinions, what was to be done in so
weighty and doubtful a case. At length he mernly demanded of one sir Hugh a
Linne, who had been a good military man in his days, but was then somewhat
distraught of his wits, what he would advise him to do: Issue out (quoth sir
Hugh) and let us set upon them, and stay them every mothers son; and by Gods
eyes, when thou have so done, thou have killed all the faithful friends that
thou have in England. [Anonymus.]

KIng Henry the fourth, a wise Prince, who full well knew the humor of the
English, in his admonition to his son, at his death, said; Of Englishmen, so
long as they have wealth and riches, so long s^alt thou have obeisance; but
when they be poor, then they be always ready to make insurrections at every
motion. [Hall.

King Henry the fourth, during his sickness, caused his Crown to be set on his
pillow, at his beds head, and sodain^ly his pangue so sore troubled him, that
he lay as though his vital spirits had been from him departed: Such
chamberlaines as had the care and charge of his body thinking him to be dead,
covered his face with a linen cloth. The Prince his son being thereof
advertised, entered into the chamber, and took away the Crown, and departed.
The father being suddenly revived out of his trance, quickly perceived that
his Crown was taken away: and understanding that the Prince his son had it,
caused him to repair to his presence, requiring of him for what cause he had
so mis-used himself. The Prince with a good audacitie answered: Sir, to mine
and all men: judgments you seemed dead in this world, wherefore I, as your
next and apparent heir took that as mine own, not as yours. Well fair
son, (said the King with a great sigh) what right I had to it, and how I
enjoyed it, God knows, Well (quoth the Prince) if you die King, I will have
the garland, and trust to keep it with the Sword against all mine enemies, as
you have done. [Hall.

KIng Henry the fifth, when he prepared wars against France, the Dolphin of
France sent him a present of Paris Balls, in derision: but he returned for
answer, That he would shortly resend him London Balls, which should shake
Paris Walls. [Anonymus Angtice.

When King Henry the fifth had given that famous overthrowe unto the French at
Agincourt, he fell down upon his knees, and commanded his whole army to
do the same, saying that verse in the Psalm, Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed
nomini tuo da gloriam: Not unto us (O Lord) not us, but unto thy name give the
glory.

HEnry the sixth did take all injuries, whereof he received plenty so patiently,
that he not only did not seek to revenge them, but Gave God thanks that he
did send them to punish his sins in this life, that he might escape
punishment in the life to come. [Vita Henrici Sexti. As the Emperor Frederick
the third, when he heard of the death of a great noble man of Austria, who
lived ninety three years most wickedly in fleshly pleasures, and yet never
once afflicted with grief or sickness, said; This pro^veth that which Divines
teach, that after death there is some place where we receive reward or
punishment; when we see often in this world, neither the just rewarded, nor
the wicked punished.

The same King Henry having in Christmasse a show of young women, with their
bare breasts laid out, presented before him, he immediately departed with
these words, Fie, fie for shame, forsooth you be too blame. [Idem.

He receiving on a time a great blow by a wicked man, which compassed his
death, he only said, Forsooth, forsooth ye do fowly to smite a King
anointed.

Not long before his death, being demanded why he had so long held the Crown
of England unjustly, he replied, My father was King of England, quietly
enjoying the Crown all his reign, and his father my grandfire was also king
of England, and I even a child in cradle was proclaimed and crowned King
without any interruption, and so held it forty years, wel-neere all the
states doing homage unto me, as to my Ancestors. Therefore wi^^ I say with
King David, My lot is fallen in a fair ground, I have a goodly heritage, my
help is from the Lord which saves the upright in heart. [Idem.

Thomas Montacute ^arle of Sarisbury, when he besieged Orleans, and had so
enforced it, that the Inhabitants were willing to articulate, and to yield
themselves to the Duke of Burgundy, then being in his company: he highly
disdaining it, said in the English proverb; I will not beat the bush, and
another shall have the birds. Which proverbiall speech so offended the
Burgundian, that it wholly alienated his mind from the English, to their great
loss in all the French wars following. [ Paulus Aemilius Lib. 10.

John Lord Talbot first Earl of Shrewsbury of that family, supprised upon
the sudden by the French army at Chastilion, far from cowardly f^are of
death, and fatherly affected to his son the Lord ^isle, who would not
forsake him in that danger, advised him to f^le, saying; My death in respect of
my former exploites can not be but honorable; and in respect of thy youth,
neither can it be honorable for thee to die, nor dishonorable to f^ie. But
this young Lord in height of courage, nothing degenerating from so worthy a
father, lost his life with his father in the field, and with them a base son,
and a son in law of the said Earls. [ Paulus Aemilius Lib. 10. and
Commentarij Pij PP. 2. Lib. 6.

After this battle, when the flames of inward war began to flash out in
England, the martial men of England were called home out of France, to
maintain the factions here: at which time a French Captain scoffingly asked
an Englishman when they would return again into France. He answered
feelingly, and upon a true ground: When your sins shall be greater and more
grievous in the sight of God, than ours are now.

Until this time, from the beginning of King Edward the first, which was about
an hundred and sixty years, whosoever will with a marking eye consider the
comportment of the English Nation, the concurrent of martial men, their
Counsels, military discipline, designs, actions, and exploites, not only out
of our own Writers, but also foreign Historians; cannot but acknowledge, that
they were men of especial worth, and their prowess both great and glorious.
Why afterward it should decay, as all other professions, which even like plants
have their times of beginning or in-rooting, their growing up, their
flourishing, their maturitie, and than these fading, were a disquisition for
the learned. Whether it proceeds from celestial influence, or those Angels
which Plato makes, or the Secundei which Trith^^^ius imagined to have the
regiment of the world successively, or from the degenerating of numbers into
sums, which I confess I understand not, being an ignorant in abstruse
learning. Only I have read in Paterculus, Velleius Paterculus. li. 1.
Naturaliter quod procedere non potest, recedit.
that when either envy, or admiration has given m^n an edge to ascend to the
highest, and when they can ascend no higher, after a while they must naturally
descend. Yet I rely upon that of Eccclesiastes, as I understand it, Cuncta
fecit bona in tempore su^ Deus, and mundum tradidit disputationi eorum, vt non
inveniat home quod operatus est Deus ab initio vsque ad finem. But pardon me,
I cannot tell how I have been by admiration of our Progenitors diverted from
my purpose.

In the year of our Lord 1416. when a fifteen hundred English under the
conduct of I: Beaufort earl of Derset were encompassed between the sea, and
fifteen thousand French. The Earl of Arminac general of the French, sent to
the Earl, advising him to yield himself, but he answered, It is not the
manner of the English, to yield without blows, neither am I so heartlesse
that I will deliver my self into their hands, whom God ^ay deliver into mine.
And accordingly God gave him the honor of the day, to the great confusion of
the enemy. [ Walsingham in Ypodigmate.

When Elizabeth the widow of sir John Gray was a suter unto King Edward the
fourth (against whom her husband lost his life) for her ioynture: the kind
King became also a suter to her unto her for a nights lodging: But she wisely
answered him, when he became importunate, That as she did account her self
too base to be his wife, so she did think her self too good to be his (...).

When love grew so hot in this K. Edward the fourth, that he would needs
marry the said Elizabeth, widow of sir John Gray, to the great discontent of
his Counsel, but especially of his mother, who alleging many reasons to the
contrary, said, That only widowhood might be sufficient to restrain him, for
that it was high disparagement to a King, to be dishonored with bigamy in his
first marriage. The King merrily answered; In that she is a widow, and has
already children; by Gods blessed Lady I am a batcheller, and have some too:
and so each of us has a proof, that neither of us are like to be barren. And
therefore Madam, I pray you be content, I trust in God she shall bring you forth
a young Prince; that shall please you. And as for the bigamy, let the Bishop
hardly lay it in my way when I come to take Orders: for I understand it is
forbidden to a Priest, but I never wist it yet that it was forbidden to a
Prince.

His note love nevertheless was partable among three other of his Mistresses,
of whom he was wont to say, The one was the fairest, the other the merriest,
and the third the holiest, for she had wholly devoted her self to his bed and
her beads.

When Jews the eleaventh French King entertained diverse Counselors of king
Edward the fourth with large pensions to steed him in England, he sent Peter
Cleret one of the masters of his household unto the Lord Hastings the Kings
Chamberlain, to present him with two thousand crowns. Which when he had
received, Petre Cleret did pray him, that for his discharge he would make him
an acquittance; The Lord Chamberlain made a great difficulty thereat. Then
Cleret does request him again that he would give unto him only a letter of
three lines for his discharge to the King, signifying that he had received
them. The Lord Chamberlain answered; Sir, that which you say is very
reasonable; but the gift comes from the goodwill of the King your Master, and
not at my request at all: If it please you that I shall have it, you shall put
it within the pocket of my sleeve, and you shall have no other acquittance of
me. For I will never it shall be said for me, that the Lord Chamberlain of
the King of England had been Pentioner to the King of France: Nor that my
acquittances shall be found in the Chamber of accounts in France. The afores^id
Cleret went away malcontent, but left his money with him, and came to tell
his message to his King, who was very angry with him. But thenceforth the Lord
Chamberlain of England was more esteemed with the French, and always paid
without acquittance. [ Philippe de Commines.

KIng Richard the third, whose monstrous birth foreshewed his monstrous
proceedings, for he was born with all his teeth, and hair to his shoulders,
albeit he lived wickedly, yet made good Laws, and when diverse shires of
England offered him a benevolence, he refused it, saying, I know not in what
sense; I haa rather have your hearts, than your money. [Ioannes Rossus
Warwiceusis.]

John Morton then Bishop of Elie, but afterward of Canterbury, being
solicited by the Duke of Buckingham then alienated from Richard the third, to
speak his mind frankely unto him, in matters of State: the Bishop answered
him; In good faith my Lord I love not much to talk with Princes, as a thing
not all out of peril, although the words be without fault. Forasmuch as it
shall not be taken as the party meant it, but as it pleases the Prince to
construe it. And ever I think on Aesopes tale, that when the Lien had
proclaimed, that on pain of death, there should no horned beast abide in that
wood, one that had in his forehead a bounch of flesh, fled away a great pase.
The Fox that saw him ruune so fast, asked him whither he made all that haste:
he answered; In faith I neither wot nor recke, so I were once hence, because
of this proclamation made of horned beasts. What fo^le (quoth the Fox) thou
may well enough abide, the Lion meant not by thee, for it is no horn that
is upon thy head: No Mary (quoth he) that wot I well enough, but what and
he call it an horn, where am I then? [Tho: Moore.

Sir Thomas Rokesby being controlde for suffering himself to be served in
treene Cups, answered; These homely cups and dishes pay truly for that
they contain: I had rather drink out of treene, and pay gold and silver,
than drink out of gold and silver, and make wooden payment.

When Richard the third was slain at Bosworth, and with him John Howard Duke
of Norffolke, King Henry the seventh demanded of Thomas Howard Earl of
Surrey the Dukes son and heir then taken prisoner, how he d^rst bear Arms
in the behalf of that tyranne Richard. He answered; He was my crowned King,
and if the Parliamentary authority of England set the Crown upon a stock,
I will fight for that stock. And as I fought then for him, I wi^ fight for
you, when you are established by the said authority. And so he did for his
son King Henry the eight at Flodden field. Anonymus.

When Margaret the widow of Charles the Hardy Duke of Bargundie, and sister
to king Edward the fourth, envying much the happy estate and reign of Henry
the seventh descended of the adverse family of Lancaster, had at sundry times
suborned two rascalles to counterfeit the persons of her two brothers sons,
thereby to withdraw the hearts of his subjects, and raise vproares in his
realm, the king sent over unto Philippe the Duke of Burgundy doctor Warrham
afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, to inform him of her treachery. This
Doctor in the latter ^^d of his Oration thus nipped the seditious Duchess
That within few years after she was past threescore years of age, she had
brought forth two monsters, Lambert and Peter, and not in the nine and tenth
months, as women naturally do, but in the hundred and fourscore month, (for
they were both about fifteen years of age when she brought them abroad, as
it were, out of her belly:) neither were they Crisomers, but such
childe-choppers, that as soon as ever they were borne, they were able to wage
war with a mighty King. [Th: More.

The earl of Kildare being charged before king Henry the seventh for burning
the Metropolitan Church of Cassilles in Ireland, and many witnesses procured
to avouch the truth of the Article against him, he suddenly confessed it to
the great wondering and detestation of the Counsel. Then it was looked how he
should justify that fact. By Jesus (quoth he) I would never have done it, if
it had not been told me that the Archbishop had been within it. And because
the Bishop was one of the busiest accusers present, merrily laughed the king at
the plainness of the man, to see him allege that intent for excuse, which
most of all did aggravate his fault.

When among many articles the last article exhibited by the Irish against that
Earl of Kildare, the last was: Finally, All Ireland cannot rule this Earl.
Then (quoth the King) shall this Earl rule all Ireland; and shortly after he
made him Deputy thereof.

When one reprooved King Henry the seventh for his slownesse in making wars
on those that wronged him, he answered, If we Princes should take every
occasion that is offered us, the world should never be quiet, but wearied with
continual wars.

When a Gentleman, none of the wisest, told King Henry the seventh, that he
found sir Richard Gr^ftes, who was made Banneret at the battle of Stoke to be
a very wise man. The King answered, He doubted not that, but marvelled much
how a fool could know a wiseman.

It h^ppened that there was fallen in communication the story of Joseph, how
his master Putiphars wife a great m^n with the King of Aegipt, would have
pulled him to ^e^b^d ^n^ he fled away. Now Master M^^o (he was the King
Almoner) quoth king Henry the seventh, You be a tall strong man on the one
side, and a cunning Doctor on the other side, what would you have done, if you
had not been Joseph, but in Joseph's stead? By my troth fir (quoth he) and it
like your Grace, I cannot tell what I would have done, but I can tell you what
I should have done. [Tho: Moore.

The Lady Margaret Countess of Richmond mother to king Henry the seventh, a
most worthy Patroness of good Letters, would often say, On the condition that
Princes of Christendom would combine themselves, and march against the common
enemy the Turk, she would most wil^ingly attend them, and be their Laundresse
in the camp.

There was a poor blind man in Warwickshire, that was accounted very cunning
in prognosticating of weather: upon a day, Empson a great lawier, as he road
that way, said in scorn of his cunning. I pray you tell me father when does
the Sun change? The chafed old man that knew his corrupt conscience,
answered: when such a wicked Lawier as you goes to heaven.

Doctor Collet the Deane of Paul's said, that if the Clergy were naught, the
Laity were worse, for it could not otherwise be, but the lay men must ever be
one degree under the Clergy: for surely it can be no (...) that our Savior
says himself, who says of the Clergy, that they be the salt of the earth,
and if the salt once appall, the world must needs wax unsavory: and he
says that the Clergy be the light of the world; and then says he, if the
light be darkened, how dark will then the darkness be? that is to wit, all
the world beside, whereof he calls the Clergy only the light.

Cardinal Wolsey, his teeth watering at the rich Bishopric of Winchester,
sent one unto Bishop Fox (who had advaunced him unto the kings service) for to
move him to resign the Bishopric, because extreme age had made him blind:
the which message and motion Fox did take in so ill part, that he willed the
messenger to tell the Cardinal thus from him: that although old age bereaving
me of sight, I know not white from black, yet I can discern truth from
falshoode, and right from wrong: yea, and that now I am blind I have esp^ed his
malicious unthankfulness: the which I could never before perceive when my e^e
sight was at the best. And let my lord Cardinal take heed, that his ambition
and covetousness, bring him not into a worse blindness then I have, and make
him fall before he fear.

At sir Thomas Moore his first coming to the service of King Henry the eight
the King gave him this godly lesson. First look unto God, and after unto me.

He would also wish, as I have heard of an ancient man of that age, that his
Councellers would commit simulation, dissimulation, and part^^litie, to the
Porters lodge, when they came to sit in council.

The same King Henry the eight, finding fault with the disagreement of
Preachers, would often say; Some are too stiff in their old Mumpsimus, and
other to busy and curious in their new Sumpsimus. Happly borrowing these
phrases from that which Master Pace his Secretary reports in his book De
Fructu doctrinae, of an old Priest in that age, which always read in his
Portasse, Mumpsimus Domine, for Sumsimus: whereof when he was admonished, he
said that he now had used Mumplimus thirty years, and would not leave his
old Mumpsimus for their new Sumpsimus.

A noble man of this time, in contempt of learning said, that it was for noble
men's sons enough to wind their horn, and carry their Hawk fair, and to
leave study and learning to the children of mean men. To whom the foresaid
Richard Pace replied. Then you and other noble men must be content, that your
children may wind their bornes, and keep their Hawks while the children of
mean men do manage matters of estate [R. Pacaeus De fructu doctrinae.]

John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, when the King would have translated him from
that poor Bishopric to a better, he refused, saying: He would not forsake
his poor little old wife, with whom he had so long lived. Happly thinking of
the fifteenth canon of the Nicone Council, and that of the Canonistes,
Matrimonium inter Episcopum, and Ecclesiam esse contractum, etc.

There was a Nobleman merry conceited, and ^iotously given, that having lately
sold a Manor of an hundred tenements, came ruffling into the Court, in a new
suit, saying: Am not I a mighty man, that bear an hundred houses on my back?
Which Cardinal Wolsey hearing, said: You might have better employed it in
paying your debts. Indeed my Lord (quoth he) you say well; for my Lord my
father, owde my master your father three half pence for a Calves head, hold,
here is two pence for it. As Skeleton iested at the Cardinal, that he was
descended of Sanguil^er, he was cast out of a Butchers stall, for his father
was a Butcher of Ipswich.

When Stephen Cardiner was advaunced unto the Bishopric of Winchester, and
sent over as Ambassador into France with great pomp^^ he said unto an old
acquaintance of his that came to take his leave of him; Now I am in (...)
Gloria Patri: Yea (said his friend) and I hope, ^t nunc and semper. Or
(replied the Bishop) if it please the king my master, Sicut erat in principio.
A poor Scholar of Cambridge again.

When sir Thomas, Moore was Speaker of the Parliament, with his wis^dome and
eloquence, he so crossed a purpose of Cardinal Wolsey that the Cardinal in a
chafe sent for him (...) White Hall; where when he had daunced attendaunce
long, at length the Cardinal coming out, said in the presence of many;
Master Moore, I would you had been at Rome, when you were made Speaker of
the Parliament house. He immediately replied: And if it pleased your Grace, so
would I, for then I should have seen a famous City, whereof I have heard
much, but never saw. [Vita Tho: Mori impressa.

The same cardinal at a full Counsel table, when sir The Moore was first made
privy Counselor, moved that there might be a Lievteuant general of the
Realm chosen for certain considerations; and the body of the Counsel
inclined thereunto. Sir Thomas Moore opposed himself. Whereupon the Cardinal
in a chafe said; Are not you ashamed who are the meanest man here, to dissent
from so many honorable and wise personages: you prove your self a plain
fool. Whereunto master Moore forthwith answered; Thanks be to God that the
Kings majesty has but one fool in his right honorable Counsel. [Idem.

When he was Lord Chancellor, he enjoined a Gentleman to pay a good round
sum of money unto a poor widdowe whom he had oppressed; and the Gentleman
said: Then I do hope your Lordeship will give me a good long day to pay it.
You shall have your request (said sir Thomas) Monday next is Saint Barnabas
day, the longest day in all the year, pay her me then, or else you shall
kiss the Fleet.

When he had no lust to grow greatly upward in the world, neither would
labor for office of authority, and over that, forsake a right worshipful
room when it was offered him, his wife fell in hand with him, and asked him;
What will you do that you list not to put forth your self as others do? Will
you sit still by the fire, and make goselings in the ashes with a stick, as
children do? Would God I were a man, and look what I would do. What? By God
go forward with the best; for as my mother was wont to say, It is ever more
better to rule than to be ruled, and therefore I warrant you, I would not be so
foolish to be ruled, where I might rule. By my truth wife (quoth he) I dare
say you say truth, for I never found you willing to be ruled yet.

He used, when he was Lord Chauncellor, upon every Sunday, when he was at
home, to sit in the Quire in his surplice and sing the Service: and being one
day espied in that attire by the Duke of Norffolke. The Duke began to chafe,
crying, Fie, fie, my Lord, the Lord Chancellor of England a parish priest,
and a paltrie singing man, you dishonor the King, you dishonor the King. No
my Lord (quoth sir Thomas) it is no shame for the King, if his servant serve
his Sovereign and Savior, who is King of kings.

During the time of his Chancellourship of England, he used to send his
Gentleman-usher to his wifes pew, after divine service was done, to tell her
that he was gone: but the next Sunday after he gave up his Chancellourship of
England, he came himself to her pew, and used the usual words of his
Gentleman-usher, Madame, my Lord is gone.

His latter wife was a widow, of whom Erasmus writes, that he was wont to
say, that she was, nec bella, nec puella: who as she was a good huswife, so
was she not void of the fault that often follows that virtue, somewhat
shrewd to her servants: Upon a time sir Thomas found fault with her continual
ch^ding, saying; if that nothing else would reclame her, yet the consideration
of the time (for it was Lent) should restrain her. Tush, tush, my Lord (said
she) look, here is one step to heavenward, showing him a Friars girdle. I
fear me (quoth sir Thomas Moore) this one step will not bring you up a
step higher.

One day when she came from shrift, she said merrily unto him, Be merry sir
Thomas, for this day was I well shriven, I thank God, and purpose now
therefore to leave off all my old shrewdness; Yea (quoth he) and to begin
afresh.

When he was sent prisoner unto the Tower, and the Lieutenant, his old friend,
received him with a heavy cheer, he said; Is this the entertainment and
good countenance you give your guests when they come to you? Why look man,
here are twenty angel nobles (showing him his purse) and when this is spent,
turn me out at doors, as a bare gamester, and not able to pay for that he
takes. Hitherto may be referred his silent answer, when at his entering into
the Tower, one of the Officers claimed for a fee, his upper garment, (meaning
his gown or his cloak) he offered him his cappe.

Being asked after his condemnation, and before his execution, whether he had
changed his mind, he said: Yea, for I thought to have been shaven, but now
seeing I shall die so shortly, I will let my beard grow.

His daughter Roper one day as she repaired unto him into the Tower,
counseled him to recover the Kings favor, and his own former liberty, by
doing I know not what, the which she said one of the greatest States of this
Realm, and a man learned too, and his tender friend, said he might do,
without scruple of conscience, as most of the Nobility of the Realm had
done, not once sticking thereat, save only himself, and one other man. This
speech of her he answered with a pleasant tale. At a Bartholomew fair at
London, there was an Escheater of the same city, that had arrested a Clothier
that was outlawed, and had seized his goods, which he had brought into the
fair, tolling him out of the fair by a train. The man that was arrested was
a Northern man, which by his friends made the Escheator to be arrested within
the fair, upon an Action I not near what, and called a Court of Pipowders.
Now ^ad the Clothier, by friendship of the Officers, found the means to have
all the Quest almost made of the Northern men, such as had their Boothes
standing in the fair, who were no sooner departed from the bar, and come
into the house, but the Northern men were agreed, and in effect all the other,
to cast our London Escheater. They thought they needed no were to prove that
he did wrong, than even the name of his bare office alone. But then was there
amongst them, as the Devil would, an honest man of another quarter called
Company. And the fellow seemed but a seely soul, and sat still, and said
nothing; they made noreckoning of him, but said. We be agreed now, come, let
us go and give up our verdict. Then when the poor fellow saw that they made
such hasle, and his mind nothing gave him that way that theirs did (if that
their ^^ndes gave them that way they said,) he prayed them to tarry and talk
upon the matter, and tell such reason therein, that ^ee might think as they
did, and when they should so do, be would be glad to say with them; or else
he said they must pardon him: For since ^ee had a soul of his own to keep,
as they had, be must say as he thought for his soul, as they must for theirs.
When they heard this they were half angry with him, What good fellow, (quoth
one of the Northern men) whare wannes thou? Be not we eleaven here, and thou
but one all alone, and al we agreed, whereto should thou stick? Whates thy
name good fellow? Masters (quoth he) my name is called Company. Company (quoth
they) now by my troth good fellow, play then the good companion, come thereon
forth with us, and pass even for good company. Would God good masters (quoth
the man again) that there lay no more weight thereon. But now, when we shall
hence, and come before God, and that he shall send you unto heaven for doing
according unto your conscience, and me to the devil, for doing against mine,
al passing at your request here for good company now, By God Master Dickenson
(that was one of the Northern men's names,) If I then shall say unto you al
again; Masters, I went once with you for good company, which is the cause
that I go now to hell, play you the good fellows now again with me, as I
went then for good company with you, so some of you go now for good company
with me: would you go master Dickenson? Nay, nay, by our Lady, nor never a
one of you all. And therefore must you pardon me for passing as you pass; for
the passage of my poor soul passes all good company.

In the like sense he used often to say, That he would never pin his soul at
another man's back, not even the best man that he knew that day living; for he
knew not whither he might hap to carry it.

When one came to him, to signify that he must prepare himself to die, for
he could not live, he called for his vrinall, wherein when he had made
water, he cast it, and viewed it (as Physicians use) at last he said
soberly, That he saw nothing in that water, but that he might live, if it
pleased the King.

When he was in prison, and his books and papers taken from him, he did shut
his chamber windows both day and night, saying; When the wares are gone, and
the tools taken away, we must shut up shop.

When he went to death, a certain woman offered him a cup of wine, which he
refusing, said; Good woman, Christ in his passion drunk gall, and no wine.

When he was to mount the scaffold he said to one of the Shiriffes men, I
pray thee help me up, as for coming down I take no care.

When the hangman (according to his manner) desired him to pardon him his
death, he answered, I do forgive thee with all my heart: but one thing I will
tell thee, thou w^^t never have honesty in cutting off my head, my neck is so
short.

NOw we have done with sir Thomas Moore his own Apothegmes which have come to
my hands, I will transcribe out of his works, a few Tales, or call them what
you please.

A poor man found a priest over familiar with his wife, and because he spoke
it abroad, and could not prove it, the priest sued him before the Bishops
Official for defamation, where the poor man in pain of cursing was
commanded, that in his parish Church he should upon the Sunday, at high
Mass, stand up, and say, Mouth thou lie: Whereupon for fulfilling of his
penance, up was the poor soul set in a pew, that the people might wonder at
him, and hear what he said: and there all aloude (when he had rehearsed
what he had reported by the priest) then he set his hands on his mouth,
and said; Mouth thou lie: And by and by thereupon, he set his hands upon
both his eyes, and said; But eyne (quoth he) by the Mass ye lie not a whit.

When sir Thomas Moore had told one whom he terms in his Dialogue the
Messenger, how he might yearly have seen a miracle done at the Rhodes, if he
would have gone thither. So far, quoth the Messenge? nay, yet I had rather
have Gods blessing to believe that I see not, then to go so far for it. I am
well apaid (said sir Thomas) thereof, for if you had rather believe, then take
the pain of a long pilgrimage, you will never be so stiff in any opinion,
that you will put your self in ieopardie for pertinacy, and stubborn standing
by your part. Nay Marie said the Messenger, I warrant you that I will never be
so mad, to hold, till it wax too hot, for I have such a fond fantasy of
mine own, that I had rather shiver and shake for cold in the Summer, then be
burned in the mids of Winter.

It happened that a young Priest very devoutly in a Procession, bare a Candle
before the Cross for lying with a Wench, and bare it light all the long way,
wherein the people took such spiritual pleasure and inward solace, that they
laughed apace. And one merry Merchant said unto the Priests that followed him,
Sic luceat lux vestra coram hominibus, Thus let your light shine before the
people. But a lewd Priest in later time, being reproved of his loose life, and
told that he and other of the Clergy ought to be the Lanthornes of light, How
can we (said the shameless Priest) be Lanthornes of light, when as ye Lay men
have all the horns.

When a lusty gallant saw a Friar going barefoote in a great frost and snow,
he asked him why he did take such pain. He answered, that it was a very
little pain if a man would remember hell: Yea Friar (quoth the Gallant) but
what and if there be no Hell? Then art thou a great fool: Yea Master (quoth
the Friar) but what if there be hell, then is mastership much more fool.

A Friar as he was preaching in the Country, espied a poor wife of the
parish, whispering with her Pew-felow, and he falling angry thereat, cried out
unto her aloude, Hold thy babble I bid thee, thou wife in the red hoode, which
when the huswife heard, she waxed as angry, and suddenly she started up, and
cried unto the Friar again that all the Church rang thereon; Mary sir, I
beshrew his heart, that babbleth most of us both, for I do but whisper a word
with my neighbor here, and thou have babled there a good large hour.

King Ladislaus used much this manner among his servants, when one of them
praised any deed of his, or any condition in him, if he perceyved that they
said nothing but the truth, he would let it pass by uncontrolled: But when he
saw that they did set a gloss upon it for his praise, of their own making
beside; then would he shortly say unto them, I pray thee good fellow, when thou
faist grace, never bring in Gloria patri, without a Sicut erat. Any act that
ever I did, if thou report it again to mine honor, with a Gloria patri, never
report it but with a Suut trat. That is to wit, even as it was, and no
otherwise, and lift not me up with lies, for I love it not.

Friar Donalde preached at Paul's Cross, that our Lady was a virgin, and yet
at her pilgrimages, there was made many a foul meeting. And loud cried out,
Ye men of London, gang on your selves with your wives to Wilsdon, in the Divils
name, or else keep them at home with you with a sorrow.

Sir John Moore was wont to compare the choosing of a wife unto a casual
taking out at all a very ventures of Eles out of a bag, wherein were twenty
Snakes for an Ele.

Sir John Fineux, sometime chief Justice of the Kings bench, was often heard
to say: Who so takes from a Justice the order of his discretion, takes surely
from him more than half his office.

Wise was that saying of Doctor Medealfe: You young men do think us old men to
be fools, but we old men do know that you young men are fools.

Katherine wife to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk: when her husband at a
feast, willed every Lady to take to sit by her, him that she loved best,
provided he were not her husband, she took Stephen Cardiner, Bishop of
Winchester, saying: Seeing she might not have him whom she loved best, she
would take him whom she loved worst.

KIng Edward the sixth when three swords were delivered at his coronation unto
him, as king of England, France, and Ireland, said, There was yet another
sword to be delivered unto him. Whereat when the Lords marvelled, he said: I
mean (said he) the sacred Bible, which is the sword of the spirit, without
which we are nothing, neither can do any thing. [Balaeus in Centurijs.]

When sit Ralfe Fane was condemned to die by the practice of the Duke of
Northumberland, he said no more, protesting his innocence, but, My blood shall
be the Dukes bolster, as long as he lives: Meaning, as I think, that his
conscience affrighted with shedding innocent blood, should enjoy little quiet,
but pass restless nights. Relatio Gallica.

Thirlby Bishop of Elie, when he was Ambassador at Rome, one of her men
negligently laying down his livery cloak, in his lodging lost it: wherewith
the Bishop being angry rated the fellow roughly, who told him that he
suspected nothing in so holy a place as Rome was, but did take them all for
true men. What knave (qvoth the Bishop) when thou come into a strange place,
think all men there to be thieves, yet take heed thou do not call them
thieves.

When he was prisoner in the Tower, he was searched by the Lievetenaunt, and
five hundred French crowns found in his purse, and in his doublet about him:
whereat when the Lieutenant wondering, asked him, what he meant to carry so
much money about him: he answered, I love to have my friends still near about
me, and can not tell how I should be used if I lacked them.

In the rebellion in the Weast, during the reign of king Edward the sixth, sir
Anthony Kingston marshall of the field, hanged up a fellow that was servant to
a rebellious Miller, whom he affirmed himself to be, until he came unto the
gallows, and then his denial would not be allowed. Afterward the matter being
better known, sir Anthony was told that he had executed the man for the
master. It is well enough ( quoth sir Anthony) he could never have done his
master better service, than have hanged for him.

THese following are taken out of the life of Cardinal Poole Archbishop of
Canterbury, written by a learned man, and Printed at Venice.

When one asked counsel of Cardinal Poole, what method and way was best to
be taken, to understand the obscure places in Saint Paul's Epistles: he
answered him he thought the best and shortest way was, to read first the
latter part of those Epistles, which does entreat of Christian manners, and
understand it, and express it in life and good manners; and then to go unto
the first part, where the matters of faith are subtily and exactly handled,
saying; That God will give his spirit of understanding soonest unto those, that
with all their whole hearts seek to serve him.

He was wont to say, That he and all other Bishops ought to consider that they
were ordained, not only Judges over those of their Dioceses, but father Judges.

In communication when mention happened to be made of a certain Bishop, who
was wont to blame the Bishops that lived at Rome, and neglected their charge,
and yet he himself was resident at Rome. He (quoth Poole) does like unto those
that cannot abide the smell of garlic, for if they have to do with them that
have eaten garlike, they eat some too themselves, that they may not percerve
their stinking breaths.

Speech was heard of a young man that was learned indeed, but too bold, and
ready to censure. Learning ( quoth Poole) does work almost that in young men,
that wine does in the fat; there it works, there it boileth up, and
swells. But as soon as it is purged, and put in the vessel, having gathered
his forces together, it is quiet and still.

When one very skillful in Astrology told him, that he had very exactly
calculated his-nativitie, and found that great matters were portended of him:
Poole answered, Perhaps it may be as you affirm, but you must remember that I
was borne again by baptism, and that day of nativitie wherein I was borne
again, does eclipse the other before.

When one had said, that we must be so wholly busied in the study of the
Scriptures, that no time should be left for other studies: and another man had
added, that the studies of other learnings were to be used as Wayting-maides,
and Bond-women, What do you not know (quoth Poole) that Agar was cast out of
the doors, because she was a bondwoman?

When Sadolet adhorted him unto the study of Philosophy, giving to it the
price above all other studies: Poole answered him, While all the world was
overwhelmed with the darkness of Paganism, it did excel al other Arts: but
since that thick mist was chased away, by the bright beams of the preaching
of Christ and his Apostles, and their successors; the study of the sacred
Scriptures and divinity had gotten the pa^ne and chief praise, adding, that
Philosophy was now as Tenedos, of whom Virgil writes:

-- notissima fama
Insula div^s opum Priami dum regna manebant.
Nunc tantum sinus and statio malefida carinis.
A famous Isle of riches great while Priamus kingdom stood,
Now nothing but a baggage bay, and harbor nothing good.
He used friendly to admonish a certain Bishop, not to forsake his sheep, but
rather leaving Rome to repair home and execute his office. This Bishop upon a
time came unto him, and told him that he was minded to go out of the city,
for one month, and to visit his sheep, and therefore he did desire that he
might depart with his good leave and liking: Poole answered, I shall take this
comfort by your departure, that you shall be beaten the less.

When Letters were showed unto him very artificially penned, which one had sent
unto a great man, to comfort him for the death of his friends, and to tha^
intent had used all the places of Rhethoricke, he read them, and then said;
That he never in all his life had ever read Letters, that could bring greater
comfort; for they were such, that no man that should read them, could be able
to keep himself from laughing.

Having heard a certain Preacher of great name, who arrogated much to
himself, and did passingly please himself; he was asked what he thought of
the man. Poole answered; Well, but I would that he would first preach unto
himself, and then afterward to other.

When a Nobleman of Rome told him, that he did trust that he should come to
his pleasant gardines, which he had sumptuously made, yea thirty years
after, and wonder at the beauty of them. Poole answered, I hope I have not
deserved so ill of you, that you should wish me so long a banishment from my
heavenly country.

While he was in the Low countries, and one day would have gone unto Charles
the Emperor, but he could not be admitted to his speech: but two days after
the Bishop of Arras was sent unto him by the Emperor, to excuse his long stay,
and desire him to come unto him: Poole said, that he had strange hap, That
whereas be spoke daily unto God for the Emperor, yet he was not admitted unto
the Emperor, to talk with him about a matter belonging to God.

There was one that was very curious in keeping of his beard, and it was
reported that he bestowed every month two ducats upon the trimming of it. If
it be so (said Poole) his beard will shortly be more worth than his head.

After the death of Paulus Tertius when many Cardinals came unto him, and told
him, that if he liked of it, they would make him Pope: He desired them to
look well to it, that they were swayed by no passion of the mind, or did
ought for favor, and good will, but refer all their cogitations wh^lie unto
the honor of God, and the profit of his Church; the which only they all ought
especially to have always before their eyes.

When one of the Cardinals of the adverse faction did one day charge him with
ambition, and said that he did untimely and over-hastily seek the Popedom:
He answered gravely That he thought not the burden of that great office to be
so light, but that he was of the mind, that it was rather to be feared, than
desired. A^ for them which understood not, and thought more basely of so great
a place, he lamented their case, and was sorry for them.

When the Cardinal Farnesi, and diverse other of his fri^nds came unto him, at
midnight, to make him Pope, by adoration, he repelled them saying; He would not
have so weighty a matter tumultuously and rashly done, but v^^aily and orderly,
that the night was no convenient time therefore, that God loved the light more
than darkness, wherefore they should defer it until the next day, and that
then of it plea^ed God, it might very well be done. But this his pious modesty
lost him the Papacy.

He used often to say, Those which would betake them unto the study of the holy
Scriptures, (which was as though they would go into the inner and secret part
of the Temple) must pass through a low and a narrow door: For that no man can
attain to the understanding of the Scriptures, that is proud and puffed up
with the sharpness of his wit, or excellency of humane learning; but be that
brings lowliness of mind, and (...) tempt of himself, and yeeldes his
understanding ( as the Apostle says) captive unto faith.

Of this also did he often admonish those that would study the sacred
Scriptures, That they should specially beware that they never went to the
reading of them with this intent and mind, that they might dispute of them to
show their learning, and by that knowledge to get them honors and riches: for
both purposes, were every contrary to this kind of study. Whereunto ought to
be adhibited, first fervent prayers* then a lowely mind, and finally an heart
void of all ambition and greedy desire. Thus far of this good Cardinal.

Wil^iam Marq^es of Winchester, being asked how he continued of the counsel on
the troblesome times of diverse Princes, answered. By being a Willow, and not
an Oak. He would also often say, that he found great ease in this: That I
never sought to rule the r^ste, and to be the director of others, but always
suffered my self to be swayed with the most and mightiest. As another Courtier
of former times said he had borne off many court-stormes indangerous times. By
suffering injuries and giving thanks for them.

A lusty gallant that had wasted much of his patrimony, seeing master Dutton a
gentleman in a gown, not of the newest out, told him that he had thought it
had been his great grandfathers gown, It is so (said master Dutton) and I
have also my great grandfathers lands, and so have not you.

A reverend man my first teacher would often say in the midst of his mirth,
Sorrow is good for nothing save sin only.

NOw we draw to an end, have a few savings of merry M. ^^elwood the great
Epigrammatist. When Qu: Mary told this Heiwood, that the Priests must forgo
their wives. He merrily answered, Your Grace must allow them Lemmans then,
for the Clergy can not live without sauce.

He being asked of the said Queen Mary, what wind blew him to the Court,
answered her, Two specially, the one to see your Majesty, We thank you for
that, said Queen Mary; But I pray you, what is the other? That your Grace
(said he) might see me.

When one told him, that Pace being a master of Art had disgraced himself
with wearing a fools come, he answered, It is less hurtful to the
commonweal, when wisemen go in fools coats, than when fools go in w^^e
m^ns gowns.

When he saw one riding that bare a wanton behind him, he said; In good
faith sir, I would say that your horse were overloaden, if I did not perceive
this the (...) you carry were very light.

When a man of worship, whose beer was better hopped than maulted, asked him
at his Table, how he liked of his beer, and whether it were not well hopped:
Yes by the faith of my body (said he) it is very well hopped: but if it ha^
hoppea a little further, it had hopped into the water.

When one said, that the number of Lawyers would mar the occupation; he
answered, No, for always the more spaniels in the field, the more game.

This usual speech of sir Th: Moore, both of himself and other Book breeders,
which is also extant in an Epistle of his, I have reserved to close up this
part. Booke-makers are ful^^se folk who p^ine and ^^ne themselves away by
writing, to subject themselves to the censure of such which in Ordinaries and
in Ale-benches will (...) pull them by their words, phrases, and lines, as it
were by the beards; when some of them are so pill^ themselves, as that they
have not one hair of honesty; or to use his own words, Ne pilum boni
hominis. But these he resembles to those unmannerly guests, which when they
have bin well and kindly entertained flinch away never giving thanks, but
depraving and disprasing their courteous entertainment.

CERTAIN Poemes, or Poesies, Epigrammes, Rythmes, and Epitaphs of the English
Nation in former Times.
POEMS.
OF the dignity of Poetry much has been said by the worthy Sir Philipp
Sidney, and by the Gentleman which proved that Poets were the first
Politicians, the first Philosophers, the first Historiographers. I will only
add out of Philo, that they were Gods own creatures, who in his Book de
Plantatione Noe, reports, that when he had made the whole worlds mass; he
created Poets to celebrate and set out the Creator himself, and all the
creatures: you Poets read the place and you will like it. Howsoever it pleases
the Italian to censure us, yet neither does the Sun so far retire his
chariot from our Climate, neither are there less favorable aspects between
Mercury, Jupiter, and the Moon, in our inclination of heaven, if Poets are
Fato, as it pleased Socrates, neither are our Poets destitute of Art
prescribed by reason, and grounded upon experience, but they are as pregnant
both in witty conceits and devises, and also in imitation, as any of them. Yea
and according to the argument excel in granditie and gravity, in smoothness
and propriety, in quickness and briefnesse. So that for skill, variety,
efficacy, and sweetness, the four material points required in a Poet, they
can both teach and delight perfectly.

This would easily appear if any lines were extant of that worthy British Lady
Claudia Rufina, so commended by Martial, or of Gildas which Lilius Giraldus
saw in the libraries of Italy, Beda Eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 24.
or of old Chedmon who by divine inspiration about the year 680. became so
divine a Poet in our English tongue, that with his sweet verses full of
compunction, he withdrew many from vice to virtue, and a religious fear of
God: or of our Claudius Clemens one of the first founders of the University of
Paris: and does most clearly appear to all that can judge by many learned
Poems published in this our learned age. But whereas these later are in every
man's hand, and the former are irrecouerable, I will only give you a taste of
some of middle age, which was so ouercast with dark clouds, or rather thick
fogges of ignorance, that every little spark of liberal learning seemed
wonderful: so that if sometime you happen of an uncouth word, let the time
entreat pardon for it, when as all words have their times, and as he says.

licuit semperque licebit,
Signatum praesente nota procudere nomen.
We will begin with Joseph of Excester, who followed our King Richard the first
in his wars in the holy land, celebrated his acts in a book called
Antiocheidos, and turned Dares Phrigius so happily into verse, that it has
been Printed not long since in Germany, under the name of Cornelius Nepos.

The passing of the pleasant river Simois by Troy, and the encounter between
the waves of the Sea, and it, at the disemboging, or inlett thereof, he lively
sets forth thus: Proxima rura rigans alio peregrinus ab orb
Visurus Troiam Simois, longoque meatu
Emeruisse velit, vt per tot regna, tot vrbes
Exeat aequoreas tandem Trotanus in vndas.
Dumque indefesso miratur Pergama visu
Lapsurum suspendit iter, fluuiumque moratur,
Tardior and totam complects destinat vrbem:
Suspensis infensus aquis violentior instat
Nereus, atque amnem cogens procul ire minorem;
Proximus accedit vrbi, contendere credas
Quis propior, sic alternis concurritur vndis,
Sic crebras iterant voces, sic iurgia miscent.


You may at one view behold mount Ida with his trees, and the country adjacent
to Troy in these few lines, as in a most pleasant prospect presented unto you
thus, by the said Joseph.

Haud procul incumbens intercurrentibus aruis
Idaeus consurgit apex, vetus incola montis
Silua viret, vernat abies procera, cupressus
Flebilis, interpres laurus, vaga pinus, oliua
Concilians, cornus venatrix, fraxinus audax,
Staet comitis patiens vlmus, nunquamque senescens
Cantatrix buxus: paulo procliuius aruum
Ebria vitis habet non dedignata latere
Cancricolam poscit Phoebum, vicinus aristas
Praegnantes faecundat ager* non plura Falernus
Vina bibit, non tot pascit Campania messes.
A right woman and Ladylike disdain may be observed in the sa^e Author, where
he brings in Pallas, mating dame Juno with modest disdamfulnesse before
Paris, in the action of beauty, a matter of greatest importance in that sex,
after this manner of reply.

Magna parens superum, nec enim nego; magna Tonantis
Nupta, nec inuideo; meritum, Paris inclyte, nostrum
Si quod erat carpsit testor freta, testor Olympum,
Testor humum, non armatas in praelia linguae
Credideram venisse deas; hac part loquacem
Erubeo sexum, minus hic quam faemina possum;
Martem alium didici, victoria faeda vbi victis
Plus laudis victore feret, nostrisque trophaeis
Hic hand notus honos. Sed quo regina dearum
Effatu tendit, Dea sit, cedo, imo Dearum
Maxima, non dextrae sortiri sceptra potentis,
Partiri ue Iouem certatim venimus, illa
Illa habeat, quae se ostentat.
In the commendation of Britain, for breeding Martial men, and praise of the
famous King Arthur, he song in his Antiocheidos these which only remain out
of that work, Inclita fulsit
Posteritas ducibus tantis, tot dives alumnis,
Tot faecunda viris, premerent qui viribus o^ bem,
Et fama veteres. Hinc Constantinus adeptus
Imperium, Romam tenuit, Byzantion auxit.
Hinc Senenum ductor captiua Brennius vrbe,
Romuleas domuit flammis victricibus arces.
Hinc and Scaeua satus pars non obscura tumultus
Ciuilis, Magnum solus qui mole soluta
Obsedit, meliorque stetit pro Caesare murus,
Hinc celebri fato faelici floruit ortu
Flos regum Arthurus, cuius tamen acta stupori
Non micuere minus, totus quod in aure voluptas
Et populo plaudente fauus. Quacunque priorum
Inspice, Pellaeum commendat fama Tyrannum,
Pagina Caesareos loquitur Romana triumphos,
Alciden domitis attollit gloria monstris.
Sed nec pinetum coryli, nec sydera solemn
Aequant, Annals Graios, Latiosque reuolue,
Prisca parem nescit, aequalem postera nullum
Exhibitura dies. Reges supereminet omnes
Solus praeteritis melior, maiorque futuris.


If a painter would portraite devils let him paint them in his coulors, as
Foelix the old Monk, of Crowland depaynted the bugges of Crowland in his
verses, and they will seem right hell hounds.

Sunt aliqui quibus est crinis rigidus, caput amplum,
Frons cornuta, gena distorta, pupilla coruscans,
Os patulum, labra turgentia, dens praeacutus,
Et quibus est crinis quasi seta, caput quasi truncus,
Frons quasi cera, gena quasi pix, oculus quasi carbo,
Os quasi sporta, labra quasi plumbum, dens quasi buxus.
Sunt alij quibus est vultus gibbosus and acer,
Nasus curuatus and foedus, auris acuta,
Et grandis, ceruix dependens and macilenta:
Caesaries and barba rigens, frons and gena pallens,
Nasus and auris olens, vertex and sinciput horrens.
Et sunt perplures qui crine videntur adusto,
Front truci, naso praegrandi, lumine toruo.
Faucibus horrendis, labris pendentibus, ore
Igniuomo, vultu squamoso, vertice grosso,
Dente fero, mento peracuto, gutture rauco,
Pelle nigra, scapulis contractis, ventre rapaci,
Costis mobilibus, lumbis ardentibus, anis
Caudatis, genibus nodatis, cruribus vncis,
Plantis auersis, talisque tumentibus, and sunt
Nonnulli, quibus est non horrida forma, sed ipse
Horror, cum non sint scelerati, sed scelus ipsum.
He did seem also a good poet in his age, which described a great battle
between the Danes and the English; thus.

Eminus in primis hiberni grandinis instar
Tela volant, syluas hastarum fragmina frangunt;
Mox ruitur propius, praescinditur ensis ab ense,
Conculcatur equus ab equo, ruit hostis in hostem.
Hic effossa trahit hostili viscera ferro,
Hic tacet exanimis fusa cum sanguine vita.
Hic pedis, ille manus, hic pectoris, ille lacerti
Vulnere damnatus reditum proponit inanem.
If he which scraped together the fragments of ancient poets, had happened on the
verses following, written to a Bishop of Norwich, happily he would have
inserted them.

Magnus Alexander bellorum saepe procellas
Immixtus fregit studijs, Socratesque studend^
Continuum solitus interrupisse laborem,
Threicias tremulo numerauit pollice chordas.
Cedit Atlas oneri, civilly scriptor ab ense
Julius abstinuit, inuictus saepe quieuit
Alcides, rigidum mollis lyra flexit Achillem,
Tu quoque lugenti patriae grauiterque diuque
Expectate parens, sibi quem viduata maritum
Iam Pastoralis Norwici regia poscit. etc.
John Hanuill a Monk of S. Albanes made this good and godly invocation before
his poem, comparable with many of the latter brood.

Tu Cyrrhae latices nostrae Deus implue menti,
Eloquij rorem siccis infunde labellis,
Distillaque fauos, quos nec dum pallidus auro
Scit Tagus, aut sitiens admotis Tantalus vndis.
Dirige qua timide susc^pit dextera, dextram
Audacem pauidamque iuua, tu mentis habenas
Feruoremque rege, quicquid dictauerit ori
Spiritus aridior, oleum suffunde fauoris.
Tu patris es verbum, tu men's, tu dextra, Verbum
Expediat verbum, men's mentem, dextera dextram.
Lasie and superficial scholars which thrust the day forward ward with their
shoulders in the university, and return as wise as they came thither he
describes in this sort: Hi sunt qui statuae veniunt-statuaeque recedunt,
Et Bacchi sapiunt non Phaebi pocula, Nysae
Agmina non Cirrhae, Phaebo Bacchoque ministrant,
Hoc pleni illo vacui.


The old ale knights of England were well depainted out of him, in the ale
house colors of that time, in this manner, Iamque vagante scypho, discincto
gutture was-heil
Ingeminant was-fieil; labor est plus perdere vini
Quam sitis, exhaurire merum vehementius ardent,
Quam exhaurire sitim.


The same John Hanuill when he would signify whatsoever envy had wrought
against Troy, the Roman virtue had repaired, sung briefly.

Si quid de culmine Troiae
Diminuit liuor, virtus reparauit, vt orbi
Hic vrbem rapuit, haec orbem reddidit vrbi.
Passionate are these verses upon the death of K. Richard the first, penned by
one Gaulfrid.

Neustria sub clypeo Regis defensa Richardi
Indefensa modo gestu testare dolorem,
Exundent oculi lachrimas exterminet ora
Pallor, connodet digitos tortura, cruentet
Interiora dolor, and verberet era clamor:
Tota peris ex morte sua, mors non fuit eius
Sed tua, non vna sed publica mortis imago.
O Veneris lachrimosa dies, o sidus amarum.
Illa dies tua nox fuit, and Venus illa venenum.
Illa dedit vulnus, sed pessimus ille dierum
Primus ab vndecimo, qui vitam victricus ipsam
Clausit, vterque dies homicida, tyrannide mira,
Traiecit clausus inclusum, tectus apertum,
Prouidus incautum, miles munitus inermem,
Et proprium Regem.
And after a few verses: he speaking to Death, adds in commendation of that
prince.

--, Nihil addere nouerat vltra
Ipse fuit quicquid potuit natura, sed istud
Causa fuit quare rapuisti, res pretiosas
Eligis, and viles quasi dedignata relinquis.
These former verses were mentioned by Chaucer our English Homer in the
description of the sudden stir and Panicall fear when Chanteclere the cock
was carried away by Reynold the Fox with a relation to the said Galfride.

The silly widow and her daughters two
Herd the hens cry and make ado.
And out at the door stert they anon
And saw the fox toward the woodygon,
And bare upon his back the cock away
And cried out harow and well away.
Aha the fox, and after him they ran,
And eke with staves many other man.
Ran Coll our dog, Talbot and eke Garland,
And Malkin with her distaffe in her hand,
Ran Cow and Calfe and eke the very hogs,
For they so sore afraid were of the dogs.
And showting of men and of women eake.
They ran so her heart thought to breaks
They yellen as fends do in hell,
The Duckes cried as men would them quell,
The Geese for fear flew over the trees,
Out of the heues came swarms of Bees.
So hideous was the noise, ah benedicite
Certes Jack Straw, ne his meiney
Ne made never shoutes half so shrill
When that they would any Fleming kill,
As that day was made upon the Fox.
Of brass they blew the trumpes and of box,
Of horn, and box, i which they blew and pouped,
And therewith they shriked and shouted,
It seemed as though heaven should fall.
O Gaulfride dear master sovereign,
That when the worthy King Richard was slain
With shot, complainedst his death so sore,
Why ne had I now thie science, and thy lore?
The Friday for to chide as did ye,
For on a Friday shortly slain was he.
Then would I show you how that I could plain,
For Chauntecleercs dred and for his pain.
Certes such cry, ne lamentation,
Was never of Ladies made when that Ilion
Was won, an Pirrhus with his bright sword,
When he hent King Priam by the beard,
And slough him (as says Aeneidos)
As made all the hens in the cloos,
When they lost of Chantecleere the sight:
But souerainly dame Pert^lott shright,
Well louder than did Hasdruballs wife,
When that her husband has lost his life,
And that the Romans had brent Cartage,
She was so full of torment and of rage,
That wilfully into the fire she stert,
And brent her self with a steadfast heart.
O woeful Hens right so cried ye,
As when that Nero brent the city
Of Rome, cried the Senators wives,
For that her husbonds should lose her lives.
These may suffice for some Poetical descriptions of our ancient Poets, if I
would come to our time, what a world could I present to you out of Sir Philipp
Sidney, Ed. Spencer, Samuel Daniel, Hugh Holland, Ben: Johnson, Th. Campion,
Mich. Drayton, George Chapman, John Marston, William Shakespeare, and other
most pregnant wits of these our times, whom succeeding ages may justly admire.

Epigrammes.
IN short and sweet Poems, framed to praise or dispraise, or some other sharp
conceit which are called Epigrammes, as our country men now surpass other
nations, so in former times they were not inferior, if you consider ages, as
the indifferent Reader may judge by these.

In the praise of our native Country England, Alfred of Beuerley made this.

Anglia plena iocis, gens libera et apta iocari,
Libera gens cui libera men's and libera lingua,
Sed lingu. i melior, liberiorque manus.
And in another old Book I find this.

Anglia dulce solum, quod non aliena, recensque,
Sed tua dulcedo pristina dulce facit,
Quae nihil a Galli^, sed Gallia suscipit a te
Quicquid amoris habet quicquid honoris, habet.
In the dark misle of all good learning, about 800. years since, in
commendation of the godly King Saint Os^uald, was made this.

Quis fuit Alcides? quis Casar Julius? aut quis
Magnus Alexander? Alcides se superasse
Fertur, Alexander mundum: sed Julius hostem:
Se simul Osuualdus, and mundum vicit, and hostem.
To the honor of Elfleda noble Lady, which repaired Darby, Chester, Warwick,
etc. I have found this.

O Elfleda potens, o terror virgo virorum,
Victrix naturae, nomine digna viri;
Te quo splendidior fieres, natura puellam,
Te probitas fecit nomen habere viri.
Te mutare decet, sed solum nomina sexus
Tu Regina potens, Rexque trophaea parans.
Iam nec Caesarei tantum meraeri triumphi,
Caesare splendidior virgo, virago viges.
This also may here have place, which William Conquerours Poet made to him when
he had obtained this Realm.

Caesariem Caesar tibi si natura negauit,
Hanc Wilielme tibi stella comata dedit.
It may seem he alluded to the baldness of Julius Caesar, who for that cause
used a Laurel Garland, to the Comete appearing before his conquest of this
kingdom, portending the same as it was thought, and to the manner of the
French in that time: among whom long bushie hair was the signale mark of
Majesty, as Agathias notes, when as all subjects were rounded, and the Kings
only long haired. Which custom continued among the French Kings, until Peter
Lombard Bishop of Paris dissuaded them from it, and among ours, as appears by
their seals until King Henry the 5.

The happy success of English and Normans, with the cowardly flight of the
French, at Nugent 1109 in the time of King Henry the first, was thus expressed.

Henricus regum rex and decus, abstulit altos
Francigenis animos, Ludouicum namque Nugenti
Rex regem campo magnum mayor superauit:
Praeposuere fugam bellis, calcaria telis
Galli praecipites: fama spolijsque potitos
Laurea Normanos, and laus aterna coronat,
Sic decus iste ducum sic corda tumentia pressit,
Oraque Francorum superba mutire coegit.
Maud daughter to Malcolm King of Scots, a woman of rare piety, buried at
Westminster, to which Church she would come daily barefoote, while the Court
lay there, had an excellent Epigramme made to her commendation, whereof these
four verses only remain.

Prospera non laetam fecere, nec aspera tristem,
Aspera risus erant, prospera terror erant.
Non decor effecit fragilem, non sceptra superbam,
Sola potens humilis, sola pudica decens.
No bad Poet was he which wrote to the honor of Adeliza, second wife to King
Henry the first, who was daughter to the Duke of Brabant, and sister to Lord
Ioscelin, from whom the Percies Earls of Northumberland descended.

Anglorum Regina tuos Adeliza decores
Ipsa refer parans Musa, stupore riget.
Quid Diadema tibi pulcherrima? quid tibi gemma?
Pallet gemma tibi, nec Diadema nitet.
Deem tibi cultus, cultum natura ministrat,
Non exornari forma beata potest.
Ornamenta cave, nec quicquam luminis inde
Accipis, illa micant lumine clara tuo;
Non puduit modicas de magnis dicere lauds,
Nec pudeat dominam te precor esse meam.
But among all our old Epigrammatists all commendation is carried away by old
Godffery Prior of Winchester, who lived Anno 1100. which City has brought
forth so many excelling in Poetical faculty, not only in former ages, but
also in latter, out of the worthy College there, that the very Genius loci
does seem Poetical. Out of his Epigrammes first imparted to me by the right
learned Master Th. Allen of Oxford, I will here impart a few unto you.

To one that would know how long he should learn, he wrighteth thus.

Discendi Damiane modum te quaerere dicunt,
Discas dum nescis, sit modus iste tibi.
That the contempt of fools is not to be respected.

Contemptum stulti contemnere Dindime laus est,
Contemni a stulto dedecus esse nego.
Against pride in prosperity.

Extolli noli quum te fortuna beauit
Pompone, haec eadem quae leuat, ipsa premit.
Against such as teach well, and live not accordingly.

Multa Solon, sed plura Cato me verba docetis,
At nemo vestrum quanta docetis, agit.
To one which had eaten stinking meat.

Druse comedisti quem misit Siluius hircum,
Vel tibi non nasus, vel tibi nasus olet.
He teaches us to rely upon firm and sure supports, lest we fall to the
ground with them in this.

Non est securus super titubantia fultus
Iungere labenti, labitur ille, ruis.
That we must look for like measure, if we do not as we would be done unto,
he admonishes all under the name of Albius.

Iurgia, clamores tibi gloria gloria lites,
Et facis and dicis omnibus, vnde noces.
Expectes ead^m quae nobis seceris Albi,
Nam quem tu laedis, te ferit ille libens.
Youth which in their haughty heat, reject the advice of old men, he advises
thus.

Pannorum veterum facile contemnitur vsus
Non sic consilium, posthumiane, senum.
The vanity of them which vaunt of their ancient nobility, and have no
nobility in themselves, he thus taxes.

Stemmata continuas, recitas ex ordine patres,
Queis nisi tu similis, Rufule quid recitas?
That there was no contending with him who with missiue bribes can prevail
against Justice.

Missilibus Daciane tuis Astraea recessit
Vincis m^ssilibus Ius Dac^^nc tuis.
The common proverb, Love me love mine, he thus advised us to observe,

Me tanquam socium te dicis amare Trebati,
Et quos totus amo dente furente teris
Sed nisi sis socius socijs, and amic^s
Non potero nostrum dicere te socium.
Against hooked gifts which draw others.

Multa mihi donas, vereor ne multa requiras,
Nolo mihi doncs Aulice, si repetas.
Against one that sought a benefice and would teach before he could teach.

Qua doceat sedem quaerit Pl^timus and aedem,
Quarit qua doceat, non ea quae doceat,
Against a covetous wretch.

Nasidiane diu vixisti semper anarus,
Oro tibi ^^uas Nasidiane dus.
Against one that would exact of others, and do nothing himself.

Ex^gis a nobis quem (...) soluis amorem,
Quam nulli praestes exigis. Aule sidem.
Exig^^ a nobis quem non m^rearis honorem,
Mirum est quod non das, id tibi velle (...).
Against an Abbot that would defend his monks from others, but worrye them
himself.

Tollit onem de fauce lupi persaepe molossus,
Ereptamque lupo ventre recondit ouem.
Tu quoque Sceuae tuos praedone tueris ab omni,
Vnus praedo tamen perdis vbique tuos.
One amidst the wars between King Stephen and Henry the second, commended
the same Henry in these verses.

Praelia quanta mouet Stephanus, moucat volo namque
Gloria nulla foret si pralia null: moueret.
Tu contra Stephanum cui copia multa virorum;
Duxisti pautos, our paucos? gloria mayor,
Est* multos paucis, quam paucos vincere multis.
At the same troublesome time and as it were desolation of England were written
to the same Henry as it were in a Prosopopcia of England.

Dux Henrice nepos Henrici maxim magni;
Anglia tota ruo, nec iam ruo, tota ruina. etc.
Upon two other fearful flights of the French, one at Vernoil, the other at
Vandosme in the time of King Henry the second, one made this.

Gallia fugisti bis, and hoc sub rege Philippo,
Nec sunt sub modio facta pudenda duo.
Vernolium sumit testem fuga prima, secunda
Vindocium, noctem prima* secunda diem.
Nocte fugam primam celerasti, mane secundam,
Prima pauore fuit, vique secunda fuit.
When one had flattered William Longchampe Bishop of Elye the only powerable
man of England in his time with this blandation.

Tam been, tam facile, tu magna negotia tractas,
Vt dubium reddas sis homo, sieve deus.
Giraldus Cambrensis a man well borne and better lettered, of that house from
whence the Giraldines of Ireland are descended, and secretary to King John,
played upon these verses, and that Bishop after he was apprehended in woman's
attire flying out of the realm.

Tam male, tam temere, tam turpiter omnia tractas,
Vt dubium reddas bellua sis, vel homo.
Sic cum sis minimus tentas maioribus vti,
Ve dubium reddas simia sis, vel homo.
He that made the verse following (some ascribe it to that Giraldus) could
adore both the son rising, and the son setting, when he could so cleanly
honor King Henry the second then departed, and King Richard succeeding.

Miracano sol occubuit, nox nulla sequuta.
Great was the commendation of Maecenas, who when he could do all with
Augustus, yet never harmed any, whereupon in an Elegy upon his death, Pedo
Albinouanus writes.

Omnia cum posses, tanto tam carus amico,
Te sensit nemo posse nocere tamen.
Which commendation king Henry the eight gave to that worthy Duke of Suffolk
Charles Brandon, who never used the Kings favor to the hurt of any. And the
same Giraldus testified the like of King Henry the second, in this verse very
effectually.

Glorior hoc vno, quod nunquam vidimus vnum,
Nec potuisse magis, nec nocuisse minus.
These also following are referred unto him.

Viue deo, tibi mors requies, tibi vita labori,
Viue Deo, mors est viuere, vita mori.
These following were likewise written by him against lewd love.

Nec laus, nec probitas, nec honor superare puellam,
Sed Veneris vitium vincere laudis opus.
Vis melius sapiens, melius vis strenuus esse,
Si Venerem superes, istud and istud eris:
Noli castra sequi Veneris, sed castra Mineruae,
Haec docet, illa furit, haec iu^at, illa nocet.
Cum sit amor vetitus, vetiti malus actus amoris,
Si malus ergo nocet, si nocet, ergo fuge,
Cuius caepta timor, medium scelus, exitus ignis,
Tu fuge, tu reproba, tu metuendo cave.
Why the Sun appears ruddy and as it were blusheth at his first rising.
Alexander Necham sometime prior of Cirencester renders the cause thus.

Sol vultu roseo rubicundo fulget in ortu,
Incestae noctis facta pudore notans.
Nempe rubore suo tot damnat damna pudoris,
Cernere tot Phaebum gesta pudenda pudet*
Tot blandos nexus, tot suauia pressa labellis,
Tot miserae Veneris monstra nouella videt.
Frigida quod nimium caleat lasciua senectus,
Ignis quod gelido ferueat amne stupet.
Of the fiery color of the planet Mars, and the spotts in the Moon he gives
this reason.

Mars Venerem secum deprensam fraud mariti
Erubuit, superest flammeus ille rubor.
Sed cur lunaris facies fuscata videtur?
Quae vultu damnat, furta videre solet.
Add quod Ecclesiam Phaebe, maculae nota culpam
Signat, habet maculas vtrque Luna suas.
If you will read carping Epigrammaticall verses of a Durham Poet against the
prior Ralfe, here you may have them.

De seen, de caluo, de delirante Radulpho
Omnia monstra cano, nil nisi vera tamen:
Imputat errores alijs semper, sibi nunquam,
Est alijs Argus, Tyresiasque sibi.
Non vult esse bonus, sed vult bonus esse videri*
Est ouis exterius, interiusque lupus.
Sus vita, canis officio, vulpecula fraud,
Mente lepus, passer renibus, ore lupus.
Talis qui demon nunquam poterit nisi morte
Esse bonus, postquam desinat esse malus.
The same Author played also pretily upon William and Alan Archdeacons of
Northumberland and Durham.

Archileuitas in sort Northumbria largos,
Dunnelmum cupidos semper habere solet.
Nunc e conuerso sedem dotauit vtramque
Willelmi probitas, crimen Alane tuum.
Vos nunc degeneres patribus succeditis ambo,
Hic bonus, ante malus, hic malus, ante bonus.
Answerable to these, were these verses of the said Durham Poet, upon the fate
of a Pot and a Pipkin, when the pot was all broken, and the Pitcher lost
but the handle, by the fall of a window.

Lapsa fenestra ruit, luit vrna sciphusque propinquus,
Desinit haec esse prorsus, hic esse been.
Alias.
Lapsa fenestra ruit, sciphus vrna luunt, nihil illa
Quo teneat, nihil hic quo teneatur, habet.
When King Richard the first was detained prisoner with the Emperor, one did
write this supplicant verse to the Emperor in a sharp close.

Magnus es, and genibus flexis tibi supplicat orbis,
Cum possis, noli saeuire, memento Neronis.
A huswife which had increased her family in her husbands absence with a new
bratte, assured her husband at his return, that she conceived it of a
Snow-ball cast at her. But he conueying it away, selling it to a beggar assured
her with the like lie; that as it was conceived by Snow, so it was melted away
by the Sun, which a Poet in the time of K. John expressed thus very briefly,
and for that age pretily.

Rebus in augendis long remorante marito,
Vxor maecha parit puerum; post multa reuerso,
De niue conceptum fingit, fraus mutua, caute
Sustulit, asportat, vendit, matrique reportans
Ridiculum simile, liquefactum sole refingit.
But two others comprised the same matter more succinctly in this manner.

De niue conceptum quem matter adultera fingit,
S^o^sus eum vendens, liquefactum sole refi^xit.
Vir quia quem reperit genitum niue famina fingit
Vendit, and a simili liquefactum sole resinxit.
That scholar also could play at even and odd, that could keep the figure
Compar so precisely in these two verses upon the spring.

Turba colorum, vis violarum, pompa rosarum,
Induit hortos, purpurat agros, pascit ocellos.
A suter wearied with delais in the Emperors court, did at the length frame
this distiche, and coled it on a wall.

Si nequeo placidas affari Caesaris aures,
Saltem aliquis veniat, qui mihi dicat, Abi.
So a poor English man fed with vain hope by many, in the time of King Henry
the third did write this distiche.

Spem mihi dent alij magnam, rem tu cito paruam,
Res me parua iuuet, spes mihi magna nocet.
Against a carping companion was this made about that time by John Hauill.

Zoile tu laudem cunens, tu serra bonorum,
Magna doles, maiora notas, in maxima saeuis.
Such as can speak feelingly of church livings, will not dissemble that these
were the four entraunces into the church, which a countriman of ours long
since in this manner Epigrammatically opened.

Ecclesias portis his quatuor itur in omnes,
Principis, and Simonis, sanguinis atque, Dei.
Prima patet magnis, nummatis altera, charis
Tertia, sed raris ianua quarta patet.
Good also is that under S. Peter in the Cathedral church of Norwich, (were it
not for the fault which is in the former,) but therein you have S. Peter's ship
Sea, Nets, and Fish.

Ecclesiam pro Naue rego, mihi climata mundi
Sunt mare, scriptura retia, piscis homo.
When Eustathius was elected Bishop of London, one congratulated his
advancement thus.

Omnes hic digni, tu dignior omnibus, omnes
Hic plene sapiunt, before ipse sapis.
Of a bragging braule between two well met, was framed this by Henry of
Winchester, but the beginning is lost.

Hic ait, ille negat, hic asserit, ille refellit,
Hic proauos multum praedicat, ille premit.
Fisus vterque sibi se venditat, iste decorem
Iactitat, ille decus, hic opus, alter opes.
Hic bonus, ille beatus, hic multis disserit, ille
Multiplicata refert: hic leuis, ille loquax.
When Adrian our countriman had converted some people of Norway, and was made
Pope, this was composed to his honor.

Conferet hic Romae, plus laudis quam sibi Roma,
Plus dabit hic orbi, quam dabit orbis ei.
But this would not easily be matched in our age, which was written in the time
of King Henry the 6. over the entrance into the Reccipt at Westminster, to
admonish accontants to be circumspect in entering, as Ianus with his two heads,
and as vigilant in ending Exchequer accounts, as Argus with his hundred eyes.

Ingrediens Iani, rediture sis aemulus Argi.
RYTHMES.
RIming verses which are called Versus Leonini, I know not wherefore (for a
Lions tail does not answer to the middle parts as these verses do) began in
the time of Carolus Magnus, and were only in request then, and in many ages
following, which delighted in nothing more then in this minstrelsie of meeters.
I could present you with many of them, but few shall suffice, when as there are
but few now which delight in them.

In the praise of Miles Earl of Hereford, Sub Stephano rege.
was this penned, in respect he was both martial and lettered.

Vatum and ducum gloria
Milo, cuius in pectore
Certant vires and studia,
Certat Hector cum Nestore.
Virtutum priuilegia,
Mente geris and corpore.
Teque coronat arbore
Mars Phoebi, Phabus propria.
Walter de Mapes Archdeacon of Oxford, who in the time of King Henry the second
filled England with his meriments, confessed his love to good liquor, with the
causes, in this manner.

Mihi est propositum in taberna mori,
Vinum sit appositum morientis ori:
Vt dicant, cum venerint, Angelorum chori,
Deus sit propitius huic potatori.
Poculis accenditur animi lucerna,
Cor imbutum nectare volat ad superna,
Mihi sapit dulcius vinum in taberna,
Quam quod aqua miscuit praesulis pincernn.
Suum cuique proprium dat natura munus,
Ego nunquam potui scribere iciunus:
Me iciunum vincere posset puer vnus.
Sitim and iciunium, odi tanquam funus.
Vnicuique propriumdat natura donum,
Ego versus faciens, vinum bibo bonum,
Ft quod habent melius dolia cauponum,
Tale vinum generat copiam sermonum.
Tales versus facio, quale vinum bibo,
Nihil possum scribere, nisi sumpto cibo,
Nihil valet penitus, quod iciunus scribo,
Nasonem post caelices carmine praeibo,
Mihi nunquam spiritus prophetiae datur.
Nisi tunc cum fuerit, venture been satur
Cum in arce cerebri Bacchus dominatur,
In me Phoebus irruit, ac miranda fatur.
The infirmity and corruption of our nature prone to sensuality he
acknowledges thus.

Via lata gradior more iuuentutis,
Implico me vitijs, immenor virtutis,
Voluptatis auidus, magis quam salutis
Mortuus in anima curam gero cutis.
Mihi cordis grauitas, res videtur grauis,
Iocus est amabilis, dulciorque fauis.
Quicquid Venus imperat labor est suauis,
Quae nunquam in mentibus habitat ignauis.
Quis in igne positus igni non vratur?
Quis in mundo demorans castus habeatur?
Vbi Venus digito iuuenes venatur,
Oculis illaqueat, facie praedatur.
This lusty priest when Pope Innocent the third forbade the Clergy their
wives, became Proctor for himself, and them with these verses: desiring only
for his fee, that every priest with his sweet heart would say a Pater noster for
him.

Prisciani regula penitus cassatur,
Sacerdos per Hic et Haec olim declinatur,
Sed per Hic solummodo, nunc articulatur.
Cum per nostrum praesulum Haec amoueatur.
Ita quidem presbyter caepit allegare,
Peccat criminaliter qui vult seperare,
Quod Deus iniunxerat, faeminam amare.
Tales dignum duximus^fures appellare.
O quam dolor anxius, quam tormentum grave,
Nobis est dimittere, quoniam suaue.
O Roman pontifex, statuisti praue,
Ne in tanto crimine moriaris, cave.
Non est Innocentius, immo nocens vere,
Qui quod facto docuit studet abolere:
Et quod olim inuenis voluit habere,
Modo vetus pontifex, studet prohibere,
Gignere nos praecipit vetus Testamentum:
Vbi nouum prohibet, nusquam est inuentum.
Praesul qui contrarium donat documentum,
Nullum necessarium his dat argumentum,
Dedit enim dominus maledictionem
Viro qui non fecerit generationem.
Ergo tibi consulo, per hanc rationem,
Gignere, vt habeas benedictionem.
Nonne de militibus mili^es procedunt?
Et reges a regibus qui sibi succedunt?
Per locum a simili, omnes iura laedunt.
Clericos qui gignere crimen esse credunt.
Zacharias habuit prolem ^t vxorem.
Per virum quem genuit adeptus honore^:
Baptiz^uit enim nostrum saluatorem:
P^reat, qui teneat nouum hunc errorem,
Paulus caelos rapitur ad superiores,
Vbi multas didicit res secretiores,
Ad nos tandem rediens, instruensque mores.
Suas (inquit) habeat quilibet vxores.
Propter haec et alia dogmata doctor^^.
Reor est m^lius, et magis decorum,
Quisque suam habeat et non proximorum,
Ne incurrat odium and iram eorum.
Proximorum faeminas filias, and neptes,
Violare nefas est, quare nil deceptes.
Vere tuam habeas and ha^ del^^les
Diem vt sic vltimum tutius expectes
Ecce iam pro clericis multum allegaui,
Nec non pro presbiteris plura comprobaui:
Pater noster nunc pro me quoniam peccaui,
Dicat quisque presbiter, cum sua suaui.
Merry Michaell the Cornish poet piped this upon his pipe for merry England, but
with a mocking compassion of Normandy, when the French usurped it in the time
of K. John;

Nobilis Anglie pocula, prandia, donat et era:
Terra iuuabilis, et sociabilis agmine plena
Omnibus vtilis Anglia fertilis est, et amaena.
Sed miserabilis et lachrimabilis absque caterua,
Neustria debilis, et modo flebilis et quia serua,
He begged his exhibition of King Henry the third with this distich.

Regie rector, miles vt Hector, dux vt Achilles,
Te quia sector, melle ^vector, Money my honye.
mel mihi stilles.
The same Michael highly offended with Henry of Aurench the kings Poet for
disgracing Cornwall, thought to draw blood of him with these bobbing times.

Est tibi gamba capri, crus passeris, et latus apri,
Os leporis, catuli nasus dens et gena muli,
Frons vetulae, tauri caput, et color vndique Mauri:
His argumentis quaenam est argutia mentis?
Quod non a monstro differs: satis hic tibi monstro.
If you please to hear a solemn plea at Reasons bar between the Eye and
the Heart, run over this, which a contriman of ours made in time of king
Henry the 3.

Quisquis cordis et oculi
Non sentit in se iurgia,
Non nouit qui sunt stimuli,
Quae culpae seminaria.
Causam nescit periculi,
Cur alternant convitia,
Cur procaces and aemuli
Replicent in se vitia.
Cor sic affatur oculum
Te peccati principium,
Te fontem, te stimulum,
Te mortis voco nuntium.
Tu domus meae ianitor
Hosti non claudis ostium,
Familiaris proditor
Admittis aduersarium.
Nonne fenestra diceris
Quod mors intrat ad animam;
Nonne quod vides sequeris
Vt bos ductus ad victimam.
Saltem sordes quas ingeris,
Cur non lauas per lachrimam
Aut quare non crueris
Mentem fermentans azimam?
Cordi respondet oculus,
Unjust de me quaereris,
Seruus sum tibi sedulus,
Exequor quicquid iusseris.
Nonne tu mihi praecipis,
Sicut et membris caeteris,
Non ego, tu te decipis,
Nuntius sum quo tu miseris.
Cur damnatur apertio?
Corpori necessaria,
Sine cuius obsequio,
Cuncta languent officia.
Quo si fiat ereptio.
Cum sim fenestra peruia,
Si quod recepi nuntio,
Quae putatur iniuria?
Addo quod nullo puluere
Quem immitto pollueris,
Nullum malum te laedere
Potest, nisi consenseris.
De cord mala prodeunt
Nihil inuitum pateris,
Virtutes non intereunt,
Nisi culpam commiseris.
Dum sic vterque disputat
Soluto pacis osculo:
Ratio litem amputat
Diffinitiuo calculo.
Vtrumque reum reputat
Sed non pari periculo,
Nam cordi causam imputat,
Occasionem oculo.
Dan Elingham a Monk of Linton of Saint Benedicts order, coming to the
White-friers in Nottingham, found there John Baptist painted in a white Friars
weed, whereat marueling, he coled out these verses upon the wall near to the
picture.

Christi Baptista, vestis non te decet ista,
Qui^e vestiuit fratrem, maledictus abiuit.
Nunquam Messiah ^iater fuerat, nec Helias,
Non stat plebs lata, dum sit pro fratre propheta.
Si fratrem Ionam fingis Geezi tibi ponam:
Ac Iebusaeum, ne iungas his Helisaeum.
But a white Friar there answered Elingham, with these following in the person
of John Baptist.

Elingham mentiris, metris fatuis quoque miris
Atque ea quae nescis, sic astruis vt ea quae scis.
Nam deus est testis, decet haec me candida vestis,
Plusquam te vestis pulla, sieve nigra cuculla.
Sum Carmelita merito, sed tu Geezita.
A^ frater fictus Benedicti, non benedictus.
He which made this when King Edward the first, and the Pope concurred in
exacting a payment from the Clergy, should have smarted, had he been known.

Ecclesiae nauis titubat, regni quia clauis
Errat, Rex, Papa facti sunt vnica capa,
Hoc faciunt do, des, Pilatus hic alter Herodes.
A merry learned Lawyer which had received Wine for a regard, or remembrance,
from the Abbot of Merton, who had entertained him in a cause, sent these two
verses, as standing upon his integrity against bribes, and requiring rather
good evidence than good Wine.

Vinum transmissum nunc me facit esse remissum,
Conuiuis vina, causis tua iura propina.
The Abbot which persuaded himself what would move a Lawyer, when Wine could
not, returned these three distiches.

Tentaui temere vino te, posse movere,
Non movi vere, sed forte moveberis aere.
Vinum non quaeris, sed tinnit si sonus aeris,
Et spe duceris, forsitan alter eris.
Vt mihi sis mitis, tibi misi pocula vitis,
Nec tamen illa sitis desinit, vnde sitis.
King Edward the third when he first quartered the Arms of France with
England, declared his claim in this kind of verse, thus.

Rex sum regnorum bina ratione duorum,
Anglorum regno sum rex ego iure paterno,
Matris iure quidem Francorum nuncupor idem.
Hinc est armorum variatio facta meorum.
These following were made by his Poet, when Philip de Valoys the French King
lurked in Cambray, and so well liked of him, that he swear by Saint George they
were valiant verses; and commanded them to be shot upon an arrow into the
City, as a cartell of challenge.

Si valeas, venias Valoys, depelle timorem,
Non lateas, pateas, maneas, ostende vigorem.
In the Chapter house of York Minster is written this in commendation thereof:

Vt rosa flos florum, sic est domus ista domorum.
The Exchequer officers were extortours in the time of King Henry the 4,
otherwise Henry Bell Collectour of the Custom, (as he styles himself at that
time,) would never have written a riming long Satyr against them, which
begins thus.

O Scacci Camera, locus est mirabilis ille.
Vt referam vera, tortores sunt ibi mill.
Si contingat ibi temet quid habere patrandum,
Certe dico tibi caetum reperire nefandum.
And concludes in this manner.

O sic vexate tortoribus and cruciate
Non dices vere propter tales Miserere.
But this is good advise, which he gives to such as have to deal with the
officers of the Receipt.

Qui tallas scribunt, cum murmr saepe loquuntur,
Summas quique solent in magna scribere pelle.
Scribere valde dolent, dum non sit soluere belle.
Escas mane datas propter ientacula pones,
Costas assatas, pisces, pinguesque capones,
Illos conforta pariter per fortia vina,
Westminster porta, pro talibus est medicina.
Now for the Fleet then, he writes thus.

Cum sis in Fleta, patioris mill molesta,
Illic dona dabis, si sanus vis fore puncto,
Nam custos Fletae bona de prisonibus unit,
Ni soluant laete mox hos per vincula punit:
Illis qui baculos portant, ostendere debes,
Valde pios loculos, and ludere praebeo, praebes.
In the time of King Henry the 4. when in leauying of a Subsidy, the rich
would not, and the poor could not pay, so they of the meaner sort bare the
burden: a skillful dicer, and no unskillful rimer wrote these verses.

Dews As non possunt, and Sise Sink soluere nolunt,
Est igitur notum, Cater Tree soluere totum.
Of the decay of gentry one made these rimes.
Ex quo nobilitas seruilia caepit amare,
Nobilitas caepit cum seruis degenerare.
Many more and of great variety of meeters in this kind I could present you
with all, for these rimers have as curious obse^^ations in their Art
Rithmizandi, as the Italian makers, in their Stanzas, Quartetts, Tercetts,
Octaves: but now they are counted long eared which delight in them.

Beside these, our Poets has their knacks as young Scholars call them, as
Ecchos, Achrostiches, Serpentine verses, Recurrents, Numeralls, etc. yea and
our prose Authors could use Achrostiches, for Ranulph of Chester began the
first Chapter of his Polychronicon with P, the 2. with R, the 3. with E. the 4.
with S. the fifth with N. and so forth, as if you would spell the first Chapters
of his Book, you, shall find, Praesentem chronicam compilauit Ranulphus
Monachus Cestrensis. And why not as well as Agapetus the Greek, who did the
like in his admonitions to Justinian the Emperor.

But I will end with this of Odo, houlding Master Doctors Mule, and Anne with
her table-cloth: which cost the maker much foolish labor, for it is a perfect
verse, and every word is the very same, both backward and forward.

Odo tenet mulum, madidam mappam tenet Anna.
Anna tenet mappam madidam, mulum tenet Odo.
Epitaphes.
GReat has been the care of burial even since the first times, as you may see
by the examples of Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, Joshua, the old prophet in Bethel,
and Tobie; and also by that in holy scriptures: Mortuo ne deneges gratiam. The
Jews anointed the dead bodies, wrapped them in sindon, laid them in covered
sepulchers hewed out of stone: The Egyptians embalmed and filled them with
odoriferous spices, reserving them in glass or coffins, the Assirians in wax
and honey, the Scythians carried about the cleansed carkases to the friends of
the deceased for 40. days with solemn banquets. And that we may not
particulate, the Romans so far exceeded in funeral honors, and ceremonies,
with ointments, images, bonfires of most precious woods, sacrifices, and
banquets, burning their dead bodies until about the time of Theodosius,
Macrobius.
that laws were enacted to restrain the excess. Neither have any neglected
burial, but some savage nations as Bactrians, (which cast the dead to their
dogs) some varlet Philosophers, as Diogenes which desired to be devoured of
fishes, some dissolute courtiers as Mecaenas, who was wont to say.

Non tumulum curo, sepelit natura relictos. As an other said.

De terra in terram, and quaeuis terra sepulchrum. Yea some of especial note
amongst us neglecting the last duty either upon a sparing or a precise humor,
are content to commit to the earth their parents, wives, and the nearest unto
them in tenebris with little better than Sepultura asinorum. Plinius lib. 6.
Epist. 10. and lib. 9. Epist. 19.
As for those which philosophically dislike monuments and memorialls after
their death, and those that affect them, I think as Pliny did, speaking of
Virginius, and Apronius: that both of them do ambitiously march with like paces
toward glory, but by diverse ways, these openly, in that they desire their due
titles, those other covertly, in that they would seem carlesly to contemn
them.

But among all funeral honors Epitaphes have always been most respective,
for in them love was showed to the deceased, memory was continued to posterity,
friends were comforted, and the reader put in mind of humane fraielty.

The invention of them proceeded from the presage or forfeeling of immortality
implanted in all men naturally, and is referred to the scholars of Linus, who
first bewailed their master when he was slain, in doleful verses then called
of him Aelinum, afterward Epitaphia, for that they were first song at Burialls,
after engraued upon the sepulchers.

It were needless to set down here the laws of Plato, that an Epitaph
should be comprised in four verses, or of the Lacedaemonians, who reserved this
honor only to Martial men, and chaste women: or how the most ancient,
(especially Greek) were written in Elegiac verse, after in prose:

How monuments were erected most usually along the high way side, to put
passengers in mind that they are, as those were mortal.

How such as violated sepulchers were punished with death, banishment,
condemnation to the mines, loss of members, according to circumstance of fact
and person, and how sacred they were accounted.

In which regard I cannot but give you the words out of the Nouellae leges
Valentiniani Augusti: De Sepulchris titulo. v. which are worth reading Scimus,
nec vana fides, and solutas membris animas habere sensum, and in originem suam
spiritum redire caelestem. Hoc libris veteris sapientiae, hoc religionis, quam
veneramur and colimus, declaratur arcanis. Et licaet occasus necessitatem men's
diuina non sentiat, amani tamen animae sedem corporum relictorum, and nescio
qua sort rationis occultae sepulchri honor laetantur: cuius tanta permaneat
cura temporibus, vt videamus in hos vsus sumptu nimio praetiosa montium metalla
transferri, operosasque moles censu laborante componi. Quod prudentium certe
intelligentia recusaret, si nihil crederet esse post mortem. Nimis barbara est
and vesana crudelitas, munus extremum luce carentibus inuidere, and dirutis per
inexpiabile crime^ sepulchris, monstrare caelo corporum reliquias humatorum.
Against which I cannot without grief remember, how barbarously, and
unchristianly some not long since have offended, yea some Mingendo in patrios
cineres, which yet we have seen strangely revenged.

I could here also call to your remembrance how the place of burial was called
by S. Paul Seminatio, in the respect of the assured hope of resurrection, of
the Greeks Caemiterion, as a sleeping place until the resurrection, and of
the Hebrews The house of the living in the same respect, as the Germans call
Churchyardes until this day Gods aker, or Gods field. And in the like sense
tombs were named Requietoria, Ossuaria, Cineraria, Domus aeternae, etc. As you
may see in old inscriptions at Rome, and elsewhere. Which Lucian scoffingly
termed Camps and Cottages of Carkases.

Notorious it is to all how the same Lucian brings in Diogenes laughing and
outlaughing King Mausolus for that he was so pitifully pressed and chrushed
with an huge heap of stones under his stately monument Mausoleum. for the
magnificence accounted among the worlds wonders: But monuments answerable to
men's worth, states, and places, have always been allowed, yet stately
sepulchers for base fellows have always lain open to bitter jests, as that
marble one of Licinus the barber, which one by way of comparison thus derided,
with a doubt thereon, whether God regarded men of worth.

Marmoreo Licinus tumulo iacet, at Cato paruo,
Pompeius nullo. Credimus esse Deos?
Whereunto another replied with an assurance that God does regard worthy men.

Saxa premunt Licinum, vehit altum fama Catonem,
Pompetum tituli, Cedimus esse Deos.
As for such as bury themselves living, and say they live to themselves, when
they live neither to themselves, nor to other, but to their belly, ease, and
pleasure, well worthy are they to have while they live, that Epitaph which
Seneca devised for Vatia their fellow to be inscribed upon his house, Hic situs
est Vatia. and no memorial at all when they are dead.

It is not impertinent to note in one word as the ancient Romans began
Epitaphes with D. M. for Dijs Manibus. D. M. S. i. Dijs Manibus sacrum. Hic
situs est. Hospes, as speaking to the reader. So we and other Christians began
them with Hic deponitur, Hic iacet, Hic requiescit, Hic tumulatur* in French
Icy gist. Here lies. and in latter time according to the doctrine of the time
Ora pro. etc. Of your charity, etc. And now after the ancient manner D. O. M.
for Deo. Optimo. Maximo. Posteritati Sacrum. Memoriae Sacrum. Deo and Posteris.
Virtuti and Honori Sacrum. etc.

Likewise as our Epitaphes were concluded with On whose soul God have mercy.
Cuius animae prepitietur Deus. God send him a joyful resurrection. etc. So
theirs with, Hoc Monumentum posuit vel fecit, in these letters. M. P. M. F. in
the behalf of him that made the Monumente. With Vale, Vale, and Salve anima,
nos eo ordine quo natura iusserit. sequemur. With H. M. H. N. S: for Hoc
monumentum haeredes non sequitur. When they would not have their heirs
entombed therein; with Rogo per Deos superos inferosque ossa nostra ne violes,
And most commonly with Sit tibi terra leuis in these notes, S. T. T. L. And
sometime with Quietem posteri non inuideant.

But omitting this discourse I will offer unto your view a Century of choice
Epitaphes of our nation for matter and conceit, some good, some bad, that you
may see how learning ebbed and flowed: most of them recovered from the injury
of time by writers. And will begin with that at Rome as most ancient erected
to the memory of a Britanne; who after the manner of the time, took a Roman
name. M. VLPIO IVSTO. Q. SIG. AVG. MILITAVIT. AN.

Arthur the valerous vpholder of the ruinous state of Britain against the
Saxons about the year 500. was buried secretly at Glastenburie, least the
enemy should offer indignity to the dead body, and about 700. years after
when a grave was to be made in the Churchyard there, a stone was found between
two Pyramides deep in the ground with a cross of lead infixed into the lower
part thereof, and inscribed in the inner side of the cross in rude Characters,
which the Italians now call Gotish letters.

HIC IACET SEPVLTVS INCLYTVS REX ARTVRIVS IN INSVLA AVALONIA. Under which in a
trough of Oak were found his bones, which the Monks, translated into the
church and honored them with a tomb, but dishonored him with these horn pipe
verses.

Hic iacet ^rturus flos regum, gloria regni,
Quem morum probitas commendat laud perenni.
Augustine the first Archbishop of Canterbury, who first preached Christ to the
English nation, converted the Kentishmen, and revived Christianity in this
Isle, which flourished among the Britains, many years before his coming, was
buried at Canterbury in S. Peter's Porch, with this Epitaph.

Hic requiescit dominus Augustinus Dorobernensis Archiepiscopus primus, qui
^lim huc a beato Gregorio Remanae vrbis pontifice directus, and a Deo
operatione miraculorum suffultus Aethelbertum regem, ac gentem illius ab
idolorum cultu ad Christi fidem perduxit. and completis in pace diebus officij
sui, defunctus est septimo Kalendas Iunias, eodem rege regnante:

In the same place were interred the six succeeding Archbishops, for whom and
Augustine making the seventh, were these verses, as common to them all, written
on the wall with this title: as I find them in Geruasius Dorobernensis.

Septem primae ecclesiae Anglorum columnae.
Augustinus, Laurentius, Mellitus, Iustus, Honorius. Deus-dedit. Theodorus.
Septem sunt Anglis primates and protopatres,
Septem rectores, caelo septemque triones,
Septem cisternae vitae, septemque lucernae,
Et septem palmae regni, septemque coronae
Septem sunt stellae quas haec tenet area cellae:
But Theodore the last of the 7. which first taught Greek in England, and died
in the year 713. had this severally inscribed upon his tomb.

Scandens alma nouae foelix consortia vitae
Ciuibus Angelicis iunctus in arce poli.
Cedwall King of the West Saxons went to Rome in the year 689. and there being
Baptized, renounced the world, ended his life, and lies buried with this
Epitaph.

Culmen, opes, sobolem, pollentia regna, triumphos
Exuuias, proceres, mania, castra, lares.
Quaeque patrum virtus, and quae congesserat ipse,
Caedwal armipotens liquit amore Dei.
With some more which you may see in Paulus Diaconus, and Beda:

King Eadgar surnamed the Peaceable, the great patron and favorer of Monks,
deserved well for his foundation of so many Abbayes this Epitaph.

Author opum, vindex scelerum, largitor honorum
Sceptriger Eadgarus, regna superna petit.
Hic alter Solomon, legum pater, orbita pacis,
Quod caruit bellis, claruit inde magis.
Templa Deo, templis monachos, monachis dedit agros
Nequitiae lapsum, iustitiaeque locum.
Nouit enim regno verum perquirere falso.
Immensum modico, perpetuumque breui:
To the honor of King Alfred, a godly, wise, and warlike prince, and an
especial aduancer of learning, was made this better then that time commonly
afforded.

Nobilitas innata tibi probitatis honorem
Armipotens Alfrede dedit, probitasque laborem,
Perpetuumque labor nomen: cui mixta dolori
Gaudia semper erant: spes semper mixta timori,
Si modo victor eras ad crastina bella pauebas
Si modo victus eras in crastina bella parabas.
Cui vestes sudore iugi, cui sica cruore
Tincta iugi, quantum sit onus regnare probarunt.
Non fuit immensi quisquam per climata mundi
Cui tot in aduersis vel respirare liceret:
Nec tamen aut ferro contritus ponere ferrum,
Aut gladio potuit vitae finisse labores.
Iam post transactos vitae regnique labores
Christus ei sit vera quies, et vita perennis.
It is marvelous how immediately after this time learning decayed in this
Kingdom, for John Erigena alias Scotus, favored of Charles the Bald King of
France, and the forsaid King Alfred for his learning, when he was stabbed by
his scholars at Malmesbury was buried with this rude, rough and unlearned
verse.

Clauditur in tumulo Sanctus Sophista Johannes
Qui ditatus erat, iam viuens dogmate miro.
Martyrio tandem Christi conscendere regnum
Quo meritis, regnant sancti per secula cuncti.
And from this time learning so low ebbed in England that between Thames and
Trent, there was scant one found which could understand Latin, and that you may
perceive, when as Hugolin Treasurer to King Edward the Confessor, had these
most silly verses in graven upon his monument in the old Chapter house of
Westminster.

Qui ruis unjust capit hic Hugoline locus te,
Laud pia clares, qnia martyribus nece clares:
But shortly after the Conquest learning revived, as appears by these that
follow, which were cast in a more learned mould than the former.

King William surnamed the Conqueror for his conquest of England, was buried at
Caen in Normandy, with this Epitaph, discovered in the late civil wars of
France, but mentioned in Gemeticensis.

Qui rexit rigidos Normannos atque Britannos,
Audacter vicit, fortiter obtinuit:
Et Caenomanenses virtute contudit enses,
Imperijque sui legibus applicuit.
Rex magnus parua iacet his Gulielmus in vrna:
Sufficit and magno paruae domus domino.
Ter septem gradibus se voluerat atque duobus,
Virginis in gremio Phoebus, et hic obijt.
Upon Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury degraded for his corruption, I find
this most viperous Epitaph in an old Manuscript.

Hic iacet Herodes Herod ferocior, huius
Inquinat infernum spiritus, ossa solum.
William the Valiant, Earl of Flaunders, nephew to this King William the
Conqueror, son to Robert, who unhappy in his state, loosing the hope of the
Kingdom of England, and dying of a wound in his hand, was not altogether
unhappy in his Poet, which made him this Epitaph.

Vnicus ille ruit, cuius non terga sagittam,
Cuius nosse pedes non potuere fugam.
Nil nisi fulmen erat, quoties res ipsa mouebat,
Et si non fulmen, fulminis instar erat:
King Henry the first, for his learning surnamed Beauclerc, had this flatterng
Epitaph, as Poets could flatter in all ages.

Rex Henricus obit, decus olim, nunc dolor orbis,
Numina flent numen deperijsse suum.
Mercurius minor eloquio, vi mentis Apollo,
Jupiter imperio, Marsque vigore gemunt.
Anglia quae cura, quae sceptro Principis huius,
Ardua splenduerat, tam tenebrosa ruit.
Haec cum rege suo, Normania cum Duce marcet,
Nutrijt haec puerum, perdidit illa virum.
Of him also another composed these in respect of his peaceable government, and
the troubles which ensued under King Stephen, both in England and Normandy.

Anglia Iugeat hinc, Normannica gens fleat illinc,
Occidit Henricus modo lux, nunc luctus vtrique
Upon William son of, King Henry the first, and heir apparent of this
Realm, drowned upon the coast of Normandy, I have found this Epitaphe.

Abstulit hunc terrae matri maris vnda nouerca,
Proh dolor? occubuit Sol Anglicus, Anglia plora:
Quaeque prius fueras gemino radiata nitore,
Extincto nato viuas contenta parente.
But well it was with England in that he was so prevented, which threatened to
make the English draw the Plough as Oxen. ( Hypodigma)

Mawd daughter to the foresaid King, wife to Henry the Emperor, mother to King
Henry the 2. who entitled her self Empress and Augusta, for that she was
thrice solemnly crowned at Rome as R. de Diceto test fieth, and Anglorum
Domina, because she was heir apparent to the crown of England, was very happy
in her Poet, who in these 2. funeral verses, contained her princely parentage,
match, and issue.

Magna ortis, maiorque viro, sed maxima partu,
Hic iacet Henrici filia, sponsa, parens.
Alberic Vere graundfather to the first Earl of Oxford, and his son William
were buried together Anno 1088. with this Epitaphe at Colne where he was
founder and afterward Monk, as it is in the Annals of Abingdon.

En puer, en senior, pater alter, filius alter,
Legem, fortunam, terram venere sub vnam:
In which the maker seemed to imitate that of Conrad the Emperor at Spires in
Germany.

Filius hic, pater hic, annus hi, proauus iacet istic.
Thomas Beket Archbishop of Canterbury had these Epitaphes expressing the
cause, the time, and place of his death, made by his especial favorer.

Pro Christi sponsa, Christi sub tempore, Christi
In templo, Christi verus amator obit
Quinta dies natalis erat, flos orbis ab orb
Carpitur, et fructus incipit esse poli.
Quis morritur? praesul. cur? pro grege. qualiter? ense:
Quando? natali. quis locus? ara Dei.
For Theobald of Bloys Earl of Champaine nephew to King Henry the first.
Giraldus Cambrensis Bishop of S. David's in Walls made this.

Ille comes, Comes ille pius Theobaldus eras, quem
Gaudet habere polus, terra carere dolet.
Non hominem possum, non audeo dicere numen:
Mors probat hunc hominem, vita fuisse Deum.
Trans hominem, citraque Deum, plus hoc, minus istud,
Nescio qui^ neuter, inter vtrumque fuit:
Vitalis Abbot of Westminster which died in the time of the Conqueror, had
this Epitaph:

Qui nomen traxit a vita, morte vocante
Abbas Vitalis transijt, hicque iacet:
And for Lawrence Abbot of the same place which died 1176. was made this
alluding to his name:

Pro meritis vitae dedit isti Laurea nomen,
Detur ei vitae laurea pro meritis.
These two happily, may find as much favor with some if one word do not
prejudice, as that ancient one of Floridus so highly commended.

Quod vixi flos est, seruat lapis hic mihi nomen,
Nolo Deos manes, flos mihi pro titulo.
Geruays de Bloys base son to King Stephen, and Abbot also of the same church
was buried with the foresaid in the cloister with this.

De Regum genere pater hic Geruasius ecce
Monstrat defunctus, mors rapit omne genus:
William de Albeney Earl of Arundel, and Butler to the King, was buried at
Wimodham which he founded with this.

Hunc Pincerna locum fundauit, and hic iacet alla
Quae dedit huic domui, tam sine fine tenet.
That mighty Monarch King Henry the second, which by his own right adjoined
Anioy, Maine and Tourain, by his wife Aquatine, Poyctov, and by conquest
Ireland to the Crown of England, and commanded from the Pyrene mountains to
the Orcades, had this Epitaph according to his greatness.

Rex Henricus eram, mihi plurima regna subegi
Multiplicique modo, Duxque Comesque fui.
Cui satis ad votum non essent omnia terrae
Climata, terra modo sufficit octo pedum.
Qui legis haec pensa discrimina mortis, et in me
Humanae speculum conditionis habe.
Sufficit hic tumulus, cui non suffecerat orbis.
Res breuis ampla mihi, cui fuit ampla breuis:
Rosamond the fair his paramour, daughter to Walter Lord Clifford, and mother
to William Longspee, the first Earl of Sarisbury aeternised by master Daniels
muse, had this nothing answerable to her beauty.

Hac iacet in tumba rosa mundi non Rosamunda,
Non redolet, sed olet quae redolere solet.
William Longspee Earl of Sarum, base son to King Henry the second by this
Lady, had an Epitaph not unlike to that of his mother.

Flos comitum Willielmus cognomine longus
Ensis, vaginam caepit habere breuem.
The glory of that magnanimous and lionlike prince king Richard the first,
renowned for his Conquest of Cyprus. The king whereof he took and kept in
setters of silver, and for his great exployts in the holy land stirred up the
wits of the best Poets in that age, to honor him, with these Epitaphs which
follow, when he was slain in viewing the Castle of Chaluz in Limosin.

Hic Richard iaces, sed mors si cederet armis
Victa timore tui, cederet ipsa tuis:
Another also writ of him.
Istius in morte perimit formica leonem:
Proh dolor, in tanto funere, mundus obit.
An English poet imitating the epitaph made of Pompey and his children, whose
bodies were buried in diverse contries, made these following of the glory of
this one king divided in three places by his funeral.

Viscera Carccolum, corpus fons seruat Ebrandi,
Et cor Rothomagum magne Richard tuum.
In tria diuiditur vnus, qui plus fuit vno:
Non vno iaceat gloria tanta loco.
At Font Euerard where his body was enterred with a gilt image, were these six
excellent verses written in golden letters, containing his greatest and most
glorions atchieuementes: as his victory against the Sicilians, his conquering
of Cyprus, the sinkinge of the great Galiasse of the Saracens, the taking of
their Conuoie, which in the East parts is called a Caruana, and the defending
of Ieppe in the holy land against them: Scribitur hoc tumulo Rex auree, laus
tua, tota
Aurea, materiae conueniente nota.
Laus tua prima fuit Siculi, Cyprus altera, Dromo
Tertia, Caruena quarta, suprema Iope.
Suppressi Siculi, Ciprus pessundata. Dromo
Mersus, Caruana capta, retenta Iope.


But sharp and satirical was that one verse, which by alluding noted his
taking the Chalices from Churches for his ransom, and place of his death which
was called Chaluz.

Christ tui calicis praedo sit praeda Caluzis. Sauaricus Bishop of Bath and
Wells a stirring prelate, which labored most for the redeeming King Richard,
when he was captive in Austria, and is famous in the decretalls ( lib. 3. tit.
9. 0 Nouit ille) had this Epitaph, for that he was always gadding up and down
the world, and had little rest.

Hospes erat mundo per mundum semper eundo,
Sic suprema dies, fit sibi prima quies.
And the like in late years was engraven upon the monument of Iacobus Triulcio
a military man of the same metal, as Lodonic Guicciardin reports.

HIC MOR TVVS REQVIESSCIT SEMEL.
QVI VIVVS REQVIEVIT NVNQVAM.
But ^imilis Captain of the guard to Adrian the Emperor, when he had passed a
most toylesome life, after he had retired himself from service, and lived
privately 7. years in the country, Xiphilinus.
acknowledged that he had lived only them 7. years, as he caused to be
inscribed upon his monument thus.

Hic iacet Similis cuius aetas multorum
annorum fuit, ipse septem duntaxat
annos vixit.
It may be doubted whether Wulgrine the Organist was so good a Musician, as
Hugh Archdeacon of York was a Poet, which made this Epitaph for him.

Te Wulgrine cadente cadunt vox, organa, cantus,
Et quicquid gratum gratia vocis habet.
Voce, lira, modulis, Syrenes, Orphea, Phoebum
Vnus tres poteras aequiperare tribus.
Si tamen illorum non fallet fama locorum,
Quod fueras nobis, hoc eris Eliijs.
Cantor eris, qui cantor eras, hic charus et illi,
Orpheus alter eras, Orpheus alter eris.
Upon one Peter a religious man of this age I found this.

Petra capit Petri cineres, animam Petra Christus.
Sic sibi diuisit vtraque petra Petrum.
Upon the death of Morgan base son of king Henry the 2. was made this
Epitaph, alluding to his name in that alluding age.

Larga, benigna, decens, iacet his stirps regia, morum,
Organa Morgano fracta iacente, silent:
In the time of king Henry the third they began to make Epitaphs, as they call
it now out of Propria quae maribus, as some do in our age, but among them this
was short and good for William Earl of Pembroke and Marshall of England, buried
in the Temple church.

Sum quem Saeturnum sibi sensit Hibernia, Solemn
Anglia, Mercurium Normannia, Gallia Martem.
And this was not bad for Richard de Clare, Earl of Glocestor and Hertford
which died, Anno 1262.

Hic pudor Hippoliti, Paridis gena, sensus Vlissis,
Aeneae pietas, Hectoris ira iacet.
I doubt not but this time of Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester, slain at
Euesham found favor in that age, as the Earl himself who was so followed by
the people, that he durst confront his sovereign king Henry the 3. and as the
Epitaph does implie, was the peerless man of that time, for valor,
personage, and wisdom.

Nunc dantur fato, casuque cadunt iterato
Simone sublato, Mars, Paris, atque Cato.
Upon a gentleman as some think named None buried at Wimondham who gave
nothing to the religi^ous there, was made this.

Hic situs est Nullus, quia nullo nullior iste;
Et quia nullus erat, de nullo nil tibi Christ.
Excellent is this (which I found in the book of Wimondham) for Pope Lucius
borne at Luca, Bishop of Ostia Pope of Rome, and dying at Verona.

Luca dedit lucem tibi Luci, Pontificatum
Ostia, Papatum Roma, Verona mori.
Imo Verona dedit tibi vere viuere, Roma
Exilium, curas Ostia, Luca mori.
If you will see an old Deane named Ham^ Sol, resembled to the twelve sons
of old father Annus which had every one as Cleobulus was wont to call them
thirty daughters, some fair, some foul, all dying and never dying,, read this
epitaph.

Participat mensis dotes cuiuslibet Hamo
Circumspectus erat vt Ianus, crimina purgans,
Vt Februus, veterana nouans us Martius ipse,
Semina producens vt Ap^ilis flore coruscans,
Vt Maiu^, facie plaudens vt Iunius, intus
Feruens vt Julius, frugis maturi^^ adultae
Messor vt Augustus, faecundans horrea more
Septembris, replens vino cellaria more
Octobris, p^stor pecundum sed spiritualis,
More Nouembris epulator dapsilis instar,
Omne Decembris habet hiemalis peste quiescens.
Another playing upon the name Hamon made this for him Olim piscator hominum
quasi pisces ab hamo
Mortis captus hamo, celebrat conuiuia vitae.
But witty was this, whereas he died in a Leap year upon the leap day
accounted so unhappy a day of the Romans that Valentinian the Emperor durst
not peep out in that day: one, made this: Hamo Decane iaces, toto fugit exul
ab anno
Interitum Solis, ausa videre dies.
Verily he was a man of some good note in that time, for I find another of him
alluding also to this leap day.

Nulla dies anni nisi bisextilis, et anni
Iudicio damnata sui, nec subdita mensi,
Sed noctis lux instar erat, lux nescia lucis,
Et lux existens inter luces, quasi bubo,
Inter aues, huius poterat concludere vitam
Solis, et humanum genus hac priuare lucerna.
Alexander Necha^ a great learned man of this age, as appears by his books de
diuinae sapientiae laudibus, was buried in the cloister at Worcester with this,
but deserved a better.

Eclipsim patitur sapientia: sol sepelitur;
Qui dum vinebat, studij genus omne vigebat:
Soluitur in cineres Neccham, cui si foret haeres
In terris vnus, minus esset flebile funus.
A merry mad maker as they call poets now was he which in the time of K. Henry
the 3. made this for John Calf.

O Deus omnipotens vituli miserere Iohannis,
Quem mors praeucaiens noluit esse bouem.
Robert de Courtn^y was buried at Ford, as appears by the register of that
place 12 ^2. under a stately Piramis, who whether he was descen^ed from the
Earls of Eodessa, or from Petre the son of (...) the Gross K. of France,
had but this bad inscriptio^ which I insert more for the honor of the name,
then the worth of the verse.

Hic iacet ingenui de Courtney gleba Roberti,
Militis egregij, virtutum laud referti.
Quem genuit strenuus Reginal dus Courteniensis
Qui procer eximius fuerat tunc deuoniensis.
A Monk of Duresme busied his brain in nicking out these nice verses upon the
death of W. de La-march Chauncellor of England under king John.

Culmina qui cupitis
Lauds pompasque sititis
Est sedata sitis
Si me pensare velitis
Qui populos regitis
memores super omnia sitis
Quod mors immitis
non parcit honor potitis
Vobis prapositis
similis fucram been scitis
Quod sum vos eritis
ad me currendo venitis
William de valentia commonly called Valens Earl of Pembroke, and half
brother to K. Henry the 3. from whom, the Earls of Shrewsbury, Kent, and
others are descended, is intombed at Westminster, with these rank rimes.

Anglia tota doles, moritur quia regia proles,
Qua slorere soles, quam continet infima moles:
Guilelmus nomen insigne valentia praebet
Celsum cognomen, nam tale dari sibi debet
Qui valuit validus, vincens virtute valor
Et placuit placido sensu, morumque vigore.
Robert Grostest commonly called Robin Groshead bishop of Lincoln, a most
learned prelate, reported by Matthew Paris to be a severe reproouer of the Pope,
a favorer of learning, a searcher of scriptures, a preacher of the word, and
generally a man of great worth commanded this only to be engraven over his
Tomb.

Quis sim nosse cupis? caro putrida, nil nisi vermis;
Quisquis es, hoc de me sit tibi scire satis.
But upon his death this was written.

Rex dolet ac regnum gemit, et flet Anglia tota,
Plebs plangit gemitus ingeminare iuuat,
Quippe Grosredus speculum, virtutis, asylum
Iust^^ciae, Regis inchora morte iacet.
Non poterit tamen ille mori, cui fama perorat,
Laus loquitur, redolet fructus, abundat honor,
Vnde (...) tristatur homo, canit Angelus inde,
Vnde serenantur sidera, pallet humus.
Upon the tomb of doctor John Bekingale sometime bishop of Chichester this is
engraven which I set here, for rare correspondency of the rhyme.

Tu modo qualis eris? quid mundi quaeris honores?
Crimina deplores, in me nunc te speculeris:
En mors ante fores, quae clamitat omnibus adsum
In paenis passum, pro me te deprecor ores.
Which is the same in sense with that at Geneua.

VIXI VT VIVIS MORIERIS VT SVM MORTVVS SIC VITA TRVDITVR. Jews de Beaumont
that learned bishop of Duresme, who was preferred thereunto for his affinity
unto the Queen, although he could not with all his learning read this word
Metropoli^ice at his consecration, but passed it over with Soit pour dict. and
would swear by S. Jews that they were discourteous, which set down so many
hard words in the ordering of priests, had this upon his tomb in Duresme
Church where he was buried 1333.

De Bello Monte iacet hic Lodouicus humatus,
Nobilis ex font regum, Comitumque creatus etc.
King Edward the first a most worthy, and mighty prince the first establisher
of the kingdom of England, had affixed at the Altar of S. Edward near his
tomb at Westminster, a large Epitaph in prose, whereof I have found only this
fragment.

Abauus autem and tri^vus eius dilatantes imperia, subie^erunt sibi Ducatus and
Comitatus. Edwardus vero paternarum magnificentiarum amplius aemulator
existens. Regaleque solium perornans in clypeo and in hasta, Principatum
Walliae truncatis eius principibus, Leclino and David potentissime adquisiuit.
Quinimo dominium regni Scotiae, primo magni industria consilij, de inde virtute
bellorum victoriosissime est adeptus. Nihilominus Comitatibus Cornubiae and
Northfolke (disponente ^o cuius est orbis terrae and plenitudo eius) ad manus
Edwardi mirabiliter deuolutis, suis successoribus amplissimam reliquit materiam
gloriandi. Vbicunque igitur Christus habet nomen, inter praecellentissimos
reges fidelium habeat and Edwardus honorem.

The famous K. Edward the 3. which had so great victories over the French, to
the greater glory than good of England as some say, is entombed at Westminster
with this.

Hic decus Anglorum, slos regum praeteritorum,
Fama futurorum, rex clemens, pax populorum,
Tertius Eduardus regni complens Iubilaum:
Robert Hawley a valiant Esquire, was murdered in Westminster Church in
service time, where he had taken sanctuary, and is there buried in the place,
where he was first assaulted with these verses.

Me dolus, ira, furor, multorum militis atque,
in hoc gladiis celebri pietatis asylo,
Dum leuita Dei sermones legit ad aram
Proh dolor, ipse meo Monachorum sanguine vultus
Aspersi moriens, chorus est mihi testis in ^uum,
Et me nunc retinet sacer hic locus Hawle Robertum,
Hic quia pestiferos male sensi primitus hosts:
Famous is L. Siccinius Dentatus, who served in an hundred and twenty
battles. And glorious is Henry the third Emperor, who fought 62. battles,
and likewise honorable should the memory be of Sir Matthew G^urnay out
Countriman, of whose house Sir H. Newton is descended, which commanded in 6.
battles, and was buried at Stoke Hamden in Somersetshire, with this French
memorial now defaced.

Icy gist le noble and valient Cheualer, Mahe^ de Gurnay iadis seneschall de
Lands and Capitayn du Chastell d'Aques pro nostre Signior le Roy en la Duche
de Guien que in sa vi^ fu a la battle, de Benamazin and a la pres a la siege
de Algezir sur le Sarazines and auxi a les battayles de Scluse, de Cressy, de
Ingenesse, de Poyters, de Nazara, etc. Obijt 96. aetatis 26. September. 146.

Henry Chichely although he was founder of All Souls College in Oxford, and
an especial furtherer of learning, was but little honored by this unlearned
Epitaph 1443.

Pauper eram natus, post Primas his releuatus
Iam sum prostratus, and vermibus esca paratus,
Ecce meum tumulum:
His next successor one John Kempe, happened upon a better Poet, who in one
verse comprehended all his dignities which were great.

Thomas Kempe.
Bis Primas, ter praesul erat, bis cardine functus.
For he was Bishop of Rochester, Chichester, and London, Archbishop of York,
then of Canterbury, and Cardinal, first Deacon, than Priest.

This that follows is engraven about a fair tomb in a goodly Chapel
adjoining to the Quire of Saint Mary's Church in Warwick, being a worthy
monument of so noble a person, since whose time although but late, you may
observe a great change both of the heirs of his house, and the use of words in
this Epitaph.

Pray devoutly for the soul whom God asso^le of one of the most worshipful
Knights in his days of manhood and cunning, Richard B^auchampe late Earl of
Warwick, Lord dispenser of Bergeuenny, and of many other great Lordships,
whose body rests here under this tomb, in a full fair vaulte of stone, set
in the bare roche. The which visited with long sickness, in the castle of
Rohan, therein deceased full Christianly the last day of April, in the year
of our Lord God 1439. he being at that time Lieutenant general of France, and
of the Duchy of Normandy, by sufficient authority of our Sovereign Lord
King Henry the sixth. The which body by great deliberation and worshipful
conduct, by sea and by land, was brought to Warwick the fourth of October, the
year abou^said, and was laid with full solemn exequies in a fair Chest made
of Stone, in the West door of this Chapel, according to his last Will and
Testament therein to rest, till this Chapel by him devised in his life were
made, the which Chapel founded on the Roche, and all the members thereof his
executors did fully make, and apparail, by the auctority of his said last Will
and Testament. And thereafter by the said authority, they did translate
worshipfully the said body into the vaulte aforesaid: Honored be God therefore.

His sister the Countess of Shrewsbury was buried in Saint Faithes under S.
Paul's at London with this:

Here before the image of Ihesu lies the Worshipful and right noble Lady,
Margaret Countess of Shrouseburie, late wife of the true and victorious
Knight, and redoubted Warrior John Talbot, Earl of Shrousebury, which
worshipfully died in Gien for the right of this land, the first daughter and
one of the heirs of the right famous and renowned Knight Richard Beauchampe,
late Earl of Warwick which died in Roane, and of dame Elizabeth his wife, the
which Elizabeth was daughter and heir to Thomas late Lord Berkely, on his syd,
and of (...) moders side Lady Lisle, and Ties, which Countess passed from this
world the xiiii, day of June, the year of our Lord 1468. On whose soul the
Lord have mercy.

For that valerous Earl her husband the terror of France, I found no Epitaph,
but instead thereof I will give you ^o understand, that not long since his
sword was found in the river of Dordon, and sold by a pesant to an Armorour
of Bordeaux, with this inscription, but pardon the Latin, for it was not his,
but his Camping priests. SVM TALBOTI M.IIII.C.XLIII.

This inscription following is in the Cathedral Church at Roan in Normandy,
for John Duke of Bedford, and Governor of Normandy, Son to King Henry the
fourth, buried in a fair plain monument; which when a French Gentleman
advised Charles the eight French King to deface, as being a monument of the
English victories, he said: Let him rest in peace now he is dead, whom we
feared while he lived.

Cy gist feu de noble memoire haut and puissant, prince Iean en son viuant
regent du Royaume de France, Duc de Bethfort, pour lequel est fond vne Mess
estre par chacun iour perpetuellement celebr^e en cest autel par le college,
des Clementins incontine^^ apres prime: and trespassa le 13. Septembre 1435. Au
quel 13. iour semblablement est fond po^r luy un obit en ceste eglise. Dieu
face pardon a soname.

Upon an ancient Knight Sir Iernegan buried Crosse-legd in Somerly in Suffolk
some hundred years since, is written: Jesus Christ both God and man,
Save thy servant Iernegan.
Happy and prudent K. Henry the 7. who stopped the streams of civil blood,
which so long ouer-flowed England, and left a most peaceable state to his
posterity, has his magnificall monument at Westminster, inscribed thus:

Septimus hic situs est Henricus gloria regum
Cunctorum illius qui tempestate fuerunt,
Ingenio atque opibus gestarum nomine rerum:
Accessere quibus naturae dona benignae,
Frontis honos, facies augusta, heroica forma
Iunctaque ei suauis coniunx perpulchra, pudica
Et faecunda fuit, foelices prole parents,
Henricum quibus octauum terra Anglia debes.
Hic iacet Henricus, huius nominis VII. Angliae quondam rex Edmundi Richmundiae
Comitis filius, qui die 22. Aug. Rex creatus, statim post apud Westmonasterium
30. October. coronatur, anno Domini. 1485. moritur deinde xxi April. anno aetatis
Liii. Regnauit annos xxii. men's. viii. minus vno die.

This following I will note out of Hackney Church, that you may see that the
Clergy, were not always anticipating, and griping many livings by this worthy
man, which relinquished great dignities, and refused greater.

Christopherus Vrswicus Regis Henrici Septimi Elemozinaerius, vir sua aetate
clarus, summatibus atque infimatibus iuxta charus. Ad exteros reges vndecies
pro patria legatus. Decanatu^ Eboracensem, Archidiaconatum Richmundiae,
Decanatu^ Windsoriae habitos viuens reliquit. Episcopatu^ Norwicensem oblatum
recusauit. Magnos honores tota vita spreu^t, frugali vita contentus, hic
viuere, hic mori voluit. Plenus annoru^ obi^^ ab omnibus desideratus. Funeris
pompam etiam testamento vetuit. Hic sepultus carnis resurrectionem in aduentum
Christi expectat: Obijt anno Christi incarnati 1521. Die 23.
Martij. Anno aetatis suae 74.


This testamentarie Epitaph I have read in an old Manuscript.

Terram terra tegit, Demon peccata resumat.
Res habeat Mundus, spiritus alta petat
The name of the defunct is as it were enigmatically expressed in this old
epitaph.

Bis fuit hic natus, puer and bis, bis iuuenisque
Bis vir, bisque senex, bis doctor, bisque sacerdos,
In the Cathedral church of S. Paul's in London, a stone is inscribed thus
without name.

Non hominem aspiciam vltra. OBLIVIO. This man yet would not willingly have
been forgotten, when he adjoined his Arms to continue his memory, not unlike
to Philosophers which prefixde their names before their Treatises of contemning
glory.

Another likewise suppressing his name, for his Epitaph did set down this
goodly admonition.

Look man before thee how thy death hastes,
Look man behind thee, how thy life wastes:
Look on thy right side how death thee desires.
Look on thy left side how sin thee beguileth:
Look man above thee, joys that ever shall last.
Look man beneth thee, the pains without rest.
The Abott of S. Albanes which lies buried there in the high Quire, suppressed
his name as modestly as any other, in this.

Hic quidam terra tegitur
Peccato soluens debitum,
Cuius nomen non impositum,
In libro vitae sit inscriptum:
In the Cloister on the north side of S. Paul's now ruinated, one had this
inscription upon his Grave, without name.

VIXI, PECCAVI, PAENITVI, NATVRAE CESSI. Which is as Christian, as that was
profane of the Roman:

AMICI, DVM VIVIMVS V^VAMVS. Queen Jane who died in Child birth of King Edward
the sixth and used for her device a Phaenix, has this thereunto alluding for her
Epitaph. Phoenix Iana iacet, nato Phaenice, doendum
Secula Phaenices nulla tulisse duos:


The noble Thomas Earl of Surrey, father to Thomas late Duke of Norfolk, and
the right honorable and nobly learned now Earl of Northampton, in the time of
King Henry the eight, first refined our homly English Poesy; among many other,
made this Epitaph comparable with the best, for Thomas Clear Esquire his friend
and follower buried at Lambeth.1545. Norfolk sprang thee, Lambeth holds thee
dead,
Clear of the County of Cleremont though high.
Within the womb of Ormondes race thou bread
And saw thy cousin crowned in thy sight;
Shelton for love, Surrey for Lord thou chase,
Aye me, while life did last that league was tender:
Tracing whose steps thou saw Kelsall blaze,
Laundersey burnt, and battered Bullen render,
At Muttrell gates hopeles of all recure
Thine Earl half dead gave in thy hand his will:
Which cause did thee this pining death procure,
Ere summers seven times seven, thou could fulfill.
Ah, Clear, if love had booted, care, or cost;
Heaven had not wonn, nor earth so timely lost.


The Duke of Suffolk and his brother, sons of Charles Brandon, which died of
the sweat at Bugden, were buried together with this. Vna fides viuos coniunxit,
religio vna,
Ardor et in studijs vnus, et vnus amor.
Abstulit hos simul vna dies: duo corpora iungit
Vna vrna, ac mentes vnus Olympus habet.


The Earl of Devonshire Edward Courtney honorably descended, from one of the
daughters of King Edward the fourth, is buried at Saint Anthonies in Padua with
this which I set down more for his honor, then the elegancy of the verse.
Anglia quem, genuit, fueratque habitura patronum,
Corteneum celsa haec continet ar^a Ducem:
Credita causa necis, regni affectata cupido,
Reginae optatum tunc quoque connubium --
Cui regni proceres nou cosensere, Philippo
Reginam Regi iungere posse rati,
Europam vnde fuit iuuem peragrare necesse:
Ex quo mors misero contigit ante diem.
Anglia si plorat defuncto principe tanto,
Nil mirum, Domino deficit illa pio.
Sed iam Corteneus caelo fruiturque beatis
Cum doleant Angli, cum sine fine gemant:
Cortenei probitas igitur, praestantia, nomen,
Dum stabit hoc templum, viuanda semper erunt.
Angliaque hinc etiam stabit, stabuntque Britanni,
Coniugij optati fama perennis eris.
Improba naturae leges Libitina rescindens,
Ex aequo iuuenes praecipitatque senes.


Walter Milles, who died for the profession of his faith, as some say made
this Epitaph for himself. Non praua impietas, aut actae crimina vitae
Armarunt hosts in mea fata truces.
Sola fides Christi sacris signata libellis,
Quae vitae causa est, est mihi causa necis.


This man was not so godly, as he was impious (as it seems*) who was buried
in the night without any ceremony under the name of Menalcas, with this. Here
lies Menalcas as dead as a logge*
That lived like a devil and died like a dog:
Here does he lie said I? then say I lie,
For from this place, he parted by and by.
But here he made his descent into hell,
Without either book, candell, or bell.


This may seem too sharp, but happily it proceeded from some exulcerated
mind, as that of Don Petro of Toledo Viceroy of Naples, wickedly detorted out
of the Scriptures. Hic est.
Qui propter nos and nostram salutem, descendit ad inferos:


A merry and wealthy Goldsmith of London in his life time prepared this for his
Grauestone, which is seen at S. Leonards near Foster-lane.

When the Bells, be merrily runge,
And the Mass devoutly song,
And the meat merrily eaten:
Then is Robert Traps, his wife and children quite forgetten,
Wherefore Ihesu that of Mary sprung,
Set their souls the Saints among;
Though it be undeserved on their side,
Let them evermore thy mercy abide,
Doctor Caius a learned Physician of Cambridge, and a cofounder of Gunwell and
Caius college, has only on his monument there: FVI CAIUS.

Which is as good as that great learned man of his profession Julius Scaliger.
SCALIGERI QVOD RELIQVVM.

But that which Cardinal Pole appointed for himself, is better than both.
Depositum Poli Cardinalis.

This ensuing for Sir N. Bacon Lord Keeper of the great Seal, is worthy to be
read, both for the honor of the person who was a most wise Counselor, and
the rareness of Iambique verses in Epitaphes (albeit this our age does delight
(...)) But as he says, Malos Iambus enecat, beat bonos.

Hic Nicolaum n^ Baconum conditum
Existima illum, tam diu Britannici,
Regni secundum columen; exitium malis.
Bonis asylum, caeca quem non extulit,
Ad hunc honorem sors; sed aequitas, fides,
Doctrina, pietas, vnica, and prudentia,
Non morte raptum creed, qui vnica
Vita perennes emerit duas: agit
Vitam secundam caelites inter animos.
Fama implet orbem, vita quae illi tertia est.
Hac positum in arca est corpus, olim animi domus:
Ara dicata sempiternae memoriae.
W. Lamb, a man which deserved well of the city of London by diverse
charitable deeds, framed this for himself.

As I was so be ye,
As I am ye shall be:
That I gave, that I have,
That I spent, that I had:
Thus I end all my cost,
That I left, that I lost.
All which Claudius Secundus a Roman contained in these four words: HIC MECVM
HABEO OMNIA.

Short and yet a sufficient commendation of M. Sands was this.

Margareta Sands.
Digna haec luce diuturniore,
Nisi quod luce meliore digna.
And answerable thereunto is this, for a Gentleman of the same name.

Who would live in others breath?
Fame deceaues the dead man's trust:
When our names do change by death:
Sands I was, and now am dust.
Sir Philip Sidney (to whose honor I will say no more,) but that which Maro
said of Marcellus nephew of Augustus. Ostendunt terris hunc tantum fata, nec
vltra esse sinunt, which also was answered by the Oracle to Claudius the 2.
Emperor of his brother Quintilius) has this most happily imitated out of the
French of Mons. Boniuet, made by Ioach. du Bellay, as it was noted by Sir
George Buc in his Poetica.

England, Netherland, the heavens, and the arts,
The soldiers, and the world has made six parts,
Of noble Sidney, for who will suppose,
That a small heap of stones, can Sidney enclose.
England had his body for she it fed,
Netherland his blood in her defense shed:
The heavens have his soul, the arts have his fame,
The soldiers the grief, the world his good name.
Upon the golden Lion rampaut in Gueles of the house of Albenye which the late
Earl H. Fitz-Alan bare in his arms as receiving the Earldom of Arundel from
the house of Albenye, one composed this Epitaph.

Aureus ille leo (reliqui trepidate leones)
Non in sanguineo nunc stat vt ante solo:
Nam leo de Judah vicit, victoque pepercit,
Et secum patris duxit ad vsque domos.
Sic cadit vt surgat, sic victus vincit, et illum,
Quem modo terra tulit, nunc Paradisus habet.
In the Cloister of New College in Oxford, this following is written with a
coal, for one Woodgate who bequeathed 200 pound to one, who would not bestow
a plate for his memorial:

H^us Peripatetice,
Conde tibi tumulum, nec fide haeredis amori:
Epitaphiumque compara,
Mortuus est, nec emit libris haec verba ducentis.
WOODGATVS HIC SEPVLTVS EST.
Therefore the counsel of Diego de Valles is good, who made his own tomb at
Rome with this inscription.

Certa dies nulli est, mors certa, incerta sequentum
Cura, locet tumulum qui sapit, ante sibi.
A Gentleman falling off his horse brake his neck, which soddaine hap gave
occasion of much speech of his former life, and some in this judging world,
judged the worst. In which respect a good friend made this good Epitaph,
remembering of S. Augustine. Miserecordia Domini inter pontem, and fontem.

My friend judge not me,
Thou see I judge not thee:
Betwixt the stirrup and the ground,
Mercy I asked, mercy I found.
To the honor of Sir Henry Goodyer of Polesworth, a knight memorable for his
virtues: an affectionate friend of his, framed this Tetrastich.

An ill year of a Goodyer v^ ^^rest,
Who gone to God, much lack of him here left:
Full of good gifts, of body and of mind,
Wise, comely, learned, eloquent, and kind.
Short and sufficient is this of a most worthy Knight, who for his Epitaph has
a whole College in Cambridge, and commanded no more to be inscribed than this.

Virtute non vi.
Mors mihi lucrum.
Hic iacet Gualterus Mildmay Miles, et vxor eius.
Ipse obijt vltimo die Maij 1589.
Ipsa decimo sexto Martij 1576.
Reliquerunt duos filios et tres filias
Fundauit Collegium Emanuelis Cantabrigiae.
Moritur Cancellarius and subthesaurarius Scaccarij, et
Regiae Maiestati a consilijs.
Upon a youngman of great hope, a student in Oxford w^^a made this.

Short was thy life,
yet live thou ever:
Death has his due,
yet die thou never.
But I fear now I have ouercharged the Readers mind, with doleful, dumpish,
and uncomfortable lines. I will therefore for his recomfort, end this part with
a few conceited, merry, and laughing Epitaphes, the most of them composed by
master John Hostines when he was young, and will begin with the Bellows maker
of Oxford.

Here lies John Cruker a maker of Bellows,
His craftes-master and King of good-fellowes;
Yet when he came to the hour of his death,
He that made Bellows, could not make breath.
Thomas Elderton, who did arm himself with Ale (as old Father Ennius did
with Wine) when he ballated, had this, in that respect made to his memory.

Hic situs est sitiens atque ebrius Eldertonus,
Quid dico hic situs est? hic potius sitis est.
Of him also was made this.

Here is Elderton lyeng in dust.
Or lyeng Elderton, chose which you lust.
Here he lies dead, I do him no wrong,
For who knew him standing, all his life long.
Some wise man was he, and so reputed for whom this was composed.

Here lies Thom Nicks body
Who lived a fool and dyed a nodye:
As for his soul ask them that can tell.
Whether fools souls go to heaven or to hell.
Neither may this offend any, for that of Durandus the old priest is little
better.

Hic est Durandus positue sub marmore duro,
An sit saluandus ego nescio, nec ego curo.
Miserable was Hermon, who when he had only dreamed that he had disbursed
money, dyed for woe, likewise Ph^idon who weapt not for that he should dye, but
that his burial would stand (...) at 4. s. But most miserable was that
pinchpenie Hermocrates, that in his last will and testament made himself his
own sole heir and executor of all he had, and yet refused to live when he
might, because he would not be at charge of a purgation. And our countriman
old Sparges ^ight seem to be of his tribe, for whom was made.

Here lies father Sparges
That died to save charges.
Master Wills doctor of Physic who died lately at Vienna would often say that
he would have this verse only for his Epitaph.

Here lies willing Wills.
But a friend of his that knew him to be Caprichious, wished him to add one
verse more to make up time after the manner, but when he said, he had nothing
he might add more, one extempore said it might be well made up thus.

Here lies willing Wills
With his head full of Windmills.
For one that had continual new encounters in his own mind, and crammed his
head with contrary discontents, I have heard this.

Here lies he,
Which with himself could never agree.
You shall have this out of the Cathedral Church of Norwich whatsoever you
account of it.

Under this stone
Lies John Knapton.
Who died just
The xxviii of August
M.D.XC. and one
Of this church Peti-Canon,
Upon merry Tarlton, I have heard this.

Hic situs est cuius vox, vultus, actio possit
Ex Heraclito reddere Democritum.
Here lies Richard a Preene,
One thousand, five hundred, eighty nine,
Of March the 22. day,
And he that will die after him may.
Here lies he, who was borne and cried,
Told ^hreescore years, fell sick, and died.
Here lies the man whose horse did gain,
The Bell in race on Salsbury plain:
Reader, I know not whether needs it,
You or your horse rather to read it.
Here lies the man that madly slain,
In earnest madness did complain,
On nature that she did not give,
One life to loose, another to live.
Here lies C. under ground,
As wise as L. thousand pound.
He never refused the Wine of his friend,
Drink was his life, and drink was his end.
Here lies N. a man of fame
The first of his house and last of his name.
At Fa^lam on the west marches near Naworth Castle.

John Bell broken-brow
Ligs under this stean:
Four^ of mine even sons
Laid it on my weam.
I was a man of my meat
Master of my wife
I lived on mine own land
Without micle strife.
For old Th. Churchyard the poor Court-Poet this is now commonly current.

Come Alecto and lend me thy torch,
To find a Churchyard in the Church Porch.
Poverty, and Poetry this tomb does enclose,
Therefore Gentlemen be merry in Prose.
With this memoriales of the dead which give a little living breath to the
dead: for as he says, Mortuorum vita in memoria vi^orum posita est, I conclude:

Et veniam pro laud peto: laudatus abunde:
Non fastiditus si tibi Lector ero.
FINIS.

