Camelles Reioindre, to Churchyard.
To Churchyard or Ma^naring, or for lack of a name:
To Dicar the dreamer, if you know the same.
May a man be so bold (an order to keep:)
To bid you good morrow, now after your sleep?
If I may be so saucy, and make no mistaking:
God speed master Dreamer, if you be waking.
But Dreamer or Dicar, or as you say Dauy:
Which shall I now call you* as our Lord save ye?
Three names are to many* for one man alone: He has.v. Dreamer. Dicar. David.
Mannaring. Churchyard.


And two mo makes five, for faylyng of one.
If you had two other* that men might you seek:
Then had you a name, for each day in the week.
But no man does doubt* that so sundry names:
Should have other loomyng, the^ out of good frames.
And therefore I thyncke, they come every chone:
Out of some old house* tho the posts begone.
Or else kept in memory, for that they were found:
In some old stock, in some noble man's ground.
And so do remain* for mind of your auncestry:
As Syb to Sybbel, sibbes very properly.
So Jermaines lyps ioynde, and so M. Churchyard:
And Mannaryng met, both in an Orcharde. Ask him where he named him self Lord
Mannarynge, and how he used it.

And David the Dicar, came in with his spade:
And dolue up the Dreamer, till the line was made.
And thus perco^seque^ce* sins your writing does gre it:
Your name for my part: David Dreamer be it.
And good M. dreamer, your reason long sought for
Has combred your capax, I se very sore.
Snap of the case, and young and whot blood:
Have al to be fumed you, and moved your mood
That danger it were, in you of a feeuer:
If heat and collar* should cuple together.
But thanks be to God, a vomet has rydde:
A culpin of collops, far inwardly hid.
And now yt your reason, has fair brought it fourth
It is a fair reason* and a reason well wourth. Parturiunt montes. Nascetur
ridiculus mus.

And first you reply* to mine obieccion:
With words of pleasure, as a man of correccion.
Whereby you would seem, a learned man of art:
And yet Master Mome, you are out of your part. Churchards aunsware does but
rail.

For as your answer, does but talk and tomble:
So you answer not me, but rail out and romble.
And yet had you marked* my then to your when:
I no more falted you, then I did other men.
I mean mad raungers, that so raunge at large:
To meddle with matters, not joined to their charge.
And such men I bad, as then I bad you:
To send such whens home, their vycar unto.
And leave dreaming dreams, to busi men's brains:
With nedeles matters, and as thankeles pains.
And this little neded, to have netled your noddye:
If you were (as you would be) some pretty wise body.
But you will choplogicke, and be Be to busse: Churcharde will be the bussinge
be.

But good Master Busserd, be good yet to us.
And tell me in truth, and lie no whyt then:
Have not I touched, no part of your when?
If you still dream not, as you do yet:
I trow I have touched, your when every whyt.
I need not to bid you, turn my text again:
But take your own text, to answer your brain.
I touch not one point, that you wrote you say: His replica^^on.

And yet you call me, a Daniell strayghtway.
Lo how these two now, agree in them selves:
They both shame their master, these.ii. eluish elues.
If you give me a name without an effect:
your mastershyps brain, is madly infect.
And foul ouershot, to bring two for witness:
Which are in themselves, clean contraries I guess
But if my first answer* do seem such a mystery:
That you see not your when, there answered alredye.
Then to awake you, and raise you from sleep.
Good Master Dreamer, mark this and take keep.
your when has in it, a meaning of who say, His when.

Which ryghtly to mean, is thus meant I say:
That when those things be, which these dais be not
Then knit you your the^ up, in such sort as you wot
But whom you accuse* in whenning so large.
I mean not to open, nor put to your charge.
But way with your self, and sober your brains:
And defend not a when, might put you to pains*
I could perchance, make your when larger.
And serve it before you* as broad as a charger,
And point you your when, by line and by Leuel.
Against Jupiters seat, and Jupiters Counsel.
But I list not so narow, to look to your whanning
Nor make to your whanning, so open a skanning
You bid me not slander you, I slander you not.
If your self hurt you* your own is the spot.
You ascribe to me, the manners of Gnato.
Full clarkelye applied good master Thraso.
A title as meet, they say that do know me.
As your title of dream, to the matter of Dauye.
But vices in stage plays, when their matter is gone
They laughe out the rest, to the lookers on.
And so wantynge matter, you bring in my coat.
In faith master dreamer, I borrowed it not.
Tho I have heard, that good fellows and so.
Not you (gods forbod) in borrowed gear go, Graculus ornatus est Plumis
Pauonis

But when every foul, has pulled home his fether
The soul and the body* may then dwell to gether
And make a right summer man, to let in the heat
For clothes in whot wether, do but make me^ sweat
Which you sir perchance, er summer come out:
Will vle for a medicine, in trauailinge about,
And colloure the matter, with a title of season:
As doutles your mastership, has very good reason
By which al yt know you, will think you well hable
To thrust a poor Camel, to lurk in some stable.
And doubtless if dreaming, may any thing speed,
I know David dreamer, will do it in deed.
But tho I have heard, a Lion often rore,
I never heard ass, so rore out before,
With bitings and bridellings, and raining of necks
O fine master ass, how sharp be your checkes. Churchard is a fine ass.

You threaten to bitte me, to trim me and trick me:
Wehe master ass, what, will you needs kick me.
Camelles and asses, be both mete for burden.
Then gip fellow ass, then iost fellow lurden.
No nerer my buttocke, iost jade are you winsyng?
It is merry to see, master ass fall to minsing*
Did you never here tell of the ass trapt in gold? De Asino aureo. The french
alms, perchance has altered him.

Lo master asenoll, lo do as you should.
you say I know you not, and yet as I trow:
you cast your old coat, a great while a go.
But if I mistake you, for that a new spring,
Has wrought as a workma^, to give you a new ski^
And that I may not, now know you by ear mark
Then for a more knowledge* to know you in dark The ass would have a Bell to
be known up

Tie a Bell at your tail, to make some tinginge.
And there goes the ass (I shall say) by the ringing.
But whether I know you, or else do not know:
Thus much I know* and am certain I trow:
An ass binds no camels, tho he bray nere so loud
Robin hoode so showed me, out of a cloud. Churchards Poets. Robin hoode Sir
Lancelot and Beuis. Qualia vis metere: talia graua sere*

And when asses forget, to know what they are,
Sir Lancelot then biddes, to nip them more nar,
And Beuis of Hampton, whose clergy I know:
Biddes me serve you* with the same sede you sow.
And not to contend* for the asses shadow.
Whose shadow I leave you, and body also.
And thus* M dreamer* your folli has brought me
To follow you further, then first I bethought me
Being much sorye* my pen so to spend.
To answer your follyes* and thus lo I end.
Domine saluum fac Regem and da pacem in diebus nostris. Thomas Camel,

Imprinted at London by Hary Sutton, dwelling in Poules churchyard.


