The Alphabet of Prayers, very fruitful to be exercised and used of every
Christian Man. Newly collected and set forth, in the year of our Lord, 1564.
Seen and allowed according to the order appointed in the Queens Majesty's
Injunctions.

Luke. 11. Every one that asks receives, and he that seeks finds.

IMPRINTED AT LONdon by Henry Denham, dwelling in Paternoster Row, at the
Sign of the Star.

The Glory of the Honorable, is, to fear God.

Ecclesi. 9. HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE


It is good for every estate
These few lines to imitate.
R Remember thy calling.
O Obey thy Prince.
B Beware of Ambition.
A Aduenge not thy cause
R Regard thine estate.
T Take counsel of the wise
D Deserve no evil report.
V Use Justice.
D Defend the right.
L Let wisdom rule thee.
E Embrace Honor.
Y Yield to Truth.
To the Right high and Honorable, and my Singular and very good Lord, Lord
Robert Dudley, Earl of Lecester, Baron of Denbigh, and Knight of the most
Noble order of the Garter.
THE chief and Principal thing (most Noble Earl,) appertaining to every
Honorable Personage (which thing it is good to see that your Honor does well
consider) is to walk in the Garden of Humility, and the high or direct
Ecclesia. 11.
way to the same, is to pass by the gate of Virtue, whose foundation is
ancred and linked to the fear and love of God: for as by the one is Ecclesia.
1.
covered the multitude of sins, so by the other is obtained blessedness,
wisdom, and knowledge. David that noble king and prophet, after Ecclesia. 25.
that he had long travailed and had passed through the gate of virtue, entered
the fair and pleasant garden of humility, And his walking and continuance
therein, so much pleased God, that God said of him by the mouth of his
Prophet. I will set up thy seed after thee, which 2. Kings. 7. Psalm. 89.
shall proceed out of thy body. Which sentence most worthy Earl (although not
spoke of your Noble parentage) in your honor may be approved, which I doubt not
your honor considers. Knowing therefore most honorable, the great love and
effection which your honor ever has and does bear to Virtue and good Letters,
I was thereby moved the more boldly after I had gathered together this small
handful of flowers (named the Alphabete of Prayers) to dedicate the same to
your Honor, as the fruits of my labors, nothing doubting, but that it shall
most acceptablye come into your favorable and sure protection. And for so
much as Prayer is the key that opens to Virtue, I thought good most
honorable, to set forth to the open show of the world and to thencrease of
Virtue, this little Volume or Treatise, most humblye beseeching your Honor to
accept it as my good will, craving your pardon if any thing have escaped me for
want of Learning. And I according to my bounden duty, shall call daily (with
my most humble and hearty Prayers) to Almighty God to finishe that he has
begone in you, with prosperous preservation of your health, long to live in
Honor, loye and Felicity. Amen.

James Canceller wishes continual health.

To the Reader.
IT is written (gentle Reader,) that in the beginning, in the days of Seth the
son of Adam, the people first began Genesis. 4.
to invoke and call on the name of God, which is to say, by devout Prayer
they did require and ask all things of him, praised him, trusted in him, and
gave to him the honor and worship that belonged unto him.

And this manner of praying, was used among the Fathers from Noe, unto the
coming of Christ: And they did frequent and use the same as a special mean
and way to crave of God, his mercy, his grace and his assistance.

By Prayer also they did set forth the glory of God, appeased his wrath and
displeasure, and rendered him thanckes for his benefits received. Christ our
Savior after his coming taught it Math. 6. 7. John. 16.
also, as a most necessary and comfortable doctrine, whereby we might crave of
his heavenly Father, not only all things necessary and needful for us (as
appears in his Prayer taught to his Disciples) but also forgiveness of
sins, to the attainement of eternal Life. And therefore may we well say,
that as the use thereof is worthy praise, so is the want thereof to be
lamented. For where as Prayer is not frequented, there God is not called upon
for his grace and assistance, neither is he thancked for his gracious
benefits, the free gift of his mercy is not desired, neither is the horrible
punishment of his justice feared.

Right well therefore may we in this our age (wherein sin so much abounds,
and the ordinarye use and time and place of Prayer so much neglected) lament
the lack of the use thereof in all degrees, with the loose life of men, which
is so frail, so weak, so perverse of nature and so prone to evil, that
almost none in manner shows in living to fear God. Who is afraid to
offend him? or who refrayneth to blaspheme his holy name? who seeks to
subdue the flesh to the Spirit? yea rather who seeks not to lay the bridle.
of liberty at length, freely and without stay to follow sin, the cause
whereof is (as I have said) the want of true and unfeigned calling on God in
devout Prayer: For by it is wrought in us, the hate of sin, and by it is
driven from us, all other occasions that might provoke the wrath of God upon
us. And therefore it may be called our speedy messanger or trusty Ambassador,
which does obtain 1. Kings. 2.
for us a gratyous audience before the Majesty of God, presenting to him the
fruits of our contrite hearts.

But who may not now trowest thou (Gentle Reader) rightlye say to the world,
as Jonas said to the Niniuetes: There is yet forty days, and the world Luke. 11
shall be destroyed.

The Niniuetes, as soon as the Prophet had proclaimed destruction to come on
them for their sin, they immediately at the first crying of him, with
trembling and fear turned to God, believed him, feared his justice, confessed
their sins, and with penitent hearts craved his mercy. But thou, O England,
whom it has pleased God to call, not by the mouth of one man, as he did the
Niniuets, but he has called thee by diverse other and sundry means: as first
by giving thee a most virtuous and gracious Queen, who for her worshipping of
God and setting forth his name and glory, may be compared with Josiah king of
Judah: for her virtues, policy, and wisdom, with Iudeth: and for the cares
toward her peopte, with humble Hester.

He has not (as I say) called thee, by this his good gift of so merciful
and gracious a Queen, but also has called thee by the Preachers of his Word,
by death and famine, otherwise by fire from Heaven, by motion of war, and
lastly by mortallitie of Pestilence, yet nothing (O England) do thou
regard his calling: wherefore to thee it may be said, the more he seeks thee
the more thou shunnest him, the more he loves thee the less thou regardest
him, the more thou need him the less thou think on him: so that by thy
great unkindness God is compelled to say unto thee, as he said to the
Israelites: I am ouerweried with bearing and long suffering of thy wicked and
sinful living. If thou therefore, do desire to be free from the horrible
plagues and threatenings of GOD, thou must like a true Niniuete, with a broken
and penitent heart, call on God with continual Prayer, craving of him his
mercy, grace and assistaunce, which if thou ask with a sure Faith, he will
grant it thee. And therefore when thou do pray, thou must (after the
mind of the Apostle) ask with a steadfast faith, James. 1.
not wavering nor doubtful, and thy request shall be granted thee. He
therefore that asks as he ought, receives: and he seeks well that seeks
with continual desire: and he knocks well which does provoke Gods goodness
to hear him, as did the Woman of Cananie, unto whom Christ said, after her
peticion made: O Woman great Math. 15.
is thy Faith, be it unto thee even as thou have desired. Thus (gentle Reader)
if thou love thy health, if thou long to be acceptable to God, if thou desire
to be sure from the grennes of the Devil, from the storms of this World,
from the way of thine ennimies, if thou covet to be happy at the last, let no
day pass thee, but that thou once at the least do present thy self to GOD
by Prayer: And falling down before him with an humble affecte of devout mind
(not from the extremity of the lips only, but out of the inwardenesse of
the heart,) cry with the Prophet: O Lord, the offenses of my Youth and mine
ignorance, remember Psalm. 25.
thou not: but after thy mercy and goodness O Lord remember thou me. And
thus the holy spirit that prays for thee, and eke thine own necessity,
shall every hour put thee in mind what thou shall pray for, and what you
shall desire of God.

Who therefore that will persist and continue in Prayer, shall not only be
unto God dailye more and more grateful and acceptable, but shall also dailye
proceed further and further from virtue to virtue, and shall be made like unto
the heavenly and Angelical minds, which daily behold the presence of God. And
because all the felicity of the soul, stands in the clear beholding of the
fruition of God, and for that our felicity shall be everlasting with him, let
us rejoice and say with the Prophet: Thou shall (O Lord) fill us full of
gladness with thee, which is no more but that our felicity is fulfilled in
the seeing and beholding of God and our nature in Christ, sitting in heaven on
the right hand of his Father, so that our reward is, that we may behold God
and Jesus Christ his son, whom he has sent: to the which reward he bring
us that sits there and prays for us, Amen.

Certain Sentences set forth after the order of the Alphabete, very necessary
to meditate in mind.
Ask with a sure Faith. Be fervent in Prayer. Confess thy Sins. Do well
to all men. Envy no man. Forgive them that hate thee. Give alms to the Pore,
Hurt not thy Enimye. In adversity be pacient. Keep the Commandments. Love
Virtue, and hate Vice. Mourn with them that mourn. Never be ashamed of well
doing. Obey God and thy Prince. Put the fear of God before thee. Quicken thy
self with Gods promises Remember the end, ere thou begin. Succor the pore
and needye. To all men be Indifferent. Use often and hearty Prayer.
When you begin to pray, think upon the remission of Sins promised in
Christ Jesus, and let not this sweet Sentence spoken of our Savior, be left
out of your remembrance, which is I say unto you, whatsoever you ask the
Father in my name, he will give it you.

A Prayer for the Morning.
ALmightye and most merciful God, I heartily thank thee for the sleep and
quiet rest which under thy protection I have received this night, and for that
it has pleased thee safely to bring me to the beginning of this day: I
wretched Sinner most humbly beseech thee to defend, cherishe, comfort and
govern me, and all my counsayles, studies and labors, in such wise, that I
may spend and bestow this day according to thy most holy will, without the
hurting of my neighbor: and that I may evermore by thy governance, do that is
thy will and pleasure, hate wrong and love justice. Also I beseech thee most
merciful GOD, strength and keep me in the Faith of the Catholic Church, and
kindle in me the love and light of thy holy spirit, that I may walk in the
truth of thy Word. Grant this merciful God, for thy dear Son Jesus
Christ's sake. Amen.

The first Psalm, wherein the penitent requires of God to walk in his
Commandments.
BLessed are all those that are undefiled in the ways of the Lord: and
blessed are they that keep his Testimonies, and seek him with their whole
heart.

Cause me thy Creature and handyworke therefore (O Lord) diligently to keep
thy Commandments: and so direct my ways, that I may keep thy Statutes.

Do so unto thy servant (O Lord) that I may live and keep thy most holy
Word.

Ever with my lyppes will I be telling of the judgments of thy mouth, that I
may have delight in the way of thy Testimonies, as in all manner of riches.

For so shall I not be confounded, while I have respect unto all thy
Commandments.

Give me understanding I beseech thee O Lord) and I shall keep thy law:
yea, I shall keep it with my whole heart.

Hear my voice (O Lord) according to thy loving kindness: and quicken thou
me, according as thou art wont.

O Lord, stablishe thy Word in thy Servant, that I may fear thee: and open
thou mine eyes, that I may see the wondrous things of thy law.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, World without end.
Amen.

R D
Reward me not O Lord according to my deserving, for if thou do then must I
needs perish: Wherefore to thee I come most merciful Father, not trusting in
mine own righteousness, but in thy great mercy and promises made in Christ
Jesus thy Son: For whose sake, O Heavenly Father, I humbly beseech thee to
pardon and forgive me all mine offenses. Amen.

O God my Refuge and my strength, which art the author of all Godliness, be
ready to hear the devout Prayers of thy servant, that those things which I
ask fayhfully, I may obtain effectually, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Behold not good Lord, that which is amiss in me, for if thou do, I shall
no more be worthy to be called thy Son: yet of thy great goodness (O Lord)
pour down of the crommes that fall from thy Childrens table, that I may be
the least among them. Amen.

ASsist me thy Servant (O Lord) against this World, with all the vain
pomp, pleasure and beauty thereof, that it may be unto me as vile dust,
fylthynesse and ashes, that I may use it, as though I used it not, and that it
may serve me, and I not it, that I may take my part thereof unto my necessity,
yt I do not use thy creatures voluptuously, but yt I may always live (in this
short life) righteously, soberly, and justly. Amen.

REmember not O Lord, the number of my sins, but according to the multitude
of thy mercies, deliver me from the pains due for them. Grant this O Father,
for thy dear son Jesus Christ's sake: Amen.

TEach me good Lord to number my days, that I may apply my heart to learn
thy Wisdom, and so strengthen me with thy Spirit, that I swerve not from thy
law. Amen.

Do not with me O lord, as I have deserved, but call to remembrance (for thy
son Jesus Christ's sake) thy tender mercies, which have been ever of old:
and cast me not from thee, in thy heavy displeasure, least I be consumed and
brought to naught. Amen.

Unto thee (O thou God of my comfort) I wretched Sinner do come, craving of
thee thy mercy: Incline therefore thine Ear unto my calling (O Lord,) and
consider the request of my heart, for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

Dear Father, to whom it is more easy to do all things, than for me to
think any one good thought, give power unto thy servant, that I may with a
strong faith, vanquish and subdue, whatsoever may cause me to rebel against
thy blessed will. Amen.

Lord grant unto me thy servant the strength of thy holy Spirit, to subdue
the body of Sin, with the whole lusts thereof, that it may be made obedient in
will and mind to thy laws. Amen.

Every one that says Lord, Lord, shall not enter the kingdom of heaven.
Strengthen therefore (O Lord) thy servant with the power of thy right hand,
against all the malignitie of the old wily serpent: replenish my heart with
thy wisdom, comfort my soul with thy sweet promises made in Christ Jesus,
and let thy mercies cover mine infirmities. Amen.

IN all these my Meditations (O Lord,) let thine ears be open, that thou
may hear the prayers which I thy servant have made before thee this day.
And grant that I may always ask of thee in such sort as you requirest, to
the honor, praise and glory of thy name, to the furtherance of thy Word, to
the profit of my neighbor, and to my consolation and comfort, through Jesus
Christ my Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

The second Psalm, of thanks giving after Adversity.
AFter that I had long looked for thee O Lord: at the last thou dyddest
attend unto me, and heardest my Prayers.

Blessed art thou Lord, which haste not holden back thy mercy from thy
servant: but have taken me out of the lake of miseries, and set my feet upon
a rock, and made my steps sure.

Conioyne thy self (O God) unto my soul, and make it strong, least mine
Enemies overcome me, and the companies of Tirannes ouerwhelme me.

Dominion, power, and glory be thine, for thou haste made all things: and
because thy will is so, they do still continue.

Even thou (O Lord) haste done many things, wonderful and great: and there
is none that can be like* unto thee in thy works.

For thou helpest them, whose hearts be broken with sorrow: and bear up
with thy hand, them that be contrite in Spirit.

Go not from me, O thou God of mercy: for thou art my sure refuge, and the
strength of my hope.

Have thou in remembrance (O Lord) the rebuke that thy servant has been put
to: and how furiously my enemies have persecuted me.

I have tasted and felt of thy sweetness: truly blessed is that man that
trusts in thee.

Keep thy mercy for me (O Lord) my strength and my praise: thou haste
brought down mine Enemies, which art a Judge from the beginning.

Lord, there shall no good thing* be lacking to them that seek thee: and
they* that fear thee, shall not be helpless.

My soul therefore shall never cease to speak of thy righteousness and of
thy benefits, which be so many that I cannot number them.

No man may help me O Lord, but thou, who have brought my soul out of Hell,
and haste helped me up from falling into the deep, from whence no man
retourneth.

O Lord, thus haste thou revenged the wrongs that mine enemies have done to
me, thus have thou been my comfort in the time of my trouble, and haste been
merciful unto me.

Put away from me O Lord, that which is evil, for thou art holy, and save
thy servant which ever has trusted in thee.

Quicken me in thy righteousness, and so shall I triumph and rejoice in thy
mercy, for that thou haste looked upon my necessyties, and haste regarded my
soul in my great distress.

Remember Lord, that thou of thy own will and mind did give strength unto
my soul: but when thou hyddest thy face from me, I was astonished.

Send forth therefore (O Lord) thy light and thy truth: and they shall lead
me unto thy holy Hill, and into thy holy Tabernacle.

Then shall I have joy for the days wherein I was in sorrow: and shall
rejoice, that thou have remembered the rebuke that thy servant has been put to.

Verily, I was afraid that thou (O Lord) had cast me out of thy
presence: yet it has pleased thee to hear my Prayers, and according to thy
great mercy, haste taken me again unto thy grace and favor.

Wherefore (O Lord) thy name be blessed, praised, magnified, both now and
ever: as it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without
end. Amen.

The Prayer.
I Give thee thanks, O God almightye, which not alonely have delivered me from
many dangerous perilles and troubles of Enemies, but also haste endued me with
the gifts of nature, as reason, power, and strength, and with all other
needful things thou haste possessed me. I acknowledge therefore (O Lord) and
confess with the Apostle, that these are thy gifts, and that there is no
perfect and good gift, but it comes from thee (O Father almighty) which
give frelye, and casts no man in the teeth. I acknowledge with the Prophets
also, that Gold is thine, and Silver is shine, and thou gyuest it to whom it
pleases thee. Wherefore my most merciful God, I humbly beseech and desire of
thee that the increase of these thy gyfts draw me not from thee, but that thou
will frame in me, with thy holy Spirit, a true and faithful heart and ready
hand to good works, that I lay not up treasure here, where Thieves may rob,
and Mothes corrupt: but in thy Heavenly Kingdom, where neither Thief may
steal nor Moth corrupt. Grant this dear Father, for thy sweet Son Jesus
Christ's sake* Amen.

The third Psalm, of Confidence and trust in God.
ALthough (O God) never so strong Enemies shall pytche their Tents against
me, my heart shall not be afraid: for this is certain, that all they which
trust in thee, shall not be confounded.

Break not therefore (good Lord) the covenant that thou have made with thy
Servant: and change not that which has issued out of thy mouth.

Cause that thy holy Angel may direct and guide me, that my soul may trust
in thee: for thou art the fountain of Life, and my recreation in aduersytie.

Deliver me from the snares of the hunters, and from the perilles of my
persecuters: and make a shaddowe* for me under thy shoulders, and I shall be
harmless.

Evil men are risen up against me, yet thy truth shall be my shield and
buckler: and therefore if my enemies come against me, I will not fly nor
turn my back.

For who is he that has trusted in thee, and is confounded: or who has
called upon thee, and thou haste despised him?

Go not from me (O Lord,) for like as the Heart when he is chased, coueteth to
the rivers of water: even so my soul desires to be with thee.

How great pleasures have thou (O Lord) prepared for me in heaven: that I
should delight in no earthly thing, but in thee?

I will therefore acknowledge, that I have all my strength of thee: for thou
art my hope, my protection, my God and my Savior.

Keep me O Lord, for in thee my health and glory does consist: thou art my
comfort, my strength and helper, in whom I do trust.

Let all them O Lord, rejoice and be glad, which seek thee: and let them
which love to have Salvation of thee, say: Magnified be the Lord for ever.
Glory be to the father. etc.

The Versycle.

O Lord hear my Prayer,

The Answer

And let my cry come unto thee.

The Prayer.

O Most gracious and most wise guide, my Savior Christ, which do lead
all them that truly and unfeignedly trust in thee, the right way to immortal
blessedness: Grant me, that like as I am weak and feable, so I may take
and repute my self, that I presume not as of my self, to see my self, but so
far to see, that I may always trusting in thee, have thee before my eyes,
to follow thee being my guide, to be ready at thy call most obediently, and to
account my self wholly unto thee: that thou which only know the way, may
lead me in the same way to thy heavenly joys, where thou raygnest God
everlastingly. Amen.

The fourth Psalm, of Mercy. To be said before the receiving of the Communion.
O Merciful Jesus,

Have mercy upon me, according to thy great mercy: and according to the
multitude of thy mercies do away all mine offenses.

O Sweet Jesus.

I Have sinned against thee, and done evil in thy sight: that thou may be
justified in thy saying, and may overcome when thou art judged.

O Christ the Son of God,

Look on me with ye eyes of thy mercy, the unknown things of thy wisdom
haste thou revealed unto me: if thou therefore sprinckle me with ysope, I
shall be cleansed, if thou wash me, I shall be whiter than Snow.

O my Savior,

MAke thou a pure heart in me, and look no more on my sins: but after thy
mercy and great goodness, put out of thy sight all mine offenses.

O my Redemer.

NO man can help me but thou, cast me not therefore from thy presence* and
thy holy Spirit take not from me.

O my Maker,

OUt of the bowels of thy mercy give me comfort, and thy help: so shall I
teach thy ways unto the wicked, that they may convert unto thee.

O King of Kings.

PUt from me Bloudgyltynesse, thou that art the hope of my health: and my
tongue shall speak of thy righteousness.

O Jesus,

Quench the desire of Sin in me, and open my lips, that my mouth may set
forth the worthy praise of thy name.

O marvelous Creator,

REmember, thou desyrest not the Sacryfice of Calves, nor delightest in whole
burnt Offerings, yet haste thou pleasure in a lowly Spirit, and a contrite and
humble heart, do thou not despise.

O Holy of Holiest.

Send down thy favorable benevolence upon Sion thy holy habitation, and
build up the walls and pyllers thereof: then shall the acceptable sacrifice
of righteousness be laid upon thine altar.

O Holy Father,

PRaise be to thee, and to the Son and holy ghost: as it was in the
beginning is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

The versicle.

O Lord Jesus have mercy,

The Answer.

Which came down and suffered for me.

The Collect.

O Sorde Jesus Christ Son of the living God, set thy holy Passion, Cross,
and death, between thy judgment and my soul, both now and at the hour of
death. And moreover vouchsafe to grant unto ye living mercy and grace, that
after this life they may have rest and quietness in thee: And to thy whole
Church grant peace and concord, that all the members thereof may live and joy
in thee for ever, which live and raignest with the Father and holy Ghost
world without end. Amen.

The Prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ the only stay and defense of my mortal state, my only
hope, my only salvation, my victory, my glory and my triumph, who in the
flesh, (which thou had for my only cause taken upon thee) did suffer
thy self to be tempted of Satan, and who only and alone did utterly
overcome and vanquish sin, death, the world, the Devil, and all the kingdom
of Hell: And whatsoever thou haste so overcome for my behouse, it is thou yt
haste ouercomed it alone. Give me therefore I beseech thee (O Lion most
victorious of ye tribe of Judah) strength against the deceitful waiting of the
most subtle Serpent, which dailye seeks to devour my soul. Thou being a Lamb
as white as Snow, the vanquisher of Satan's tyranny, give unto me (thy little
one,) the strength and virtue of thy Spirit, that being of my self weak and
feable, but in thee strong and valiant, I may withstand and overcome all
assaults of temptation, so that my ghostly Enemy the Devil may not glory over
me, but being a co^querour through thee* I may give thanks to thy mercy, which
never leaueste him destitute that puts his trust in thee, who live and
raignest God for ever without end. Amen.

When thou shall receive the Communion, say thus.
O Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who in thy last Supper with thine Apostles
did give unto them in a Sacrament, thine own body and Blood, to be the food
of their souls: Grant me I beseech thee, ever steadfastly to believe, and
kindelye to acknowledge thy Infinite and Almighty power, and thine
incomprehensible love toward me, and that I may always worthily receive the
same blessed Sacrament and memorial of thy death, according to thy holy
ordinance, that it may work in me increase of all Godliness, in unity of
spirit, with thee our head, and by thee and thy spirit, with all the company
of them yt be truly thine, which be thy spiritual and mystical body, and my
spiritual and Christen brethren. Hear me my Savior and my Christ, for thy
names sake. Amen.

After the Communion fay thus.
O Lord Jesus Christ, which have vouched safe Spirituallye to give unto me in
these holy mysteries, thy body and blood, mortifye whatsoever is evil in me,
and garnishe me with thy merits and virtues, that thou may delight to abide
and dwell in me. Renew my spirit, my soul, and my body, with thy excellent
grace, that I may be made like unto thy holy humanity, frame me after thine
own hearts desire, knit me unto thee most nearly, that I may be changed
altogether into thee. And grant that I may do nothing, speak nothing, nor
desire nothing, but that which may be acceptable unto thee, which art my God,
my Savior, and Redemer, to whom with the Father and holy Ghost, be all honor
and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

The fifth Psalm, for the Remission of Sins.
ALmighty God, Lord of Lords, great and dreadful is thy name: which by thy
Word haste made Heaven and Earth, and all things contained in them.

All things be under thy dominion and rule, both man and beast, and all other
living creatures: and thou haste mercy on whom thou will, and haste
compassion on whom it pleases thee.

Against thee holy Father, against thee have I sinned and done evil: I have
been an offender even from my cradell, and since I sucked my Mothers breasts I
have not seized to do evil.

But what am I (Lord) that I dare speak to thee: I am thy poor creature, and
a worm most abject.

Behold Lord, I have naught, and of my self I am naught, thou art only
good, righteous and holy, thou orderest all things, thou give all things,
and thou fulfillest all things with goodness.

Behold I am thine (O righteous Father,) and one of them whom thy only dear
Son has redeemed: and of thee, which art judge of all men, I ask mercy.

Cast not away (O Lord) a contrite and penitent heart, humbly calling upon
thee: but turn the eyes of thy mercy toward me, and forgive me the sins of
my youth.

Cast not thy darts at me, nor lay not thy heavy hand upon me (O Lord,) for
I have borne thine anger a long while, and of the Cup of thy displeasure
have I drunk very deep.

Cast me not away from thy presence, neither take thou thy holy spirit from
me: but give me the comfort of thy help, and stablishe me in thy truth.

Destroy me not (O merciful Father) because of mine iniquity: but be thou
merciful unto me, for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake.

Destroy me not utterly, nor leave me in my sins: for thou art a God full
of mercy, and very gracious to them which trust in thee.

Dailye, sorrow overcomes me, and sadness possesses my heart: I look for
a time of health, but my grief continues still.

Enter not Lord into judgment with thy Servant: for if thou accuse me, I
shall never be quite, and if thou mark my sin and iniquity, no man shall
deliver me.

Except thou help me of thy goodness and mercy: how may I which have
offended thee, be raised up from my sins.

Even of thee therefore (O holy Father) which art the God of mercy, I
wretched sinner do ask mercy: and for the glory of thy name, be no longer
angrye with me.

For as thou art God, so art thou gracious and merciful, and patiently
suffer sinners, and would that no man should perish: but that all men
should turn to penance.

For albeit yt no man is able to bear the punnishment, which thou do
threaten against Sinners: yet thy mercy which thou haste promised, is great
and unsearchable.

Forgive for thy name sake (O Lord Almightye) all my sins: and put out of
thy sight all mine offenses

Give me a new heart, and take from me al wicked desires, that I may evermore
know, what thing is acceptable in thy sight.

Give light (O Lord) to mine eyes, that I sleep not in death: and then my
sins shall not prevail against me.

Grant me (holy Father) yt I may ever desire and will that, which is most
pleasant and acceptable in thy sight: and that I have no desire to will or not
to will, but as thou will.

Glory be to the Father. etc. As it was in the begin. etc.

The Uersicle.

Cut Lord my sack of sorrow in pieces,

The Answer.

And clothe me with gladness.

The Prayer.
ALmighty and most merciful Father, I wretched sinner most humbly beseech
thee, that thou of thy goodness will not remember the offenses of my youth,
but that according to the greatness of thy mercy, thou wylt turn fro me the
pain, that I have iustlye deserved for sin, and that by thy grace I may
(while I am in this vale of miserye,) evermore be renewed in the spirit of my
mind, that a pure life may always appear in me. Amen.

The sixth Psalm, wherein he desires to be heard of God.
HOw long (O Lord) shall my mind be troubled with paynefull sorrows and
heavy thoughts: how long shall careful cares torment my heart?

How long (O God) wylt thou reject my prayers which dailye I pour out before
thee: wylt thou Lord hear me at no time, or will thou now cease to show
mercy?

Haste thou (O Lord) cast me away for ever, or will thou never hereafter be
pleased with me? Thy hand is not weakened but it may help, and thine rares
be not stopped, that they refuse to hear.

I beseech thee (O righteous father) for Jesus Christ's sake, that ye sighings
and inward desires of my heart, may move and incline thee to hear me.

I have been an untrue and froward child to thee, I have not feared thee, nor
showed due reverence unto thee, but have been ever disobedient and stubbourne
against thee.

I am in prison and bound in fetters of sorrow: till thou with thy gratyous
presence vouchsafe to visit me, and bring me again to liberty and joy.

Keep thy mercy therefore for me always O Lord: and the couenaunte which
thou haste made with me, let it be surely performed.

Keep me Lord from sin, and I shall then dread neither death nor Hell: and as
thou always have been merciful to penitent sinners, so now good Lord
forgive my sins.

Keep my heart in thee, and then shall I rejoice in thy mercy: for that thou
have looked on me and have regarded my soul in my great distress.

Let me never hereafter go away from thy ways: nor leave me not now in the
depenesse of my troubles.

Lo, now be the days of health and grace, now is the accepted time: for in
death who shall remember thee (O Lord) or in Hell who shall praise thee?

Lord behold therefore my weakness and fraylenesse, best known unto thee:
and look down from Heaven upon the sorrow and heaviness of me thy poor
creature.

My life is as it were in the midst of fierce Lions: whose teeth are like
unto spears, and the sharpness of them like unto the sting of Scorpions.

Mollify my heart (O Lord God) that I may return to thee and walk in all
thy ways: for I have wandered ouerlong in the way of sinners.

Make a perpetual league and covenant with me, that thou will put thy fear
into my heart: yt I never swerve from thee again.

No man may so hide himself from thee, but that thou may see him: who do
fulfill both heaven and earth.

Nevertheless I will speak unto thee, and will not hold my peace so long as
the breath is in my mouth: but still shall call on thee for thy mercy.

Nothing is able to resist thy power, thy mercy is above all thy works: and
thou art gracious and merciful to them which diligently observe and keep thy
laws.

O Lord my Prayers be ever unto thee, let thine anger be turned from me, that
I may find favor in thy sight.

O Lord look thou not upon the hardness of my heart: but like as thou have
many times showed mercy, so now be merciful and forgive that I have offended
thee.

O Lord my God, which tenderly love mankind, and art a most rightful
Judge, spare me I beseech thee: and show on me ye abundance of thy mercy

Glory be to the Father. etc. As it was in the bigin. etc.

The Versicle.

Turn not thine eyes from me O Lord.

The Answer.

But teach me to do that is pleasant in thy sight.

The Collect.

O Merciful God, which by thy son Christ have taught us to call on thee in
our necessitye, give me grace I beseech thee, to acknowledge mine own
infirmity and weakness, that I depending on thy merciful goodness, may
(with a strong and steadfast faith) continuallye call on thee with a true
repentant heart, for thy grace, mercy, and pardon, that after this corruptible
life I may behold thee in thy everlasting glory, where thou raignest God
everlasting. Amen.

The Prayer.
O Lord our God, thou that broughtest thy people out of the land of Egypt
with a mighty hand, with tokens and wonders, with thy great power and
stretched out arm. Before thee O Lord my God, have I sinned with my
forefathers, and have done wickedly, behauing my self ungodly in all thy
righteousness. Turn thy wrath from me O Lord, and hear my Prayers and
Peticions for thine own sake; and bring me home again which long have been
astraye, that they that hate thy name, may know that thou art the Lord my
GOD, and that I have called on thy name. O Lord look down upon me thy poor
creature, incline thine ear and hear me, for the dead yt be gone down to
their graves, and whose souls are out of their bodies, ascribe unto thee O
Lord, neither praise nor righteous making, but the soul that is vexed for the
multitude of her sins, which goes on heauilye and weakly, whose eyes begin
to fail, yea such a soul (O Lord) ascribes praise and righteousness unto
thee. I therefore O Heavenly Father require mercy in thy sight, not for any
goodness that is in me, but for the merits of thy dear Son Jesus Christ's
sake, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be laud and praise for evermore.
Amen.

The seventh Psalm, for the obtaining of Godly Wisdom.
Preserve me O God, for in thee do I trust: let thy Wisdom rule and guide my
thoughts, that they may always praise thee.

Put thy word in my mouth, and fasten thy wisdom in my heart: that other
also may be converted unto thee.

Pluck me from mine heinous offenses, and heal my soul which has offended
(O God:) that I may be free from the gylt of my transgression.

Quicken me (O Lord,) as thou art wont to do thy chosen: and let thy hand
direct my ways, that I may walk in thy statutes.

Quicken me, that I may live and keep thy words: that my soul may praise
thee, and that thy judgments may help me.

Quicken me also with thy loving kindness: and so shall I keep the
testimonies of thy mouth.

Remember me O Lord, for thy goodness sake: and for the great love that thou
bear toward me.

Remember that thou haste made me of the earth: and that I shall return into
the dust of Death.

Remove me therefore good Lord from the way of sinners: and strengthen me with
the power of thy right hand.

Show me the ways O Lord, and send forth the hot flames of thy love, to
burn and consume the fantasies of my mind.

Satisfye me with thy mercy, and that sone: so shall I be glad and rejoice in
thee all the days of my life.

Show now good Lord, and declare thy goodness unto me: send down from
Heaven the spirit of thy Wisdom, and replenishe my heart with knowledge
thereof.

Thou fulfillest the desires of them that fear thee: and hear the Prayers
of them that call on thee with their whole heart.

Thou leadest straight in thy judgments, them that be mylde and tractable: and
teach them that be meek, thy words and Testimonies.

Thou hold up all them which else should fall: and all that are fallen, thou
lyftest up again.

Up Lord, and help thy servant, thou art my hope and refuge, thou art my
strong hold and castle: for thy names sake lead and guide me.

Uerelye if thou show me thy goodness and manifold mercies, I shall florishe
as the Olive tree, that brings forth fruit in due season.

Uerely my soul has special respect unto thee (O Lord,) for that my health,
my strength, and my glory, comes from thee.

Which have saved my life from destruction, and showed me thy grace and mercy.

Which haste satisfied my desire with good things: and shalt once restore to
me my youth again.

Wherefore to thee most loving Lord and for these thy mercies, I offer to thee
the Sacrifice of laud and praise: Giving thee thanks now and evermore world
without end Amen.

Lord have mercy upon me.

Christ have mercy upon me.

Lord have mercy upon me.

OUr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive the^ that trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from evil. For thine is the
kingdom, the power, and the glory, forever and ever. Amen.

The Uersicle.

Destroy me not O Lord for my Sins.

The Answer

Neither reserve eternal punishment for them.

The Prayer.
MOst righteous God, for thy great mercies sake, hearken to these my humble
Prayers, which I make before thee: and consider merciful Lord the desire and
thought of my heart. Let my loud cryings come unto thee, and let my unfeigned
Prayers enter into thine ears. Heart me O Lord, for I am destitute of thy
help. Take care for my soul, save me thy Servant which wholly must in thee.
Have mercy O Lord have mercy upon me, for I will never rea^^^ crying to thee
for thy help and mercy. In the day time I will call on thee, and in the night
my cry shall not be hid from thee. O thou God of the Heavens, the maker of
the waters, and Lord of al Creatures, hear me a most wretched sinner calling
on thee, and take (...) (...) me all my sins, and make steadfast my faith and
confidence in thy merciful promises, that I putting my trust in them, may
have as you have promised, everlasting life, through Christ Jesus thy Son our
Lord. Amen.

An other Prayer.
OLorde and heavenly Father, plant in me true obedience to thy holy laws,
and to my Sovereign and Gracions Lady Queen Elizabeth, whom thou have set to
reign over me. And let not the cares of this world deceive me. Keep me
also good Lords, from all unclean desires, and grant me thy grace, to walk
before thee all the days of this my Pilgrimage, with good conscience and pure
mind, that when thou shalt appear to reward every man according to his
deeds, I may receive at thy hand the reward of one that has not been ashamed
of thee in this life. O Lord increase my faith, increase my love, increase in
me a sure hope of my salvation, O Lord my Savior increase strength in me to
overcome sin, and to stand against all temptations: let thy holy Angel
always keep and conduct me, yt I may evermore be thankful unto thee in
Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be all honor and
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Here follows the Letanie with certain other Godly Prayers.
O God the Father of Heaven, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Father of Heaven, have mercy upon us miserable Sinners.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son, redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us iniserable
Sinners.

O God the holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from. etc.

O Holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God, have
mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O Holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity. etc.

Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins, spare us good Lord, spare ye people who^e
thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for
ever.

Spare us good Lord.

From al evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting dampnation.

Good Lord deliver us.

From blindness of heart, from pride, vainglory and hypocrisy, from envy
hatred and malice, and al uncharitableness.

Good Lord deliver us.

From fornication, and all other deadlye sin, and from all the deceytes of
the world, the flesh, and the Devil.

Good Lord deliver us.

From lightning and tempest, from plague, pestilence and famine, from battle
and murder, and from sudden death.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all sediction and privy conspiracy, from all false doctrine and heresy,
from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word, and commandment.

Good Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy incarnation, by thy holy nativity and
circumcision, by thy baptism, fasting, and temptation.

Good Lord deliver us.

By thine agony and bloody sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, by thy precious
death and buryall, by thy glorious resurrection and ascension, and by the
coming of the holy Ghost.

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death and in the day of judgment.

Good Lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us (O Lord God) and that it may please
thee to rule and govern thy holy church universally, in the right way.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of
thee, in righteousness and holiness of life, thy Servant Elizabeth, our most
gracious Queen and governor.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to rule her heart in thy faith, fear, and love, and
that she may eucrmore have affyaunce in thee, and ever seek thy honor and
glory.

We beseeh thee to hear us good Lord*

That it may please thee to be her defender and keeper, giving her the victory
over all her enemies.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Pastors and ministers of
the Church, with true knowledge and understanding of thy word, and that both
by their preaching and living they may set it forth, and show it accordingly.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to endue ye Lords of the Counsel, and all the
Nobility, with grace, wisdom, and understanding.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace
to execute justice, and to maintainetruth.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to al nations* unity, peace and concord.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy commandments.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to al thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekely thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth ye
fruits of ye spirit.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have erred
and are deceived.

We beesech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weak hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat
down Satan under our feet.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to succor, help and comfort all that be in danger,
necessity, and tribulation.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travail by land or by water,
all women laboring of child, all sick persons, and young children, and to
show thy pity upon all prisoners and captives.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to defend, and provide for the fatherless children
and widows, and all that be desolate and oppressed.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecuters and sclaunderers,
and to turn their hearts.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of
the earth so as in due time we may enjoy them.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give* us true repentance, to forgive us al our
sins, negligences and ignorances and to endue us with ye grace of thy holy
spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy word.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

Son of god: we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God* we beseech thee to hear us.

O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world.

Grant us thy peace.

O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world.

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in. etc.

And lead us not into temptation.

But deliver us from evil.

Amen.

The Versicle

O Lord deal not with us after our sins.

The Answer.

Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray

O God merciful Father, that despiseste not the sighing of a contrite heart,
nor the desire of such as be sorowefull, mercifully assyst our prayers that we
make before thee, in all our troubles and adversities, whenever they oppress
us, and graciously hear us, that those evils, which the craft and subtilty
of the devil or man works against us, be brought to naught, and by the
providence of thy goodness, they may be dispersed, that we thy servant being
hurt by no persecutions may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord arise help us and deliver us, for thy name sake.

O God we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us
the noble works thht thou did in their days, and in the old time before
them.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honor.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end.
Ame^.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciously look upon our afflictions.

Pitifullye behold the sorrows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Fauourablye with mercy hear our Prayers.

O Son of David have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us O Christ.

Graciously hear us O Lord Christ.

The Versicle

O Lord let thy mercy be showed upon us.

The Answer.

As we do put our trust in thee.

Let us Pray.

WE humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifullye to look upon our infirmities
and for the glory of thy names sake, turn from us all those evils that we
most righteously have deserved, and grant that in all our troubles we may put
our whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in
holiness and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory, through our only
Mediator and Advocate Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the Queen.
O Lord Jesus Christ, most high, most mighty, God everlasting, King of Kings,
Lord of Lords, the only ruler of Princes, the very son of God, on whose
right hand sitting do from thy throne behold all the dwellers upon earth:
with most lowely heart I beseech thee vouchsafe with favorable regard, to
behold our most gracious sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, and so replenishe
her with the grace of thy holy spirit, that she always may incline to thy
will, and walk in thy way: keep her far of from ignorance, and through thy
gift let prudence and knowledge always abound in her royal heart: so instruct
her O Lord, raygning upon us in earth, that her human Majesty, always obey
thy Divine Majesty in fear and dread. Indue her plentifully with Heavenly
gifts. Grant her in health and wealth long to live. Heap glory and honor
upon her. Glad her with the joy of thy countenance. So strengthen her, that
she may vanquishe and overcome all her enemies, and be dread and feared of
them: and finallye after this life, I beseech thee good Lord, that she may
attain everlasting joy and felicity where thou raignest God with the Father
and the holy Ghost. Amen.

A Prayer to be said in the time of extreme Sickness.
O Lord Jesus, which art the only health of all men living, and the
everlasting life of the^ which dye in thy faith, I wretched Sinner give and
submit my self wholly unto thy blessed will. And I being sure that the thing
cannot perish which is committed unto the mercy, willingly therefore beseech
thee most merciful Lord Jesus Christ, that thou will by thy grace make strong
my soul against all temptations, and that thou will cover and defend me
with the buckler of thy mercy, against all the assaults of the Devil. I see
and acknowledge that there is in my self no hope of salvation, but all my
hope, confidence and trust, is in thy mercy: I have no merits nor good works
which I may allege before thee: of sins and evil works (alas O Lord) I
see a great heap, but yet through thy mercy I trust to be in the number of
them that shall be saved, to whom thou wylt not impute their sins, but take
them to everlasting life. Thou Lord wast borne for my sake, thou did
suffer hunger and thirst for my sake, thou did pray and fast for my sake,
finally thou did all good works and deeds for my sake, and gave thy
most precious body to dye, and thy blood to be shead on the cross for my
sake. Now therefore most merciful Savior, let all these good things profit
me, which thou freely have given me, that have given thy self for me. Let
thy blood wash and cleanse away the spots and fowlenesse of my sins, let
thy righteousness hide and cover mine unrighteousness, let the merits of thy
passion and blood be the satisfaction for my sins. Give me O Lord thy grace
that my faith and salvation in thy blood waver not in me, but ever to be firm
and constant, that the hope of thy mercy never decay in me, that charity wax
not cold in me, finally that the weakness of my flesh be not overcome with
the fear of death. Grant also merciful father, that when Death has shut up
the eyes of my body, yet that the eyes of my soul may still behold and look
upon thee, that when death has taken away the use of my tongue and speech, yet
that my heart may cry and say unto thee: O Lord into thy hands I give and
commit my Soul, and with thy holy Martyr Steven beholding thee in my soul,
may say: Lord Jesus receive my soul unto thee, which live and raignest God
everlasting, with the Father and Holy Ghost. Amen.

A Prayer of Chrysostom.
ALmighty God which haste given us grace at this time, with one accord, to
make our common supplications unto thee, and doeste promise that when two or
three be gathered together in thy name, thou will grant their requests,
fulfill now O Lord, the desires and peticions of thy servant, as may be
most expedient for them, granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth,
and in the world to come, life enerlasting. Amen.

ij. Corinth. xiij. THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God,
and the fellowshippe of the holy ghost, be with us all evermore.

Amen.
Evening Prayer.
The Antheme.
REmember not O Lord, mine offenses, nor the offenses of my forefathers,
neither take thou vengeance of my sins, spare me good Lord, whom thou haste
redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angrye with me for ever.

The first Psalm at Evening Prayer.
AGainst thee (O Lord, against thee have I sinned, and done wyckedly before
thee: and thou see also that mine iniquity is great.

Behold good Lord, I am sold under sin: and in my flesh I find not that
which is good.

Comfort therefore (O Lord) the soul of thy servant: for unto thee do I
lift up my heart and mind.

Do thou show on me thy mercy (O Lord:) and grant unto me thy salvation.

Early in the morning do I cry unto thee: because of thy righteous judgments
and mercy.

For thou Lord art good and gracious, and of great mercy: unto all them that
call upon thee.

Give light unto mine eyes, (O Lord) for I have slept to long in death: and
my sins have prevailed against me.

He that lives (O Lord) he that lives shall praise thee: and shall make thy
mercy known.

In thy Tabernacle (O Lord) will I dwell for ever: and my defense and covering
shall be under thy wings.

Glory be to the Father. etc.

The second Psalm.
Lord deliver me from among the wicked: that I may give thanks to thy holy
name, and make my boast of thy praise.

Make all nations whom thou haste made, to rejoice and worship thee: that they
may praise and glorify thy name.

Now teach thou me O Lord, that I may walk in thy truth: and knit my heart
unto thee, that I may fear thy name.

O Lord fourne thee unto me, and have mercy upon me: give thy strength unto me
and succor me.

Praised be thy name O Lord my God: for thou have set thy glory above all the
Heavens.

Quicken my soul O God, and all the powers thereof: that it may cleave fast
and be joined to thee in joyful gladness of Ghostly rauishings.

Regard O Lord the Prayer of thy servant: and hyde not thy face from me, in
the time of my trouble.

Show some good token upon me, that they that hate me may see it and be
ashamed: because thou Lord have helped and comforted me.

Thou Lord art good and gracious: and of great mercy, unto all them which call
upon thee.

Unto thee therefore O Lord, will I perform my vows: and I will give thee
thanks both now and evermore, world without end. Amen.

The Antheme.

Save me good Lord waking, and keep me sleeping, that I may wake in Christ,
and rest in Peace.

The Versicle.

Blessed be the name of the Lord

The Answer.

From this time forth for evermore.

The Collect.

O Lord God I beseech thee to lighten my darkness, and deliver me from all
ye dangers of this night, O merciful Lord, through thy Son Jesus Christ,
who lives and reigns with thee in unity of the holy Ghost, world without
end. Amen.

The Antheme.

O Lord grant me thy light, that I being delivered from the darkness of
sin, may come to the very eeight which is Christ.

The Versicle.

Lord hear my Prayer.

The Answer.

And let my cry come unto thee.

The Collect.

LIghten my darkness I beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend
me from all the perils and dangers of this night, that after my sleep I may
safely awake, to the praise and glory of thy name, through Christ thy Son
our Lord and Savior. Amen.

The Prayer.
O Merciful God and Heavenly Father, whether I sleep or wake, live or die, I
am always thine. Wherefore I beseech thee heartily that thou will vouchsafe to
take charge and care of me and not to suffer me to perish in the works of
darkness, but to kindle ye light of thy countenance in my heart, ye thy Godly
knowledge may dailye increase in me, through a right and pure faith, and that I
may always be found to walk and live after thy will and pleasure, through
Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Prayer for the Queen.
O Heavenly Father, God almighty, whose Kingdom is everlasting and power
infinite, which of thy good, nesse haste vouchsaued to restore unto us of the
English nation the light of thy holy Gospel, by thy chosen servant and
Minister Elizabeth our most gracious sovereign Lady. I beseech thee O good
Lord so to rule her heart, that she knowing thy will, may always incline to
do the same effectually. And grant that we her Subjects, duly considering
her Regal auctoritye and power, which thou have given her, may truly and
faithfully serve, honor, and humbly obey her, in thee, and for thee,
according as thou haste commanded us in thy blessed and holy Word, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost be all honor and
glory, for ever and ever Amen.

A Psalm and Prayer against the Enemies of the Catholic Church.
ARise O Lord, and stretch forth thine hand, the Heathen are fallen into
thine heritage: thy holy Temple have they defiled, wherein thou haste put thy
name, and made of it and heap of stones,

Behold the dead bodies of thy servants have they given to the Fowls of the
air, to be devoured: and the bones of thy Saints have they consumed with
fire.

Cruellye have they (on every side) shead like water the blood of thy
Faithful: and have despised to bury them.

Deceytfullye have they crept into thine habitation: and with scorn and
derision, have they (O Lord) spoken against thee.

Even in the midst of thy Temple have they (O Lord) blasphemed thy name: and
have not ceased to do wickedly.

Forget not I beseech thee (O Lord) how cruelly this wicked people have
devoured Jacob thy chosen: and laid waste thy dwelling place.

Give glory therefore to thy name (O God everlasting) and let the vengeance
of thy servants blood which is shead, be openly showed upon the wicked in our
sight, that we thy people and sheep of thy pasture may joyfully say: blessed
be our God Iehoua, for ever and ever. Amen.

The Uersicle.

Lord utterly destroy thine enimye.

The Answer.

Which has polluted thy Sanctuarye.

The Prayer.
Deliver thou us O Lord, from these ungodly and stiffenecked persons, for thou
see, that in their hearts they ymagine mischief, and have pleasure to eat
up and devour thy chosen. Their tongues be more sharp than the sting of Adders,
and under their lyppes, lurketh poison. But O merciful Lord, let us not fall
into their hands least they handle us after their own lust. Look down from
Heaven thy habitatio^ we beseech thee, on thy dispearsed sheep, and strengthen
our weakness against their furious rages: Abate their pride, assuage their
malice, confound their devises, wherewith they lift up themselves against
Christ Jesus thy Son our Lord.

We be not able of our selves to stand against their assaults, except thy
undeserved grace and mighty arm defend and deliver us. Perform therefore thy
promises made to Jacob thy Servant, and stop the mouths of thy cursed
Enemies. Call to repentance thy seely sheep, and forgive all those that
wilfully and obstinately rebel not against thy holy Word. Look also we
beseech thee upon thy poor dispersed, which for thy truth sake are compelled
to wander from place to place, and rid them out of their daily greuances,
that we may all with one voice and upright heart, and pleasant countenance,
extolle and magnify thy holy name. Amen.

An other Psalm for the Church, under the borrowed speech or name, of a
Uineyarde.
Hear O thou Shepeherde of Israel, thou that leadest Jacob like a flock of
sheep: how long will thou be angrye over the Prayers of thy people.

In Egypt thou had a Uineyard, which thou broughtest among the Heathen,
thou plantedst it there, and it took root: so that the whole land was
covered withal.

Lo the hills were covered with the shaddowe of it: and so were the strong
Cedre trees with the bows thereof.

Marvelous was the increase of it, after it had taken root: and so was the
name of it, among all nations.

Nevertheless thou haste suffered the hedge thereof to be broken down, so that
the wild Bore out of the wood has rowted it up: and the beasts of the field
have devoured ye Grapes thereof.

O Lord, thou God of hosts, let them perish in thy wrath, that thus have
destroyed and laid waste this thy pleasant vine: whose branches spread from
see to see.

Prevent we beseech the O Lord, the malicious enemies of this thy vine: and
so shall we with voice and heart, laud and praise thy holy name. Amen.

The Uersicle.

Turn thee O God, look down from Heaven.

The Answer.

And behold the Uineyarde which thy right hand has planted.

The Prayer.
A Rise O Lord, look on thy vineyarde, that it be not devoured of the wicked
haters thereof. Let thine enemies be scattered, the righteous (O Lord) make
thou pleasant and merry, let them blow abroad thy Magnificence let them sing
praises and pleasant songs unto thee, let them most highly advance thy
Majesty, let thy glory grow, let the Kingdom of Christ from Heaven among the
chosen be enlarged: be thou (O Holy Father) the Protector of them, namely, whom
the world forsakes and pursues for Christ's sake. How dry O Lord is the
flock of thine heritage? pour down largely we pray thee therefore, the
showers of thy grace, that the Church thy Spouse may deal large spoils of
the conquered Satan. In thy house O Lord, let us dwell in peace and concord:
give us all one heart, one mind, and one true interpretation of thy word,
that all that believe in thee by Christ our Lord, might lift thee up with
praises. And give to thy people cunning and power to withstand sin, and to
obey thy word in all things. Grant it so to be most merciful Lord, for thy
Son Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

Here follows certain Prayers very profitable to be exercised.
A Prayer to God the Father for the obtaining of mercy for his Son Christ's
sake.
O Holy Father, remember not the offenses of my youth, but think upon thy
great mercies and covenant made unto me in Christ Jesus thy Son my only
Advocate and Mediator. He it is (O holy Father) whom thou did send to be
the obtainer of mercy for my sins. He was made weak to make me strong. He
was wounded for mine offenses. He gave his body to be beaten and his Cheeks to
be stricken. He turned not away his face from them that scorned him and spyt
upon him. He gave himself to death for them which were offenders. Through his
love and mercy, he has redeemed them that were lost, and by his bloudsheading
on the Cross he has pacifyed all things in Heaven and in Earth. Behold holy
Father therefore, who it is that thus has suffered, and forgive the sin of
him that is redeemed. O Heavenly Father, for this thy Son Jesus Christ's
sake, write in my heart, love to thy law, and hate to all sin, yt I may be
worthy through the merits of his death and passion, to dwell with him and thee
everlastingly, to whom with thee and the Holy ghost, be all honor praise, and
glory. Amen.

A Prayer for the obtaining of a good Life.
O Heavenly Father, God Almightye, maker of Heaven and Earth and all things
contained in them. I beseech thee, that thou will vouchsafe of thy goodness,
to direct, sanctifye and keep my heart and body, my senses, my doings, my
talk and communication in thy holy laws, and in the works of thy
Commandments: and that thy holy Angel may be with me, to direct my feet
into the way of peace, truth, and health, that I may deserve to be whole,
safe, and free, in thee and by thee, both here and in the world to come. Thou
yt art the Savior of the world, and king of glory, hear me and save me,
which live and raignest God in perfect unity world without end. Amen.

A Prayer to the Father, wherein we desire to do those things that may please
him.
O Heavenly Father, have thou pity and compassion upon the weakness of me
thy unworthy Child, be thou pressed and ready (O holy Father) to help me,
always showing thy mercy upon me, and prosper thou me in whatsoever I Godly
go about, so that thou giving me light, I may see what things are to be
accepted before thee, and thou encoraging me, I may have an earnest desire to
do the same, and thou being my guide I may come where to obtain them: for I
having nothing but mistrust in my self, do yield and commit my self full and
wholye unto thee alone, which workest all things in all creatures to thy honor
and glory. Amen.

A Prayer to Christ the Son of God.
O Bountiful Jesus, O sweet Savior, O Christ the Son of God have pity
upon me, mercifullye hear me and despise not my Prayers. Thou have created
me of nothing, thou have redeemed me from the bondage of sin, death and Hell,
neither with gold nor silver, but with thy precious blood, which thou offeredst
upon the Cross for all mankind. Cast me not away O Lord, whom thou by thy
great wisdom have made, nor let ye wickedness of my youth, destroy yt which
thy goodness has builded. Whilst I am here (O Jesus) have thou mercy on me,
and whilst I have time, give me thy grace to repent. Look upon me, O Lord,
with thy merciful eyes, as thou did vouchsafe to look upon Peter thine
Apostle, that after his example I may bewail my sinful life, that obtaining
thy favor, I may dye therein. I acknowledge that of my self, I have deserved
everlasting death, but yet I appeal to the high throne of thy mercy, not
doubting but that thou will have mercy on me: Thou have O Lord Jesus given
thy self an acceptable Sacrifice to thy Father to appease his wrath and to
bring al sinners truly repenting unto his favor. Accept me therefore sweet
Jesus, truly repe^ting my sins* among the number of them which shall be
saved, and that I may lead a Godly and innocent life, so that after this life
I may attain life everlasting through the merits of thy death and Passion. Amen.

A Prayer to Christ our Savior.
O My Savior Christ Jesus, which did say: I will not the death of a
sinner, but that he live and convert. Vouchsafe I: beseech thee to look
upon me most wretched sinner with those merciful eyes, with which thou once
did behold and look upon Peter bytterly weeping in the court of Pilate,
wherewith also thou did look upon Mary Magdalene the penitente, at the
feast of Simon, likewise upon the Thief hanging on the cross: and cause me
through thy great goodness, that I may worthylye bewail my sins, and
weep with Peter, and with Mary to love, thee with a pure and perfect love,
and with the Thief that I may behold and see thee, which with God the Father
and the holy Ghost raygneste GOD, world without end. Amen.

A Prayer to Christ our daily to be said.
O Merciful Lord Jesus, I beseech thee to be merciful unto me a wretched
sinner: as for all my iniquity and my negligences, and all my
immortifications, I put them all into thy most precious wounds. O Lord put
away all my sins, wash me clean with thy precious blood, sanctify me with
thy bitter passion and death, cleanse me perfectly, restore again unto me the
innocence which thou (O Lord) gave me in baptism, that I may truly please
thee. I worship, and land, and glorifye thee, I praise and give thanks unto
thee my Lord Jesus Christ, for all thy mercies and benefits which you daily
bestowest on me. I thank thee O son of the living God, which for ye exceeding
great charity that thou did bear toward me, haste vouchsaued to be made
man. Thou would for my sake be borne in a stable, and as an Infant be
wrapped in clothes, to be swadled and laid in a manger, to be fed with the
little milk of the Maiden and Virgin thy blessed Mother. Thou did for my
sake suffer needynesse and poverty, and many other agonies dyddest thou suffer
(O Lord) for my sake: as to be apprehended and taken shamefully, and to be
bound unworthily, and to be condemned unjustly: thus with innumerable
sorrows, wast thou brought, to y^ shameful death of the Cross, whereupon for
my sake thou did shead thy most precious blood. Grant me therefore most
merciful Christ, always to acknowledge thy great love and kindness toward
me, which have suffered for me, that I may after this life live with thee
everlastingly. Amen.

A Prayer to the blessed Trinity.
O Holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, three persons and one God, have mercy upon me. Lord omnipotent and
everlasting God, without beginning or ending, whom we do confess one in
Trinity and three in unity, I praise thee I worship thee, I glorify thee, and
give thanks unto thee, for thy merciful goodness and clemencye, which
would that I being in the darkness of all error and ignorance, should be
made partaker of thy grace and mercy. I beseech thee also most blessed and
glorious Trinity, bring to pass the work of thy merciful goodness begone
in me, and lead me in all piety and Godliness, and cause me always to
think, speak, and do those things which shall be acceptable in thy sight, yt
after this life I may have the fruition of thy deity, which live and
raignest God in perfect unity, world without end.

A Prayer upon the Peticions of the Lords Prayer.
O Almighty and Eternal God, which vouchsauest that we, as it were thy
heavenly children, should every one of us, call thee our Heavenly Father:
grant that among us by pureness and example of living, thy most holy name
may be sanctified, that all other nations, beholding our virtuous deeds that
thou workest in us, may be stirred to bless and gloryfie thee.

Grant O Lord, that the Kingdom of thy grace and mercy may reign
continually in our hearts, so that we may be partakers of the Realm of thy
glory and Majesty.

Grant that unto the very death we refuse not to follow thy Divine will, and
that we (according to the example of the Celestial Citizens, agreeing together
quietly) united in spirit, al controversy in opinions laid aparte, the lusts
of the flesh being subdued, and all flattering assaults of the world and the
Devil overcome, never wrestle against thy most holy will.

Grant (O Lord) for our body needful sustenaunce, that we may the more
freely serve thee. Give us we beseech thee (O merciful Father,) that Heavenly
bread, the body of thy son Jesus Christ the very food and health of our
souls. Give us the bread of thy Divine precepts, that we may truly walk
and live in them. Give us the bread of thy heavenly word, which is the strong
fortress and sure defense of our souls, that we being well fed and filled
with this food, may worthyly come to the celestial feast, where as is no
hunger.

Grant (O Lord) that we patiently bear and suffer our Enemies and such as
hurt us, and wyllingly forgive the offenses committed against us, that so we
may find thee (O Lord), mylde and merciful in forgiving us our trespasses.

Grant O Lord, that we be not utterly led into temptation, that thereby we
should be lost: but in all perilles of temptation, and in the middste of the
stormy tempests of tribulations, let us thy children perceive and feel thy
Fatherly succoure ready to help us, least that we (overcome with the naughtye
crafts and deceytes of the tempters,) should be drawn into everlasting
destruction: but when we be well assayd, approved, and pourged with the fire of
temptation, then let us finishe our course, and so well and valiantly fight,
that we may for evermore live with thee in that heavenly City, where and
against the which, no manner of temptation can prevail.

Finally grant (most merciful Father) that we through thy benign goodness,
may be delivered from all euilles present and to come, both of body and soul:
and that at the last the yoke of the foul fiende being shaken of, we may
possess the heritage of thy Heavenly Kingdom, which thy Son with his
precious blood, bought for us thy Children: and there for ever to have fruition
of Celestial delectations, accompanied with Angels and blessed Saints,
through the help, benignity and grace of our Savior Jesus Christ, to whom and
to thee our Father, and the holy Ghost, be glory and honor now and ever. Amen.

A comfortable Meditation of the reconcilation and atonement made by Christ, to
God the Father,
OAlmighty God, father of my lord: behold, the most high and precious thing yt
I can find, the same have I offered unto thee, the thing of most estimation
that I could find, have I humbly presented unto thee, which is thy dear son
Christ. I have left nothing, but in him I have declared it, to thy Divine
Majesty. There is nothing remaining that I may add more, because I have
committed and betaken my whole hope unto him. I have I say (O holy Father)
sent unto thee my advocate and spokesman, even thy well-beloved son. I have
sent thy glorious child to be a mediator for me: I have sent him as an
intercessor, by whom I trust to get pardon and forgiveness of my sins. I
have sent (O merciful Father) word unto word, that is, God unto God, according
to the saying of thine Apostle: In the beginning was the word and the word was
with God. etc. which word I believe was sent down from thee for my mysdeedes,
and did take upon him my humanity and nature, in the which he thought not
scorn to suffer buffettes, bonds, spittings, and mockes. Yea, he took upon
him to suffer the cruel pains of the Cross, nails, and darte, and after
diverse punishments, gave up his most holy spirit, and was reckened among the
dead. Look merciful Father here upon thy Son, whom thou diddeste beget,
and bond servant who^e he redeemed. Behold here a Creator, and do not refuse a
Creature. Receive the shephearde welcomed with a gentle and loving
countenance, and mercyfully look upon the sheep which he has brought home
to the ninety and nine. Behold (O Lord) my King and my God, which like a good
shepherde, renders to thee that which thou did commit to his charge. I
was able (O holy father) by my self to offend thee, but I was not able of my
self to appease and pacify thee. If thou therefore despise me (as it were
right) for mine iniquity, yet at the least wise, mercifullye look upon me,
for the charity of thy well-beloved Son. Look (O Holy Father upon the
Sacrifice of flesh, and pardon the offenses of flesh: and because flesh has
stirred thee to anger, let flesh (I beseech thee) move thee to mercy, that
like as flesh has seduced and led me to sin, so flesh may get and
obtain for me, remission for sin. For certain it is, much that mine
iniquity has deserved, but yet much more it is, that the goodness of my
redeemer may even of right require. Mine unrighteousness is great, but yet
holy Father, his righteousness is greater: wherefore most noble Creator of
light, pardon mine offenses, for the miserable trauayles and pains that thy
beloved Son did sustain. Now I beseech thee (O merciful Father) let his
goodness be set against my wickedness, his modestye and temperance, against
my ungracious naughtiness, and his meekness against my fierce cruelty. Let
his humility recompense my pride, his patience, mine impacience, his
gentleness mine unkindness, his obedience, my disobedience, his quietness,
mine unquietness, his pleasant towardness, my bitter frowardness, his
sweet facilitle and gentleness, mine anger and fretting fumes. To conclude, O
holy Father, let his charity make amends for mine vnmercyfulnesse.

To whom with thee and the holy Ghost be all honor and glory, both now and
ever, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Paternoster Row, at the
Sign of the Star.

Anno. 1565. Septembris. 3.


