A particular declaration or testimony, of the undutiful and traitorous
affection borne against her Majesty by Edmond Campion Jesuit, and other
condemned Priests, witnessed by their own confessions: in reproof of those
slanderous books and libels delivered out to the contrary by such as are
maliciously affected toward her Majesty and the state.

Published by authority.

Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty. AN. DO. 1582.

DIEV ET MON DRO IT



1. Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves unto all manner ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, whether it be unto the King, as unto the superior, or unto
governors, as unto them that are sent of him, for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well.

To all her Majesty's good and faithful subjects.
ALthough the course of proceeding in the late indictment, araignement, trial,
judgment and execution of Edmond Campion and others, being as well upon
sundry of their writings, letters and Confessions, as also upon other good and
manifest proves found guilty of high treason, was such, as ought in truth and
reason, to satisfy all indifferent persons and well affected subjects, to
whom her Majesty's merciful and gracious inclination toward offenders, is so
well known: yet has it been found that some disloyal and unnatural subjects
have untruly spread abroad sundry rumors and reports, and have published
diverse slanderous pamphlets and seditious libels, as well in this Realm as in
foraine parts, in sundry strange languages, in excuse and justification of the
said Traitors so justly executed, with purpose to defame her Majesty's
honorable course of justice, so much as lies in them, setting out those
condemned persons as men of singular virtue and holiness, and as her highness
true, loyal, deuote, and obedient subjects, and in no wise spotted with any
stain of ill disposed affection toward her Majesty, being not otherwise to
be charged, then with certain points of religion that concerns only matters
of conscience, that were no way prejudicial to her Majesty's state and
government, with diverse like untruths, which are meant shall be hereafter
answered more at large, whereby both the malice of the writers may be made
known to the world, and her Majesty's most merciful and gracious government
may be preserved from the malice of such unnatural and undutiful subjects. In
the mean time notwithstanding, the Lords and others of her Majesty's most
honorable privy Counsel, being desirous that the dutiful subjects, may be
preserved from the undermining of such seditious slaunderers, whereby otherwise
they might happily by such wicked illusions be carried into some hard conceits,
touching the due and lawful proceeding against the said Traitors: have found
it very expedient, that as well certain confessions taken of the said Campion
and others before his arraignement, as also certain answers lately made to
certain articles propounded to those that were at that same time condemned of
high treason, but yet spared from execution, should be published truly and
sincerely, in such precise form of words, as the same have been acknowledged
and subscribed, not only with the proper hands of certain persons of public
calling and credit that were present at their examination and have subscribed
thereunto, but also with the proper hands of the offenders themselves, (Heart
only excepted) as appears by the Originals extant to be showed, whereby it
may be most evidently seen, even by them selves still persisting in their most
Traiterous affection, how untruly the said persons are reported to have been
and to be true and faithful subjects in matter of her Majesty's estate and
Crown, and how justly they were condemned for treason and not for points of
religion, being those, that having been by her Majesty's clemency so long
spared upon hope of repentance, continue yet still in such Traiterous
disposition of heart toward her highness, two of them only now acknowledging
their true duty of allegiance, though in points of religion not reconciled,
as also one other named Edward Rishton, that did before, openly at the bar at
the time of the arraignment (varying from Campion and the rest of his fellows
therein) acknowledge his said duty and alleagiance to her Majesty: toward
whom (to thend it may appear unto the world that the said Campion and the
rest that were executed, were not put to death for points that concerned
matters of conscience, but for treason:) Her Majesty does mean to extend her
grace and mercy, hoping that as it has pleased God to frame their consciences
to acknowledge toward her that duty of allegiance that by the laws of God
and man they owe unto her as their most lawful prince and Sovereign: so he
will hereafter open their eyes to see, how dangerously they have been hitherto
through false and erroneous doctrine seduced, as well in matters concerning
their duty toward God, as in their alleagiance toward their Prince. It is
also looked for, that all such as make profession to be dutiful and well
affected subjects, howsoever they be affected in religion, seeing the most
dangerous and pernicious opinions that are held and maintained by these
Jesuits and Seminary men sent into this Realm, will hereafter as well in
respect of the duty they owe unto her Majesty, as for the care they ought to
have as good members of this Realm to preserve the tranquillity thereof, as a
thing that imports every man's particular duty, not only refuse to receive
and harborough such disloyal persons, but also do their uttermost endeavor to
apprehend them, and to present them to Justice, whereby they may receive such
condign punishment as is meet to be inflicted upon disturbers of the public
peace in Realms and Kingdoms.

D. Sanders de visibili Monarchia, lib. 7. Page 730.
DOctor Sanders reports, that in the year 1569. Pius quintus The Pope.
Pontifex Maximus, sent Nicholas Morton Englishman Doctor of Divinity, into
England, to admonish certain Catholic Noblemen, Elizabetham quae tunc rerum
potiebatur, haereticam esse: ob eamque causam omni dominio and potestate, quam
in Catholicos vsurpabat, iure ipso excidisse, impuneque ab illis velut Ethnicam
and publicanam haberi posse, nec eos illius legibus aut mandatis deinceps
obedire cogi. Which is to say, That Elizabeth which then governed, was an
heretic, and for that cause has by very law lost all dominion and power which
she usurped over the Catholics, and may freely be accounted by them as an
heathen and Publicane, and that they are not from thenceforth bound to obey
her laws or commandments.

Whereupon he says, that many Noble men adventured to deliver their brethren
ab haereticorum tyrannide, from the tyranny of the heretics. And although
things fell not out to their expectation, yet he says, Illorum nobilium
laudanda consilia erant, quae certo suo, eoque foelici successu non caruerunt.
Quanquam enim omnium fratrum suorum animas, e schismatis puteo educere non
potuerunt, tamen and ipsi fidem Catholicam egregie confessi sunt, and multi
eorum animas pro fratribus (qui summus est charitatis gradus) posuerunt, and
reliqui seipsos, tum ex haereseos, tum ex peccati seruitute in libertatem
vendicarunt eam, qua Christus nos liberauit. That is to say, The purposes or
endeavors of these Noblemen were to be praised, which wanted not their certain
and happy success. For though they were not able to draw the souls of all
their brethren out of the pit of schism, yet both they themselves, nobly
confessed the Catholic faith, and many of them gave their lives for their
brethren, which is the highest degree of Charity, and the rest of them reskued
themselves from the bondage both of schism and of sin, into that freedom,
wherewith Christ has made us free.

Bristowe in his book of Motives, published with allowance of Doctor Allen, in
the 15. Motive. fol. 72. c. 73.
FOr a full answer to them all, although the very naming of our Catholic
Martyrs, even of this our time, to any reasonable man may suffice, as the B. of
Rochester, Sir Thomas Moore, the Monks of the Charterhouse, with many more under
King Henry: and now of late time, all our holy Martyrs that have been and daily
are made, by loss of their livings, by poison, by whipping, by famishing, by
banishment, Bishops, Priests, Deanes, Archdeacons, Canons, Ecclesiastical
persons of all sorts, Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, laymen of all sorts: so
many likewise that have openly suffered, the good Earl of Northumberland, D.
Story, Felton, the Nortons, M. Woodhouse, M. Plumtree, and so many hundreths
of the Northren men: such men both in their life and at their death, as neither
the enemies have to stayne them, as their own consciences, their own talk,
and the world it self does bear good witness: many of them also, and
therefore all of them, (because of their own cause) being by God himself
approved by miracles most undoubted. Although I say, no reasonable man will
think those stinking Martyrs of the heretics, worthy in any respect to be
compared with these most glorious Martyrs of the Catholics, yet supposing,
etc.

Sanders lib. 7. page 732.
SPeaking of the Northren commotion, he says, Certe quidem illud miraculo
imputetur necesse est, quod cum viri fere quingenti exijs, qui arma pro fide
sumpserunt, ab haereticis capti, and morte affecti essent, nemo illorum
repertus sit, qui aut fidem Catholicam deseruerit, aut belli eius authors
alicuius culpae accusarit: that is to say, Verily this must needs be imputed
to a miracle, that whereas nere five hundred men of those that took arms for
the faith, were taken and put to death by the heretics, yet there has not
been found any one of them, which has either forsaken the Catholic faith,
or has accused of any blame the authors of that war.

And a little after, Nobile etiam Martyrium in eadem causa subierunt duo viri
Nobiles de familia Nortonorum, ex quibus alter dicebatur Thomas Nortonus, alter
vero Christopherus: and Christopherus quide^ Thomae nepos erat ex fratre, ille
autem huic patruus. Qui ambo nec a fide sua dimoueri, nec vt Elizabetham
confiterentur legitimam Reginam adduci potuerunt, etc. That is to say, There
suffered also a noble martyrdom in the same cause, two worshipful Gentlemen
of ye house of Nortons, of whom the one was called Thomas Norton, the other
Christopher, and Christopher was Thomas his brothers son, and Thomas was
Christophers Uncle, which both could neither be removed from their faith, nor
be brought to confess Elizabeth to be lawful Queen.

Sanders. lib. 7. page 734.
AFter a long recital of the causes that moved Pius quintus to excommunicate
her Majesty, he says, De Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine declarauit,
praedictam Elizabetha^ haereticam and haereticorum fautricem, eique adhaerentes
in praedictis Anathematis sententiam incurrisse. Quin etiam praetenso regni
praedicti iure, necnon omni and quocunque dominio, dignitate, priuilegioque
priuatam. Itemque proceres, subditos and populos dicti regni, ac caeteros omnes
qui illi quomodocunque iurauerunt, a Iuramento huiusmodi, ac omni prorsus
dominij, fidelitatis and obsequij debito, perpetuo absolutos, prout illos tunc
sententiae suae authoritate absoluit: and priuauit eandem Elizabeth. praetenso
iure regni alijsque omnibus supradictis: praecepitque and interdixit vniuersis
and singulis Proceribus, subditis, populis and alijs praedictis, ne illi,
eiusue monitis, ma^datis aut legibus audere^t obedire. Qui secus agerent, eos
simili anathematis sente^tia innodauit. That is to say, Of the fullness of
Apostolic power has declared the said Elizabeth an heretic, and a favorer
of heretics, and that such as adhere unto her in the promises, have incurred
the sentence of Anathema accursed. Moreover, that she is deprived of her
pretensed right of the said kingdom, and also of al and whatsoever dominion,
dignity and privilege. Furthermore, that the nobles, subjects, and peoples of
the said Realm and all other which any wise whatsoever have taken oath unto
her, are assoyled for ever from such oath, and utterly from all duty of
allegiance, fidelity and obedience, even as he then assoyled them by
authority of his sentence, and deprived the same Elizabeth of her pretensed
right of the kingdom, and all other things above said. And he has commanded
and forbidden all and every the nobles, subjects, peoples and other
aforesaid, that they be not so bold to obey her, or her aduertisements,
commandments or laws: and whosoever otherwise do, he has bound with like
sentence of curse.

Bristowe in his 6. motive. fol. 31.
WHereby it is manifest, that they do miserably forget them selves, who fear
not excommunications of Pius quintus of holy memory, in whom Christ him self
to have spoken and excommunicated, as in Saint Paul, they might consider by the
miracles that Christ by him as by Saint Paul did work.

In his 40. motive under the title, obedient subjects.
ANd if at any time it happen, after long toleration, humble beseeching and
often admonition of very wicked and notorious Apostates and heretics, no
other hope of amendment appearing, but the filthy daily more and more
defiling him self and others to the huge great heap of their own damnation,
that after all this the sovereign authority of our common pastor in religion
for the saving of souls do duly discharge us from subjection, and the Prince
offender from his dominion: with such grief of the heart it is both done of
the Pastor and taken of the people, as if a man should have cut off from his
body for to save the whole, some most principal, but rotten part thereof.

Sanders lib. 7. fol. 744.
Under this title, Insigne martyrium Iohannis Feltoni, The honorable
martyrdom of John Felton, etc. he says of Felton in this manner. Is enim
Catholicae fidei studio zeloque adductus, cum pene desperatam patriae suae
valetudinem non nisi acerbissima aliqua medicina restitus posse animaduerteret,
noluit committere vt haec sententia summi pastoris ciues ac proximos suos
lateret. That is to say, For he, led with the love and zeal of the Catholic
faith, when he saw that the (in a manner) desperate health of his country could
not be restored, but by some most bitter medicine, would not suffer that this
sentence of the sovereign pastors should be hidden from his countrymen and
neighbors.

And after the further report of his fact, thus, Cum, vero de hac re
diligentissime quaereretur, Johannes Feltonus tandem appraehensus, dignum se
Jesus Christi, and Primatus ab eo instituti testem exhibuit.

But when most diligent inquiry was made thereof, John Felton being at length
apprehended, showed himself a worthy witness of Jesus Christ, and of the
Supremacy by him ordained.

Under this Title: Illustre Martyrium Iohannis Storaei Angli, etc. The noble
Martyredome of John Story Englishman, etc. Anno autem Domini. 1571. 25. die
mensis Maij productus in iudicium, perduellionis reus peragitur, veluti qui
coniurationem cum certis viris apud Belgas in ciuitate Antuerpiensi contra
Elizabetham iniuisset, religionemque schismaticam quae iam in Anglia regnat, in
Catholicam commutare tentasset. Facta vero pro se dicendi potestate, fori
tantum exceptionem proposuit, negans iudices ipsos vllam in se potestatem
habere, qui iam non Anglicanae principi, sed potius regi catholico subiectus
esset.

That is to say, In the year of our Lord 1571. The twenty five day of the
month of May, being brought to the bar, he was araigned of hie treason, as
he yt had conspired with certain men in the low country in the city of
Antuerpe against Elizabeth, and had attempted to change the schismatic
religion which now reigns in England, into ye Catholic religion. Being
permitted to speak for himself, he only pleaded to the jurisdiction of the
court, denying that the Judges themselves had any power over him, which was now
no subject to the English Queen, but rather to the King Catholic.

And after further discourse of the speech of Doctor Story, and of his
condemnation, he adds thus: Storaeus autem biduo post, cum ad vxorem Louanii
agentem scriberet, deque huius sententiae iniustitia quereretur: significauit
perfacile sibi fuisse, si apud alios iudices actum esset, id quod de
coniuratione contra Elizabetham facta obiiciebatur confutare. Cuius rei testes
citabat illos ipsos, quibuscum Antuerpiae hac de re egisse dicebatur. Verum
quia hoc quod probe sciret nescire non posset, integrum sibi non fuisse aliter
causam dicere quam dixisset. Intellexit vero probe se scire, praetensam Angliae
Reginam per declaratoriam summi Pontificis sententiam ob haeresim manifestam
omni iure Regni, Dominioque priuatam esse, ac propterea magistratum nullum ab
illa creatum, eique adhaerentem a se agnosci posse, ne forte ipse etiam eodem
Anathemate innodaretur.

That is to say, Story two days after, writing to his wife who then remained
at Louaine, and complaining of the injustice of this sentence, he advertised
her that he could easily, (if the matter had been tried before other Judges)
confute what was objected against him, touching the conspiracy made against
Elizabeth, whereof he alleged for witnesses, those with whom he was said to
have dealt at Antuerpe about this matter: but because he could not be ignorant
of that which he well knew, he could not otherwise plead then he had pleaded.
His meaning was, that he well knew yt the pretensed Queen of England by the
declaratorie sentence of the Pope, was for manifest heresy deprived from all
right of the kingdom, and from Dominion, and that therefore no magistrate
created by her, and adhering to her, could be acknowledged by him, least him
self also should be bound with the same curse.

And in the end. In ipsis ergo Calendis Iunii, tantus dei martyr iniectus
crati, ad locum supplicii trahitur. Therefore the first day of June, so great a
martyr of God, was thrown upon a hardell, and drawn to the place of
execution. And so concludes with the report of his execution.

The first of August. 1581.
EDmond Campion being demanded whether he would acknowledge the publishing of
these things before recited by Saunders, Bristowe and Allen, to be wicked in
ye whole, or in any part: and whether he does at this present acknowledge her
Majesty to be a true and lawful Queen, or a pretensed Queen, and deprived,
and in possession of her Crown only de facto. He answers to the first, that
he medleth neither to nor fro, and will not further answer, but requires that
they may answer.

To the second he says, that this question depends upon the fact of Pius
quintus, whereof he is not to judge, and therefore refuses further to answer.

Edmond Campion. This was thus answered and subscribed by Edmond Campion, the
day and year above written, in the presence of us. Owyn Hopton. Robert Beale.
Jo. Hammond. Thomas Norton.


Short extracts out of Briant and Sherwins confessions.
Alexander Briant.
He is content to affirm, that the Queen is his Sovereign Lady, but he will
not affirm that she so is lawfully, and ought so to be, and to be obeyed by
him as her subject, if the Pope declare or command the contrary. And he says,
that that question is too high, and dangerous for him to answer.

The 6. of May 1581. before Owen Hopton Knight, John Hammond, and Thomas Norton.

Whether the Pope have authority to withdraw from obedience to her Majesty, he
knows not.

The 7. of May 1581. Alexander Briant.

Ralphe Sherwins examination.
BEing asked whether the Popes bull of deprivation of the Queen were a lawful
sentence or no, he refuses to answer.

Being asked whether ye Queen be his lawful Sovereign, and so ought to
continue notwithstanding any sentence that the Pope can give, he does not
answer.

Being again asked whether the Queen be his Sovereign, notwithstanding any
sentence that the Pope can give, he prays to be asked no such question as
may touch his life.

The 12. of November. 1580. Ralphe Sherwin.

Articles ministered to the Jesuits and Seminary priests, which are in the
Tower, and were condemned, with their answers to the same. 13. Maii. 1582.
WHether the Bull of Pius quintus against the Queens Majesty, be a lawful
sentence, and ought to be obeyed by the subjects of England?

2 Whether the Queens Majesty be a lawful Queen, and ought to be obeyed by
the subjects of England, not withstanding the Bull of Pius quintus, or any other
Bull or sentence that the Pope has pronounced, or may pronounce against her
Majesty?

3 Whether the Pope have or had power to authorize the Earls of
Northumberlande and Westmerland, and other her Majesty's subjects, to rebel
or take arms against her Majesty, or to authorize Doctor Saunders, or
others, to invade Irelande, or any other her dominions, and to bear arms
against her, and whether they did therein lawfully or no?

4 Whether the Pope have power to discharge any of her highness subjects, or the
subjects of any Christian prince from their allegiance or oath of obedience to
her Majesty, or to their prince for any cause?

5 Whether the said Doctor Saunders, in his book of the visible monarchy of
ye Church, and Doctor Bristowe, in his book of Motives (writing in allowance,
commendation, and confirmation of the said Bull of Pius Quintus) have therein
taught, testified, or maintained a truth or a falsehood?

6 If the Pope do by his Bull or sentence pronounce her Majesty to be
deprived, and no lawful Queen, and her subjects to be discharged of their
allegiance and obedience unto her: and after, the Pope or any other by his
appointment and authority, do invade this Realm, which part would you take,
or which part ought a good subject of England to take?

Luke Kirbyes Answer.
LVke Kirby. To the first he says, that ye resolution of this article,
depends upon the general question, whether the Pope may for any cause depose
a prince: wherein his opinion is, that for some causes he may lawfully depose a
prince, and that such a sentence ought to be obeyed.

To the second, he thinks that in some cases, (as infidelity or such like,)
her Majesty is not to be obeyed against the Popes Bull and sentence, for so he
says he has read, that the Pope has so done, de facto, against other princes.

To the third he says, he cannot answer it.

To the fourth, that the Pope (for infidelity) has such power, as is
mentioned in this article.

To the fifth, he thinks, that both Doctor Saunders, and Doctor Bristowe,
might be deceived in these points of their books, but whether they were
deceived or not, he refers to God.

To the last he says, that when the case shall happen, he must then take
counsel what were best for him to do.

Luke Kirby. John Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Jews. John Hammond.


Thomas Cottoms Answer.
THomas Cotto^. To ye first, in this and al other questions he believes as the
Catholic church (which he takes to be the church of Rome) teaches him. And
other answer he makes not, to any of the rest of these articles.

Byme Thomas Cottom Priest. John Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Jews. John
Hammond.


Lawrence Richardsons Answer.
LAwrence Richardson. To the fifth article he answers, that so far as
Doctor Saunders and Doctor Bristowe agree with the Catholic doctrine of the
church of Rome, he allows that doctrine to be true. And touching the first,
and all the rest of the articles he says, that in all matters not repugnant
to the Catholic religion, he professes obedience to her Majesty, and
otherwise makes no answer to any of them, but believes therein as he is
taught by the Catholic church of Rome.

Lawrence Richardson. John Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Jews. John Hammond.


Thomas Fordes Answer.
THomas Ford. To the first he says, yt he cannot answer, because he is not
privy to the circumstances of that Bull, but if he did see a Bull published by
Gregory the thirteenth, he would then deliver his opinion thereof.

To the second he says, that the Pope has authority to depose a prince upon
certain occasions: and when such a Bull shall be pronounced against her Majesty,
he will then answer what the duty of her subjects, and what her right is.

To the third he says, he is a private subject, and will not answer to any of
these questions.

To the fourth he says, that the Pope has authority upon certain occasions
(which he will not name) to discharge subjects of their obedience to their
Prince.

To the fifth he says, that Doctor Saunders, and Doctor Bristowe, be
learned men, and whether they have taught truly in their books mentioned in
this article, he refers the answer to them selves, for him self will not
answer.

To the last he says, that when that case shall happen, he will make answer,
and not before.

Thomas Forde. John Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Jews. John Hammond.


John Sherts answer.
John Shert. To all the articles he says, that he is a Catholic, and
swarueth in no point from the Catholic faith, and in other sort to any of
these articles he refuses to answer.

John Shert. John Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Jews. John Hammond.


Robert Iohnsons Answer.
RObert Johnson. To the first he says, he can not answer.

To the second, he cannot tell what power or authority the Pope has in the
points named in this article.

To the third, he thinks that the Pope has authority in some cases, to
authorize subjects to take Arms against their Prince.

To the fourth, he thinks that the Pope for some causes, may discharge
subjects of their allegiance and obedience to their natural Prince.

To the fifth he says, the answer to this article depends upon the
lawfulness of the cause for the which the Pope has given sentence against
her: but if the cause was just, then he thinks the doctrine of Doctor
Saunders, and Doctor Bristow to be true. Whether the cause were just, or not,
he takes not upon him to judge.

To the last, he says, that if such deprivation and invasion should be made
for temporal matter, he would take part with her Majesty: but if it were for
any matter of his faith, he thinks he were then bound to take part with the
Pope.

Robert Johnson. John Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Jews. John Hammond.


John Hearts answer.
John Heart. To the first he says, that it is a difficult question, and that he
cannot make answer thereto.

To the second he says, that her Majesty is lawful Queen, and ought to be
obeyed, notwithstanding the Bull supposed to be published by Pius quintus. But
whether she ought to be obeyed and taken for lawful Queen, notwithstanding any
Bull or sentence that the Pope can give, he says he can not answer.

To the third he cannot answer, and further says, that he will not meddle with
any such questions.

To the fourth he says, he is not resolved, and therefore he can not answer.

To the fifth he says, he will not deal with any such questions, and knows
not whether Saunders and Bristowe have taught well herein or not.

To the last he says, that when such a case shall happen, he will then advise
what becomes him to do, for presently he is not resolved.

This he did acknowledge to us, after he had fully perused the same, but
refused to subscribe to it.

John Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Jews. John Hammond.


William Filbee his answer.
WIlliam Filbee. To the first he says, the Pope has authority to depose any
prince: and such sentences when they be promulgated ought to be obeyed by the
subjects of any prince: but touching the Bull of Pius quintus he can say
nothing, but if it was such as it is affirmed to be, he does allow it, and
says that it ought to be obeyed.

To the second he says, it is an hard question, and therefore he can not
answer it, but upon further aduisement, he answers as to the first.

To the third, he knows not what to say thereunto.

To the fourth he says, that so long as her Majesty remains Queen, the
Pope has no authority to warrant her subietts to take arms against her, or
to disobey her, but if he should depose her, then he might discharge them of
their allegence and obedience to her Majesty.

To the fifth he says, he will not meddle with the doctrine of Doctor
Saunders and Doctor Bristowe.

To the last, when this case happens, then he says he will answer: and if
he had been in Ireland, when Doctor Saunders was there, he would have done
as a priest should have done, that is, to pray that the right may have place.

William Filbee. John Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Jews. John Hammond.


James Bosgraue his answer.
James Bosgraue. To the first he says, that in his conscience and as he
shall answer before God, he thinks that the bull or sentence of
excommunication of Pius quintus against her Majesty, was at no time lawful,
neither was at any time or is of any of her Majesty's subjects to be obeyed.

To the second he says, that her Majesty is lawful Queen of this Realm,
and so ought to be taken, notwithstanding any bull or sentence that the Pope
either has, can, or shall hereafter give.

To the third, he thinks the Pope had no power or authority, to license the
Earls of Northumberland and Westmerlande or any other of her Majesty's
subjects, to rebel or to take arms against her Majesty: and like he says
of Doctor Saunders: but he holds both Doctor Saunders and all other that
shall upon such warrant take arms against her Majesty, to be traitors and
rebels.

To the fourth he says, that the Pope neither has, nor ought to have any
authority, to discharge any of her Majesty's subjects, or the subjects of any
other Christian prince from their allegiance, for any cause whatsoever, and so
he thinks in his conscience.

To the fifth he affirms in his conscience, that Doctor Sanders, and
Doctor Bristowe, in the books here mentioned, and touching the point here
specified, have taught, testified and maintained an untruth and a falshode.

To the last he says, that whatsoever the Pope should do, he would in this
case take part with her Majesty against the Pope, what cause soever he would
pretend, and this he takes to be the duty of every good subject. And this to
be his opinion in all the points above recited, he will be ready to affirm
upon his oath.

James Bosgraue. John Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Jews. John Hammo^d.


Henry Ortons answer.
HEnry Orton. To the first, he says that he thinks the Bull of Pius quintus
was at no time a lawful sentence or of force, to bind any of her Majesty's
subjects, and that notwithstanding, her Majesty was, and is to be obeyed by
every of her subjects.

To the second, he thinks that her Majesty is to be holden for lawful
Queen of this Realm, and ought to be obeyed by all her subjects,
notwithstanding any thing that ye Pope either has done, or can do.

To the third, he thinks the Pope neither has, nor had authority to warrant
any of the persons here named, to do as they have done, or any other of her
subjects, to take Arms against her Majesty, and that those which have taken
Arms against her upon that or the like warrant, have done unlawfully.

To the fourth, he thinks the Pope has no authority to discharge any
subject, from his allegiance and obedience to his Prince.

To the fifth, he thinks that D. Saunders, and D. Bristowe have in the
points mentioned in this Article, taught and maintained an untruth and a
falsehood.

To the last he says, that in the case here supposed, he would take part with
her Majesty against the Pope, or any other inuading the Realm by his
authority.

Henry Orton. John Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Jews. John Hammond.


Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.


