A RELATION OF THE LATE ROYAL ENTERTAINMENT GIVEN BY THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE
LORD KNOVVLES, AT Cawsome-House near Redding: to our most Gracious Queen,
Queen ANNE, in her Progress toward the Bathe, upon the seven and eight and
twenty days of April. 1613. Whereunto is annexed the Descr^on, Speeches, and
Songs of the Lords Mask, pres^d in the Banqueting House on the Marriage night
of the High and Mighty, COUNT PALATINE, and the Royally descended the Lady
ELIZABETH.

Written by THOMAS CAMPIAN.

LONDON, Printed for John Budge, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
South-doore of S. Paul's, and at Britains Bursse. 1613.

A RELATION OF THE LATE ROYAL ENTERTAINMENT GIVEN BY the Right Honorable, the
Lord KNOVVLES, at Cawsome-House near Redding: to our most gracious Queen,
Queen ANNE, in her Progress toward the Bathe upon the seven and eight and
twenty days of April. 1613.
FOr as much as this late Entertainment has been much desired in writing,
both of such as were present at the performance thereof, as also of many which
are yet strangers both to the business and place: it shall be convenient, in
this general publication, a little to touch at the description and situation
of Cawsome seat. The house is fairly built of brick, mounted on the
hill-side of a Park, within view of Redding, they being severed about the
space of two miles. Before the Parke-gate, directly opposite to the House, a
new passage was forced through earable-land, that was lately paled in, it being
from the Park about two flight-shots in length: at the further end whereof,
upon the Queens approach, a Cynick appeared out of a Bower, dressed in a
skin-coate, with Bases of green Calico, set thick with leaves and boughs:
his nakedness being also artificially shadowed with leaves; on his head he
wore a false hair, black and disordered, stuck carelessely with flowers.

The speech of the Cynick to the Queen and her Train.
Cynick STay; whether you humane be or divine; here is no passage; see you not
the earth furrowed? the region solitary? Cities and Courts fit tumultuous
multitudes: this is a place of silence; here a kingdom I enjoy without
people; my self commands, my self obeyes; Host, Cook, and Guest my self; I
reap without sowing, owe all to Nature, to none other beholding: my skin is
my coat, my ornaments these boughs and flowers, this Bower my house, the
earth my bed, herbs my food, water my drink; I want no sleep, nor health; I
envy none, nor am envied, neither fear I, nor hope, nor joy, nor grieve: if
this be happiness, I have it; which you all that depend on others service, or
command, want: will you be happy? be private; turn Palaces to Hermitages,
noies to silence, outward felicity, to inward content.


A stranger on horseback was purposely thrust into the troop disguised, and
wrapped in a cloak that he might pass unknown, who at the conclusion of this
speech began to discover himself as a fantastic Traveler in a silken suit
of strange Checker-worke, made up after the Italian cut, with an Italian hat, a
band of gold and silk, answering the colors of his suit, with a Courtly
feather, long guilt spurs, and all things answerable.

The Travelers speech on horseback.
Travel. Whether travels thy tongue ill nurtur'dman? thy manners show
madness, thy nakedness poverty, thy resolution folly; since none will
undertake thy presumption; let me descend, that I may make thy ignorance know
how much it has injured sacred ears.


The Traveler then dismounts and gives his cloak and horse to his Footman,
in the mean time the Cynick speaks.

Cyn. Naked I am, and so is truth; plain, and so is honesty; I fear no man's
encounter, since my cause deserves neither excuse, nor blame.


Trau. Shall I now chide or pity thee? thou art as miserable in life, as
foolish in thy opinion; answer me; do thou think that all happiness
consists in solitariness?


Cyn. I do.

Trau. And are they unhappy that abide in society?

Cyn. They are.

Trau. Do thou esteem it a good thing to live?

Cyn. The best of things.

Trau. Had thou not a Father and Mother?

Cyn. Yes.

Trau. Did they not live in society?

Cyn. They did.

Trau. And were not thou one of their society, when they bred thee,
instructing thee to go, and speak?


Cyn. True.

Trau. Thy birth then and speech in spite of thy spleen make thee sociable,
go, thou art but a vainglorious counterfeit, and wanting that which should
make thee happy, contemnest the means; view but the heavens, is there not
above us a Sun and Moon, giving and receiving light? are there not millions
of Stars that participate their glorious beams? is there any Element simple?
is there not a mixture of all things? and would thou only be singular? action
is the end of life, virtue the crown of action, society the subject of virtue,
friendship the band of society, solitariness the breach. Thou art yet young,
and fair enough, were thou not barbarous; thy soul poor wretch is far out
of tune, make it musical, come, follow me, and learn to live.


Cyn. I am conquered by reason, and humbly ask pardon for my error, henceforth
my heart shall honor greatness, and love society; lead now, and I will
follow as good a fellow as the best.


The Traveler and Cynick instantly mount on horseback, and hasten to the
Parke-gate, where they are received by two Keepers, formally attired in green
Perpetuana, with ierkins and long hose, all things else being in color
suitable, having either of them a horn hanging formally at their backs, and on
their heads they had green Mommoth-caps, with green feathers, the one of them
in his hand bearing a hooke-bill, and the other a long pike-staffe, both
painted green: with them stood two Robin-Hood-men, in suits of green striped
with black, dressed in doublets with great bellies and wide sleeves, shaped
fardinggale-wise at the shoulders, without wings; their hose were round, with
long green stockings; on their heads they wore broad flat caps with green
feathers cross quite over them, carrying green Bows in their hands, and
green Arrows by their sides.

In this space Cornets at sundry places intertaine the time, till the Queen
with her train is entered into the Park: and then one of the Keepers presents
her with this short speech.

Keeper. More then most welcome, renowned and gracious Queen, since your
presence vouchsafes to beautify these woods, whereof I am Keeper, be it your
pleasure to accept such rude intertainment, as a rough Wood-man can yield. This
is to us a high holy day, and henceforth yearly shall be kept and celebrated
with our Country sports, in honor of so Royal a guest; come friends and
fellows now prepare your voices, and present your joys in a Siluan dance.


Here standing on a smooth green, and environed with the Horsemen, they
present a Song of five Parts, and withal a lively Siluan-dance of six
persons: the Robin-hood-men feign two Trebles, one of the Keepers with the
Cynick sing two Countertenors, the other Keeper the Base; but the Traveler
being not able to sing, gapes in silence, and expresses his humor in Antike
gestures.

A Song and Dance of six, two Keepers, two Robin-hood-men, the fantastic
Traveler, and the Cynick.
DAnce now and sing the joy, and love we owe:
Let cheerful voices and glad gestures show,
The Queen of grace is she whom we receive,
Honor and State are her guides,
Her presence they can never leave.
Then in a stately Siluan form salute
Her ever flowing grace.
Fill all the Woods with Ecchoed welcomes,
And strew with flowers this place:
Let every bow and plant fresh blossoms yield,
And all the air refine.
Let pleasure strive to please our Goddess,
For she is all divine.
2.
Yet once again, let us our measures move,
And with sweet notes record our joyful love.
An object more divine none ever had.
Beauty, and heau'n-borne worth,
Mixed in perfection never fade.
Then with a dance triumphant let us sing
Her high advanced praise,
And even to heaven our gladsome welcomes,
With wings of music raise;
Welcome, O welcome, euer-honoured Queen,
To this now-blessed place,
That grove, that bower, that house is happy
Which you vouchsafe to grace.
This song being sung and danced twice over, they fall instantly into a kind
of Curranta, with these words following.

NO longer delay her,
'Twere sin now to stay her
From her ease with tedious sport;
Then welcome still crying,
And swiftly hence flying,
Let us to our homes resort.
In the end whereof the two Keepers carry away the Cynick; and the two
Robin-hood-men the Traveler, when presently Cornets begins again to sound in
several places, and so continue with variety, while the Queen passes through
a long smooth green way, set on each side with Trees in equal distance; all
this while her Majesty being carried in her Caroch.

But because some wet had fallen that day in the forenoone (though the
Garden-walks were made artificially smooth and dry) yet all her foot-way was
spread with broad cloth, and so soon as her Majesty with her train were all
entered into the Bower Garden, a Gardener with his Man and Boy, issued out of an
Arbor to give her Highness entertainment: The Gardener was suited in gray with
a ierkin double iagged all about the wings and skirts, he had a pair of great
slops with a cod-peece, and buttoned Gamachios all of the same stuff, on his
head he had a strawne hat, pibaldly dressed with flowers, and in his hand a
siluered spade: His man was also suited in gray with a great buttoned flap on
his ierkin, having large wings and skirts, with a pair of great slops and
Gamachios of the same, on his head he had a strawne hat, and in his hand a
siluered Mattox: The Gardiners Boy was in a pretty suit of flowrie stuff,
with a siluered Rake in his hand: when they approached near the Queen, they
all valed Bonet, and lowting low, the Gardner began after his anticke fashion
this speech.

Guard. Most magnificent and peerless Diety, lo I the surueyer of Lady Floras
works, welcome your grace with fragrant phrases into her Bowers, beseeching
your greatness to bear with the late wooden entertainment of the Wood-men,
for Woods are more full of weeds then wits, but gardens are weeded, and
Gardners witty, as may appear by me. I have flowers for all fancies, Time for
truth, Rosemary for remembrance, Roses for love, Hartsease for joy, and
thousands more, which all harmoniously rejoice at your presence; but my self,
with these my Paradisians here, will make you such music, as the wild
Wooddists shall be ashamed to hear the report of it. Come sirs prune your
pipes, and tune your strings, and agree together like birds of a feather.


A Song of a treble and base, sung by the Gardiners boy and man, to music of
Instruments, that was ready to second them in the Arbor.
1
VVElcome to this flowrie place,
Fair Goddess and sole Queen of grace:
All eyes triumph in your sight,
Which through all this empty space
Casts such glorious beams of light.
2
Paradise were meeter far
To entertain so bright a Star:
But why erres my folly so?
Paradise is where you are
Heaven above, and heaven below.
3
Could our powers and wishes meet,
How well would they your graces greet,
Yet accept of our desire,
Roses of all flowers most sweet
Spring out of the silly brier.
After this song, the Gardener speaks again.

Guard. Wonder not (great Goddess) at the sweetness of our Garden-aire (though
passing sweet it be) Flora has perfumed it for you (Flora our mistress, and
your servant) who enuites you yet further into her Paradise; she inuisibly
will lead your grace the way, and we (as our duty is) visibly stay behind.


From thence the Queen ascends by a few steps into the upper Garden, at the
end whereof, near the house, this Song was sung by an excellent counter-tenor
voice, with rare variety of division unto two unusual instruments, all being
concealed within the Arbor.

1
O Joys exceeding?
From love, from power of your wished sight proceeding!
As a fair morn shines divinely,
Such is your view, appearing more divinely.
2
Your steps ascending,
Raise high your thoughts for your content contending;
All our hearts of this grace vaunting,
Now leap as they were moved by inchaunting.
So ended the entertainment without the House for that time, and the Queens
pleasure being that night to suppe privately: The Kings Violins attended her
with their sollemnest music, as an excellent consort in like manner did the
next day at dinner.

Supper being ended, her Majesty accompanied with many Lords and Ladies came
into the Hall, and rested Her self in Her Chair of State, the Scaffoldes of
the Hall being on all parts filled with heholders of worth, suddenly forth
came the Traveler, Gardener, Cynicke, with the rest of their crew, and others
furnished with their Instruments, and in manner following entertain the time.

Traveler. A Hall, a hall for men of moment; Rationals, and Irrationals; but
yet not all of one breeding. For I an Academicke am, refined by travel that
have learned what to Courtship belongs, and so divine a presence as this; if we
press past good manners, laugh at our follies, for you cannot show us more
favor, then to laugh at us. If we prove ridiculous in your sights, we are
gracious; and therefore we beseech you to laugh at us. For mine own part (I
thank my Stars for it) I have been laughed at in most parts of Christendom.


Gardener. I can neither brag of my Travels, nor yet am ashamed of my
profession; I make sweet walks for fair Ladies; Flowers I prepare to adorn
them; close Arbours I build wherein their Loves unseen may court them; and who
can do Ladies better service, or more acceptable? when I was a Child and lay
in my Cradle, (a very pretty Child) I remember well that Lady Venus appeared
unto me, and setting a Silver Spade and Rake by my Pillow, bad me prove a
Gardener; I told my Mother of it (as became the duty of a good Child)
whereupon she provided straight for me two great Platters full of Pappe;
which having duetifully devoured, I grew to this portrature you see, sprung
fodainely out of my Cabine, and fell to my profession.


Trau. Verily by thy discourse thou have Traveled much, and I am ashamed of my
self that I come so far behind thee; as not once to have yet mentioned Venus
or Cupid, or any other of the gods to have appeared to me. But I will
henceforth boast truly, that I have now seen a Dietie as far beyond theirs,
as the beauty of light is beyond darkness, or this Feast whereof we have had
our share, is beyond thy Sallets.


Cynick. Sure I am, it has stirred up strange thoughts in me; never knew I the
difference between Wine and Water before. Bacchus has opened mine eyes, I now
see bravery and admire it, beauty and adore it. I find my Arms naked, my
discourse rude, but my heart soft as Wax, ready to melt with the least beam
of a fair eye; which (till this time) was as intractable as Iron.


Guard. I much joy in thy conversion, thou have long been a mad fellow, and now
proues^ a good fellow, let us all therefore join together sociably in a Song,
to the honor of good fellowship.


Cyn. A very Musical motion, and I agree to it.

Trau. Sing that sing can, for my part I will only while you sing, keep time
with my gestures. A la more du France.


A Song of three Voices with diverse Instruments.
NIght as well as brightest day has her delight,
Let us then with mirth and Music deck the night,
Never did glad day such store
Of joy to night boqueath.
Her Stars then adore,
Both in Heaven, and hoar beneath.
2.
Love and beauty, mirth and Music yield true joys,
Though the Cynickes in their folly count them toys.
Raise your spirits nere so high,
They will be apt to fall:
None brave thoughts envy,
Who had ere brave thought at all.
3.
Joy is the sweet friend of life, the nurse of blood,
Patron of all health, and fountain of all good:
Never may joy hence depart,
But all your thoughts attend,
Naught can hurt the heart,
That retains so sweet a friend.
At the end of this Song, enters Siluanus, shapt after the description of the
ancient Writers; His lower parts like a Goat, and his upper parts in an
anticke habit of rich Taffatie, cut into Leaves, and on his head he had a false
Hair, with a wreath of long Boughs and Lillies, that hung dangling about his
neck, and in his hand a Cypress branch, in memory of his love Cyparissus,
The Gardener espying him speaks thus.

Guard. Silence sirs, here comes Siluanus god of these Woods, whose presence is
rare, and importes some novelty.


Trau. Let us give place, for this place is fitter for Dieties then us.


They all vanish and leave Siluanus alone, who coming nearer to the State, and
making a low Congee, speaks.

SILVANVS. THat health which harbors in the fresh air'd groves,
Those pleasures which green hill and valley moves,
Siluanus the commander of them all,
Here offers to this State Imperial;
Which as a homager he visites now,
And to a greater power his power does bow,
With all, thus much his duty signifies:
That there are certain Semideities,
Belonging to his Siluan walks, who come
Led with the Music of a Spritely drome,
To keep the night awake and honor you,
(Great Queen) to whom all Honors they hold due,
So rest you full of joy, and wished content,
Which though it be not given, it is fairly meant.

At the end of this speech there is suddenly heard a great noise of drums and
phifes, and way being made, eight Pages first enter, with green torches in
their hands lighted; their suits were of green Satin, with cloakes and caps
of the same, richly and strangely set forth: Presently after them the eight
Maskers came, in rich imbrodered suits of green Satin with high hats of the
same, and all their acoutrements answerable to such Noble and Princely
personages, as they concealed under their visards, and so they instantly fell
into a new dance: at the end whereof they took forth the Ladies, and danced
with them, and so well was the Queen pleased with her intertainment, that she
vouchsafed to make her self the head of their Revels, and graciously to adorn
the place with her personal dancing: much of the night being thus spent with
variety of dances, the Maskers made a conclusion with a second new dance.

At the Queens parting on wednesday in the afternoon, the Gardener with his
Man and Boy and three handsome Country Maids, the one bearing a rich bag
with linen in it, the second a rich apron, and the third a rich mantle,
appear all out of an Arbor in the lower Garden, and meeting the Queen, the
Gardener presents this speech.

GARDENER. STay Goddess, stay a little space,
Our poor Country love to grace,
Since we dare not too long stay you,
Accept at our hands, we pray you,
These mean presents to express
Greater love, then we profess,
Or can utter now for woe
Of your parting hast'ned so.
Gifts these are, such as were wrought
By their hands, that them have brought,
Homebred things, which they presumed,
After I had them perfumed
With my flowrie incantation,
To give you in presentation
At your parting, come feate Lasses
With fine cursies, and smooth faces,
Offer up your simple toys
To the Mistress of our joys;
While we the sad time prolong
With a mournful parting song.

A Song of three voices continuing while the presents are delivered and
received.
1
CAn you the Author of our joy
So soon depart?
Will you revive, and straight destroy,
New mirth to tears convert?
O that ever cause of gladness
Should so swiftly turn to sadness!
2
Now as we droupe, so will these flowers
Bard of your sight.
Nothing avail them heavenly showers
Without your heavenly light.
When the glorious Sun forsakes us,
Winter quickly ouer-takes us.
3
Yet shall our prayers your ways attend,
When you are gone;
And we the tedious time will spend,
Remembering you alone.
Welcome here shall you hear ever,
But the word of parting never.
Thus ends this ample intertainment, which as it was most nobly performed, by
the right honorable the Lord and Lady of the house, and fortunately executed
by all that any way were Actors in it, so was it as graciously received of her
Majesty, and celebrated with her most royal applause.
THE DESCRIPTION, SPEECHES, AND SONGS, OF THE LORDS MASK, PRESENTED IN the
Banqueting House on the marriage night of the high and mighty Count Palatine,
and the royally descended the Lady ELISABETH.
I Have now taken occasion to satisfy many, who long since were desirous that
the Lords mask should be published, which (but for some private lets, had in
due time come forth. The Scene was divided into two parts from the roof to the
floor, the lower part being first discovered (upon the sound of a double
consort, expressed by several instruments, placed on either side of the room)
there appeared a Wood in prospectiue, the innermost part being of releaue, or
whole round, the rest painted. On the left hand from the seat was a Cave, and
on the right a thicket, out of which came Orpheus, who was attired after the*
old Greek manner, his hair curled, and long; a laurel wreath on his head;
and in his hand he bare a silver bird, about him tamely placed several wild
beasts, and upon the ceasing of the Consort Orpheus spoke.

ORPHEUS. Again, again, fresh kindle Phoebus sounds,
T'exhale Mania from her earthie den;
Allay the fury that her sense confounds,
And call her gently forth, sound, sound, again.

The Consorts both sound again, and Mania the Goddess of madness appears
wildly out of her cave. Her habit was confused and strange; but yet graceful,
she as one amazed speaks.

Mania. What powerful noise is this importunes me,
T'abandon darkness which my humor fits?
Jove's hand in it I feel, and ever he
Must be obai'd even of the franticst wits.

Orpheus. Mania?

Mania. Hah.

Orpheus. Braine-sick, why start'st thou so?
Approach yet nearer, and thou then shall know
The will of Jove, which he will breath from me,

Mania. Who art thou? if my dazeled eyes can see,
Thou art the sweet Enchanter heavenly Orpheus.

Orpheus. The same Mania, and Jove greets thee thus,
Though several power to thee, and charge he gave,
T'enclose in thy Dominions such as rave
Through bloods distemper, how durst thou attempt
T'imprison Entheus, whose rage is exempt
From vulgar censure? it is all divine
Full of celestial rapture, that can shine
Through darkest shadows, therefore Jove by me
Commands thy power strait to set Entheus free.

Mania. How can I? Franticks, with him many more
In one cave are locked up, open once the door,
All will fly out, and through the world disturb,
The peace of Jove; for, what power then can curb
Their rainelesse fury? --

Orpheus. -- Let not fear in vain
Trouble thy crazed fancy, all again
Save Entheus to thy safeguard shall retire,
For Jove into our music will inspire
The power of passion, that their thoughts shall bend
To any form or motion we intend:
Obey Jove's willing then, go, set Entheus free.

Mania. I willing go, so Jove obeyed must be.

Orph. Let Music put on Protean* changes now,
Wild beasts it once tamed, now let Franticks bow.

At the sound of a strange music twelve Franticks enter, six men, and six
women, all presented in sundry habits and humors: there was the Lover, the
Selfe-louer, the melancholicke-man full of fear, the Schoole-man overcome
with fantasy, the ouer-watched Usurer, with others that made an absolute
medly of madness, in midst of whom Entheus (or Poeticke fury) was hurried
forth, and tossed up and down, till by virtue of a new change in the music,
the Lunatickes fell into a mad measure, fitted to a loud phantasticke tune,
but in the end thereof the music changed into a very solemn air, which they
softly played, while Orpheus spoke.

Orph. Through these soft and calm sounds Mania pass
With thy Phantasticks hence; here is no place
Longer for them or thee; Entheus alone
Must do Jove's bidding now, all else be gone.

During this speech, Mania with her Franticks depart, leaving Entheus behind
them, who was attired in a close Curace of the Anticke fashion, Bases with
labels, a Roabe fastened to his shoulders, and hanging down behind; on his head
a wreath of Laurel, out of which grew a pair of wings, in the one hand he
held a book, and in the other a pen.

Enth. Diuinest Orpheus, o how all from thee
Proceed with wondrous sweetness, am I free?
Is my affliction vanished?

Orph. -- Too too long
Alas, good Entheus, have thou brook't this wrong;
What? number thee with madmen? o mad age,
Senseless of thee, and thy celestial rage.
For thy excelling rapture, even through things
That seems most light, is borne with sacred wings:
Nor are these Musicks, Shows, or Revels vain,
When thou adorn'st them with thy Phoebean brain;
They Are palate sick of much more vanity,
That cannot taste them in their dignity.
Jove therefore lets thy imprisoned spright obtain
Her liberty and fiery scope again:
And here by me commands thee to create
Inventions rare, this night to celebrate,
Such as become a nuptial by his will
Begun and ended, --

Enth. -- Jove I honor still,
And must obey, Orpheus I feel the fires
Are reddy in my brain, which Jove enspires,
Lo, through that veil, I see Prometheus stand
Before those glorious lights, which his false hand
Stole out of heaven, the dull earth to inflame
With the affects of Love, and honored Fame,
I view them plain in pomp and majesty.
Such as being seen might hold riualitie,
With the best triumphs; Orpheus give a call
With thy charmed music, and discover all.

Orph. Fly cheerful voices, through the air, and clear
These clouds, that you hid beauty may appear.
A Song.
1
COme away; bring thy golden theft,
Bring bright Prometheus all thy lights,
Thy fires from Heaven bereft
Show now to humane sights.
Come quickly come; thy stars to our stars straight present,
For pleasure being too much deferred, loses her best co^te^t,
What fair dames wish, should swift as their own thoughts appear,
To loving and to longing hearts every hour seems a year.
2
See how fair; O how fair they shine,
What yields more pomp beneath the skies?
Their birth is yet divine,
And such their form implies.
Large grow their beams, their nere approach afford the^so
By nature sights that pleasing are, cannot too amply show,
O might these flames in humane shapes desce^d this place,
How lovely would their presence be, how full of grace!

In the end of the first part of this Song, the upper part of the Scene was
discovered by the sudden fall of a curtain, then in clouds of several
colors (the upper part of them being fiery, and the middle heightened with
silver) appeared eight Stars of extraordinary bigness, which so were
placed, as that they seemed to be fixed between the Firmament and the Earth;
in the front of the Scene stood Prometheus, attyred as one of the ancient
Heroes.

Enth. Patron of mankind, powerful and bounteous,
Rich in thy flames, reverend Prometheus,
In Hymen's place aid us to solempnize
These royal Nuptials, fill the lookers eyes
With admiration of thy fire and light,
And from thy hand let wonders flow to night.

Prom. Entheus and Orpheus names both dear to me,
In equal balance I your Third will be
In this nights honor, view these heaven borne Stars,
Who by my stealth are become Sublunars.
How well their native beauties fit this place,
Which with a chorall danee they first shall grace,
Then shall their forms to humane figures turn,
And these bright fires within their bosoms burn.
Orpheus apply thy music for it well
Helps to induce a Courtly miracle.

Orp. Sound best of Musicks, raise yet higher our sprights,
While we admire Prometheus dancing lights.
A Song.
1
Advance your Chorall motions now
You musick-louing lights,
This night concludes the nuptial vow,
Make this the best of nights,
So bravely Crown it with your beams,
That it may live in fame,
As long as Rhenus or the Thames
Are known by either name.
2
Once move again, yet nearer move
Your forms at willing view,
Such fair effects of joy and love,
None can express but you,
Then revel midst your ayrie Bowres
Till all the clouds do sweat,
That pleasure may be powered in showers
On this triumphant Seat.
3
Long since has lovely Flora thrown
Her Flowers and Garlands here,
Rich Ceres all her wealth has shown,
Proud of her dainty cheer.
Changed then to humane shape descend,
Glad in familiar weed.
That every eye may here commend
The kind delights you breed.

According to the humor of this Song, the Stars moved in an exceeding
strange and delightful manner, and I suppose few have ever seen more neat
artifice, then Master Innigoe Jones showed in contriuing their Motion, who in
all the rest of the workmanship which belonged to the whole invention, showed
extraordinary industry and skill, which if it be not as lively expressed in
writing as it appeared in view, rob not him of his due, but lay the blame on
my want of right apprehending his instructions for the adoring of his Art. But
to return to our purpose; about the end of this Song, the Stars suddenly
vanished, as if they had been drowned amongst the Clouds, and the eight
Maskers appeared in their habits, which were infinitely rich, befitting States
(such as indeed they all were) as also a time so far heightened the day
before, with all the richest show of solemnity that could be invented. The
ground of their attires was massy Cloth of Silver, embossed with flames of
Embroidery, on their heads, they had Crowns, Flames made all of Gold-plate
Enameled, and on the top a Feather of Silk, representing a cloud of smoke.
Upon their new transformation, the whole Scaene being Clouds dispersed, and
there appeared an Element of artificial fires, with several circles of
lights, in continual motion, representing the house of Prometheus, who then
thus applies his speech to the Maskers.

They are transformed.

Prometh. So, pause awhile, and come ye fiery spirits,
Break forth the earth-like sparks to attend these Knights.

Sixteen Pages like fiery spirits, all their attires bing alike composed of
flames, with fiery Wings and Bases, bearing in either hand a Torch of Virgin
Wax, come forth below dancing a likely measure, and the Dance being ended,
Prometheus speaks to them from above.

The Torch-bearers Dance.

Pro. VVAit spirits wait, while through the clouds we
And by descending gain a hier place. (pace,

The Pages return toward the Scaene, to give their attendance to the Maskers
with their lights: from the side of the Scaene appeared a bright and
transparant cloud, which reached from the top of the heavens to the earth: on
this cloud the Maskers led by Prometheus, descended with the music of a full
song; and at the end of their descent, the cloud brake in twain, and one part
of it (as with a wind) was blown overthwart the Scaene.

While this cloud was vanishing, the wood being the vnder-part of the Scaene,
was insensibly changed, and in place thereof appeared four Noble women-statues
of silver, standing in several nices, accompanied with ornaments of
Architecture, which filled all the end of the house, and seemed to be all of
gold-smithes work. The first order consisted of Pillasters all of gold, set
with Rubies, Saphyrs, Emeralds, Opals, and such like. The Capitels were
composed, and of a new invention. Over this was a bastard order with Cartouses
reuersed, coming from the Capitels of every Pillaster, which made the upper
part rich and full of ornament. Over every statue was placed a history in gold,
which seemed to be of base releaue; the conceits which were figured in them
were these. In the first was Prometheus, embossing in clay the figure of a
woman, in the second he was represented stealing fire from the chariot-wheele
of the Sun: in the third, he is expressed putting life with this fire into his
figure of clay; and in the fourth square, Jupiter enraged, turns these new
made women into statues. Above all, for finishing, ran a Cornish, which
returned over every Pillaster, seeming all of gold and richly carved.

A full Song.
SVpported now by Clouds descend,
Divine Prometheus, Hymen's friend,
Lead down the new transformed fires,
And fill their breasts with loves desires:
That they may revel with delight,
And celebrate this nuptial night,
So celebrate this nuptial night,
That all which see may stay.
They never viewed so fair a sight,
Even on the cleerest day.
While this Song is sung, and the Maskers court the four new transformed
Ladies, four other Statues appear in their places.

Entheus. See, see Prometheus, four of these first dames
Which thou long since out of thy purchac't flames,
Did forge with heavenly fire, as they were then,
By Jove transformed to Statues, so again,
They suddenly appear by his command
At thy arrival, Lo how fixed they stand,
So did Jove's wrath too long, but now at last,
It by degrees relents, and he has placed
These Statues, that we might his aid implore,
First for the life of these, and then for more.

Prom. Entheus, Thy councels are divine and just,
Let Orpheus deck thy Hymn, since pray we must.

The first Invocation in a full Song.
Powerful Jove, that of bright stars,
Now have made men fit for wars;
Thy power in these Statues prove,
And make them women fit for love.
Orpheus. See Jove is pleased, Statues have life and move,
Go newborn men, and entertain with love,
These newborn women, though your number yet
Exceedes their's double, they are armed with wit,
To bear your best encounters, Court them fair:
When words and Music speak, let none despair.
THE SONG.
Woo her, and win her, he that can,
Each woman has two lovers,
So she must take and leave a man,
Till time more grace discouers;
This does Jove to show that want,
Makes beauty most respected;
If fair women were more skant,
They would be more affected.
2.
Courtship and Music, suite with love,
They both are works of passion,
Happy is he whose words can move,
Yet sweet notes help persuasion.
Mix your words with Music then,
That they the more may enter;
Bold assaults are fit for men,
That on strange beauties venture.

Promet. Cease, cease your woing strife, see Jove intends,
To fill your number up, and make all friends,
Orpheus, and Eutheus, join your skils once more,
And with a Hymn the Dietie implore.
The second Invocation to the tune of the first.
Powerful Jove, that have given four,
Raise this number but once more,
That complete, their numerous feet
May aptly in just measures meet.

The other four statues are transformed into women, in the time of this
invocation.

Enth. The number's now complete, thanks be to Jove,
No man needs fear a Rival in his love;
For, all are sped, and now begins delight,
To fill with glory, this triumphant night.

The Maskers having every one entertained his Lady, begin their first new
entering dance: after it, while they breath, the time is entertained with a
dialogue song.

BReath you now, while Io Hymen
To the Bride we sing:
O how many joys, and honors,
From this match will spring?
Ever firm the league will prove,
Where only goodness causes love.
Some for profit seek
What their fancies most disleeke,
These love for virtues sake alone:
Beauty and youth unite them both in one.
CHORUS. Live with thy Bridegroom happy, sacred Bride;
How blessed is he, that is for love enui'd.

The Maskers second dance.

BReath again, while we with music
Fill the empty space:
O but do not in your dances,
Your selves only grace.
Every one fetch out your Pheare,
Whom chiefly you will honor here,
Sights most pleasure breed,
When their numbers most exceed:
Choose then, for choice to all is free,
Taken or left, none discontent must be.

CHORUS. Now in thy Revels frolicke-faire delight,
To heap Joy on this ever honored night.

The Maskers during this Dialogue take out others to dance with them, men
women, and women men, and first of all the Princely Bridegroom and Bride were
drawn into these solemn Revels, which continued a long space, but in the end
were broken off with this short Song.

A Song.
CEase, cease you Revels, rest a space,
New pleasures press into this place,
Full of beauty and of grace.
The whole scaene was now again changed, and became a prospectiue with
Porticoes on each side, which seemed to go in a great way, in the middle was
erected an Obeliske, all of silver, and in it lights of several colors, on
the side of this Obeliske, standing on Pedestals, were the statues of the
Bridegroom and Bride, all of gold in gracious postures. This Obeliske was of
that height, that the top thereof touched the highest clouds, and yet
Sybilla did draw it forth with a thread of gold. The grave Sage was in a Roabe
of gold tuckt up before to her girdle, a Kirtle gathered full, and of silver;
with a veil on her head, being bare neckt, and bearing in her hand a scrole of
Parchment.

Eutheus. Make clear the passage to Sibilla's sight,
Who with her Trophee comes, to crown this night,
And as her self with Music shall be led,
So shall she pull on with a golden thread.
A high vast Obeliske, dedicate to fame,
Which immortality it self did frame.
Raise high your voices now, like Trumpets fill,
The room with sounds of Triumph, sweet and shrill.

A SONG.
COme triumphing, come with state,
Old Sibilla, reverend Dame,
Thou keep'st the secret key of fate,
Preventing swiftest fame.
This night breath only words of joy,
And speak them plain, now be not coy,
SIB. DEbetur alto iure, Principium Ioui,
Votis det ipse vim meis, dict is fidem.
Vtrinque decoris splendet egregium Iubar,
Medio triumphus mole stat dignus sua,
Coelumque summo Capite dilectum petit;
Quam pulchra pulchro sponsa respondet viro!
Quam plena numinis? Patrem vultu exprimit,
Parens futura masculae prolis, Parens
Regum, imperatorum: Additur Germaniae
Robur Britannicum. ecquid esse par potest?
Vtramque iunget vna men's gentem, fides,
Deique Cultus vnus, and simplex amor.
Idem erit vtrique hostis, sodalis idem, idem
Votum periclitantium, atque eadem manus.
Fauebit illis Pax, fauebit bellica
Fortuna, semper aderit Adiutor Deus.
Sic, sic Sibilla; vocibus nec his deest
Pondus, nec hoc inane momumentum trahit.
Et aureum est, and quale nec flammas timet,
Nec fulgura, ipsi quippe sacratur Ioui.

Pro. The good old Sage is silenc't, her free tongue
That made such melody, is now vnstrung:
Then grace her Trophee with a dance triumphant,
Where Orpheus is none can fit music want.

A Song and dance triumphant of the Maskers.
1
DAnce, dance, and visit now the shadows of our joy,
All in height, and pleasing state, your changed forms employ.
And as the bird of Jove salutes, with lofty wing, the morn;
So mount, so fly, these Trophies to adorn.
Grace them with all the sounds and motions of delight,
Since all the earth cannot express a louelier sight,
View them with triumph, and in shades the truth adore,
No pomp or sacrifice can please Jove's greatness more.
2
Turn, turn, and honor now the life, these figures bear,
Lo, how heavenly natures far above all art appear,
Let their aspects revive in you, the fire that shined so late,
Still mount and still retain, your heavenly state.
Gods were with dance, and with music served of old,
Those happy days derived their glorious style from gold:
This pair by Hymen joined, grace you with measures then,
Since they are both divine, and you are more then men.
Orph. Let here Sybilla's Trophee stand,
Lead her now by either hand,
That she may approach yet nearer,
And the Bride and Bridegroom hear her
Bless them in her native tongue,
Wherein old prophesies she sung,
Which time to light has brought:
She speaks that which Jove has taught.
Well may he inspire her now,
To make a joyful and true vow.

Syb. Sponsam sponse t^ro tene pudicam,
Sponsum sponsa tene toro pudicum.
Non haec vnica nox datur beatis,
At vos perpetuo haec beabit vna
Prole multiplici, parique amore.
Laeta, ac vera refert Sybilla, ab alto
Ipse Iuppiter annuit loquenti.

Pro. So be it ever, joy and peace,
And mutual love give you increase,
That your posterity may grow
In fame, as long as Seas do flow.

Enth. Live you long to see your joys,
In fair Nymphs and Princely Boys:
Breeding like the Garden flowers,
Which kind heaven draws with her warm showers.

Orph. Enough of blessing, though too much
Never can be said to such;
But night does wast, and Hymen chides,
Kind to Bridegroomes and to Brides,
Then singing the last dance induce,
So let good night prevent excuse.

The Song.
NO longer wrong the night,
Of her Hymenaean right,
A thousand Cupids call away,
Fearing the approaching day,
The Cocks already crow,
Dance then and go,
The last new Dance of the Maskers, which concludes all with a lively strain
at their going out.


