To David Dicars when.
To him that does dream,
David Dicars when,
And even so from him,
to such other men.
FRom when unto when, to come to this when.
When fools of your folly, will work like wise men
And know their own fautes, and leave faulting other
And first mende them selves, and the^ warn their brother,
Enuiyng none, for that their sort is not
Such as they would be, like others I wot.
Gods of degree, to rule and bear swaye,
Whose manners mete not, to stand in such stay,
And yet would have mouths, to rore like the Lion
Being but Asses, brute of condition. Esopus de asino ru^e^te

Forgetting that order does thus ask and crave,
That each should him self in order behave.
As beasts of low sort, to be meke of their mind,
To those that be higher, and greater of kind.
The Bore not to brag, to strive with the Lion.
The Heart not to stand, with the Bull in contencion,
The Ox that does draw, to thyncke him self able,
To run for a wager, with the Horse of the stable.
It grees not, it cords not, nor orderly fyttes
That men should find fault, with Gods and their wits.
Jupiters seat stands somewhat to hye
For us to judge it, that come it not nigh.
And judgments of guess, in any such sort,
May serve to the Gods, for a laughter and sport.
To se how Judas, would feign become Judah,
To just at the life, of Iuli apostata.
Let Beasts that be meet, for carte and caryage,
Lean to their labor, as manne to his marriage.
And since we be members of one common wealth.
Let us join aptly, as fyttes for our health.
The eye as the eye, let him stare and look,
And let the leg learn, to bow and to crook.
Let the hand answer, to help and to do.
As the will of the heart, shall will him unto.
And let not the foot, make murmur and cry.
To ask why our head is placed so hye.
Our instrument iarres, it makes no right melody.
If we thus tune not to order our armony.
Then master when, when both you and I,
And every man else will learn to apply,
To our right metyarde, and keep our just compass,
And look not so deep in an other man's glass.
And leave dreaming dreams of dead David Dicar,
And send such whens home, to our person or vycar.
And therwyth remember, this verse of Cato,
Whose wysdo^ does warn us, with these words I trow
Que soles culpare, ea tu ipse:
ne feceris. when we mark this nipse,
And leave drawyng dialles, on other men's dooyng
And learn for to look to our own works and brewynge,
Then I say then, when you again when:
will say well your self, and such other men,
And all folk will do well. Lo thus I end then,
All things shall be well, which god grant. Amen.
Domine saluum fac Regem and da pacem in diebus nostris. Quod T. Camel.

Imprinted at London by Hary Sutton, dwelling in Poules Churchyard, at the
sign of the black boy.


