A true report of the death and martyrdom of M. Campion Jesuit and preiste,
and M. Sherwin, and M. Bryan preistes, at Tiborne the first of December 1581

Observid and written by a Catholic priest, which was present thereat

Whereunto is annexid certain verses made by sundry persons



Apoca. 7.

These are they that came out of great tribulation, and have washed their stoles
and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.

TO THE READER.
AMongst the diverse reports of the behavior of M Campion, M. Sherwin, and M
Brya^ at their death (passing among freindes from hand to hand) I happened upon
one geven out as it seems by a Catholic priest, who as it apereth pressed to
observe and mark those dealings: which report I have here published,
considering the diverse and many slanders raised since by some maliciously
blinded to satisfy and content all such as do desire to understand the manner
of the same: I hope that consideration which has movid me hereto, will also
persuade that priest to the well liking of this my doing? and I dout not but
that the relation it self will content the reader thoroughly touching their
words, and behavior at the time of execution, Notwithstanding those slanders
which were since spread to diminish the honor of their refolute departure and
Martyrdom, as that M Campion was timorous and fearful, and that M Sherwin
died a protestant, with other such false reports, as thou shall see in
pervsing this short relation here exhibitid for thy satisfaction: wherein is a
lively Image of resolute martirs, constantly professing their faith and belief,
resolutly disclaming from all treasons and treacheryes falsely intendid
against them: and loyaly behaving them selves toward our queen and country.
Who as they were in their lives lanterns of piety and virtue, so in their
deaths made themselves paternes and examples for all good christian subjects
to follow.

And here by the way I might point out M. Elmers folly, as not one of the
least, who notwithstanding the known lerning of M. Campion (he him self a man
of known wisdom, and judgment,) was not ashamed, at a Sessions at Newgate,
upon the appearance of the Cutler of Holborne, to say openly, that M Campion was
vnlern^d, and that a Note book or two of his fellows being taken from him, he
had nothing in him, as it was manifest in his disputations in the Tower.
Further that all the Papists in the world could not answer Whitakers book
against the said M Campion. Which his censure, I refer unto the judgment of
the learned discret and wise, who I know do condemn the babbling of that barren
declaymer, as void of wit, discretion, lerning, modesty, and truth. But
how frivolous and vain these slanders are, although the whole world (filled
now with the fame of his lerning) does know, yet it shall be made more manifest
and apparent even unto him self by those Disputations had in the Tower, to the
honor of M Campion and furthering of his cause, at such time as by the grace
of God they shall be published. This rehearsal (good Reader) I confess is
impertinent to the purposse of that Priest who gave out the report following,
and yet I thought it not altogether amiss to touch those slanders so false
and malicious, as many good Gentlemen can not but confess. Much more M Elmer
spoke that day, as he thought, to the discredit of M. Campion, but I pray God
give him better consideration both of this and of further justice, and so shall
the poor Poulter at his next complaynt be heard, even of himself, being as
he himself said, a Bishop, a Lord, and of some credit Farewell.

A true report of the death of M. Campion Jesuit and Priest, M. Sherwin, and
M. Bryan preistes.
THE diverse and contrary reports falsely and maliciously bruted and published
of M. Euerard Haunse, directly executed for cause of Religion, after his late
martyrdom, gave just fear of the like practice toward those three glorious
Martirs, learned, meek, stout, and constant Priests, M. Edmund Campion
Jesuit, M. Rodulph Sherwin, and M. Alexander Bryan preistes, who upon the
first day of December last past were under pretense of high treason most
injuriously to the great lamentation generally of all good men, martired for
the Catholic faith and religion. Upon which occasion many good catholic
gentlemen desirous to be eye witnesses of that which might hapen in the speech,
demeinor, and passage of those three rare paternes of piety, virtue, and
innocence, presented them selves at the place of execution, and my self a
Catholic priest pressed to that bloody spectacle, no dout a lively sacrifice
unto God, and a sweet savor unto his Angels, with mind upon occasion to
refer uncerely and truly to my power this tragedy, with such accidents as
did hapen in the manner, course, and end thereof. Since which time, upon
request of some of my fellows and brethren, I wrote those dealings, to answer
and satisfy our adversaries generally, to content and comfort our persecuted
brethren specially, and in part to diminishe those sinister rumors which are
raised against these good men by a notable and most infamous libel, entitled,
An Advertisement and defense for truth against her backbyters, and specially
against the whispering favorers and colorers of Campions, and the rest of his
confederates treasons: published there, and openly read, printed abroad without
authority of seen and allowed, a pamphlet, false, impudent, and farssed with
lies and untruths, only to color and shadow with some face of equity those
strange procedinges, my meaning is not to refute in spetial falsities, that
shamfull aduertisment already generaly confutid in all men's consciences, and
with private mutteringes even of the aduers part them selves flatly condemned,
for I know, and all men are pe^swaded that those inocentes suffered only for
religion for our fathers faith, and spiritual inheritance, for serving god in
priestly function and duties. And not for treson, not for conspiring her
highness death and ruin as it shall more clerly apere by their own defense at
the time of their arraignment, which will shortly be published as a testimony,
and expreste signification of their innocence, together with their
dispntations privately had in the tower, arguments of their learning and seal
toward this our native country, so divided daily with nombers of new
faithes and religions, to the ruin and damnation of many our parents,
children, kinssolkes and friends, for whose instruction and salvation only
these good men with infinite more have offered, and as i^ were, consecrated
them selves to these dangers, and ^erilles of our times. But if I ^houlde upon
that defeuce of their doings stand long to the contrary, yet could I not, when
all were done, say more then other men have already alleg^d, by whom is
declared how our doings and labors in these spiritual affairs, are
misconstred, how truth is made treason, religion rebellion. To whose books I
do refer my dear country men eith^r inwardly affected, or outwardly
afflicted by the sweet departure of these so lern^d^ so m^ke, so virtuous
Priests, of whose innocence, dutiful purposes, demeinors, and attemptes
toward our native country, our parents and friends, notwithstanding that
general testimony of many learned m^n, are further and most sure witness their
disputation publicly challenged, and by the adverse part privately performed,
their answers wise, and even to the admiration of al men discrete at their
arraignement, their resolute denial and plain disclaming from all such
practices surmised, and violently intended at their last speech, and that
assured upon the peril of their souls, and lastly the disloyal and traterous
practice of the aduers part, against 24.
her highness, her crown, and state, against her friends, against some of her
grave and wise, true and faithful Counselers, practiced secretly, as by private
speech of her majesty's subjects generally is cons^ant and manifest, by some
hollow hearted friends and flaterers vtered now, and no doubt if all were
known, for some purpose broched by M. Norton now prisoner, who for the better
face of his own disloyalty and treason, procured these her majesty's true and
most loyal subjects to be accused, condemned and executed for treason. But O
alta iuditia dei. I say no more, but half those words he used, wonld have been
made plain and express treason in pore Catholics, howsoever some will seem
to excuse them as rash words. Well here as I will answer for mine own sonle
before God I mind to write sincerly and simply a truth concerning the
behavior of these men at their departure, wherein of mine own faith and
fidilitie in reporting I call witness of those gentilmen who before the beginning
of this tragedy at Tiborne disputed of the motion of the Sun from east to
west which was violent and which was natural, at whose backs I sta^ed the end
of this pageant: I minded this end, and they I know atended the same. this I do
implie to remember those gentilmen of the manner, of the behavior, meke,
humble, constant and resolute of those honorable martirs, now no doubt daily
intercessors for ^his our miserable country, not douting but that, as they
were then charitably moved and affected with compassion, so now they will truly
give testimony of their innocence and my faith in relation. Let therefore
malice report treason, and here^ie sownde conspiracy, a practice even from the
infancy of religion and faith, to bread hatred to religious and faithful men,
yet in all these inventions of quarelling Lawyers in our doing in such wise
made treasonable, we for them and our selves by S. Paul's example (who being
charged before the civil magistrate, Act. 24.
of conspiracy, and il demeinour toward his country, protested that he was
judged concerning the resurrection, a question in religion, and not for
sedition or concourse in tumults) do cry to God and al Christian people which
beheld their sufferance, and do still see our afflictions, that ye cause of
their death and our extreme misery, is merely and only religion, no treason,
no vnduetifulnes to our Prince, no disobedience to her temporal laws, howsoever
they who malign our faith and Priesthood, have by these Macheuilian practices
drawn al our doings, ententes, and endeavors to disloyalty and treason: by
which means were lately condemned thirtene preistes, and one lay man, against
law, equity, conscience, without special evidence, upon general presumption,
by testimony of three or four lewd Apostates, unlawful persons, and
notoriously infamed. This is vox populi, and was at the time of their
arraignement expressly proved, howsoever this namelesse Aduertiser does without
shame most falsely affirm the contrary. But to my purpose, which is to intimat
and publi^he the behavior, speches, and protestation of these so learned and
rare men. It is not unknown that M. Edmund Campion Jesuit and Priest, a man
reputed and taken, and by diverse his coequals plainlye confessed the flewer of
Oxforde for that time he studied there, and since abroad in foreine countries
one in whom our country has had great honor, the fruit of his l^rning,
virtue, and rar^ gifts, which as they were in his childhood here among us
wonderful, so they were abroad, as in Italy, Germany, and Bohemia an honor to
our country, a glass and mirror, a light and lantern, a pattern and example
to youth, to age, to learned, to unlearned, to religious, and to the laytie of al
sort, state, and condition, of modesty, gravity, eloquence, knowledge,
virtue, and piety, of which just and due commendation, some of our adversaries
can give true and ^erteyn testimony, who after diligent sifting and enquiring
of his life, manners, and demeinor, found nothing faulty, nothing worthy of
blame. This man ( M. Campion I say) first mekely yielded himself and his
carcass to this butcherie, with such humility and courage, as moved most
beholders to compassion and pity. Those speches he used in the way to diverse
calling and crying unto him, I leave (my self not able to make relation
thereof) to common report, or to that man's testimony, who either for pity or
affection wiped his face defiled with dirt, as he was drawn most miserably
through thick and thin, as the saying is, to the place of execution: for which
charity, and happily some sodein moved affection, God reward him, and bless
him. What he spoke openly, that my meaning is to set down truly, my self
being present and very nere, as hard by Sir Frances Knoles, the Lord Howard,
Sir Henry Lee and other Gentlemen then gathered there to see and hear him. And
here I will omit, although it be very much material, his usage in time of
imprisonment, his constant patience in his rackinges, and after his
comdemnation by report of some very nere to him, his five days fast from
temporal and bodily sustenance, his abstinence from sleep and ordinary rest,
which was before his death by credible report of some, continued two nights,
bestowed in meditation and prayer. Who after many conflictes and agonies,
joyfully coming to receive his reward and crown, the kingdom of heaven, an
enheritance certain to such, who in this life refuse the world, things
worldly, and themselves for Christ's sake, after some small pawse in the carte,
with grave countenance and sweet voice stoutly spoke as follows.

Spectaculum facti sumus Deo, Angeli, and hominibus saying, 1. Cor. 4.
These are the words of S. Paul, Englished thus: We are made a spectacle, or
a sight unto God, unto his Angels, and unto men: verified this day in me, who
am here a spectacle unto my lord god, a spectacle unto his angels, and unto
you men. And here going forward in this text, was interuptid and cut of by Sir
Frauncis Knowles and the sh^ryfs, earnestly urging him to confess his treason
against her majesty, and to acknowledge himself gilty. To whom he answered
saying^ You have now what you do desire, I beseech you to have patience and
suffer me to speak a word or too for discharge of my conscience. But beiug
not suffered to go forward, gave answer to that point they always urged, that
he was giltlesse and innocent of all treason and conspiracy, craving credit to
be given to this answer, as to his last answer made upon his death and soul:
adding that touching this point both the Jury might be deceauid, and more also
put in the evidence then was true: notwithstanding he forgave, as he would be
forgeuen, desiring all them to forgive him whom he had confessed upon the
rack. Further he declared the meaning of a le^ter sent by him self in time of
his imprisonment out of the Tower, in which he wrote, he would not disclos^ the
secrets of some houses where he had bin interteined, affirming on his soul,
that the secrets he m^nt in that letter, were no^ as some miscon^tred them,
treason, or conspiracy, or any matter else any way intended against her Majesty
or the state, but saying of Mass, hearing of confession, preaching, and such
like duties and functions of Priests: this he protested to be true, as he would
answer before God. Then he desired Sir Francis Knowles, and some other of
nobility, to hear him touching one Richardson condemned about a book of his,
and ernestly besought them to have consideration of that man, saying, he was
not that Richard son which brought his book, and this he affirmed with
vehement protestation upon his death. Then one Hearne a seolemaster, as I
learned after, red the new Advertisement openly with loud voice unto the
people, published only to color so manifest and ^xpresse injury: M. Campion all the time of his reading deuoutlye praying Notwithstanding which advertisement
or defense of theirs, as well because they dis^r^s^ed their own po^^cie in
publication thereof, as that they did also ^^si^e ^me better color or faster
v^said for their procedings, pressed him to declare his opinion of Pius quintus
Bull concerning thexcommunication of our Sovereign and queen. To which
d^maunde he gave no answer. But being asked whether he renounced the Pope,
said he was a Catholic: whereupon one inferred, saying: In your Catholisisme
(I noted the word) al treas^n is contained. In fine, preparing himself to
drink his last draght of Christ his cup, was interrupted in his prayer by a
minister, willing him to say, Christ have mercy upon me, or such like prayer
with him: unto whom he looking back with mild countenance, humbly said. You
and I are not one in religion, wherefore I pray you content your self, I bar
none of prayer, only I desire them of the household of faith to pray with me^
and in mine agony to say one Creed. Some also called upon him to pray in
Engli^h: to whom he answered, that he would pray in a language that he well
understood. At the vpshot of this conflict he was willed to ask the queen
forgeuenes, and to pray for her. He meekely answered: wherein have I offended
her? In this I am innocent, this is my last speech, in this give me credit,
I have and do pray for her. Then did the Lord Charles Howard ask of him: For
which queen he prayed, whether for Elizabeth queen. To whom he answered, Yea
for Elizabeth your queen, and my queen, unto whom I wish a long quiet reign,
with all prosperity. And so he meekely and sweetly yielded his soul unto his
Savior, protesting that he dyed a perfect Catholic.

M. Campion having thus triumfed on the world, the flesh, the devil, and
received his long desired crown, M. Rodulph Sherwine, a stout, wise discret,
and learned Priest, was brought unto the cart, a man so mortifi^d, so febled
with fasting, watching, and such like spiritual exercise, as was wonderful
unto such, who had conuersed with him before his imprisonment. He standing
upon the carte, with closed eyes, with hand^s lifted up to heaven in
contemplation and prayer, al men marking his demeinor, with mild voice first
made this demand: Does the people expect that I should speak? Being answered
of many, and some of nobility, yea, yea, with stout courage and strong voice
said: Then first I thank the omnipotent and most merciful God the father for
my creation, my sweet and loving savior Christ Jesus for my redemption, and
the holy Ghost for my sanctification, three persons and one God. After this
thanks giving unto the holy and blessed trinity, entering in discourse of his
faith, his condemnation and death, was interrupted and stayed by Sir Frauncis
Knowles and the sherifs, saying You have declared your faith, and we know it,
come to the point, and confess your treason and disloyalty toward your
Prince. Whereupon he constantly said: I am innocent and guiltles. And being still
urged, answred, I will not belie my self, for so should I condemn mine own
soul. And although I have confusion in this world yet I doubt not of my
salvation in Christ Jesus, in whom only I look to be saved, and in whose
death, passion, and blood I only trust: and so made a sweet prayer to Jesus,
acknowledging the imperfection, misery and sinful wretchedness of his own
nature, still protesting his innocence from al treason and traitorous
practices, and that his going out of this Realm beyond the seas, was only
for his souls health, to learn to save his soul And being again interrupted
by Sir Frauncis Knowles, said in this wise: Tush, tush, you and I shall answer
this before an other Judge, where my innocency shall be known, and you see that
I am guiltles of this. Whereupon Sir Frauncis said, We know you are no
contriuer or doer of this treason, for you are no man of arms, but you are a
traitor by consequence. O miserable consequence, that has deprived us of so
worthy members, and is like to imbrue our country and nation with much
innocent blood, do not our Sovereign and queen deny the same so strangely
inferred upon no premises, and turn her Highness hand of indignation from
many our afflicted brethren, her heart to wonted mercy and clemency toward her
true, loyal, and natural Catholic subjects. But to M Sherwine, who boldly
answered, If to be a Catholic only, if to be a perfect Catholic, be to be a
traitor, then (said he) am I a traitor. After which words being by authority
debarred of further speech, he said, I forgive al, who either by general
presumption, or particular error have procured my death, and so devoutly prayed
unto Jesus: after which prayer Be was urged to speak his opinion touching the
said bull of Pope Pius: to which point he gave no answer. Then being willed
to pray for the queens Majesty, answered, I have and do. At which words the
Lords Howard again asked, which queen he meant, whether Elizabeth queen? to
whom somewhat smiling he said, yea for Elizabeth queen, I now at this instant
pray my Lord God to make her his servant in this life, and after this life
coheir with Christ Jesus. When he had prayed to God to make her his servant,
there were, which said openly, that he meant, to make her a Papist, to whom he
boldly replied, Else God forbid. And so collecting himself to prayer, dyed
patiently, stoutly, and mildly, crying, Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, esto mihi Jesus.

Here I can not omit a practice of some of our young masters, slanderously
given ont against M. Sherwin, dreamed ou^ by them of his words here, as that
he dyed a protestant, because he disclaiming from the wretchedness of his own
mortality, and nature, reposed himself wholly upon Christ and his passion.
These minions would, no doubt, make Catholics monsters in points of religion
and faith, and do labor to persuade the people, that the Catholic religion
does euacuate the comfort of our fraylties and price of our souls, the sheding
of Christ's most precious blood, in which we do acknowledge all our
suffitiency, and in which only as the sole foundation spring and cause of all
merit, the merit of all our well doing, so injuriously to Christ his passion
abolished by protestants, is, has, and shall be by us maintained, not against
these naked solifidians only, but even against the gates of hell. What web
soever some sottish weauer or such like shall weaue in the mean time of a
suposid suttelty touching justification in M. Sherwins words here uttered,
his fine suppose is coming out with great labor and much ado and all not
woorthe a rush. Truly it is a world to see the raggid rabble of these petti
pratres who since M. Campions imprisonment and death, have cast up their
chargid gorge against priesthood, priests and the society of Jesus, who if
it would please her Highness and her honorable Counsel to lay open either pul^it,
or print, would shortly plums these daw^s in such short, that their nakedness
aparantly discouerd, would show them in their kind then should nether Ch^rke,
Ha^^er, Whitakers, Fyld, Keltrigh, Eliot, kogging Monday riming Elderton, and
John Nichols the disciple of Bawdy Bale, all worshipful writers at this time
against Preistes and Jesuits, so daunse in their nets, as now by sway of
time they do, to the great hurt of ins^^ute innocent souls then should not
William Wiborns Magg Howlet (a false and malicious practice of some few
melancholic heretics first broched, and now renewed by him self to diminish
the credit and authority of Councels) fly free in the day from pursuit and
wonder of other birds: at whom now with the rest I think the learned and wise
Catholic will look and laugh, as not worthy of refutation and answer,
howsoever some younger scoler may shortly exercise him self in reply upon him
whom all English Catholics (as they say) can not answer.

After these two glorious Martirs, was brought unto his martyrdom M. Alexander
Brian, a man although in lerning and knowledge inferior to them, yet equal in
patience, constancy and humility, whose pressures in prison and tortures,
strange I dare say, among heathens, more monstrous among Christians, may be
thought incredible, and are signified unto his brethren abroad by him self. To
omit his rackings, what practice was it of uncharitable Protestants to put
pinnes under his nails? What heart could see his famine so extreme, that for
his corporal sustenanse he was driven to lick the moisture of walls? His usage
is abroad in men's hands, written by him self, a testimony^ of their cruel and
hard hearts, who in such wise abused a sacred priest of God. Being in the
cart prepared to death, began first to declare his bringing up in the Catholic
faith and religion, his being in Oxford, upon which word he was stayed by
one, saiing: What have we to do with Oxford? come to the purpose, and confess
thy treason. Whereupon he answered, I am not guyltye of any such death, I was
never at Rome, nor then at Rhemes, when D. Sanders came into Ireland, To this
end he spoke and protested, as he would answer before God. He spoke not
much, but where as he was urged more then the other to speak what he thought of
the said Bull of Pius quintus, he said he did believe of it as al Catholics and
the Catholic faith does, and thereupon protesting him self to dye a true
catholic, saying Miserere mei Deus, was delivered of the carts with more pain
by negligence of the hangman the^ either of the other, who after his beheading,
himself dismembered, his heart bowels and intrels burned, to the great admiration
of some, being laid upon the block his bellye downward, lifted up his wholly
body then remaining from the ground: and this I add upon report of others,
not mine own sight.

Here you have the speech and demeinor of these three glori^us martirs at their
last hour, and in their last breath, of the true report whereof I do refer
my self unto diverse of nobility and worship, unto those gallant and brave
courtiers who beheld and hard the same, who pitti^d their innocence so
punished, who commended their death so patie^tly sustained, who through mere
pittye procured them favor, and prevented the bloody purposes of some cruel
tormenters: for which favor God reward that Gentleman, who after M. Sherwin
was put from the cart, turned back and said, This man was a wise man. God, I
say, reward him, God increase his honor, God make him a sheep of his foulde,
a child of his Church, God board him in that arc which has, does, and shall
preserve al Christ's folowers from the flood and deluge, in which only is grace,
security, and salvation, out of which is naught but desperate misery, and
perdition. To conclude, upon this occasion I hane not thought impertinent to
remember al Catholics, and specially us Preistes, of some words of a learned
and famous Doctor, which to this end I have, as it follows, gathered out of
his exhortation to martyrdom, largely and sweetly delivered us in an Apologye
of the English Seminaries: That as the cause, not the pain, or persecution,
(whereof our Heretics only vaunt them selves) justifies all men: so Christ,
and these good men's, consciences formed in all piety, meekness, and modesty,
so their last protestation, washed, sealed, and confirmed with their blood, so
their resolute death for religion, for our faith, for the church, no doubt by
Gods grace shall animat and strengthen us, who remain either in the furnace of
Gods probation, or in the burden or broyle of this hot harvest of our Lord,
or by suer treading, threshing, and winewing, are laid up for well tried
wheat in the barn floor of Christ's Church. And further may move her
Majesty's heart to have compassion, may open her grave Counselors eyes to see
our innocence, may alter our enemies and ill informers minds to love and
charity, may stir up the minds of al men inwardly and in conscience to
consider the cause of our sufferance, affliction, and imprisonments, and give
them such sense, reason, and religion, that they may acknowledge our undeserved
calamities: I say, this may the deaths of so good and holy martirs work, as
they did sufficiently testify, that they were not acquainted with any
conspiracy against our Prince and country, but did suffer for the honor,
peace, and unity of the Church, for saving of their souls, and the souls of
our beloved parents, children, and friends, for the defense of Christ's
priesthood and souerainty in earth, for his eternal sacrifice and sacraments,
who move the heart of our noble Prince to tender her true and trustiest subjects
afflicted Catholics. Amen.

God save the Queen.
A caveat to the reader touching A, M his discovery
Anthony Monday, or as it is [not without some consideration] thought, that
some macheuillian in mnndayes name has shufled out of late a Discovery of M
Campions and his confederates treasons, the same in effect and substance with
the aduertisment before rehearesed. My self considering this neiwe hatched
discovery to peep out by seen and allowed: have thought good in the conclusion
of this report for the more credit of this his discourse to advertise the
reader, of the qualities and conditions of this davus, so railing and rauing at
uertuous and good men deseassed, that there by he may the better Judge and
value the truth of that neiwe pamphlet which has been perused by no wurs man
then by M, Norton a supposed traitor in the tower, and now delivered ont by
monday, North bronkes book against plaiers
who first was a stage player [no donbt a calling of some creditt] after an
aprentise which time he well seemed with deceauing of his master then wandering
toward Italy, by his own report became a coosener in his journey. Coming to
Rome, in his short abode there; was charitably relieved, but never admitted in
the seminary as he pleseth to lie in the title of his book, and being weary of
well doing, returned home to his first vomit again. I omite to declare how
this scholar new come out of Italy did play extempore, those gentlemen and
others which were present, can best give witness of his dexterity, who being
weary of his folly, hissed him from his stage. Then being thereby discouraged, he
set forth a balet against plays, but yet (O constant youth) he now begins
again to ruffle upon the stage. I omit among other places his behauior in
Barbican with his good mistres, and mother, from whence our superintendent
might fetch him to his conrt, were it not for love (I would say slannder) to
their gospel. Yet I think it not amiss to remember thee of this boys
infelicitie two several ways of late notorious. First he writing upon the
death of Euerard Haunse, was immediately controled and disproued by one of his
own hatche. and shortly after seting forth the aprehension of M. Campion, was
disproued by George (I was about to say) Judas Eliot, who writing against him,
proved that those things he did were for very lucers sake only, and not for
the truth, although he himself be a person of the same predicament, of whom I
must say, that if felony be honesti, then he may for his behauiore be taken
for a laweful witness against so good men. al which considred, I wish the
^eder to think that the credit of this discourser (at the time of their
arraignment an accuser) should be such as in every indifferent man's judgment we
know and see by experience the accusers report against the accused does
deserve. Therefore good reader examine this man's honesti so reported, and
snspend thy judgment against these good priests, until by gods grace the whole
manner course, and order, araignment, accnsation, condemnation, and answers,
shall come forth, which is shortly intended for thy benefit and satisfaction.

Upon the death of M. Edmund Campion, one of the society of the holy name of
Jesus.
WHy do I use my paper ink, and pen,
and call my wits to connsel what to say,
such memories were made for mortal men,
I speak of Saints whose names can not decay:
an Angels trumpe were fitter for to found
their glorious death, if such on earth were found.
Pardon my want, I offer naught but will,
their register remains safe above,
Campion exceedes the compass of my skill,
yet let me use the measure of my love,
and give me leave in low and homeli v^rse,
his hye attempts in England to rehearse.
He came by vow, the cause to conquer sin,
his armor prayer, the word his targe and shield,
his comfort heaven, his spoil our souls to win,
the devil his foe, the wicked world the field,
his triumph joy, his wage eternal blis,
his captain Christ, which ever blessed is.
From ease to pain, from honor to disgrace,
from love to hate, to danger being well,
from safe abode to fears in every place,
contemning death to save our souls from hell,
our new Apostle coming to restore
the faith which Austine planted here before.
His natures flowers were mirt with herbs of grace,
his mild behauior tempered well with skill,
a lowly mind possessed a learned place,
a sugared speech a rare and virtuous will,
asaintlike man was set on earth below,
the seed of truth in e^ring hearts to sow.
With tung and pen the truth he taught and wrote,
byforce whereof they came to Christ apace,
but when it pleased God, it was his lote
he should be thrald, he lent him so much grace,
his patience then did work as much or more,
as had his heavenly speeches done before.
His fare was hard, yet mild and sweet his cheer,
his prison close, yet free and lose his mind,
his torture great, yet small or none his fear,
his offers la^ge, but nothing could him blind.
O constant man, O mind, O virtue strange,
whom want, nor woe, nor fear, nor hope could change.
From rack in Tower they brought him to dispute,
bookeles, alone, to answer all that came,
yet Christ gave grace, he did them all confute
so sweetly there in glory of his name,
that even the aduers part are forced to say,
that Campions cause did bear the bell away.
This foil enragde the minds of some so far,
they thought it best to take his life away,
because they saw he would their matter mar,
and leave them shortly naught at al to say:
traitor he was with many a seely slight,
yet pact a Jury that cried guylti straight.
Religion there was treason to the queen,
preaching of penance war against the land,
prests were such dangerous me^ as have not bin
prayers and beads were fight and force of hand,
cases of conscience bane unto the state,
so blind is error, so false a witness hate.
And yet behold these lambs be drawn to dye,
treason proclaimed, the queen is put in fear,
out upon satan, fie malice, fie,
speakst thou to them that did the guildles hear?
can humble souls departing now to Christ,
protest untrue? Auant foul fend thou list.
My sovereign Liege behold your subjects end,
your secret foes do misenforme your grace:
who in your cause their holy lives would spend
as traitors dye, a rare and monstrous case,
the bloody wolf condemns the harmles sheep
before the dog, yt whiles the sherherds sleep.
England look up, thy soil is staind with blood,
thou have made martirs many of thine own,
if thou have grace their deaths will do thee good,
the seed will take which in such blood is sown,
and Campions lerning fertile so before,
thus watered too, must needs of force be more.
Repent thee Eliot of thy Judas kiss,
I wish thy penance, not thy desperate end,
let Norton think which now in prison is,
to whom was said he was not Caesar's friend,
and let the Judge consider well in fear,
that Pilate washed his hands, and was not clear
The witness false, Sledd, Monday, and the rest,
which had your slanders noted in your book,
con^^esse your fault beforehand it were best,
lest God do find it written when he does look
in dreadful doom upon the souls of men,
it will be late (alas) to mend it then.
You bloody jury Lea and all the leaven,
take ^eede your verdit which was given in have
do not e^clude you from the joys of heaven,
and cause you rue it when the time is past:
and every one whose malice causd him say
Crucifige, let him dread the terror of that day.
Fond Elderton call in thy foolish rhyme,
thy scurile balates are to bad to sell,
let good men rest, and mende thy self in time,
confess in prose thou have not meetred well,
or if thy folly can not choose but feign,
write alehouse ^oys, blaspheme not in thy vain.
Remember you that would oppress the cause,
the Church is Christ's, his honor can not dye,
though hell her self reuest her gresly jaws,
and join in league with schism and heresy,
though craft devise, and cruel rage oppress,
yet skill will write and martyrdom confess.
You thought perhaps when learned Ca^pion dies,
his pen must cease, his sugared tongue be still,
but you forgot how loud his death it cries,
how far beyond the sound of tongue and ^uil,
you did not know how rare and great a good
it was to write his precious gifts in blood.
Living he s^ake to them that present were,
his writings took their censure of the view,
Now fame reports his lerning far and nere,
and now his death con^^^m^s his doctrine true,
his virtues now are written in the skies,
and often read with holy inward eyes.
All Europe wonders at so rare a man,
England is filled with rumor of his end,
London must needs, for it was present than,
when constantly three saints their lives did spend
the streets, the stones, the steps you ^ald the^ be,
proclaim the cause for which these martirs die.
The Tower says the truth he did d^fend.
the bar bears witness of his guiltles mind,
Tiborne does tell he made a pa^^ent end,
on every gate his martyrdom we find,
in vain you wroght yt would obscure his name
for heaven and earth will still record the same.
Your sentence wrong pronounced of him here,
exemptes him from the judgments for to come,
O happy he that is not judged there,
God grant me too to have an earthly dome,
your witness false and lewdly taken in,
does cause he is not now accusd of sin.
His prison now the city of the king,
his rack and torture joys and heavenly bliss,
for men's reproach with angels he does sing
a sacred song which everlasting is
for shame but short and loss of small renown,
he purchase has an ever during crown.
His quarterd lims shall join with joy again,
and rise a body brighter then the sun,
your blinded malice torturde him in vain,
For every wrinch sow glory has him won,
and every drop of blood which he did spend,
has reapt a joy which never shall have end.
Can dreary death the^ daunt our faith, or pain?
is it lingering life we fear to loose, or ease?
no, no, such death procures life again,
it is only God we tremble to displease,
who kills but once, and ever still we dye,
whose hot revenge torments eternallye.
We can not fear a mortal torment, we,
this Martirs blood has moystned all our hearts,
whose partid quarties when we chance to see,
we learn to play the constant christians parts,
his head does speak, and heavenly precepts give,
how we yt look should frame our selves to live.
His youth enstru^ts us how to spend our days,
his flying bids us how to vanish sin,
his straight profession shows the narrow ways
which they must walk that look to enter in.
his home return by danger and distress,
emboldens us our conscience to profess.
His hardle draws us with him to the cross,
his speeches there provoke us for to dye,
his death does say this life is but a loss,
his martird blood from heaven to us does cry,
his first and last, and all conspire in this,
to show the way that leads unto bliss.
Blessed be God which lent him so much grace,
thanked be Christ which blessed his martyr so,
happy is he which sees his masters face,
Cursed are they that thought to work him woe,
b^unden be we to give eternal praise,
to Jesus name which such a man did raise.
Amen.
An o^h^r upon the same.
WHat iron heart that would not melt in grief?
what steel or stone could keep him dry from tears,
to see a Campion haled like a thief
to end his life, with both his glorious fears,
in whose three deaths unto the standers by
even all the world almost might seem to dye.
England must lose a sovereign salve for sin,
a sweet receipt for subtle herisie,
India a saint her seely souls to win,
Turkey a bane for her idolatry,
the Church a soldier against Babylon,
to batter hell and her confusien.
The skowling skies did storm and puff apace,
they could not bear ye wrongs yt malice wroght,
the sun drew in his shining purple face,
the moistened clouds she brimsh tears for thought
the river Thames a while astonished stood,
to count the drops of Campions sacred blood.
Nature with tears bewaild her heavy less.
honesty feared her self should shortly dye,
religion saw her Champion on the cross,
Angels and sainis desired leave to cry,
even herisie the eldest child of hell
began to blush, and thought she did not well.
And yet behold when Campion made his end,
his humble heart was so bedewde with grace,
that no reproach could once his mind offend,
mildnes possessed his sweet and cherefull face,
a pacient spectacle was presented then,
in sight of God, of angels, saints, and men.
The heuens did clear, ye sun like gold did shine,
the clouds were dry, the fearful river ran,
nature and virtue wypt their watered eyes,
religion ioyed to see so mild a man,
men, angels, saints, and all that saw him dye,
forgot their grief, his joys appeard so nigh
They saw his patience did expect a crown,
his scornful cart a glorious heavenly place.
his lowly mind a happy high renown,
his humble cheer a ^hining angels face,
his fear, his grief, his death and agony,
a joy, a peace, a life in majesty.
From thence he prays and sings in melody
for our recure, and calls us to him,
he stands before the throne with harmony,
and is a glorious suter for our sin:
with wings of love he iumped up so hye,
to help the cause for which he sought to dye.
Rejoice, be glad, triumph, sing himmes of joy,
Campion, Sherwine, Brian, live in blis,
they sue, they seek the ^ase of our annoy,
they pray, they speak, and al effectual is,
not like to men on earth as heretofore,
But like to sain^s in heaven, and that is ^^ore.
FINIS.
A Dialogue between a Catholic, and Consolation.
Catholic first speaks. Is righteous Lot from sinful Sodom gone?
is old Elias left alone again?
and has the earth no just man, no not one,
the cause of Christ and Christians to sustain?
if holy life with true religion fail,
then farewell faith, for falsehood will prevail.

Consolation. No, Lot thou have some fellows in this land,
Elias there are left seven thousand yet,
rejoice thou earth thou have a warlike ba^de,
for our good Lord in martial order set,
by life and death this quarrel to begin,
to vanquish falsehood, satan, hell, and sin.
Although a worthy Champion of your train,
were slain of late, and yet not vanquished,
into his place another stepped again,
who^ Christ's spouse our common nurse has bred,
lament not then, for there are in his rome
as good as he, expecting martyrdom.

Catholic. Such men no doubt are very hard to find,
for dainty things are seldom sifted out,
the Pheni^ has no partner of her kind,
a man perhaps may seek the world about,
ere he may find one Campion again,
wherefore his less makes me the more complain.
Where shall you find so many gifts in one,
a wit so sharp, joined with such memory,
a great divine, hating promotion,
a lusty man prof^ss^ng chastity,
a worthy impe sprung up of basest kind,
a learned man to bear a lowly mind.
Solon for pith, for wisdom Solomon,
Peter for style, and Paul for eloquence,
David for truth, for beauty Absolon,
for personage Saul, a Iobe for patience:
all that for which the fame of these began,
(a thing most strange) were ioynde in this one man
Not rack nor rope coold daunt his dredles mind,
no hope nor hap could move him where he s^ood,
he wrote the truth as in his books we find,
which to confirm he sealed with his blood,
which makes me dout there are no mo such me^,
send workmen Lord into thy vineyarde then.

Consolation. Despair thou not thou seely mournful wight,
for there are mo have took this match in hand,
we needs must win, our lord himself does fight,
the Cananites shall be expulsd the land,
for Edmund lives and helps godly men
by prayers, more then erst with tongue or pen.
His quarters hong on every gate do show,
his doctrine sound through countries far and near,
his head set up so high does call for more
to fight the fight which he endured here,
the faith thus planted thus restord must be,
take up thy cross says Christ and follow me.
As well as priests the lay men too shall frame,
their skillesse heads to take so good a ^^we,
God can of stones raise seed to Abraham,
doubt not therefore for there will be enowe.

Catholic. Fiat voluntas Dei then say I,
we owe a death, and once we needs must dye.

FINIS.
The complaynt of a Catholic for the death of M. Edmund Campion.
O God from sacred throne behold
our secret sorrows here,
Regard with grace our helpless grief,
amend our mournful cheer.
The bodies of thy Saints abroad
are set for fowls to feed,
And brutish birds devour the flesh
of faithful folk in deed.
Alas I rue to think upon
the sentence truly scande,
No prophet any honor has
within his native land.
Thy doleful death O Campion is
beway'd in every c^ste,
But we live here and little know
what creatures we hane l^ste.
Bohemia land laments the same,
Rodulphus court is sad,
With deep regard they now record
what virtues Campion had
Germania mourns, al Spain does muse,
and so does Italy,
And France our friend has put in print
his passing tragedy
They that wuld make these me^ to seem^
to be her highness foes,
O Lord it is a world to see
the feigned fraud of those.
For when they had in dastard wise
devised to dispute,
And could not find in all their craft
the cause for to confute,
And that their winnings was so well
they needed not to boste,
And that in conscience they did know
new found is lightly lost,
They suttly seek a further fetch
contrary to all reason,
To say he is not Caesar's friend,
accusing him of treasone.
But shall we mutche lament the same,
or shall we more rejoice,
Such was the case with Christ our lord,
such was the Jewish voice.
so were their wrathful words pronounst,
so was their sentence wrong,
For Christ did give to Caesar that
which did to him belong.
So Christ his true disciples here
no treason do pretend,
But they by Christ and Christ his lore
their faith till death defend.
Though error have devised now
a visard so unfit
To cloak her craft to change the case
to blear each simple wit,
Because she taught us long before
that none ^or points of faith
According unto Christ's lore
ought to be done to death.
Her wil^nes were soon bewrayed,
had they but once recanted
No doubt thereof they had not then
not life nor living wanted
Thus who so ways her works and words,
with fraud shall find them fraught,
And how they now perform the same
that heretofore they taught.
God knows it is not force nor might,
not war nor warlike band,
Not sh^^ld and spear, not dint of sword,
that must convert the land,
It is the blood by martirs shed,
it is that noble train,
That fight with word and not with sword,
and Christ their captain.
For sooner shall you want the hands
to shed such guiltles blood,
Then wise and virtuous still to come
^o do their country good.
God save Elizabeth our queen,
God send her happy reign,
And after earthly honors here,
the heavenly joys to gain.
And all such men as heretofore
have misinformd her Grace
God grant they may amend the same
while here they have the space.
FINIS.
Good reader pardon all faults escaped in the printing and bear with the
woorkmanship of a strainger.


