PRAEDICTIO Astrologica.

The great and vvonderfull Prognostication, for the year of our Lord 1598.

Written by Rodulphus Grapheus Doctor of Physic in the Town of Deuenter.

Translated out of Dutch into English by W.P

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf, with the assent of Rychard Watkins. 1598.

Chap. 1. Of the entrance of the Sun in the first point of Aries, and of the
Planets that are Lords of the year.
WE read in the holy scriptures, that great kingdoms and princely Cities for
their sins have been altered and brought under the government of strange
nations: and that many towns for their wickedness have been punished, and
brought in subjection: and Christ says, that we never know him but when we
are visited with some affliction. I find by right calculation, that this year
of our Lord 1598. according to the meridian of the town of Deuentre, and
other places lying under 52. degrees and 40. minutes, and after the old style
begins upon the 10. of March, and according to the new style upon the 20. of
March in the afternoon, a little after 12. of the clock, when the sun
enters into Aries, at which time it stands in the middle of the element, and
then night and day through all the world are all of one length, and as Ovid
says, noua temporisaetas, then the Sun by his heat opens the earth, and
reuiueth it, which by the cold of the Winter season was dead and withered,
making grass, trees, and all things else so fair and green, that it makes
all creatures living to rejoice, and thereupon all learned men are of opinion,
that this time of the year, the world heaven, and earth, and all the creatures
therein were created, and many wonderful works of God performed therein as
the delivery of the children of Israel out of Aegipt, the conception of the
Virgin Mary, and after that his passion, death, and resurrection upon the same
day. I find Saturn ascendent Eastwarde in the 24. degree of Sagittarius in the
second house, Jupiter in the 2. degree of Cancer, in the 8. house, Mars in the
4. degree of Taurus and the 6. house, the Sun in the first degree of Aries,
and the 4. house, Venus in the third degree of Aries and the 4. house hard by
the Sun, Mercury in Pisces, the Moon in the 11. degree of Pisces, and the 4.
house, the Dragous head in the first degree of Gemini in the seventh house,
and so begins this year 1598. whereby we plainly see, that the Moon and
Mercury are Lords of the year, and Mars assistant, and are both found in a
watery sign. The rest of the planets for the most part are weak and badly
plac'st, whereupon we must ground our judgment, and proceed accordingly,
making the situation and conjunction of every Planet, whereby it is found, that
this shall be none of the best years, for that the effects of the years
95.96. and 97. do yet continue, whereby I judge, that this year many crafty
and secreat enterprises will be wrought both by water and by land, and that
there is a special matter pretended, which will be to the overthrow and
advancement of diverse persons, whereby certain provinces shall be brought
into extreme misery and desolation, specially such countries as lie under
Cancer, and her quadrangle, as Brabant, Flanders, France, and the provinces
bordering upon it. Ciprianus Leouitius says touching the revolution of this
year, that it threatens us with much rain, great sickness, and bloody and
cruel wars, as also that certain Princes and great men both spiritual and
temporal shall be overthrown and cast in prison, whereby much misery and
grievous alterations shall happen among the common people: for that in this
revolution of the world the effect of two eclipses, one of the Sun, the other
of the Moon shall happen. Wherefore I counsel all good Christians to be
watchful, that these things come not suddenly upon them, and so I will end
this Chapter with the words of David.

Ni Deus aedificet frustra domus illa paratur,
Quam volet humanus constituisse labor. Psalm. 1^6.

Ni Deus inuigilet, frustra custode tuentur.
Chap. 2. Of good and evil fortune, strife and contention between men and
women, being young and lovely like Venus dearlinges, upon whom all the world
does cast their eyes.
FOr that man's nature is addicted to hear and see strange things, I have here
set down the signification of the heavenly influences of this year 1598.
which I write to give cause of watchfulness to careless men: I find by the
right calculation of the prouincial figure, that lovely Venus, coupeled with
Jupiter and Mercury, signifies good fortune to Venus children, women, young
maids, and all sweet Venus dearlinges, which gladly take all that is given
them, they shall have good fortune by gifts, presents, Iewelles, apparel, and
other toys, which if they have not it will be great grief unto them. I find
the Planet Venus well placed in Aquarius, which signifies great favor to all
women in general, as well spiritual as temporal: women shall by nature
flourish, and be lofty, they shall be much beloved, and diverse that are of
mean parentage and degree, shall by marriage rise and be preferred to high
estate, but some of them must take care that when they are at the highest, that
they keep themselves at that stay: such proud and lordly women, that often
stumble at a straw, and are soon trodden upon the toes, which always sing the
unpleasant song, they shall cause great sorrow and grief unto their husbands by
chiding and contention, for that a woman which chideth without reason, does
often drive her husband out of doors, whereby shall arise strife, hearts
grief, mourning, and other misfortunes. I find Mars and Venus in conjunction.
Dabit incestas, libidines, fornicationes, adulteria, coniunctiones virorum ac
mulierum horrendas and abominandas. In the last part of the year I find there
will be great deceit and untruth among men, whom women and maids shall feed
with fair words, and pay them with the like, standing much upon their
credites and reputations, also I find the Planet Venus to be retrograde, which
signifies great quarrels and contentions with such as men have made of their
secreat counsels, where upon shall follow grief, sorrow, and diverse diseases.
You shall likewise hear of great strife between men and their wives, whereby
controversy will arise, so that many weddinges shall be holden, where there
will be no music, and where the Lord or rulers of the land shall be betrayed.
I find also in the provincial figure, that Jupiter is elevated above Venus,
which signifies that women's nature is always desirous of pleasure, for they
are the mother of our generation: They shall also be fortunate in
childbearing, and are worthy of honor in all places. The quadrangle of Mars
and Venus brings no good tydinges to old men, and others that use many
women, for they shall be bitten and not hurt, every man look to himself and
be careful.

Chap. 3. Of the Eclipses of this year 1598. and of wars and contentions, and
other untrue dealings among men, which the Almighty God according to his great
goodness can change and convert as pleases him, and of the beginning and ending
of the Turks.
WE are al greatly to praise the Lord, that he has given us the right
knowledge of Astronomy, and made us know the nature of Eclipses, to show
causas, rations and demonstrationes, and when the Sun and Moon are
eclipsed, diverse conjunctions of the uppermost Planets are openly seen, (which
never fails) as you may read in the books of ancient Astronomers, as also in
writings. I find that in this year 1598. we shall have three Eclipses, one of
the Sun, and two of the Moon: the first Eclipse of the Moon will be seen
here in our meridian and Pole, being under 52. degrees and 40. minutes in the
Town of Deuentre and other places bordering on the same, upon the 12. of
February at 6. of the clock and 34. minutes in the morning, in the third
degree and 3. minutes of Virgo, not far from the Dragons tail, and will
begin to be eclipsed at 4. of the clock and 24. minutes, and in the morning
end at 8. of the clock 14. minutes: we of Deuentre and the low countries shall
see the beginning and the middle, but not the end thereof: the effect and
working of this first Eclipse shall continue a whole year. The second Eclipse
shall be of the Sun, and shall be seen upon the 25. of February (Stilo antiquo)
somewhat before 10. of the clock, and (Stilo nouo) upon the 7. of March
before 10. of the clock and 48. minutes, and shall be 8. points great, in the
17. degree and 14. minutes of Pisces, not far from the Dragons head, it shall
begin to darken at 9. of the clock, and 50. minutes before noone, and end at
11. and 46 minutes. This Eclipse shall take effect the 17. of July 1598. and
end the 22. of June 1600. The third Eclipse shall be of the Moon, which shall be
seen upon the 6. of August, and after the new style the 16. of August, at 7.
of the clock and 35. minutes after noone: the color thereof shall be black,
mixed with some read, in the 23. degree and 29. minutes of Aquarius, not far
from the Dragons head, and shall begin to darken in the evening at 5. of the
clock and 51. minutes, and end the same evening at 9. of the clock: we of the
Netherlandes shall not see the beginning thereof, but only the middle and the
end. Luna enim tota tenebrosa ab Horzionte nostro ortiuo emerget. This Eclipse
shall take effect the 24. of August (Stilo antiquo) and end on the fifth of
December 1598. The Arabian and Chaldean Astronomers say, that one Eclipse of
the Sun is worse then 6. Eclipses of the Moon, specially when they happen in
one month, as now they do. Vno mense subit tenebras cum Lum vterum que, Tunc
gemina causa tristia fata ferunt. We have this year likewise diverse
conjunctions and aspects of Planets, which signify much wars, troubles,
mutinies, bloodsheddinges, and secret practices in the low Countries, and those
that lie West southwest from it. The countries and kingdoms that lie Eastward
toward the rising of the Sun, and under Aries, Cancer, Leo and Scorpion,
shall be vexed with wars, blood-sheddings, and secret practices, which are
Grecia, Turkey, Muscouia, Swethland, Russia, Walachia, and certain countries
in the Mediterranean sea, as Marsellus, the Province of Languedoc, Gascony,
Dauphine, France, England, Hungary, Bohemia, Austria, Crabuten, Corinthia,
Vianne, Seuenbergen, and such as are contributary to the Turk, the people
thereof shall be spoiled, and brought into great miseries (as Leouitius says) In
the years 1544. 48. and 49. in which there appeared diverse Eclipses in
Scorpion, the Turks and other Christians that had fallen from the faith of
Christ had a great overthrow by the mighty king of Persia, as
Historiographers do witness. Also the Emperors Maximilian and Rodulphus, with
other mighty Princes, as Sigismund Bathorius in Transiluania, and diverse
princes and Lords that have rebelled against the Turk, with other Princes and
Lords by Gods help for certain years have had great fortunes and victories
against our ancient enemy the Turk: so shall the Christian princes by Gods
power, as ye chief of al princes have much more good fortune and advancement
against the Turk and Sarrasens, so they follow it, as the old verse says,
Front capillata post est occasio calua: We may sit at a table and yet eat no
meat, and so the good fortune that God sends us may be neglected, if we
follow it not, and for that in the year 1584. it was the fiery Triangle, and
that the Turks Empire began in the watery Triangle, so his Empire shall decay
and be overthrown in the fiery Trigonis or Triangle, which decay has
begun now within few years under the fiery Triangle, as in the years 1595.
96. and 97. it has well been seen, but the greatest fall and hardest pinch
that the kingdom of Mahomet shall endure, according to my judgment shall be
in the years 1603. or 1607. and then in an. 1610 it shall be wholly
overthrown. Such prophesies certain of the Turks themselves do write, which
they do much fear, and are grieved thereat, for in the said prophesies it is
evidently said, that the City of Constantinople shall not continue above 150.
years in his authority, neither yet their religion above 1000. years, As also
that there shall not be above 14. Emperors of Turkey, that are of Ottomans
race, and then it shall decay and be wholly overthrown, which if it happen all
Christendom has cause to rejoice. The City of Constantinople was taken from
the Christians by the Turk in anno 1453. and Mahomets false religion began
among the Turks in an. 613. now if you add 150, to 1453. which is the year
of the winning of Constantinople by the Turks, and 613. to 1598. to see when
it makes 1000. years for the continuance of Mahomets law, they will fall out
in an. 1603. and 1613. and the Turk that now is called Mahomet the third is
the 14. Emperor of the race of Ottoman, as all Histories do witness, touching
that which has been written by John Lichtenberg, Martin Snellenbergh, and
specially by John Hilten a learned Friar of Eisanach, that when we shall write
1600. the Turk by that time shall have run through al Germany, but whereupon
they write if I know not, unless I be otherwise instructed: Wherewith I will
end this Chapter with the words of Martin Luther, Lord God we beseech thee
help us, not for that the heavens and course of the planets do threaten us with
many miseries, but because the subtlety of the Devil at this day does creep
and enter into all corners of the earth, and seeks to destroy us. Lord be
merciful unto us. Amen.

Chap. 4. Of sicknesses and fruitfulnes of this year.
Having considered the constitution of ye 6 house and the Lords of the same,
from whence and from the conjunction of the Moon we make our judgment of
sicknesses, I find Saturn to be Lord of the 6. house in the Ram, which
signifies new diseases in the head, omnia genera apoplexiae, cathares, pains
in the heart and breast, laskes, red melisoen, burning feauers, pestilences,
agues, yellow and black Iandis. The year shall be indifferent fruitful of all
kind of corn, as Rye, Barley, Wheat, Oats, Pease and Beans, but fruit upon
trees because Venus is found to be retrograde, shall endure some hurt, for by
reason of the quadrangle of Mars, they shall be hindered in their growth: Oil,
Honey, Hops and Flax shall be scant, but Wine will be good and great plenty: The
Summer season shall be cold and moist with strong winds, whereby Bees, Sheep,
and fruits of the earth shall endure much hurt: all fourefooted beasts shall be
profitable and give good increase, Butter, Cheese and Bacon in great plenty,
and an indifferent year of Acornes. There will be no want of fruits, but
rather want of amendment in men, for that wickedness daily increases more and
more, and we give our minds rather to beastly cruelties, then love and
Christian humanity.

An Astronomicall Discourse of the particular effects of the 12. Months of
this year 1598. Written in verse.
January has 31. days.
THis year it shall be wonderful and strange,
Beginning on the 10. of March to come,
Wherein both Sun and Moon shall be eclipst,
The Sun but once, the Moon in double fold:
What great effects these 3. Eclipses make
In time the year will plainly make us see,
Once be you sure no good by them will come,
At the hour of ten somewhat before noone,
The five and twenty day of February,
The Sun shall be eclipst, more then eight points,
And so remain the space of two long hours:
The other two Eclipses in the Moon,
One about seven of the clock, and in
The morning, of the sixth of August next,
Thirteen points great which causes grief abound,
For diverse Planets then meet in one point,
As Mars and Saturn both of nature bad,
Being conioynd presageth us no good,
And seldom one misfortune comes alone.
February has 28. days.
The first and last days of this present Month
Mars and Mercurius are the governors,
Whereby strange things shall then be heard and seen,
With vprores and rebellions manifold:
The common people thereby shall it rue,
Mercurius many subtle sleights shall use,
But he and his in fine shall dearly buy it.
This does the heavens manifestly show,
In Western parts shall be accomplished,
Till Peter's band before the door does come,
Or not long after to no little woe,
For Mars by night his corn shall take in,
And strangely work in covert of the shade,
That men may not behold his actions,
For many thereby might sore moved be,
What shall hereof ensue I will not say,
Time will it make t'appeare in open sight.
March has 31. days.
In time of lent beginning of the year
When all things bud and show both fair and green,
Pleasant and sweet as time of year does serve,
Mercurius shall by Mars be troubled
In other lands, for there shall come a Lord
That suddenly shall leap and dance for joy,
And now the force of Mars being decaide,
Sol enters, and with heat and virtue rare,
And like a bryde begins for to reign,
Whereby this year shall be most flourishing,
With more increase then had the year before,
Which will be cause of love and peace likewise,
But at the first it shall not take effect:
Ask Saint Gregory the most holy man,
When that the Sun begins in force to be,
The Planets Venus and good Jupiter
Will us support, God send our cuntry peace.
April has 30. days.
It is a thing that commonly is seen,
Both in great Realms and little provinces,
That strange effects are wrought in every place,
As France shall make it plain unto our view,
There shall the cock against nature bring forth eggs
And Hen like cock shall crow and that full high,
Which husbandman small profit will procure:
For he that badly has a time to sow,
Shall find but small increase for him to mow,
Saint Denis he shall turn and so rebel,
Whereby great mischief will thereof ensue,
Against right and ancient statutes of the land,
And in the end will cause a spring of hate,
To flow up and increase in noble hearts,
Which likewise shall our land make desolate,
By flattery which slily shall creep in.
May has 31. days.
Walk joyfully in the field in May,
Pass time away by making garlands sweet
Of fragrant flowers and Lillies that are fair,
Be bold I say to sport your selves with joy,
Mars he is gone to France here it is cold,
Lillies are here so soon not to be had,
Keep well your holds, your sconces watch and ward
Borrow new sums upon the quittance old,
Make alliance, but yet with good foresight,
Leave of to mourn and sigh, it is not good.
That which full stout did stand shall have a fall,
He that was proud in all his actions,
And among beasts accounted fierce and strong,
Shall become weak in that he takes in hand,
And too much lust shall make him impotent.
June has 30. days.
Look out to Sea, watch and you shall behold,
Great store of ships sailing in companies,
The riches of God Neptune to defend,
But words shall cause a noise and tumults strange
The noise of Phifes and Drums shall sound full high
Ships you shall see to wind and twine each way,
Where shot and powder shall not spared be;
That shall not fail, men may it not neglect,
Much blood it shall cause to be spilt in vain,
Yet little profit shall it breed thereby
To common people, which are not esteemde,
Many a man shall fall into mishappe
That lived in peace and had the world at will:
Ask good S. John he shall you wonders tell,
And Mary Magdaline shall weep full sore,
S. Jacob will at large show what it means.
July has 31. days.
As we this month do thoroughly behold,
And books peruse that speak of wonders strange,
And likewise men be mindful and take care,
In every place to look unto our selves,
Then we may say and prove it to be true,
That in this month many shall weep and wail,
Such as do under Cancer still remain,
Hoping by anchor hold still to be safe,
With ditch and sluice from water you defend,
You that upon the water dwell and build,
Look well unto your selves, and take good heed,
That it deceive you not unto your cost,
On land great matters shall be practiced,
If they should chance to lose their sleeue it is no harm
So that the arm from body be not cut,
And though they should be hindered by the cold
Yet will they pass, God speed them on their way
If shoe be lost, the foot it will not fail.
August has 31. days.
This Month has an Eclipse, but to no good,
Which is the second of this years hard chance,
Three dark Eclipses causes are of woe,
And torments great, that manifold shall be,
For sure I think that all evil aspects
And Planets badde that in the skies are placed,
With signs of woe have banded all in one,
To work dispight to humane creatures,
A league shall be agreede by wicked men,
Even to the spoil of their next neighbors house,
By fighting, strife, contention and debate,
To overthrow the poor and innocent.
If you behold the Equinoctial line,
And mark how the eclipsed figures stand,
You may divine an enterprise in hand,
To overthrow the land that lies southwest,
Between some men accord there shall be made,
Whereby in fine a peace it will ensue:
September has 30. days
Agree in one most Christian Princes brave
By God ordaind your Countries to defend,
That Turk prevail not against us with his power,
And Christian blood be shed by tyrants vile,
Stand up and fight for our most holy faith,
Which we do hope will be unto our joy,
For in the East the infidels will stir,
That only seek to rob, spoil, and destroy:
England and France shall likewise have a change,
And so dainely by means of some great charge,
The one shall first upon the other fall,
Which will fall out but hardly for them both,
Full many towns that on the Roane do lie,
Shall by deceit be brought unto decay:
Contention shall abound, but in Sauoy
It shall proceed unto most bloody end:
Saint Matthew shall full many separate,
Which shall be led like sheep for to be slain.
October has 31. days.
The rage of Mars shall now still more abound,
Mammon shall stir most vile rebellion,
Whereby full soon many shall weep and wayle,
And countries strange shall torments great endure,
The subject poor, shall only bear the smart,
For that deceit shall ketch them in her snare,
By means of Mars his subtle practices,
He shall speak fair but only with the mouth,
But secretly his heart is set on blood,
Which many seek, like unto thirsty hounds,
Beware poor people what ye undertake:
It were much better, though unto our shame,
Our minds were set on quietness and peace,
But now the world and her inhabitants,
Is filled with pride, deceit and wickedness,
For which the Lord as angry does us scourge
With bloody wars within our native land.
November has 30. days.
I have in other places signified,
That children under Jupiter his power,
Shall in the eight house of the heavenly sphere,
By evil aspect much pain and woe endure,
Which at this time accomplished shall be:
Beware you Lords and governors each one,
Look to your selves, and seem not to neglect,
Least that the burden heavily do fall,
And so dispearse you by disunion,
For that great blame upon you will arise,
It is most true, and therefore look unto it,
And for your wicked life shall so fall out,
The great oppression of the Gospel pure,
The strange injustice unto every man
Are sins of yours, for which God does us plague,
And lays his cross upon us every day,
For that our works are wholly wickedness:
If we convert God will withdraw his wrath.
December has 31. days.
By placing of the figures we may see,
And course of planets give us t'vnderstand
How that this strife falling most heavily,
Shall still endure, although it seem all done,
And from this place in other countries slide,
Which likewise may procure them double woe,
And though within this month it fall not out,
Yet time will make it evidently seen,
Therefore I need not much thereof to say,
On Planets can I not so surely bind,
Although full many things they do foreshew,
For God that guides all things by his power,
(As often I have said, and find it true,
What ever Planets threaten to befall)
Can at his will convert and make them void.
FINIS.

