THE HISTORY OF THE LIFE AND REIGN OF THAT Famous Princess, ELIZABETH:
Containing a brief Memorial of the chiefest Affairs of State, that have
passed in these Kingdoms of England, Scotland, France; or Ireland, since the
year of the Fatal Spanish Invasion, to that of her sad and ever to be
deplored dissolution. Whereunto also is annexed an Appendix, of Animadversions
upon several passages, Corrections of sundry errors, and Additions of some
remarkable matters of this History never before imprinted.

Polyd: Virg. Hist. Angl. lib. 3. page 53. Ne quid falsi dicere audeat
Historicus, ne quid very non audeat:
Ne qua suspitio gratia sit, ne qua simultatis.
LONDON: Printed for William Web Booke-seller in Oxford. Ann. Dom. 1634.

TO THE SACRED MAJESTY OF MY SOVEREIGN LORD KING CHARLES.
SIR;
IT was so far from my Ambition, that it was my Fear, to make your Majesty
(who already is* of my College) Visitor of my Labors; for indeed, could the
Honor of this Story have descended to the humble content of a lower Patronage,
I should no more have adventured the Favor of your protection, then I can
deserve it. The only credit which I crave from This Inscription is, to
countenance, not my Reputation, but Reason; which tells me, that to undervalue
the Majesty of this Story with a Dedication less then Princely, were to
furnish, not my labors but errors, with a Patronage. Should I here steal
into a seasonable commendation of the Subject of this History, I should but
iniure Goodness with some thin applause; and not, blazon, but stifle Virtue in
too straight a Panegericke: I will rather leave still, her Name, for a terror
to the Romish Faction, her Death, for a commonplace of Sorrow to the English
Nation, her Virtue, for an example to Your envious Imitation, and her unworthy
Translator to the gracious acceptance and Princely pardon Of

your MAJESTY'S most loyal Subject, and humble poor Scholar THO: BROWN.
From my study at Chapter Chapter in Oxon.
To the Reader.
IT were well, if, what once the tongue of the Athenian Crier did to every
Orator, the language of Authority would, to every Babbler; Inter dicere, ne
praefatione and affectibus uterentur, and lubere, ut rem mod^ exp^^^rent (...);
A law indeed, which notwithstanding by a necessary disobedience, I must now
both approve, and violate; for I confess, that in excusing my self, I had
rather hazard the uncertain censure of this ostentation, then by concealing an
indifferent truth, sit down to a certain discredit. Know therefore Reader (for
I care not who does) that when I made the first onset upon this Exercise, it
was my desire rather to see what I could do* then care what I did; for with
the just expenses of a months time and labor, I digested the whole body of
this History into a perfect frame. I must confess my way was hard, and my time
as short; insomuch, that by the very transcribing of so complete a Volume in
such a space, my ^and her self seemed to earne a commendation. But withal I
must acknowledge, that since, I was feign to add the discretion of my second
thoughts, to correct and regulate some gross absurdities; which
notwithstanding was such, as that it spo^e only in interlinings, and marginall
references, and not added the supplement of one sheet to increase the former
bulk. Having thus lickt it so far, to make it worth the reading, that I made
it almost impossible to be read, (as I first began it, to ease the troublesome
request of a private friend, so now) I rendered it up into his hands, to punish
him with a peru^all. But it seems, when the respects of love and friendship
blin^e the just censure of a judicious eye* there, weak endeauours may find
both entertainment and acceptance. Thus fell it out with me; for, (although the
conscience of my own imperfections could bequeath it no better light, then that
that should consume it) it pleased him to think it worth a brighter, this of
the worlds; so that I, (whose conscience and duty bound me to an equal
observance of his Desire, with other men's Commands) was forced now again to
fashion my collected errors for the Press; desiring to publish rather my
obedience to my Friend, then name to the World. Then might I have justly and
boldly said, what Erasmus once did upon his Edition of Saint Ieromes Works, --
Vnum illud and vere dic^m and audacter; minoris arbitror Hieronym^ suos
constitisse libros conditos, quam nobis restitutos: and paucioribus vigilijs
apud illum natos fuisse, quam apud nos renatos. For I may well auerre, that the
very reviewing of my Pains, exceeded the Pains which I reviewed, by so much
the more, as it is easier to commit a fault, then to find it, once committed.

If this serve for an excuse, I cra^e acceptance at thy hands, if not,
forgiveness; but if thou be not pleased to give, then exchange a courtesy,
which is naught but this; for my defects, let me have thy pardon; and for my
deserts, I Will dispense with thy commendation. Farewell.

T. B.

-- Corrige, sodes,
Hoc, bone Lector, et Hoc. --

PAge 35. Line 18. Read^ Martigue. p. 36. l. 1. Prince (...). p. 141. l. 5.
Duke of Alua. p. 178. l. 24. which was to Feroll. p. 192. l. 3. dealt with them
of Dantzicke. p. 221. l. 25. William Peter. p. 241. l. 24. the same Hagan. p.
244. l. 34. who notwithstanding had not yet. p. 255. l. 10. Monast^ry of
Typarary. p. 311. l. 21. Saint-Iohn (...) Bletnesho. p. 360. l. 14. Roger and
Gawyn the two Harui^s.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS BELONGING TO THE HISTORY, OF THE LIFE AND REIGN OF
QVEENE ELIZABETH.
Anno M.D.LXXXIX.
THe practices of the Spaniard in Scotland against England. Page 1 A mutiny in
Scotland. 2 The mutiny is (...). 3 The Earl of Arrundel arraigned. ibid. His
Peers. 4 The h^ads of his accusation. ibid. His demands of the Judges. ^ The
Earls answer. 7 The Earl condemned. 10 His life pardoned. ibid. Drakes
expedition. ibid. The Groyne assaulted. 11 The base Town taken. 12 The high
Town assaulted, but in vain. ibid. Preparation from the Spaniard. 13 The
Spaniards driven back. ibid. The English depart, and embarque for Portugal.
ibid. Peniche taken. 14 Lisbon assaulted. ibid. The Spaniards sally forth upon
the English. 15 They are forced home to their very Gates. ibid. The English
depart. ibid. Drake* blamed. ibid. Cascay's yielded. 16 Three^^^^^ H^lkes
taken. ibid. Vigo burnt. ibid. The English retur^e. ibid. The English subject
to diseases (...) Spain. 17 The Hans^-townes complain. ibid. The Queens
answer. 18 The Queen aides the King of Navarre. ibid. The Holy League in
France. 19 The Barricadoes at Paris. ibid. The Duke of Guise ^laine. 20 Henry
the third* King of France slain. 21 Contention about the election of a new
King. ibid. The Cardinal of Bourbon proclaimed King. 22 The Queen (...) the
French King. ibid. The English (...) in France. 23 The English return. 24 The
Spaniard affects the Kingdom of France. ibid. The Queen propounds a
marriage to the K. of Scots. 25 He is betrothed to Anne of Denmark. ibid. He
passes over to Norway. 26 Tempests raised in his Voyage by Witches. ibid.
Bothwell accused by them. ibid. The Countess of Sussex dies. ibid. Sir Walter
Mildmay dies. ibid. The Earl of Worcester dies. 27 And the Lord Sturton.
ibid. And the Lord Compton. ibid. And the Lord Paget. ibid. And Doctor
Humphrey. ibid.
Anno M.D.XC.
Sundry Havens fortified. Page 29 Charges for the Navy. ibid. Money lent to the
French King. 30 The rates of the Custom House raised. 31 The Queens care of
the States. 32 She restores ships to the Ve^e^ians. 33 She procures peace
from the Turk for the Polo^^^ns and Moldauians. ibid. She congratulateth the
marriage of the King of Scots. 34 Her care of France. ibid. French Havens taken
by the Spaniard. 35 His pretense of right to the Duchy of Britain. ibid. Aid
from England requested. 36 The Queen prouides for Britain. ibid. And for all
France. ibid. Wherefore she hea^^^neth not to the ill suggestions of some both
English and French men. 37 Her observation. ibid. The Earl of Warwickes death.
ibid. And Sir Francis Walsingham's. ibid. The death of Sir Thomas Randolph. 38
And of Sir James Cro^^. 39 And of the Earl of Shrewesbury. ibid. The death of
the Lord Wentworth. 40 Tir-Oen strangleth Gau^loc. ibid. He is sent for into
England, and pardoned. ibid. Hugh Ro^-Mac-Mahon hanged by the Lord Deputy. 41
Whereupon Brian O-R^cke rebels. ibid.
Anno M.D.XC.I.
THe Queens care of the French King. Page 43 She sends him aid. 44 The
conditions and articles that are agreed upon between them ibid. A Proclamation
in England against the French Leaguers. ib. Sir John Norris is sent into
France. 45 La-Noue that famous warrior, dies of a wound. ibid. Sir Roger
Williams behaueth himself bravely in the French wars. ibid. Anthony Reaux
sent over to the Queen. 46 He demands more aid from her. ibid. The Queen
sends over into France the Earl of Essex. ib. He is sent for presently to
Noyon by the King of France. ib. He knighteth many of his followers, to the
great discontent of some of the English. 47 He is disappointed of his promise
by the French men. ibid. His Brother Walter dies of a wound at his approach to
Roan. ibid. He is sent into Champaigne by the French King. 48 The French King
breaks promise with the Queen. ibid. He sends the Earl of Essex over into
England, to require more aid of the Queen. ibid. He sends moreover the Lord
Mourney du-Pleffis, for the same purpose. ibid. The education and behavior of
William Hacket. 49 His extraordinary calling, and Revelations. ibid. His
confederates, and who they were. ibid. They all seek to accuse the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Lord Treasurer of Treason. 50 Hackets hatred
to the Queen. 51 His Disciples sent abroad. 52 They are apprehended. 53 Hacket
condemned. ibid. His blasphemy at the time of execution. ibid. Coppinger
starued himself. 54 Arthington recants. ibid. The Queens jurisdiction in
spiritual matters impugned. ibid. It is defended and maintained. 56 Captain
Greenuile in the Rear Admiral called the Revenge, is assailed. 56 He is
sorely wounded. 57 Greenuile yielded upon condition. ibid. The Revenge suncke.
ibid. A requital for her loss. 58 The East-Indie Voyage. ibid. Riman drowned.
ibid. Their return. 59 Cauendish his Voyage to the Magellane Streights. ibid*
A Proclamation against transportation of the provision into Spain. ibid. The
death of Sir Christopher Hatton. 60 Brian O-rorke arraigned. 61 He is hanged at
Tiburne. 62
Anno M.D.XC.II.
BOthwell is proclaimed traitor. Page 64 The Earl of Murray slain. 66
Bothwels attempt at the Court at Falkland. ibid. The zeal of the Ministers in
Scotland. ibid. Letters and Blanckes taken by them. 67 Sir John Perot
questioned. ibid. He is accused. ibid. The Articles of his accusation. ibid. He
is condemned, 68 He dies in the Tower of a disease. 69 His goods are intailed
upon his Son. ibid. The Earl of Essex returns from France. ibid. The K. of
France requesteth more aid from the Queen. 70 She condiscendeth upon some
conditions. ibid. Captain Norris is sent over. 71 The Duke of Parma dies.
ibid. Sir Walter Rawleighs expedition. 72 A Portugal Caracke persued by
Borough. ibid. He is assaulted by the English. 73 The spoil taken, and the
value of it. ibid. The covetousness of some English Merchants noted. 74 A
Proclamation about making of Ordnance. ibid. The Queen going on progress
visits the University of Oxford. ibid. The Thames dried up. 75 A discourse
about the reason of it. ibid. The death of Viscount Mountague. 76 And of the
Lord Scroope. ibid. And of Sir Christopher Wray. ibid.
Anno M.D.XC.III.
A Parliament assembled at Westminster. Page 77 What Subsidies were granted
more then ordinary, and the caution about them. 78 The sum of the Queens
speech. ibid. Henry Barow a Sectary, hanged. 79 The Queens care of Scotland.
ibid. Her admonition to the King of Scotland. 80 The L. Borough sent over to
Scotland, on an Embassy. 81 What the Queen demanded* by him. ibid. What the
K. of Scotland answered to the Queens demands. ib. Bothwell being demanded of
the Queen by the King of Scotland, when he lurked in England, wherefore not
delivered up to him. 82 Bothwell returns secretly into Scotland. ibid. Hi^
insolent behavior there. 83 Tumults by him raised in the Court, and the
Chancellor thence removed. ibid. Libels in Germany against the Queen. 84
Which the Queen procures to be called in. ibid. She procures peace between
the Turk and the Transiluanian, and between the King of Sweden and the
Musco^ian. ibid. Captain Norris his proceeding in Britain. 85 His return
again into England. ibid. The King of France reconciled to the Church of Rome.
ibid. The reasons which he gave for his conversion. 86 The Queens Letter
written in Latin, which she sent him so soon as she heard thereof. 88 A Book
of Boethius translated by her. 89 The French King excuses his breaking promise
with the Queen. ibid. Agreements made between the Queen and him. ibid. The
Queens care for the Protestants in France, 90 She fortifieth her Islands of
Garnsey and Iersey, and sundry other places. 91 A great plague in London. ibid.
Hesket hanged, and wherefore. ibid. The death of the Earl of Darby. ibid. And
of the Earl of Sussex. 92 And of the Lord Gray. ibid. And of the Lord
Cromwell. ibid. And of the Lord Wentworth. ibid. And of Sir Christopher
Carlisle. ibid. Complaints of the Irish. ibid. Grudges between Tir-Oen and
Marshall Bagnall. 93 Mac-Guir rebelleth. ibid. Ineskelline taken. 93 Tir-Oen
usurps the title of O-Neale. 94 Shan O-Neales Sons surprised by Tir-Oen.
ibid.
Anno M.D.XC.IV.
THe Lord Zouch sent Ambassador into Scotland. Page 96 The answer of the King
of Scots. 97 Bothwell again rebelleth. ibid. The pretense and cloak of his
rebellion. 98 Bothwell put to flight. 99 The Scotch Papists banished the
Realm. ibid. Their plots and new devices. 100 The pretended right of the
Infanta to the Crown of England. 101 Parsons the Jesuit excuses his Book of
Dolman. 103 Prince Henry borne. ibid. Treason against the Queen conspired by
Lopez, and others. ibid. Their several confessions. 104 The Traitors
condemned. ibid. Cullin executed. 105 York and Williams apprehended. ibid. The
Queen informs the Spaniard of treason. 106 Antonio Perez lurketh in England.
ibid. The strength of the Leaguers much impaired. 107 Norris sent over into
Britain. ibid. Morley taken. ibid. Quinpercorentine taken. 108 Crodon
assaulted. ibid. It is taken. 109 Fourbisher slain. ibid. Norris recalled.
ibid. Hawkins his Nauigations. 110 He reaches the (...) Streights. 110 He is
assaulted. 111 He yields upon condi^^on, (...) set at liberty. ibid.
Lancasters voyage. 112 Honor conferred by a foreign Prince, (...) at home.
ibid. The death of Cardinal Allen. 113 And of Doctor Piers Archbishop of
York. 114 And of the Earl of Darby. ibid. Contention about the Isle of Man.
115 The death of the Lord (...). 116 And of the Lord E^ers, and of the Lord
Chandoys, and the Lord Montioy. 117 Sir William Russell made Lord Dep^^y of
Ireland. ibid. Tir-Oen submits to him. ibid. He is accused by Marshall
Bagnall. 118 Bu^ for all that is dismissed. ibid. The Lord Deputy prosecuteth
the Rebels. ^^9 Tir-Oen bewrays his rebellious (...). ibid.
Anno M.D.XC.V.
THe King of Scotland (...) Spaniard. Page 121 York and Williams hanged. 122
War pro^laimed in France against the Spaniard. 123 The war (...)
Luxenborough, and ^iccardy. ibid. Aid required from England. 124 The Queen
prouides against the sp^^^ard. ibid. More aid required (...) England. 125 The
Queen acquitteth her self of (...) imputations about the taking of Cambra.
125 The King of France persuaded to, and dissuaded from a peace with the
Spaniard. 127 Conditions proposed to the King of France by the Pope, and (...).
128 Co^nwall invaded by the Spaniard. ibid. Rawleighs voyage to Guiana. 12^ Sir
John Hawki^^, and Sir Francis Drakes expedition into America. 130 The voyage to
Porto-Rico. 131 (...) de-la-Hach fired, and (...). 132 (...). ibid. The death
of Sir Francis Drake. ibid. (...). ibid. ^ distaste between the Queen (...)
Low Countries, the reason of (...). ^^3 Sir Thomas Bodly sent over. ibid. His
message. ibid. The answer of the (...). 134 Some moneys offered in part of
payment. ibid. (...) ibid. Great debating about the matter. 135 Conditions
proposed by the States to the Queen, what they are. 136 The Queen accepts
of them. 137 (...). ibid. The Queens answer thereunto. ibid. The death of the
Earl of Arundell* and of the Lord (...), and Sir Thomas (...), and of D.
Whitaker. 14^ Sir John Norris sent into Ireland. 141 Tir-Oen takes Blackwater.
14^ He is proclaimed Traitor. ibid. The strength of the Rebels (...) Ireland.
143 Norris sets forward toward Tir-Oen. 143 And the Lord Deputy joins with
him. ibid. Tir-Oen lurketh. ibid. Captain Norris seems too much to (...)
Tir-Oen. 1^^ He entertaineth a parley with Tir-Oen* 1^^ Tir-Oens counterfeit
submission to Norris. ibid. And of O-donells, and Feagh-Mac-Hugh^. 1^^ A truce
made, and the danger of it. ibid.
Anno M.D.XC.VI.
SIr Henry Wallop, and Sir Robert Gardner, sent to parley with Tir-Oen,
O-donell, and the rest of the Rebels, and to hear their grieuances. Page 147
The complaints of Tir-Oen, of O donell. 148 Of Shan-Mac-Brian, Mac-Phelim, and
O-Neale, and (...) others. 149 Propositions proposed to the Rebels, they flight
(...) reject them. 150 The manner of the truce c^ncluded between them. ibid.
The Queens opinion of the (...). 151 Tir-Oen deals underhand with the
Spaniard. ibid. Tir-Oen sends Letters of the Spaniards to the Lord Deputy.
152 He deludeth Captain Norris and (...) from them a writ of pardon. ibid. The
Lord Deputy redu^eth O-Maden. ibid. Tir-Oens dissimulation laid open. 154 The
Lord Deputy pursues Pheagh-Ma^h-Hugh. 155 He is slain by (...). ibid. His
head is sent to (...), and the head of James (...). ib. Callis assaulted by the
Archduke of A^stria, and (...). 156 The Queen prepares a Navy of 140.
ships. ibid. The Earl of Essex, and Lord H^^ard, equal Generals of the
Forces. 157 The Prayer of Queen Elizabeth for the Navy. 158 The Navy sets
forward to Cadiz. 159 Where it arriues the 20. of June. 160 Certain Galleys of
the Spaniards withdraw themselves into the open Sea. 161 The English Soldiers
are set on shore. ibid. They break down Suaco Bridge. ibid. They take the
town. 162 They set fire on some Spanish ships. 163 No man of note lost in this
expedition but Captain Wingfield. ibid. The names of those that were knighted.
164 The English consult what to do. 165 They come to the town Pharo. ibid.
From thence to the (...). 166 They return home. ibid. How glorious this
victory was to the English, how profitable to them, and how hurtful to the
Spaniard. 167 Sir Francis Vere made Governor of Brill. 168 Which the Earl of
Essex takes very ill, but worse the choice of Sir Robert Cecill to be the
Queens Secretary, he having appointed Sir Tho. Bodley for that place. ibid.
The Spaniard prouides a new Fleet. ibid. The greatest part whereof cast away.
169 Queen Elizabeth fortifies the shore, she enters into a new League with
the French King. ibid. Which they both swear to. 170 The King of France made
Knight of the Garter. 171 Counterfeit Pur^euants and Apparators punished. ibid.
Thomas Arundell Count of the sacred Empire. 172 The question discussed, whether
a Subject be to admit of the honor which is conferred on him by a foreign
Prince. ibid. Such honors not to be admitted. 173 Counts and Viscounts, such
as some Officers in the Court of Rome. 174 Count-Palatines, and who boasted
themselves so to be. ibid. The Queens judgment on that question. ibid. The
death of Sir John Puckering, and of Richard Fletcher Bishop of London, and of
the Lord Hunsdon, and Sir Francis Knolles. 175 The death of the Earl of
Huntington, and of the Countess of Darby. 176
Anno M.D.XC.VII.
THe battle of Tournhalt in Brabant. Page 177 The Queen furnishes a Navy to
surprise the Spanish Navy at Azores, returning from the Indies. 178 Sir Walter
Rawleigh lands at Faiall. 181 He takes the town. 182 The Earl of Essex angry
for his landing. ibid. Rawleigh defends himself, and at last is received
into favor again. 183 The Islands Gratiosa and Flores yield to the Earl of
Essex. ibid. Villa Franca taken. 185 An Indian Caracke burnt. ibid. The English
Fleet returns. ibid. The Spanish Navy dispersed. 186 Grudges between the
Earl of Essex, and Sir Walter Rawleigh, and betwixt the Earl of Essex, and
Sir Robert Cecill. ibid. Essex discontented at the Titles given to the Lord
Admiral, whereupon the Queen makes him Earl Marshall of England. 187 Pa^l^s
D'l'ali^e sent Ambassador from the King of Poland. 187 His Oration to the
Queen, full of contempt. The Queens sudden answer made him in Latin. 188
The Queen le^^es him, and answers him by her Counselors afterward. 189 The
Merchant Adventurers are forbidden traffiquing in Germany. 190 And those of the
Hanse-townes, here in England. 191 The Embassy of Sir George Carew into
Poland. ibid. What he effects with those of Dantsicke. 192 And with the
Polacke. ibid. And with those of Elbing. ibid. An Ambassador from Christian
the fourth King of Denmark. ibid. The King of France requesteth aid from the
Queen. 193 He recouereth Amiens. 194 The King of Spain enclineth to a peace.
195 A Parliament assembled in England. ibid. The Lord De-la-ware restored to
his old place. 196 And also Thomas Lord Howard of Walden. 197 The death of the
Lord Cobham. ibid. And of W. Powlet Marquess of Winchester. ibid. The Lord
Borough made Deputy of Ireland. ibid. Captain Norris dies. 198 The Lord
Deputy winnes the Fort at Blackwater. 199 The Earl of Kildare dies. ibid. The
Rebels besiege Blackwater Fort. ibid. The Lord Deputy dies. ibid. Justices
appointed in Ireland in the mean time. 200 Tir-Oen presents his grieuances to
the Earl of Ormond, now Lieutenant of Ireland. ibid.
Anno M.D.XC.VIII.
THe King of France would mediate for a peace between the Queen of England,
and the Spaniard. Page 202 Ambassadors sent over about that business. 203
Cecill Secretary to the Queen, sent over to France. ibid. He ouertaketh the
King of France at Andes. ibid. The resolution of the King of France about
war. 204 Cecils answer in the behalf of the Queen. ibid. The Kings reply,
and promise to conclude a peace shortly for the benefit of both ^ingdomes.
ibid. But he deals under hand with the Archduke about the said peace;
whereupon some expostulations past between him and the Queen. 205 Barneuelts
Oration before the French in the behalf of the Estates of the Low Countries.
ibid. A difference between Secretary Cecil, and some of the French, whereupon
he is dismissed with fair words only. 207 Sir Thomas Edmonds thereupon is
sent over by the Queen with Letters, which the French King t^^ke not very
pleasantly. ibid. The King of France stands sto^tly for the Queen in the
Treaty at Veruins. 208 The order of Session amongst the Delegates. ibid. The
French take exceptions, that in the peace there was no mention of the Queen of
England. 210 The Queen has a care of her own^ estate. ibid. A disceptation
about a peace with the Spaniard. ibid. The reasons which were collected for
peace. 211 The reasons that were collected against it. 213 The reply of those
that stood for a peace. 215 Burghley Lord Treasurer, particularly for the
peace. 217 The Earl of Essex much against it. ibid. Whereupon he writes and
publishes his Apology. 218 A kind of contention between the Queen and the
Earl of Essex. ibid. The Earl behaues himself somewhat irreuerently before
the Queen. 219 Her distaste thereat. ibid. His answers full of indignation to
those that gave him good advice or counsel. ibid. The death of the Lord
Burghley Treasurer of England. 220 His Nativity and kindred, his education, he
was Master of Requests, and Secretary to King Edward, he began to retain under
Queen Elizabeth. 221 He is made Baron, and Treasurer of England, and Knight of
the Garter. 222 His Issue. ibid. New articles of agreement between the States
and the Queen. 223 Sir Thomas Bodley of Council for the Estates, he restored
the public Library of Oxford, first instituted by Humphrey Duke of
Gloucester. 224 The Lord Zouch, and Christopher Perkins, sent over into
Denmark, by reason of some contention between the Danes and the English. 225
Isabella Daughter to Philip King of Spain, betrothed to Albert of Austria.
ibid. The death of the King of Spain, being above seventy years of age. ibid.
Three places which he was w^nt to call the Keys of the Kingdom of Spain.
ibid. George Clifford Earl of Cumberland returns home from Sea. He took
Porto-Rico, and other places; but continued not there, by reason of a disease
that happened amongst his Soldiers. 226 The treason of Edward Squire
discovered; the proceedings therein; he is instigated to it by Walpole a
Jesuit; he bedawbes the pummell of the Queen^^ Saddle with poison, but to no
purpose. He besmeared a Chair of the Earl of Essex's with poison, but to no
more purpose. 227 He is questioned, and confesses all, and is hanged. 228
Rumors scattered abroad against the K. of Scots. ibid. Especially by one
Valentine Thomas, at the time of his execution. 229 The Queens admonition to
the King of Scots, in behalf of this business. ibid. Books written in the
behalf of the K. of Scots. ibid. The Contents of those Books about the course
of kingdoms. 230 The K. himself writes his Book called Basilicon-doron. 231
The affection of the Queen toward good studies. ibid. Books that she her
self translated. ibid. The death of D. Stapleton Professor at Doway. ibid.
And of D. Cosins Deane of the Arches. ibid. The death of Edmund Spencer the
Arch-Poet; his burial at the cost and charges of the Earl of Essex. 232
Black-water Fort in Ireland besieged by the Reb^ls. ibid. The English hau^ the
worst of it, in a battle. ibid. The Fort not long after yielded up to the
Rebels. 233 All the Province of Mounster reuolts from the Queen. ibid.
Protections hurtful to the Commonwealth. 234 Mounster all spoil^d and hauockt
by the Rebels. ibid. Tir-Oens brags of his success and victory. ibid. Sir
Richard Bingham sent over again into Ireland. 235 Who died there, presently
after his arrival. ibid.
Anno M.D.XC.IX.
A Great consultation in England, about the choice of a new Lord Deputy to be
sent into Ireland. Page 237 The Earl of Essex secretly desires it himself.
ibid. He is at length made Lord Deputy of Ireland. 238 An army allotted him,
and the number, the greatest that Ireland ever saw. 238 The sum of his
Commission. His departure. ibid. He marches to Mounster against some petty
Rebels, and neglects the tenor of his Commission. ibid. The Queen takes it
unkindly, and he as much, the making of Sir Robert Cecill Master of the Wards,
an Office which he himself expected. 240 The Earl excuses the fault, and
lays it on the Irish Council. ibid. Sir Coniers Clifford sets forward against
the Rebels. ibid. He is slain in the battle, with Sir Alexander Ratcliffe.
241 A fresh supply sent over from England into Ireland. ibid. Tir-Oen desires a
Parley of the Earl of Essex. ibid. Which is at last condiscended unto, at
Balla-Clinch Rivers Foord. ibid. Tir-Oen and the Earl of Essex talk together
almost an hour. 242 Tir-Oen desires to have another conference with the Earl
of Essex. ibid. Whereupon a truce is made for six weeks. ibid. Whereat the
Queen is angry with the Lord Deputy. ibid. She sends letters to him, and to
the Council of Ireland. 243 The Earl of Essex much discontented at the
letters. ibid. His secret plots to take some unlawful course to subdue his
enemies at Court. 244 An army of 6000. men mustered in London; half whereof
lay at watch and ward for the safety of the Queen. ibid. The Earl of Essex
makes an unexpected return into England, with some few followers. ibid. He
comes and kneeles before the Queen at Nonesuch. 245 He is committed to
custody in the Lord Keepers house. 246 He endeauoures to remove the suspicion
of ill that was conceived of him by reason of his sudden return. ibid. When
some would have freed him by force out of custody he would not agree to it.
247 The Truce broken in Ireland by Tir-Oen, in the Earls absence. ibid. The
proud answer, and the reason thereof. ibid. Tir-Oen behaues himself very
proudly. 248 The feather of a Phoenix sent him from the Pope. ibid. The Lord
Keeper of the Seal lays open the cause of the Earl of Essex in the
Star Chamber, to appease the people; and the Lord Treasurer, and the Lord
Admiral, and Secretary Cecill. 249 The Earl of Essex wholly devoted to prayer
and godly meditation. 251 A peace between Spain and England proposed. ibid.
The Spanish Galleys arrive at Flanders. 252 Charles King of Swethland sends
over to excuse himself to the Queen of England. ibid. The death of Richard
Hooker. 253
Anno M.DC.
TItles to Crowne-Land confirmed by the Queen. 154 A Proclamation that no gold
or silver should be carried out of the Kingdom. 255 Tir-Oen conferreth honors
upon his followers. ibid. Mac-Guir and Warrham Saint Ledger are slain. ibid.
Charles Blunt, Lord Montioy made Deputy of Ireland: who arrived there in the
very midest of winter. ibid. The Pope of Rome encourages the Rebels of
Ireland with his iudulgence and general pardon. 256 The form and manner of
it. ibid. The Rebels sound an Alarm in the very suburbs of Dublin. The Deputy
neglects them, and only sets forward after Tir-Oen. 257 But Tir-Oen preuents
him. ibid. The Deputy sends a Garrison to Vlster. 257 The City of Derry is
fortified, and Tir-Oen repulsed. 258 Ony-Mac-Mory-Og, the chief of the Family
of O-More, is slain. ibid. The Lord Deputy sets forwards again toward
Vlster. 259 He breaks through many difficulties. ibid. Mont-Norris Fort
erected. ibid. Henry Docwray chaseth the Rebels. ibid. The Lord Deputy Montioy
restrains the fury of the Rebels in the Province of Leinster. 260 After that
he returns again to Vlster. ibid. The exploits of Sir George Carew President
of Vlster, and what he did in that Province. 261 A new proposal of a peace
with Spain again. ibid. Upon what hopes this peace was propounded. 262
Bononia, or Bolonia, the place appointed for the Treaty. 263 Observations about
the precedence of the kingdoms of Spain, England, and France. ibid. Peers
designed for the Queens part. 264 The instructions of the English for the
Queens honor. ibid. Exceptions taken on both sides concerning some terms in
the Commissions of the Delegates. 265 The title of Most Illustrious canuased.
ibid. The English challenge for the Queen the first place. 274 The Spaniards
will not yield them place equal with them. ibid. New instructions to the
English from the Queen. 275 The complaint of the Archduke about the Queens
succouring the Hollanders, in the time of Truce, answered. 276 By reason of
Priority or Equality denied to the Queen, the Treaty breaks off very
abruptly, after it had continued three months. 277 The battle at Newport, with
the rest of the proceedings there. 278 Sir Francis Vere wounded in the leg, and
the thigh, and his Horse slain under him. 280 They that were taken of the
enemy; they that were wounded; and the Englishmens names that best deserved in
the battle* 281 Contentions betwixt the English and French about prizes. ibid.
The matter of agreement between both parties. 282 Contentions between the
English and the Danes concerning Traffic, and Fishing. 283 The English
complain of the exacti^n of tribute for passing the Sound; the Danish
Delegates depart for want of victuals. 285 Two Breefes sent privately by the
Pope against the K. of Scots, nex^ Heir to the Crown of England. ibid. The
treason intended by the Ruthwens, the Brothers of Earl Gowry. 286 Great
complaint in England for the scarsity of Corn. ibid. The Earl of Essex
commanded to keep his house. 287 He appears before the Lords Commissioners.
ibid. The Earl makes answer for himself. 288 The L. Keeper interrupts the
Earl in his answer. 289 Great hopes of the Earls liberty, collected from the
Queens natural inclination to mercy. 290 As also from the nobleness and
virtuous disposition of the heart of Essex himself. ibid. Considerations in
what course of life the Earl was best to employ himself. 292 Great
humbleness of mind in the Earl of Essex. 293 The Earls message to the
Queen full of humility. ibid. The Queens answer in words she would often
use. 294 Cu^^e gets access to the Earl of Essex. ibid. But the Earl is yet
deaf to his bad counsel. ibid. The Queen will not yield to Essex's petition.
295 Whereat the Earl grew much discontented. ibid. And now begins to hearken
to ill counsel. ibid. He keeps open entertainment for all comers. 296 The
death of Roger Lord North. ibid.
Anno M.DC.I.
Ambassadors sent from Ma^ritania and Russia. Page 297 Diverse Princes resort
to visit the Qu^^ne. ibid. The Earl of Essex quite deaf to any good advice.
298 He is m^re and more enraged, but especially for the Earl of Southamptons
being assa^l^ed by the Lord Gray in the open street. 299 He e^deauoureth to
draw the King of Scots to his party. ibid. The Earl of Southampton, Sir
Charles Dauers, Sir Ferdinando Gorge, Sir John Dauis, and John Littleton, made
privy to the Earl of Essex secret plots and purp^ses. 300 Their meeting in
Drewry house the things proposed there: the concl^si^n of surprising the Court.
301 Whereupon suspicion is daily increased of the Earls loyalty. ibid. And the
Earl^ him self, sent for to the Lord Treasurers. 302 B^t he excus^^h himself
by reason of ill health, and went not. ibid. He begins to conceive new
plots. ibid. A great multitude of people assemble about Essex house. 303 Some
Lords of the Co^ncell sent to know the reason. 304 The Earl of Essex his
complaint to them. ibid. The open clamors of the multitude to kill the
Councillors. 305 The Lords are locked up in Essex house. ibid. The Earl
himself enters London, to the Sheriffes-^^use. 306 He is presently proclaimed
Traitor. ibid. He thinks which way to return home again. 307 Sir Ferdinando
Gorge sets the Lords of the privy Council free. ibid. A conflict near the
Bishop of Londons Palace. ibid. The Earl takes b^at at Queene-hith, and
f^rtifies his house. 308 The Earl of Essex commanded to yield, will not, but
upon some conditions. ibid. The Admiral will give none. ibid. Tbe Earl
determines to issue forth upon them. ibid. But upon better advice begins to
think of yielding. 309 They all yield themselves up to my Lord Admiral. ibid.
The Earls of Essex and Southampton imprisoned. ibid. The care of the Citizens
highly commended by the Queen in a Proclamation. 310 Thomas Lee taken, and
executed at Tiburne. ibid. A Proclamation against (...) and R^n-awaies. 311 The
plots of the Conspirators are detected. ibid. The Earls of Essex and
Southampton arraigned. ibid. The principal heads of their Inditements. ibid.
Laid open at length by the Queens Lawyers, (...) Yeluerton, and Sir Edward
Coke. 312 The Earl of Essex's reply. 313 He excuses his injuries done to the
Lords of the Council. 314 The lays open the injuries done to himself. ibid
He extenuates the testimony of Sir Ferdinando Gorge. 315 The Earl of
Southampton defends his own^ cause. ibid. Certain cases propounded to the
Judges. 316 The Earl of Essex much accuses his aduer^aries. ibid. Sir Francis
Bacon remoues the accusation. ibid. The Earl of Essex interrupteth him in his
speech, and accuses Secretary Cecill. 317 Cecill comes forth out of a little
Closet, where he stood to answer to the Earls objections. ibid His speech to
the Earl of Essex. ibid. The Lord Knolles sent for to the Judges to decide the
matter. 318 Cecill inueigheth against the Earl of Essex. ibid. Southampton
again excuses himself. ibid. The Judges opinion concerning the protestation
of both the Earls. 319 The Earls are both found guilty of treason by the
Peers. 320 The Earl of Essex's speech at the pronunciation of sentence. ibid.
The sentence pronounced both against the Earl of Essex, and Southampton. 321
Others also are arraigned about that business. ibid. The Earl of Essex
desires to speak with some of the Lords of the pri^y C^^^cell. 322 He accuses
Cuffe as the author of all his treachery. 323 The Earl reueals more that knew
of the conspiracy. ibid. He is brought out to executiou in the Tower yard. 324
He is beheaded. 325 His commendation* his stock, and Ancestors. 326 His Wife,
and Issue. 327 Blunt, Danuers, Dauis, Mericke, and Cuffe arraigned. ibid.
Blunt's examination, and what he confessed. 328 Danuers, what he answered for
himself. 329 And Dauis for himself. ibid. The arraignment of Cuffe, with the
particulars thereof. 330 Cuffe, what he a^swered for himself. 331 The
arraignment of Sir Gill. Mericke, with the particulars thereof. 332 What Sir
Gill. Mericke said for himself. ibid. Sir Christopher Blunt, and Charles
Danuers request to be beheaded. ibid. Cuffes execution at Tiburne, and his
confession there. 333 Merickes execution there also. 334 Blunt, and Danuers
beheaded on Tower Hill. ibid. The confession of Sir Christopher Blunt. 335 Sir
Henry Neuill committed upon suspicion. 336 The punishment of Daniel an Impostor
of the Earl of Essex's Letters. 337 The Queens answer to the Ambassadors of
Scotland. ibid. Galleys first prepared. 339 The States think how to subdue
Flanders. ibid. They are prevented by the Archduke. ibid. Sir Francis Vere
made Gouer^our of Ostend. 340 The description and situation of Ostend. ibid. A
parley with the Archduke about yielding of Ostend. 341 Vere being supplied with
provision, breaks it off. ibid. He resigneth up his Office into the hands of
the States. 343 The chiefest Englishmen that died at the Siege. ibid. Marshall
Birone sent over into England. 344 A Parliament assembled at Westminster. ibid.
Monopolies restrained. 345 The Queens speech to some of the Lower House about
them. ibid. The death of the Earl of P^mbroke. 346 And of the Lord Norris.
ibid. And of the Lord Willoughby. 347 A Proclamation against transporting money
into Ireland. ibid. Deliberation about altering the Coin in Ireland. ibid. The
Soldiers pay altered without any t^mult or mutiny. 348 The Lord Deputy sets on
toward the Rebels. ibid. And Sir Henry Docwray in other parts. 349 The English
surprise Donegall Monastery. ibid. Rumors concerning the approaching of the
Spaniard at Munster, draws the Lord Deputy back^ again. 350 Ballashanon is
seized on. ibid. President Carew surprizeth the titular Earl of Desmond, and
send both him and Florence Mac-Carty over into England 351 He makes preparation
against the Spaniard. ibid. He informs the Lord Deputy of the affairs. 352 A
consultation whether or no the Deputy should enter Mounster without his Forces.
ibid. The Spanish Forces land in Ireland. ibid. The reasons of their coming
published. 353 The English beset them. 353 The Spaniards driven out from
Rincurran Castle. ibid. Tir-Oen comes into Mounster. 354 The Rebels determine
to bring their Forces into the town. 355 The English hinder them. ibid. The
Rebels retire: and the E^glish pursue them. ibid. An earthquake in London the
24. of December. 356 The Rebels p^t to flight. ibid. The commodities of that
victory. 357 The Spaniards desire a parley. ibid. Articles about their
yielding. 358 They depart out of Ireland. ibid.
Anno M.DC.II.
DVnboy Castle assaulted by the President. 360 The Rebels reduced into order.
ibid. Bishop O-Hegan slain. 361 A Navy dispatched to the Spanish sh^re. ibid.
The Gal^ies and Carackes set upon in the Haven of Cezimbra. ibid. A Caracke and
Galleys are set upon. 362 The Galleys are put to flight. ibid. Some of them
taken. ibid. A parley. ibid. They yield. 363 The r^st of the Galleys are for
Flanders. ibid. They light upon the Queens ships. 364 They skirmish. ibid.
Their Galleys vanquished. 365 A treaty at Bremen with the Danes. ibid. They
complain of too much Tribute paid for passing the Sounds. ibid. Their demands.
365. A controversy discussed about the freeness of the Sea. 366 The treaty
breaks. 367 Disagreements between the Jesuits and Secular Priests. 368 See
Watsons Quodlibets of State. 369 Jesuits and Secular Priests banished. 370
Marshall Birone beheaded. 371 The French King complains of the Duke of Bullen.
ibid. He asks Queen Elizabeth's counsel what he should do with him. ibid.
The Queens answer. 372 The French Kings reply. 373 The opinion of others
concerning this matter. ibid. Geneua relieved. 374 The death of Alexander
Nowell. ibid. Tir-Oen fears both his own power and his Armies. 375 The Deputy
persues him. ibid. He builds Charlemont. ibid. And Fort Montioy. 376 Docwray
chaseth the Rebels. ibid. Yet he is slightly regarded. ibid. More of the Rebels
submit themselves. 377 Tir-Oen craves pardon. ibid.
Anno M.DC.III.
TIr-Oen absol^tely submits himself. 378 The Queen falls sick. 380 In the
Kings Preface to the Reader in his Basilicon Doron. 384
THE LIFE AND REIGN OF THE most famous Princess ELIZABETH; An. Dom. 1589.
With a memorial of the chiefest matters and affairs of the States of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland: and sundry other occurrences of the
affairs of most part of Christendom: Which have happened since the fatal
Spanish Invasion, to the tim^ of her Dissolution.
AFTER that so unexpected a success had blasted the glory of the Spanish
Invasion, They to ^alue their wounded honor* and to forestall in the English
the very thought of the like invasion, begin now to prosecute their
foreintended purpose of wounding and molesting the peace of England, The
practices of the Spaniard in Scotland against England.
by the hands of her neighbor Scotland. To which purpose, the industrious
villainy of Robert Bruce, a Priest, with Creicton and Hay, Jesuits working upon
the distempered Religion of the Earls of Huntley, Arrolle, Crawford and
Bothwell (a man as fickle as his fortune, but yet the natural son of John
Prior of Coldingham, the son of James the fifth King of Scotland) easily
persuaded them into a strong mutiny. The drift and scope of their purpose was,
that having surprised the King, they might make way for some foreign forces
to restore the decaying Romish Religion to its former perfection, and then to
assail England, in revenge of the death of the Queen of Scots. The pretenses
whereby they drew the facil disposition of the comminalty into a favoring and
following of the business, were, That the king was against his will
constrained to the custody of Maitland the Chancellor, and some others of the
English faction; That the English men flesht, as it were, with the safe and
unrevenged death of the Queen of Scots, had now made themselves ready, even to
root out the whole Scottish nobility; and that they, at the request of the
King himself, had put themselves thus in arms to rescue Him from the
strictness of his custody, and the Realm from ruin. A mutiny in Scotland.
The King (having been gone a hunting, and certified by many messengers upon
one and the same day, that on the one side Bothwell, was near at hand with a
troop of Borderers; and that Huntley and the rest, came marching toward him
from the Northern quarters, with a complete army) by his Proclamation to and
for the same purpose, declares them all Traitors; and sends out a press
amongst his loyal Subjects, excepting none but those whom, either by reason of
defect of sixteen years, or excess above threescore, not his clemency so
much, as Nature exempted from service. Hereupon Bothwell discomfited for the
very fear of an overthrow, forsakes his courage (as his accomplices did him) and
betakes himself to his places of retire; But the Earl of Huntely still
keeps on his march, and by the way surpriseth Glamise, an old enemy of his,
and Captain of the Kings Guard.

The Queen of Englands discretion entertayning a jealous thought, that her
own Kingdom would share in the doleful effects of those mischiefs that
Scotland hatched, Allayed by the Queen.
left nothing unattempted which the forcible argument either of money or reason
could effect, to spur on the King of Scots to an immature crushing of this
Spanish policy, which notwithstanding the ripeness of his own judgment had
already prompted him to. For being as wary to prevent, as skillful to foreknow
the storm that might follow, he presently sets forward toward Huntley. But
he, whether out of a guilty fear of Majesty imprinted in the heart of
rebellion, or out of some politic distrust of his own, or his accomplices
ability, having marched on as far as Dee-bridge, no sooner understood of the
approach of the Kings forces, but dismissing Glamise, he betakes himself to
the deceitful security of his own dwellings amongst the ragged hills at
Strathbolgie. Thither when the King (more eager of the chase, then careful
either of his age or Person, unacquainted with labor, want and such course
entertainment as those sharp climates affoorded) had narrowly pursued him:
first the Earl tendered a submission upon the condition of safety both of life
and goods; but afterward, he wholly and absolutely yielded up himself to the
pleasure of the King: who at the first indeed, vouchsafing him not so much as
the courtesy of conference straightway committed him to prison; but not long
after released him, both from his punishment and his offense, neither only
pardoned he him, but extended the same mercy to every one of his accomplices,
whose sober discretion could so far dispense with their proud ambition, as to
petition for it.

The same month that these affairs went thus harshly with the Spaniards
favorites in Scotland, was Philip Howard Earl of Arundel, The Earl of Arundel
arraigned.
now after three years imprisonment in the Tower, for suspicion of too good
affection to the Spaniard, arraigned at Westminster Hall, before Henry Earl of
Darby, appointed Lord High Steward of England, for this matter, and the rest of
his Peers: William Cecil, Lord Burgheley, Hi^ Peers.
High Treasurer of England, William Marquess of Winchester, Edward Earl of
Oxford Lord High Chamberlayne of England, Henry Earl of Kent, Henry Earl of
Sussex, Henry Earl of Pembrooke, Edward Earl of Hartford, Henry Earl of
Lincoln: The Lord Hunsdon, The Lord Willoughby of Eresby, The Lord Morley, The
Lord Cobham, The Lord Gray, The Lord Darcy of the North, The Lord Sands, The
Lord Wentworth, The Lord Rich, The Lord Willoughby of Parrham, The Lord North,
The Lord Saint-Iohns of Bletso, The Lord Buckhurst, The Lord La-ware, and the
Lord Norrice.

The Earl being commanded to lift up his hand, lift up both that, and his
voice in these words: Beh^ld a hand clear, and a mind sincere. The principal
heads whereof he was accused were:

First, that he was of too intimate acquaintance with Cardinal Allan, Parsons
the Jesuit, The heads of his accusation or indictment.
and other Traitors, who lay in continual wayt for the destruction both of
Prince and people; and who by exciting both Forrayners abroad, and Natural
Subjects at home, plotted the reducement of the Romish Religion to its ancient
vigor.

Secondly, that in letters sent by Weston, otherwise Burges, a Priest, he had
engaged his promise to the said Cardinal, for the promotion of the Catholic
cause, and to that intent would secretly have conveyed himself out of the
Realm.

Thirdly, that he was privy to the Bull of Sixtus Quintus Bishop of Rome,
whereby the Queen her self was deposed, and her kingdoms bequeathed to the
invasion of the Spaniard.

Fourthly, that in the time of his imprisonment in the Tower of London, he
caused Mass to be said for the prosperous success of the Spanish Fleet; and
that he himself had used diverse peculiar prayers to the same purpose.

Then being demanded whether he were guilty or not, he requires his fourefold
ac^usation with a fourefold interrogation of the Judges: as

First, whither it were l^wfull to wrap and knead up so many particular
offenses in one Indictment?

To whom they answered it lawful.

Secondly, His demands of the Judges.
whether Coniecturall Arguments were of force or no, to convince a truth?

To whom they answered it lawful for him to interpose exception against them.

Thirdly, whether they could lustly accuse him of things that were made treason
in the thirteenth year of the Queen, now, after the time allotted in the very
law?

To whom they promised no proceeding against, but out of the old law for
treason, enacted by King Edward the third.

Lastly, he demanded whether that were a formal Indictment, which erred both
in time and place?

To whom they returned the thing what* and not so much the time when, or the
place where to be chiefly to be considered. Then being demanded again whether
he were guilty or no, he pleaded not guilty, submitting his cause to God and
the judgment of his Peers; requesting withal, that the weakness of his
memory much impaired by the great indisposition of his body, and the long
time of his imprisonment might occasion no harm or disadvantage unto him, ^f
he should by chance falter in such multiplicitie of matter.

Sergeant Puckering dilating upon the former part of the Indictment, declares
unto them how that Cardinal Allan with other Jesuits had devised and sought
to accomplish plots mischievous both to Prince and people, for which cause the
said Cardinal was banished the Realm; yet notwithstanding that the Earl
maintained an intercourse of letters with him still, in some whereof he assured
him of his utmost endeavor for promoting the Catholic cause, which words he
argued could admit of no milder exposition, than an invasion of England. The
Earl made answer that by promoting the Catholic cause, he meant not the
subversion of the Realm, as they fancied, but only the conversion of as many
Proselites as he could. The Queens Attorney Popham urges against this, the
confessions of Savage, Throgmorton, and Babington, out of which he made his
illation, that by those words the Earl meant an invasion of England by force
of arms.

Soutl^worth, Sergeant at Law having alleged the Statutes lately made against
Jesuits and Seminary Priests, begins to unfold the secret mischievous purposes
of sending Jesuits over into England; concluding them to be Traitors from a
testimony taken from the Earls own mouth, who when Val^ngers case about the
Libell was tried in the Starrechamber, openly affirmed, that he that was
thoroughly a Papist must needs be a Traitor, aggravating the matter with these
circumstances be^ides, that the Earl had entertained such men notwithstanding
into his familiar acquaintance, and that also he had reconciled himself to the
Roman Church, and tendered obedience to that See.

This reconcilement the Earl earnestly denied, beseeching them that testimony
might be produced for confirmation: but they produced none but himself, who
having formerly granted them, that he had been confessed his sins by Burges
the Priest, gave them occasion to use this argument against him; he that is
admitted to the use of the Sacraments of the Church of Rome must first be
reconciled to that Church: but he had been admitted by Gratley, a Priest to
the use of the Sacraments of the Church of Rome; and therefore they concluded
his re^oncilement.

Here Popham with as great vehemence of words, as multip^icitie of matter,
argues his reconcilement, from his own letters, from his resolution to depart
the Realm, and from his continual being thus at the Cardinals beck, thence
concluding him guilty of treason, and afterward producing letters of Gratley
and Morgan to the Queen of Scots, taxed him as if he professed the Romish
religion, not out of conscience, but as a color for his discontents if they
should chance to break out into open rebellion. After all this was produced a
little picture found in the Earls casket on the one side whereof was a
handshaking a Serpent into the fire, with this inscription, Si Deus n^biscum,
quis contra nos, that is, If God be with us, wh^ can be against us? On the
other side a Lion rampant with his tallents cut off, but this motto, Tamen leo,
that is, I am yet a Lion. To this he add^d that the Cardin^l^ exhortation to
the contrary diuerte^ his ^esolution of departing the Realm, alleging that
he might do the Church of Rome better service at home, than he (...).
Likewise that in a letter sent the Queen he had bitterly traduced and sorely
calumniated the legal proceeding of the Realm, especially in the sentence of
death both of his (...) and Grandfather, that the Queen of Scots had commended
him to Bibington as a fit man to be the Chief Head of all Catholics. That
Cardinal Allan plainly intimated, that the Popes B^ll was procured by the
means of a Great man in England, wh^ must necessarily be the Earl himself,
since none of all the nobility was guilty of that familiarity with him, which
the Earl by letters daily increased and augmented. Then were read the
confessions of William and Margaret brother and sister to the Earl. Likewise
some of his own letters which he wrote, when he resolved a departure of the
Realm, every one magnifying even to admiration the clemency of the Queen,
who at that time qualified his offense of treas^n with a triuiall imputation of
a bare contempt only.

To these things the Ear^e here and there mingled an answer; The Earls Answer.
as that the picture was a small ordinary trifle, and the gift of one of his
servants. That indeed he assured Cardinal Allan of the extremity of his
endeavors, but yet neither against Prince nor people. That whatsoever he had
formerly written concerning the judgment pronounced either against his Father
or Grandfather, the Chronicle was better able to (...)

Then were read certain letters of the Cardinal Allan to the Queen of S^ots,
and others of the Bishops of Rosse since the time of his intended flight
concerning a fresh invasion of England. After that the Bull also of Sixtus
Quintus, and many sentences gleaned out of the Cardinals admonitions to his
Countre^ men in England the year before printed at Antwerpe. The Title also of
Philip Duke of Norfolk found in some scattered papers was laid to his charge,
by reason indeed that the Cardinal not long since, had exhorted him to use a
Higher Title; and a^l this, to prove him guilty of Treason before his
imprisonment.

But Egerton the Queens Solicitor having compendiously collated all the
premises, does undertake to convince the Earl of Treason likewise since his
imprisonment, and that at three several times; as first, before the Spanish
Navy came, by wishing a fortunate success unto it; then at the very time of
the Nauies coming, by causing Services, Prayers, and the Mass of the Holy
Ghost, to be said full four and twenty hours without respite for the
prosperity thereof: and lastly, at the time of its shameful flight, by more
then ordinary grief bewayling the misery of so unexpected fortune. The
testimonies to confirm these allegations were taken (...)

The Earl indeed denied not the saying of Mass or prayers, but the end
thereof, as they imagined* his end being only to divert the cruelty of that
slaughter, which he (...) was threatened Catholics. But what Gerar^ affirmed
he constantly denied; and adiuring him by the terror of the fearful day of
judgment, either so distracted his memory, or quickened his conscience, that
he accused none more than himself of folly in speaking little or nothing to
the purpose. What Bennet witnessed, the Earl sought to suppress the belief
of, by producing to them palpable contradictions, which his whole confession
was in a (...) clad with, and for the rest as being men partly condemned,
partly dissolute in their life, and partly of small credit, he not so much
esteemed of their testimony, as traduced that courtesy which he thought
allowed him company the better to entangle him.

This peremptory slighting and disreputing of the witness that came for the
Queen, being (...) with some reprehension, the Queens Solicitor gave them
notice to hear the words of the ancient law of Richard the 2. read; wherein is
declared that the Crown of England is under no Jurisdiction, except only
Gods; and that the Bishop of Rome has no right either in or over the same.
After which time the variety of these distracted matters having wasted the day
to twi^ight, occasioned the Earl to be withdrawn: who humbly submitting
himself to his Peers, and protesting still his allegiance and duty to the
Queen, requested them to re^olue and determine upon that, which might be
glory unto God, for the safety of the Queen, and the ^onor of their quiet
conscience.

His Peers withdrawing themselves, continued in consultation the space of an
(...) of the Judges in some points of law, they returned to their seats. And
being demanded their sentence, all of them laying their hands to their hearts,
He is condemned.
thereby acquitting their Honor from corruption, and their conscience from any
partial imputation, did pronounce the Earl guilty. Who being asked, what he
had to say that Judgment might not pass upon him, used no other words then
what his father had formerly in the same place, Fiat voluntas Dei, that is, The
Lords will be done. After the pronouncing of his sentence of death, he
requested that he might speak with his wife, see his young son, borne since
the time of his imprisonment; make even with his creditors, and take order for
the payment of his debts. And then having desired that the Queen would accept
his son into her favor, his white wand or staff of authority was broken by
the Lord Steward, and he dismissed to the place of his imprisonment in the
Tower, with the fatal ha^chet carried the wrong way before him.

The immature ruin of so hopeful a blossom (for he had not yet seen three
and thirty) could not more exasperate the due grief of many, then it amplified
the discretion of the Queen; who by this awaked the proud hopes of the
Romanists to a just ^eare. Yet notwithstanding she pardoned him his life, His
life pardoned.
esteeming it a more merciful policy to let him and his Popish favorites,
rather know, then feel the power of her incensed Majesty.

And now the Queen as well to manifest her force and strength abroad, as she
had done her wisdom at home, began to pursue that victory which God had
already given her against the Spaniard. Drakes expedition.
And therefore accounting it as honorable, (...) the like from him, she gave
free license to the courage of Sir John N^r^ice and Sir Fran^is Drake, (who
most confidently believed that the power of the Spaniard stood much engaged to
most men's (...) opinion, and many men's fear) to set out a Navy for Spain;
which they did furnish with as (...) cheerefulnes, as expenses, demanding
nothing of the Queen, but some few of her men of war. But as their valor
began the motion, so their discretion prompted them to this condition, that all
ships or other spoils should be no farther distributed then amongst
themselves, to the encouragement of valor, and the small recompense of their
cost and charges. Yet the forces of this expeditio^ reached not to tha^
strength and quantity as was expected. For the States of the Low Countries
(rather to show their discontent at the English for Captain Sir John
Wingfields fake the Governor under whom the Garrison was corrupted, and
Geertrudenberg it self betrayed to Prince Maurice, then great affection to
their proceedings in this voyage) joined only some few ships to them: so that
in all there might be more or less, some eleven thousand soldiers and about
fifteen hundred mariners. To these also Don Antonio the base borne, and Prior
of Crato, with some few Portugals joined themselves: who out of a claim he
laid to the Kingdom of Portugal (who by the Laws of the Country accepts
base borne as well as legitimate Kings) loaded the vain expectation and belief
of the English with empty promises of the Portugals revolt from the servile
yoke of the Spaniard, to his just and lawful subjection; and of great succor
which he was to have from the free bounty of Mulley Hamet King of Moracco.

The provisions for this enterprise being all in a readiness, in April next,
they put forth from Plimmouth; and five days after they landed within a mile
of the Groyne The Groyn is assaulted.
without impeach. From thence marching toward the Base town, a great Galeon
and two smaller ves^els that rode in the Bay, beat sorely upon them, especially
on some of the vnskilfuller sort, whom either their own indiscretion, or their
vnhapy fortune could not rescue from the danger. But afterward the English
planting some few pieces of Ordnance upon the shore, made them quickly abandon
the Road, and themselves a safer way.

The next day after, the Base Town was assaulted at one and the same time in
three places; on that part that looked toward the Continent Colonel Bret and
Vnton made onset, with some three hundred more; and Richard Wingfield and
Sampson with five hundred on the other side. These attempting it by Scalado,
were forced sometime to abandon their possessions, by reason of strong
resistance they found in the enemy. But the rest brake in upon them valiantly
and happily without any great loss; which made the Spaniards that inhabited
there, quickly forsake the Town and their Arms, The Base Town taken.
and convey themselves through passages as difficult to find out, as dangerous
to pass through, to the High town. The enemy in the great Galleon, perceiving
her to be on fire and her Artillery ouercharged, came presently a shore,
leaving her to suffer a two days martyrdom; and her provision of all sorts,
and good warlike munition (which had been stored up there against the next
invasion) to be conveyed into the English ships.

Then marched the English up to the High Town, The High Town assaulted, but in
vain.
which when General Norris observed to be seated upon a Rock, and only
mineable in one place, there he employed the industry of many workmen: and the
better to distract their fear, he places his engines at the other side of the
wall, intending to make a breach at the same time. But his policy was more
laudable* then the event of it suitable; for the underminers, having not bedded
their powder enough in the walls, the fire recoyled back again, frustrating
both their labor and expectation. Wherefore they fell to it again, and worked
deeper into the foundation of the wall. The miners gave fire to the train:
whereby they blew up great part of the Tower, under which their powder was
planted; but the other part thereof falling afterward upon many of the English
that contended for their own destruction by entering the breach, ^lew many of
them; and wounded so many, that the rest forsaking their commanders to secure
their own lives, left them to scuffle with a double enemy men and stones. And
yet they that continued this assault at the Breach at the very same time on the
other side of the wall, by reason that the inconstancy of some rubbish would
not allow them sure footing, were feign after the loss of some men, to lose
their labor to and retire; their discreet valor notwithstanding being more to
be commended, then their success vpbrayded.

General Norris then having certain intelligence that Conde de Andrada had
assembled his forces together at Puente de Burgos; Preparation from the
Spaniard.
and that Conde de Altemira hastened with a greater leauy, either with intent to
succor the Groyne, or else to encampe between the English and the place of
their imbarking, so to hinder their shipping, forthwith resolves with ten
regiments to go visit the enemies forces. In the foreward were the Regiments
of Sir Edward Norris, and Colonel William Sidney. In the main battle that of
the General himself, and Colonel Medkerkes a Low Country man. In the
Rereward the Regiments of Sir Henry Norris, Colonel Hantley, and Colonel Bret.

The enemy although having strongly entrenched himself at the foot of the
Bridge, The Spaniards driven back.
yet was by force driven back, and made to forsake their barricadoes of
Barrels, and the Bridge which was flanked on both sides with shot, which did
afford the English an easy passage both for themselves, and for their cruelty
to slaughter the enemy at pleasure, for at least three miles chase; and safely
to ransacke hamlets and neighbor villages, and set the whole Country
thereabouts on fire: which when they had done about two days after, The
English depart* and embarque for Portugal.
they took ship and embarked for Portugal.

But whilst a contrary wind lengthned their intended course, Robert Earl of
Essex, whether out of love of glory, hate of the Spaniard, or pity to Don
Antonio, licenced more by his own mind then the Queens pleasure, having put
forth to sea, came into the English fleet. The Queen being as angry, as
ignorant of his voyage, and very unlikely to have seconded this his resolution
with her consent; as being wary not to endanger any of her chief Nobility in
such a kind of a private enterprise. ^t is uncertain (although many would
talk it into truth) whether or no the Earl put himself upon this Action with
a thought of being sole Commander and General of the Navy: By reason that by
former preferments he had engaged to his service, the hearts of most of the
Colonels and Captains there, that might by joint consent confer it upon him:
yet certain it is, that in this, if he lost his Desire, he purchased Honor.

Two days after, the sea being so boisterous that a discreet suspicion might
have construed it ominous, they landed at Peniche Peniche taken.
in Portugal; where after the sea had defended it more valiantly then the men,
by drowning many before they landed, the enemy fled and the Castle yielded to
Antonio. From Peniche the Army marched by land to Lisbone under the conduct of
General Norris, which was some threescore miles off: General Drake assuring
that he would follow with the fleet up the River Tagus. In their voyage at
Torres Vedras, a Council of War was called; whereby it was decreed most
convenient to pitch the Camp on the East side of the City, that so all hopes
of succor might be blocked up from the Spaniard, and that so every
Portuguesse might the more conveniently have access to their King.

After six days marching, the Army approached the Western suburbs of
Lisbone, Lisbon assaulted.
without so much as the hope of an encounter with the enemy; and there entering
S. Katharines to scour the streets, they found none but old folks, beggars and
the like, without as much as any weapon but their tongue, which they employed
in this general acclamation, Viua el Rey Don Antonio. For Albert Duke of
Austria, their late Governor had already disfurnisht the Town of provision
both for war and life, leaving the Portuguesse nothing but their empty
allegiance.

The Army being now quartered in the suburbs, and the soldiers tired with
their tedious march being newly reposed to rest, The Spaniards sally forth
upon the English.
the Spanish Garrison sallieth forth upon them; the main violence and heat
whereof, Colonel Bret and his quarter bore, till such time that the English
coming in to succor, But are forced home to their very gates.
drove them to a shameful retreat and chased them even to their City gates.
But in this charge Colonel Bret with Captain Carsey and Carre both of his
regiment, were slain. Two days after this, the Portuguesse not so much as
assuring them hope of the pretended revolt to Don Antonio, the idle promises of
the King of Morocco being discovered, fresh forces still crowding into Lisbone,
and a disease violently impouerishing the strength of the Army, besides the
scarsity of powder and victuals, and the want of the Ordnance which they
expected General Drake should have brought them, forcing them thereunto, the
English departed the suburbs without either pillage or spoil, although the
place were very rich in outlandish merchandise; The English depart.
for they forbore any violence, thinking that the winning of the hearts of the
Portuguesse by so unexpected a courtesy, would recompense that loss which they
sustained with no small difficulty.

Having now marched to Cascays, a little Town situate at the mouth of the
River, they began to question General Drake Drake blamed.
for the breach of his word and promise; imputing the loss of their victory to
his sloth and inconstancy, in not following them, as he promised with the whole
Navy: He rather refelling the contumely, then excusing the pretended injury,
urged that it was impossible for him to pass the Channel Alcaceue, which the
multiplicity of shallow foords had made vnnauigable. That then if he should
have come straight on by S. Iulians Fort, which was well fortified with fifty
great pieces of Ordance and store of Galleys, with their fore deckes turned,
he should have exposed the Navy to uncertain success, but certain danger.
Concluding that if the Navy should be once overthrown, the whole Army could
not be of long subsistence.

The Castle of Cascays Cascayes yielded.
being summoned, presently yielded up, which for the most part was blown up
with gunpowder, but being not of sufficient value either to defray the charges
of the Army, or to appease the hungry desire of the soldiers. The Fleet
whilst it lay thereabouts at Road, fetched in about some threescore Hulkes
Threescore Hulcks taken
of the Hanse Towns in Germany, laden with corn and all sorts of provision
for the furnishing of a Navy against the next invasion of England, who indeed
had taken great pains to be thus surprised. For although they knew a nearer
cut by far, yet they fetched their circuit about, by the Islands of Orcades
and Hebrides and Ireland, ^or fear of this accident: well enough knowing, that
the Queen not long since had by her Letters warned those Cities not to
traffic with the Spaniard, either for provision, or any warlike munition upon
danger of loss both of their ships and goods.

The English deaf to the entreaty of Don Antonio, who eagerly labored their
continuance a little longer there, putting from thence landed* and set fire on
the Town Vigo. Vigo burnt.
And having spoiled and burnt the Country they returned home to England, The
English return.
with a hundred and fifty pieces of Ordnance, and a sufficient prize besides
the ample content of the Commanders, able to stop the covetous Mariners from
mutiny.

But the whole Realm rested well satisfied, in that in so short a time they
had vanquished one town, and valiantly assaulted another, in that they put to
flight his Catholic Majesty's forces, the most potent Prince in Europe,
landed in four several places, marched with banners displayed in the enemies
ground seven days together; attempted one of their greatest cities with no
small forces: lodged three nights together in the suburbs thereof, chased the
enemy to their own gates, took two castles by the sea side, and unfurnished
the enemy of great store of warlike provision. Yet wanted there not some
discontented detractors, who by interposing the loss of six thousand soldiers
and mariners, which the violence of the disease swept away, sought to discredit
the true glory of this noble and heroicke enterprise. But certainly* by it
England has learned not to fear the conceited power of the Spaniard, and is
now better flesht against the next occasion of the like service.

It has been much controuerted concerning the original cause of this disease
amongst the English, The English subject to diseases in Spain.
whether or no it proceeded from immoderate drinking of wine, and excessive
eating of fruit, from the natural disproportion of theirs and our air, or
from all of them. And it is an observation as worth our wonder, as our memory,
that expeditions from England into Spain, have been for the most part ever
unfortunate to this Nation, as was that of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster,
about the year of Grace MCCCLXXXVI. wherein of twenty thousand Englishmen, The
number of the dead does far exceed the computation which Speed and Hollinshed
both make in the Reign of Richard the second: for they reckon not above a
thousand that died by this disease: and cite Fros^ard, for their authority.
ten thousand died. And that of the Marquess Dorset in the year 1512. wherein
of ten thousand English a disease murdered 1000. in a short space, and that in
the hithermost coasts of Spain. But the observation of the learned may give
this wonder a probability of reason. For they argue, that an army coming from
the South into the North is thereby the more hardened, according as the Inward
heat is either remitted or intended by the outward air: and that, that of
Vitruvius is very true: They that remove out of cold countries into h^tter,
cannot long continue: But they that come from hot countries into colder in the
North, do not impea^h their health by this change of air, but confirm it.

When that the tract of small time had acquainted those of the Hanse towns
with the unexpected surprizall of their captive Hulkes, The Hansetownes
complaint.
they begin to fashion their discontents into a form of complaint, seasoned
with some weak (...), which they present to the Queen concerning the
violations of their ancient Privileges and customs. The Queen returns them
this answer: That her former admonition to them, The Queens Answer.
of not transporting come or any other warlike provision to the Spaniard, had
made this surprizall which they complained of, very lawful; and that it could
be thought of no otherwise, unless that they would have her prefer their
Private commodities before the good public of her own common wealth; That
she ought not to avouch such Privileges which are only Private Laws,
against the safety of her Dominions which is a Supreme Law. And that, the same
Act, with which they urge the violating of their customs, does annihilate
their complaints; for that in the Privilege granted to them by King Edward the
First, there is this clause interweaued, That they should not transport or
convey any (...) or merchandise into the countries of manifest and notorious
enemies of the Kingdom of England. That therefore in the heat of any war,
their Traffic was wont to be stayed when they furnished either enemy. And
that not only the English served them so, but even Charles the fifth, the King
of Sweden, and Denmark, and Poland, and not long since the Prince of Orange,
and all justly, even according to the Law of Nations, wishing them hereafter
so to use the benefit of their neutrality, that whilst they a^^isted the one,
they injured not the other party. And lastly, gently admonishing them of their
unseemly threats, especially to a Prince who in respect of Ability, dreaded not
the mightiest Monarch breathing, yet in respect of her Honor would embrace a
peace with the meanest; and most constantly observe all laws of Neighborhood.

And of this her constancy the King of Navarre The Queen^ aids the King of
Navarre.
and France was no small witness; one whereof she succored both with money
and munition, to the suppressing of a difficult war* and the other she
established in quietness even upon the very point of despair of it. For (to
digress yet a little in the way) the Duke of Aniou brother to the King, dying
without issue, the King at that time being both without children and the very
hope of ever having any, the kingdom of France was lineally to descend to the
King of Navarre, and afterward to the Prince of Conde, both zealous
professors of the Reformed Religion. Whereupon the Catholic Princes of France
not unknown either to the Pope or to the Spaniard, complotted a devilish
conspiracy wherein they had only interested the cause of Religion; and
therefore termed it the Holy League, The Holy League in France.
utterly to overthrow the King, by heaping the envy of the whole land upon
him; and so by perverting the natural course of succession, with that, to
ruinate also the Reformed Religion.

They that impiously combined themselves in this conspiracy, bound themselves
by a strong oath, never to suffer any one to rule France, that either had ever,
or was likely to profess any Religion, but the Roman Catholic, that they
would never allow of one that being brought up and bred in the Reformed
Religion, should afterward absolutely forswear it, least having once gotten
the Kingdom, he should change his Religion with his State.

Who could be so besotted in his judgment, as not to see that this business
tended only to excluded Navarre, and the Prince of Conde? Yet notwithstanding
the mystery of this conspiracy wrought so covertly that it was long ere it
could come to ripeness. For first the Duke of Guise the chief Head of this
villainy having valiantly defended Poitiers, against the Protestants, and
vanquished the Germane horsemen sent by the Duke of Alenzon, and scattered the
mighty leauy of Germans under the conduct of Baron D'onawe, was so infinitely
magnified both by the Laity and the Popish Clergy of France, that to the
prejudice of the King himself, he was every where styled the Sole defender of
the Catholic Religion; and the Hammer of the Protestants. Upon but his very
(...) into Paris at one time there arose such an vproare amongst the inconstant
people, The Barricadoes at Paris.
that the King for the safety of his person was compelled to impeach his own
Honor, to retire from Paris, and to call a Council a^ Bloys; In which
Council his necessities drove him to a forced patience of these
inconveniences, to consent to this Holy League by his express Proclamation in
Iulie, to root out the Reformed Religion, to constitute the Duke of Guise the
Great Master of the French Wars, and to seal to him the confirmation of
these Articles with the receipt of the Sacrament.

The King himself now fearing him, whom he himself had made thus to be
feared; and so great that no Law could question him or his proceedings, began
now to a^gment his fear to a cautelous suspicion, lest the Dukes ambitious
policy should lay wayt for his life; and concluding his own life and safety
out of the necessary murder of the Duke, shortly after as he was entering the
Arras of his Privy chamber, caused him to be run through; and his Brother the
Cardinal to be strangled; The Duke of Guyse slain.
committing the Dukes son, Cardinal Bourbon, and as many of the Leaguers, as
the danger of those times would license his enquiry for, to the safe custody of
close prison.

And now began a general confusion to ouerrun the face of all France; the
disiointed limbs of a complete Kingdom lept into a variety of rebellion. The
people began at their pleasure to disburthen themselves of their duty to
Magistrates; and to rob the Kings very Court at Paris. Some Cities began to
affect and est^b^ish Democracy; others Aristrocracie; the rest Oligarchy; few
or none a Monarchy. The villainy of this conspiracy having now grown ripe for
such misery, that by striving to make as it were many Kingdoms, they had
almost reduced it to none.

At their next assembly the Leaguers cause a new Seal for the administering the
affairs of the Realm to be engraven; arrogating to their ambitious rebellion
all Princely Jurisdiction: they share amongst it themselves the best fortified
places, and sometimes whole Provinces: They stop the Revenues of the Crown;
and recall the Spanish forces out of the Low Countries; four whole Parliaments
of France seconding them with their unanimous suffrages, and all the Clergy of
the Realm preaching nothing but war against their own Sovereign. Insomuch
that the King turning to the Protestants, and they turning from their
allegiance, Henry 3d. of France slain.
caused one Jacques Clement a Monk to murder him.

The Leaguers (although not only his right of Succession, but also the Kings
option on his death bed, assured him of the Crown) by a Proclamation banished
Navarre, not more from the Crown then the Kingdom; declaring him guilty of
Heresy, and of drawing the enemies forces into his own country. But although
all of them agreed in this to exclude Navarre, Contention about the election of
a new King.
yet every man's private engagement could not easily come to an agreement whom
they should create King. Charles Duke of Maine, Brother to the slain Duke of
Guyse, thought himself most worthy of it, because he had forced the
Protestants many times to a great inconvenience; and most of their Cities to
their ancient obedience. Likewise because Cardinal Bourbon being feeble, a
Priest, and now in prison, would, if he should be elected, rather exercise the
wits of the French to scoff and scorn him, than their allegiance to reverence
and obey him, yet that by making him King they might not only acknowledge the
Right of the family of the Bourbons to the Crown, but also recall the old
Right of the Uncle against the Nephew. But the controversy came not so near
the hope of reconcilement, for others preferred the Cardinal of Lorraine or
any of his family: that so now at length the ancient Right so long abused, by
Hugh Capet at first, might be restored to the family. Urging that the Spaniard
greatly favored that House, and that he would bequeath his daughter to any
one that was chosen out thence. Others opposed against him the Duke of Sauoy,
son of the daughter of the King of France, son in law to the King of
Spain, a neighbor Prince, and as truly courageous as noble. The rest
nominated Guise, by reason of his Grandfather and Fathers service done the
Realm and the Catholic Religion. Neither were there wanting some scattered
suffrages for the Spaniard himself, which flattery would easily have
increased, had there been any hope of speeding. But the mayor part pretending
a very form of justice in the height of a rebellion, reflecteth upon the
Cardinal of Bourbon, The Cardinal of Bourbon proclaimed king.
as being one degree nearer to the deceased King, than his Nephew Navarre was,
and as one that had suffered much in the Catholic cause; by whose means
after an easy deliverance, out of the prison to the Throne, they might, if not
with as much speed, yet with more conuenience repress the Reformed Religion,
than by craving foreign helps for assistance in that matter.

This conclusion was cunningly broacht by Mendoza the Spaniards Ambassador,
who since he perceived he could not pleasure his master with his conceited
hope of an Immediate election, thought to lay here a foundation of reducing by
degrees that Kingdom under his Dominion. So that now amongst these Leaguers
and Conspiratours Cardinal Bourbon is proclaimed King, and coins dispersed
about in traffic with his inscription of Charles the tenth. The Duke of Maine
is declared to be Lieutenant General of the Crown of France, who presently to
bring his office into execution, musters all his forces with an intent either
to surprise Navarre (proclaimed likewise King of France amongst his
confederates) at Deep where he resided, or drive him by violence out of France.

The French King The Queen aids the French king.
being now reduced to so great streights, having pitched his camp near unto
Deep with as good success as speed, presently dispatched Beauore La Noe-cle,
and immediately after Buhie and Bozenuale into England, to proffer to the Queen
an offensive and defensive league, and to desire some aid from her. The Queen
unwilling to be defective to his doubtful hopes in such a courtesy, out of
her true zeal to his Religion and fortune, mixed with a jealous fear of the
reuolting of the Germans and Switzers his stipendiaries, who to gain but the
empty riches of a large promise were likely to endanger their fidelity,
presently furnished him with two and twenty thousand pounds of english Gold, (A
sum which either somewhat to the disparagement of his own estate, or more to
the true token of his gratitude, he ingenuously acknowledged he never yet saw
paralelled) besides munition and some four thousand men, under the conduct of
Peregrine Lord Willoughby, who after the departure of the Earl of Leicester
out of the low countries, had in succeeding him purchased no small honor. She
appointed Sir Thomas Wilford, (who was also Marshall) Sir John Borough, Sir
William Drury and Sir Thomas Baskeruile, Colonels: allotting them a months pay
before hand; who after their arrival in France behaved themselves both to the
Kingdoms and their own honor. The brute of their expected arrival, mingled
with the overthrow as much against their reason as their hopes, which the
French King lately gave the Leaguers at Arques, so discouraged the pride of
their hop^s, that the very day before the arrival of the English they fled
from before the King with bag and baggage.

The King partly encouraged with this victory, the object of his wonder as much
as joy, and partly with the welcome arrival of the English, The English arrive
in France.
began to draw his forces toward Paris, where the English and the Switzers
attempting that part thereof which lies between Saint Marcels gate and the
river Seine, made such a resolute breach through their rampires and enclosures,
that having gotten as far as Saint Victors, they esteemed the entrance of the
main City, as the last, so the least part of the assault.

The French King whether out of fear of the disabilitie of his forces, or of
hope that shortly it would yield, or persuasion that the Duke of Maine would
not bid him battle, sounds presently a retreat from Paris and remoues to
Estampes leaving the Lord Willoughbie and the English on the way, to block up
the Leaguers passage, till such time that both the Town and Castle yielded.

After this they took Vendosme, the same place, which with the whole country
Henry the Fifth of England, had formerly given to Robert Willoughby Governor of
Normandy, as a sure argument of his love and the others valor. They reduced
likewise to their due obedience Caen, Alanzon, Falais, Loux, and Honfleure.
After which time and travel of above five hundred miles, The English return.
besides the weariness of their Irish service, they that suruiu'd returned
home to England. The chief of note that died either by disease or battle,
were one Captain Hunning and Stubs, who having formerly lost his right hand
for writing against the marriage of the Queen with the Duke of Aniou, here
lost his life: and Sir William Drury one without doubt who had enjoyed a longer
life, if reason could have prevailed with his passion to have preserved it. For
contending with Buroughs a Lords younger son, for the upper ^and against the
order of ranking Nobility in England, he was slain by him in a single combat.

The Queen intended not so speedy a return of the English, and the French
King grieved at it, The Spaniard affects the Kingdom of France.
having had intelligence that the Spaniard lay in wayt for the Kingdom of
France: for he already through the means of Morea Taxie and Bernardine
Mendoza, got it propounded in the Council of the Leaguers, that to recompense
his charges which he had been at for their assistance, they should nominate
him the Protector of the Catholics in France, and confer upon him the same
Prerogatives that he enioyes in the Kingdom of Naples and Sicily, of bestowing
by his Delegates all Offices whether Ecclesiastical or Civil. The loftiness
of this undermining request, intermingled with the eager promoting of it by
Cardinal Caietan the Popes Nuntio, came yet so short of their expectation of
success, that it occasioned great coffeehouse in the French themselves,
whose riper judgments prompted them to this caution, by promoting their
Religion not to lose their Reason.

And as the Queen employed no small care in establishing Navarre in the
Kingdom of France, so had she a long time sought opportunity to contriue a
match between his sister Katharine and the King of Scotland; The Queen
propounds a marriage to the King of Scots.
wisely considering that both of them would stand her in great stead to refell
the force of Catholics and their plots against Protestants: but the event
proved not answerable, by reason that her age was of the most, and her means
of the least; her brother himself likewise being much impouerished by these
never discontinuing wars. The King of Scotland notwithstanding being still
unmarried ceased not very often to solicit the Queen for her advice in the
choice of a wife; who being more slow in answering him, then the desire of the
Scots, although not then reason, required, gave occasion to the Scots not only
to suspect, but even to vent this suspision in open clamors, that the English
by their cunning tricks sought to deprive the King both of Honor and Issue,
thereby conceyting an impunity for the death of his mother, and to exclude the
Scottish race from succession in England.

This when the Queen understood, she exhorted the King to choose himself a
wife, and such a one, that might well please him, not displease the people, nor
occasion the long amity between them to fall into suspicion.

The King of Scots therefore having somewhat about a year before, settled his
affection on Anne He is betrothed to Anne of Denmark.
the daughter of Frederick the Second, King of Denmark (who was also honored
with the Queens ample commendations:) this year about July contracted
himself to her by his Proxy the Earl Marshall: But she being shipped for
Scotland in the midst of her voyage was driven back by a tempest into
Norway, which so bruised her ships, that she could not in long time put to sea
again. The King, to the praise of his Religion, as well as his love, about
October next passes to Norway, He passes ^uer to Norway.
(for the Sates of the Kingdom appointed, and he himself sealed their
resolution with a vow, to marry within the compass of a year) and there
celebrated the marriage, where both of them were compelled to stay till next
May, before their ships, necessity and a seasonable opportunity, would license
their departure.

It was first the opinion of many, but afterward their faith, that these
tempests at sea, were raised by the execrable power of sorcerers and witches;
Tempest^ raised in his voyage by Witches.
by reason of the violence of the waves and winds that were more turbulent and
the storms shorter, and yet oftener than ordinary; whereupon they concluded
some operati^e power besides nature; partly by reason that evil spirits
Princes of the Air, may with better safety trade with the poor ignorant
people in the Northern clymate, from whom partly their poverty and want of
other men's industry, has concealed the light of the Gospel; but especially by
reason of the open confessions of some Witches, that were upon some occasion
apprehended, who confessed that they raised those storms on purpose to keep^
the Queen from Scotland: and that likewise Bothwel Bothwel accused by them.
had been with them to know the Kings fortune. This being denounced Treason
amongst the Scots by a Law of Queen Marry, co^t Bothwel a strict imprisonment;
yet it seems not so strict, but that shortly he brake out, from that into
worse troubles, wherewith all Scotland was annoyed.

There died this year Frances the Countess of Sussex, widow of the Thomas
Earl of Sussex, The Countess of Sussex dies.
and sister to Henry Sidney, who having given many precepts of virtue in her
life, at her death taught it by example; in erecting Sidney Sussex College in
Cambridge. And Sir Walter Mildmay, And Sir Walter Mildmay.
a man as full of variety of virtues, as ever he was of offices; yet was he
chosen by Henry the Eigth, to be ouersee^ of the Court of Augmentation,
Knighted by King Edward the Sixth, made a Privy Counselor by Queen Elizabeth,
Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Subtreasurer. He founded Emanuel College at
Cambridge in the year 1584. endowing it with means and revenues to maintain
threescore and two Students, and a President. Him succeeded Sir John Fortescue,
an excellent man, and a good Grecian, who was long time Tutor to the Queen,
and Master of her Wardrobe.

Likewise there died William Somerset Earl of Worcester, And the Earl of
Worcester.
the Son of Henry, and Nephew of Charles, whom his only Son Edward
succeeded, a man so prosperous in his issue, that he might reckon more sons
and daughters, then most Noble men in England.

There died also John Lord Sturton, And the Lord St^rton
the son of Charles, (whom Queen Mary made an example of her justice for
murder) begotten of the body of Anne Stanley, the daughter of Edward Earl of
Darby, whom Edward his Brother succeeded.

Also Henry Lord Compton And the Lord Compton.
leaving his heir his son William, begot of Francis Hastings the daughter of
Francis Earl of Huntingdon; and at Bruxeils there died, Thomas Lord Paget, And
the Lord Paget.
who fearing some suspicion should arise out of his inward well wishing to Mary
Queen of Scots, covertly dispatched himself out of the Land; leaving his
only ^sonne begotten of Nazareth Newton, and named William, his Heir.

And even now, Learning it self had occasion of grief, for the death of
Lawrence Humfrey, And Doctor Humfrey.
Doctor of Divinity in Oxford; who being banished in the days of persecution
under Queen Mary, translated out of the Greek, a Tract of Origens, concerning
a Right Faith; and Philo concerning Nobility; having also himself written
three Books of Nobility, which he styled by the name of Optimates. After his
return home he was made President of Magdale^e College in Oxford, where he
was first brought up. He was likewise the Reg^ous Professor of Divinity,
where, by his public Lectures and usual Sermons for many years together he
got great credit to the Church, although but small profit to himself. For he
was never preferred to any higher place amongst the Clergy then to the Deanery
of Winchester; the chiefest reason that was to be guessed at, being, that in
matters of Ceremony or Indifferency, he altogether consented not with the
Church of England.

THE THREE and thirtieth Year OF HER REIGN.
Anno Domini 1590. 1590

THE Queen who never laid aside the thought of war, because her desire was
still peace, at the beginning of the Spring fearing some as^ault from the
Spaniard, Sundry havens fortified.
mustereth up her soldiers here in England, and likewise in the South parts
of Ireland. In Ireland she fortifies Duncannon, lying at the mouth of the River
Suire, and in Wales repayres the ruins of Milford Haven, Charges for the Navy.
with new works. For the mayntenance of her Navy safe and sound, she alotteth
yearly, eight thousand five hundred and seventy pounds sterling of English
money. And although about three years ago she had lent the King of Navarre,
Money lent to the French King.
an hundred and one thousand, five hundred and sixty French crowns to leauy an
Army in Germany under the Baron d'Onaw, by Horatio Pallauicine; and but the
last year, seventy one thousand, one hundred sixty five more, upon Beauoire,
Buhie, and Buzenuales bonds, and had spent twenty thousand more in sending over
her forces to him under the Lord Willoughby; yet notwithstanding first this
year she lends upon the Vicount Turenes bond, thirty three thousand, three
hundred thirty and three more, to muster an army in Germany under the conduct
of the Prince of Anhault, and after that as much more upon Beauoires bond, and
Incaruilles.

Besides all these charges every two months did she pay to the Garrisons in
Flushing and Brill, an hundred and five and twenty thousand Florins, and two
hundred and threescore more to three thousand horse and foot, that served in
the Low Countries. She set out many brave ships, she was at infinite charges
to prevent all clandestine machinations of the Pope or Spaniard in Scotland;
and yet for all this, at this time she repayed to her subjects moneys which
she lately had borrowed, in so much that many men justly wondered, whence this
ability should spring, she being not in any man's debt, (a virtue which few
Princes can boast of) and yet of a sufficient competency to maintain her
kingdom against the enemy, without admitting any auxiliary forces, which none
of the greatest of her neighbor Kings could at that time do.

Certain it is, she was a most provident Princess, seldom entertaining any
charge which was not either for the maintenance of her Honor at home, or the
Succor of her friends abroad. Besides, the Lord Treasurer Burghley, bore a
provident eye over those that had charge of Subsidies, or imposts; for many
times by the covetousness of such subordinate ministers, moneys received for
the Queens use, were employed to their private p^ofits, and others that should
have been received, were omitted by a wilful oversight, and hired negligence.

About this time the commodity of the Custom house amounted to an unexpected
value, The rates of the Customehouse raised.
For the Queen being made acquainted by the means of a subtle fellow, named
Caermardine, with the mystery of their gains, so enhansed the rate, that Sir
Thomas Smith, Master of the Custom house, who heretofore farmed it of the
Queen for fourteen thousand pounds yearly, was now mounted to two and forty
thousand pounds, and afterward to fifty thousand pounds yearly, which
notwithstanding was valued but as an ordinary sum for such oppressing gain.
The Lord Treasurer indeed, the Earl of Leicester and Wal^ingham, much opposed
themselves against this Caermardine, denying him entrance into the Privy
Chamber, in so much that expostulating with the Queen, they traduced her
hearkening to such a fellows information, to the disparagement of the
judgment of her Council, and the discredit of their care. But the Queen
answered them, that all Princes ought to be (if not as favorable, yet as
just) to the lowest, as to the highest, desiring that they, who falsely accuse
her Privy Council of sloth or indiscretion, should be severely punished, but
that they who justly accused them should be heard; That she was Queen, as well
to the poorest as to the proudest, and that therefore she would never be deaf
to their just complaints. Likewise, that she would not suffer, that these
Toole-takers like horse-lee^hes, should glut themselves with the riches of the
Realm, and starve her Exchequer, which as she will not endure so to be
dieted, so hates she to enrich it with the poverty of the people.

Without doubt she was a great enemy to all extortions, and unreasonable
taxes, hating to oppress her poor subjects as many of her Predecessors had
done, sweetning their own extortions with the name of the Peoples
contribution, the Commons liberality, or their free benevolence, or the like.
She would not suffer Tolling by the head of living creatures, once to be
proposed as lawful, although it had been formerly proposed in the days of
Edward the sixth. And hence was it that the people paid their subsidies with
such alacrity; and though that now her necessity had occasioned a greater tax
than ordinary, yet it seemed only a voluntary payment. Wherefore the Queen,
by a merciful Statute, to reward her people for their forwardness, would have
exempted those of the meaner sort, and multiplied their payments upon the
richer, as was once done in the time of King Richard the second; but the event
of this courtesy would have been more injurious to her self, than
beneficial to the people; it being plainly demonstrated by casting up the
accounts, that the subsidies would fall far short of their expected value, if
those of indifferent estates, which we call Pound-men, should be favored with
any exception.

About this time certain Inhabitants of the town of Groyning, one of the
richest in all Friezland, which neither could bear the servile yoke of the
Spaniard, nor would admit of a subjection to the States, The Queens care of
the States.
made a motion unto the Queen, to receive them into her protection; which she
eagerly refused, being unwilling any way to benefit her self by the States
coffeehouse. At which time likewise she was much offended with the
Zelanders, for ^husing the King of France their Patron, and not acquainting the
States of Holland with their purpose. And publicly reproved many of those
Provinces, who under pretense of obedience and affection unto her, had
occasioned many discontents and dissentions at home. She was indeed, somewhat
larger in this reproof, then her ordinary displeasure would allow her, because
she was given to understand, that Richardot had been very importunate, that
pardon and liberty of Religion should be granted to all Low-Countreymen, who
had fled out of their Provinces, if they would return home again: which if he
brought to pass, she soon foresaw would be disaduantagious to the States, by
reason that such kind of men formerly inhabited the emptiest Cities of
Holland, and would contribute much to the maintenance of war.

About which time also at the mediation of the Duke of Tuscany, She restores
Ships to the Venetians.
she commanded some ships that had been taken by the English, to be restored
to the Venetians and Florentines, straightly commanding, that none should offer
violence to the Italian, Venetian, French, Dane, Low-Countreymen, or those of
the Hanse Towns.

But the Spaniard, as he escaped the contents of this command, so escaped he
not many onsets and affronts of the English; some in the Atlantique Ocean, and
some at and about the Islands of Azores, where his Nauies from either Indies
must necessarily come for refection, and others by the Earl of Cumberland, who
surprised some of his ships, demolished to the ground his Fort of Fayoll, and
brought from thence fifty eight great pieces of Ordnance; and others by some
more of the English, who scouring the Gaditan Sea, much endangered the ordinary
safety of his usual Traffiques.

The glory of the Queen, although it were far spread, and almost fearful,
by reason of her prosperous success in war, yet was it more admirable and much
bettered in report, by a peace which she obtained between the Great Turk and
the Polonians, even at the brinke of a terrible battle; and the Vayvode of
Moldauia, She procures peace from the Turk, for the Polonians and Moldauians.
whom the Great Turk sorely perplexed also; which courtesy of hers, the
Polonian, and his Chancellor, by their letters, gratefully since acknowledged.

And now to confirm that inviolable bond of amity, between her and the King
of Scots, she sent Edward Somerset, Earl of Worcester to him, to congratulate
to him his happy marriage, and his as happy return home; with some admonitions
also, that as her love had lately been manifested in honoring both him and
the King of France with the order of S. George, so his care should be as
circumspect to choke all popish practices, even in their birth. The King most
gently entertained both the love and care of the Queen, She congratulateth
the marriage of the King of Scots.
and to publish his desire of a continuation of amity with England, and an
universal peace withal, he sent Colonel Steward into Germany, to treat with
the King of Denmark, and the Ambassadors of the other Princes, about the
renewing of a League between England, Spain, and France.

France Her care of France.
all this while was in a sore combustion, which as the malice of the Leaguers
first kindled, so now their power as strongly fomented. The Queen, scanning
all possibilities of quenching the same, entered into many consultations and
counsels, whether she should join her old English Soldiers, that served in
the Low Countries, with the forces that were a coming into France out of
Germany, or whether she should leauy forces, and send them over into the Low
Countries, to detain still the Duke of Parma from entering into France. But
most of all she controuerted this question, how she might keep the Spaniard
from the Sea coasts of France, especially ^ince she understood, that the
Spaniard had seconded his violence by corrupt bribery, to reduce New-hauen unto
his own power, and had also resolved to send a Navy into low Britain, or
Britania Armorica.

But before the varieties of consultations could be easily ripened to any
resolution, the D. of Parma enters France* Parma enters France.
For the Spaniard, after his easy perswa^ion to it by the Leaguers, (who
thirsted sore after some revenge, for their shameful discomfiture at the
Battle of Yurie) straightly commanded the Duke this journey by virtue of his
Protectorship of the Catholics, and the comely gloss of charity to his
neighbors. The Duke having speedily run quite through Picardy, succoureth the
fainting rebellion at Paris with variety of provision, and having ransack't
Corbu^ile and Laygnay, to store Paris with a larger plenty of provision, he
retyreth with his army, which spoke better of his skill in intrenching in, and
delaying of battle, after the manner of the Romans, then of his warlike
discipline, which could not restrain the covetousness of his Soldiers, from
open and shameful sacrilege.

On the otherside, certain Regiments of Spaniards, French havens taken by the
Spaniard.
under the conduct of Don Iuan d'Aquila having arrived at lower Britain, about
the Autumnall Aequinox, at Blawet, assault and surprise Henebon, a fortified
town, by the Sea side, by the means of Philip Emanuel Duke of Merceur, one of
the house of Lorraine, who at that time, when the Leaguers began to distribute
and quarter France into their several portions, sent for this troop of
Spaniards, to seat him for his part in the Duchy of Britain, or in some part
of it at least. This thought he easy to accomplish by the help of the
Spaniard, and the right of his wife, who was the only daughter of Sebastian
Martigne, whose mother Caroletta was Duchess of Britain, and Heir to I.
Brosse, Duke of Estampes.

This occasion the Spaniard, His pretense of right to the Duchy of Britain.
without great importunity, quick^y embraced, being himself conceited also,
that Britain by right, belonged to his Daughter, being it was a Feminine fee,
and by reason that she descended from Elizabeth of Valois, the eldest daughter
of Henry the second of France, who by reason of the death of all her Uncles
without Issue, had right alsoo^ succession to the whole Crown of France, did
not the Salique Law cut that off. And although he, could not be ignorant, that
in the reign of Francis the first, the Duchy of Britain was incorporated to
the Crown of France, yet would he not subscribe to the resolution of all the
Lawyers in France, concluding, that Whatsoever is once annexed or incorporated
to the Crown of France, can never be dismembered or severed from it.

Presently after the ariuall of these Spaniards, Henry Bourbon, son to the
Duke Montpensier, and Prince D^ Bear, whom with La-Noue, the King made
Governor of Britain, requesteth aid from England: but it seemed good, Aid
from England requested.
neithe^ to the Queen, nor her Council to second this request with a grant,
because he was but a subject; the King being busied elsewhere in difficult
affairs, and no more acquainted with this message, than the occasion of it.
The Queen notwithstanding could not well endure, that the Spaniard should be
possessed of so rich and convenient a place, to invade England, Holland, or
Zeland from; The Queen prouides for Britain,
In so much, that the continual meditation of this matter, wrought these words
out of her, that This business concerned her more than that of Edward the
third, who at excessive charges maintained the cause of John of Montfort, to
keep the French from possessing themselves of Britain.

There were indeed some about the Court (to the commendation of their wariness
more than wisdom) that prompted the Queen to a par^imony; And for all France.
aduising her not to be at so great charges for others good, but rather to
regard her own; wishing her not to put any confidence in Frenchmen, as being
tra^terous even to their own Kings; thence taking an occasion to return to
her memory their cruelty, in butchering one of their Kings that was a professed
Catholic, and their villainy in thus persecuting another that is a Protestant;
They urged to her likewise, the unjust claim the French laid to Metz, Toul,
and Verdune, formerly annexed to the Empire of Germany, which notwithstanding
(the memory of later ages witnessing as much) they by violence have disioynted
from it; That they do as constantly hate the English, even now when they are
friends, as others do when they are enemies; that they do so duly break
promise in repaying of moneys to the English, that they use to Nickname other
Creditors, whom they likewise disappoint, with this byword, Les Anglois, These
are Englishmen. Lastly, that by their homebred seditions, they have so rent a
flourishing estate into factions, that the whole Realm might rather excite her
neighbors pity, than occasion their fear; it being now like a gross body,
burdened with its own weight, and so disordered by the mutable obedience of
the people, that if it should chance to fail of an enemy abroad, it would
soon find one at home.

The Queen (as desirous of the commendations of the French, Wherefore she
hearkeneth not to the ill sugge^tions of some, both English and Frenchmen.
from the mouth of an English man, as careful of their safety from the hands of
an enemy) entertained this discourse, both with disdain and laughter; and when
not only the English, but even some French themselves, counseled her to put in
for her share, and ceaze upon Picardie, or Normandy, as the Spaniard and the
Leaguers had already cantonized all France, putting her in mind of the saying
of Charles of Burgundy, that It was best for all neighbor nations, when France
had twenty Kings: She heard them with a much forced patience, and disdainfully
putting them by, Her observation.
said, That whenever France it is last day should be at hand, the evening
thereof would bring in Englands ruin and destruction.

Whilst these businesses were on foot, Ambrose Dudley; Earl of W^rwicke, The
Earl of Warwick di^th,
son of John, Duke of Northumberland, and Knight of the Order of S. George,
departed this life, as full of virtue, as empty of Issue. And not long after,
Sir Francis Walsingham And Sir Francis Walsingham.
also, the Queens Secretary, and Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, and
of the Order of the Garter. He was a man as commendable for industry, as
imitable for his wisdom and piety; one that had been employed in many
honorable Embassies; a strict professor of the reformed Religion; a curious
searcher out of secrets; one that could diue into men's dispositions, and work
them to his own ends at pleasure. His Art that way, as it was past imitation,
so was it beyond the Queens own expectation; in so much that the Papists
every where traduced him as a subtle enginere, to screw simple Prose^ytes
within the danger of the law. This intelligence which he continually had of
all plots and devises that were hatched within the Realm, cost him such
excessive charges, that having spent not only his estate, but even his credit,
which was much impeached by his abundant debts, he was in the night time buried
at Paul's, without any Funeral solemnity. He left but one daughter, who first
marrying Sir Philip Sidney, bore him a daughter, married to Roger Earl of
Rutland, and then marrying her second husband, the Earl of Essex, bore him one
son, and some daughters: and afterward being married to the Earl of
Clan-Richard, an Irish Lord, bore to him also Children of both sexes.

Not long above a month or two, Sir Thomas Randolph And Sir Thomas Randolph.
ouer-liued him, yet not so near to him in his death, as he was in
acquaintance and love in his life. This was he whose brother Edward, a brave
soldier, died victoriously in Ireland, in the year 156^. In the time of his
youth he lived a Civil Lawyer in Christ-Chuch in Oxford, and afterward
became the Principal of Broad-gates Hall, since named Pembroke College. He
had been employed in many several Embassies, thrice to the Peers in
Scotland, thrice to Queen Mary of Scotland, after her return from France.
Seven times to James the sixth of Scotland, thrice to John Basilides Emperor of
Russia, once to Charles the ninth of France, and again to Henry the third. The
Queen rewarded this his service with the Chamberlaines Office in the
Exchequer, heretofore a place of great honor and worth, the Mastership of the
Posthorses, and some small land. Neither could ambition, or the charge of many
chi^dren occasion any appetite in him of greater wealth; to the true pattern
of a contented mind for all high and worldly men, whereof there are very few,
but have less occasion and greater desire.

And let me not forget that which may benifit posterity with the memory of it,
a letter which he sent to Sir Francis Walsingham, a little before his death,
wherein he declared, how fitting it was, and how necessary, that the one
should leave of the tricks of a Secretary, and the other of an Ambassador,
and employ the time before their death in repentance for the sins of their
life.

Shortly after him died Sir James Croft, And Sir James Croft.
who in the days of Edward the sixth valiantly defended Hadington in Scotland,
against the French. He was for a while Lord Deputy of Ireland, having been
condemned for treason in the hot days of Queen Mary, was as graciously
pardoned by Queen Elizabeth, and made Governor of Barwicke and the Eastern
borders. He likewise was Comptroller of her Majesty's household, and a Delegate
at the Treaty of Bourbourge. After all which having had the virtue to excite
the very envy of the Court against him, and yet he, happy fortune to overcome
it, lived and died in the love and favor both of Prince and people.

With the year also ended George Talbot his life^being Earl of Shropshire,
And the Earl of Shropshire.
the son of Francis, and the seventh Earl of that House, who in the Reign
of Queen Mary, having to the number of three thousand under him, committed to
him by his Father the General of the Army in the Scottish wars, rescued the
Earl of Northumberland at Lo-wick out of most eminent danger. He was also
Captain of a troop of five hundred horse. He was one of the appointed Guard
for the Queen of Scots. Afterward at the decease of the Duke of Norfolk, he
was substituted Earl Marshall of England. For the space of fifteen years he
continued in such trusty loyalty, that neither the calumny of the Court, the
plots of his enemies, nor the troubles he sustained by his second wife, could
undermine or shake it to the glory of his wisdom as well as valor.

He had by Gertrude the daughter of Thomas, Earl of Rutland his first wife,
Francis that died untimely; Gilbert, that was his heir, married to Mary
Cauendish the daughter of his mother in Law; Edward, married to the daughter
and joint heir of the Lord Ogle, with Henry and Thomas; He had daughters
Catharine married to Henry the son of the Earl of Pembroke that died
issuelesse, Mary married to Sir George Sauil, and Grace to Sir Henry Cauendish.
By his later wife Elizabeth the widow of William Cauend^sh he had no issue.

And to make up the Catalogue of this years mortality, Thomas Lord Wentworth
And the Lord Wentworth.
also departed this life, being the last English Governor of Callice, whose
second son Henry (for the eldest died when the Father lived) succeeded.

In Ireland the last year Hugh Gaueloc Tyrone strangleth Gaueloc.
(so nicke-named by reason of his long continuance in fetters) the natural son
of Shane-Oneale had accused Hugh Earl of Tyre-Oen, for having had privy
conferences with some Sp aniards that in 88 were cast upon the Irish shoares;
which accusation the Earl coveting to frustrate by some speedy prevention,
gave order that he should be surprised by some trick or other and strangled:
and when the reverence of him and his family had struck such a conscience
into the exe^utioner that was prescribed for this villainy, that he refused to
do his office, the Earl himself was reported to have fitted the cord, and
strangled him h^mselfe. Hereupon being cited into England, he craved the
Queens pardon for his fault, and obtained it at her Majesty's Manor of
Greenwich; Tyr Oen pardoned.
where he protested a peace with all his neighbors, but especially with
Turlogh Lenigh, and gave hostages for the assurance of the performance: also,
of not assuming upon himself the title of O-Neale, or the exercise of any
Jurisdiction over the Nobility that were h^s neighbors; of reducing all
Tyr-Oen into the complete form of a County; of imposing no taxations (which
they call Bonaghti) upon his poor Country men that were under him: Of not
blocking up the passage for provision for the English Garrison at Black water,
or the river More; of not admitting Monks, Friars, or Nuns, or other rebels
to reside within his territories or dominions; and of performing many more such
like Articles; yet on this condition also, that Turlogh Le^igh, and the rest of
the Nobility near him might be bound to a peace also with him, lest that his
necessity of quietness should excite their after injuries. After his return
into Ireland he made a confirmation of his former protestation before Sir
William Fitz-Williams Deputy of Ireland, and other Councillors of Estate: and
indeed for some time, there was such an unexpected reformation in his outward
carriage, that might promise an unquestioned loyalty of an obedient subject;
which he so colored with the smooth pretense of virtue, that his now exemplary
duty seemed unto many, from conscience, more then the fear of disobedience.

Not long before, the Lord Deputy having apprehended at home Hugh
Roe-Mac-Mahon, a great Noble man, in the County of Monaghan, whom his own
judgment before had preferred before some others of the Nobility, that
contended with him for principality caused a company of common soldiers to
pass Judgment upon him (as the Irish complain) condemned, and hanged him for
having displaied his banners after the rude custom of the Irish, and demanded
his tributes from, them. His lands were divided amongst the English, and some
of the Mac-Mahons; certain revenues only being allotted them which they were
to hold of the English. The policy of this justice was to weaken as much as
might be a House greater then the rest, and ^tronger in the multitude of
dependants, and also utterly to extinguish both the tyranny and the name of Mac
Mahon; A title, that whosoever could purchase either by might or right, seemed
to privilege them to any injurious tyranny.

The terror of this severe Justice so amazed the guilty conscience of Brian
Ororcke, O-rorkes rebellion.
a noble man in Brennie that lies next to Monaghan, that striving to prevent
such torture in himself, he provoked it; and for fear of being apprehended,
turned traitor, and took up arms against the Queen. But being vanquished by
Sir Richard Bingham President of Conaugh, he fled over into Scotland, and was
delivered at her demand to the hands of the Queen. The King of Scotland
willingly sending her both him and this answer: That he esteemed every one of
her enemies his own: which indeed appeared, for he not only slighted his
Popish Peers in Scotland, and the Earl of Westmorland with some other
factious English, who would have incensed him against the Queen; but also
caused James and Donald Mac-Conell to give in caution not to nourish any
sedition in Ireland, either out of the Hebrides or Scotland.

THE FOUR and thirtieth Year OF HER REIGN.
Anno Domini 1591. 1591

IN all this variety of troubles, The Queens care of the French King.
there was not any more busied the whole thoughts of the Queen, then the
affairs in Bretaigne, and the desire of succouring the distressed King of
France. Wherefore in the beginning of this year, sending over to him Sir
Edmund York, who lovingly reproved him for his last three months silence; she
admonished him to enter into consideration, how much it stood him upon to
secure the Duchy of Bretaigne, and to contriue some possible means to
prevent the second coming of the Duke of Parma; promising him sufficient
assistance, to drive out that enemy that had already possessed his Country,
upon condition that the King would but parallel her forces.

The French King, having much extolled the care and love of the Queen, gave
her amp^e thanks, and larger promises, requesting her for some three thousand
men for his war in Britain, and some Regiments to be forthwith transported
over into Picardy; Her aid.
nominating Cherburge, Glanuile, or Breast, and ^ lawe^ too (I know not whether
to make a jest, rather than an answer) for Ports for retyring for them.
Hereupon he gave full authority to Beav^ire No-cle, his ordinary Ambassador
in England, to covenant for him with the Lord Burghley Treasurer; The
conditions agreed upon between them.
Charles Howard Lord Admiral, and the Lord Husdon Chamberlain, Delegates for
the Queen, whom he brought to these Articles.

First, that three thousand should be sent over into Picardy and Britain,
re^dy furnished.

Secondly, that the King should repay the charges of their transportation,
their pays, and the prices of their furniture, and all necessaries at London,
within a whole year, or sooner, if so be the enemy should be removed sooner
out of the Kingdom.

The Queen indeed was the more willing to condescend to these covenants, by
reason she had heard that the Spaniard had admission into Paris, the greatest
city in France; and that the Parisians vouchsafed their lawful King, no other
title but the King of Bearne, acknowledging the Spaniard as their Lord and
King; who hereupon conceived no small hope of reducing France under his
government, which conceit he not at all dissembled before Ianine the Leaguers
Ambassador then in Spain. Likewise, because she understood, that Pope Gregory
the thirteenth of that name, had levied many forces in Italy and Switzerland,
under the Duke Mon^martin, against the King of France, whom he had already by
his Bull excommunicated; which Bull, notwithstanding the Parliament at Paris,
and the other at Tours, condemned, and causing it to be hung upon a Gibbet by
the Hangman, set fire to it.

Hereupon came forth a strict Proclamation in England, A proclamation against
the French Leaguers.
that no man, upon pain of treason, into any parts or places, belonging either
to the Spaniard or Leaguers, should transport corn, munition, or any kind of
traffic. And the same also was before set forth by the King of Scots. About
which time Sir Henry Palmer, being sent forth, with some few men of war,
surprised thirteen of their Ships, at their return from Noua Francia.

And Sir Roger Williams, with some six hundred soldiers, passed over to Diepe,
where the enemy lay roauing about, having express Commission to recide in
those quarters: and Sir John Norris, Sir John Norris sent into France.
presently after, shipped over with the rest of the Soldiers into Britain,
under whom were Sir Henry his brother, and Sir Anthony Sherley, worthy
Commanders.

These having joined forces with the Kings, and in vain having assaulted
Lamballe (where that famous Warrior Fr. La-Noue La-Noue slain.
died of a wound) took Castili^n: the uttermost of their glory in it being
stretched, Sir Roger Williams behaues himself bravely.
to a keeping under of the Spaniard and Leaguers, not a removing of them. Sir
Roger Williams with his forces, and Chattre, the Governor of Diepe, having
broken through the enclosures, barricadoed with wine vessels at Cinquensanoe,
scattered all the Leaguers that infested the passage by ^remble-Court and
Lounde, and vanquished them; being rewarded for his valor by a commendatory
letter' from the King to the Queen. This remembrance of his commendations
wrought him into such a forgetfulness of his Commission, that he left Diepe,
accompanied the King to the suburbs of Paris, and sent a Challenge to the
Spaniards, to hazard with him, two hundred Pikes, and a hundred Musketeers
against so many English; which being not performed, he returned again to
Diepe, but scarce had he bin come to it, but the King sending speedily for him,
he posts with his Army presently to Noyon, having no such warrant in his
Commission, where being too prodigal of others blood, he exposed many English
to great danger in the assault; the Queen not knowing of it, and therefore
being the more angry.

At that time, the French King sent Anthony Reaux, Reaux sent over to the
Queen;
to certify the Queen, that he had resolved to bring Roan, and New-Hauen
under his subjection, before the Duke of Parma should set foot into France too
far; and to that effect he craved of her four thousand English, Demands
aid.
to be sent over into Normandy, entreating her to give them pay for two months,
promising, that if they continued a longer time, he would pay them; and
presently upon their ariuall, come and join his forces with them: But that in
the mean time, he would continue still at Picardy, least otherwise those of
Roan should have some inkling of his resolution.

The Queen, who desired nothing more than the remouall of the Enemy from the
Sea coasts, willingly condiscended; so that the covenants were agreed upon in
the same fashion as before; only with this clause, that they should be
confirmed and authorized by Act of Parliament, within few days after. The
number being complete, arrived at Diepe, under the command of Robert Earl of
Essex, E^^le of Essex sent ^^er.
a worthy young man, and in great favor with the Queen. Many Noblemen of note
accompanied him, amongst whom Thomas Leighton, and Henry Killegrew were
appointed to be of his counsel. The Earl at his ariuall here in France,
understood that the King was at Noyon; he saw not so much as any preparation
for war, neither could any man instruct him what to do with his forces;
insomuch that he greatly wondered at the King, that he should so slightly
esteem of his promise.

After some small continuance there, Sir Roger Williams posteth unto him,
entreating him in the name of the King, to make all possible speed to Noyon,
Sent for to the King to Noyon.
there to confer about the manner of the war: thither when the Earl came,
the King declared unto him, that of necessity he must dispatch into Champagne,
to join forces with the Germans, promising to send to him Marshall Byron, and
the Duke Montpe^sier, to besiege Roan. Hereupon the Earl returned to his own
forces, who had now encamped at Arques; where, to win the hearts of warlike
men, he knighted many, He knighteth many.
thinking to add courage by this addition of Honor, but not without the envy
and anger of many that enjoyed that title at home, who took it ill to see him
lauishly prostitute that title of so great credit with the English, which the
Queen was so thri^ty in bestowing, even upon deserving men. Byron and
Montpensier, after so long expectation, as yet appear not, the one being gone
into Champagne, Is deceived by the French.
to the marriage of the Vicount Turene, with the daughter of the Duke of
Balloigne; and the other having turned out of his way, to the unnecessary
besieging of Pierre-pont Castle.

The Queen, having been very urgent by her Leagier Sir Henry Vmpton with the
King for the siege of Roan, ca^sed him to send Reaux over into England, to
certify her the reasons, why he prolonged the siege. She was likewise very
earnest with him for the ratifying of his late Covenants by Act of Parliament,
but being a long time delayed, was at last forced to a content with his bare
Confirmation of them.

All this while lay the Earl of Essex idle, although not without discontent of
mind; who afterward, to satisfy his thirsty mind with some difficult
exploit, approached Roan, where he lost Sir Walter Loses his brother Sir
Walter.
his brother, who was shot through with a bullet; the Queen indeed checked him
both for his voyage to the King, without her knowledge, and for his
incon^iderate approaching Ro^^, but he quickly made his peace with her by a
smooth Letter* and in the mean time behau'd himself bravely in the assault,
and taking of Go^rnay with the Marshall Byr^n.

About which time also, the French King sent over Beauoir with Letters to the
Queen, Is dispatched ^^to Champaigne.
to desire her to let the Earl of Essex pass into Champaigne with his forces,
as if he had not so much as thought of the besieging of Roan; which the Queen
took so ill at his hands, that she began to expostulate with him concerning
it; The French King breaks his promis^.
obiecting also, that now tw^ months were expired since the covenant was made,
and (...) her Soldiers had not their pay; that both she and they were deluded
by him, being first hurried this way, and then that way, but every way exposed
to all possible danger; vpbraiding him likewise with the not performance of his
promise, to the discredit of his gratitude, and that he had now made her loose
all her former charges. Wherefore, that now she had resolved to recall her
Soldiers out of Normandy, unless he made some better account of his promise,
and took better order for the Soldiers pay from hence forward. But the King,
by the insinuating language of his Letters, soon appeased this distaste she
conceived against him, excusing all things with the necessity he was in, and
his tumultuous throng of business.

But in the beginning of November, hearing that the Duke of Parma was in a
readiness, he began slowly to buckle himself to the siege of Roan; and sent
the Earl of Essex over into England to muster up more forces for him.

The Earl quickly being returned, on Christmas Eve, they set upon the Fort of
Saint Catharine, in four places at once; in three whereof the English valor
was thoroughly tried, who were alone exposed to the fortune of slaughter.

And at the same time he sent over the Lord Mournay d^ Plessis, More a^de
required.
to require of the Queen a new supply, to hinder the coming of the Duke of
Parma; neither did the Queen deny it, but first touched him bitterly about his
carelessness, in delaying the siege of Roan, and preventing betimes the Duke of
Parma's coming. She desired him, a little (...) favorably to deal with the
English, and not still to put them alone upon all his most dangerous exploits.

But I leave this to the French Historians, who indeed hitherto have either
been ignorant of it, or dissembled their knowledge. And as willingly would I
leave to the pains of our Ecclesiastical Writers, the mad frenzy, or rather
impious blasphemy of William Hacket, which about this time first began to peep
forth; about which I would more willingly employ my memory to forget that which
even affrights me with repetition; but lest by concealing his wickedness, I
might seem either to favor the cause, or to disparage the truth of it, take
here briefly, the sum of his large blasphemy.

This same Hacket H^^ket his education and behavior.
was an ordinary Yeoman of Oundell, in the County of Northampton, an
illiterate, insolent, and cruel natured fellow, so prone to revenge for the
smallest injury, that when an ingenuous Schoolmasters desired to be reconciled
and made friends with him, as he embraced him close, he bit off his nose, and
being greatly entreated by the poor man to restore it again, that he might
have it sowed on whilst the wound was green, he like a Dog, devoured it. He
was so great an alien to all piety and devotion, that whatsoever by chance he
had heard at Sermons, he would sit scoffing and gybing at over his pots:
afterward, having spent that estate which he had with his wife, in
riotousnesse, on a sudden he became a very upright man, and one of a most holy
conversation; he was much given to hearing Sermons, and reading the
Scriptures, insomuch, that in a short time, he began to belie himself with
Revelations His revelations.
from heaven, saying, that he was extraordinarily called by God: by which
means he insinuated himself into the acquaintance of many Divines, who out
of a fiery pure zeal, took sore pains to bring the discipline of the
Presbytery from Geneva into England.

Amongst them was one Wiginton, His confed^rates.
a Minister, and a brainsicke fellow, one that had already learned to contemn
the jurisdiction of the Magistrate: 1590
by this man's means he was brought acq^ainted with Edmund Copinger, a Gentleman
of a good house, who had persuaded himself and one Arthington, a great admirer
of his gifts, that he was also e^traordinarily called by God, to the good of
the Church and Commonweal, and that he had order given him immediately from
heaven, to bring the Queen and her Council to a better mind, to wit, to
embrace the discipline of Geneua. He confirmed himself and the rest the more
in this faith, having been instructed by some Ministers, that God both daily
stir and raise up Laborers in his Church extraordinarily. Since that time
rejoicing in his spirit, he would impart all to Hacket, willingly, who with
his praying extempore, fasting on Sundaies, boasting how he had been,
buffetted by Satan, and faining an ordinary talk with God, which he would
take to be true upon his damnation, and with many bitter oaths did so swear
the people into a belief of him, that they esteemed him greatly beloved of
God, and greater than Moses, or S. John Baptist: neither did he obscurely
intimate, that he was a Prophet of Gods revenge and justice, wheresoever the
people embraced not his mercy: also prophesying, that from henceforth there
should be no Pope, and that this year England should be sorely afflicted
with famine, pestilence and war, unless the Lords discipline (for so he
called it) and Reformation were admitted and practiced over and throughout the
Land. And for bringing in of this said Reformation, they devised a plot, as was
found out afterward, to accuse the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, They seek^
to accuse the Archbishop and the Chancellor.
and the Lord Chancellor of treason, because they cheiefly opposed themselves
against this Reformation; determining besides to make both of them away, and
all the rest that in the Star^ chamber should give sentence against the
promotion of the Reformation, or against the Ministe^^ that desired it: they
printed also many rithmes, whereby they thought to stir the people to sedition,
amongst which this was a dogmaticall Tene^, that it was lawful for a true
Christian, although he were a country Swain, or a very Clown, to prescribe
a manner of government to his Prince, and even to dispossess^ the Queen of her
Throne, if she promoted not Reformation.

Indeed, Hacket Hackets hatred to the Queen.
exceedingly hated the Queen, as appears in that he durst mutter, that she had
fell from her right of succession, and in that he durst offer violence to her
picture, in thrusting it through the breast with a Poniard: neither was this a
great wonder, for he had persuaded himself already, that God had made him King
of Europe, and that therefore he ought not to endure a Rival. Likewise he
persuaded both Copinger and Arthington, that they were inspired, not only with
a Prophetical, but even with an Angelical spirit, and they persuaded
therewith, exhibited to him all obedience and reverence, as appointed King by
God, thereby endeavoring to give fuel to this sedition, which they longed to
see on flame. About July next, they came to a Nobleman of the Realm, and
proffered to him the tuition of the Kingdom, under the Queen, to whom they
dedicated the life of Hacket and Arthingtons prophesies, but he either having
or faining urgent business to do, slighted both them and their courtesy.

Shortly after, they certified Wiginton, that Christ had appeared to them the
night before, not bodily, as he is enthroned in heaven, but Spiritually, by
possessing Hacket in the spirit, more than any of the rest: that Hacket was
that Angel that was to come before the day of judgment, with his Fan and
his Hook, to separate the Sheep from the Goats, and that he should tread
down Satan and the Kingdom of Antichrist. Afterward from Wiginton, they
betake themselves to Hacket again, by whose side, as he lay down upon his
bed, they prostrated themselves in very earnest prayer, and Hacket rising up,
joined with them in prayer, oftentimes zealously requesting the Spirit to
direct them to Gods glory, and then went to bed again. Not long after
Arthington willed Copinger in the name of Jesus Christ to anoint Hacket with
the Holy Ghost, and make him King: So Copinger, having thrice humbly kissed the
pauement, and bowed the knee with great reverence, approached toward Hacket;
but he drove him back with his hand, saying, It is needless for you to
anoint me, for I am already anointed by the Holy Ghost; go ye only and do
as I command you; Go and preach through the City, that Jesus Christ is come
with his fan in his hand, to judge the world; if any man ask you where he
is, direct him hither; if they will not believe, let them come, and if they
can, let them kill me, for as sure as God is in heaven, so no less sure is it
that Christ is now come to judgment.

Scarce had he ended this commandment, His disciples sent abroad.
but they pr^sently fly upon the execution of it, and running out of doors,
cry up and down the streets, that Christ is come, redoubling with a loud
voice, that and many other things which Hacket had told them, crying, Repent,
repent, etc. throughout the City, till they came to Cheapside: and when they
were much pestered there with a throng of people, they got up into a Cart, and
there partly without book, and partly by the help of some notes they had,
they openly cried out, that Hacket had participated of Christ, by his more
peculiar Spirit a body truly glorified; and that he was now come with his
Fan, to propagate the Gospel through Eurpoe, and to constitute a new
discipline and Commonwealth in England; intimating withal unto them the place
where he lodged; declaring themselves to be two Prophets, the one of Mercy,
and the other of Judgment, that were allotted to him for facilitating this so
difficult an enterprise, vowing, protesting, and swearing, that as they hoped
to b^ saved, all this was true.

Then they added, that Hacket was a supreme and sole Monarch, and that all the
Kings and Princes of Europe were but his Vassals, that therefore he must only
be obeyed, and the Queen deposed.

Lastly, they railed at bitterly, and cursed the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
and the Lord Chancellor, as the sole oppugners of the true and sincere
Religion, which they would have brought in: and then having endeavored to have
crowded into other quarters of the City, with like proclamations, but being
hindered with the press of the people, and the persuasion of some of their
friends, they returned home to Hackets lodging.

Shortly after, being apprehended They are apprehended.
and brought before some of the Privy Council, and other Magistrates, to be
examined, they behaved themselves with such contempt before them, that they
would not so much as stand bare, but peremptorily answered those that reproved
them, that they were above all Magistrates. Shortly after this Hacket Hacket
condemned.
was accused of treason, who acknowledged himself guilty, whereupon he was
condemned: at which time he used many blasphemous speeches, even to the terror
of those that heard him; cunningly, as much thought, to bring the Judges to
think, that he was distracted in his wits, but yet in all his other gestures
and behauiours, there was no sign of any such matter, for they relished more
of a well settled gravity, than any such distemper: afterward was he drawn
upon a hurdle into Cheap Side, incessantly crying all the way with a fearful
voice, Iehoua Messiah, Iehoua Messiah, Beh^ld the heavens open, beh^ld the Son
of the most high coming down to deliver me.

When he was brought to the Gallows, and wished to confess his sins
against God and the Queen, he used many contumelious speeches against the
Queen; But for God, he cried out to him with a Stentors voice, His blasphemy
at the time of execution.
O heavenly God, Almighty Iehoua, Alpha and Omega, Lord of Lords, and King of
Kings, O eternal God, thou know that I am the true Jehovah whom thou have
sent, now show some miracle from the cl^^des (...) convert all, these infidels,
and deliver (...) from mine enemies: If thou will not (O how I tremble (...)
the repetition) I will fire the heavens, and with these hands p^ll thee from
thy throne, using sometimes speeches, if it were possible worse than these.
Then turning about (...) the Hang^ man that was ^itting the rope to his neck,
(...) Bastard, said he, will thou hang thy King Hacket? and after that being
haltred, he lift up his eyes to heaven, saying, I^ this my reward for my
kingdom bestowed, behold I come and will revenge it.

The rope stopped his mouth at this blasphemy, but not all his punishment, for
being immediately cut down, according to his sentence, he was straight way
quartered. And thus we see how the enemy of mankind besots those whom he
finds affecting a counterfeit holiness, and not contented with sobriety in
knowledge.

C^pi^ger Coping^r steru'd himself.
shortly after, having voluntarily s^^ru'd himself, died in prison; but
Arthington Arthington recants.
growing wiser to repentance, acquitted himself of this folly, in a serious
book which was set out to the same purpose, by him not long after.

And indeed, not only these, but many others, who having condemned the
received discipline of the Church of England, and reproved the calling of
Bishops, had in vaine^ with many contumelious speeches, hitherto opposed the
Prelates, had now drawn into their faction, many of the Lawyers of the Realm,
who sharpened both their tongu^^ and pens, against the Queens jurisdiction in
Ecclesiastica^^, matters, The Queens jurisdiction in spiritual matters
impugned.
and consequently against her delegating the same to the Clergy, as being a
thing most unjust, publishing (...) print, that against the law of the Realm
men were vniust^ly oppressed in our Courts Ecclesiastical, that the Quee^^ had
no right residing in her self of such Jurisdiction, and that others therefore
could not justly exercise the same, being delegated to them from her, alleging
that those (...) Ecclesiastical, ought not to impose upon a guilty man an oath
of Duty, which they call Insuriandum ex officio, by reason that no man is
compelled to be his own accuser, and by reason that thereby a man must either
wilfully condemn himself, or by forswearing himself, for the safety of life
and goods, ruin his own soul.

Besides this, they urged the form of the ancient Writ, running in this
manner; We will and command the Sheriff of our Counties, S. N. etc. that they
permit not any within their Bailife-ship to make recognizance by oath, but
only in cause of Matrimonial, and Testamentary.

Against these men, It is defended and maintained.
the Professors of the Ecclesiastical Law, maintained the Queens
Jurisdiction in spiritual matters, wherein she had been before invested by
act of Parliament, alleging, that to withstand that, was only to assault the
Queens Majesty, and with the breach of their oaths of Allegiance, to insult
over the sacred Prerogative of their Princess.

They answered, that Ecclesiastical Courts had authority to take notice of
other causes besides Matrimonial, and Testamentary, as appears by the Statute
of Circumspecte agatis, and by the Articles of the Clergy, under King Edward
the first. Concerning the Writ, they much suspected the truth of it, by the
reason of the variety of reading of it, and the uncertainty of the time of it is
original, being it is sometimes read disiunctiuely, To make recognition, or to
take oath. Besides this, they answered, that to make Recognition, did not
signify a deposition of witnesses, or answer to the party conuented, but only
the confession of the debt, or holding plea of debts and chattels; concluding
that such taking of oaths were exacted time out of mind, to avoid Simony,
Adultery, and other works of darkness; especially, if the Information be (as
they call it) clamorous. And although that no man be compelled to betray
himself with his own accusation, yet that he is bound to be accused by a
Fame, and to show whether or no he can purge himself, and defend his
innocence, by reason that such penance imposed, is not to be esteemed a
Punishment, but only Physic, to cure sinners, and to fright others from the
like sin, or to take away any general scandal, according to that of the
holy Writ, Be not ashamed for thy souls sake, to tell the truth, for there is
a confusion that brings sin, and there is ^ne that brings grace and gl^ry.

But wherefore stand I deciding this controversy? which if any man will
iudiciously scanne, let him consult with the learned Apology of Doctor Cosins,
Doctor of Law, or of John Morris, or Lancelot Andrews, whose learned writings
in this matter, will soon give the scrupulous conscience of any ^an a speedy
resolution.

By this means the Queen easily impeached the adversaries of her
Jurisdictions violence, and conserved both in her self, and in her Clergy,
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction free from blemish.

About this time was it, when Thomas Howard, the second son of the D. of
Norfolk, with six ships of the Queens; and as many Victuallers, had expected
the Spanish Nauies return from America this whole six months. And about this
time lingering about the Island Flores, amongst those of Azores, where most of
his Mariners languished (as for Soldiers he had none); where he was suddenly
overtaken by Don Alphons^ Bazan, that was sent out with fifty thr^^ ships, to
conduct the Navy home in safety, in so much th^^ he in the Admiral with much
ado escaped into the main^ Ocean. Captain Richard Greenuile Captain
Gree^^ile in the Rear Admiral called the Revenge.
in the Rear Admiral, who was called the Revenge, (what by reason partly of
stay he made to recall his men aboard from out of the Island, and partly out of
a courageous mind, as unhappily in success, as inconsiderately in the
enterprise,) for bad to strike sail; by which means he became hemmed in
between the Island and the Spanish Navy, Is assailed.
which was divided into four squadrons; one whereof, while he endeavored
courageously to make way through, he was so ouerburthened with the massy
Spanish Admiral S. Philip, that it kept all the wind from him on one side,
and on the other side three more did the like. Yet the Spaniards that were
diverse times coming on, were either feign to recoyle again, or were cast into
the Sea, and with a continual succession of fresh men in their places, to
their great slaughter, they still maintained fight against them all the night.

And now began the English to want powder, their Pikes being broken, and every
valiant Soldier being slain or sore wounded, the Masts of their fore-Decke,
and hind^Decke fell down. Their Cables cut; the Ship torn with eight hundred
shot of great Ordnance; Sorely wounded.
Capt. Greeneuill being grievously wounded, even as he was having a plaster,
was again wounded in the head, and the Surgeon at the same time slain. At the
beginning of the dawning of the day, the hatches all besmeared with blood, and
paued with Carkases, and men half dying, afforded but a sad spectacle to all
the beholders.

After this, having now fought fifteen hours, Greenuill seeing his case to be
desperate, willed them to sink the ship; but the Pilot forbade it, and having
got the mayor parts assent thereto, he was conveyed in the ship boat, and
yielded to the Spanish Admiral, upon condition of safety and freedom from the
Galleys: but Captain Greenuill, Greenuill y^^lded upon condition.
languishing under the torments of his deaths wounds, being brought into the
Spanish Admiral, within two days after d^ed, being sufficiently praised for
his valor even of his enemies. The ship was yielded up, but having been board
through in many places, The Revenge sunk.
was afterward swallowed up in a tempest, being manned with two hundred
Spaniards at least; so that the Revenge perished not unrevenged.

The Lord Howard (...) more on his good courage, than ability to (...) have put
in amongst them, bu^ the Pilate was so far from iniuring them with his
consent, that he would rather have tumbled himself into the Sea, than, not to
have hazarded, but willingly thrust the Queens ship upon so apparent danger:
and indeed, it seemed not good to them all at last to undergo a skirmis^,
without hope of success to themselves, or succor to their distressed
companions, when they but once considered, that to hazard five ships, against
three and fifty, was nothing els^ but inconsidera^ely to their own
destruction, to thrust the glory of a victory upon their enemies. Yet
notwithstanding, both he and the rest, especially Sir Thomas (...) (who two
hours together still succored the Re^enge) d^d all the service that either
the courtesy of the wind, or the continuance of the day light would suffer
them to do*

The English abundantly repaired the loss of that one ship, Are^^itall for her
loss.
with the surprizall of many Spanish; in one where^^ besides other riches, were
found about some twenty tho^^sand Popish Indulgences, sent from the Pope into
America* for they compel the ^imple Indians, every year to buy (...)
remission of their sins at the Popes market, to their (...) advantage and
gain.

About this time George Riman, an excellent Seaman, The East Indy voyage
and James Lancaster, set forth also for the East Indie voyage: (...) having
reach^ the Cape of Good Hope at Cab^ Corrient^^ the Admiral was swallowed up
in a tempest, and Riman in it. (...).
Afterward, the heavens did thunder most fearfully, and in the rest of the
Ships four of the Mariners, having their necks wreathed aside with the force
of the thunder, died instantly. Ninety more were taken blind; many other^
lamed; some stretched as it were upon the rack; and yet all of them, sooner
than their own expectation could have cured them, recovered their health
again, and yet undaunted for all this went on their voyage.

Whilst they went to water at the Island Comoro, the Barbarians slew thirty of
them, besides the Pilot, yet all this misery diuerted not their resolution, but
they wintered at Zanziber; and about they spring the surprised some Mah^metane
ships of Peg^, with wooden anchors; and other Portugal ships, well laden with
Pepper and Rice. After that they came to Zeile, and the Island Ni^ubar,
plenteously inricht with Cinnamon and Diamonds; but then having not above thirty
men alive, and provision of victuals not sufficient for so few, they turned
sail home again: having refresht themselves a little at S. Hellens Island,
they were tossed upon Trinidado, but found small comfort there, till such time
as they chanced to light upon Charles Barbotier a French man, who relieved
their necessity; and as he did that charitably, so as discreetly did he
eschew their treachery, which it was likely not they, but their necessity
plotted against him.

Afterward Lancaster, having somewhat refreshed himself in the Island Nona,
the ship being tossed with a violent tempest, returned home with seven more as
weather-beaten as it self. Their ret^rne
The rest shortly returned by the courtesy of the French, home too, rich
enough in that they returned; having by their example taught the English Nation
the manner of trading with the East Indians.

In the mean time, Captain Thomas Cauendish, who before in the year 1578.
had incircled the whole world, and returned with as great glory as experience,
now again had made a voyage with five ships to the Magellan Straights;
Cauendish his voyage to the Magellan^ straights
hitherto when by reason of the cross winds he could not reach, he fell with
the coast of Brasill; while, immaturely dying, he blamed much in his last Will
and Testament Captain John Dauis, as one that per^^diously had forsaken him.

And now the wars growing hot on every side, there was a Proclamation set
forth, A Proclamation against transportation of provision into Spain.
forbidding any man under pain of treason, to transport corn, or warlike
munition, either belonging to sea or land, into the Spaniards Dominions: a
reason thereof being expressly added, that he had bin a professed enemy to this
kingdom, and that he had refused to confirm the ancient league, made by his
Predecessors.

Likewise, by reason that English Seminaries had daily crept into England out
from their Seminaries at Rome, France, and Spain, (for the Spaniard had lately
erected a Seminary for English fugitives too, at Valledolid, to withdraw the
hearts of the Queens subjects from her obedience, and to draw them to the
Spanish ^action). In October there came also another Proclamation, forbidding
any man, so much as to entertain any one, unless before hand he enquire who
he be, and whether or no he go to Church, by what means he lives, and where
he recided the last year, with many other questions: and if any man chance not
to give ready answer, that then they should be sent to the Del^gates of several
^hires, to prevent further mischief.

This Proclamation being held too sharp and severe, drew forth from the
adversary poisonous writings, thick and threefold, especially against the
Lord Treasurer, as the only occasioner thereof; yet amply commending Sir
Christ^pher Hatton, as somewhat inclined to their side, by reason his natural
cle^ency could not be drawn into a persuasion* that in case of Religion, men
should be burnt, hanged, or quartered; The death of Sir Christopher Hatton.
but he good man died the day before the publication thereof, being troubled
with the Diabetes, (a dis^ase as unmannerly as troublesome) and as much with
the Queens discontent, somewhat eagerly requiring the Tithes and first fruits
from him, which by the privilege of his favor with the Queen, he well hoped
she would have pardoned him.

He descended from a family more ancient that great, i^ Northamptonshire, and
being a tall handsome young man, and of a comely countenance, he came into such
favor with the Queen, that first she made him one of her Gentlemen
Pensioners; afterward for his modest pleasant behavior, she made him one of
the Gentlemen of her privy Chamber; then she made him Captain of the Guard,
Sub-chamberlaine, and one of her privy Council; and lastly, Lord Chancellor
of England, and one of the Order of Saint George: he was a man of a good^y
disposition, and of a great pity to the poor; one very liberal toward all
good Scholars, (whereupon he was chosen Chancellor of Oxford) and one that
performing so weighty a calling as the Chancellorship of England, kept himself
always with an upright conscience. He was honorably buried at Paul's, and a
Tomb erected at the charge of Sir William Newport, whom, taking the name of
Hatton, he made his heir. The custody of the Great Seal, for some months
together remained with the Treasurer, Hunsdon, Cobham, and Buckhurst, but
afterward was committed to John Puckering, with the title of Lord Keeper of
the Great Seal.

About this time Brian O-rorke, Brian O-rorke ^^raigned.
a Nobleman of Brennie in Ireland, who being so zealous as he was for the
Spanish cause, was, as we said the last year, sent by James of Scotland into
England, now was arraigned at Westminster Hall.

The chief matters whereof he was indicted, were

First, for stirring up Alexander Mac-C^nel and others, to a rebellion against
the Queen.

Secondly, for willing and commanding the Queens picture in a frame to be
drawn at a horses tail, and to the great disgrace of the Queen represe^ted
therein, to be hewn and cut in pieces.

Thirdly, for having given entertainment to some shipwrackt Spaniards, against
the express proclamation of the Lord Deputy.

Fourthly, for having set most of his neighbors houses on fire, only to
wreake his own mischi^uous stomach.

Fifthly, for killing many; and offering the Kingdom of Ireland to the King of
Scotland.

He being informed all these things by an interpreter (for he understood not
a word of English) very barbarously insolent, refused to put himself upon the
verdict and sentence of his Jury, unless they would give him longer time of
respite, unless they would allot him an Advocate, unless his accusations sent
out of Ireland were delivered into his hands; and lastly, unless the Queen
her self would sit chief Judge upon the Bench. The Lord Chief Justice
replying by an interpreter, that if he would not put himself upon the verdict
of his Jury, to try and examine his case, they must proceed against him by
Law, according to the contents of his accusation; he answered nothing again
but this, If it seem good to be so, let it be so.

The sentence of death being pronounced upon him, within few days he suffered
a traitors death at Tyburne, but with so obstinately a resolute courage, that
he even at that time scoft at Meilerie Chreah Archbishop of Casseils, who in
Irish began to comfort and consolate him, having been a wicked man in
conversation, and of a wavering faith; and besides, having broken his vow in
refusing the order of the Francisca^es.

This year the Queen in Dublin, the chief city of Ireland, founded a
College, which she dedicated to the holy and individual Trinity, in the place
where was before the Monastery of All Saints; she enricht the same with the
privileges of teaching, and conferring and bestowing degrees, the titles and
honor of learning (which privileges the Bishop of Rome had granted to that
City in 1320.) thereby hoping to propagate both humanity and religion
throughout the whole Island, and to ease well given Parents of the great cost
and charges of sending their children into foreign Universities.

At the same time Hugh Odonell, (whom Sir John Perot, Lord Deputy, having by a
trick enticed into a Ship, had committed to prison in Dublin, for fear lest
that being of a turbulent spirit, he should cause some vproares,) now escaped
out of prison again, and by letters to the Lord Deputy, now certified him,
that his father had resigned unto him the authority of O-d^nell, that is, rule
of Tir-C^nel^, whereupon he began a fresh to mutiny in Ireland, as Bothwell
did in Scotland; concerning whom, although willingly I would not wea^e my self
into a mixture of the affairs of Scotland, yet somewhat must be spoken,
especially since they are both so riueted together, that the one yields light
to the others understanding, which otherwise would be clouded in much
obscurity.

Bothwell t^erefore, wh^ had bee^e accused of trading in witchcraft, (...) had
latel^ ^scaped (...) of prison, ^eing most outragiously incensed against
Metellane the Chancellor, (whom he suspected the greatest engineer of his
accusations) altogether applies himself to the bringing under of both him and
the King himself to his power; and to that intent toward the end of December,
he breaks in upon the Court which was at Edenborough, with some more of his
accomplices, and English borderers, and there assaulted the Queens Chamber with
a mallet, and the Kings and Chancellors both with fire. But his plot being
frustrated in success, by the nimble obedience of the Citizens that came in
against him, he suffered a repulse, and was glad to fly; some of his
attendants and Pages were thereupon hanged, and the Mallet also upon the
Queens Chamber doo^e, in remembrance of so bold a villainy.

THE FIVE and thirtieth Year OF HER REIGN.
Anno Domini 1592. 1592

AT the very entrance in of the next year, the King by Proclamation declared,
that Bothwell Bothwell is proclaimed traitor.
was the author of this dangerous and ignominious enterprise; that he was a
fellow so molded and soadred together with all vices, that having given
defiance to vert^^ and godliness, he durst insult over God himself, much
more upon the authority, ordained by God. Declaring also how that after his
return from Italy, he had associated himself with all manner of companies,
although he had nothing to do with them: that very villainously he had slain
David Humes; ^hic^ off^nce, (...) his mercy had condoned and pardoned him; that
he eschewed by all means possible to come to trial for any of his ^normious
o^^rages, because a Wizard in Italy had foretold him* that his destruction
would come from the just judgment of the King: Adding, how that this jealous
fear of trial greatly increased in him, at that time, when he outragiously
had slain William Stewart of Vchiltre, the Kings servant: and how that
thereupon with all his (...) and might, with ^is ^loody villains and
comp^ices, (...) and Spaniard, the destruction of both Realms. Then how he
had ranked himself to the^^ side, who a^ the River (...), at the Bridge there,
(...) the Court, out of some private disco^ten^, (...) down their ^rmes, He
still marched, and (...) his Camp against Edenborough, where he surprised
some; and from whence he retreated not, till such time as he heard the King was
in a readiness (...) him.

Then was declared, how after that, he had betook ^^^selfe to devilish Arts,
to (...) and Witchcraft, to (...) away the life of his King (when he was absent
in Denmark) which was only out of hope of avoiding his desert of punishment,
and obtaining (...) authority (...) so much feared, to wit, the Crown. That
hereupon (...) committed to prison, from whence, even when he was (...) to be
set out upon some easy conditions, his ^onscience so pricked him, that by
private escaping, he (...) courtesy of his ^awfull delivery.

And then, how, to expiate this off^nce, he had (...) another more heinous, to
wit, in assaulting the Court upon no other resolution, but by making away his
King, to ^ick Justice under feet, to dominere in his villainy (...); that he
sought out for the King, and attempted the Kings and Chancellours lodgings by
fire, and the Queens with a (...) (...) (...)

(...) ^ntailed upon his (...) b^fore-hand, His g^ods entailed upon his son.
who had married the sister of the Earl of Essex, and afterward the Queen
confirmed also the same. ^hus did the vnbridl^d vntoward^^sse of a roauing
tongue, cause destruction to a worthy man, and one that deserved will of the
Commonwealth; leaving an admonition to all posterity, that reproachful words
against Princes, find a deep impresion in them, and commonly a very sharp
memory.

The French King, whom we said, had pitched his Camp the last year, with the
auxiliary forc^s of the Earl of Essex at (...), there also with his small army
wintred. The spring (...), and ^e wearied with these troubles of his (...)
siedge; and finding himsel^^ unable for the taking of so (...) into the City,
he called to him the Earl of Essex* and suffered it not; for the (...) of the
Frenchman was such, that (...) it not good to (...) a C^^y be ransack't by the
(...), which (...) shortly yield i^ self into (...).

The Ea^le of Essex, The Earl of Essex ret^rnes from France.
being de^pri^ed of any hope of matters to do* (after he had challenged
Vill^^s, the Governor of the City of Roan, to a single combat, and he no^
(...) weather beaten and w^^ne away, (...) took his leave of the (...) King,
and made have over, being called by the Queen^, and advised by his friends,
that many envious men at Court, had (...), and secretly, and craf^^ly had set
(...).

^

(...), ^arched vp^ards in to Fr^^ce, with his son (...), as intending to
bring aid to those that lay in Garrison in Ch^^me. He took Ne^fve-Chastel;
and having skirmished somewhat fortunately against the King ^t (...), he so
increased the stomachs of those of Ro^a^, that bursting forth, they invaded
the Kings Camp, and got many of his pieces of Ordnance. The Duke returns to
Abbeuille, as if he were going home: the King indeed thought he had been
gone home; and upon that dissolues the siege for want of provision, and
dismisseth a great part of his Army. Upon that, the Duke without any delay,
embracing his occasion, pursues his enterprise again; and having made sound
the River S^yne, for a passage for victuals, he takes (...), and reli^cues the
distressed City with store of pronision; he strengthens the Rebels; and out
of a cra^ty warlike policy, always delaieth battle, yet not without great
loss; and being distempered in body, returns home.

All which time, how valiantly the English behaved themselves in battle, when
the Army of the Leaguers was vanquished at (...), the King himself by letters,
dated at ^iscara-ville, to the Queen, sufficiently witnessed; extolling Sir
Roger Williams likewise, as another C^sar, and Sir Matthew Morgan.

The French King, being ouer-whelm'd with these weighty wars, again flies
for aid to the Queen of England, desiring pro^ision for War, and six
thousand men, for his war in Britain. She condiscendeth to send four
thousand, and some pieces of Ordnance, and other furniture, upon condition
agreed upon by (...), and (...), Delegates, for the King of France; That the
King should not enter into a League with the Leaguers, unless they had first
submitted themselves, and promised assistance to drive the Spaniard out of the
Kingdom; That he should not also make a peace with the Spaniard, except she
were agreeing thereto; That he should allot some harbor and re^^ptacle for the
English, and join to them four thousand French footmen, and a thousand
horsemen; that within a year he should pay the charges of their
transportations, and money for their pay; and that this agreement should be
registered amongst the Acts of the Chamber of Accounts.

Upon this, Captain Norris, who had been sent for out of Britain into
France, to certify the Queen of the proceedings therein, was sent back
again in October. When the English had arrived in France, there was not any
Frenchmen to join forces with them ac^ording to the agreements. But Captain
Norris, called from one place to another; sometime to war in Normandy and
Lamaine; sometimes elsewhere, suffering the Spaniards all this while to
strengthen themselves in Britain; at which the Queen was so discontented*
that had she not for certain vnd^rstood, that the Duke of Parma was on
another expedition into France, to supply the forces in Britain, and to seize
upon some other Havens, certainly she had recal'd her men home again.

But whilst the Duke of Parma was in a readiness for this expedition, he
died, having been Commander of the Spanish forces in the Low Countries
fourteen years. He was a Prince most abundant in all virtues, having
purchased love and respect, even amongst his enemies; whom even the Queen
never named, but very honorably, and with commendation; but ^et so warily that
his praises hurted not.

The Queen being not ignorant that the Spaniard maintained these wars, not
trusting upon his own strength, as the gold of America, and that by that
means he pierced into all secrets of States, corrupted good council, and
much impaired many men's loyalty, determined to send Sir Walter Ra^leigh, with
fifteen men of war into America, to seize upon Panama, where they bring
together their gold, or to surprise the Spanish Fleet; but having exceeding
contrary winds, he was three whole months before he struck sail. At last,
having out reached the Promontory of Neri^^, he understood of a certain, that
the Spaniard had expressly commanded, Rauleigh's expedition to America
frustrated.
that none set out of America this year.

Not long after, a mighty tempest dispersed the English Fleet, and drowned
their little Fli^-boates; so that now the opportunity of following his intent
being lost, being about to return again, he distributedd his Navy into two
parts, committing the one to Sir John Borrough, second son to the Lord
Borrough, and the other to Martin Fourbisher; he gives ^he one charge to ^oaue
about the Spanish coast, and hinder ships from entering, willing the other to
tarry at the Islands of Az^r^s, for the return of the Carackes out of the East
Indies. Neither did this purpose fail of a wished success, for whilst the
Spanish Admiral at sea, rests only in observing and watching Fourbisher, he
altogether neglecte^ his care of the Carackes. Borrough (to omit some small
ships he took from the Spaniard, and how valiantly he winded himself out of
danger, when he was encompassed between the Spanish Coasts, and the enemies
Navy) having arrived at a little town called Santa Cruce, in the ^land Flores
within a few days after, espied a Portugal Caracke A Portugal Caracke
pursued by Borrough.
(which three of the Earl of Cumberlands ships lay in wait for, but by reason
of a sluggish calm, they could not come near them;) a tempest arising in the
night, compelled both the English and the Portugals to take up anchor; but on
the next morning, the English might discern the Portugal^s vnlading at the
Island Flores, as fast as they could possibly; who discrying the English making
after them, presently set their ship on fire.

Borrough, having understood by one or two Captives whom he had taken, that
more and greater Carackes were to come that way, severed all his ships to the
space of two leagues distance, over against the Island Flores, and thereby had
(...) of viewing far and near the Coast about him; neither did fortune
de^aine them long in expectation, for behold, a great Caracke, called, the
Mother of God, which was a hundred and sixty foot long, and seven deckes in
height, laden with rich Merchandise, and manned with six hundred men, came in
their sight.

The English set upon her with many pieces of Ordnance, The English assault a
great Caracke.
in diverse places, and with as diverse success; being indeed, more courageous
than ordinary, by reason of the hope of the expected prey: but being equally
amazed with the hugeness of it, and the multitude of Soldiers in it, they
began to desist skirmishing, till such time that Robert Cross, twharting the
fore-Castle of the Caracke, with the Queens ship, called the Providence,
maintained skirmish three whole hours together. Then the rest fell so fiercely
upon her on every side, especially on the poope, that at the stern no man
durst appear.

First of all, Cross brake in, and borded, and after him all the rest; where
finding a great slaughter committed, dead men being mingled with half dead,
and the whole with the wounded, so confusedly, that pity moved them to use
their victory mildly.

The spoil The spoil taken.
that was brought home, was valued at a hundred and fifty thousand pounds of
English money; besides those commodities which several Commanders, Mariners,
and Soldiers pilfered and snatched for themselves: and when there was a strict
inquisition made after these men, for those goods that were stolen away in this
manner, under pretense that they had not discharged the due ^raight for
carriage; and afterward when a Proclamation came forth, severely threatening to
punish those as Robbers and Pirates, that brought these pilfred commodities not
to light again; yet did their wickedness easily frustrate the busy industry
of the Delegates in this matter, and the perjury of many of them mocking the
public s^uerity of the Proclamation, pre^en^ed the execution of it; for they
stuck not to say, That they had rather endanger their souls by perjury before
God, that was exceeding merciful, that their whole fortunes and estates before
men, that were so unmerciful.

Not unlike to this was the treacherous covetousness of many Merchants here,
The covetousness of some English Merchants.
who to glut their desire of wealth, even in this time of open war (although
not proclaimed yet) between England and Spain, furnished the Spaniard with
Ordnance of brass and iron both, wherewith they stored their wants in many of
their unprovided ships.

This, as soon as the Queen came to understand, she set forth her
Proclamation, A Proclamation about making of Ordnance.
forbidding any man hereafter to do so, under penalty of aiding an enemy
against ones own country: withal commanding, that they who work in iron,
should make no greater pieces that the ordinary Mynions, and none above
sixteen thousand pound weight.

The Queen, The Queen goes on progress.
having gone on progress this summer, took Oxford in her way, where she
remained some few days, being entertained with Orations, Plays, and
Disputations, and a costly banquet, provided by the Lord Buckhurst, then
Chancellor of Oxford. Visits the University of Oxford.
At her departure she gave them a Latin speech; wherein she professed, that
she more esteemed of their true hearty loves, than of all other sports and
pleasures never so delightful; for which she gave them hearty thanks, making
a solemn vow, and giving them sound counsel; her vow was, that as she wished
nothing more than the safety of the Kingdom, the happiness and glory thereof,
so she wished also, that especially the University, which is one of the eyes
of the Kingdom, might grow famous and flourish for ever. Her counsel was,
that they should worship God first of all, not to suit themselves according to
the curiosity of many, but to the laws of God and the Kingdom; that they
should follow the laws, and not go before them; that they should not dispute,
whether or no better laws might be, but keep those that already were made,
that they should obey their Superiors, and mutually love each other.

This summer, as also last summer, there was such a great drought through
England, that not only the fields, but even many fountains were dried up, and
many cattle were choked with thirst, and perished every where up and down;
even the River of Thames, The Thames dried up.
the chiefest in all England, nay, one than whom Europe has not a longer, (for
it ebbes and flows above threescore miles every day) was even without water
the fifth day of September, to the great admiration of all that beheld the same;
in so much, that a horseman might easily pass over at London Bridge. Whether
or no, this fell out by reason of the great drought, or the fierce rage of the
North-east wind, which had blown upon the water two whole days, and either
drove away the fresh water, or hindered the flowing of the Sea, I cannot tell;
especially the Moon being then in the increase descending to the South, and
the Aequinox being near at hand; at which times seamen observe greater flowing
in the Thames, than at any other.

There were those that searched into the hidden secrets of Philosophy, to show
that this accident fell out by a natural cause and direction; arguing, that as
a quartane Ague comes at her due time, and as the Gout at certain seasons, and
as a Purge, if nothing hinder it, keeps it is accustomed time for working, and
as a woman's childe-bearing ordinarily comes within a months reckoning; so the
waters have some secret place of respite* whither they withdraw themselves, and
whence they stream out again: that some of them that are less may be the
better noted; that they that are greater are yet certainly so.

And what wonder should this be, to see Nature her self go on by statutes
and degrees? The heat of the Summer comes when the time is; the alteration of
the Spring and Autumn is, when it is wont to be; the Solstice and the Aequinox
keep their appointed seasons; then let us not think but there are laws of
nature under earth, which may perchance be less known to us, but not less
certain in themselves. Let us believe to be below, whatsoever we see is
above us.

There died this year Anthony Brown, Vicount Mou^tague, Vicount Mountague
dies.
son to Sir Anthony Brown, master of the Horse, and Standard Bearer of
England; whom Queen Mary had before given this title to, because that his
Grandmother was the Daughter and heir of John Neuill, Marquisse of Mountague.
She made him Knight of the Garter, and sent him to Rome in the behalf of the
whole kingdom, to yield obedience to that See.

Queen Elizabeth, having had experience of this man's loyalty, esteemed very
well of him, although he were a Romance Catholic; she came moreover and
visited him; for she well knew that he was borne and bred in that religion,
which he professed; and not embraced it as many did, only to further a
faction: and him, Anthony, Nephew to his son succeeded. And the L. Scroope.
There died also, Henry Lord Scroope of Bolton, Knight of the Garter, and
President of the western parts of the Borders of Scotland; having left Thomas
his son, by Marquisse Howard, the sister of Thomas, the la^^ Duke of
Norfolk, his successor.

Neither to be passed over in silence, is the death of Christopher Wray, And
Sir Christopher Wray.
Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench; a man of great wisdom and skill in
the Law; one of sincerity, and as great constancy; he had much issue, but more
credit in Magdalene College in Cambridge, of which he well deserved; whom
^op^am the Attorney, a man of much noted severity, succeeded.

THE SIX and thirtieth Year OF HER REIGN.
Anno Domini 1593. 1593

IN February, this year the Peers of the Kingdom assembled in Parliament at
Westminster, A Parliament ass^mbled.
where they enacted laws about the restraining of Schismatics and Papists
that would not go to Church, and also enticed others not to go too: also
about possessions of Monasteries entailed upon Henry the eight; about relieuing
Soldiers and Mariners; and about not building within three miles of London,
and many other matters. And when they had weightily considered (for I speak
out of the Acts of Parliament) with what resolute malice the enemy raged
against Englands overthrow, and the Confederates in France, to ceaze the Low
Countries, or Scotland, or to surprise any convenient place for inuading
England, they adjudged it fit to grant some Subsidies to repel these dangers.
Wherefore acknowledging and magnifying the heroicke princely mind of their
Princess, together with her provident care and especial affection to her
people, that had so happily waged war against her enemy; and to that end she
continually exhausted the wealth of her Treasure, and never offered to burden
the poor comminalty with taxations; and that not only in defense of her own
Kindgome, but also in easing and relieuing her confederates according to these
words, and her promise. The Clergy granted two entire Subsidies, Subsidies
granted.
and the Laity three, and six Fifteenes and Tenths, to be paid at a time, with
a willing and obedient mind. But yet with submission petitioning, that since
these things were so assigned over to Posterity in public Records, that in
express words there should be this caution added, that these so great (and the
like never before heard-of) Subsidies being granted unto so good a Princess,
upon so extraordinary occasions, should never be made an example for hereafter.

The Queen being present the last day of the Parliament, The s^mme of the
Queen^ speech.
that by her consent she might give life to these Laws to make them of force,
having professed her love to all her people, first protested, that all her care
only watched to this intent, that the glory of God and the Commonwealth might
be enlarged; and that she would spend only to that end all whatsoever they
should bestow upon her. After that, with her flowing ^loquence quickly and
lively she runs through, how far she always has been from a s^^ggish
want of courage; how that trusting still to God, and the buckler of her good
conscience, she never knew how to fear, nay, not her greatest and her most
potent enemies. Lastly, to put courage into their hearts, she discoursed very
accurately of the valor of the English, and among other things, that even our
enemies themselves could not but acknowledge that the English, (out of a
natural and inbred valor) were always prompt to undergo any dangers: and
that they found so much indeed by experience too, although they dissembled it;
that they should yet try it more fully, if so be that the English slept not too
much in security, or be not fallen upon being unprovided; then concluding, with
hearty thanks for Subsidy moneys, she promised to dedicate all her thoughts
to God, and the good of the Commonwealth.

And indeed, how she performed this promise toward God, let the
Ecclesiastical Writers tell, what punishment she inflicted upon Henry Barowe
Barowe a Sectary hanged.
and his Sectaries, who by the seed-plot of dangerous opinions, condemning the
Church of England, derogating from the Queens authority in spiritual matters,
had not a little distempered the peace of the Church.

But as concerning her promise toward the good of the Commonwealth, certainly
she amply also fulfilled that, in employing all her greatest care to weaken the
strength of the Spaniard, to hinder all his proceedings, and possibly to remove
his forces out of Britain. And as she did this, so likewise bestowed she
little less care and pains to keep them from Scotland: Her care of Scotland.
instly fearing, lest that a troublesome confusion of affairs (which we have
said was in Scotland) might open a door for the Spaniard, to both Kingdoms
destruction. For she had most certainly understood, that the Popish Nobility of
Scotland bad by the tricks and plots of the Priests, conspired to bring in the
Spaniard into Scotland, to alter the Religion there, and to set upon England on
that side; and that one Creicton a Jesuit (whom she had lately set at liberty)
having passed his faith, that he would never combine against the good of
England, had under this pretense passed over often into the Low Countries, and
into Spain. She wisely foresaw that the Comminalty of Scotland (especially
those in the west parts) would be easily corrupted with Spanish gold: also she
weighed how full of Havens the Scottish shores were, how warlike the Nation it
self was, and how well furnished in Horsemen* how easily then they might enter
England as at a backe-doore. Besides all this, considering of what an unstable
loyalty the English themselves were, that are neighbors ot Scotland, most of
them being Papists, and every one desirous of innouations, who had their means
and their hopes in their own hands. And lastly, that there is always more
courage in them that do oppugn, then in them that defend, who as it were
only cast dice for their own lot.

Wherefore she gave the King of Scotland The admonition to the king of Scotland.
to understand these things, admonishing him to keep under his Nobility
betimes, and willing him to exercise his Regal power over such seditious
persons, that he might not seem to reign at their pleasure. And truly, he
did that of his own accord, by instituting severe Laws against the Papists,
and the Abettors of them; as in that he punished David Graham Fentrey, for
being secret to the conspirators, as also in that he persecuted the Earls of
Anguise, Hu^tl^y and Aroll, whom he easily scattered a sunder.

Bothwell in the mean time, having lain lurking in England, collogued with
the Queen by his flattering letters, promising, that if the King of Scotland
would but enter him into his favor again, he would faithfully serve and obey
him, and much weaken the Spanish faction: withal entreating her to intercede
with the King for his pardon.

But the Queen, as soon as she understood that the King of Scotland took it
but very i^l that Bothwell had been entertained here in England, she detesting
his impious rashness, that he durst offer violence to his Prince, the express
^igne and Type of God himself, and put him into so great fears, sent the Lord
Borough Lord Borough sent Ambassador into Scotland
on an Embassy into Scotland, that he might truly inform the King that
Bothwell was not harbored here, but that he secretly crept in; and that she
would severely punish those that had entertained him: withal, she incensed the
King against the Spanish faction, wishing him to procure a new Association of
Protestants to keep himself in safety, and to defend Religion against all
outward seditions, with hearts and hands knit together: and this was shortly
after effected.

The Lord Borough having expected the Kings return out of the Northern
quarters of Scotland, The Queens demands.
demanded these things in writing from him* That he would certify the Queen
of all the Spanish enterprises against England that he heard of; That by his
justice he would defend his Regal authority, and if that he could not execute
justice upon the bodies of such Traitors, that he would have their goods
confiscated; That he would chause into his Council men of pure and well-tried
trust; That all these things he would certify the Queen of by his own hand,
that both she and also all other Princes of the same religion might easily
understand, with what a provident care he resisted the enemies thereof. Lastly,
that he would take order for a peace in the Borders of both Kingdoms. Adding
withal, That if these things were done, she would not be wanting in any thing,
as she lately was not, in severely mulcting those Englishmen that had
entertained Bothwell.

To these things distinctly the King answered, The King^ answer.
that he had certified her of all the machinations of the Spaniard, as soon as
he found them out; that as speedily as he could he had persecuted all the
Rebels, punishing some with loss of goods, and others with life; That he had
appointed Lieutenants in their Dominions; and that he would have all of them
banished by act of Parliament; and after their banishment, their goods should
be confiscated. That he would admit to Council only men of sound judgment, of
purity in Religion and love to their Country; and that he would witness all
this to the Queen, with his own handwriting; that he would also take order
about the Borderers. But then, that it was meet, that the Queen should furnish
him with monyes to bring this to pass, both to resist the Spaniard, and his
own Rebels, that were of great wealth and strength.

Last of all he required, that She would punish those that favored Bothwell;
and since he was a fellow of vnexpiable villainy, detestable before all
Princes, even to example, that she would deliver him up to his hands, if he
lurk't in England; since she could not choose but esteem the favorers and
friends of such an enemy, as her own enemies.

But notwithstanding, when Sir Robert Meluill came, and demanded Bothwell, and
moneys also for to pursue the rebellious Papists, some moneys indeed were sent:
but as for Bothwell, it was answered, that he should be delivered up,
according to the covenants of the former Treatise, or banished out of England.

Now the reason of this unexpected answer to the King of Scotland, might well
be unknown, when indeed it was no other, but because some Scottishmen in
England, had enueagled the Queen with conceit, that the King of Scotland dealt
too favorably with his popish Nobility.

Bothwell, Bothwell demanded of the Queen.
about the same time, having been proclaimed Traitor by the States of
Scotland, returns secretly home again, and brought into the Kings Chamber by
some of his friends, He returns secretly into Scotland
upon a sudden he fell down at the Kings feet, (he little dreaming of any such
matter,) and casting his sword on the ground, humbly begged for mercy; and by
the importunate intercession of many, he obtained it upon certain conditions,
to wit, that he should depart from the presence of the King; that he should
appear personally in judgment of the case of his dealing with witches; that,
if he be absolu'd and quitted of that, he should depart the Kingdom, and live
any where, where it should please the King. Yet for all this, the day after he
was quitted from his dealing with Witches, His insolent behavior.
he by force, drew many of the Kings servants out of the Court, till at length
his faction grew so potent in the Court, that the King, for his own safeties
sake, and the peace of the Realm, was feign, not only to pardon him, and all
his Pages and Attendants, but also to remove out of the Court, the
Chancellor, the Treasurer, the Lord Humes, and George Humes, whom he esteemed
most loyal unto him.

But afterward, within a month, weighing with himself, to his great
discontent, how to the indignity of his Majesty, these things had bin extorted
from him against all reason, he declared in the next assembly of the Nobility
of Scotland, that they esteemed no better of him, than of a Captive, and even
Bothwel's captive; that he could no longer suffer a subject that had now
thrice waged was within the walls and chamber* of his Prince, both to triumph
over him, and his servants, who had so well deserved at his hands; And he
easily had it granted by the States, that they did approve him a free Prince,
to exercise his authority, and to choose his Counselors, and other Servants and
Officers, according to his own discretion.

Hereupon he recals to his Court the Chancellor, and the rest again,
cancelling whatsoever before (against his will) he had granted to Bothwell. Yet
notwithstanding, by reason of his mild nature, he vouchsafed to pardon him,
and all his accomplices, all their offenses, and to restore them to their goods,
if so be they supplicantly sought for the same; upon condition, that quietly
they betake themselves home, and approach not to the Court, except they be
sent for; that Bothwell, within a limited and appointed time, do depart into
some place beyond Sea, and continue in set places, so long as it shall please
the King. He makes great alteration in the Court in a short time; banisheth
Bothwell, who thinks still of worser mischief toward the King and Kingdom,
and to that end lay hid, lurking still within the confines of the Kingdom.

Yet for all this was not Scotland yet at quiet, for the Clergy men and
Ministers took it very hainously, that the King persecuted not the Papists
with fire and sword: against whom they themselves made assemblies, and without
anthority from the King, assembled together the Lords and Burgesses, to
consultation about it, to prevent danger that might fall out to the
Commonwealth.

At this time in Germany, there came out in print, many libels against Queen
Elizabeth, calumniating her, as if she had incensed the Turk to war against
all the Christian World: the letters came forth also which she had sent to the
Turk, in many places corrupted, altered and changed, and many malicious
calumnies added, and feigned on purpose.

But the Queen, having sent a messenger to the Emperor, so clearly washed
away these calumnies, that forthwith the books were called in, and the Copies
of them burnt at Prague: for certainly, she took all the pains she could,
for remoouing the Turk from Christendom; and the Emperor acknowledged as
much. Neither surely had she any thing to do with the Turk, but only to
secure her subjects traffic at Turkey; to which purpose she had her agent
there at Constantinople, as the French, Polacke, Commonwealth of Venice, and
others had: there he Agent did nothing but help the business of her Merchants
traffic, and at their own charges.

About this time also She procured peace between the King of Swedon and
Muscouy; She procures peace between the Turk and the Tran^il^anian, and
between the K. of Swed^n and Musco^ia.
as also between the Turk, and Sigismond Bathor, Vaiuod of Tran^iluania: For,
when as the Turk had trespassed beyond his limited bounds, and laid taxes upon
them, not only beyond the form and fashion of their league, but even beyond
their strength and ability, Sigismond, by his Ambassador Stephen Kakaze,
entreated her earnestly to try what favor she could find in the Turks
Court, and interceed for him; that nothing might be exacted beyond the ancient
order, and that nothing might be detracted from his territories and Dominions.
Which thing (since that even the good of all Christians was interessed therein)
she undertook, and prosecuted, according to her mercy, wherewith she was wont
to succor all her distressed neighbors.

In lower Britain in France, Norris Norris his proceeding in Britain.
having expected still Marshall D'Aumont, and also Espinay of Saint Luke, who
had promised to join forces, spent all the winter the last year to no
purpose: in which time a disease consumed many of the English; and the Queen
was put to the charges of paying every week three thousand and two hundred
pounds of English money.

Indeed about April next following Espinay came and joined his forces;
whereupon Ravendeers troops were vanquished at Saint Sulpice; Guearch
surrendered up; and the forces of the Governor of Lauall, (amongst whom most
were slain) quite vanquished; wherein also Captain Randolph, Bourley, and
Christmasse, courageous English men, were all slain.

Marshall D'Aumont not as yet drawing down toward Britain, neither assigning
the English a safe place of retire, as was couenanted for, gave the Queen such
just occasion of discontent, that she forth with recalled Sir I, Norris home
again; notwithstanding that Aumont earnestly ^ollicited the Queen by his
letters, for more forces from England, who had so discourteously entertained
these, that were so lately sent before.

But whilst the Queen only for Religions sake, aids the French King, The
King of France united to the Church of Rome.
distrusting his own strength, at so great charges, and so great troubles of
mind, as if ^he esteemed his loss, her own, behold a most certain report
flies over into England, spreading it out, that the French King, either had
embraced, or would shortly embrace the profession of the Romish Religion.
Hereupon Sir Thomas Wilkes is disspatched into France, to know the certainty,
and, if as yet he had not altered his Religion, to dissuade him by forceable
reasons contained in writing. But before he came, the King had made a public
profession of the Roman Catholic Religion at S. Dennis, although
notwithstanding even some Papists at that very time lay in weight for his life.
The King ingeniously laid open to Wilkes the motives of his conversion thus:

When first (said he) I was chosen King of France, The reason of his
conversion.
I took a solemn oath, that at a set time I would be instructed in the Romish
Catholic Religion, neither was I admitted King upon any other condition. I
have deferred this my instruction in that Religion this full four years,
neither (but against my will) I have now condescended to it. The King my
Predecessor being taken away, I was necessarily to retain the same
Counselors and Servants, and by their voices (being the major part) have
things so been carried, that all my consultations against the Leaguers have
been snatched up by them, and never came to a prosperous success. Those that
were Protestants (and of my Counsel) were seldom or never there; being, more
then was needful, intending only their own affairs; insomuch that I was
quite forsaken even of those in whom I put my confidence; and fearing also lest
that I might be forsaken by the Papists too, I was necessarily glad to
subscribe to their determinations and counsels. I do most solemnly protest,
that as soon as I was called to the Crown, eight hundred Noblemen, and nine
Regiments of Protestants returned home; neither could I detain them by any
reason; insomuch, that I had not any but even my household servants of my
Bedchamber. The Papists (when they saw me forsaken even of my own side) began
to domineere a little, and urge me to an alteration of my religion, saying,
that Catholics cannot with a safe conscience obey an Heretic. Yet I still
prolonging it from day to day, so delayed time, till that seeing my own
weakness, (who being but relieved with a few supplies from my friends, and
being unequal to the Popes, Spaniards, and the Leaguers forces) was feign to
yield; especially finding a third faction on foot between the Princes of the
bloud-Royall, the Officers of the Kingdom, the Prelates, and most of the
Nobility; who had entered into a consultation with the Governors of most
Provinces and Cities of my Kingdom, to forsake me utterly, as one of a most
heretical naughtiness, and to share my Provinces amongst them man by man. And
when my necessity afforded me no means of prevention for this undertaken
counsel, I passed my word I would be conformed to the Roman-Catholike
Religion. They allowed me one or two months to conform my self, sending to
Rome for my Absolution. The Leaguers to prevent this, made all possible speed
to the election of another King; many vowed their endeavor to enthrone Guize
in my seat, upon condition that the places of Office that they did enjoy,
might be assigned to them for ever, and to their Heirs. Therefore with good
deliberation have I embraced the Romish Religion; yet the Prelates refused to
admit me into the Church, without the advice of the Pope of Rome, till that I
hardly persuaded them to admit of my conversion without any information,
disputation, or debating. And by this means I have thoroughly joined to my
self the third faction, prevented the election of Guize, purchased the good
will of my people, and bound the Duke of Tuskany to me perpetually; besides, I
have saved the Reformed Religion from danger of burning, which would
necessarily have followed, if that my conversion had been brought to pass by
Informations, Disputations, or Debates.

These things in the mean time Morlant certifieth the Queen of, coloring
what the King had done with very fair words: but she much grieuing at it, and
discontented in mind, having snatched her Pen, presently sent him a Letter much
after this manner.

ALas! The Queens letter to the K. of France.
what grief, what flowing sorrow, what heavy groans have I endured in mind,
in hearing this news from Morlant? O the faith of men? Is this an age? could
it be, that worldly respects should put the fear of God from before thee? can
we possibly expect an happy end of these things? could thou imagine that he
that has so long defended thee, and preserved thee, should now forsake thee?
certainly it is dangerous to do ill that good may come thereon. Then let some
better spirit put thee in a better mind. In the mean time I will not cease to
commend thee in my prayers to God, and earnestly beseech him, that the Hands of
Esau spoil not the Blessing of Jacob. That you do esteem so well of our
friendship, I think I have deserved it at a good rate: neither would it have
repented me, had you not changed your Father. Certainly, I cannot hereafter be
your Sister by the Fathers-side. But I will always love mine own Father,
dearer then a counterfeit one; as God himself knows, who in his good time
bring you to a better path, and a sounder judgment.

Subscripsit: Vostre Seur, si ce soit a la vieille mode, auec ^ouuelle je n'ay
que fair. ELIZABETHA R.


In this her trouble she only found ease and solace from the holy Scriptures,
She translateth a book of Boethius.
the writings of holy Fathers, often conferences with the Archbishop, and even
sometimes out of the Philosophers she drew comfort. For certainly I know, that
at that time she was very conversant in the Book of Boethius, Boethius de
consolatione.
and that she then translated it into English.

Amongst these things, Wilkes certified the French King, that he was nothing so
good as his word in the affairs of Britain; that this lingering of Marshall D'
Aumont, was very hurtful to his Mistress the Queen, both in regard of the
loss of her Soldiers, and the expenses of her money; and that it was as
unprofitable to him himself; that the Queen would not increase the number of
her men in Britain, except there were some place of repose allotted for them.
The F. Kings excuse of not keeping pr^mise.
The King laying the fault altogether upon the negligence of Marshall D'
Aumont, promised to heal all such incommodies, and provide a place for the
Queens Soldiers. Also he gave the Queen to understand these things by Mouie
a Gentleman of his Bedchamber, commending health and happiness unto her;
acknowledging that he is beholding to her for his kingly honor; promising
withal, that as soon as businesses were compassed at home, and a truce made,
that he would march with his Army into Britain.

In the mean time there is an agreement made between the Queen and him at
Mellun in August, Agreements between the Queen and the F. King.
under their hands and seals, in good faith, and the word of a Prince, that
with io^nt forces the shall war against the Spaniard, both with offensive and
defensive war, as long as he shall war against either of them; and that
there shall be no peace between him and them, without their mutual consent
thereunto.

Yet for all this, is Britain still neglected by the French King, France in
the very bowels thereof still laboring, and neitheir yet could the Englishmen
get so much as Pimpol or Breac, a little Island, for their retiring place, but
upon extreme hard conditions; to wit, that they fortify it not: neither that
they lodge either in the houses of Priests or Noblemen. Yet for all this the
States of Britain humbly requested the Queen not to recall her forces, which
she had even resolved on: but even ouer-entreated, commanded them to stay: and
they dispersed and scattered up and down about the Country Villages, and
exposed both to the malice of the Heaven, and their enemies, were ^ain^ to have
a lamentable wintering, when Pimpol (by reason it was so little) could not
contain them all.

Neither spared she her continual admonitions to the King of France, that he
should consider how much it stood him upon, to protect and keep in hold the
Sea coasts; which once being gotten into the power of the enemy, opens a way
for further loss, and is not easily recovered again: The Queens care for the
Protestants in France.
she wished him by Sir Robert Sidney to protect in safety the professors of
the reformed Religion. He promised again, that as he had hitherto been, so he
would always be their Protector and Defendor; although that even the chiefest
Nobles of them had already forsaken him. But when Sidney would have dealt with
him about Breast, for a retyring place for the English forces, and a pawn for
the moneys he had already had, (which indeed the Queen greatly desired) he
stopped his ears at that. For truly the Frenchmen could not endure that the
English should once set foot in any other possessions in France, no not so much
as in their Havens; no^ being forgetful how easily they a great while ago,
having but once been possessed of their Havens, victoriously ran over France,
and how hardly they resigned up again their possessions. And thus miserably
did the French turn the counsel of the Queen upon her self, and the
English, which she gave them for a caution against the Spaniard.

The Queen that she might secure her own self from the Spaniard, fortified
the Islands of Silley in the British Ocean, having erected a Fortress in S.
Mari^s Island; which by reason of the fashion of a star, like to which it was
made, she called the Starre-Marie; she fortified that also with a set Garrison.
Also she strengthened her Islands of Ga^nsey and Iersey, opposite against
France, and other places besides, with great cost and charges, and as great
courage and alacrity, although the times then were very heavy. The Queen
fortifies her Islands of Garnsey and Gersey, and other places.
For in that year Saturn running through the end of Cancer, and the beginning
of Leo, (as in the year 1563.) the Pestilence or Plague miserably tormented
the City of London; A great plague in London.
insomuch that the rigor thereof in the whole course of one year, mowed down
the people of the City and Suburbs, to the number of 17890. besides Sir
William Roe the Lord Major, and three more Aldermen. Bartholomew Fair was not
kept that year in London, and Michaelmas Term at S. Albanes twenty miles from
London. At which Term Richard Hesket Hesket hanged.
was condemned and executed, because he had persuaded Henry Earl of Darby
(whose Father Henry died not long before) that he should claim the Crown of
England, fetching his right from his great Grandmother Mary the Daughter to
Henry the seventh; largely promising moreover assistance and money from the
Spaniard; withal, threatening the Earls sudden destruction, if he kept it not
secret, and if he put it not in practice. But the Earl fearing this to be a
plot only to bring him into danger, betrayed his conspiratour, who of his own
accord acknowledging his fault before the judgment seat, sorely cursed those
that advised him thereto, and those also that hearkened to his advise in it;
and indeed those curses fell upon some body in all probability: For the Earl
within four months after died of a miserable kind of death, as shall be
spoken of shortly.

In this years space, Henry Earl of Darby dies.
two famous Earls of England died, both of the Order of the Garter; Henry
Stanley (whom I now mentioned) Earl of Darby, the son of Edward, by Dorothy
the Daughter of Thomas Howard first Duke of Norfolk. He got of Margaret the
Daughter of Henry Clifford Earl of Cumberland, of Elenor Brandon the Niece of
Henry the eight by his Sister Mary, two sons, Ferdinand and William, that in
order succeeded him.

The other Earl that died was Henry Ratcliffe Earl of Sussex, And Henry Earl
of Sussex.
Governor of Portsmouth, having left only one Son Robert, which he had by
Honor the Daughter of Anthony Pound. At Portsmouth, Charles Blunt, afterward
Lord Montioy, succeeded him.

Three Lords accompanied these Earls also into another life; Arthur Gray And
the L. Gray.
of Wilton, that famous Warrior, and of the Order of the Garter, to whom
succeeded Thomas his son by Jane Sybill Morrison. The second, Henry Lord
Cromwell, The Lord Cromwell.
the Nephew of that Thomas Earl of Essex so often spoken of, that was the
mocking-stocke of Fortune; after him succeeded Edward his son by Mary the
Daughter of John Powlet Marquess of Winchester. The third Henry Lord
Wentworth, The Lord Wentworth.
whom succeeded Thomas borne of Anne Hopton, his son and heir.

Neither will we conceal the death of worthy Christopher Carlisle, And S.
Christopher Carlisle.
whose warlike skill was sufficiently tried in the Low Countries, France, and
Ireland, and in America at Carthage, and Santo Dominico, in the year 1585. for
he about this time accompanied the forenamed into a better life.

In Ireland O-Conor Dun, Complaints of the Irish.
Mac-Da^y, and O-Brien Nobleman of Conaugh, and others, make complaints, that
they were unjustly gone to law withal about the possessions of the Mortimers,
Earls of March, which they had no color of pretense for, but continuance of
long time, wherein they had only usurped the same.

Also about this time the Noblemen of the Province of Vlster, who long before
feared lest they should fall into a conformity to English laws, which they
thought would be brought in upon the^, (as they saw it done already in
Monaghan,) and that they should loose much of their power thereby, whereby
sometimes they did even tyra^^ize over the people, begin now to bring to light
that rebellion which before long had been conceived; and first of all Hugh
O-Donell on a sudden surpriseth Montrosse Castle. Now there had been a grudge
long between the Earl of Tir-Oen and Henry Bagnall Grudges between Tir-Oen
and Marshall Bagnall.
Marshall of the Irish forces, whose Sister the Earl had stolen for his wife.
The Earl he made his complaint before the Lord Deputy of Ireland, the
Chancellor, and others, that whatsoever he had brought in obedience to the
Queen at Vlster, by his continual labor, and even hazard of his blood, that
redounded only to the commodity of the Marshall, and not to himself* that yet
the Marshall had falsely accused him of treason, and to that purpose had
suborned base conditioned men to be his witnesses: that he had incensed the
Lord Deputy himself to his destruction: that he had lain in wait for his
life, and not truly or sincerely to have delivered his answers to the Queen.
And truly the Marshall was altogether believed about the Court, till such
time, as the Earl Tir-Oen* having sent Letters into England, proffered to come
to his trial either in England or Ireland. Yet on the other side, certain it
is, that the Earl had made a League with the Nobility of Vlster very sec^etly,
to defend the Romish Religion (for Religion was the only cloa^e time afforded
for war and to shut out the She^^ffes, and all that lay in Garrison within
their Territories, to defend mutually their own Rights, and propell the
Englishmens injuries.

The next after O-Donell (that increased the rebellion) was Mac-Guir a
Nobleman, Mac-Guir rebelleth.
who was thrust out as far as Fermanagh, for his more easier practice. He
was a man of a troublesome spirit, and contentious, who much complained that he
was too much molested and troubled, and undeservedly by the Sheriff of that
County. Wherefore he rushed out, preying on his neighbors grounds; he enters
Conaught, having Gaur^n a Priest accompanying him, whom the Pope had created
Primate of Ireland. This Gauran still egged him on to try his fortune, and
trust to the help of God; assuring him, that there could be no doubt of
victory. But yet it fell out otherwise, for by the valor of Richard Bingham
Mac-Gui^ was put to flight, and his Primate and many more slain. Hereupon
Mac-Guir breaks out into an open rebellion; whom Tir-Oen persuing out of a
counterfeit officiousness, received a great wound, to the praise both of his
valor and loyalty. Dowdall an Englishman, and a valiant Commander, Ineskelline
taken.
beset and took I^eskelline near the Lake Erne, which was Mac-guirs best and
strongest fortress; wherein he slew most that lay at Garrison in it. And at
that time were the pure Irishmen first chosen to be Commanders, and put into
Bands; who being always disloyal to the English, made most think it then
most vnprouidently done, which truly they all found afterward indeed.

In the mean time the Earl of Tir-Oen (keeping a watchful eye over his own
affairs) now began to challenge to himself the Title of O-Neale, (in
comparison whereof the very Title of Caesar is base in Ireland) by reason that
Turlogh Lenigh was newly dead, who before bore that Title: Tir-Oen usurps the
title of O-Neale.
forgetting his oath and promised faith to the Queen, and pain of treason.
Yet it seems he forgot it not, but would excuse it, that he only did
challenge it to himself, to prevent others, that likely else would do so
much. And at last he promises to renounce and disclaim all his right to it;
but yet earnestly desires that he be not bound thereto by any oath.

Presently after that he surpriseth one or two of Shan O-Neales sons, Shan
O-Neales sons surprised by Tir-Oen.
(that either by their own craft^nesse, or some others con^iuence, had escaped
out of prison,) fearing le^t they might be a hinderance unto him: for he well
knew in what esteem they were amongst their own, and how easily they might
be able to crush all his p^ots and practices whatsoever. Therefore when he
was expressly commanded by the Lord Deputy to set them at liberty, he still
refused it, only complaining grievously of the ill will of the Lord Deputy
toward him, the treachery of the Marshall, and the injuries of them that lay
in Garrison: yet he so covertly bo^^ all this* as that as if he had forgotten
it all, he came and professed obedience unto the Dep^ty* gi^ing his faith for
security thereof, and so in an humble submission returned home again*

THE SEVEN and thirtieth Year OF HER REIGN.
Anno Domini 1594. 1594

THe Queen persuaded her self that she could easily quench this young and
modest rebellion, that scarce durst show it self in Ireland, if that once she
had but weakened a little that apparent and open faction in Scotland. The Lord
Zouch sent Ambassador into Scotland.
Wherefore, having been asked her counsel by the King of Scotl^^d, what she
thought of the Decrees made by the States of Scotland, for the preservation of
Religion, and the peace of the Kingdom, She sends Edward Lord Zouch into
Scotland; that he might confirm the Peers of the English party in their
obedience, and exact greater severity against those of the Spanish, then that
which the Decree ordained. Since that it was most certainly confirmed, that
they had been at Mass; that they harbored Jesuits and Priests; that they
had sent blancks over into Spain, with their hands and seals thereto. And
^ince, that even the Spaniard was now in contemplation, and very near practice
of inuading England by Landforces, through Scotland, which before he could not
by Sea, with all his invincible Navy.

The King made answer thereunto, The answer of the King of Scots.
that he would use all severity against the Papists, that the Statutes of the
kingdom could allow: and that if they being given warning to, shall not obey,
he would pursue them, till such time that he should bring them into order, or
drive them out of the kingdom, if so be that the Queen (whom it concerned as
much as himself) would join with him.

Zouch being somewhat peremptory in urging severe persecution of the Papists,
(for indeed some of the zealous Ministers of Scotland continually suggested to
the Queen, that the King dealt more favorably with Papists, then either the
necessity of the time would, or his own conscience (if it were upright) could
suffer him to do) the King demanded whether, or no, he were under any bodies
authority? or, whether his Queen would prescribe him a form of government
that was an absolute King? But withal protesting, that he would strongly
defend his Religion, and inuiolably preserve peace and amity with the Queen.
Yet again, somewhat complaining, that Bothwell a most troublesome Rebel,
should be fostered up in England, since that he so readily had delivered to
the Queens hand the Irish Rebel O-Rorke, that lurked in Scotland.

But Bothwell (it seems) staid not long lurking in England, Bothwell again
rebelleth.
but again he bore up his rebellious Ensigns against his King: and having
entered Scotland with four hundred Horse of Borderers of Scotland, he came as
far as Leeth without any impediment, or resistance: and having come thither,
(after the Art of rebellion, that colors fowlest deeds with fairest pretenses)
he published this in writing.

SInce that the true Religion toward God,. The pretense and cloak of his
rebellion.
the safety of the King, the Honor, the Justice thereof, the Commonwealth it
self, and that commodious friendship between the Kingdoms of Scotland and
England were now in the extremity of danger, by reason of some pernicious
Counselors, who had crept into the Commonwealth; who had suffered
Mass Priests to wander from Village to Village; who had given ostages to the
Low Countries, and sent for Spaniards over to oppress both the Religion and
the Commonwealth; and to break the League with England: That therefore he,
with the Nobility, the Lords, and Burgesses joined with him, had determined
(out of their fear of God, and the love of their King) to pursue these
Consulters after an hostile manner, till such time that they either willingly
submit to come to trial, or fly out of the Kingdom. And that he made the more
haste to the prosecution thereof, because the Spaniard was even upon arriving
and landing in Scotland. Wherefore he humbly entreats the King, ex^orts the
Nobility, commands the people, that forthwith they join arms with him in this
so godly, just and so necessary a cause: demanding the authority (besides) of
the Magistrate to further the prosecution of this enterprise. Concluding, that
whosoever assisted these Counselors with help, should be punished with great
severity.

To this purpose he sends his Letter to the Synod, which at that time was at
Dunbarre: and also he sends it to the English Ambassadors; for (indeed) both
these were said to favor his designs, and not very obscurely. He on the very
same day that he had understood, that the Kings forces set forwards from
Edinborough, which was scarce three miles off, parted in two his Troops, and
set forth out of Leeth. But being unequal to the Kings forces, by reason that
very few flockt to him, even since his public Edict, he being skillful enough
how to eschew danger (as mischievous to intend it) seeks all by^places;
Bothwell put to flight.
and once having set on the Kings forces upon a steep hill* drove them back,
having taken some few of them, but not any man killed. Keeping his order he
retreats to Dalkeeth, and from thence (being pricked with the conscience of a
Rebel) he betakes himself to his accustomed lurking-holes in the confines of
the Realm. But the Queen forbad by Proclamation, any man near the borders of
Scotland, to entertain, succor or assist him. And this was very acceptable to
the King; who on the other side (to show his desire of requital) assembled his
Peers in Parliament, for the banishing of these Popish Earls and Nobles of
the Realm. The Scotch Papists banished the Realm.
The Nobility but few, being met, yet all refused to give their voices against
them, in respect, that although it were true, that they had sent such Papers
into Spain, yet nothing but only bare conjectures could be gathered from
thence, what their intents might be.

Yet for all that, the number of the Clergy men and Burgesses, making a
plurality of Voices, they were all banished the Realm. Their Coats of Arms,
and Badges of Gentility (according to the custom of Scotland) were broake, and
cast out of the windows of the Towne-house, and their banishment publicly
proclaimed by a Herald. Afterward the Earl of A^gile was sent out with forces
against those Earls, but having received of them an overthrow in a set
battle at Genliuet, the King himself (after many tedious and difficult
iourneies) comes thither, and there suffers the Ea^le Huntlies Houses at
Strathbolgie, Slanie, and Newton, to be quite demolished. Shortly he brought
the Earls to that pass, that Huntley first withdrew himself to his Aunt, the
Countess of Sutherland, and afterward was compelled to be gone into France,
and the rest to change their soil.

And so it came to pass, that the mutual good will that was betwixt the
Queen and the King of Scotland, his settled constancy in Religion, which could
never be battered, by the means, the prayers, the promises, or the subtle
practices of the Papists, the severe laws against the Jesuits, Their plots
and new devices.
and men of that faction, the punishment maturely inflicted on Graham Fentree,
one of the favorers of the Spanish party, the supreme authority in spiritual
matters conferred upon the Prince by Parliament, and their mutual endeauours
against the growth of Papistry; all these (I say) did so shake the very hopes
of restoring Romish Religion in England, and in Scotland, which the Jesuits
had long conceived, that some of them began to devise new plots, and to try
(since they could not immediately estate their Religion in its former honor)
if they ^^uld at last estate some Professor of the Religion in the ^^rone of
England, which so might both countenance and protect it.

But (when the disagreeing multitude of them could not meet upon one person fit
to their purpose, a great while) at last they reflected upon the Earl of
Essex: in whom, (although he were no Romish Catholic) yet they expected a
well-qualified temper of Religion, because his clemency drove him to a
persuasion, that in case of Religion men should not suffer death. The right of
inheritance which they ^eigned for him, was drawn from Thomas of Woodstock,
the Son of Edward the 3, from whom he descended.

But the runnagates and fugitives stood hardly for the Infanta of Spain,
although they feared that the Queen and the Court of Parliament would prevent
that, by making every one take the oath of Allegiance.

Not long after came a book out, dedicated to the Earl of Essex, under the
belyed name of Dolman, but not without the notable malice of Parsons the
Jesuit, against this Dolman a Priest, but of a milder disposition, (if I may
believe the Priests:) for the Authors of that book were Parsons, a maine enemy
to Dolman, Cardinal Allan, and Francis Inglefield. In this book, ^etting at
naught the right of Birth, they only discourse of changing the Laws of the
Realm, allowing hereditary succession in the Kingdom of England, of bringing
in a new manner of election: and lastly, that no man should be admitted King,
of what neernesse in blood soever he were of, except he were a Roman Catholic.

In the same, they most contumeliously traduce most of the Kings of England,
that many were not Legitimate, or at least incapable of the government of the
Kingdom. Besides, they tear to pieces the most certain Right of the King of
Scotland, and seek to derive the Right of succession upon the Infanta of
Spain, because she was a Roman Catholic. But oh, I am amazed to say how
falsely it was affirmed by such as they were, The pretended Right of the Infanta
to the Crown of England.
since the lips of the Priests should preserve knowledge, and since they should
stand, having their loins girt with truth. The colors that they used for her
right, were many.

First, Because she (as the Book says) descended from Constance the Daughter
of William the Conqueror, from whom she draws her pedigree. This Constance
was wife to Alane Fergant Earl of Britain: yet notwithstanding, Gulielmus
Gemeticensis (one that lived about that time) in his last Book bears
witness, that this Constance died without any Issue: and so say all our
Chroniclers of Britain, with one accord.

Secondly, Because she draws her parentage from Elenor the firstborn of King
Henry the second, married to A^phonsus the ninth King of Castile. But, that not
Ele^or, but Matilda wife to H^nry Leo Duke of Saxony, the Mother of Otho the
fourth Emperor, was the firstborn to the said Henry. Pope Innocent the third
will give us to understand, as it is in Matthew Paris page 381. whom also Robert
Abba^ de Monte Michaelis, who was her Godfather, writes to have been borne in
the year 1162.

Thirdly, Because she descends from Blanch the firstborn of the said Elenor:
and this both Rodericke Archbishop of Toledo, book nine, chapt. five. And Pope
Innocent, who should better be believed, that lived in the same time, deny as
false.

Fourthly, Because she was descended of Beatrice the Daughter of Henry the
third King of England; and in the mean time, they forget that she had Brothers
two, Edward the first King of England, and Edmund Earl of Lancaster* from whom
(besides those of the Royal Family) sprang a whole nation of Nobles in England.

Fifthly, They derive this right of the Infanta, from the Portugal Family; as
also from Philip the Daughter of John of G^unt Duke of Lancaster* whom they say
was the firstborne by his former wife Blanch; when as for all this* Frossard
(that lived at the same time at Court) in 169. page of the second part,
demonstrates unto us, that Elizabeth married to John Holland, who was
afterward Duke of Ex^t^r, was the firstborn.

But we have sufficiently refelled these Genealogicall fantasies, which were
bred out of the vaporous crudities of treachery, wherewith that Book much
abounds. But yet cannot but wonder, that these men should be so unmindful of
their own profession, scorning both the authority of the Council of Trent,
concerning avoiding all secular affairs and occasions; as also of the Toletan
Council, and their own Laws but the very last year at Rome newly revived;
only to curry favor with the Spaniard, to abuse simple men, to strew the way
for tumultuous insurrections, to prouid^ Ladders for the ambitious, though to
their own ruin, and to offer violent hands to the Truth, making their
Religion the cloak for all their ^reason. Nay, in the conceit of this new made
Right of the Infanta, some of them went so far on, that they compelled the
English Priests in their Spanish Seminaries, to subscribe to this Right of the
said Infanta; if we may even believe themsel^es that related it.

These things, Parsons the Jesuit excuses his book of Dolman.
whatsoever Parsons the lesuite thought they would effect, yet after all
failed, and that James of Sc^tland, was proclaimed King of England after the
death of the Queen; then he strove to excuse the matter in Letters to most of
his Friends, as if so be, that those words in his Book against the right of the
King of Scotland, had not been spoken of him, out of any ill will, or desire
any way to hurt the King; but only out of an earnest desire he had to bring
the King to the profession of the Roman Ca^holike Religion; also, he thought
that it would serve well enough for his excuse, that those injuries he offered
the King were not prejudicial to him, because they took no effect*

But whilst these Turne-coats feign to themselves a false H^ire in Spain,
God* that laughed at their de^ises, raised up to James of Scotland the true
Heir, a Son that might also have been his heir. Prince Henry borne.
For on the 19. of February was borne to him Henry Prince of Scotland, the love
and delight of Britain: whom Queen Elizabeth in an ^onourable Embassage by
Robert Earl of Sussex was Godmother to.

Now as the learned sort of our English (...) studied to enthroane the Spanish
Infanta in the (...) of Engl^nd by their writings: So some of them took the
nearer way of murder; having sent over privy murth^re^s to (...) ^ way the
Queen. The Spaniards on the other side they (...) with poison: Treason against
the Queen conspired, Lopez and others.
but much suspecting the truth of the English, thinking the Nation affoorded
none so cruel against ^is Princess, they made use of Roderike Lopez a Jewish
S^ctary* and a Household Phisit^on ^o the Queens Court* and (...) of him, but
also of S^^phan F^rreira Gama, and Emanuel Lowise, Portugalls: for at that time
many Portugalls under the pretense of their banished Anthony, Their several
Confessions.
crept here into England. They having been apprehended, by reason of some of
their Letters that were intercepted, and being accused toward the latter end
of February, both confessed that they conspired to make away the Queen by
poison.

Lopez being of a well-tried honesty, and never suspected, confessed
voluntarily that he was thereunto induced by Andrada a P^rtugall, to do so
much service to the King of Spain; that also he had received from Don
Christoph^ro de Moro one of his intimatest Counselors, a very precious
Jewel, who as fast as he could learn any thing from him, still informed the
Spaniard of it, till at last the agreement was made, and for 50000. Crowns he
promised to poison the Queen; and that he had certified the Conde de Fuentes,
and Ibarra, Secretary to the Spaniard in the Low Countries, as much as that
came too.

Stephano Ferreira confessed that the said C^nde de F^entes and I^arra* had
certified him indeed both by Letters and Colloquies, that they were putting
their counsel in practice, of taking away the Queen by poison: that he
himself wrote Letters, as Lopez dictated them, wherein he promise^ to do it
for 50000 Crowns; he confessed also, that Emmanuel Lowise was sent over from
the said Conde de Fuentes, to hasten Lopez to make an end of the matter.

Emmanuel confessed that, having taken oath to conceal all his counsel, Conde
de Fuentes showed him Letters which Andrada the Portugal had wrote in Lopez's
name concerning the making of the Queen away: also that now he was sent from
him, that he should deal with Ferreira and Lopez, about the hastening the
Queens death, also to promise both money to Lopez, and preferment to all his
children.

Lopez brought forth, The Traitors condemned.
, said but little: but, that Ferreira and (...) were nothing but composed of
deceit, and lying: that he never thought any hurt against the Queen, but
always hated the gift of that Spanish Tyrant, that he gave to the Queen the
Jewel sent him by the Spaniard, that he never intended more then to deceive
the Spaniard, and cosen him of his money.

The rest said nothing for themselves, but continually accused Lopez, so that
they were all three condemned, and within three months after hanged at
Tyburne, Lopez still professing that he loved the Queen as well as Christ
Jesus; which being spoken by a Jew, as it was, was but only laughed at by the
people. Cullin executed.
The day after these were condemned, one Patricke Culline an Irish Fencer also
was condemned; and one that being burdened with great promises, and having
money for his travail by the way, given him by the turne-coats in the Low
Countries, promised to kill the Queen; he, his fault being in a manner known,
and proved by some tokens and signs, being ready to die with fainting,
suffered the like punishment, as those before. Then also were apprehended
Edmund York, and Richard Williams, York and Williams apprehended.
both hired to kill the Queen, by Ibarra, and suborned to that also by the
turne-coates in the Low Countries, and more incendiaries also to set the
Queens Navy on fire with balls of wildfire.

Thus did these miscreant English turne-coates, as well Priests as others on
the one side, conspire the death of the Queen* out of an ungodly opinion, and
almost now inbred in them, that Princes that were excommunicated were to be
rooted out: and the Spaniard on the other side, out of an inbred hate which
they bare always against her. But she never fearing, but of a manlike virtue,
and wary carefulnes, relying upon God, contemned all these trecheries and
treasons: and ever and anon would call to mind the words of the Kingly
Psalme-writer, Thou art my God, my times are in thy hand.

And as she was careful for her own safety, so she was diligent in others
too: for she informed Ernest Archduke of Austria, She informs the Spaniard
of those Treasons.
Governor of the Provinces under the Spaniard in the Low Countries, that the
like treacheries were also laid by Ibarra, and other servants of the Spaniard,
and runnagate English, entreating him besides, to signify to the Spaniard,
that he would blot out the very thought of this wickedness from any way
appertaining to him, by punishing his servants that strove to attempt the same:
and by giving up into her hands again, the English Architects and chief
compilers of this wickedness, to wit* Hugh Owen, Tho. Throcmorton, Holcot a
Jesuit, Giffard and Worthington Divines, lest that otherwise he but deceive
the good estimation and honor which he has among the people, whilst he
shall nourish with him such wicked creatures. And lest that he might require
also Don Antonio Perez, Antonio Perez lurketh in England.
of late Secretary to the Spaniard, who had now flowne (by reason of vproares
he raised in Arragon,) and lurked in England: She protested that he was sent
by the French King into England to his Ambassador against her knowledge; and
that she neither did, or ever would relieve him either with her pension, or
protection. And certain it is, that neither she, nor Burghley Lord Treasure^
would so much as speak with him, that against his oath had revealed the
secrets of his Prince: yet indeed, the Earl of Essex gave him entertainment,
and supplied him with great cost, making use of him (as an Oracle) that was so
well skilled in the secrets of the Spanish Court, and that was a man of an
excellent wit and wisdom, who notwithstanding (as most commonly such king of
men always are) was so tossed up and down by fortune, that he bestowed upon
his Picture nothing but this Motto:

THE MONSTER OF FORTUNE. And now by this time in France that boisterous fury of
conspiracy that had ranged through France eight years, a little more or less,
began to cease a little. For when as the King by his forces had much much
empaired the strength of the Leaguers, The strength of the Leaguers much
impaired.
and severed their forces by his sleights which he used, and the last year
having embraced the Roman Religion, had his Inauguration solemnized the
beginning of this year, many of the Nobility being reconciled by great
promises again returned to a duty to him. Others would not, but upon
condition, that they always might enjoy those offices, which now they
possessed, for them and their heirs, according to the courtesy of Hugh Capet
King of France, who to get the good wills of all his Nobility, gave their
offices hereditarily, to them and their heirs.

Now many of the rebellious Cities were yielded up, and many suddenly seized
on: Paris it self (the King being privily called in) yields to him, with the
great joy of the Citizens, and hence was the break-necke of the Spaniards hope
of joining to them the French Kingdom by the marriage of the Infanta with the
Duke of Guise: for now they themselves were glad to depart out, bag and
baggage; and not without foul scoffs from the French, that now had learned a
little more wit.

But when those Spaniards which had been called in by the Duke of Merceur into
Britain, continued still in their resolutions, and strengthened the
Seacoasts, the better to maintain their possession. Captain Norris that had
been sent for over to inform the Queen of the affairs of Britain, was sent
back again with Commission, Norris sent over into Britain.
that he should assault the Spanish Fort at Crodon, near to the Haven Breast,
and he arrived at Pimpole with a new Band of men, on the Kalends of September.
At which time Marshall D'Aumont and Thomas Baskeruile, that in the absence of
Norris commanded the English forces, besieged Morlay, Morlay taken.
and upon the return of Captain Norris, had it yielded to them. Yet for all
that, although it were before agreed by the French Ambassador in England, that
if it were taken it should serve for a retyring place to the English, Marshall
D'Aumont to prevent that, made it one of the Articles of their yielding, that
none but Roman Catholics should be admitted into the Town. After that the
Marshall and Norris having taken also Quinpercorentine, Quinpercorentine taken.
both French and English set forward to the Spaniards Fort at Crodon, on the
Kalends of November, and there Martin Furbisher expected them in the Bay with
ten English men of war. Crodon as^aulted.
This Fort on two sides is washed round with the water; and on the Land side
there are two great Fortresses, between which there runs a wall that is full
seven and thirty foot broad. Within is a very thick Countermure, and Rocks
defend the Fortresses upon the ^ide, whereon there are placed pieces of
Ordnance. The English and French men heap up Bulwarks, and entrench there,
where the Fortress looks toward the Land. The Spaniards rusht out once upon
them to hinder their proceedings, but they quickly retreated in again; there
Anthony Wingfield Serieant Major of the English forces, a famous old Soldier,
having made his Will but the day before, being shot clean through, died upon
it. Upon the 23. day of the month 700. shot from their Ordnance made a small
gap in the wall, and threw down their Enclosures against the wall, which
Lister an Englishman presently seized upon. But when the valor in the
cheerful assaulter was not greater then the firm resolution of the stubborn
Defendants, there were many slain, Bruder, Iackson, and Barker, Commanders of
great note: many wounded, and many dangerously blown up with wildfire.

There were many in England that accused Norris for being too prodigal of the
English blood, in hazarding it even rashly upon all dangerous occasions.
Surely, the Queen (o^t of her inbred mercy and favor) commanded him by her
Letters, that he should more regard the safety of her Soldiers, then his
honor. That in these assisting wars he should not put them upon certain
destruction; that he should not prodigally waste man's blood; that the forward
boldness of some hot spirits is rather to be kept under, then to be cast upon
apparent danger; then should his wisdom be thought less wanting by many men,
then should not his unmercifulness be condemned by all, but both his and the
Queens love of the English blood, be sufficiently praised. But these Letters
came too late.

The Siege growing hot, it seemed good to D'Aumont and Norris, to undermine the
Eastern part of the Fortress, where the French men had been dealing, and
that succeeded happily, for they made a gap in the wall big enough in
conscience, and now they set upon the Fortress on every side; Latham, Smith,
and other English Cap^aines, setting upon the Western part thereof, whilst
the French men set on the Eastern, and others the Wall between, from noone
till four of the clock, at length the English enjoyed the Western Fortress,
and having slain Thomas de Parades, the Governor thereof, Is taken.
entering the Fort, they snatched their Colors, and made a passage for all the
rest; and there they slew about four hundred that lay in Garrison; they razed
the Fortress to the ground, even the very same day that Don Iuan de D'Aquila
came to bring them aid.

Neither was this Victory purchased by the English without loss of blood,
Fourbisher slain.
for many valiant men were wanting, and Martin Fourbisher was shot in the hip
with a Bullet, and having brought back his Navy to Plymouth, then died.

Not very long after, it being found out, that there came some Spanish
Commanders into Ireland, to stir up a rebellion there, Norris Norris recalled.
was recalled from Britain, the ships that should have brought him over,
having arrived at Morlay, were forbid entrance to the Haven, insomuch that they
were compell^d ^o trust to the courtesy of the Sea, and a Wintery cold Ha^en,
and at length to arrive at Rusco, no very sa^e Bay for them. The Queen ^ooke
this (as she might very well) wondrous ill at Marshall D'Aumonts hands, that
he should deny Morlay Haven for her ships, when according to their own
conditions, he did owe the very same place to the Auxiliaries of England,
as soon as it yielded.

And not in France only, but even in the most severed part of the world,
America, did the English war against the Spaniard: for Richard Hawkins
Hawkins his Navigations.
(son to that famous Nauigator John Hawkins) having free leave and license
(under the great Seal of England) to molest the Spaniard in those parts of the
World, with three ships, and two hundred Seamen, set forth for Sea the last
year. His first landing was at the Island of S. Anne, where whilst he
refreshed the fainting spirits of his Mariners, the least ship of the three
was (by chance) fired. He took a Portugal ship; and the fame of him spreading
out to Peru, the Deputy thereof ^urnisheth his Navy to surprise him.
Afterward (by reason of a great tempest) one of his two ships returned home,
but not without the punishment of the Master of it.

Hawkins being now left alone, was taken away from shore by force, and carried
to the latitude of fifty degrees; where he lighted on a fruitful, woodish, and
a Land very full of Havens, holding out in length some threescore Leagues from
the West to the North; which he passed by, till such time that the wind
blowing him back again, he was cast upon the streights of Magellan, He
reaches the Magellan streights.
about the end of January this year, which he found to be nothing but an Ocean
full of Islands; yet he came as far in it as to the breadth of six and fifty
degrees. After that he had spent a mo^eth and a half amongst these Islands,
and had wandered up and down according to the uncertain motions of the same
Sea, not without much and great danger, with great pains at last he got into
the open Sea. And now ^ayling by the Chiline shor^ in the Southern Sea, at
Villa-Parissa he seized on five ships laden with Merchandise; he took away one
of the^, and the Pilot; but dismissed the rest upon the payment of 2000.
Ducke^s, when they indeed were valued at more then twenty thousand.

Afterward at Arica, he was assailed by Bertrand a Castro, who with eight
ships was sent out by the Vicegerent or Deputy of Peru, to that purpose; but
first his munition, furniture, and tackling for sailing being somewhat scant,
he ventred on him, to his own loss; but afterward being better provided, He
is assaulted.
he assailed him again in the Gulf Attacame, but with no better speed, for
they fought hand to hand very fiercely, many being slain on both sides:
insomuch that the Spaniard thought it better to skirmish a far off, and to
play upon them with their Ordnance. Yields upon condition.
Which when they did three days without ceasing, Bertrand senta Glove, and in
the name of the King proffered their liberty to Hawkins and his followers, if
they would yield up unto him. This condition they (all being sore wounded, and
unequal for longer skirmish) did accept, which they found also fulfilled; for
Bertrand used them very courteously. But there arose a question
notwithstanding, whether (or no) this promise were to be kept, because it was
questioned whether Bertrand (who was not delegated General immediately from the
King, but mediately from his Deputy) could make such a promise to Hawkins, who
had received immediately his authority from the Queen. But at length they all
fell into this opinion, that the promise made in the Kings name should be kept,
since that Hawkins was no Pirate, but a lawful enemy; neither would they that
the Spaniard should use any other martial Laws in the Southern Seas, then
what were suitable to the rest elsewhere.

But yet for all this, He is sent prisoner into Spain.
(and although that Bertrand to the praise of his honesty, much endeavored
that his promise might be fulfilled) was Hawkins sent into Spain, and kept
prisoner there some few years; for it seemed good to the Spaniard to use this
severity, that he might fright others from attempting those Seas again. Set
at liberty.
But at last the Duke of Miranda (President of the Council) gave him his
dismission, upon consideration, that such promises made deliberately by the
Kings Commanders, should be kept, because that otherwise no body would ever
yield.

But in the other part of America, Lancasters voyage.
James Lancaster that was sent out with three ships, and a Brigandi^e by the
London Merchants, whose goods the Spaniard had lately laid hands upon, had
far better fortune against them. For he took 39. Spanish ships; and having
associated to himself Venner an Englishman, some Hollanders, and some French,
that lay about expecting some prey in those Seas, he determines to set upon
Fernambuc in Brasile, where he understood there had been vnladed great
treasure out of a Caracke that shipwrack't coming from the East Indies. But
when he saw the enemy flock in multitudes very thick to the shore, he chose
out some of the English, and put them in the shipboates; and rowing with such
violence that they brake the Oars, the Boats ran a shore, a success tr^ely
as happy as the counsel was valiant. For by their valor the enemies being
drouen to the upper Town, he enjoyed the lower Town and the Haven; defending
the same thirty whole days against all their crafty and deceitful assaults;
and refusing all parley, he frustrated all their fiery machinations against his
ships, and at last laded some fifteen ships with the wealth of that Caracke we
spoke of, with Sugarcanes, Brafil wood, and Cottens, and then returned safe
home.

I know not whether or no this may be worth remembrance, Honor conferred by a
forr^igne Prince, not to be admitted at home.
except to the instructing of more ambitious minds: at this time Sir Nicholas
Clifford, and Sir Anthony Shirley deserved so well in the wars of France at
the Kings hands, that having given them their oath, he made them Knights of St.
Michael: which when they somewhat gloried too much of in their own Country,
the Queen being discontented, that they had taken such honor from a foreign
Prince, without notice given to her, as if they had been not hers but his
Subjects, committed them both to prison. But yet (out of her mercy) she would
not let the Law pass upon them, both out of a respect to their youthful
folly, and her good will to the King of France that bestowed it. But she
commanded them both to resign them up again, and send back their honor
again. Which when the French King heard of, he was reported to have merrily
said, That the Queen may be even with me; I wish the would make some of my
ambitious subjects with her, Knights of King Arthurs round table. For as that
Order has been worn away long since in Ballades, so has this of S. Michael
degenerated into a contempt: Insomuch that a Noble French man said, that the
chain of S. Michael was once a badge of Noblemen, but now a collar for all
creatures.

About this time Cardinal Alan died at Rome, The death of Cardinal Alan.
commonly called the Cardinal of England. He was borne in the County of
Lancaster, of a good family, which in some of the kindred, contained some of
the nobler sort. He was brought up in Oriall College in Oxford, where in the
time of Queen Mary he was Proctour of the University, and afterward made one
of the Canons of the Church of York. As Soon as the alteration in Religion
began, he changes his country for Doway in Flanders, where the University
beginning in the year of Grace 1562. he professing of Divinity, was made one
of the Canons Regular of the Church of Cambray.

He took order that a Seminary should be provided for the English at Doway;
and afterward another at Rhemes; where also he was made Canon. He ordained a
third at Rome for the English: besides two more in Spain, to preserve the
Roman Religion in England; out of zeal to which, he had put off both his love
to his country, and his obedience to his Prince: he incensed the Spaniard and
the Pope of Rome, to assault England. And to that purpose adjoined himself to
all pernicious con^ultations about that matter, after that Pope Sixtu^ Q^intus
had bestowed on him the title of Cardinal of S. ^^rti^ in Montibus, and the
(...) gave him an Abbacy in the Kingdom of Naples, and nominated him
Archbishop of Machline. When the Bull of excommunication against the Queen, at
that time that the great Navy was provided for England, came forth, he brought
it into the Low Countries, and caused it to be printed in English. Withal he
wrote an Admonition to the Englishmen, that they should stick to the Pope and
Spaniard* But being deceived of all his hopes, he returned again back to
Rome, where being wearied with the discords, hatreds, and dissentions of the
English Run^awayes, both Scholars, and Nobles; at l^st he dyed, being of the
age 63. years. He was buried in the English Church, called by the name of the
Trinity. In his time he wrote in Latin a Book concerning the Eucharist; and
in English, an Apology for Seminaries; and another for English Catholics;
another for William Stanley, who had betrayed (...) to the Spaniard; besides
the admonition we spoke of, and a book^ about Purga^ory; neither have I seen
any other.

About this time too, died John Piers Archbishop of York, And of Doctor Piers
Archbishop of York.
a great Divine, and yet a modest one, who was long time, Almoner to the
Queen. Matthew Hutton being removed from the Bishopric of Durham, succeeded
him.

Ferdinand Stanley Earl of Derby, And of the Earl of Derby.
he whom we spoke of before in the last year, even upon the beginning of this
year died in the prime of his youth, but not without suspicion of poison,
^auing been miserably afflicted with cruel pains, and casting up stuff like
the color of rusty Iron. In his chamber was found a little Image made of Wax,
with the belly of it thrust through with hairs, just of the color of those of
his head* which was laid there (as the wiser the^ thought) to remove the
suspicion of po^soning him away* and father his death upon the art of
Wi^chcraft. That which in his sickness he cast up by vomiting, so distayned
his fee^ with a (...) color, that they would never be (...) were wrapped up in
Seare-cloth, and covered with Lead) did so flow with corrupted and stinking
humors, that no man in a long time durst come near his burial place. There
fell no small suspicion of his death upon his Horse-keeper, for, as soon as the
Earl was once dead, he fled away with one of his best Horses.

William his Brother succeeded him in the County of Darby, A contention about
the lsle of Man.
between whom and the three daughters of the deceased Earl, when there arose
a contention, to whom the Dominon of the Isle of Man belonged, the Queen well
considering that the English run-awayes and the Spaniard, did still cast an eye
toward that Island, committed the government thereof to Sir Thoma^ Gerard,
both by reason of his approved honesty, and proximity. But whilst the new
Earl and the three Sisters were at law about the Right to that Island, the
Queens Lawyers (being of a most quickesighted craftiness) found out of their
points of the law, that the Right of that Island belonged to the Queen; and
that the Stanleys, and the Earls of Derby, had without any just right
possessed the said right of that Island, this two hundred years. By reason
that they alleged (that we may hear all from the beginning) that as soon as
Henry the fourth had seized upon this Kingdom, William Scroope then Lord of
the Isle of Man being banished, Henry the fourth gave the same to Henry Percy
Earl of Northumberland. This Henry some six years after fell into a
rebellion. Hereupon (the year then following) the King granted it by Letters
Patents to John Stanley for his life time; before the Earl o^ Northumberland
had been banished by act of Parliament, of his goods confiscated to the King.
Within a month the King and the same Stanley agree, that those former Letters
Patents for his life time, and other things granted to him by the King, should
be restored again, and cancelled, and the Island again granted to him and his
heirs under this form, We, for and in consideration that the said John
Stanley has restored to Us again Our Letters Patents, into the Chancery, to
be cancelled, have granted unto the foresaid John, the foresaid Island, etc.
Out of these words, and well observing the circumstances of time, that those
former Letters Patents were granted for his life, before that the Earl was
banished, the Lawyers pronounced that the King could not give the Island away
for his life, because as yet it was not attributed, or judged fa^ne into the
hands of the King: and then consequently, that those latter Letters Patents,
which altogether consisted upon the restoring of the former, were of no force;
saying, that the King was deceived by a false suggestion, and that therefore
his grant was void, and of no virtue. But the Queen for all this yielded up
her Right in it, and an agreement was made between the Uncle and the Nieces.

Also, And of the L. Dacres.
about this time Gregory Fienis, or F^nis, Lord Dacres, the last of that name,
and therefore not to be forgotten, changed this life for a better, he was of no
weak capacity, the Nephews Nephew of Richard Fenis, of the ancient Family of
the Earls of Bon^nia; to whom Henry the ^ixt, and Edward the fourth, gave the
title of Lord Dacre, because he had married the heir female of Thomas Lord
Dacre. He was son of Thomas Lord Dacre, who died in the reign of Henry the
eight, when he was scarce 24. years of age. For when as there was a murder
committed by some of his Familiars that were a going with him a hunting,
(although he were not present at it) yet he was called into question, and
being persuaded by some Courtiers (that cunningly lay gaping for his
inheritance) that he could in no manner save his life, unless he would
confess the fault, and submit himself to the mercy of the King: which when he
indiscreetly had done, he was forthwith condemned, and the day after executed.
But yet the Courtiers that had so gone about the bush, were deceived of their
hopes, for the inheritance fell by law unto his Sister Margaret, that was
married to Sampson Lennard, and the Lordship confirmed upon the said Lennards
son named Henry.

Neither are they to be omitted, who followed in the expiring of their
mortality, William Lord Euers, The death of the L Euers. And the L. Chandos.
And the Lord Montioy.
having left Ralph his son and heir by Margery Dimocke. Giles Lord Chandos,
who dying without issue male, left his Brother William his successor. Lastly,
William Blunt Lord Montioy, having too much weakened his body by his
intemperate youthfulness, to whom succeeded his brother Charles governor of
Portsmouth.

In August next Sir William Russell Sir William Russell Lord Deputy in Ireland.
the youngest Son of Francis Earl of Bedford, was substituted in the Lord
Deputy of Irelands place, William Fitz-williams having been called over, after
that Henry Duke, and Edward Herbert, who were sent with victuals, provision,
and auxiliary forces to succor those that lay in Garrison in I^iskelline, who
were besieged by Mac-Guir, were vanquished with no little loss by these
Rebels. And as soon as Sir William had received the sword of authority,
Tir-Oen, Tir-Oen submits to him.
beyond all expectation, having received a Protection, comes unto him, falls
down at his knees, humbly begs pardon for his faults, in that when he was
commanded he came not unto the former Deputy; excusing it, by reason that his
adversaries lay in wait for his life, and much lamenting that he had lost his
favor with the Queen, not by his desert, but their false informations; for
the Queen he held most benign, and most liberal unto him; whom, as she had
raised up to the height of honor, so she might as easily thrust him out of
Ireland. He entreated that the sincerity of his cause might be paised in equal
balances, and that he would obey whatsoever was commanded, he largely
promised to him* either in raising the ^iege at Iniskelline, or in driving the
Scottish Islanders out. He called to witness both God and men, that although
his forward nature had led him into some defense for his life against his
enemies, yet that he would never take Arms against the Queens Majesty.
Lastly, he vehemently besought the Deputy, and all the Couns^llours of Ireland,
that they would make intercession to the Queen for the recovery of his lost
favor.

But Bagnall He is accused by Bag^all.
Marshall of the Irish Army being there present, exhibited articles against
him, accusing him, that by his means Mac-Guir, and Gauran the Priest, Primate
of Ireland made by the Pope, came into Conaught; that he had secret
consultations with Mac-Guir, O^ Donell, and other Rebels; that he aided them in
wasting the Countries of M^naghan, and in besieging Iniskelline, by Cormac
Mac-Baron his Brother, and Cone his base-borne Son; that he had withdrawn
by threatenings from their loyalty toward the Queen the Capt. of Kilut, and
Kilwar^y. He most resolutely denied all this* and as one much presuming on the
safeguard of his whole and undefiled conscience, he proffered to renounce the
virtue of his Protection, if these things objected against him, could be proved.

Hereupon did the Counselors seriously canuase the matter, But yet dismissed.
whither (or no) they should detain him to make him come to trial. The Deputy
judged it fit he should be detained; but the rest (either out fear to violate
that privilege of his Protection, or out of some good will toward him) judged
that he should be now dismissed, and the matter deferred till another time. To
which sentence there being the major part on that side, the Deputy unwillingly
condiscending, he was dismissed, neither his accusers or his witnesses being
heard. But it somewhat troubled the Queen, who knew that every one knew of his
wicked consultations, and more wicked offenses that lay open to all men's eyes;
and the more it troubled her, because she had admonished before hand, that he
should be detained till he had cleared himself of his objected accusations.

The Earl Tir-Oen (at his dismission) gave indeed great hopes to the
Counselors both of England and Ireland, that his service should be most
faithful to the Queen: readily promising to do whatsoever almost they
proposed unto him* to wit, as to hinder his Brother Corma^ from assisting
Mac-Guir, and the other Rebels; to drive out the Scottish Islanders, as well as
he could, out of Ireland; to persuade O-Donell that he would do the like; to
defend the Borders with his wing of Horse in the absence of the Deputy; to see
the orders fulfil^ed concerning provision for victuals; to build a Jail in
Dunganon; to admit of a Sheriff and Justices in Tir-Oen upon certain
conditions; and to command Turlogh Mac-Henry upon his oath, not to suffer any
Scottish Islanders to come into Ireland.

Not long after the Deputy The Deputy prosecuteth the Rebels.
being gone to free Iniskelline from the siege that lay at it, having put to
flight the Rebels, furnished it with all manner of provision, and also
strengthened the Garrison. Then he fiercely disquieted and troubled Feagh
Mac-Hugh rebelling in Leinster, and having but gone out as it were a hunting,
he wanted but little of taking him. He drove him from his House at Bullencure,
into almost inaccessable Valleys, which they call the Glinnes; and there he set
a Garrison, and sending out some troops to search out these desert passages,
where there was no way for a man to come to them almost, they went so (...) to
work, that there seldom passed by a day, but they sent in (after the fashion
of the Country) some heads cut off from the Soldiers of the Rebels: they
took Rhise the wife of Feagh, more then of a womanly courage; who, (...)
^^^^^ght the rest, was adjudged to be burnt* but the mercy of the Queen out^
stripped the severity of justice, and her life was saved.

On the otherside Marshall Bagnall having been sent by the Deputy, did raise
the siege laid by Mac-Guir and Mac-Mahon, at Monaghan Castle, and he placed
there a new band of Soldiers.

The Lord Deputy, having diverse times ^ought to have Tir-Oen Tir-Oen bewrays
his rebellious humors.
(whom he lately dismissed) come again unto him, although he sent most
courteously for him; yet he could by no means induce him to it. For first, he
made as if he stood in fear of the Marshall, that came on the errand; and
afterward much unmindful of his duty, he began proudly to talk of truce
and peace, (which indeed a King does not willingly hear of from the mouth of
his Subject) insomuch, that men exceedingly meruailed, to see how much he was
changed and altered from that humbleness, wherein he lately submitted himself
to the same Lord Deputy.

THE EIGHT and thirtieth Year OF HER REIGN.
Anno Domini 1595. 1595

ANd now both the Queen, and all England with her, greatly rejoiced, to hear
of the well approved good will of the King of Scotland, and his earnest desire
and endeavor to keep Peace: For, The King of Scotlands provision against the
Spaniard.
he newly set forth a Proclamation, whereby he commanded that there should be a
Mustering throughout all Scotland, to resist the Spaniard, whom he heard had
provided a great Navy for the destruction of all Britain. And that they might
with greater ease, and better success resist him; he exhorted his especially,
that above all things, they lay aside their private enmities and discords, and
bend themselves to the public good of the Commonwealth. He severely commands
the Borderers (some whereof having been baited and taken with Spanish gold,
had burst out into England, preying all about, on purpose to break the League
between England and Scotland) not only that they show themselves not as
enemies in any occasion; but moreover, that with all their endeauours they
preserve the frienship, which the near kindred between both Princes, the
profession of the same Religion, and the likeness both of Language and
Manners, had united and conjoined.

The Queen sets forth her Proclamation, even to the same purpose. And when any
injuries were offered on either side, it was agreed upon, that there should be
Delegates on both sides, to know the matter, that both Justice and Peace might
be still preserved.

In the second month of this year, Edmund York Nephew to him that betrayed
the Fort at Zutphen, and Richard Williams, York and Williams hanged.
who had been apprehended the last year (as we said) now suffered at Tyburne
for Treason. York confessed that Holt a Jesuit, Hugh Owen, James de
Francesco, and others, proffered him an Assignement of 40000. Crowns, that was
sealed by Ibarra the Spaniards hand, if he himself would either kill the
Queen, or assist Richard Williams in the fact. That this Assignement lay in
Deposito, in custody to be delivered up by Holt, having kissed the holy Host,
and swore to deliver up the moneys, as soon as the murder was committed: that
withal he bound both York and Williams to commit it by receiving the
Sacrament, and confirmed it with their oaths taken.

Certainly, notable was the villainy of these times, when sometimes these
English runnagates would excite murderers; and sometimes villains (thirsting
after gain) would proffer themselves to commit that murder, and being once
hired with money, would be^ray it. Some unfaithful to themselves, as if they
were about some other matter, would bring the rest to destruction; being indeed
so entangled with mutual deceits, that sometimes they were feign to burden
others with false lies, to make their own story good.

The King of France by this time had resolved to denounce war against the
Spaniard, War proclaimed in France against the Spaniard.
by reason, that he had employed all his endeavors to translate the Scepter of
France, and had stirred such doleful commotions in France. This thing he
certifies the Queen by Letters of, withal entreating her to advise him how
they might follow the war against him: complaining, that the recalling of the
English out of Britain, was very hurtful to him, and would be very commodious
to his enemies. The Queen, much commending his resolution of denouncing war
against the Spaniard, wishing him all happiness in the prosecution of it;
withal, certifying that she had so openly wa^^ed against the Spaniard, both by
Land and Sea, and that also in the Low Countries, Spain, Portugal and
America, that the whole world may bear record of it. And if so be that he
would do as much too by offensive war, which he had already done by
defensive, the Spaniard could not be able to hurt either of them. Answering
also, that the English were necessarily recalled from Britain, because the
rebellion grew very thick in Ireland; besides, that the English were to tarry
there no longer according to the covenant, because the Spaniards were then
removed from the Fortress^ at Breast; then complaining that they were very ill
used, that the aid that was promised never came to join; and that Morlay which
was promised to be a retyring place for them, was not given them to that
purpose.

As Soon as the Spaniard and the French King had sounded the Alarm for war,
The war grows hot.
a doleful war raged about the Duchy of Luxenburgh and Picardy; Castelet
and Dourlans were taken by the Spaniard: and Cambray by him besieged.
Cheualiere of the Kings Counsel, being sent over into England, Aid from
England.
demands auxiliary forces to be sent over into Picardy within 15. days after
the date of the Letter, when as he himself had spent 12. of them in his
journey, and had left but three days to muster them, and transport them. Yet
without delay there were forces mustered, which should be sent over (if need
were) to Calis, Bulloig^e, Diepe and the Sea coasts: and this the Queen
certified the King of France of by Sir Roger Williams, and the Governors of
these forenamed Towns. But when those of the Kings Council in England
vehemently urged, that some Subsidy or ayd^ might be sent over, to rescue and
succor the French, there was no definitive answer made, because they neither
mentioned what number they would have, not to what end.

And now flew a rumor about, The Queens provision against the Spaniard.
not secretly stealing from mouth to ear, but openly, and by the tongue of all
the parts of Britain, that the Spaniard had put from shore with a mightier
Army then that he had before, with intent to invade England. Hereupon, round
about the Sea coasts there was a Muster made of choice men, that should lie at
watch and ward upon the shore; and also two Nauies furnished, one to go
against them in the British Ocean; and the other, for America, under Hawkins
and Drake. Every man provided himself, and buckled against the war; most
complaining, that so many valiant men, that might now have done their own
Country good service; and also that so much money had bin lost in France, (for
the expedition for Breast by Sea, stood the Queen in about Forty seven
thousand, two hundred forty and three Crowns of the Sun; and her charges in
sending over forces under the Earl of Essex, Two hundred thousand, six
hundred and forty more,) both women and men mourning that their Sons and
Brothers were slain before, and not reserved for to lose their lives in the
defense of their own Country.

About this time Lomene flies over into England, More aid required from
England.
and although he dissembled not the taking of Cambray, yet he lies hard at the
Queens mercy to send over more auxiliary forces into Picardy, and afterward
would that there should be Delegates chosen to treat about the manner of the
war. Which when it seemed somewhat preposterous both to the Queen and her
Council, he being impatient of the very show of a denial imputed to the
Queen the loss of Cambray; obiecting also, that she delighted in the miseries
of his King, and would bring him to a peace with the Spaniard as soon as
possibly he could.

She forthwith answered him presently, and the King in her Letters by Sir
Thomas Edmonds, who then supplied the place of an Ambassador, that she took
it very sorrowfully that Cambray She acquitteth herself of scandalou^
imputations about the taking of Cambray.
was lost, but yet more sorrowfully that Lomene should impute the loss thereof
to her, because her assistance was not as ready as their expectation and
necessity. Demonstrating that the narrow streights of the limited time could
not produce those ^orces: and that it was no wisdom, the French having been
once or twice vanquished, to cast her Soldiers upon the triumphing cruelty of
the Spaniard, le^t that while she should so much esteem his misery, she might
be compelled to relieve it with the loss of the lives of many of her Subjects,
and the love of the rest. Yet that she was so far from rejoicing at his
unfortunate misery, or driving him to a peace with their common enemy, that
neither he himself, nor any man else, without the prejudice of his discretion,
could light upon any suspicion; especially if so be he would but recall to his
memory, the good Offices wherewith she honored him, and the sacred bond of
their friendship. She promised all aid, though not such as his desire, yet,
such as her necessity could afford; confessing that both their fortunes were
hazarded upon one chance. That none should need to require help from her
against the Spaniard, who, since such time that he put on hatred against
England, and (upon no other ground, then because his envy should increase on
the one ^ide, as fast as her mercy did on the other, in relieuing the
distresses of her Neighbors) never ceased either by Sea or Land, to infringe
the greatness of his power, or to bend it from it is proper and assigned
object: even that now all her thoughts have been even bespoken to be employed
against him, and his Navy; and that therefore her excuse for not aiding him
presently, stood warrantable in Justice, unless that she should unclothe her
own Dominions of forces, to furnish her Neighbors. And by reason that she had
heard it whispered into a common talk by the French, as that she doubted of
the Kings constancy in his friendship, or beheld his prosperous succeeding with
the eye of envy or sorrow, she protested, that as such thoughts should be
unworthy of the breast of a Prince, so were they of hers, and were never
harbored there.

Besides this, she willed Edmonds to inculcate daily into the Kings memory,
that it is the part of a King sometimes even to thwart the resolution of his
private breast, to give some public satisfaction to the desires of the people;
because the goodwill of the people is the rock of the Princes safety. And that
since he himself had wisely done so, for the preservation of the love of his
people, he could not value her good will by her outward performance, which she
abstained from, for the love she bare to her people, to whose duty, love, and
obedience, and valor, she accounted no ordinary blessing of God. Their valor
France it self could well testify, where many to get credit and renown, lost
their lives: and more would have lost them there, but that the doleful cries
of Mothers, the groans of Kindreds, and the lamentations of young children,
mourning the loss of their Fathers before they knew them, had interceded a
little for them: and, but that the affairs of war at home, or at least,
great rumor of war had reprieued them to a longer time of execution. That if
the King would weigh these things in an impartial judgment, she did not doubt
but he would be sufficiently contented with this her answer, that he would stop
up the ears of those that for the furtherance of the greater good of the
common enemy, had occupied all their endeauours to unbind their Peace. That
this is the principal endeavor of many, that by their ill Offices they might
rob the Prince of the good will of his Subjects, and the hearts of his
courageous Commons.

But on the other side, the miseries of France multiplying as conti^ually as
their wars, many men incited the King to enter into a League with the
Spaniard. The King of France persuaded to, and dissuaded from a Peace with the
Spaniard.
Persuasions were drawn from the actions of the Queen of England, who, they
said, did nothing but feed his ears with empty promises. Some on the other
side again, busied all their inventions to deter him from it, especially
Catharine of Navarre, Sister to the King, the D. of Bulloigne, and Vmpton the
Leager there, obiecting incontine^tly, that his hope of Peace with the Spaniard
would rely but upon weak grounds, if he should consider how long the Spaniard
had de^ained from him Navarre, his Grandfathers Kingdom; how he had molested
all France, and quartered it out into his own possessions; how he challenged
little Britain, as the inheritance of his Daughter; and how he hired a feigned
Right for her to England, against the King of Scots, in Books set forth to
that purpose: insomuch that he seems by the virtue of his vast conceit, to
have swallowed up under his own government, the huge Monarchy of all Europe.

When the King began to shut his ears against so forceable persuasions, the
Queen began in her mind much to question his promise, and doubt of
performance; but more especially when she understood out of the College of
Cardinals, that the Pope of Rome had entered him into a blessing of the Church,
upon these conditions, and these words.

HE shall abjure all heresies, Conditions proposed to the King of France by the
Pope, and his Conclaue of Cardinals.
he shall profess the Catholic faith in that form that shall be ^ere done
by his Ambassadors: He shall bring in the profession of it to the
Principality of Bearne, and shall nominate all Catholic Magistrates in that
Province: He shall undertake within a year to bring the Prince of Conde out of
the hands of Heretics, and shall see him well instructed and grounded in the
Catholic faith: He shall cause the Decrees of the Council of Trent, to be
published and received throughout all the Kingdom of France: In all Churches
and Monasteries he shall nominate persons of upright conversation, and
Catholics, being free from the very suspicion of any Heresy: He shall employ
all his endeauours that the Churches and Clergy be restored to their goods
again, without any judicial Process. In disposing of all Offices and Honors
be shall provide, that only Catholics shall be preferred, and that as much
as in him lies, Heretics be driven out. All the Concordates shall be observed,
the abuses from them being taken away, which have crept in against them.
Absolution given by Bishops in France shall be condemned. He shall write
Letters unto all Princes of the Christian world, wherein he shall signify his
conversion from his Heresy, his renouncing of it, and his profession of the
Catholic Faith.

Whilst these things are in action, Cornwall invaded by the the Spaniard.
the Spaniards (under the conduct of Dudac Brochar) with some four Galleys,
setting forth from Britain against Cornwall in England, in July arrived at it
betimes in the morning, they burnt St. Paul's Church that stood alone in the
fields, Mouse-hole, Newlin, and Pensa^se, little Villages for Fishermen, and
neither having slain or taken away one with them, they betake themselves home
again: being indeed the first and the last of the Spaniards that ever made any
hostile incursion upon England.

But some Englishmen privately, and the Queen her self publicly, undertook
greater adventures against the Spaniard; for Sir Walter Rawleigh, Rawleighs
voyage to Guiana.
Captain of the Guard, having deflowred one of the Queens Maids of Honor,
(whom he afterward took to Wife) being put out of favor, and for some few
months being kept under custody, was now set free, but banished from the
Court. He to follow the directions of his own Genius, that was always
inclined to search out hidden Regions, and the secrets of Nature, undertook a
Navigations to Guiana, that bears Gold, which journey he hoped would prove
aduantagious to his Country, both by getting store of wealth, and by molesting
the Spaniard, within the inward Coasts of America, which he thought would be
more profitable then on the Sea coasts, where there are never any Towns laden
with any riches, but when they are conuayed thither to be carried over into
Spain.

Setting out from Plymouth the sixth of February, he arrived at the Island
Trinidado the 22. of March, that lies some eight degrees beneath the Equator.
There he easily took a little City called St. Joseph, and the Governor
thereof Don Antonio de Bereo, but found not so much as a piece of Silver there.

Having enquired many things of this Antonio about the Mines of Gold in Guiana,
he left his ship in Trinidado, and entered the vast River Orenoque, with little
Barks, and some hundred Soldiers: he searched up and down Guiana for the
space of four miles, among the crooked and short turnings of the water
several ways: where, being parched with the reflecting beams of the Sun,
that was just over his head, and too much wet sometimes with showers; and
having long wrastled with such like difficulties, he yet continued so long,
till that it growing wintery cold in April, the waters all ouer-spread the
earth; insomuch that now he could pass away in no less danger of the waters,
then he came thither in danger of his enemies.

In his return from thence, he set fire on Cumana, because the Inhabitants
thereof refused to redeem it at a set rate of moneys* also he fired some
little Cottages in St. Mary, and Rio de la Hach. Neither gave he over the
pursuit of his intent, although the watchful eye of the Spaniard placed a
Colony in Trinidada.

At the same time Captain Amias Preston, and Captain George Summers sacked and
burnt the Isle of Puerto Santo near Madera, and Coche near Margarita, the
Town of Coro, and the City of Iago de St. Leon: but upon the receipt of mo^ney
spared Cumana. And some few months before three ships of the Earl of
Cumberland, set upon a great Caracke called Cinque Lagas, or the five wounds of
Christ, which having got fire, burnt it self and all her merchandise* insomuch
that the English hardly escaped, whilst the Portugals threw themselves into
the Sea.

Now the Queen having been certified that there was great store of riches
laid in at Porto Rico, in the Island B^riquene, or St. John's Island, for the
Spaniards use, she sent forth Sr. John Hawkins, and Sr. Francis Drake, An
expedition into America.
with equal authority in the Sea forces, and Sr. Thomas Baskeruile, Governor
of the Land forces, allotting them six of her ships, and twenty other men of
war. They struck sail at Plymouth the 27. of August, and the seven and
twentieth day after, they arrived at Great Canary. Drake and Baskeruile
adjudged it necessary for their credit, and better conueniency of furnishing
their Navy plentifuller with victuals, to assault the same: but Hawkins,
alleged the sufficiency o^ provision in the Navy, and his unwillingness to
spend time any where, till the end of their Voyage had been attained unto; yet
at length by Baskeruiles persuasion (who had begun the assault four days,)
and by the Mariners, who had almost caused a dearth of provision, he
condiscended thereunto. Baskeruile having come a shore, and having espied the
difficulties whereon he ventured, seeing the Townsmen on the one side in
battle array ready for him, and the Sea on the other raging at the shore,
and chiding the bounds thereof for lying in her way, gave over his enterprise.
And coming a board again, they sailed a whole month, and came to the Island
S^. Dominico; at which time five Spanish ships lay there, and came about as
spies for the English, and chanced to light upon a little shore ship of the
English, that strayed too far from her company. And having rackt both the
Master and Mariners into a confession, they understood that the English were in
preparation for Porto Rico; The voyag^ to Porto Rico.
wherefore plying thither with all speed possible, they tell them of the
Englishmens approaching: which when it was bewrayed openly, they hid all their
gold and silver, and having sent forth little Brigandines to all the Islands
thereabouts, and the Spanish coasts, they give notice thereof to the Spaniard,
who being now forwarned, is fore-armed.

Now the English staying at Dominico to build some shore ships, delayed time
so, that it was late before they could arrive at Porto Rico. Where as soon as
they had cast anchor, it thundered out from their Bulwarks, and at Supper time
Sir Nicholas Clifford, and Brute Brown being deadly wounded with a Bullet,
died within one or two days after: and the very same day Sir John Hawkins
(partly by sickness, and partly by reason of some discords between him and
the other Captains) departed this life, being much lamented of the Mariners.
The Spaniards forti^ie the mouth of the Haven, having suncke a great ship, and
drawn the long Masts thereof from one Castle on the one side to another Castle
on the other side, which fortified the entrance. Within those five ships of the
Spaniards well balanced, furnished with Gunners, and provided of great pieces
of Ordnance, stood opposite against them. Yet notwithstanding Baskeruile,
having placed his Soldiers in the ship-boats, endeavored strongly for a
passage; he burnt one or two of the Spanish ships, but being driven back with
a shower of bullets that rained about him, he listed not to renew his purpose
against so stormy a violence. So that having put from thence toward the
continent, or firm land, they set fire on Rio de la Hach, Rio de la Hach
fired. And other little towns.
a little Village, whose Inhabitants offered 34000. Ducats for their
redemption. Then they set fire also on St. Martha, but found not one dram of
gold or silver there. Thence they went and took Nombre de Dios, as empty of
riches as Inhabitants, which they burnt also. From thence going toward Panama
Their voyage toward Panama.
with 750. armed Soldiers, they were so entangled with bypath, and so
ensnared in durty ways, and so pelted with shot out the woods about, and so
abashed to find a Fortre^^e just against them in these narrow ways, and to
hear that there were two more within that blocked up the way, that being quite
tired, they returned to their ships again.

From thence they turned their course to Scudo And to Scudo.
an Island, and from thence to Porto Bello; in the mean time Sir Francis
Drake, The Death of Sir Francis Drake.
having been sorely molested with the bloudyfluxe, and grieved at these
untoward proceedings yielded up the ghost: and being let down into the Sea,
with a peale of Ordnance, after the manner of Sea Funerals, he was buried even
in the same place almost where in his prosperous Voyages he began to be famous.

And now having begun to return by the South side of Cuba over against the
Island Pinor, The Navy returns home.
the Spanish Navy that had tarried for them, now met them: but on the first
onset, (if we may believe them that did it) Baskeruile, and Throughton, one in
the Admiral, the other in the Vice Admiral, so molested the Spaniards, that
they offered more harm then they received: Afterward, some 8. months being
expired, they returned home, with spoil poor enough, in respect of the death
of those men of worth; their greatest riches being that they had made their
enemy poor, by burning many of his petty Towns, and more of his ships.

Whilst these things were thus in action in the Western world, there arose a
kind of distaste, A distaste between the Queen and the States of the Low
Countries.
which indeed had but now grown up to a controversy, between the States
confederate, of the Low Countries, and the Queen. Which by this means grew
up, and as well withered away again. Burleigh the Queens Treasurer had
demonstrated to her what sums of money from the year 1585. had been spent in
their wars; what sums of gold and silver had been new stamped by them, to
their great gaining advantage; what store of English blood had been lost to
keep their cause upright; what costs and charges were necessarily to be
employed, to extinguish the fire of rebellion in Ireland, and the practices of
the Spaniard in England. Besides, he showed how the States had not only
defended themselves by the help of the Queen, but also offended their
enemies; how they had now established firmly their tottering Commonwealth; how
they had increased their wealth by traffiques, and their power by subduing more
Territories to their government; and then, how that the Queen, with the long
continuance of war, and the excess of charges, was even tired to a kind of
poverty.

The Queen considering duly these things, The reason of it.
sent Sir Thomas Bodly her Ambassador to the States, to acquaint them with all
these passages, as first, that England was now even drawn dry, both of men and
money, by reason of war against the Spaniard, who in no other matter
professed himself her enemy, Sir Thomas Bodley sent over.
but for that she was their friend* Wherefore ^he demanded that they would ease
her of the cost of her auxiliary forces, and that they would repay some part of
her charges, and choose some Delegates, to give account, His message.
and take order how the money that had been spent in their cause, which was due
indeed to Sir Horatio Pallauicine (of whom it was taken at Interest) should be
repaid him.

The States acknowledging these infinite courtesies received from the Queen,
The answer of the State^.
professed themselves beholding to her under God, for all their good fortunes.
But withal they protested, they had been at such charges in eighty eight last,
against the Spanish Armada, and in the next year in the Portugal expedition,
and after that in the expedition at Breast; and besides, that they had suffered
such loss by unaccustomed i^undations, that they were so brought behind hand,
that they could not discharge the debt, unless they should oppress the poor
people, and undo their own cause; also protesting, that by reason of those
Towns and Territories which they had gotten from the enemy, their charges were
not eased, but are multiplied and increased, by reason that now they are feign
to fortify them, and place new Garrisons in them. And for their traffiques,
they showed how equally they hung between loss and gain, by reason of the
Arrests in Spain, and the Pyracies both of the English and of the Dunkerks.
Indeed they confessed that they gave some aid to the French King, but not out
of the abundance of their ability, or out of a fo^d insolent arrogance, or any
way to rob England of the glory of succo^ring France, or to draw France from
England into their Patronage; but only to divert the enemy, and bring it to
pass that the French made not a League with Spain, which his necessity,
domesticke discords, and ill counsels would quickly advise him to. Some moneys
offered in part of payment.
Yet notwithstanding they promised her some part for the present of the moneys
in present payment.

But when as the Queen The Queen requires more.
demanded a greater sum, the States contended out of the agreement made 1585,
that there should not be present present payment of the money back again,
till such time as the war was ended; and that if the Queen would but take as
much counsel from her royal Honor, as she did from some ill members that put
this first into her head, they knew she would not fall from her agre^ment.

For all this, the Queen continued in the contrary opinion, relying upon the
Oracles of her Lawyers and Politicians: such as were these.

THat all contracts and agreements made between Prince and Prince, Great
debating about the matter.
are understood to be interpreted bona fide. Neither is a Prince bound by any
contract, when that contract on just cause occasions hurt to the Commonwealth.
That the Peace is not broken, when a Prince breaks the contract, when he is
occasioned to do it, by cases of contingency, or when the matter is come to a
new case, which should have otherwise been provided for, if the said case had
been thought upon. That the Leagues and agreements of Princes ought not to be
occasions of cauilling, neither ought they to be in virtue to those who break
the covenants. That in case it turn to the damage and prejudice of his
Subjects, a Prince is not bound to stand to covenants made; or if it but
concern the detriment of his own estate. That all agreements, although they
be sworn to, yet are they to be understood: Things being in the same cases, as
they then were, and not altered, as they now are. That the obligation of a
Prince to the good of his Country and Commonwealth, is of greater force and
virtue to bind him, then any outward contract; urging besides the authority of
Seneca the Philosopher. A wise man changes not his determination, all things
continuing in the same state they were when he first determined: and therefore
he never does repent for it, because at that time nothing could be done better
then that which was done, and nothing better appointed then that which was so
appointed.

So concerning this matter there were great disputations and controversies, as
also, if the States were liable to the payment to the Queens successor, (in
case of mortality) since that by virtue of the contract, neither one was bound
to help them in the like distresses, neither was the other bound to repay the
moneys to them. Also, whether that the moneys borrowed of Palla^icine at use,
should not as well be exacted of the Brabanders, and the Flemmings, and
Artesians, since that agreement was made when they were confederates too, and
before the confederacy of the now united Provinces.

But Sir Thomas Bodley brought these controversies to such a good temper,
Conditions proposed by the States to the Queen.
that the States fearing the anger of so mighty a Princess, propounded these
conditions, which they would oblige themselves unto.

First, That as soon as they could they would case the Queen of all her
charges for auxiliary forces of the English, which came to forty thousand
pounds a year.

Secondly, That within some years they would pay her 20000. pounds sterling,
and help her with a certain company of ships.

Thirdly, That they would not enter into League with any without her consent.

Fourthly, That after a Peace concluded, they would pay her for four years,
every year 100000. pounds. But upon these conditions, that they may be
permitted 4000. Soldiers out of England, and all their debts raced out of her
her accounts. Humbly entreating her to admit of these things, for the reasons
forementioned. Moreover, they protested their estates were built upon very
fickle foundations, that the people was even astonished, at the rumor of those
forces the enemies keep, that the Provinces were at discord about a rule
concerning Lone-money, that the chiefest of them were at discord one against
another: that many had relapsed from the Religion which they lately professed
with them. That the Emperor by his Ambassadors had entised the people to a
peace; inasmuch, as that if this ten years debt should be now rigorously
exacted, it would justly be feared, that a sad Catastrophe, and lamentable
period would finish all the former endeauours of the confederate Provinces.

And then the necessity and the mercy of the Queen began a new controversy;
for, although the proportion of her necessity admitted not any excuse or delay
of payment, yet her mercy rests satisfied; for although she wanted moneys, she
never wanted that. And indeed she was the willinger to commiserate their
necessities, for fear lest otherwise she should disioynt the Confederacy,
bring them to despair, or give their enemies occasion of rejoicing; only upon
conditions, that they furnish thirty ships, and join them with her Navy, which
was a rigging for Spain: and that they pay the monthly payments awhile to the
aux^liary forces of the English. And so these matters of controversy ended in
a quiet peace at this time.

In the mean time there was sore complaints made to the Emperor of Germany,
The complaints of the Hans-townes to the Emperor against the Queen.
and the States of the Empire by the Inhabitants of the Hanse-Townes, about
their Customs: that their ancient privileges and customs granted by the
former Kings of England, were now quite abolished: that in the expedition
against Portugal, their goods were taken by the English: and that Monopolies
were instituted in Germany, by the English Merchants. To these things the
Queen made answer by Christopher Perkins.

THat those ancient Privileges by reason of some abuses, The Queens answer.
and for other good motives and reasonable causes, were abrogated by the Court
of Parliament, in the reign of Edward the sixth; and that from thence there is
no appealing. One reason was, that the said Privileges were not necessary for
those times, and that therefore they were quite inhibited by Queen Mary. But
yet that the Queen does not now desire an absolute annihilation of these the
said privileges, which indeed she could do by the act of Parliament; but had
in the former years of her reign been very indulgent to them, as the times
then went, till such time that they (having no regard of the league and
friendship) disturbed the English in Hamborough, neither giving them any
warning of their the like usage; and yet that for all this, she granted to them
the same order of negotiation and trade, as the English used* but they refused
it, except they might have it by better right. That indeed this was in custom
nowhere, neither was it to be suffered, that strangers should be preferred
before homebred Citizens, in the traffic for those things that are peculiar
to every Region, which indeed they would challenge by virtue of their
Privileges. Besides this, that it could in no case stand with the good of the
Commonwealth, if so be they should pay no more custom, the^ that which was
imposed upon them 300. years ago; that Privileges that have been granted, and
afterward occasion the Damage of the Commonwealth, are not to be admitted of,
and being once abrogated upon just occasions, should not be renewed at any man's
will or pleasure. Yet notwithstanding, that she even esteemed of them, almost
as English, in that she willed that they should pay no more custom for the
carriage of Cloth hence, or the bringing of Merchandises hither, then her
natural Subjects, upon conditions that their Merchandise come from the
Hanse-Townes. But if so be that they bring in any commodity either from Spain,
the Low Countries, or any other place, that then also it shall be lawful for
them to bring them into England, but with payment of one penny in the pound
less then any Forrainer, only excepting Cloth, which it shall not be lawful
for those of the Hanse-Townes to transport any whither but to their own Cities
and Towns, beyond the River of Elbe, the City Embden toward the East, and the
Baltique Sea. That she had permitted to them houses at London, and other places
in England, for them to retain, and in any honest manner of society to govern
their affairs by their Alder^a^, ^^^ly upon condition that nothing be done
prejudicial (...) the Queens Majesty, or the laws of the Realm, although
the extremities of their granted Privileges never allowed them so much, as to
constitute to themselves an Alderman, or exercise any Jurisdiction in another
Kingdom, as she has given them leave to do, etc.

Withal answering, that those goods which they complained were taken away,
were only warlike munitions, which they were a transporting into Spain,
against England; whereas this was not lawful for them to do, even by the best
virtue of their Privileges. That moreover, it was publicly defended through
their Citi^s, that they should not do so, except they would be esteemed as
enemies to England. That their ships were dismissed, and that nothing was
detained but their Munition and warlike prouisi^n, which was lawful for her to
do by the law of Arms. And concerning Monopolies, that the Germans themselves
have testified in open writings, that the manner of the English traffic with
them, is far from Monopoly. And that therefore she did hope, that the
Imperial Edict which was by them obtained, to forbid English traffic, would
be suspended; especially sin^e that the States of the Empire could not be well
informed of the privileges belonging to the Laws and Rights of the Realm of
England* which being an absolute Kingdom, acknowledges no Superior.

Yet in the midst of all these, there was great store of Corn broug^t in by
them into England, (after that they had license to bring in without custom,)
which much eased the pen^ry the land was almost drouen to: which by reason of
con^inuall rain spoiling that which would have grown, and daily private
transportation of that which was grown, did so languish, that some of the
poorer sort began to mutiny.

About this time died Philip Howard Earl of Arundell, The death of the Earl
of Arundell.
in the Tower of London, who had felt the merciful justice of the Queen, who
did so punish his fault, that yet she spared his life ever since he was
condemned in 1589. since which time he wholly gave himself over to sacred
meditations: and being bound thereto by the institution of his straight and
severe religion, almost pined himself to death; having left only Thomas his
Son by Anna Parre Gille^^and.

About this time also departed William Lord Vaulx, And of the L. Vaulx.
one no less deuote to the Roman Religion, to whom succeeded Edward his Nephew
by his Son, and Elizabeth Roper.

Also Thomas Heneage, And Sir Th. Heneage.
servant to the Queen, even from his youth; first Treasurer of her
Bedchamber, then Sub-Chamberlaine, and Chancellor of the Du^chy of Lancaster;
a man borne for the Court; having left one Daughter, which increased the family
of the Finches both with wealth, and children.

Toward the latter end of the year, William Whitaker died, And of Doct.
Whitaker.
a famous Divine for learning, and life: he was Regius Professor in Diuinty at
Cambridge for 15. years, and President of St. John's College in Cambridge.
Having much impouerished his weak body by continual study, even at that time
when the question was so ri^e among the Divines, whether a true and justifying
faith may be lost, he was freed from this body of flesh, and lost his life,
having left behind him the desire and the love of the present times, and the
envy of posterity, that cannot bring forth his parallel.

In the same month Sir Roger Williams (a Welch^man) departed this life also,
being of the Family of Pen-rose in Munmouth shire. First, he was a hireling
under the Duke of Alba; afterward, having run through all the degrees of
Military offices, he might have bin sided with the best of our times, if his
discretion could have but well tempered his hot furious valor. In this
certainly he out went many, that being unlearned, and only tutored by
experience, he penned the History of the Low Country wars, with very
exquisite judgment, at which indeed he himself was present. Besides, he
defended the Military Art of these days, against that of the former days, in
an excellent Book, but to the great envy and discontent of some old-beaten
Soldiers, and other lovers of Archery. The Earl of Essex, and all the warlike
men of the City mourned at his Funeral in Paul's. Shortly after died Sir Thomas
Morgan his kinsman, somewhat ancienter, of the old house of the Morgans of
Pencarn, in the same Shire borne: he being nourished up in warlike affairs,
got the love of all men, but especially of the Queen, to whom he exhibited and
gave up the assignment of an yearly pension of great value, proffered by the
Spaniard, if he would turn to his side, only being content with a small part
thereof.

In the mean time Russell Lord Deputy of Ireland, foreseeing that the passages
of the last year, would breed a doleful war in which they were likely to
end, dealt with his friends here in England, that some choice fellow and
warlike Soldiers might be sent over, who might help him with their pains and
counsel: and he earnestly wished that Baskeruile might be the man, although he
named none. But he was sent, whom he little expected, even Sir John Norris, S.
John Norris sent into Ireland.
a man very well skilled in Martial discipline, valiant against any danger,
and very famous for that which he had already done.

As Soon as Earl Tir-Oen had understood that he was come with 1300. old
trained Soldiers, that had been in service both in Britain in France, and in
the Low Countries, besides a new supply of fresh Soldiers adjoined to them:
and besides, that all these English forces were intended to march toward
Ballishonon and Belicke, two Castles at the end of the Lake Earne: he being
somewhat guilty in his own conscience, suddenly assaulted the Fortress at
Blacke-water, by which was a passage into the County of Tir-Oen: Tir-Oen
takes Blacke-water.
and he as easily took it, as he eagerly assaulted it, Sir Edward Cornwall the
Governor thereof, being negligently absent.

And in almost the very same minute, through the inconstancy of his unsettled
mind, on the one side he sends Letters to the Earl of Kildare, wherein he
proffers his assistance against the injuries of the Ministers of the Deputy. On
the otherside to the Earl of Ormond, and Sir Henry Wallop Treasurer of the
Army, he promises to continue still in his loyalty. And in Letters sent to Sir
John Norris, he entreats him to deal favorably with him, and not cause him
unwillingly to break his faith and loyalty. But Marshall Bagnall surprised
these Letters, which turned to his further harm, as the Earl afterward
complained.

For presently after, in the month of July, he is proclaimed by Proclamation
both in Irish and in English an enemy to his Country, and a Traitor, Tir-Oen
proclaimed Traitor.
under the name of Hugh O* Neale, Son of Matthew Fadare^gh, that is, an
Iron-smith, the base-borne son of Con O*Neale. In the Proclamation first was
proposed his ingratitude against the Queen, who had relieved his poverty with
a yearly pension, lifted him up to the Title of an Earl, enriched him with
possessions above other Irish Earls, pardoned him the injuries done his
neighbors, and his barbarous cr^eltie used upon Shan O*Neales son, whom he
strangled before he came ever to ^ryall; then is declared how he used the rest
of his sons, by keeping them in prison; then how per^idiously he enticed the
Nobles of VIster in^ ^he company of his rebellion; and lastly, pardon is
promised to all that forsake him: and every man severely warned not to furnish
in any sort his rebellion.

At this time the forces of the Rebels of Ireland The strength of the Rebels in
Ireland.
amounted to 1000. horse, 6280. foot in Vlster, 2300. in Conaugh, who were all
at Tir-Oens beck: and most of these skillful in handling Arms, being
ordinarily exercised therein: elpecially since that time that the Deputy Perot
had prescribed such a set number for every Nobleman of Vlster, to be exercised
in training* for better re^isting the Scottish Islanders: or since
Fitz-williams had sent for them over to the English war.

Neither indeed were the English forces under Captain Norris, Norris sets
forwards toward Tir-Oen.
inferior to that number, who was now commanded to march forwards against the
Rebels, to prevent the aid they expected daily from Spain. To him was
delegated an absolute power of pardoning any Rebel, by the Mandate of the
Queen from the Deputy; also the greatest authority in Martial affairs, with
the title of General of the Forces in the absence of the Lord Dep^ty in
Vlster: And the L. Deputy joins with him.
by whose policy this was, I well know not, but it caused much, maruelling in
many, when the whole strength of the Kingdom should now consist in one man's
command; and that nothing was more dangerous then a ^wo headed Governor, which
indeed is a Monster in policy as well as Nature. And ^or all this the Deputy
adjoined (...) to him besides* and they marched on to Armagh, to the so great
terror of the Rebels, tha^ Tir-Oen having forsaken and abandoned his Fort at
Blacke-water, fell to set fire upon the a^^acent Villages, and the Town
Dunganon* and demolisht most of his own houses himself: Tir-Oen lurketh.
and grieuing to hear himself proclaimed against, he begins to ^eeke out
lurking holes: when as the forces came not farther on, by reason of
insufficiency of provision, which indeed has occasioned an annihilation of
many venturous expeditions in Ireland, they there stood still, proclaiming
Tir-Oen a Traitor in his own Territories; and then having put a Garrison in
the Metropolitan Church of Armagh, they returned back again.

As fast as they returned backward, so fast would Tir-Oen a far off show
himself to them now and then; but he egged them not on to the renewing of his
pursuit: for they placed ^ Garrison at Monaghan, and having even returned to
Dundalke, the Deputy (according to the authority that he had received)
committed the whole prosecution of the war to Captain Norris, and many words
of complement being banded on both sides, the Deputy betook himself to
Dublin, wisely having a care of the affairs of the other three Provinces,
Leinster, Conaugh, and Munster.

Norris all this time continued in Vlster with a puissant army; but did not
anything worthy either of the power residing in him, or the expectation of
things from him, whether or no it were out of an emulation of the Lord Deputy,
while^t one endured not a fellow, the other no superior; or whether it were
out of the politic fear of most Soldiers, that are contented to spin out a
little war in a long twine, having by experience been beaten into a truth of
this axiom, That ^ Soldiers estimation lasts no longer then there is use of
him: or whether it were out of favor to Tir-Oen, Norris seems too much to
favor Tir-Oen.
which he seemed to show toward him in as ample manner as the Deputy did his
hate. For whilst that he gave an ear to the complaints of Tir-Oen, and his
favorers, he stuck not to accuse the Deputy as one too unjust against
Tir-Oen, by reason that his hating passion so over ballanc't his reason, that
he adjudged no peace to be made with him. Now the Deputy was always persuaded,
that the servile flattering of Tir-Oen, and submissions, whatsoever they
seemed, were nothing else but his means to procrastinate time a little, till
such time as his aid should arrive from Spain. Wherefore he always refused
parli^s and truces with him* as most (...) and treacherous; esteeming it not to
stand with the preservation of his honor, conferred by the Majesty of the
Queen, either to receive L^tters, or give hearing to any Messengers ^ent from
one that is proclaimed Traitor.

Norris on the other side, having a faith very pliable to the probabilities of
e^ents, conceived a great hope of bringing him ^o peaceful conditions, in as
much that he entered into parley with him; He parlieth with him.
but not without the worthy wonder of all men that saw or heard of it, that so
great a warrior as he was should de^^^nd so low, as to parley with a public
enemy, and a Trai^our, before he ever came to a combat, which is the best
Oratory of a Soldier.

But he was not so credulous, but the Earl Tir-Oen Tir-Oens co^^terfeit
submission ^o Norris.
was as crafty, who by all means possible (...) up that hope in him
continually, by counterfeiting his submission sealed with his own hand, and by
falling on his knees before Captain Norris and Secretary Fenton, and begging
pardon. Besides protesting:

THat he never neglected his duty toward his Prince, out of any malicious
humor, or an ambitious; but only that his friends and followers had run into
a rebellion only to revenge the injuries vnderseruedly offered him, and to
requite the plots laid so often for his life. That this was his first offense
against the Queen, wh^^h he promised to wa^h away with his faithful serui^^
^^d his best blood: promising also to renounce the title of O*Neale, which he
had lately taken upon him, for fear lest others should usurp it against his
right: that from henceforth he would have nothing to do with the Spaniard
(with whom, he said, be never had any thing to do before last August) only on
condition, that mercy, pardon, and ^orgetfulnesse pass by his offenses past,
and a ple^ary pardon be obtained both for him and his.

O*donell And O*donells.
likewise submitted himself, so that hereupon (having given hostages) there
was a truce made A Truce made.
till the Kalends of Ian^ary. A little after, under the same mask of
dissimulation comes F^agh Mac-Hugh, And Feagh Mac-Hugh.
with a mournful howling, casting himself at the Deputies feet, begging
pardon: who being admitted into his patronage, for a while continued quiet.

The wiser men of those times observed, that these Colloquies, Parlies, Truces,
The danger of the Truce.
etc. proved very prejudicial to the Queen, and hurtful to the
Commonwealth. For in that space the Rebels enjoyed free liberty, to digest all
their secret plots and machinatio^s, to strengthen their sides by new
con^ede^cies abroad, and to increase them at home with new forces; whilst all
this while the English lay at a costly idleness, feeding on the fruits of
their friends and faithful well-willers, when by reason of the truce, they
might not prey upon the enemy.

THE NINE and thirtieth Year OF HER REIGN.
Anno Domini 1596. 1596

IN the beginning of January, when the Truce was now expired, (and yet in the
time of (...) Truce, the Rebels by their sub^le sleights had seized upon (...)
Castle) Sir Henry W^llop W^llop and Gardener sent over to parley with the
Rebels.
(...) of the Army in Ireland, and Sir Robert Gardener chief Justice of the
Kingdom, men of gravity, and as great wisedo^^, were sent that they might
parl^y a little with Tir-Oen, O*d^nell, and the rest of the Rebels, and
persuade them to peace.

Now these other Rebels rendered up their grieuances and occasions of trouble;
likewise their several petitions, man by man* Tir-Oen The complaints of
Tir-Oen.
complained that H. ^agnall Mar^hall of the Irish forces, had (...) the right
intent of all his labors: that with (...) defam^tions, he had thrust him out
of favor with the Queen; and almost from his rank and degre^ to^: that to
his great prejudice also he had intercepted his Letters sent to Captain
Norris, and concealed them: that he detained his wives dowry that was allotted
(...). Wit^^ll protesting* that before he was ^roclai^^^ T^aitour, ^e never
(...) with any foreign Prince. He humbly begged pardon for him and his, that
they might be restored to their former estates. That he might freely exercise
his Religion. (For indeed, as yet there was scarce any inquisition made about
religion: Neither did the Rebels harbor any thought of that, when they first
joined into a faction.) Entreating also, that Marshall Bagnall might pay him a
^housand pounds of English ^^ony in dowry for his Wife decealed. That there
mightlye no men in Garrison in the County of Tir-Oen, nor Sheriff, nor any
such like Officers. That he might be restord to his wing of fifty Horse, at
the Queens pay, as before he was Leader of. That those that shall prey upon
any of his may be subject to punishment. Which things, if they were granted, he
prom^^sed not to omit any duty of a good Subject; and also, to (...) to the
Archbishop of Armagh, and the (...), that they may use and enjoy their own
right^ and posse^^ions.

O*donell, O*donels complaints*
having first re^urned to their memories the loyalty of his Father* and his
Ancestors to the Kings and Queens of England, sorely complained, that Bome an
Englishman, and a Commander of Soldiers, under pretenc^ of informing the
people in h^mility and ciuility, was sent (...) (...) Deputy* into their
Province, where he was courteou^ly (...) by his Father, and certain Towns
allo^^d him; but yet for all this, that he behaved himself most (...) (...)
(...) (...) Deputy, they would not yield unto them. But the misery of a few
days ^iege soon quelled their hot courages, the Castle being taken, and every
one of them slain* Norris and ^enton being gone into Conaugh, could hardly
persuade the Rebels to a peace, who being hainously incensed against Bingham,
did for a time nothing but dally and delay the time, and at last concluded but
an unfaithful peace, in all probability being counseled to it by Tir-Oen.

For he began now to cast about doubtful speeches, that he could not but
suspect that he was dealt dece^^fully with, in that the L. Deputy and Norris
agreed no better togeth^^* in that, they that went to the Deputy in his name
conc^^ning a peace, were but in a manner slighted by him, in that the Deputy
was all for war, increasing his for^^s daily with supplies from England: in
that he detained the Spaniards Letter, which he sent unto him so dutifully,
and in that the Marshall his greatest enemy, had newly returned with a new
Commission from England. So that upon this he began to spoil his neighboring
Lands, and di^ide them into preyes: but shortly afterward, being troubled with
the conscience of his villainy, and being given to understand, that there was
likely to be a peace with England and Spain, he made great show that he
earnestly desired peace with all his heart. It were too tedious to examine all
the particular couerings of this his dissimulation; but to speak in a word,
whenever there was any danger h^ng over him from the English, he would so
craftily countenance his dissimulation, both with gesture of face, and humble
words, that the counterfeit repentance which he seemed to have of his
wickedness, co^sened all with the belief of a serious one; till such time as
that opportunity of persuing was lost, and his forces necessarily to be severed
and dismissed. But there was no greater reason of his so much believed
submission, and of his continual pardon, then the sluggish gain of the Irish
Commanders: the near parsimony of the Counselors in England, and the inbred
mercy of the Queen, which always desired to end these rebellions, (which she
never thought worthy the name of a war) without war: and rather to lose the
prosecution on her due justice, then any subject should in the passion thereof
lose his life.

But how full the heart and hands of Tir-Oen Tir-Oens dissimulation laid open.
were of perfidious treachery does easily hence appear, in that the very same
month in which he received his pardon, He, O-donell, (...), Mac-Williams, and
the Family of Clan-shees, sent secretly their Letters to all the Nobility in
Munster that sauoured of the Romish Religion: wherein they most sacredly
promised the assistance of their utmost help, for the defense of the Roman
Catholic religion; withal solemnly vowing and protesting, that they would
never enter into any peace with the English, wherein besides all of the
confederacy were not also comprehended. Also a little after Tir-Oen, when Feagh
Mac-Hugh came suppliant for the like pardon as Tir-Oen had, incensed him to
awaken that drowsy rebellion in Leinster, which he did presently, for
forthwith he seized upon the Fort over against Ballencure, demolished it, and
still with a continual preying, runs over all Leinster, although the Lord
Deputy followed close at the heels. Besides this, he stirred up also Peter
and James Butler Nephews to the Earl of Ormond, to continue in their
rebellion.

And these things he dealt under hand in and secretly, but the Winter coming
on apace, displayed his villainy, which so long had gone apparalled in
innocence: for then he publicly forbad that provision should be carried to the
Garrison at Armagh, against the express conditions of their agreements, he
murdered some privily that were carrying, and others that purueyed for wood.
Nay, and he himself so violently assaulted the Garrison, that thirty of them
were slain. He sent forth Henry Oge-Man-Shan his son in Law, to set fire on
the Villages thereabouts, and to follow the prey about the River Boyne: and he
himself most treacherously attempted the surprizall of Carlingford C^stle.

When the Deputy, and the rest of the Counselors, expostulated with him about
this, admonishing him, that if he ^^^eemed of the safety of his hostages, or
willed not again to be proclaimed Traitor, that he should not any way molest
the Garrisons, or hinder provision to be brought unto them. To them he replied,
that he stood to his agreements; but, that the Deputy, if not against his
covenants, yet against his promise, had sorel^^y molested Feagh Mac-Hugh, and
that the Garrison at Kelly had slain unworthily Owen Mac-Coll^, that thereupon
he doubted what also might become of him and his. Wherefore he entreated that
there might be a new Co^^oqu^e or Parley appointed for him, either with the
Deputy, or with Norris, for a better composition of affairs which were
troubleso^e on both sides. And whilst there is a consultation thereof, he
suffers provision to be carried into the Garrison at Armagh; but O*donell
with great hostility runs over Conaugh, even till the time of Parley, wherewith
Norris had been long wearied, the hopes of which now (by long delay) were
mocked into nothing.

In the mean time the Lord Deputy cease not his unwearied persuit of Feag
Mac-Hugh; Feagh Mac-Hugh slain.
till at length (having slain most of his rebellious route, and put the rest
to flight) Sergeant Milburne found him almost breathles in a lurking hole, and
having wounded him in many places, at last cut off his head, which was sent to
Dublin, to the great rejoicing of the people, a little before the Deputy gave
over his Office. About which time* the head also of James Butler was sent to
him by Thomas Lea; and Peter his Brother being taken by his Uncle the Earl of
Ormond, although he were the nearest heir of his family, was hanged.

In the midst of all these troubles in Ireland, Albert Archduke of Austria
and Cardinal, whom the Spaniard had set over his affairs in the Low
Countries, suddenly calls away the Queens mind from prosecution of her
affairs in Ireland. For he* as soon as he had enjoyed his authority, having
united together all the Spanish forces, as if he had intended to raise the
siege at La-^ere in Picardy, against all e^pecta^ion, ^urnes his course to
Callis, Callis assaulted.
and besieges it* and in the first day having taken Newnha^ Castle, possesses
himself of the Haven. Which so soon as the Queen understood from the
fearful message of the French, even on Sunday, when most were at Church, she
commanded Forces to be mustered to aid the French, and the better to provide
for* England* for she could not but suspect, but that England would perish in
her Neighbors fires. And taken.
She makes the Earl of Essex General of these Forces: but before they took
ship* she certainly understood, that both Town and Castle were taken by the
Spaniard. For, when as Albert had so (...) shaken the Town walls with his
continual (...)* (the noise whereof we heard even as far as Greenwich) the
Townsmen betake themselves into the Castle, which afterward (to the great
slaughter of many Frenchmen) was easily vanquished. So that hereupon the Army
is dismissed, and moneys lent to the French, at the security of the Duke of
Bulloigne, and the Lord Sancy.

Within a few days after, there was a greater Muster in England, of an Army
wherein many Nobles and good Gentlemen went voluntaries: by reason that a very
credible rumor possessed every man's ears, that the Spaniard intended a war
against England and Ireland; which was the more believed, because he had newly
possessed himself of Callis, from whence is the soonest and shortest passage
over into England; and because Hawkins and Drake's expedition did not succeed
well* and lastly, because the Irish Rebels hastened their aid from out of
Spain, as fast as they could.

The Queen, to remove away this tempest that hung ho^ering about her, thought
it fittest to set upon the enemy in their Havens: wherefore she sets out a Navy
of 140. ships, out of which there were 18. of the Queens, and 22. of the (...)
that those of the Council should freely speak what they thought fittest, and
not rent themselves into faction, but either to prosecute or give over a thing
according to the plurality of voices, given in that matter. And if so be that
they chance to overcome or destroy their enemies ships and provision, that then
they should send out some men of war to surprise the Indie Caraques, if they
chance to hear of any coming. Lastly, she added to these a form of Prayer,
which she willed to be used in every ship daily, to call upon God for his
assistance in this great enterprise. The Prayer I thought fit to add, and that
was this.

MOst omnipotent Maker, Queen Elizabeth's prai^r for the Naui^.
and Guider of the Worlds Mass, that only searchest and ^adomest the bottom
of our hearts conceits, and in them see the true Originals of all our actions
intended: thou that by thy fore^ight do truly discern, how no malice of
revenge, nor quittance of injury, nor desire of bloodshed, nor greediness of
lucre, has bred the resolution of our n^w set out Army, but a heedfull care
and wary watch, that no neglect of ^oes, nor ouer-surety of Haven, might breed
either danger to us, or glory to them: these being the grounds wherewith thou
do inspire the mind; we humbly beseech thee with bended knees, prosper the
work, and with the best fore-windes guide the journey, speed the victory, and
make the return the advancement of thy glory, the triumph of their fame, and
surety to the Realm, with (...) loss of the English blood. To these de^out
(...), Lord give thou thy blessed grant.

There were those that much disliked this expedition, as seeming loath that so
many men, and so many ships, and so many Mariners should be put upon the
hazard of a war; lest peradventure the Spaniard (that is so diligent upon all
occasions, and that was grown somewhat proud with the ill success of Drake
and Hawkins,) should come in in the mean time, or vanquish the English Na^y,
an^ so bring England in most apparent danger.

But for all this, The Fleet weighs anchor.
in the beginning of June, the Navy ^ets forth from ^limmouth; the first day,
the wind being against it; but the next, being very prosperous: so was it
carried down farther toward the West* and beyond the (...) of Portugal,
only on purpose to be not espied: for if once it had been but espied, in the
hithermost coasts of Spain, or in Portugal, presently by a suddenly crying up
to arms, their project had been annihilated. For they intended indeed to
assay Cadiz, Toward Cadiz.
that by the Poet is called (When as his journey he has runn^
The welcome lodging of the weary Sun.)
And by some ancient Geographers, the bound of the earth; which is a very
famous place of Merchandise and Traffic* which could easily have been
defended, and could have as easily hurt the assaulters, if it had been but a
very little warned of the danger ensuing, but none or few knew of it. For that
place was appointed them in their Co^^issions, which were sealed, and given in
several ships; and not to be opened, before they had out-reached the
Promontory of Saint Vincent; unless by necessity, if perc^ance they had been
set upon by the enemy, or had been s^^ttered from the rest of the Navy, and
that then they should ^^st them into the Sea.

As they sailed against this Promontory* they lighted upon an Irish ship, where
they understood that all was safe and secure at Cadiz, from whence that newly
put forth; that there was not a word of any English fleet, and tha^ there were
few or none at all Soldiers, but some that lay at Garrison in the Island; and
that in the Haven there were now Gallions, Galleys, Men of war, and many more
ships of Merchandise, laded with traffic for the (...) voyage.

Upon the twentieth of June which was Sunday, a^ break of day, they cast
anchor on the Western part of the Island, near unto St. Sebastians.

Essex (...) of courage, The Navy arriues at Cadiz.
would presently have landed the Forces, but the Admiral and Rawleigh liked it
not; the Admiral never approving indeed any thing that was so headily ventured
on, without mature deliberation. But at last being over en^reated, he
condiscended that some few should ^rie if they could easi^y come a shore: but
it was in vain, the S^a was so rough at shore. Essex was very earnest again
to set upon the ships, G^llies, and Men of war, that rode in the mouth of the
Haven: but that liked not the rest also, because they lay under the
Block-houses, out of which, as also out of the ships there, and fifteen other
Galleys, most certain danger would come upon them.

The day after the Spanish men of war, by reason of the (...) the Sea, sho^
with the ^ide unto the Castle P^ntall, a piece of earth that (...) out further
then the rest; the Merchants ships draw inwarder toward Port Real* whereupon
the English having waighed anchor, came into their places. Where they were set
upon with Ordnance on the one side from the Fort of St. Philip, and on the
other side with shot from the Galleys.

And now it was decreed upon to set upon the Spanish ships, whereat the Earl
of Essex so greatly rejoiced, that he threw away his Hat. This business was
committed to Sir Thomas Howard, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Sir Robert Southwell, Sir
Francis Vere, Sir George Carew, Sir Robert Cross, and other Commanders of the
smaller vessels: for it seemed not good (the Sea now ^bbing) to hazard the
greater ships in the shallow ^^reights. Wherefore Rawleigh in the middle of the
Gha^nell, directing his Foredecke of the Warre-spite, (his ships name) toward
the Spanish men of war, caused them to retire* Marshall Vere thundered shot
upon the Galleys, out of his ship the Rai^bow; who being in safety under the
Town, The Galleys withdraw themselves.
turned their Foredeckes upon him, and hardly withstood him, till Essex came in
to succor. And then they sought how to fly away: and creeping along by the
shore, by the bridge of Suaco, by which the Island ioynes to the Continent,
they got out into the open Sea, all saving one or two which Wingfield in the
ship called the Vant-Guard kept under him.

In the mean time the Spanish men of war having cast anchor at Puntall,
turned broad side upon them. And the English, that before by reason of the
too-shallow depth could not come near them, now came in cheerfully upon them.
Essex with his ship thrust himself into the middle of the skirmish, and the
Admiral with his Son. In the Miranore they fought very ^iecrely from the
break of day, till ^oone: and by that time the Spaniards resolved either to
set fire on their own ships, that were now pitifully battered, and rent, and
most in them slain, or else to thrust into shore. Many of the fearefuller sort
leapt into the Sea, willing to drown themselves for fear of death; some
whereof perchance got to shore, others were taken, most of them drowned, and
some that swomme still, and cried for mercy, were by the mercy of the Admiral
preserved. The Spanish Admiral called St. Phillip, being a ship of 1500. tun,
was burnt, and one or two besides it: the ship St. Matthew preserved by the
diligence of the Admiral, and the ship St. Andrew, by the care of Sir Thomas
Gerard were both taken safe.

After this Sea Fight was finished, The Soldiers are set on shore.
Essex landeth his forces of some 800. men under the Blocke-house at Puntall,
some league off from the City: and forthwith sends ^lifford, Blunt, and
Gerard to break down Suaco, bridge, The bridge Suaco is broken down.
and the Engine whereby the Galleys escaped into the broad Sea, thereby to
hinder a passage from the Continent into the Island: which they very
prosperously performed. He makes toward the Town in all haste, with his
followers, viz. the Earl of Sussex, Count L^dowike of Nassau, William Herbert
Son of the Earl of Worcester, the Lord Burke an Irish man, Sir Edward
Wingfield, Christoper St. Lawrence, Sir Robert Drury, Sir Thomas Germin, Sir
Christopher Heydon, Sir Alexander Ratcliffe, and other choice Gallants and
Nobles.

First, the Spanish horse and foot come and show themselves half a mile from
the Town, and then retreit again. After, when more came forth, he commanded
his forces to retreit a little, but yet in orderly array and marshall manner;
and having entised the Spaniards upon them a little, to turn upon them with
all speed. Which indeed they did so valiantly, that they put the Spaniard to
flight, and so followed them at the heels, that they scarcely could get in and
shut the gates after them. The Earl gets upon an imperfect Fort near to the
gate, whence he views an entrance, which was so deep, that it was a Pikes
length to leap down. Yet Euans Sussex's Lieutenant, Arthur Savage, Captain
of the Earls band, Pole the red-Standard-bearer, Bagnall, etc. leapt down. In
the mean time Marshall Francis Vere, and the Earl burst open the gate, and
rushed in. And now the skirmish began to be very hot in the Town, in the
midst of the streets, till at length, after half an hour they came to the
Market place, from whence the Spaniards molested the English from the house
tops, casting stones down full upon their heads. Captain John Wingfield (who
in the first skirmish having slain a Spanish Commander) was sorely wounded,
yet having got thither with his troop, was there shot through the head with a
Bullet. Many amongst them were wounded, amongst whom Samuel Bagnall having
received eight wounds, and Arthur Savage all besmeared with blood, were for
their valor knighted.

Presently upon that the Lord Admiral, the Lord Thomas Howard, Sir William
Paget, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Sir Robert Southwell, Leuison, Woodhouse, Mansell,
and other Mariners, with Sir Edward Hobby Ancient. And now the Spaniards gave
over fighting, and betook themselves to the Castle, and the Towne-house: one
whereof was forthwith yielded; and the other, the next day after (upon this
condition) that the Citizens might depart safe with their clothes on, and the
rest to ^urne prey to the English* 50^0000. Ducats should be paid for ransom;
and that forty of the best Citizens should be given as Hostages to the English
for performance of these articles. Presently after Proclamation came forth,
that no man should offer violence to any Spaniard: the woman, and all
Ecclesiastical persons were carried into P^rto Sanct^ M^ria.

In the mean time was Rawleigh commanded with his smaller ships, The s^ips are
burned.
which found the Channel nauigable for them, to set fire on those Merchant
Spanish ships, that had withdrawn themselves to P^rt Real: there was offered
for their ransom 200000. D^kats, but the Admiral in no case would hear of
it, who said, his message was to destroy their ships, and not to bargain for
their liberty.

Whilst these things were so in a contro^ersie, the Du^e of Medina Sid^nia
^a^ing unladen many ships, commanded fire to be set on them, whereby they
(...), to the great loss of the Merchan^s, There was great store of w^rlike
provision found in the City, and greater store of money, whilst every one grew
master of what he could snatch for himself. The wisest men of judgment
(considering the loss of the Spaniards ships that were fired, and that were
taken, his great pieces of Ord^ance that were (...), and that were taken, and
his provision of victuals th^^ was sp^nt) have adjudged the damage to amount
to twenty times 1000000. Dukats. No man amongst the English of any note was
lo^t, besides Captain Wingfield, who was most honorably bu^ied in the chief
Church there* with military obsequies. For a reward for their approved (...),
there were about some threescore brave men knighted, the chiefest whereof were
Robert Earl of Sussex. Count Lodowicke of Nassaw. Don Christoph^r^ a
Portugal, K^ights made.
and Son to Don Antonio. William Lord Herbert, and Sommerset. The Lord Bourke
an Irishman. William Howard Son to the Admiral. Robert Dudley. George
Deuere^x. Henry Ne^ill. Edwi^ Ric^. Richard Leuison. Anthony Astley. Henry
Len^ard. H^rati^ Vere. Arthur Throg^^^rton. Miles Corbet. Edward Conway. Oliver
Lambert. Anthony Cook. I. Tounsend. Christopher Heydon. Francis Popham. Philip
Woodhouse. Alexander Clifford. Maurice Berkley. Charles Blunt. George ^ifford.
Robert Cross. James Skidmore. Vrian Leigh. I. Lee. Richard Weston. Richard
Wainman. James Wotton. Richard Rudall. Robert Mansell. William Mounson. I.
Bowls. Edward Bows. Humphrey Druell. A^ias Presto^. Robert Remington.
Alexander Ratcliffe. ^. B^cke. I. Morgan. I. Aldridge. William Ashinden.
Matthew Brown. Thomas Acton. Thomas Gates. I. Stafford. Gill. Mericke. Thomas
Smith. William Pooly. Th. Palmer. I. Louell. I. Gilbert. William Heruey. I.
Gray. John van Du^enu^rd. Melchior Lebben. Peter Redgemort. N. Medkerke.


Afterward they treated of redeeming Captives on either side, They consult
what is to be do^^.
and then argued whether they should leave Cadiz or retain it still. Essex
thought good to retain it, because then they should be like unto a nail upon
a sore to the Spaniard: he himself undertook to remain there with four
hundred Soldiers, if they would but furnish him with provision for three
months. But the rest disagreed from him; for every man, having gotten wealth
and credit enough, thought long till he was at home again: insomuch that they
would not allow him provision for one month, nor one ship, but unwillingly
drove him to leave Cadiz. But before they went, they ransackt all the Island,
demolished the Fortresses, set fire on most of their houses; and on the fifth of
July (having bagg'd up their spoils) the whole Fleet set from Cadiz, with
these Testimonial from the Spaniards:

THat the English in religious matters show themselves Heretics; but in all
other affairs, warlike, provident; and truly noble.

From thence first they come to the Town of Phar^, Phar^.
whence the people all fled, where a ready furnished Library fell as a prey to
the Earl of Essex: and there about some Spanish Galleys that followed a far
off, began to draw near: but being commanded by the Admiral to depart, they
forthwith obey: and turning away, bid the English joyfully, God buy.

An impetuous and violent North^winde having clearly drove the Fleet into the
maine Sea, at the Promontory of S^. Vincent: the Counsel sat upon it, whether
or no they should go unto the Islands Azores, and there expect the return of
the Indy Caraques. ^ssex propounded to them a dimission of all the Landforces,
and ships, by reason of want of provision of victuals, and of diseases, that
had sorely taken the Mariners; only desiring two of the Queens ships, and
ten other, wherewith he would go to the Islands Azores, and there expect the
Carackes return from the Indies. This no man else assented to, but Thomas
Howard, and the Low Country men. So that when Essex could not obtain this, by
much persuasion, he got every man to testify his opinion in the matter with
his own hand, if perchance the not doing of it should be objected as a crime
to any of them. At last he very hardly prevailed so much with them, that they
would go to the Gr^ine They come to Groyne.
, but there was not one ship espied, nor in the next harbor Faroll. When he
thoroughly urged them that they should land their Forces, and set upon the
Groyne: or going by the shore side of Galitia, set upon the ships that lay in
St. Sebastians Haven, and Sr. Andrews; they would not so much as hear him
talk thereof, They return.
but every man with full sails hastened into England; and left him with some
few more behind, who complained much that there was nothing more done;
obiecting to them many errors in the Council of war, which they quickly
satisfied, thinking themselves masters of wealth and glory enough, that having
given such damages to the Spaniard, they returned safe with great spoils, and
not one ship lost or cast away. If that there were any error by reason of
them, it seemed only to be so, because all things were not at ones command.
But the Admiral joined himself with the Earl of Essex with good
deliberation, that thereby he might well temper his young heat and courage, and
his desire of glory with his mature moderation and well advised resolution.

Although out of this that have been already said, it does sufficiently
appear, how great glory and profit redoundeth to the Queen and Kingdom by
this expedition, and how great damage to the Spaniard; yet it shall not seem
amiss to reckon out of the Earl of Essex his memorial or Iournall these
things more amply.

First, For the glory of the English, England expected not the Spaniard (that
mighty puissant Prince) threatening and preparing a most dreadful war against
her: How glorious this victory was to the English.
but challenged him in his own dunghill, they dispersed and vanquished his so
readily furnished Navy, and the very greatest ships among them; they brought
home two great Galleons in triumph; and with a few of their ships put to flight
fifteen Spanish Galleys. They set many English Gally-slaues at liberty, and to
the praise of the mercy of the Nation, let go many Spanish Captives. They
overcame one of the best fortified Cities of Spain, almost as^oone as they saw
it, continuing 13. whole days in the enemies ground.

Secondly, How profitable.
For the profit of the English: besides those two great Galleons, to increase
the English Navy, they took 100. great Brass pieces of Ordnance, and many
other spoils: both Soldiers and Mariners returned well fleshed with spoil,
to their better encouragement for the like expedition.

Thirdly, How h^rtfull to the Spaniard.
For the loss of the Spaniard, He lost thirteen of his best Men of war,
forty Merchants Indie ships, and four other for traffic; besides he lost
great store of warlike provision both for ship and victuals, insomuch, that not
under a long time he seemed able to furnish another Navy. He lost all occasion
of trading this year into Noua Hispania in America. And which is a thing of no
small moment, thereby the English have learned what an easy thing it is to
surprise the Spanish Sea coasts at any time.

The Queen very courteously entertained them at their coming home, and gave
peculiar thanks to every particular man of any note: but especially to the
Earl of Essex, and the Admiral, whom she highly magnified with her eminent
praises. When she had called to mind, whom of these brave Soldiers she
should make Governor of the Haven of Brill, which lay as a caution with her
for the payment of the States money, (for the Lord Sheffeld had voluntarily
resigned over his place) Sr. Francis Vere Colonel of the English under the
States, seemed worthiest thereof. And although many of the Nobility stood for
the same; nay although Essex himself opposed him, Sir Francis Vere made
Governor of the Brill.
and most of the Nobility, thought the place more worthy of some nobler man;
The Queen that well knew his descent, (for he was Nephew to John Vere the
fifteenth Earl of Oxford) and besides found his valor and loyalty so well
approved, in that he had vanquished the Spaniard at Rheinberg, that he had
taken the Castles of Littenhouen and Buric, and that he had recovered the Fort
at Zutphen; after due deliberation, not only preferred him in the election
before the rest, but withal gave him leave to keep his place still amongst
the States, which many others much desired; although she could confess, it was
not very fitting to make one Governor of a Town of the States that was pawned
to her for the payment of her money; who besides, was but an hyreling to the
States for his pay. This the Earl of Essex (who had commended many to the
Queen) took heinously, nay very untowardly, not hiding his anger from the
simplest judgments; but worst of all, when in his absence Sr. Robert Cecill
was made Secretary, to which office he had before ordained Sr. Thomas Bodley,
Sir Thomas Bodley is appointed Secretary.
by reason of his well-tried wisdom in the Low Country affairs, and to the
purpose had so highly extolled him to the Queen, as one most fitting, and
bitingly calumniated Cecill, with odious comparisons.

In the mean time the Spaniard to repair the lost glory of Cadiz, The
Spaniard arms a Fleet for England.
and to heal those incommodities which since that time daily grew upon him,
rigging up all ships he possibly could, furnishes his Navy at Lisbone, he
furnishes himself with all the foreign ships that lay in the Haven; he
mustereth up his Forces at Faroll: from whence they were to sail into England,
and Ireland: but in their voyage, as report has given us to understand, a
great tempest arising, most of their ships either shipwrackt upon the rocks,
or were suncke by the billows, insomuch that the loyal air seemed to fight
in the defense of England, A great part of which was cast way.
and her Queen: for she heard of their destruction sooner then their
expedition. But for all that she fortifies her Castles and Forts by the Sea
side, Elizabeth fortifies the the shore.
at Sandford, Portland, Hurst, Southsey, Calshot, S. Andrews, and S. Maudite,
and furnish^th them with munition. And that her friendship and League with the
French, Enters into league with the French.
against the Spaniard, might grow stronger, she strengthened it with these
additions.

ALL former Treaties and confederacies shall be confirmed, and continue in
their force and virtue; unless, there whereby they derogate from this present
Treaty. To this League shall all Princes and States be invited, whom it
concerns to be careful of the Spaniards practice. As Soon as possibly can be,
an Army shall be mustered, to invade the Spaniards. Neither the K. of France,
or the Queen of England, shall have any treatise with the Spaniard, without
both's consent, because the Spaniard now besets the Dominions of France that
are nearest to the Low Countries, the Queen shall send 4000. foot, who shall
serve the King of France six months this year in any place, that shall not be
above fifty miles from Bononia by the Sea side. In the next year following
also, if the affairs of England can spare them, they shall serve the King as
long; wherein they shall stand to the assertion and conscience of the Queen.
When the Irish sedition shall be alayd, the King shall stand to the good will
of the Queen, to have 4000. sent over to him. The English shall be under the
French Kings pay, from the time of their arrival, to the time of their
departure. The Queen shall from time to time supply the want of that number.
That the Pay-masters shall be the Queens Servants, and her money, every
month: for which the King shall be bound within six months fully for to
satisfy her, having resigned over four Towns. If that the King shall stand
in need of greater Forces, the Queen shall muster them in England, and the King
shall pay them out of his own moneys. The English that shall serve the King,
shall be subject to the Kings officers, and punished by them; yet so, that the
English Captains also be called by the said officers, and sit with them in
judgment. If the Queen chance to be invaded, and shall demand aid from the
King, he within two months shall muster up 4000. foot, and send them over into
England, at his own charges, and they shall not be drawn further then fifty
miles from the shore; and the Queen shall pay them from the time of their
arrival in England. The said French Soldiers shall be subject to the Queens
officers, after the aforesaid manner: the King shall also continually supply
the number. The one shall furnish the other with all kind of warlike provision,
so long as it preiudiceth not the State. The Merchants shall mutually defend
each other in either Kingdom. The King shall not suffer the English to be
troubled in cause of Religion: the paiments of the Captains and Soldiers
shall be set down in a little roll. And shortly after there was another
Treaty, wherein it was agreed, that in this year only 2000. English should
be sent over, which serve only at Bononia and Monstrell; unless it chanced
that the King was personally present in Picardy, etc.

To the performance of these Covenants the Queen took her oath in the Chapel
at Greenewich, They both swear to perform the league.
the 29. of A^gust, delivering them to the hands of Henry de la Tour Duke of
Bulloigne, Viscount Turene, and the Marshall of France: the Bishop of
Chichester giving to her the holy Testament, and many Noble men encircling her
round about.

In September next William Talbot Earl of Shrewesbury is sent over into France
upon an Embassy, that the King might make the like oath to him in the room of
the Queen: that he might present Anthony Mildmay in the place of Leager in
France (by reason of the death of Henry Vmpton late Leager there): The King of
France made Knight of the Garter.
that he might inuest the King with the Order of St. George: and shortly after
Sir Thomas Baskeru^^e passes over with 2000. foot into Picardy, according to
their last Covenants.

Amongst these warlike affairs that some what disquieted the peace of the
Land, Counterfeit Pursuivants and Apparitors are punished.
there was also a base sort of people, that having taken upon them the
authority and badges of the Queens Apparitors, wandered up and down England,
with falsified Commissions, and the hands of the Counsel, and other Delegates
in Ecclesiastical causes, searching out all poor widows and Papists houses:
They took away almost by way of robbery, al Vessels, Chains, Jewels, or any
thing that bare upon it the picture of Christ, or any of the Saints. They
severely exacted the allowance by the way due to Apparitors, and cousened many
poor silly fearful people of their money, that they might not appear before
the Magistrates. Some of these being taken, were compelled to restore again
what they had thus robbed men of, and were set in the Pillory, their ears
clipped off, and branded in the forehead, as cheaters and couseners. Yet for
all this, this severity could not keep under this villainy that had spread
abroad, until public notice came, that Apparitors should not demand their
Viaticum before those that were cited did appear, and the Apparitors also with
them, before the Magistrate; If that many were cited by the same Commission,
upon one and the same day, the Apparitors were also to be present; If that any
man that was cited suspected his Apparitor, he might warn him before the next
Justice of Peace, to be examined, that it may be known whether he be one or
no. They who were cited under pain of excommunication, were not to bribe the
Apparitor, that they might not appear. Also, that the Apparitors take no such
bribe, unless they would lose their places, be imprisoned, and liable to
severe punishments.

This year returned Thomas Arundell of Wadour, Thomas Arundell Count of the
Sacred Empire.
whom the Emperor created Earl of the Holy Empire, and all and every one of
his Heirs, his Posterity, and those that shall descend from him, lawfully
begotten of either sex, Earls and Countesses of the Holy Empire; for because
the Queen in her Letters had commended him as her kinsman: and because he had
deserved so great an honor in his brave behavior in the Hungary war against
the Turk. This title whosoever is master of, are said to enjoy by virtue
thereof these privileges, that in all Imperial Diets they have both place and
voice, they may purchase Land in the Empire, they may muster up Voluntaries,
and need not to appear being cited to judgment, but only in the Imperial
Chamber. When he (after his return) grew somewhat famous among the common
people, by reason of this Title there arose upon it a question presently,
Whether a subject be to admit of the honor that is conferd on him by a
foreign Prince.
whether a Subject ought to admit of any such Honor or Title from a forr^ine
Prince, his own Prince being not acquainted with it? There were indeed those
that thought that such rewards for valor were to be allowed of, from what
Prince soever they were bestowed, by reason that virtue grows lanke without
her rewards of merit, urging the example of Henry the third King of England,
who very thankfully acknowledged Reginald Mohune, made Earl of Somerset by the
Apostolic authority of the Bishop of ^ome. Also of Henry the eight, who did so
congratulate Robert Curson, whom Maximilian the first Emperor, had created
Lord of the Holy Empire, for his warlike valor, that he reckoned him amongst
his Lords of England* and allowed him an annual pension for the better
maintenance of his dignity. Besides they urged some brave Scottish Soldiers,
as of Archibald Duglasse of Wigtone, who received the Title of Duke of Tours
from the French King: and of John Steward, who was by the King of France made
Earl D' Euereux, and that the Scottish kings esteemed this as an honor to the
Nation. But the Lords of England imagining that this would bereave them and
their Heirs of some of their prerogatives, if so be they and their Heirs were
to give place to such an vpstart Lord and his Heirs for ever, argued against
it thus: that such Titles of honor are neither to be received by the Subject,
Such honors not to be admitted.
nor to be allowed of by the Prince. That it is the property of the Prince for
to confer honors upon his own Subjects, and not for any Forreiner to do
it, according to the words of Valerian the Emperor.

LEt that be only an Honor, which is bestowed by our command.

Urging, that there is a great detraction both from the Majesty of the Prince,
and the duty of the Subject, if they may be tolerated to receive Dignities
from Forreiners. For there must needs be a secret allegiance between him that
is honored, and the party honoring. That these kind of Titles are nothing
else but a cunning slight, to prefer men out of the obedience to their Prince,
to any strange Forreiner. That there may be an action of theft against him,
that shall brand another man's sheep with his mark. Also that there may be an
action of cousenage and deceit against him, that shall spread abroad fodder to
entice another man's sheep into his flock. And although mighty Princes are not
bound to these Laws, yet are they by the equity of these Laws, and the Law of
Nature: As in the City and Commonwealth of Rome no man could be a Citizen of
that and any other City; whereupon Po^peius Attic^^ refused to be reckoned as a
Citizen of Athens, lest he should lose his right in the City of Rome. So in
the Commonwealth both of Venice and Genua, whosoever receive a Spiritual
diginity from the Pope, or any Temporal one from any foreign or strange
Prince, is held suspected of his Loialty, and suspended from the undertaking of
any office public. Concerning the objections they answered, that indeed it
might come to pass, that Henry the third, out of his simplicity and the times
iniquity, might allow of Reginald Mohune, thrust into an Earldom by the Pope,
when as his Father having been excommunicated, and threatened deprivation, was
compelled to acknowledge himself the tributary King of the Pope of Rome: and
yet it appears upon Acts and Records of those times, that Mohune was not
accounted as Earl of Somerset. Concerning Henry the eight, they made answer,
that he therefore accounted Curson as one of his Lords, that he might obscure
that shadowy title of Lord of the Holy Empire; but withal observing, that he
allowed him no voice in Parliament. But as for the Scots, that it was no wonder
if they received and allowed of honor from the French, Counts and Vicounts
such as some officers in the Court of Rome.
when they show themselves to be under the tuition of the French
Floure-de-luce by their Kings arms, and the Floure-de-luce therein. Many
indeed esteemed an Earl of the sacred Empire of no better rank then a public
Notary: as they esteemed all the Counts and Viscounts of the Holy Palace at
Lateran created by the Pope: or the Kings Physicians, Lawyers, Grammarians, or
Rhetoricians, who having professed 20. years, boasted themselves with the
title of Count Palatines: Count Palatines.
but we know that the Count Palatine is an honored title, and has Princely
jurisdiction in it is own courts, in Fees, and fading heredities.

THe Queens censure was, The Queens judgment in this question.
that as a woman should not follow any man but her husband, so a Subject should
not receive any thing but from his own Prince. I would not sheep my should be
branded with another mark: neither would I have them to be at another call
or whistle.

Within the compass of this year some of the greater sort, and of the
Nobility, The death of John Puckering.
departed this life. Amongst whom, the best worthy memory, were John Puckering,
Lord Keeper of the great Seal: who although he himself were a man of an
upright sincerity, yet by reason of his corrupted servants that set to fair,
Ecclesiastical Benefices for the best price, he was but hardly spoken of by
the Clergy men. Thomas Egerton the Queens Attorney General, succeeded him in
his place, who in the integrity of his virtues, equall^d the great expectation
that was of him.

Richard Fletcher Bishop of London, Of Richard Fletcher Bishop of London.
a very famous Prelate, who being sorely troubled with the displeasure of the
Queen at his marriage, (as she was at the marriage of all the Clergy) to get
that away, lost his life.

Henry Carry, Lord Hunsdon, Lord Chamberlain of the Queens Court, Of the Lord
Hunsdon.
Governor of Berwicke, and Knight of the Order of S. George: a man of a great
stomach, but very choleric, and somewhat discontented, that being somewhat
of kin to the Queen, he attained but mean honors, and wealth, departed
also; his Son George succeeded him in his dignities: and the Lord Cobham in
the Chamberlaines place, who continued in it but few months.

Another was Francis Knolles, Of Francis Knolles.
who had married the Lord Hunsdons Sister, and for the truth of the Gospel had
been banished into Germany: first he was Sub-Chamberlaine to the Queen,
afterward Captain of the Guard, afterward Treasurer of the Queens Household,
and one of the Order of S. George. In his Treasurer-ship Roger Lord North
succeeded him; and his Son William Knolles was made Comptroller of the
Household.

Another, toward the end of the year, was Henry Hastings Earl of Huntingdon,
^f the Earl of Huntingd^n.
the third of that stock, President of the Council in the Northern quarters:
and being a man of a mild disposition, but very earnest in the purity of his
religion, he spent most of his patrimony in costly succouring and cherishing of
the more fervent sort of Ministers. He was buried in the county of Leicester:
and Francis L. Hastings died then to. And the Presidency of the Council
committed to Matthew Hutton, Archbishop of York; but without the title of
President.

Neither among so many men is the death of that worthy woman Margaret Clifford,
And of the Countess of Darby.
Countess of Darby, the only daughter of Henry Clifford Earl of Cumberland,
which he had by Elenor Brandon the Niece of Henry the Eight, to be concealed;
who out of a womanish curiosity, and weakness of her sex, being too credulous,
and somewhat ambitious of far fetched hopes, dealt with Southsayers, and in
striving to get the knowledge of things to come, lost the presentfauour of the
Queen, and her life presently after.

THE FORTIETH Year OF HER REIGN.
Anno Domini 1597. 1597

IN the beginning of this year, The battle at Tournholt.
how great praise of their valor Robert Sidney and Francis Ver^ with the
English forces in the battle at Turnholt in Brabant under the conduct of
Maurice of N^ssaw did deserve and bear away, having slain 2000. Neapolitanes
and Germans, the Low Countries history does report. I hasten and intend to
greater matters.

The Queen being given credibly to understand, that the Spaniard was providing
a new piece of war out of the old decayed relics, and other ships, which he
intended against Ireland, prepares her Navy of ten of her own Ships and as
many Hollanders, either to divert his project, or to delay it.

But when as this number seemed but very small, there were more added, five
thousand Soldiers pressed, besides a thousand old Soldiers whom Vere brought
out of the Low Countries. So that in all in this Navy, there were one hundred
and twenty Ships. Seventeen of the Queens, three and forty little men of
war, the rest to carry provision. The Navy was divided into three Squadrons.
Essex commanded the first, who had the whole Expedition committed to his care;
Thomas Howard the second: and Walter Rawleigh the third. Charles Blunt Lord
Montioy was Captain of the Soldiers under the Earl of Essex, and Sir Francis
Vere Serieant Mayor. Sir George Carew master of the Ordnance and Engines, and
Sir Christopher Blunt chief Colonel.

To this war also went the Earls of Rutland, and Southampton; the Lord Gray,
Cromwell and Rich: with many other Knights, and other Gentlemen. These with
their sails displayed, and other costly vanity (that is peculiar to the
English, when they go to war) set forth from Plimmouth the ninth day of
luly. After two days, to every Ship was delivered her Commission signed,
whither she should bend her course; which way to Feroll and the Groyne, that
there they might expect the Spanish Navy, and assault it, and surprise the Indy
Navy at Azores. After mature deliberation, this was thought most expedient to
be done. For so should England rest in security: the Nauies of both the Indies
being not defended should be easierly surprised; the Islands Azores should be
surprised, where both the rich Nauies from the I^dies in their return, arrive
and water themselves. The Queen should be made absolute Commandresse of the
Sea: The Spaniard dispoyled of his Navy* should either be compelled to a peace
upon any equal terms; or to his great damage to renew his wars again.

Essex had resolved, as at least made show, and sometimes publicly professed;
That he would either vanquish this Navy, that so has threatened England the
last year; or else sacrifice himself to the good of his Country.

But they had scar^e gone forty leagues from Plimmouth, when a fearful
tempest rushes upon them, North^west, and a mist takes away sight from them.
The Air with thunder, and the water with tumultuous waves, reflecting from the
sides of the ships with a fearful Echo, did so rage four days together,
that the Mariners themselves were afraid, the Soldiers trembled, and the
whole Navy much di^^ected, not without great danger hardly recovered Plimmouth
again, and other coasts thereabouts; the Admiral it self, was so battered,
that it was scarce of any ^se: and some of (...) fresh water Soldiers, were so
troubled with an ^nmannerly Stomach, that they stole home again secretly.

The Na^y being again refresht, and repaired, although to the diminishing both
of the number and strength of the former; forthwith puts forth again, but
found the winds so contrary, that for a whole month they could not get out of
the Havens. And by that time provision of victuals grew very scarce among them,
(whereof they could have no supply, but out of the East part of England, and
that in no little time) wherefore it seemed good unto them to discharge all
their Soldiers beside one thousand old ones, and to dismiss most of their
Ships of lesser weight, and not to go to Fer^ll or the Groyne. And then it
fell to be deliberated on, whether or no they should make their expedition to
the Islands Azores; which all agreed upon, that they should; but only Vere, who
said it would neither be for the profit nor the credit of the Queen; since
that with so few Ships, and so small forces, nothing could possib^y be
effected, that might satisfy their own desires, much less Englands
expectation; and that England in the mean time wanting her choycest Captains;
and part of the Queens Navy, would more easily be invaded by the Spaniard.
Hereupon Essex and Rawl^igh ride post to the Queen, to take counsel what
should be done. Essex proposed great matters, full of difficullty, fitting for
the loftiness of his mind, promising with part of the Navy, and some
Soldiers, if they were but committed to him, to go God knows whither. But
the Queen refusing any such matter, he undertook to overcome the Spanish Navy
in the Bay at Fer^ll, if so be, that by the Queens good leave, he might but
lawfully venture the two great Ships taken from the Spaniard, Saint Andrew and
Saint Matthew; and a thousand old Soldiers, upon some danger, and leave the
rest of the Navy without the Bay, wilest he there tried his fortune with them.
The Queen would neither allow of this* but upon many good cautions. Yet at
length* the matter was le^t to their own judgments; but yet so, that they
should embrace all opportunity of burning the Spanish Navy at Feroll or
surprising the Indy Navy: and as new occasions fell out, so should they use the
iudgemen^ and discretion of the Coun^ell of war.

Having returned to Plimmouth the seventeenth of August, with aside wind, they
even wrested themselves out of the Haven: but yet before they came in the sight
of Spain, they were dejected by another cruel tempest, the great Ship Saint
Matthew having his Mast and Saile-yard broken, shipwract* upon a rock, and the
other Ship Saint Andrew was thereby taken away from all the company. The rest
of the Navy in short time having got together again, spread their Sails in
the sight of Ast^re and G^llece; but with little good advise, according to the
opinion of the wiser sort, since such and the like vainglorious o^^entations,
were very hurtful to Drake in his two last expeditions to America; and to
Norris in his expedition to Portugal. For enemies being forewarned, are
quickly strengthened to a resistance. Near the Promo^tory of Nereus, the
Saile-yard in Rawleighs Ship by reason of the violent tempest, brake and fell
down; (...) (...) came Thomas Howard, and after persuasion* obtained the
remission of this offense; whereupon both Rawleigh, and the other Captains,
that were put out of pay, are received again into favor. Rawleigh is received
into favor.
For as Essex was of a credulous nature to believe any offense or injury
against him, so he was of as mild a nature to forgive it; but yet so, that
the enimity which was on both sides, was rather lulled a sleep for a while,
then taken for ever away.

Whilst these things are in action, the Fort against* the Town is forsaken by
the Spaniards, that lay at Garrison in it; and in it were found two English men
with their throats cut. Being sent forth to search about* and having* preyed
round about one part of the Isla^d, they return^d as they went, but after some
few days, having taken away their Ordnance, they quite demolished the Town,
and consumed it to ashes.

From thence they sailed to the Island of ^ratiosa* the Inhabitants whereof,
Gratiosa and Flores yield to Essex.
as those also of (...) referred themselves to Essex mercy, and obtained it. He
resolved to have landed at Gratiosa, and to have viewed the place well,
intending there to wait for the Ind^ Navy* But being ^^sswaded from it by
^^aue an unlucky Master of a ship* thinking that no fit ^^y for the ships, from
thence he b^nds forwards (...) St. Michaels Island. But giving command to Vere,
and Nicholas Parker; that they should lie at watch between St. George* and the
Island Gratiosa: and co^^^^ding the Earl of Southampton, and sir William
Mouns^n* to w^tch at the Western side of the Island Gratiosa with their ships*
and others other where.

But behold, not above one or two hours after tha^ the English had unwillingly
put from the Island Gratiosa ^nticed thereto by an il^ destiny* the Spanish
Naui^ from America, consisting of forty ships, seven whereof were full fraught
with treasure, arriues at the same place. And understanding that the English
were thereabouts, the Spa^iard straightway goes toward Tercera. And in the
tempestuous night lights upon Mounson, which he de^ies with his Ord^^ance shot
off: the noise whereof was heard a far off, and received with an huge
Mar^iners shout, every one prouides for battle. Mounson, Southampton, and
Vere, that were nearest to them, followed them, but leasurely and a far off,
expecting the aid of the rest. In the mean time the Spanish Navy in rank
and order came into T^rcera Haven: yet three of their ^hips (rich enough) were
surprised by the English. After this Southampton and Vere tried by bigger ^oats
to enter the Haven in the night time, and cut the Cables of the our most ships,
that the wind might drive them out into the Sea: but the Spaniards vigilance
preventing the effect of this policy, made all their labor frustrated.
Wherefore, forthwith they sent out a little Brigandine to certify Essex
thereof, undertaking themselves to keep the enemy from passing through them.
Essex within one or two days after came in with the rest of the Navy,
demanding the opinion of the Captains in this matter, what should be done.
Some Colonels and many Commanders desired to hazard the danger of so^ting upon
the Navy, and the town* all thinking it an easy matter, as Essex himself
thought also* But the Mariners thought the contrary; as also Mo^tio^^ and
Essex himself was feign to think too, after they had viewed the place a
little nearer, and saw the Navy close under the Forts, the Haven fortified
with works, situation, and a Garrison: the Ordnance every where brandishing
themselves against them; and the wind so cross, that they could not use the
benefit of wildfire.

Afterward, having knighted Rutland, Southampton, William Euers, William
B^odon, and Henry Docwray, he returned to S^. Michaels, and cast anchor, before
the chief City thereof, which they call Ci^idada* and that, being beauti^^^ to
behold, enti^ed the Soldiers very much to prey upon it. Essex quite forgetting
his authority, gets into a little Boat, to observe and view where he might get
best landing, but being hindered with the tempestuous waves, and the soldiers
that now guarded the shore, he thought it not good there to land his forces.
Wherefore he commanded Rawleigh to continue still in the Bay with his ships,
that he might keep the enemy in an expectation of his landing and coming on
shore, whilst Essex himself went, and landed elsewhere. Who landing some six
miles off at Villa Franca, Villa Franca is taken.
an handsome Town, rich in Merchandise, Wine, the herb Woad that dies blew
and corn, he took the same almost without any resistance. There he tarryed
six days, and the common Soldiers found a very good booty. Rawleigh all this
while in vain expecting them at Saint Michaels.

At which time they descried not far from St. Michaels an Indian Caracke, A
Caraque is burnt.
coming with full sail; which when by reason of shot out of a Hollander, she
perceived her enemies were near about her, violently put on shore, where
having unladen very rich Merchandise, and taken fire instead thereof, she burnt
two days. Thus envious fortune in this voyage thwarted the English designs.
And although chances fall no where more then at Sea, yet these errors in them
seemed to be willingly committed, and the frustrated enterprises proceeded from
the envious emulation whereby one would strive to steal credit from the other.

On the ninth of October, The English fleet returns.
wherein the Sea was very full of daily tempests, Essex having given notice,
commanded that they should weigh anchor, and turn home all for England.

But within a day or two after there arose a great tempest out of the North,
The Spanish Navy is dispersed.
which scattered all the ships upon the Sea, even the Spanish Navy, with all
her provision against England that lay at Feroll: but so, that neither the
English nor Spanish Navy ever came in sight of one another. Not one of the
English Navy perished in this tempest, but many of the Spanish, as they
re^ort: one of them tumbled and tossed from place to place by the tempest, at
last was driven upon Dartmouth* the Soldiers and Mariners almost starued with
hunger. These informed us that the Spaniard had (...) to s^aze upon some Port
in Cornwall, whose situation might be fittest for receiving aid from Spain,
that thereby they thought to keep the English from war, as also to hinder
their voyages into the East Indies, and Spain it self.

But so did the divine powers (that decide such controversies of war) part
the fierce quarrels between both Na^ions, that for this time both their
expectations were very much frustrated.

At length toward the end of October, came Essex home safe to England, but his
ships very weary and weather-beaten, but with a spoil of sufficient value.

Then concerning this Voyage, Contention grows betwixt Essex and Rawleigh.
many men severally spent their opinions, some out of love to Essex, some out
of ill will to Rawleigh, and the love of the Queen, whereof both of them were
very well experienced, by a strange effect increased the ill will of the people
toward the one, (which indeed a sinister opinion of his impiety much
increased) and the love of them toward the other, by reason of his
affablenes^e, and the great conceit of virtue and valor that was in him.
Certainly none could find a want, either of valor in danger, or of wisdom
in consultations, in either of them: but happy successes to either none could
assure himself of, since they depend upon the providence of the Almighty. But
certainly the enmity between Rawleigh and Essex every day grew up higher,
whilst one cast the misfortunes of the voyage upon the others negligence.

Besides, And betwixt Essex and Robert Cecill.
Essex was much grieved to see Robert Cecill the last year that was made
Secretary to the Queen, for all his opposition against him, now in his absence
to be made Chancello^r of the (...) of (...); to whom he always opposed
himself, as emulous of his wisdom, and too great a favorite of Rawleigh. But
he was further grieved to hear Charles Howard Admiral made Earl of
Nottingham, with this Testimonial in his letters of Honor.

THat he secured England from all danger of the Spanish invasion, Essex is
angry at the titles given to the Admiral.
having gotten a bra^e victory in eighty eight. That jointly with our dear
kinsman Robert Earl of Essex he had valiantly and magnanimously by open
violence taken the Island and City of Cadiz, that was strongly fortified. That
he had wholly vanquished and overthrown an entire Navy of the King of Spain,
that stood ready in the said Haven to assault the Kingdom of England.

These things Essex (who had challenged to himself all the glory thereof
before) now construed them as done in disgrace to him, and great prejudice to
his valor; especially considering that the Admiral (who being a Lord) was
behind him in honor, now by being made an Earl should have the prerogative
of superiority over him. For it was established in the times of K. Henry the
eight, that the Lord High Chamberlain of England, High Constable, the
Marshall, Admiral, and Lord High Steward, and Chamberlain, should have
pre-eminence about ^ll that were but of the same degree. Essex is made Earl
(...) Engl^^d*
But yet the Queen (which was always a favorer and an enlarger of the
dignities and honors of Essex) to qualify his distaste, and so set him before
^im again, made him Earl Marshall of England; an office which had ^aine a
sleep ever since the death of the Earl of Shrewesburie.

This year came Paulus Dzialinus Ambassador from Sigismond King of Poland, An
Ambassador from Poland.
a man of greater a^^^city then ordinarily the disposition of that Nation
atta^nes unto: from whom, when the Queen expected great acknowledgment of her
Favors, and thanksgiving for the peace wrought by her from Amurath Emperor of
the Turks, He (after he had delivered his Letters to the Queen (sitting in her
Chair of state) which the Nobles about her, and she, began to read them) in a
very unseemly and unusual manner in England, His Oration to the Queen
descends to the lower part of the Privy Chamber, and there in a loud tone
began in a Latin Oration to complain, that the privileges Prutenick, and of
the Polonians were not only much enf^inged, but even violated contrary to the
Law of Nations: in that their traffic with the Spaniard was made unlawful,
and prohibited by the Queen: and that under color of that, that the Polonian
goods were forfeited to the Queens Exchequer. Urging, that his Master could
not bear with this without complaint, in respect of the great damage which he
has sustained; as also the affinity of him and the Spaniard, and the House of
Austria. Wherefore, that (...) required of the Queen, that these things that
had been ^^ken away should be restored again; and that he might h^^^ free
traffic with the Spaniard. Which if she granted not, that his Master would
take some order to provide for the safety of his Subjects, and his own estate,
and it may (...) make those repent it that were the occasion of the first (...)
offered him.

The Queen somewhat amazed at the bold speech of (...) Ambassador, in a sober
rebuking Rhetorical answer, ^^ded him these words:

LOrd, The Queens answer.
how was I deceived? I expected an Ambassador, I found an Herold. I never
heard such an Oration all the days of my life. Neither can I sufficiently
wonder at so great (...) rashuesse: If that your King ever willed you to these
speech^s, which I much doubt of; I do therefore thin^ he did it, because,
being a young man, and not chos^^ according to the usual succession of blood,
but by election: he does not understand the affairs of Traffic, or those
businesses that have been passed, through by Us, and his Pr^decessours. For
your part, you seem to Us to be well read in many book^^, but yet to be very
shallow in Policy, or matters belonging thereto. For, for as much as you have so
often used the Law of Nations in your speech; you ought to have known that two
Kings being at war one against another, it is lawful for one side to seize
and surprise all aid and succor that is sent to the other side; because he is
bound to provide that no damage from thence come to his kingdom and
Commonwealth. This we say is agreeable to the Law of Nations, which we not
only do, but even the Kings of Poland and Sweden have done the like, in the
wars against the Muscouians. As concerning the near affinity which you boast
of between your Master and the house of Austria, you might also well remember,
that some of that Family of Austria were so near your Master, that they would
have got into his room, and got the Kingdom from him. For other matters you
shall understand what Our will and pleasure is by our Counselors. And having
spoke thus, she betook herself into her Closet.

The Ambassador in conference with some of the Queens Council (that he might
excuse himself) showed unto them his Speech written, which he said was made by
others, and delivered to him by Thelitiskius Chancellor of Sweden, Zamoske
being absent, He is answered of her Counselors.
and not knowing of it. Shortly after the Queen sent Burghley Lord Treasurer,
the Admiral, Robert Cecill, and Fortescue, of her Prluy Counsel, willing them
to certify him these things. That the privileges which have been heretofore
granted to those Cities in Poland, as also to the Hans-Townes in Germany, were
abrogated in the time of Edward the ^ixt; yet that the Queen permitted them to
traffic with the English, upon equal terms, and the like right. But that
she could not give the^ leave to traffic by a better right, unless (that
like a wicked mother) she should neglect her own Children, and make more of
strangers. That to surprise aid that goes to her enemies, is not against the
Law of Nations, since Nature her self allows that liberty, that every man
should defend himself as well as he can; and that that Law is not written, but
borne and bred in us. Besides, that in the mentioned privileges there was a
Prouiso, that those Cities should not furnish the enemies of England with any
provision, as appears in express words.

IT shall be lawful for the foresaid Merchants to carry their Merchandise
whither they will, either within Our Realm of England, or without, provided
always, that they carry them not to the Lands and Kingdoms of our manifest
and notorious enemies.

Besides all this, he was given to understand, that but lately, which was fresh
in their memories, the Kings of Poland, and Sweden, surprised and con^iscated
certain English ships, and Merchandise, only upon suspicion that they had
aided the Muscouian with provision.

The Ambassador being demanded what he could say to these things, made answer,
that he had no command to answer any thing, but to deliver his message, and
return an answer, and shortly after he was very courteously dismissed to
return home. The Merchants Adventurers are forbidden trade in Germany.


By this time the importunate supplications of the Hans-Townes to the Emperor
of Germany had so far prevailed, that by Proclamation the society of Merchant
Adventurers were forbidden all traffic in Germany, by reason, that they
traffiqued only according to the Laws of England in the Empire, and not
according to the Laws of the Empire. So that, when the Queen had long time
dealt with the Emperor by Sir John Wroth, and with the Princes of the Empire
by Stephen Lesure, for the suspention or delaying of this Proclamation, and all
was in vain; the very same day that the English Merchants were warned to
depart Germany, And the Hans-Towns in England.
she banished all the Hans-Townes men and Merchandises out of London,
commanding the Lord Major to take possession of the houses they had in the
City of London, which we call the Stiliard. And hereupon they assembled all of
the Hans-Townes at Lubecke, on purpose to hinder the traffic of the English
in Poland, and Germany, by all means.

The Queen that she might nu^lifie these malicious practices, The Embassy of
Sir George Carew into Poland.
sent Sir George Carew Master of the Chancery into Prussia, to inform the King
and States of Polonia, and the Prutenic Cities, those things which she answered
to Dzialine, the last Ambassador: as also, to certify them, that the Queen
will willingly permit them to trade into Spain, with Corn, and all kind of
Merchandise (only except warlike Munition) although both by the Civil law,
and the law of Nations, she might surprise any thing that is sent to her enemy.
Also that she was contented that the Hans-Townes should enjoy their ancient
privileges in England, upon condition, that they should acknowledge them as
her mere favors, and not as covenants lawfully and rigorously to be demanded:
for those privileges which are granted to Subjects by Princes, much more to
strangers, and forreiners, may be suspended, revoked, and quite abrogated
according to the diversity of times, the good of Commonwealths, or other the
like causes. Withal, that the Hans-Townes had had experience thereof in
Denmark, and Sweden, and in England, in the time of Edward the sixth, Philip
and Queen Mary. Besides, that the case is not all one with Cities and
Kingdoms: and that Princes ought more to have a care to protect and patronize
their own honor and Majesty, then the co^etousnesse of some Merchants.

C^rew so effectually dealt with them, Gedanenses.
that they promised not to send any of there Ambassadors to Lubecke, or to
conioyne them with the Hans-Townes in Germany. Which having effected, he passed
over into Sweden, where he met the King of Poland at Steckburge, brought into
very narrow streights by his Uncle Charles: but he wrought but little with
him; What he effected with the P^lacke.
by reason (as the King himself court^ously answered) that always it is
provided by the Laws of the Realm, that the King alone shall never enter into
covenants* or any bargains or conditions with any Forreiner. Having had other
Le^ters delivered to him by the Vice Chancellor ready sealed, he refused to
take them (the title of his (...) the Queen being not absolutely perfect and
complete on all sides) lest thereby he should seem to derogate from her
Honor: and that is indeed the ob^ect of an Ambassadors greatest care,
although in the smallest matters, as this was only in the superscription.

From thence he passed unto Elbing, And those of Elbing.
where he composed and ended many quarrels and contentions between the English
and the Citizens thereof; but this was in the next year: yet I thought it fit
to forestall the narration of it, rather then to rent his own voyage, and the
readers patience into a distraction.

This year also came Arnold Whitfield Chancellor of Denmark from Christian
the fourth King of Denmark; An Ambassador from the King of Denmark.
and with him Christian Bernick; who restored again the Carter of the Order of
St. George, wherewith the Queen had honored Frederick the Kings Father. He
requested the renewing of the ancient League between England and Denmark;
also that the Danish goods might not be surprised by the English at Sea. He
pretended that the English used Fishing at Norway and the Islands, against the
League: and also promised his Masters endeavors to reconcile the Queen and the
King of Spain. The Queen having courteously entertained them, promi^eth that
the League should be renewed the goods (if any were surprised) should be
restored, and that no more should be surprised; also, that the Fishing should
be lawfully used, according to the ancient Leagues. But concerning a peace with
the Spaniard, who had first brake it so treacherously, and especially to get it
by a third man, that should seem to procure such a commodity for her, she
thought it not to stand with her honor, nor the weal of her Kingdom: she for
her own part being sufficiently so environed by the loyalty and valor of her
own people, that she feared not any man. And last of all, would she make a
Peace, or trust to it made, since that he so maliciously at this very time did
so molest his confederate the French King with a cruel war?

For the Spaniard had now by this time (under the conduct of Ferdinand Teglio a
little Dwarf, The King of France requires succor from Elizabeth.
but of great skill and valor) taken Amiens the greatest and strongest City in
Picardy, by a warlike stratageme of ouer-turning a Cart in the Port or Gate,
and had now brought the French King to such distress, that he was feign to
entreat 4000. English to aid him from the Queen. Which indeed she denied him
not, upon this condition, that he should give them pay, when as the Navy sent
out lately to the Islands, and the Army in Ireland, had much consumed her
treasure. The King solemnly protested that he was not able to pay: and that he
might obtain them without pay, certifies the Queen, that a most commodious
peace was offered him by the Popes Nuncio, with an absolute restitution of all
the places taken in France besides Calis and Ardes, if so be he would separate
himself from the Queen, and not have League with her: and that the French
Nation begged for peace most earnestly. The Queen made answer, that she could
not believe that so great a Prince, conjoined to her by necessity, and much
benefited by her especial good will, and but lately bound by an oath, would
admit of such fair deceitful shows, to draw him from the League made
between them, and the oaths and protestations made by either parties, only
because she could not in this so great necessity help him, as otherwise she
would. And Anthony Mildmay the Leager there, very earnestly (and not without
offense to the Kings ears) expostulated with him these things: a man truly of
an open heart, and a true Englishman, who very often would accuse to their
faces the French Counselors of tergiuersation, and too much inconstancy in
their answers, and lightness too, as if they only mocked England. But shortly
afterward, when some men shrewdly hallucinated, that the purpose of the
Spaniard bended only and aimed at this mark, that having broken the League
between the French and the Queen, and retaining Calis still in his
possession, he might the easier assault England from thence. The Queen thought
good to send him over aid, and to pay the Soldiers her self, if so be he
would only war in Picardy or Britains, to remove the Spaniard farther; if so
be he would join greater forces to them, and allot the English a place of
retyring. For otherwise, by reason of her motherly love toward her Nation, she
would not send them to be butchered by the cruelty of the Spaniard, only for
the pleasure or benefit of the French. And besides, she lent him great store of
moneys, for the which (and all his debts besides) he pawned to her Calis, if so
be the Queen at her own cost and charges within a set time recovered it; and
the better to recover it, he allotted the English Boloigne for a retyring place.

But whilst these things are in action, He takes again Ami^ns.
the French reget Ami^ns from the Spaniard, after a tedious and difficult
siege. For the which (as in his Letters to the Queen dated in September
appears) he was much beholding to Baskeruile that died at the siege, and
Arth^r Savage, two worthy Commanders, and the valor of the English Nation. But
the happiness of this was much bettered by the age and necessity of the
Spaniard, The Spaniard inclines to peac^.
which creeping on him very fast, excited him continually to a desire of peace.
For when experience had well informed him, that his affairs consisted more in
report, then strength, and that all his wealth was not able to repress the
assaults of the English; that the war in the Low Countries was to be
prosecuted, and that the places which he had taken in France were also to be
defended, that he was now in a good old age, and that his strength failed him,
that his Son was but of small age, and less experience of affairs, that the
French were very famous for warlike exploits; he thought it his best course (by
the means of the Bishop of Rome, who should be as an arbitratour between
them) to treat with the French King about peace, who indeed was as desirous as
himself of it; the Spaniard adiudging it better to conclude his troubles in a
well-setled peace, then to leave them all hereditary to his Son, whose years
were too tender, to go through them with good success. And truly this peace
was shortly made between them, as we shall speak of in its proper place.

As Soon as the first suspicion of this imperfect peace came to the Queens
ears, she imagining that it was only the better to molest England and entrap
it, strengthened her self before hand, both with moneys, which she almost
lacked, and the good will and love of her people, which she much increased. For
she called a Parliament at Westminster, A Parliament.
where she made many very good and gracious Laws acceptable to the people.
Vid. Act.

The States presently after send over to congratulate the restoration of the
true Religion, and the happy administration of the Commonwealth; to
congratulate also the delivery of the Realm from the hands of bloody enemies,
the defense and protection whereby Ireland was secured, the aid and assistance
which she vouchsafed both the States and the French.

After this, that the Queen might the better be ready furnished with store of
money, the Clergy voluntarily granted her three Subsidies: and the Lay people
entreated the Queen to take of them three whole and entire Subsidies, six
Fifteenes, and Tenths. Withal requesting that the necessity of these her
occasions might not be pattern for future ages to measure their liberality by,
toward the Prince. To this Parliament was Thomas De-la-ware, The Lord La^ware
is restored to his old place.
his Father William being dead, called: who gave up his Petition to the Queen,
to entreat her to restore him again to the ancient place of the Lord
De-la-ware. The occasion was this, That his Father William, having an Uncle of
his, whose inheritance and honor he gaped after, provided poison for him; and
thereupon by the authority of the Parliament in Edward the sixth his time, he
was deprived and shut out from any honor and inheritance that might fall to
him by his Uncle. Yet for all this (although in the days of Queen Mary he
was besides condemned of treason) he was by the Queen restored to his honor
again, as if so be he had never been condemned. But, when as this Lord by the
reason of the sentence of the Parliament, could not enjoy his Grandfathers
honor, by the especial favor of the Queen, he was a new created Lord
Da-la-ware, and as long as he lived he enjoyed his place according to the time
of his creating. The Queen referred this matter to the Parliament House; who
having found that the former sentence against the former Lord, was only
personal, and not touching his progeny; and that his banishment in the time of
Queen Mary nothing hindered him from losing that honor, which he had not, and
that he was restored again shortly after; as also, that his ancient honor is
not extinguished by reason of a new creation, but only as it were lay asleep,
as long as he lived, when it was not in him, in the time of his being created,
they allotted him the place of his Ancestors, between the Lord Willoughby and
Barcley, where he was justly placed.

Also Thomas Howard the second son of the Duke of Norfolk, who but lately
before was made knight of the Garter, Thomas L. Howard of Walden.
was called to this Parliament by the title of Lord Howard of Walden; and he
being at that time sick, the Lord Scroope was brought into the upper House
between two Lords, bearing his Roll in his Parliament Robes, the King of Arms
going before him. That, when the Lord Keeper had read publicly, he was seated
below all the rest of the Lords: although that elsewhere the younger sons of
Dukes take place of Viscounts. Since (as appears in an act of the Parliament
Records) in the sixth year of Henry the eight, when Thomas Howard Earl of
Surrey being called to the Parliament, challenged to himself the place of
going or sitting before the Earls, because he was the eldest son of a Duke.
It was decreed by the Parliament, that he should sit in Parliament according to
the order of his creation; notwithstanding, that his prerogative of honor and
worth, which is due to him as the eldest son of a Duke, should be reserved to
him without the Parliament house.

This year died William Brooks Lord Cobham, The death of the Lord Cobham.
of the Order of St. George, Chamberlain to the Queen, and Constable of Dover
Castle, Governor of the Cinque Ports, and Chancellor, Henry his son begot
of Frances Newton, succeeded him.

Also there died William Powlet Marquess of Winchester the third, And William
Powlet.
more famous for his great wealth, then for any thing else, having left his
son William, which he had of Anne Howard of Effingham.

In Ireland, The L. Borough made Deputy of Ireland.
when as the affairs there were very turbulent and dangerous, for all V^ster
beyond Dundalke, besides the Garrison Castles, Newrie, Knockfergus,
Carlingford, Greene-Castle, Armach, D^ndr^m, and Oldorfleet, and almost all
Conaugh had revolted from the Queen, the Lord Deputy Russell was recalled
again, and the Lord Borough made Deputy instead of him: a man indeed of a
sharp wit and great courage, but scarce insighted into the very elements of
war; wherefore his election was beyond all men's opinion or expectation, and
more Norrises, who by his deser^s and worthy skill had assured himself
thereof. But when as he perceived that his enemies at Court much prevailed,
and his friends as fast failed; when he saw one now whom in birth he thought
himself almost equal to, and in honor and glory, by reason of his exployts,
much superior, preferred before him, and himself, which was worst, to be
commanded under his authority, to continue in the Lieutenant-ship of Mounster
(...) what with grief thereof, and discontent, that Tir-^^n by his dissembling
had mocked him, out of the judgment he was thought to have had, Norris dies
he shortly after died. A man, he was certainly of great worth, and to be
celebrated amongst the famous Captains of our Nation, in his time. He was the
second son of Henry Lord Norris, borne of the Daughter and the other heir of
the Lord Williams of Tame. He first practiced himself in war under the
Admiral Coline, in the French civil wars: afterward, (being but a young
man) he was a Captain in Ireland under Walter Earl of Essex. He was Colonel
general of the English under the States of the Low Countries; Marshall of the
Army of the States under the Earl H^h^nl^; He was President of Mounster twelve
years, although absent most part thereof; General of the auxiliary English in
Britain in France. And to conclude, he was a man of great worth, if himself
had not known it* and he was well rewarded for his worth, if his conceit had
been so humble, as not to have aspired above, if not his merits, yet his birth.

Tir-O^n now being wary enough to provide for the security of his own state,
sends his Letters to the new Deputy, and very humbly desires a truce, or a
cessation from Arms, or any kind of hostility: and it seemed (indeed) at that
time somewhat to concern the good of the Kingdom, to grant this truce,
although the Deputy himself judged it very hurtful to the State. Wherefore it
was granted for a month. When the month was expired, he assembles all his
forces to the credit of his new authority, and sets out in batta^le against the
Rebels: and being brought, if not into danger, yet either to the conceit or
fear of danger, and some streights, he opens himself a safety by valor, and
valiantly winnes by assault Black water, The Deputy winnes the Fort at
Black-water
the only Fort of the Rebels, besides the woods and bogs, whereby is the
entrance into the County of Tir-Oen: and gave the Rebels to understand how
easily they might be vanquished, if he would but insist vnpon them a little.
And now on the very same day wherein the Deputy, and all his Army were giving
thanks unto God for their late victory, there was a sudden alarm, and all
called to their arms, by reason the enemy showed himself from a Neighbor
hill. Henry Earl of Kildare with a wing of horse, and some of the Nobler sort,
voluntaries, issued forth against them, and put them to flight. Of the English
there was wanting Francis Vaughan, brother in law to the Deputy, ^. Turner
Sergeant mayor, whose deaths the Earl of Kildare took so sorrowfully, The
Earl of Kildare dies.
that within few days after he died for grief thereof.

Tir-Oen now thought his fortune and credit quite undone, unless he recovered
again the Fort at Black-water wherefore he strongly besieged it. The Rebels
besiege the Fort at Black-water.
The Deputy forthwith hasteneth thither as fast as he could, being resolved
surely to pass further into Vlster. But in his full path way to great
victories death arrested him, leaving the great desire of him to the good and
to the ^ad longer security. The Deputy dies.
Had ^e but lived (in the judgment of the wisest) he had soon weakened the
hopes of the enemy, and the matters had never come to that danger as they did.

The Rebels, hearing of the Deputies death, assault the Fort with great
clamours, and as great violence, and were drove back with as great slaughter.

They that scaled up by Ladders, were cast down headlong; and at length they
distrusting their own abilities, betake themselves to a consultation, relying
upon a persuasion, that they were furnished of provision but for few days. But
for all that the Fort was strongly maintained by the valor of Thomas Williams
the Governor, and the rest that lay in Garrison, who having suffered hunger,
the sword, and all extremities, having eat up their horses, ^ed upon the
herbs that grew upon the trenches, and endured no small misery, to enjoy
their liberty.

And now by this time, by the Queens authority from England, was the Army in
Ireland, committed to the Earl of Ormond, with the title also of Lieutenant
General of the Army. Iusticiars appointed in Ireland.
The disposing and governing of all civil matters was committed to Adam
L^fthose Archbishop of Dublin, Chancellor, and Robert Gardener, with the
titles of Justices of Ireland, which office Thomas Norrris had exercised a
month before.

Tir-Oen presently sends his long tedious Letters to the new Lieutenant,
Tir-Oen presents his grieuances to Or^^nd.
wherein he exaggerates and aggrauates all his grieuances, both old and new,
not omitting the least, that might be strercht to the name of an injury. He
poorly excuses his covenant breaking with Norris: But especially much
complains, that Feogh Mac-Hugh was even hunted to death: that his Letters to
the Queen were intercepted, and suppressed: that Impositions and Compositions
intolerable, were laid upon the Nobility and the Commons. He added besides,
that he foresaw well enough that the territories of all the Peers of Ireland
should bed divided amongst the English Councillors, the Lawyers, the Scribes,
and the Soldiers. And at the very same time, wherein he assisted with help
the Sons of Feogh Mac-Hugh to a new rebellion in Leinster, he exhibited to
the Lieutenant a most submissiue writing, humbly craves to be taken into
favor, not sticking to promise any thing whatsoever; although it was easily
perceived, and known to all men, that these rebellions were for no other end
(whatsoever else was pretended) then to dislodge the English out of Ireland.

THE ONE AND Fortieth Year OF HER REIGN.
Anno Domini 1598. 1598

IN the midst of all these Irish troubles, The King of France would mediate
peace between the Queen and the Spaniard
there came as great almost out of France too. For the French King, although
he had lately recovered Ambiane, yet being wearied with war, and the daily
requests of his Subjects, and the intercession of the Bishop of Rome, the last
year almost spent, sent over Masie to the Queen, signifying unto her that he
had had some conference with the Spanish Factors concerning a peace: but yet
that he had determined not to prosecute the matter further, till such time that
he had both her consent, and the States of the Low Countries, since that he had
made a League with them both for offense and defense. Wherefore he requested
that some might be sent over out of England, and the Low Countries, that might
consult about this matter, and hear what reasonable conditions were proposed.

The Queen to satisfy the French Kings desire, Ambassadors sent about this
business.
sent over into France, Robert Cecill Secretary to the Queen, John Herbert
Master of Requests, and Thomas Wilkes, who died presently after his arrival at
France. The States sent out to them Iustine Nassaw, and John Olden-Barneuelt;
and also to the Queen some others to dehort her from this Peace.

The English were informed by instructions before hand, to know upon what
ground the mentioned peace relied: and how far it had gone on, and whither or
no it was propounded bona fide, and not deceitfully and cunningly, as in the
Treaty at Borburgh: also to know what good security shall be given to the
States, if they should condescend to the Treaty, and also to propose the
restoring of Calis to the English, for the moneys due to the Queen, were of
greater value by much then so small a Town could counteruaile. Which the Queen
the willinglier mentioned, because the French King had intimated that this
Treaty should be for some order taking about the Treaty of Cambray Castle, in
restoring every man his own: but with this prouiso or clause added to them
also, that they should consent to nothing without the Hollanders confent also.

The King of France now was in iourny toward Britain, to recover his Province
there, for the Duke of Merc^eur, and the Spaniards agreed not well, by reason
he denied to surrender into their hands Nannetu.

After long travail, Cecill at last ouertooke them at Andes; to whom the King
having with a thankful mind acknowledged the Queens love and good will,
spoke to him to this effect.

THat although the Queen had undertaken and waged war against the Spaniard,
The King of France speaks to them.
and had had fortunate success in the same; yet for his own part, although he
was borne a Soldier, yet being a King, and having people under him, he held
it no point of Religion, to expose his faithful Subjects to the rage of war,
but rather a great sin and offense, out of an irreligious ambition, to refuss
Peace, etc.

Cecill made answer, that the Queen was not so much against peace, as he might
imagine, who now having sufficiently revenged her self upon her enemy, desires
nothing but quietly to maintain the safety of her people, and her own honor.
And then (after that) he required to be informed, what condition of peace the
Spaniard had proposed, and what order should be taken with the state of the Low
Countries, The reply of the King.
if they should not accept of it. The King in answering, acknowledged, that
indeed the Queen had endammaged the Spaniard much, but the Spaniard had as
much him; that yet now the Spaniard earnestly desired a peace, and that
thereupon he would also restore all places in France that he had taken, even
Call is again. Also assuring him, that shortly he would bring the Spaniard to
agreement both with the Queen, and the States, solemnly and publicly
protesting, that it could not be if he should refuse this peace, but France
should wrap it self again in the fire of civil war, by reason that he found
the hearts of his people so prone to a rebellion.

Whilst these things are in hand, he being careful of the maine chance,
secretly agreed upon some things concerning the peace with the Spaniard,
dealing with Albert the Archduke, till such time that some authority were
delegated from Spain, to the finishing and perfecting of the peace.

This when the Queen certainly understood, she began somewhat to expostulate
with the French King about it: but he excused himself by reason of the delay
the Queen used in sending over, Expostulations between the King and the
Queen.
and by reason of the vrgency of his necessity, and the offered opportunity,
which he could not neglect: and so as it were having somewhat else to do, he
referred the matter wholly to his Counsel.

And first of all Barneuelt lays open before them in an Oration the affairs
and estates of the Low Country, Barneuelts Oration.
which by the help of God, the favor of the Queen, were now grown to such a
perfection, that they were not only able to defend themselves, but even to
aid France, if their necessity should require their assistance. Then he shows
how earnestly the French King desired a league with them, both of Offense and
Defense, which they agreed unto, only for to pleasure the Queen, and for her
sake, being certainly persuaded that a general peace would make all sure
thence, not so much as imagining that so great a King would once so much as
think of breaking it. After this, he largely dilated upon this, to show how
far the Spaniards power to the danger both of France and her Neighbors would
extend, if so be those confederate Provinces that were rich both in Arms and
wealth, were subject unto him. Then he appeals to the Kings conscience
(before God) whither or no it were fit for a King to separate himself from
those, with whom he had so firmly conjoined himself, they offering him not
the least occasion that was thereunto, and after many reasons, whereby they
could not have peace with the Spaniard, he concluded.

THat some Kings have neglected their Covenants and Leagues, only to increase
their power, but commonly with sad success. For the affairs of Kings, unless
they originally ground upon truth and faith, cannot well consist by power.

And yet for all this, in the name of the States he propounded, that if so be
the King would not hearken to the peace, and would besiege Callis, that the
States at their own cost and charges would besiege another place, to distract
and sever the enemies forces, and to give pay to seven thousand Soldiers at
the ^iege at Callis, and to furnish five and twenty men of war with all
manner of provision, upon condition that the king would allow to the siege
three thousand Horse, six thousand foot, and six pieces of Ordnance. The
Chancellor of France indeed acknowledged these things to be worthy of
consideration, and to be signified to the King, and he promised all his
endeauours to hinder the proceedings of the peace; and yet presently after he
made answer again, that this commodious peace, France being in such a fain^ing
estate, was not only to be embraced, but even by great necessity to be snatched
by all means.

The States thus altogether refusing the peace, A difference between Cecill
and the French men.
Cecill, that had only to deal for a general peace by his Commission, could
not go on forward in the matter: but yet showed ^o the said Counselors of
France that the Queen delayed not time in sending them over unto the^, neither
that she denied their King her assistance, if so be he would have employed it
against the common enemy to the commodity of all the Confederates. He showed
also that their necessity, which they so much aggrauated beyond all belief,
was not so great, being that all France (excepct one or two Provinces) was
reduced to the Kings obedience. And concerning the embracing of opportunity
they so often spoke of, he said he would not speak, especially to those that
less esteem of their ^oyall engagement in Covenants, then of opportunities
advantage; and measure their loyal Honor by their profit; or think that the
general good consists in the thri^ing of their particular occasions.

After his long discourse conc^^ning these and the like matters, he des^red a
respite the better to consider of this business. But they not granting him so
small a courtesy* he required then to return to the Kings memory, how deeply
by vows and oaths he had engaged himself before the Earl of Shrewsbury,
after the confirmation of the League, and before it, by his ^etters, signed and
subscribed by his own hand; withal, he stuck not to say, that indeed the Queen
never miscarried in the performance of any of her Covenants, but that the King
had scarce kept any, producing thereupon the contents of the Covenants. And
then gently he put them in mind, that they would take some order how the moneys
due to the Queen might be repaied her, that had now bin taught by their King
hereafter better to look to her own estate, and not bestow her benefits and
good turns so euilly, and on ungrateful men. Yet, at length, with fair
speeches they dismissed him, and the King acknowledging the infinite courte^ies
receiuted from the hands of the Queen, promised that he would do any thing
for her sake which lay in his power.

These things the Queen took very scuruily at his hands, and forthwith she
sent Letters over to him, and Sir Thomas Edmonds her French Secretary, whereby
she gently and yet freely admonishes him to remember his word and promise; to
consider a little his conscience toward God, and his good report among the
people; wishing him to take heed, that by these fair promises, and glozing
consultations, he ens^are not himself in worse difficulties. Amongst these her
grave admonitions, would she now and then weaue in such ^linging sentences, as,

THat if there were any sin against the Holy Ghost, it was ingratitude. If
that you get any good reasonable conditions of peace from the Spaniard, you are
beholding to the English for it. Forsake not your true old friend, for your new
one is not like to him, the religion of a League, and the ^aith of Covenants,
are no where snares to entrap me^ by, but amongst wicked men. A bundle tied
fast together is not so easily broken asunder. There is no easier way of
ouercomming both, then by seuering one from another.

These things, although they were too true, yet the French King heard with
great indignation; in that he said he brake not his promise, but upon urgent
necessity; wherefore he still prosecuted the pursuit of the peace, which he
shortly after finished to the great good of France, but not without reproof of
the English Commonalty, that scourged him daily with biting sentences, and
by-words against all ungrateful Princes.

But for all that, The King of France stands sto^tly for the Queen.
the French, to make good his promise, and secure his honor, omitted not any
thing for the perfecting a peace also between England and Spain. To which
purpose, he dealt with the Arch Duke about a Truce for some months,
endeavoring in the mean time for to persuade the Queen thereto, as also,
that thereby, as before he had been a trouble unto her, now he would be a
sure Fortress unto her; The treaty at V^r^ins.
and that he would never forsake her, his well deserving Sister. And certainly
he stood much for the Queen at the Treaty at Veruins, about the peace: for the
French made reckoning of her before all, after that once there arose a
contention about the more honorable place aamong the Delegates on both sides.
And concerning this controversy, I will use a small digression, from the own
handwriting of the Delegates to the Arch Duke, which I have seen, to speak
of some things, which hereafter may by chance benefit posterity. The French men
according to the sentence given by Pius the fourth, challenged stiffly the upper
place to themselves. The order of the session amongst the Delegates.
The Spanish side would not admit thereof, as being rejected by the King of
Spain; thinking it also now a great prejudice to their honor, if that* if
only but by reason they were but guests among them, the chief place were not
granted to them; by reason that they came to a town of the French Kingdom;
which they would never have done, had it not been to show their obseruancy and
respect to the Bishop of Rome and the Legate that represents him. At length the
Popes Legates much striving in the matter, it was agreed upon, that he should
sit at the upper end of the board, and the Popes Nuncio should sit by him on
the right hand: then this choice was given to the French whither or no they
would sit nearest the Nuncio on the right hand, or the Legate on the left. The
French they chose the left, as nearest to the Legate. The Spanish side
willingly took the right hand, because they thought it the best, and because
the Nuncio was none of the number of the Delegates: and thereby they thought
they sufficiently maintained the honor of their King. For if so be, that
Caligarton, the General of the Franciscan Friars (who had chosen the lowest
part of the board out of his humility, the badge of his profession) who took
great pains in this business, had been preferred before them, and set on the
lefthand nearest to the Legate, they had determined to protest publicly and
aloud, that they knew well enough the place fitting for a Catholic King;
also, that they would def^nd the same, if they had been delegated from the
Catholic King: but since they were only Delegates for the Archduke, who
would not equal himself with the most Christian King of France, and that
since in their Letters of Protection, which they have received from the most
Christian King, they were only styled the Delegates for the Archduke, they
said, they would willingly give place to the French. For the Spaniard
prouidently careful to maintain his own honor, had resigned authority over
to the Archduke, whereby he might delegate others for the matter; that so the
Spaniard himself might not immediately come to contend with the French for
superiority, which was worse for him to maintain then a war.

As Soon as the business was composed, and the Charters of the Delegation on
both sides exhibited, The French have a respect of the Queen.
the French took it very ^einously, that in that of the Archdukes there was
no mention of the Queen of England, b^ing that there was of the Duke of Sauoy.
And the answer was, that she was comprehended under the number of confederates:
but, when this little contented the French, they were feign to pretend this
reason, that she was always an enemy to the King of Spain, and that even at
this present time she did molest him with a Navy. And yet all their pretenses
could not quiet the French, till such times as they passed their faith that the
Spaniard should try to make peace with her, if she gave but any hopes thereof
unto him.

The French King, The Elogie of Henry the 4 out of Ianine.
having how concluded this Peace, although he was most famous for warlike
glory, yet now settled all his desires upon quietness, whereby he so rowzed up
the affairs of France, which had been for many years overwhelmed in civil
wars, both by assisting the Roman Religion, and the Reformed; by restoring
ancient rightes, by fostering of good learning, by recalling Traffiques, and by
adorning the Kingdom with stately edifices, that he far surpassed all the
Kings of France before him, as in misery lately, so now in glory: insomuch that
he bare the name of Henry the great.

The Queen now more inwardly having a care of her own estate, The Queen has
a car^ of her own estate.
sent Sir Francis Vere over to the States, to know of them whither or no they
would cond^scend to a Treaty with Spain; if not, what they would bestow on the
war; also, earnestly to deal with them to repay those moneys, and charges, A
disceptation of peace with the Spaniard.
which she had been at for their sakes. And in the mean time there was great
disceptation in England, whither or no, to conclude a peace with the Spaniard
were commodious either to the Queen, or the Realm. They that were desirous of
peace used these and the like persuasions thereto.

First, That a peace (besides that, that it is both pleasant and wholesome)
would now take away that aspersion that is cast upon the English, For peace.
as disturbers of the whole world, as if so be that they thought themselves
happy in other men's calamities, and secure by others dangers.

Secondly, That the Queen would be thereby more secure from foreign
practices.

Thirdly, That an end of the cost and charges of war against the Spaniard and
Arch^Duke would be thereby made.

Fourthly, That the rebellion in Ireland, would soon be lulled asleep, when
they should once perceive no help would come to them out of Spain.

Fifthly, That Traffiques would be better and oftener used to the profit of
Prince and people.

Sixthly, That Spain, that lately was so fruitful to the English Merchants,
would be open again to them, where they might exchange away Corn for Gold and
Silver.

Seventhly, That thereby the Emperors Proclamation against English Merchants
would be revoked.

Eighthly, That the danger of tumults at home, and often taxes, tributes, and
pressing of Soldiers, would be thereby taken away.

Ninthly, That the League of Burgundy would be renewed.

Tenthly, That they need fear nothing then from the French.

Eleauenthly, That England might take breath thereby, and heap wealth together
against future fortunes.

Twelfthly, That thereby the credit and estimation of the Queen would be well
provided for, in that she in An. 1585. when the States offered her the dominion
of the Low Countries, publicly (and in print) protested, that by ayding the
Low Countrymen, she meant nothing but their liberty, and the peace and
security of England. For, if so be that then it seemed great wisdom (as the
times then were) to a^^ist them: and great equity to refuse the dominion and
government of so many Provinces for the bearing of her charges in the war;
certainly, now would it seem great indiscretion to pursue war when that
peace is offered on the one side by the Spaniard, and nothing by them that so
greatly desire the war.

Besides, that these things ought to be considered, whither or no England were
of sufficiency enough to wage war in Ireland, the Low Countries, and
elsewhere against Spain. Then, whither or no, by this nourishing of a war,
there would be hope of bringing the Spaniard to better and more reasonable
articles and conditions then now were proposed; and that then it was most
exactly to be considered, since without doubt it was most convenient for the
English to have an offensive war (for woe to them that defend at home) in
what place they should have it; whither or no, in the Sea coasts of Spain, or
Portugal; and then, that indeed the Towns therein might be taken and
ransacked with easy pains, but not be retained, but with great charges, and
no profit; or, then whither or no, in the Azores; and, that then they truly
might be brought under the Queens power, to the Spaniards great loss for the
time, but not continued therein without greater cost and charges; or, then
whither or no, in America; then, that there were ships every where ready
furnished, and disposed about the Sea; that the Sea coasts were better
fortified with Garrisons then they we^e wont to be, and that not a ^ot of Gold,
Silver, Pearls, or precious Stones, could be expected there, without great
danger; that those Regions are stuffed with well fortified Cities, every one
whereof would hold out a long siege; and then, that the States were so weak
for assistance, that with the aid of England too they could only wage a
defensive war, till such time as the Spaniard turned from them to France;
lastly, that the old axiom of policy was not to be neglected, Who are equally
able to wage war, let them make peace; who are not, let them never. Then were
produced the sad examples of the Athenians, and others, that refused peace when
it was offered.

Some added, but out of an ill will and hate to the men, that the States, what
color soever and mask of defending liberty and Religion they put on, yet had
they taken away the piety of true Religion, by suffering any but the Romish.
That they did nothing but what they could to further and increase their own
commodity, by imposing heavy tributes and toles for provision, by
counterfeiting moneys, by increasing the value of them at their pleasure, and
many the like tricks, whereby also, in this war, they would cunningly
nourish it, and grow rich by it, when other Nations impouerish themselves
thereby. Besides, that by their Monopolies granted, almost every where, they
have spoiled the good use of Trading, that being Democraticall governors, they
extremely hated Monarchies. That they had drove away all of the Nobility from
amongst them, besides one or two, that stood them in steed in the wars; and,
that most certainly they intended nothing else, but (to an ill example against
all Princes) as the Switsers against the Habspurge Family, so they against the
Family of Austria, Against the peace.
that is the same. They who were against the peace persuaded themselves with
these and the like arguments.

First, That out of a peace the Spaniard would heap up to himself such
infinite store of wealth, that if perchance he should afterward break out
into a war, he would be too strong for all his neighbors.

Secondly, That a true and solid peace cannot be had, but by the dispensation
of the Bishop of Rome, since the Spaniard heretofore in 78. only mocked them
at Bourburgh, and thought that no faith was to be kept with Heretics and
excommunicated men.

Thirdly, That the Spaniard is of such a nature that he never can digest an
offered injury, but boyles continually for a revenge.

Fourthly, That thereby the Queen must forsake both the States of Holland and
Zeland, and also lose all her moneys laid out for their wars, except she
would offer to deliver those Towns that were pawned to her, into the hands of
the enemy, that the one would be a disgrace to her, the other a damage.

Fifthly, That the States being forsaken of the Queen, must needs be reduced to
the Spaniards government, and that thereby he will be more apt and ready to
invade England; also, that those Regions are the most fit places of war
against his Neighbor Kingdoms, for to constitute his Spanish universal
Monarchy, that can be.

Sixthly, Grant that it is very hard to wage an offensive war in Holland, that
it is dangerous and doubtful at the Islands Azores, that it is fruitless in
the coasts fo Spain and Portugal, and that it is very chargeable in all, yet
would war very compendiously and profitably be made in America, which being a
vast Country is peopled by the Spaniard so scarcely, and one place so far off
from another, that they cannot possibly help one another. So that if so be a
perfect entire Army of ten thousand English were sent out thither, having all
determination to inhabit there, under any expert Commander, it could not be
doubted, but that Carthagenian Castilla Aurea, Ciagre the River, that is
portable of little Vessels as far as Panama, and Panama it self, and Puert^
Bella, would be all taken by assault, and consequently the wealth which by
these places is sent to Spain from Peru, and Castilla Aurea, would be
surprised, or else detained there still. That hereby the Spaniards traffic
would be stop^ and bard up, and the Custom much diminished to the great loss
and damage of the King, and that there is no fear of the Americans, that are
by nature ^lothfull, and effeminate, by reason of the pleasant air, much less
of the Spaniards that shall be sent thither, who being wearied with the long
voyage, and a diseased stomach, will find it a hard matter to dislodge the
old weather-beaten English out of their well fortified Forts. That they need
not also fear supply of Victuals, or warlike Munition, which would be as
easily conu^ied out of England as Spain. For as soon as once it shall be
blazed about that they have come to inhabit there, all kind of people will
flock thither with necessaries, to trade with them, especially since those of
Europe have nothing more greatly desired, then to have their Traffic free in
America. And then, concerning the religion of the States, and the Monopolies,
they say, that they were bare cal^mnies of those that hated the reformed
Religion; affirming, that the States did live very religiously in that
Christian liberty, as their Grandfathers have done, and that they believed all
fundamental points alike with the Reformed Churches of all the Christian
world; that for other indifferent matters there ought to be respect had to the
time, which might very well tolerate them, seeing that in the Primitive Church,
the Tares were even suffered to grow up with the Corn. Concerning other
particular objections against the States, they answered, that a particular
offense ought not to be made Epidemicall, and ascribed to the whole Nation; and
that there was wickedness even in the Angels of God, and chiefest Apostles.
Lastly, that we ought not to envy or speak ill of a Commonwealth, that is
industrious and sparing, if she have that great happiness, as to grow rich by
war.

They that were for the peace, The reply for the peace.
endeavored to refell these arguments by these reasons, that the Queen also
and States might as well heap riches by this peace, and as valiantly provide
themselves for Defense, as the Spaniard can for Offense. That now they might
look for a true and solid peace from him, who having sustained greater
damages, may now at length learn how much he is mistaken by pursuing his
wars in the administration of the Low Country Commonwealth. That peace with
the Dukes of Burgundy, and the Kings of Castile, the Spaniards Ancestors, was
always very sound and solid, and if ever any was, healthful to England.
Grant it, that the Spaniard treatied not for a peace at Bourburgh, which would
not seem honorable for his affairs; yet would it not hurt us, although we
are ready to fight, to treat now about it. That peace was always kept with
Heretics by Popish Princes, excepting only the Pope, ancient examples
sufficiently testify; as of Charles the fifth, and his successor in the
Empire, who always kept their words with the excommunicated Protestants of
Germany, although they esteemed them as Heretics. Of Francis the first King
of France, who performed Fu^erall rites for Henry the eight of England, at
Paris, although before he had been excommunicated by the Pope. Also of Henry
the fourth now King of France, who having been reconciled to the Pope, and
surnamed the eldest son of the Church, and his dearest Son; yet he entered
into both an Offensive and Defensive League with the Queen of England. That
the Spaniards heat of revenge will be quickly cooled, when his strength and
forces shall fail him. That the Queen might justly forsake the States, being
she only bound her self to aid them till such times as the Spaniard would
propose equal conditions, and a reasonable peace for their liberty; which
conditons if they refuse, she is not bound to aid them. That it is not fit for
to give to them again those Towns which are pawned to her, which they in
reason cannot require. And that once if there were a peace concluded, there
would be a speedy course taken for recovery of her moneys. That the States
could not be so easily reduced under the Spaniard again, being that in tract
of time many things fall out unexpectedly; and if so be they were peaceably
reduced, they could take no better care for themselves, then that, except they
would resist their best commodity and profit. But howsoever, whatsoever became
of them, England and France conjoined in a solid and firm league, would
easily poise Spain between them. Lastly, they derived their reasons for peace
from the very Law of Nature, which chiefly intends the conservation of it
self; and from the Law of Nations, which commands the highest Law to be the
safety of the people; and lastly, from the piety of true Christianity, that
they might spare blood, and confirm the Christian affairs against the
Infidels.

The reasons for the war against this peace, were deduced only from humane
policy, to drive away dangers farther off; which indeed were better to be left
to Gods disposing, who would direct their counsels and consultations always to
the public good, by means which might be used with a good conscience, and not
by wars, which are never commendable, but when they are necessary. And thus
have we heard the matter on both sides largely enough discussed.

Burghley Lord Treasurer, weighing well what we have said, Burghley for the
peace.
inclined to the peace, by reason he knew the hazard of war to be doubtful,
and yet of infinite charges, he knew the Treasure of the Exchequer was much
impaired; also, that the disposition of the English were very prone to
sedition, if so be they were once taxed a little more then ordinarily; he knew
also, the inbred malic of the Commonalty against some of the Nobility, and the
poor hopes that were from Holland; that our Neighbors were suspicious to
trust to on every side; and that our own people were hardly loyal enough at
home; also, that the wealth of the Spaniard was inexhaustible; wherefore he
concluded, that by this war there could redound nothing to England, but the
turning away of evil, which was but the smallest good that could be.

Essex Essex against the peace.
on the other side, being bred up in Military affairs, not allowing talk of
this peace, argues for the war, resolutely urging it, out of the cunning
sleights of the Spaniard, his desire of the universal Monarchy, and his
in^eterate hate against the Queen, and all England, the diversity of his
religion, and the Axiom, that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, the
power of the Pope to dispense with him, if he break the peace, with many the
like reasons; insomuch that Burghley said, he nothing but breathed war, and
out of a strange presaging mind, giving him the Psalm book, secretly light
upon this verse:

Bloodthirsty men shall not live out half their days.

Yet were there many that honored much the spirit of Essex, as one that
greatly aimed at the honor and security of his Country. But on the other
side, many also that whispered it to be for nothing but to fulfill his
ambition, and serve his own turn. But Essex Essex writes his Apology.
having understood of these calumnies, writes his Apology, wherein he
amplifies himself in this matter; and besides shows, that Anthony Rolsto^ ^n
English runaway, had bin lately sent over by the Spanish ^^ction, and Creswell
a Jesuit, under the color of reconciliation and peace; but in truth and deed
(as he did confess himself) to epsy what provision there was for war, to
confirm the Papists, and both by moneys and promises to seduce from their
loyalty any of the Nobility, and the Earl of Essex by name.

Concerning this business of peace, and the choosing of one fit to look into
the affairs of Ireland, there was a great contention between Essex and the
Queen, Contention between Essex and the Queen.
no man being present but the Admiral, Cecill the Secretary, and Wi^deba^cke
Keeper of the Seal. The Queen she adjudged William Knolles Uncle to the Earl
of Essex most fit to be ^ent into Ireland: Essex, to remove him from the Court,
very stoutly affirmed that George Carew was far fitter. Which when he could
not effect, or persuade the Queen to, being too much unmindful of his duty,
very uncivilly, as out of contempt, he turns his back to the Queen, in a
manner scoffing at her. The Queen grown very impatient thereupon, gave him a
box on the ear, and bid him be gone with a vengeance. He bears himself
toward her with too little reverence.
He forthwith lays his hand upon his pummell: the Admiral stepping into him,
he vowed and swore that he would not put up so great an indignity, nay that he
could not, even at Henry the 8ths hand, and forthwith in a chafe flew from the
Court. And afterward being admonished by the Lord Keeper of the great Seal,
in very grave Letters, that he would supplicate to the Queens mercy, and give
place to time: that he would remember that of Seneca, That if the Law punish a
man justly, he must give way to Justice; if unjustly, he must give way to his
Fortune. That if he had justly done wrong to his Prince, he could not give her
any satisfaction; and if the Prince had done him any wrong, that both his
discretion, duty, and religion would command him to submit himself to so good
a Queen, seeing that between a Prince and a Subject there is no proportion.
Essex answered all this at length, very stomackfully, (his answer being
afterward advisedly diuulged about by his followers) appealing from the Queen
to God Almighty, riuetting into his discourse these, and the like sentences:

THat no tempest rages more then the indignation of a weak Prince. He answers
with indignation to this counsel.
That the heart of the Queen is hardened. I know what I have to do, as I am a
Subject; and what as I am an Earl, and Marshall of England* I cannot live like
a servant, and a bond-slaue. If I should confess my self guilty, I should
both iniure truth, and God the author of truth. I have received a dart in my
whole body. It is absolutely a sin to serve after the receipt of so great a
disgrace. Cannot Princes err? cannot they iniure their Subjects? Is their
earthly power infinite? It Is the fool in Solomon, that being struck, laughes.
They that receive benefit by the errors of Princes, let them bear the injuries
of Princes. Let them think the Queens power infinite, who believed that God
is not omnipotent. As for my part, I being rent in pieces with injuries, have
long e^ough within my breast endured the bitterness thereof.

But yet for all this, a little while after, being more submisse, he was
pardoned, and received into favor by the Queen, whose greatest anger at any
offense could never be stretched to a just hatred, except only of the offense.
Bu^ here his Friends and Favorers greatly began to fear a r^ine, who have
observed, that Fortune very seldom in reconciled with one whom she has cast
out of her care; and that Princes are a great deal seldomer, especially to
those, whom they themselves have been thought to have offended and injured.

About this time died William Cecill Lord Burghley, Cecill Lord Burghley dies
the 4. of August, in the 77. year of his age.
Treasurer of England; who being sorely troubled with grief of mind, and the
Gout too, sent his Letters to the Queen, earnestly beseeching her, that he
might lay aside the burden of his Offices. The Queen presently upon it came
and visited him, and comforted him very much: but within few days after,
having lived long enough to Nature, and famous enough to Glory, but only not
long enough to his Country, he so quietly gave up the ghost, that his greatest
enemy could confess, that he hated nothing more, or envied any thing like to
such a death in so great honor, seeing that ordinarily the ends and
Catastrophes of the Administratours of such great affairs as he did, are both
sad, and sometimes sudden.

Certainly he was an excellent man, whom (besides his venerable countenance,
and comely visage) nature made, and learning perfected to a great fame of
honesty, gravity, temperance, industry, and justice. Besides these, he was a
wondrous well-spoken man in his curious language; which neither was any way
affected, but plain and easy. His wisdom was strengthened by long
experience, and seasoned with great moderation. His faith and loyalty well
approved, and his religious piety above all, most to be commended. To speak
all in a word, the Queen was most happy in such a Counselor; and England
will be beholding to his counsel for ever. His Nativity and kindred.
If at any time it shall concern posterity to know his birth, he was borne at
Burn in Lincoln shire in 1521. His Father was Richard Cecill Master of the
Wardrope to Henry the eight; his Mother Jane, the Heir to the Family of
Ekinton, Education.
and the Walcots. He, when he was a young man was student in St. John's College
at Cambridge, where at the age of twenty years he took to wife Marie the
Sister of John Cheek, a very learned man, who within one or two years after
died. Afterward having been a Student at Law in Graies Inn at London, he
married Mildred a good Grecian and Latinist, the Daughter of Anthony Coke
Informer to Edward the sixth. Master of Requests.
Having got into the house of the Duke of Somerset, Protector of the Realm, he
was under him made Master of Requests, (being the first in England, as I have
heard of himself) that ever used that Title. Afterward, Secretary to K.
Edward.
he became Secretary to Edward the sixth, and by him knighted. He found some
favor with Queen Mary, but greater with Cardinal Poole, Tunstall, and
William Petra, for his wisdom: the resson of his favor with Mary, was in
that, (although he with the rest subscribed) he most opposed that
counterfeited pretense to Edwards kingdom, whereby both Mary and Elizabeth
were excluded from any right thereto; But yet afterward, being a very
religious Protestant, He betakes himself to the service of Elizabeth.
(although he served the times a little) when he perceived that his religion
lay as a block in his way to all promotion, he betook himself to the service
of Elizabeth; she used his pains much in her affairs whatsoever. Afterward
she made him one of her Privy Council, and in the third year of her Rai^ne,
after the death of Sir Thomas Parry, made him Master of the Wards: which Office
he so well performed, prouidently to the good of the Orphans, moderately to his
own good, and liberally to the good of his Friends, Kindred, and followers,
without any injuries, that the Queen admiring his discretion, committed the
government of all unto him in a manner. But, as his power and favor with the
Queen increased with him, so did hatred and envy in many of the Nobility
against him; but yet so, that (as he was wont to say) he over came it with
patience more then frowardness. He is made Baron and Tr^asurer of England
1571. and Knight of the Garter. 1584.
Afterward, the Queen having well approved his wisdom and loialty this
thirteen years, bestowed on him the title of Lord Burghley, and Lord high
Treasurer of England. In which Office, always hating those base tricks of
heaping money together, as he increased the public good, so also his own
private estate by his pains and parsimonie. He was very unwilling to have any
thing spent, unless for the honor of the Queen, the defense of the Kingdom,
or the aid of our Neighbors. He narrowly looked into, although not with the
eyes of security, yet of equity, the affairs of the Custom House* and the
Tole takers that belong thereto. He would profess that he never liked that
the Exchequer should like the Spleen increase continually, and the rest of the
members wither and fade away: and truly, he strongly endeavored that the
Prince might not grow rich by the peoples misery of taxation, but that both the
one and the other might want nothing. He would often say, that nothing was
profitable to the Prince, that was not honorable for her also to do: and
hereupon he would not suffer the Reuenews of her Lands to be increased, or the
old Tenants removed, or Farmers put out. As for his private estate, he so well
managed it, that neither he ever went to Law with any man, or any man with him.
Of his former wife Mary Cheek begot he Thomas now Earl of Exeter, His Issue.
very fruitful in his issue. Of his second wife Mildred Coke he begat Robert
Earl of Salisbury, his successor in the greatest Offices of the Kingdom,
with the like happiness: besides two Daughters that died before himself, Anne
Countess of Oxford (who had three Daughters, Elizabeth married to William
Earl of Darby, Bridget married to the Lord Norris, and Susan to the Earl of
Mountgomery,) and Elizabeth the wife of William Wentworth, that died without
issue. The Overseers of his Will, were Gabriel Goodman, Deane of Westminster,
an upright man, and Thomas Bellot Steward of his Household, to whom he left
great sums of money to be bestowed upon pious uses, which was done
accordingly.

Although the earnest desire which Burghely had of peace, effected not the
same, yet it greatly eased the costs and charges of the war; for in the time
of sickness the States sent over I. Duuenword Admiral of Holland, I.
Oldenbarneuelt Keeper of the Seal, to whom they joined Natales Carrone their
Agent here in England; and all they preferring war before peace, agreed upon
these conditions in August, which Sir Thomas Egerton Lord Keeper, Essex the
Admiral, George Lord Hunsdon, Buckhurst, Knolles, Cecill and Fortesc^e
Delegated by the Queen.

First, A new agreement with the States.
That the League made in 1585. except only some Articles concerning the
administration of their Kingdom, should be still in force and virtue.

Secondly, That the States of the united Provinces should pay the Queen
800000. pounds of good money of England, viz. as long as the war lasted
against the common enemy 30. thousand pounds yearly, till such time as they
had paid 400. thousand pounds. But if so be the peace were concluded by the
Queen and Spaniard, of that which remained they should pay twenty thousand
pounds a year, till they had paid eight hundred thousand pounds.

Thirdly, That the States should pay one thousand, one hundred and fifty
English men at Garrison in Flushing, Brill, and the adjoining Forts thereto.

Fourthly, That they should press English Soldiers under English Leaders,
which they should give pay to.

Fifthly, If it should chance that the Spaniard should invade England, the Isle
of Wight, Garnsey, Iarsey, or the Sillin Islands, that the States should aid
England with five thousand foot, and five hundred horse.

Sixthly, That if so be England furnished a Navy out against Spain, that the
States should join ship for ship thereto. As also, if that any forces of the
English were sent over into Flanders, or Br^bant, that they should join just
as many, and as much provision.

Lastly, That for the moneys that are due to Pallauicine, from the Queen,
which she borrowed for them, the Queen should write to the Provinces of
Brabant, and Flanders, and the rest that are out of the Leagues.

By these Covenants was the Queen eased of infinite charges, who every year
was at more or less then twenty thousand pounds charges with them, which now
she was eased of by the discretion of Burghley, and the care of Sir Thomas
Bodley, and George Gilpine, who succeeded him in the Council for the States:
Bodleyes Library.
For Bodley being now eased of these troublesome affairs, wholly commended
himself to the care and provision for good learning, worthy indeed the care of
the greatest King; for he began to restore the public Library at Oxford, first
instituted by Humphrey Duke of Gloucester; but afterward, in the days of
Edward the sixth, robbed of all the Books almost. This Library he having bought
with his money, and other men's benevolence, the choicest Books that were, so
furnished it with them; and dying, left such revenues to it, that he is worthy
to be celebrated eternally, and live as long as Learning.

Whilst these businesses are in hand between England and the States, the
Queen sends into Denmark, the Lord Zouch, and Christopher Perkins, to
congratulate with him, his marriage with the Daughter of the Prince Elector of
Brandenburgh. Where with much difficul^y they regained the payment back of
thirty thousand Dollers for Merchandises, Contention between the Danes and the
English.
which the Danish had laid hands upon, that were worth an hundred thousand
Dollers.

And about this time also Philip the King of Spain made sure his Daughter
Isabell to Albert Cardinal of Austria, and with her as a Dowry, he bequeathed
to him the Provinces of the Low Countries, and the County of Burgundy.
Whereupon the Cardinal, having duly sent back to Rome his Cardinals Cap, and
his consecrated Sword being received of the Pope, he makes haste into Spain.

But in the mean time the King of Spain above seventy years of age, Philip
King of Spain died in the seventy first year of his age.
in September departed this troublesome life, with great patience. A Prince he
was certainly, whose Dominion extended so far and near, beyond all the
Emperors, that he might truly say in his Motto, Sol mihi semper lucet, the
Sun, etc. he achieved great wisdom from his fathers counsel, which he
improued with long experience in the affairs of this world: but commonly, as
he managed many wars, so was he unfortunate in most of them, for the most
part, by reason that he himself being of a mild weak nature, was governed by
others wary counsels, and his wars followed by them, and not by himself.
Whereupon it came to pass that the three keys of the Spanish Empire The three
keys of the Spanish Empire.
(which his Father so called, and willed him before all things to keep
diligently) to wit, first Gulet in Africa, Flushing in Holland, and Gadez in
Spain, were neglected. The first taken in by the Turks, the second by the Low
Country confederates of the united Provinces, and the third much impaired, and
its strength much impouerished by the courage of the English; not so much to
the loss, as disgrace of so great a King: which it is likely his Father
foreseeing in his life time, is reported to have admonished him to make peace
with the English, and the States of the Low Countries.

And even much about this time George Clifford Ear^e of Cumberland returned
home into England, The Earl of Cumberland returned into England.
who had at his proper cost and charges furnished a Navy of eleven ships, to
surprise some Portugal Caracks, that set forth from the River Tagus, to the
East Indies. But it being heard that he houered about the costs of Portugal,
the Caracks tarried so long under Saint I^lians Fort, furnished with a hundred
great Pieces of Ordnance, that they lost the opportunity of that years voyage.
Wherefore the Earl, he bends his course toward the Canary Island; and having
taken and ransackt Lancerata and the town, after that, he landed at Boriquene;
and setting his troops in order, he assaulted Porto Ric^, He took Porto
Rico.
and having taken by force one or two Forts; he at last got the town, not
losing hardly thirty of his men in the skirmish: although there were three or
four hundred soldiers at Garrison, besides the Townsmen. And here the Earl
determined to seat all his war, by reason that it was such a fit place, that
it was called by the Spaniard the Key of America: wherefore he removed all the
Inhabitants, although for ransom of that place, they offered great store of
Merchandise, and Gold, and Silver. But the bloody (...), and the griping in the
belly did so rage amongst the English, that in forty days (for so long he
continued there) it consumed away seven hundred, which compelled him
necessarily to return home again, with great spoils, but greater victory:
yet in his spoils having some threescore pieces of Ordnance of Brass.
Certainly, this voyage was occasion of great damage done to the Spaniard, by
reason that this year neither the Carackes set forth for the East Indie, nor
the American Navy returned home to Spain.

About this time also Edward Squire was called into question, a base fellow,
and one that had been a common base Scriuener: afterward having gotten some
office in the Queens Stables; and after that served under Drake in his last
voyage, taken in the little ship that was then surprised by the Spaniard, he
was carried into Spain, and there at last came unto the knowledge of Walpole
an English Jesuit; he quickly caused him to be brought into the Inquisition,
as one that was an Heretic: and at length, by continuance of punishments,
drew the fellow to the faith of the Romish religion. Afterward he dealt with
him to try if that he would dare to do any thing for his Religions sake, that
he might be sure he truly professed it: and afterward, after many courses of
words, (as Squire himself confessed) he taught him indeed, that to take the
Earl of Essex away, was a meritorious act, but that it was far more
necessary to take away the Queens life. Then he showed what an easy matter it
was, and as well done as conceived, and as free from sin in doing, so from
danger after it is done, if it were, but by besmearing the pummell of the
Queens Saddle with poison, where she should lay her hand when she takes horse.

At length Squire having condiscended to this villainy, the Jesuit bound him by
diverse solemn vows, under pain of damnation to keep it secretly, and to do
it. So that Squire being now instructed to this villainy, and laden with the
promises of everlasting life, took his blessing from him, and the poison; and
withal took order, that he and another should be sent over into England,
concerning the ransoming of the Spanish Captives in England, that thereby no
suspicion might be had of him, by reason of his return from Spain.

This Squire, after his return a little into England, bedawb'd the Queens
pummell of her Saddle with poison, seeming to do somewhat else, and praying
with a loud voice for good success: but by Gods mercy the poison lost his
nature, as well as Squire his loyalty, and had no power to hurt the Queen.

After all this he went for a Soldier with the Earl of Essex to the Island of
Azores, and went with him in the same ship, to avoid all suspicion, besmearing
also the Earls chair with poison, which took no effect against the Earls
life. Afterward returning into England, he began to live securely, not
suspecting that his Confessor Walpole would ever reveal him. But it seems
Walpole either taking it very ill that this matter took no effect, or else
suspecting that Squire tri^^ed out all his vows, and mocked him; he wholly
bends himself for a revenge. Certainly, there was one sent over into England,
that generally accused Squire of such an intended mischief: which being of
such a great moment, Squire being hereupon examined, at the first denied it;
and afterward, being more narrowly demanded in some circumstances, and
suspecting that now his Confessor had not dealt honestly with him, he
confessed all concerning Walpoles proposals, and his consent, and about the
poison laid to the Queens Saddle. But at the judgment seat, and afterward at
the gallows, he professed, that although he was suborned to this villainy by
Walpole, and others, that yet he never resolved with all his heart to do it.
After his death, Walpole (or one under his name) set forth a book, wherein he
forswore and bitterly detested all these things which Squire confessed. But
howsoever some of our English run^ awayes have been too much learned, to the
destruction of many men, and their own great disgrace; for they have nourished
this dangerous opinion, that to murder excommunicated Princes is nothing else,
but to root out Tares out of the Lords Garden.

Much about this time were some idle busybodies, R^mors scattered against the
King of Scots.
whose only business was to stir where there was a calm, much employed to
breed debate between the Queen and the King of Scotland, who scattered rumors
that he too much favored the Papists, and was too much estranged of late from
the Queen. And to give some credit to this report, there was showed her
Letters sent to the Pope of Rome, indicted by the vi^lany of the Kings
Secretary, and counterfeitly subscribed by the Kings hand and Seal. But the
Queen, not giving credit to all this report, and their confirmation of it,
rejected these things, as all nothing but devices of wicked men, to estrange
the affections of all Protestants from him, and to reconcile the Papists to
him. Nay, when as this Valentine Thomas By Valenti^e Thomas.
a notorious villain, and now condemned for theft, required that he might be
heard speak a little of a matter of great moment; and being set by to speak,
accused the King of Scotland, as ill affected toward the Queen, the Queen
was so far from giving heed to these whisperings, that she the more loathed
this villainous wretch, only accounting him a wicked calumniator, or hired by
some to say so, to trouble the King of Scotland and her self; or at the best,
as one that devised such a lie, thereby thinking to save his life. Yet
notwithstanding, she commanded the matter to be kept secretly, and the
villains life to be repriued a while, lest thereby any blemish might be cast
upon the king of Scotlands honor.

Besides the Queen (in the height of these rumors of the King of Scotland)
sent to the King, admonishing him seriously to consider these things.

Whether there were any besides her that could do him more good or more hurt
then she could. The Queens admonition to Thomas.
Whether he knew any that had been more well-willing to him. Whether any one
expected less from him then she did, who indeed desired nothing else, then
that he would promote the glory God, and not be wanting to himself.

Neither indeed was the king any way defective. For to disperse the rumor that
was raised of him, he caused many men over England and Ireland to preach his
constancy in Religion, his wisdom, his justice, his mercy, and the rest of
his Princely virtues; Books written on the King of Scots behalf.
thereby to draw the minds of the Commonalty to a better persuasion of him.
There were also books written and dispersed, that maintained his right of
succession to the Realm of England; also to inform them, that the admittance
of him would be beneficial to both Kingdoms, and far more good then any
others intrusion, and that for these reasons. First, that he relies upon
excellent right thereto; that he is a King; that by joining both Kingdoms,
which has been so long desired, he will much increase the glory of both; he
will ^ull asleep the war in Ireland, and in Spain; he will cause a liberty
of Traffic again; he has children, the props of a Kingdom; he has power
and strength enough to defend both him and his, and is dearly beloved of all
the Christian Princes in the world: and then were proposed the lamentable ends,
not only of ^surpers, but of those that stirred up and put forward them too;
as that of Richard Neuill the Earl of Warwick, who placed Edward the fourth
in his Throne; and of the Duke of Buckingham, who did so to Richard the third.
Then for the declaration of his succession, sentences were here and there
sprinkled, to this purpose.

THat Kings cannot deprive their kindred of the hope of the Kingdom; that
Kingdoms run along in the course of blood; that those things which by the
benefit of nature fall unto children, cannot be taken away by a Fathers
disinheritance, neither removed upon any that are further off, by the States of
the Kingdom; that the Lord spared not the Israelites, but gave them as a prey
unto the enemies, because having despised the house of David, they chose
Jeroboam the son of Nebat King; that to remove the government of a Kingdom
from the nearer to the further off, is not only repugnant to Humane L^wes, but
also to Divine. As they that enter in ought patiently to expect the (...) (be
it never so tedious) of those that are coming out* so those that are on
coming out, are bound to give their Successors or comers in good ground of
entrance, lest that both complain, one being wearied with idle hope, and the
other with daily entreaties.

But better then all these was the book (...), Basilicon doron.
written by the King and given to his Son; wherein is the excellentest
description of a Prince that can be: insomuch, that it is almost incredible to
believe, how infinitely he reconciled the perverse minds of the people, and
what great expectation he stirred up in every one of future goodness. The
Queens affection toward good studies.
How the Queen took it I know not, but sure I am, that she her self was so
well affected to learning, either always reading or writing something, that
she had lately translated Salust de bello Iugurthino, into English; and about
this time, the greatest part of Horace, de Art Poetica; and the book of
Plutarch de Curiositate; all which she wrote with her own hands, for all the
rebellion in Ireland grew so hot as it did; which after we have given account
of some of our men of note, that died this year, we will declare in order.

The first whereof was Thomas Stapleton Doctor of Divinity, The death of
Thomas Stapleton.
borne in Sussex, and bred in new College in Oxford, he was Ordinary
Professor of Divinity, and the Controversies of the University at Doway: for
in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, out of the good will he
bore to his Romish religion, he went over into the Low Countries, where by his
public Lectures, and his printed works, he at last grew very famous.

The second was Richard Cousin a Cambridge man, Of Ri. Cousin.
Doctor of Law, and Deane of the Arches, who by maintaining the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, got him the report of great wisdom and learning.

The third was Edmund Spencer, Of E^mund Spencer.
a Londoner borne, and a Scholar of Cambridge, who was borne to so great
favor of the Muses, that he surpassed all our Poets, even Chawcer himself
his fellow Citizen. But laboring with the peculiar destiny of Poets, poverty;
(although he were Secretary to Gray Lord Deputy of Ireland) for there having
scarce time or leisure to write or pen any thing, he was cast forth of doors
by the Rebels, and robbed of his goods, and sent over very poor into England,
where presently after he dyed; and was buried at Westminster near Chawcer, at
the charges of the Earl of Essex, all Poets carrying his body to Church, and
casting their doleful Verses, and Pens too, into his grave.

Now all this year the rebellion in Ireland continued very hot on foot still,
for Tir-Oen had got his pardon under the great Seal of Ireland, which he so
dissemblingly implored at the hands of Ormond the Lieutenant: yet on a sudden
dared he to girt Black-water with a strong siege. The Fort of Black-water
besieged.
To remove this siege, the Lieutenant General of the Irish forces (for as yet
there was no Lord Deputy) sends forth his choycest bands; to wit, thirteen
Regiments of men of Arms, under so many Ensigns, all under Henry Bagnall the
Marshall, a bitter enemy of Tir-Oen. The fourteenth day of August they marched
from their Camps near Armagh, in a threefold battalion. The first the
Marshall Bagnall and Piercy led, Cosby and Thomas Mary-Wingfield led the
middle, and Cuine and Billings the last. Calisthenes Brook, Charles Montacute,
and Flemmings were leaders of the Horse.

They scarce marched a mile, but too much severed from themselves by reason of
the swelling up of some hills in their way; there being nothing but a plashie
plain of one side, The English come by the worst.
and woods on the other; but I say, Tir-Oen being vehemently incensed with
hatred against the Marshall, brake in upon the first Squadron, with all his
force and might, and presently having slain him amongst the thickest crowde,
put all his troops out of order with the multitude of his forces, whilst the
rest of the English, by reason of the hill between them, scarce saw any such
matter: and at the very same time the powder having by some strange chance
taken fire, blew up many of them, and maimed more. Afterward Cosby being sent
to recollect the remnant of the dispersed Squadron, had a great overthrow. But
Montacute (although not without great danger) reduced them to an order.
Wingfield in the last Squadron, failing of powder, returned to ^^magh again.
And Tir-Oen got thus a pleasant victory of the English, and a more pleasant
triumph over his enemy. And certainly, the English received not a greater
slaughter then this, since the time that they first set foot in Ireland, having
lost 13. stout and valiant Leaders, and 150. common Soldiers, that being put
shamefully to flight, were slain up and down about the fields. They that
remained alive, were opprobriously blamed, not their sluggishnes, but their
Captains unskillfulness; neither was their complaint of that altogether
frivolous, for it was no great discretion in any Captain, to march so
disioyntedly one company from another, against such barbarous people, who
always being heaped together, are more beholding to their rude violence for
their good fortune, then any policy or discretion.

Not long after this slaughter of the English, The Fort yielded up.
followed the yielding of Black-water Fort to the Rebels, the men that lay in
Garrison keeping both their loyalty and their Arms still, till such time that
there was no hope of any succor.

This victory got great glory to the cause of the Rebels, and this Fort of
especial use; for from hence they furnished themselves with all kind of
provision of Arms; and now Tir-Oen under the name of the Author of their
liberty, being greatly swollen with pride thereof, grew more fierce then before;
insomuch that all Mounster Mounster reuolts.
revolted from the Queen; and yet not so much out of this prosperous success
1599
of the Rebels, as out of their hatred toward the English undertakers, and
Farmers, who were brought into the lands and possessions of Desmond, that fell
to the Queen after his rebellion: and partly also, out of hope of Protections
if their purposes failed. For now there had been a most detestable custom
very rife in Ireland, whereby Rebels, and the like malefactors, Protections
hurtful to the commonwealth.
purchased, with moneys that they had got by preying and robbing, their
Protection.

Tir-Oen the better to keep on foot and nourish this new Revolt in Mounster,
sends thither, Ouny-Mac-Rory, O-go-More, and Tirill; who though he were an
Englishman originally, yet he was a great enemy to the very English name, and
with them he ^ent M. villains and robbers. Against these came Thomas Norris as
far as Kilma^ocke, with an army strong enough to encounter them. But when he
perceived that the very Irish that marched under his banner, began to think of
reuolting from him, and that the new Farmers that came out of England, could
not furnish him with above two hundred, and those unweaponed, having dispersed
his Forces, he betakes himself to Cork.

The Rebels all this while having their number increased with continual
concourse, Mounster spoiled by the Rebels.
by the privilege of being wicked, lay wast all the ground about them, prey
every where, and set fire on all the English Castles and houses they could;
killing the owners most cruelly and ordinarily: which they could not have done,
if so be that they that hired those grounds had sent out their Farmers
furnished and in that number, as by their Covenants they ought to have done.
The pride and vainglory of the Rebels thriuing along with their good
successes, brought them to such a pass, that they themselves declared, that
James Fitz. Thomas one of the Family of the Earls of Desmond, (but a most
filthy fellow) Earl of Desmond; Tir-Oen brags of his victories.
but yet so, that he be tributary to O-Neale, that is, the Earl of Tir-Oen.
And Tir-Oen for his part, he trumpets out the glory of his fortune throughout
all Spain, by his boasting Letters; withal beseeching the Spaniard to give no
credit to it, if he should chance to hear that he sought after a peace with
England: for certainly he would stop his ears against all conditions thereof,
were they never so reasonable. And yet in the mean time his dissembling was so
palpable, that he sent both Letters and Messengers to the Lieutenant to deal
about his submission, although therein he asked most unreasonable demands.

First of all, Richard Bingham sent into Ireland.
to repress this his insolency, Richard Bingham seemed best, and fittest, who
had been valiant, and as fortunate against these Rebels heretore. But being
removed from his President ship of Conaugh, by reason of his Prouincials
complaint of his too great severity, and recalled to England, he was thence
committed to prison. And now again, from thence was he sent back again, with
great honor and authority, and the Title of Marshall of Ireland, and General
of Leinster. He died presently after his arrival.
But even as soon almost as he arrived at Dublin, he died. He was a man of a
famous house, and an ancient in Dorset-shire, but more famous was he for his
Military honors and atchieuments; for he was a Soldier at S. Quintins in
Britain in France, at Leith in the Islands Hebrides in Scotland, at the Island
Candy, at Chry against the Turk, in France, in the Low Countries, besides what
we have heretofore said of him in Ireland.

THE TWO AND Fortieth Year OF HER REIGN.
Anno Domini 1599. 1599

ANd now Ireland was somewhat in a lamentable case; for almost all the whole
Nation had been infected with this rebellion. Some by reason of the injuries
done them, by them that lay in Garrison. Some by reason of fear of the adverse
party, which was the strongest. Some by reason of the prosperous success of
the rebellion. Some persuaded thereto by the Priests; and others drawn thereto
by a scandalous rumor scattered every where by the Arch-Rebell, that the
Queen had determined utterly to vanquish and root out the memory of the Irish
Nation.

In England now was there great consultation, who would be fittest to be sent
over to repress and extinguish this fire. The Queen, Consultation about
choosing a L. Deputy of Ireland, Essex closely begs it.
and most of the Council, cast there eyes upon Charles Blunt, Lord Montioy.
But Essex closely gave them to know, that he was of no experience that way,
only but that he had been a Captain in Holland and Britain: that he had not
means enough, nor clients good store, and that he was given too much to
study. Said, that they ought to send one over thither, who was of great
honor, and as great wealth, beloved of Soldiers, and one that had been a
General heretofore: and as much as if he had said, they should do well to
send him over. For the Queen easily perceived it, and resolved to make him
General of her (...) Ireland; But yet he would seem in a manner to refuse
it, willing that so difficult an authority should be rather bestowed on any
one: and, yet if any man else had been but nominated, he would have quickly
laye^ some rub in his way. To conclude, the Earl bare himself so in this
matter, that his enemies easily perceived that he des^red nothing more, then
the command of the army, that thereby he might unite to himself the hearts of
all the Soldiers; and this he went about withal so strangely, that some
feared a monster would be bred in his brain; especially, since the greater
was the Queens beneficence, the greater would be his arrogance. Besides all
this, his Pages and followers, would boast of great matters up and down, viz.
That he descended from the family of the Kings of Scotland by the eldest
daughter of (...) Neither were they contented to extol the glory of his
pedigree; but also every one exceedingly praised in him, Religion, Valor, and
Wisdom. These things, some in the Court, that desired his room more then his
company, aggrauated so much, that they put spurs to him that run before,
propounding unto him glory for ever with posterity, and the love and good will
of the present commonaltie. Adiuring him for the great and everlasting good of
this commonwealth, to take this hard task upon him; promising to him very
largely all their endeauours, and the utmost of their good wills. Others, a
more crafty kind of his enemies, under the color of friendship, by greatly
extolling him, and raising up great expectation of him, did the more
vehemently, as more secretly, practice their old hatred and envy against him:
well knowing, that the fierceness of his youth, would quickly run it self
to destruction; and considering that there was to show no better way of quite
overthrowing his great popularitie, and love of the people, then by putting him
upon a business, which he would not be able to go through withal. Indeed,
what need many words? He, although a man of a most perspicuous, and
quicksighted capacity, yet either perceived it not, or would not. For first,
in the conceit of his followers, and then in his own also* he seemed able to
go through the difficultest matters, that were.

Hereupon, He was made L. Deputy.
to the great and public joy of all the people, he was made Lord Deputy of
Ireland, very mighty in his power, either to prosecute or conclude by
composition, the war; to pardon any offense, of treason, or any thing against
the Queen, or any body, even to Tir-Oen himself the archrebell. This power
with great importunity, he obtained for himself, although that this the said
power in all the other Letters Pattents of the Lord Deputies, were formerly
restrained in these words (All Treasons, touching our own Person, our Heirs,
or successors being excepted.) And very prouidently, did he importun^ this
wide and ample authority of forgiving and pardoning, by reason that the
Lawyers were of opinion, that any kind of rebellion touched the Queens person.

His army was allotted him, His Army is allotted.
as much as he would desire: neither ever saw Ireland a greater. 16000. Foot,
1300 Horse; which number afterward in all was complete 20000. And, to see the
secret working of malice, there was nothing that the Earl desired, but the
officious, and more treacherous industry of his adversaries quickly obtained
it for him. And the better to entangle him unawares in unknown nots, they laid
spies round about him, that should take notice of his doings, observe his
sayings, and always make the worst of either. In his Commission His Commission.
he had authority (for I omit the ordinary privileges,. and that too* not to
knight any one, but the well de^eruing) to omit the rest of the Rebels, and
bend all his forces only against Tir-Oen, and as soon as he could possible,
for to oppress him with the garrisons at at Lake-Foyle and Balshanon. And this
he himself was always wont to hold very necessary to be done; heretofore
obiecting it as a great fault in the former Deputies to prolong the war by
often parlies and colloquies. The Earl of Essex goes into Ireland.


About the end of March, the Earl departs from London, being accompanied with
the chief flowers of the Nobility, the people accompanying and following him
with their hearty acclamations and shouts of joy; but the sky being clear
there was great thundering, and very much rain vshered down by it.

In his voyage, being tossed hither and thither by a cross tempest, at last he
arrived at Ireland: and having taken a sword, He marches to Mounster against
some pet^y rebels neglecting his Commission.
according to the custom, although there was no such matter in his commission,
he made the Earl of Southampton governor of the horsemen. And after that, by
the persuasion of some of the Queens Council there, that too much intended
the good of their private affairs, he neglects the Arch-rebell Tir-Oen, and
marched against some petty rebels in Mounster, and there he took Cahir
Castle, the Lord Edmund Butlers of Cahir, encompassed with the river Swire, and
which was a famous receptacle to the Rebels. He spread far the terror of his
coming, by driving away great store of the cattle; and scattering the rebels
out into the woods and forests thereabouts. Neither returned till toward the
latter end of July, many of the Soldiers diminished, and all sorely wearied;
and he himself very much angered, that the Queen, having fed his credulous
hopes with expectation of it, had now made Sir Robert Cecil Master of the
Wards. The Queen taking this lossefull voyage very ill at his hands, urged him
eagerly to post to V^ster after Tir-Oen: The Earl in his letters laid the
fault upon the Irish Council, to whom he could not choose but condescend, by
reason of the great experience in the Irish affairs; most solemnly promising
that very speedily he would march into Vister. These letters being scarce
delivered he sent others, whereby he signified that he must necessarily turn
aside a little to Affalla near Dublin, against O-conore and Ol-Moyle two
rebels there; and those indeed he quickly vanquished.

But returned again, he found his army so diminished, that by letters signed
and sealed by all the Irish Council, he requested more supply from England
against his voyage toward Vlster, which he was now about. And now being fully
resolved to turn all the war upon Tir-Oen, he commands Sir Coniers
Clifford governor of Conaugh, to go to Belick with his bands and troops ready
furnished, thereby to distract the enemies forces, whilst he set upon them on
another side.

Clifford forthwith marching on with 1500. men, having wearied them sorely, and
finding a great want of powder, commands them to come over the Cunlew
mountains; and having got over the greatest part of them, the Rebels under the
conduct of O-rocke his son that was hanged, on a sudden rusht upon them; But
the English at the first driving them before them, easily kept on their way.
The Rebels notwithstanding kept not far off, but understanding that they wanted
powder, set again upon them; and what by reason of their faintness in the
tedious way and inequality of resistance, they put them to flight: having
slain Clifford and Alexander Ratcliffe of Orsdal, Knights, and many old
Soldiers.

In the mean time the supply of Soldiers in England, that Essex craved was
mustered and sent over. But not many days after he sent over other letters,
thereby signifying that all that he could do this year would be with 1300.
Foot, and 300. Horse to come to the borders of Vlster.

The Earl having come thither with these forces, he perceived Tir-Oen now and
then for a day or two, to show him se^fe from the hills a far off: and shortly
after Hagan comes from him, and ^ntreats of the Deputy a parley. The Depuputie
denied it, but said, that if Tir-Oen desired a par^ey, he would parley the next
day with him in battle. The next day, there being only a small skirmish, one
of Tir-Oens horsemen, open^y cries out that Tir-Oen would no longer fight, but
would parley with the Deputy: but yet by no means between both the armies.

The next day the Deputy Essex marching forwards, troop by troop, comes the
Hag^n and meets him, and tells him; that Tir-Oen did earnestly desire the
Queen mercy and peace; and only requested that he might but be heard speak.
Which if so be the Lord Deputy would but grant unto him, that he, in all
obseruancie, near unto Balla Clinch Rivers Foord would expect him, a place not
far from Louth the chiefest town in the County. Thither sent Essex some to
view the place first: and they find Tir-Oen ready at the Foord, who told them
that although the River had ouerflowed them a little, they might easily hear
one another speak of either side.

Hereupon Essex, having set in order a troop of horse on the next hill alone
comes down: Tir-Oen riding up his horse to the belly, Tir Oen and and Essex
talk together.
comes and salutes Essex on the bank side, with great obseruancie: there
having had many words without any arbitrators, they spent almost an hour.

Within an hour or two after, Tir-Oen desires to have conference again with
Essex.
Cone the base son of Tir-Oen, following after the Deputy, beseeches him in
his Fathers behalf, once more to parley with him, and to have some of the
chiefest on both sides present. The Deputy therewith condescended upon
condition that they should not be above ^ixe. On the day appointed Tir-Oen,
with his brother Cormac, Mac-Gennys, Mac-Guir, Euere Mac-Cowley, Henry Ouington
and O-Quin shows himself at the Foord. Essex the Deputy with the Earl of
Southampton, George Bourchiere, Warham S. Ledger, Henry Danuerse, Edward
Wingfield, and William Constable Knights comes down unto them. The Earl
salutes every one of them very courteously: and not many words being on all
sides spent, it pleased them that the next day there should be some delegated,
that should treat concerning a peace. A truce made for six weeks.
Amongst those delegates it was agreed upon that there should be a truce from
that day for six weeks, and then so again for the next six: But yet so that
on either side, having given fourteen days wa^ning, they might have leave and
liberty to renew the war again. And if so be any of the Earl Tir-Oens
confederates shall not agree thereunto, that it should be lawful for the
Deputy to prosecute him as it shall please him.

Whilst these things are doing, The Queen is angry with the L. Deputy
Henry Cuffe brings those last letters we spoke of to the Queen: whereby when
she understood that Essex with so great an army in so long time, and at so
great charges had done nothing as yet, and sent her word that he could do
nothing, this year; she was greatly moved thereat, accusing all his
consultations and actions headlong, unhappy, and contemptible. Nay, she doubted
not to say but upon what jealous suspicion I know not, to some there, that he
endeavored in Ireland some what more then the good of his Prince and Country.
Neither would she recall her opinion after great persuasion, always esteeming
it the greatest folly that can be, to stir up one that is ready armed, whom
once he had stirred before, and since armed. She writes back to him.
But yet she sent her letters back to him and the Counselors of Ireland:
wherein she expressed her great admiration, that the Deputy should lose so
much time, and embrace all kind of occasions of delay, that he should spoil
many fair opportunities of good success against the Rebels, when as he
himself in England thought nothing fitter, then only to prosecute and pursue
Tir-Oen, which also in his letters since he had largely promised. She also
expostulated with him about his expedition into Mounster and Affalle, against
his own sober judgment, and against her knowledge; for had he made her
acquainted with his intent, she would have hindered that hurtful expedition. If
now the army be weak and feeble, why did he not follow the enemy when it was
not so? If the Spring time were not fit for his war in Vlster, why did he
neglect the Summer and Autumn? was not any time fitting enough for that war?
she did now well see that England must be consumed more then needs, and by this
unhappy success suffer the note of infamy of all foreign nations; Nay, that
they, that hereafter shall write the History of these times will instruct
posterity, that she never did any thing in the preserving of Ireland, and that
he never omitted any thing that might tend to the loss of it, except he would
take some better order with his wars. Wherefore she admonished both him and
the Council, that with better advice they would provide for the good of the
Commonwealth, and not be led aside by evil suggested councels As also that
they should write back to her to what pass they have brought the State of
Ireland, The Deputy much discontented at the Queens letters.
and also to take care against the further damage thereof.

The Deputy being much moved with these letters, and discontented that among
other things, the Queen had chid him too, that he removed not the Earl of
Southampton from his office which he lately bestowed upon him, (for the Queen
was displeased with Southampton, because against her knowledge as the Nobles
use not to do, he had married Elizabeth Vernon, borne of the Aunt of the Earl
of Essex secretly.) But most of all being discontented at the preferment of his
enemy Cecil, to his place of the Master of the Wards, he began to cast
himself into dark and cloudie storms of melancholy; He plots secretly to take
some indirect course.
he secretly thought some indirect course to take in hand, as, to return
again into England with his choicest Bands, and so to bring under his power by
force those his great enemies; being persuaded that great store of concourse
out of love to him, and desire of innouations, would easily and quickly flock
unto him. But Southampton, and Sir Christopher Blunt, that had married his
mother, frighted him from this dangerous, wicked, and hateful enterprise.
Whither or no the Queen had inckling of this matter, I know not; but at the
very same time, by reason of uncertain rumors of a Spanish invasion that was
willingly believed, An army of 6000* choice footmen mustered in London.
there was mustred up 6000. of the choycest and most experienced footmen of all
London; 3000. whereof lay at watch and ward about the Queen; the rest
commanded to be in readiness upon any occasion: and besides these, a great
number was also mustered out of all the places near abouts. Of all these,
Charles Howard Earl of Nottingham, Lord Admiral of England, was made
Commander, with authority both against enemies abroad, and rebels at home. But
within few days after this army was dissolved again.

Within a month after, Essex, sooner then the least opinion of any one, comes
over into England in all have, with some of his choicest friends. Essex unlooked
for returns to England.
Southampton, who now was put by his office; the Lord Dunkelline; Christopher
S. Laurence, the son of the Lord Houth, Henry Danuerso, who yet had
notwithstanding recovered himself of a dangerous wound, Henry Doc^ray, and
other Commanders, and many others, who at his arrival in England, went away
several ways. Essex accompanied only with six, comes to Nonesuch where the
Queen then lay, to inform her of the affairs of Ireland. In his way, the
Lord Gray of Wilton, one of his greatest enemies over rode him, and not once
saluted or spoke to him. The Earl fearing lest he should do him hurt at the
Court, and Sir Thomas Gerard ouertaking him, and, although in vain, requesting
him that he would do him no ill office there; Christopher S. Larence offered
his service to the Earl of Essex to kill the Lord Gray in the way, He comes
and kneeles before the Queen.
and the Secretary at the Court. But the Earl, hating such wickedness from
his heart, would not yield thereto; but made such have to the Court, that on
the morning betimes he came and fell on his knees before the Queen, that not
so much as thought of him, as she was in the Privy chamber. The Queen
entertained him with a short speech, but not with that favor she was wont; and
bid him go to his chamber and continue there. For now to his other offenses he
added this, that without her leave, or against her will he had left Ireland;
and for that he had made such a truce, that every fourteen days was violable,
when as it had been in his power, by his authority, to have ended the matters
with the Rebels, and pardoned their treasons. Being asked of the Council, why
he made such covenants with Tir-Oen, he answered, That Tir-Oen being potent,
proudly refused any conditions almost, except he would forgive all the Rebels
too in Ireland: except the Irish should be restored into their possession which
the English had, and except the Romish religion might be with liberty
professed through all Ireland. But when as these things were adjudged by the
Council uery heinous, and then his return into England again, especially
with such company as he did, grew also somewhat suspicious; and the more, being
aggrauated by the variety of plots laid by his potent adversaries: the Queen
thought it fit to confine him to some custody, but yet not to any prison, He
is committed to custody.
lest she might seem thereby to cut off all her former favors toward him;
but she confined him to the Lord Keepers house, that so, not being at liberty
he might not be led away with evil counsel. The Earl took it very unkindly,
that both his and his friends return should be so misconstrued to a suspicion
of ill; For I have seen his own handwriting, wherein in a very fair method,
he digested and heaped together whatsoever he did think would be objected
against him. To wit, He remoues the suspicions conceived by his return.
that first neglecting his instruction, he delayed his expedition into Vlster,
by losing fit opportunities, both wasting and wearing the Queens Forces
elsewhere. Secondly, that he had made covenants, and a truce most beneficial
to the Rebels. Lastly, that the affairs in Ireland, being not set in good
order, that contemning the forbidding of the Queen, he had left Ireland, and
returned with so many warlike men. To these things he adjoined this answer:

I Before I left Ireland, set all things in that order, as now they are; that
there has been no hurt done these nine months. That there was no reason why
his companions that came with him should be suspected; they being few, and
having good occasions of their return; and that no more then six accompanied
him to the Court. What hurt could he do with so small a company? It had been
an easy matter for him to have thought or done any hurt when he had the army
and all Ireland at his command. If he were desirous of revenge, that he needed
not any others help. For he is quickly master of another life, that is a
conte^ner of his own. But I knew (says he) who said to me, Vengeance is mine,
and I, etc. Shall so great a calumny fall upon me, that my return should be
suspected, who have worn away my body in my Princes service, that have spent
my fortunes, that have lain suppliant at my Princes feet. Equity and charity
ought to admit of these things, but upon very good grounds, against them
especially, whom the profession of the same religion, and the nobleness of
birth would free from the like suspicion. Shall such suspicion fall upon me?
Who have lost my father and brother in the service for this Land? Who for
thirteen of the three and thirty years I have seen, have served the Queen;
and for seven of them thirteen have been of her privy Council? Who have
been hated of all those, that either envied the Queen or her religion? Who
have so exposed my self to every ones revenge, out of my duty to her, and my
pains against her enemies, that no place but this Kingdom, and no time, but
while she lives, can secure me from them?

Neither did he alone thus complain, When some would have freed him out of
custody by force, he would not. Tir-Oen breaks the truce.
but many also every where: some of them conspiring together by violence and
force to set him at liberty: but he out of his honest and true noble mind
would not suffer it.

But let us return to Ireland, and leave Essex that has left it. The times of
the truce are scarce gone out once or twice, but Tir-Oen with an enemies
courage, assembling his Forces, prouides again for war.

From England was Sir William Warren sent to him by the Council, to know
wherefore he brake the truce. To whom he loftily answered, that he indeed
brake not the truce, but gave warning fourteen days before his renewing of
the war. And that the occasion of his renewing the war was very just, by
reason he understood that Essex the Deputy, in whom he had reposed the trust
of his life and goods, had been committed in England: and that now he would
not have to do with the Counselors of Ireland, who dealt but scuruily and
deceitfully with him before. And that now, if he would, he could not renew the
League again, because already he had sent forth O-Donell into Conaugh, and
others of his co^federates into other quarters of the kingdom.

In the mean time there were rumors spread up and down over Ireland, Tir-Oen
bears himself very proudly.
(not without Tir-Oen being the Author of them) that shortly England should be
vexed again with new commotions: and truly they were prepared reasonable well
for the matter, for the wickeder sort in Ireland, enc^eased daily in number and
strength, they which were of the Irish stock, now looking after nothing but
their ancient liberty and Nobility. The honester sort of the English blood,
being daily cast down more and more, to see so great charges of the Queen
spent in vain; complaining also, that now they were excluded from any offices
in the Commonwealth, and used like mere strangers and Foreigners.

But Tir-Oen he was very cheerful and courageous, boasting and bragging up
and down, that now he wo^ld restore to Ireland it is ancient liberty, and
Religion. He receives to his protection all tumultuous persons, furnishes them
with succor, confirms the doubtfuller sort, and eagerly labors to weaken
the Command of the Engish in Ireland, b^ing lulled on with hope of the
Spaniards aid, and money, and provision, which once or twice was sent him; and
thereto also, not a little encouraged by the promises and Indulgences of the
Pope, who had now sent unto him the Fether of a Phoenix; A Feather o^ a Phoenix
sent to Tir-Oen from the Pope.
it is like because Pope Urban the third a great while ago, sent to John the
Son of Henry the second, Lord of Ireland, a Crown of Peacockes Feathers.

In the mean time many men that had but little to do, and some suggested
thereunto, extolled the Earl of Essex for all this, The Keeper of the Seal
lays open the Earl of Essex his crimes.
wounding the Council in their disgraceful books, and sometimes the Queen
too, through their sides, as all neglecting the good of the Kingdom, and
taking no care for Ireland. Whereupon the Council, the day before the and of
Michaelmas Term, meeting according to their custom in the Star Chamber,
the Lord Keeper having admonished the Nobler sort to retire into the Country,
and keep good Hospitality among the poor, and willed the Justices of Peace,
not only severely to punish the transgressors of the Peace, but by all means
to prevent all transgressions. Then greatly accusing the ^uill language of
those back-biters and calumniators, that had traduced all the Council, he
declares unto them how careful the Queen has been in providing for Ireland,
and appeasing the tumults therein: and how preposterously Essex went to work
with the Rebels; and how base covenants with Tir-Oen he had condiscended unto,
that now durst even boast up and down that he would come into England shortly,
and here also get himself possessions.

The Lord Buckhurst that was made Lord Treasurer after Burghley deceased, The
L. Treasurer lays them open.
much inueighing against the Penmen of those infamous Pamphlets, declared also
what great armies, and what great provision was sent into Ireland, that every
month the pay was sent for three months together; and that the Queen had in
this war within six months spent three hundred thousand pounds, and the E.
of Essex could not deny this.

The Earl of Nottingham he showed how the Queen had assembled her wisest
Counselors best insighted into the affairs of Ireland, And the L. Admiral.
to a consultation about this Irish rebellion, and that all or most of them,
adjudged it fittest, first to reduce Vlster to obedience. That Essex also was
of the same mind; who oftentimes had reiterated these words, that not the
boughs of rebellion, but the root must be taken off. But that he was very
sorry that he had done otherwise: withal affirming that five of the Queens
ships, with others, ready to be used in war, had been sent over to Vlster,
and there lay six whole months without any use.

Secretary Cecill, And Secretary Cecill.
first declares the singular care of the Queen in her defending England and
Ireland, by removing (...) renown and glory of her Majesty; and which was
worst of all, would puff up the proud minds of the Rebels, as appears by
that of the arch-Rebell Tir-Oen, who the next day after the Earl of Essex came
to the English Court, could not contain himself, but he must break into the
like speeches as these; That he did not doubt but shortly to see a greater
change and alteration of things, then ever yet had been in former ages: that
he would show himself there shortly, and challenge some part of it for
himself; but professing that he could not imagine, by what divination, or
cunning, he could hope of these things, or know, within so few hours, what was
become of Essex. Thus far went Cecill: and it will be needless to repeat
what every one said, since all came to the same effect, and conclusion.

And now let us leave the Earl of Essex under custody with the Lord Keeper,
The Earl of Essex wholly denoted to pious meditations.
who being only devoted to godliness, and diuinemeditations, seemed to have
been past beyond all the vanities of this world: he sent such godly Letters
seasoned with such a religious contempt of worldly affairs, to all his Friends
and Familiars.

And now in the mean time Andrew of Austria, A peace with Spain propounded.
the son of Cardinal Ferdinand the Archduke, brother to Maximilian the
Emperor, who in the absence of Cardinal Albert of Austria, at the marriage in
Spain was made Governor of the Low Countries, very diligently dealt with
Charles Lanfrance, and Hierom Coeman about a peace between the Spanish King
Philip the third, and the Queen of England. Neither did the Queen show her
self very strange from the matter, if so be the Spaniard had delegated on him
sufficient authority to treat about the peace; and if so be they would take
good order for the States of the united Provinces. For to forsake those, or to
do any thing that might be disgraceful to her, or deceitful to them, she
thought it vnexpiable. But yet this mention of peace did cause several
suspicions and distrusts both in the Queen and the States; seeing that at the
very same time there was a very constant rumor, that there was a Na^y
providing in Spain. But the Hollanders Navy, that had now taken the Canary
Island and the Castle, and laid wast Saint Thomas Island, was thought to have
turned out of the way.

Neither is this a bare rumor, The Spanish Galleys arrived at Flanders.
for there were some Galleys provided in Spain, by the appointment of
Frederick Spinula of Genoa, who being exceeding rich above ordinary, having
been a Soldier in the Low Countries, persuaded the Spaniard to send out some
Galleys into Flanders. And those Galleys being sent out under his conduct,
passing by the French shore, came to the Haven Scluse in Flanders, not being
espied either by the English or Hollanders ships that tarried for them. For
being carried far to the North in the British Ocean, either by the tide, or
ignorance of the places, by all adventures, they escaped the English and
Ho^landers, that waited for them.

These Galleys first of all caused great admiration to the English and
Hollanders, who in the year 1545. had found the British Ocean swelling and
raging with storms, altogether impatient of such plain Vessels, when some of
them were sent from the Mediterranean Sea against England. But now they did
great hurt about where they went, for being made by skillful Ship wrights
according to that fashion of those that 1593. went as far as the Islands of
Azores, they scorned the anger of our Seas, and in a calm being rowed with
Oars, they would do great harm, when ships built at great charges, being
destitute of wind, lay at rode closly, and exposed to their hurt.

Much about the same time Charles by the grace of God Hereditary Prince of the
Kingdoms of Swecia, Charles K. of Swethland sends to exc^se himself to the
Queen.
the Goths and Vandalls, (for these are his titles) sent Hill an Englishman
over to the Queen, that he might acquit him of calumnies before the Queen, he
being traduced out of affectation of innovation, for to have wrought to
himself the Kingdom, against Sigismund his Nephew King of Poland, entreated
the Queen that she would not believe these calumniators, and also to aid him
with council, and help for to defend and propugne the sincere Religion
grounded on the word of God. The Queen publicly heard him, and answered him,
wishing him to wish his Master to keep his word better with his Nephew the
King of Poland, and not to ^inne against Justice, Nature, and the laws of
Affinity.

In this year there died too many in that one Richard Hooker borne in
Deuonsh^re, Richard Hooker died this year.
and bred in Corp^s Christi College in Oxford, a Divine v^ry modera^e,
tempe^^te, meek, and virtuous even to the best imitation; and besides, very
famous for his learned Works, as his Books of Ecclesiastical Policy, set
forth in English, but worthy to speak Latin, do testify of him.

THE THREE and Fortieth Year OF HER REIGN.
Anno Domini 1600. 1600.

IN the beginning of this year the (...) being daily busied with the affairs
of the Kingdom, that she might the better provide for money, Doubtful law
titles confirmed.
amongst her so great cost and charges in the Irish war, delegated some, who
having received their moneys, might confirm to them that Crowne-land which the
law had called into question. Also she caused the ancient laws of Edward the
4, Richard the 2, and Henry the 4* to be observed, concerning the
transportation of gold or sil^er coy^ed or ^ot coined out of England which she
proclaimed unlawful. And she became more intent then ever she had been
toward the affairs of Ireland: A proclamation that no gold nor silver should
be carried out of the Kingdom.
for Tir-Oen, after the return of Essex from Ireland, being pu^t up with the
joy of his happy mischiefs, accounted himself Monarch of ^^eland; and to
disperse that fl^me, which in his absence he had raised in M^unster, no by his
presence he s^attereth it abroad, under a pretense of a religious travel, to
see a (...) Holy Cross; which was said to be kept in a (...) Vide Carlet. p.
192.
Iourneying thither in the midst of Winter, he put on many upon rebellion with
his stately pr^mises and earnest exhortations; He makes James Fitz-Thomas the
kinsman of the Earl of Desmo^, whom the Rebels (...) had made Earl of Desmon.
Tir-Oen confers honors on his followers.
He exalts also (...) to the honorable title of Mac-Car^y-More. He takes
pledges of those of the rebellion whom he most suspected; and lays wast all
the grounds of the faithful subjects thereabouts, making them a prey to
Mac-Guyr, the boldest (...) his followers. Mac-Guyr and Warham of S. Ledger are
slain.
But this Mac-Guyr by chan^e (...) upon Warham of St. Ledger, who run him
through with a spear, and was also run through himself by him: having
sufficient victory without a triumph: and living long enough, in that he had
killed so bold and audacious a R^bell.

When this flame of rebellion had been blown up into so hot a fire, that
Ormond General of the army, nor George Carew Treasurer of the same, who were
made the Justices of Ireland, could quen^h the same* the Queen, always happy
in her own choice* sent over in the midst of Winter Charles Blunt, Lord
Montioy, Lord Depu^i^ into Ireland; whom she knew fitting to command, because
she always found him ready to obey. Montioy arrived in Ireland.
He arrived at Ireland quietly in February, with but a small company, where
(...) Ireland in a woeful and miserable pligh^. ^or Tir-Oen triumphing-like
had over run all Mo^nster, from the fa^thest part of Vlster not any resisting
him. Every honest man, either out of hope of remedy or ease, grew faint and
weary almost of their lives; the wickeder sort, they having all things
according to their own mind, thought of lofty matters, and and certainly
all the nobler sort secretly conspired to assume again their ancient liberty,
which they so tediously heretofore complained, as being sore oppressed. There
stomachs were indeed the better whetted to the matter, by reason that Clement
the eight Bishop of Rome, The Pope of Rome encourages the rebels by his
Indulgence.
had lately set forth his Indulgence out of the Churches treasury, as our
adversaries speak. And in this Indulgence or Bull (to comprehend all in few
words.) First he commends the Prelates and Peers of Ireland, for that they
aided James Geraldin, and John his kinsman, and last of all, his beloved son
Hugh Prince O-neale, and Earl of Tir-Oen, Captain General of the Catholic
forces in Ireland. Then he goes on, on this manner:

WE, that ye, both Captains and Soldiers might more courageously and more
cheerfully endeavor your selves hereafter, against the heretics of these
times, being willing to accompany you with all our spiritual graces and
favors, and being thereunto by the example of our predecessors, and trusting
to the mercy of our omnipotent God, and the authority of the blessed Apostles
S. Peter and S. Paul: Grant mercifully in the Lord, to all ye, and every one
of ye, that follow Hugh Earl of Tir-Oen, the General, his Army, or any of
those that are defenders of the Faith; or that shall adioyne your selves to
them, or bestow your pains upon them, either in your counsel, favor,
provision, arms, or any war like thing, or any other manner of way shall help
them in this Expedition: And also to Hugh himself the General, and to every
one, and all of his Army, if so be they will truly repent and confess; and
if so be, if it may be conveniently done, they shall refresh their souls with
the holy Eucharist, a plenary Pardon and remission of all their sins; and the
very same Pardon that was wont to be granted by the Bishops of our Sea, to
those that warred against the Turks, or for the recovery of the Holy Land.
Notwithstanding, etc.

Dated at Rome at St. Peter's, under the Fishermans Ring: In the ninth year of
our Popedom. M. Vestius Barbianus.


The Rebels, Essex most desirous to set upon Tir-Oen.
to fright their new-come Deputy, found alarume in the very Suburbs of
Dublin; but for all that, the Deputy neglecting them, was only earnest to set
upon the Arch-rebel himself at his return from Mounster, wherefore having
assembled a tumultuary Band, (for his selected Bands were in Mounster with
Ormond) he made all have to Fereall, to stop up the way and entertain him
with battle: But Tir-Oen being advised of this determination of the Deputies,
(for he had always some of the Queens own Council, Tir-Oen preuents him.
that were too much addicted to him) preuents him with all speed possible.

The Deputy returning again to Dublin, bent him only to the choice and
mustering up of his old Soldiers, whom he resolved to send by Sea unto
Logh-Foile, and Bala-shanon, near the mouth of the lake Erne; that so he might
hemme in Tir-Oen behind and before, and on each side: Also he took order for
the sending aid to the Garrisons in Lease, and Ophall; which being annoyed
with so many rebels, was indeed full of danger.

In the beginning of May, he marched up toward Vlster, with resolution to
turn the Rebels out of their way on that side, He sends a Garrison to Vlster.
whilst Henry Docwray strengthened the Garrison at Logh-Foile, and Matthew
Morgan at Bala-shanon. For they arrived at Culm^ on the mouth of Logh-Foile,
with four thousand Foot, and two hundred Horse. And there having placed a
Fort, and another at Ellogh, they afterward came to Derry a little City, Derry
is fortified.
half an Island of some forty acres of ground; which on one side was well
walled with the River, and on the other side impassable by reason of plashy
grounds. In this little City were the half broken and much decayed walls of
a Monastery, a Bishops Palace, two Churches, and an old Castle. The Inhabitants
had erected an Armory and many little cottages of oaken plankes, and had
fortified the place with vnhewen stones which they got hard by, and the rubbish
and remainders of old ruined houses, having made their lime of shells by the
help of fire. And this, while they were there, Tir-Oen repulsed.
the Deputy did so hinder Tir-Oens purposes by daily light skirmishes, which
were so unfortunate to him continually, that* finding the fortune of the war
now to be altered he began to betake himself to his lurking holes again.

The Garrisons thus being fortified and put in order, the Deputy returned to
Dub^in in the midst of June: and then he requested from England some more
provision, to place a Garrison in Armach on this side; that thereby he might
bring the Rebels into a narrower straight. And in the mean time having gone
into Lease, the very refuge of the Rebels of Lagene, O-more is slain.
he so followed O^y-Mac-Rory-Og, the chief of the Family of O-More, a bloody
young man, and a bold, that had but lately caused all those troubles in
Mounster, that he slew him and many more of his comrades; and having laid waste
all his grounds and possessions, so dispersed the rest of the Rebels, that
there was scarce seen any one of them in those quarters.

And now by this time, his new supplies came from England over to him: and
then, although there was great want of victuals and money, and although in
those quarters Winter drew on a pace, after the Eq^inoxe; he for all that set
forwards toward Vlster, and came as f^r as the Pass of Moghery beyond
Doudalk. The Earl of Essex sets forward again toward Vlster.
That passage is accounted naturally the most troublesome in all Ireland:
Besides, the art of the Rebels exercised therein, who with Enclosures with
stakes fastened the ground with hurdles and harrowes joined together and stones
cast between, and turfes between the mountains, woods, and yielding bogs,
had with great skill, and greater industry blocked up the passage cross: which
also was made worse besides, by the ouerflowing water of the river neereby
reason of too much rain. After that the waters were abated a little, the
English courageously brake through those Enclosures; and having vanquished all
these great difficulties, and their enemies too the authors of them, the L.
Deputy placed and erected a fort 8. miles from Armach, He breaks through many
difficultis.
for all near about it by the Rebels had bin spoiled and consumed; and to the
memory of John Norris, under whom he first exercised the Military Art, he
called the place Mont-Norris; Mont-Norris Fort.
making one E. Blany, a lusty fellow of his hands, Governor thereof; who ever
afterward kept the Rebels thereabouts in some exercise, and for the most part
kept them very much under. In the Deputies return, (to omit ordinary and daily
happy skirmishes) he gave a great and a famous overthrow to the Rebels, that
he had hedged up the way in the straight near Carlingford. On the English
side there was slain Latwa^e Doctor of Divinity, and Chaplain to the
Deputy, and Cranmer his Secretary, both learned men, and for that much beloved
of him; besides some others also.

The Deputy having returned, Tir-Oen directs all his forces and practices
against Henry Docwray: and having a^^aulted him by skirmishes, Docwray chaseth
the Rebels.
treacheries, periuries, and more then punicke deceits, wounded him sorely; but
yet he unfolded himself valiantly and happily out of these dangers: He laid
waste O-Chahans little country. Arthur O-Neale, the son of Turlogh being
Captain. He took Dunalong in the fight of Tir-Oen, and placed John Bowley
there in Garrison. And a little after, (which much grieved and angered Odonel)
he seized on Lisser Castle, by the help of Neale Garue of the Family of O
donels, whom he had persuaded and drawn to his side, promising the government
of Tir-Conelle to him, which he challenged by the right of his blood.

Much about this time there arrived a Spanish ship, furnished with weapons and
a little money, and it landed at Calebeg: whither the Rebels flying with all
speed, with hope of dividing the prey, left those quarters they kept to the
English Garrisons thereabouts.

The Deputy on the other side, Essex restraines the fury of the rebels in
Lagene.
not to lose any time in the midst of Winter, entered the Glinnes in Lagene,
where he received to obedience Donell Spaniah, Phelim Mac-Pheogh, and the
tumultuary kindred of the O-Tooles, having taken Hostages from them to bind
them the better to performance. After that he entered into Fereal, and drove
Tirel, one of the skilfullest Soldiers among them, out of his boggish Hold
(they call them Fastnessi) all thickened and fortified with briars and brambles.
And now he had gone compass victoriously through all places as far as
Vlster, and there also he laid waste Fer^ey, He returns to Vlster.
having slain the two sons of E^ar Mac-Cowley; and sending forth Richard
Morison, he laid waste too the little Province Fues. He placed a Garrison at
Breny, committed to the care of Oliver Lambard: and then bending toward
Droged, he received into obedience Turlogh Mac-Henry, a Nobleman of Fues, Euar
Mac-Cowley, O-Hanlon, who gloried himself that he was the hereditarie
Standard bearer to the King in Vlster. Also he received besides many more of
the Mac-Mahons and O-ralls, taking Hostages of them all.

All these things did Monti^y the Deputy for his part the first year: The
Exploits of George Carew.
Neither did George Carew undertake much less fortunate enterprises in
Mounster, the Southern parts of Ireland, being newly made President of the
Province, that now was even grown sick by reason of the rebellion every where
in it, under the ^i^ular Earl of Desmond. And first of all he dealt so
cunningly with the leaders of the mercenaries of Conaugh (whom they use to call
Bownies) whom the Rebels had assembled and called out, that he removed out of
the Province Dermitius O-Canar by a slight, and Redmund a Burge upon hopes of
his recovering his fathers patrimony, and Tirril, putting him into a great
fear lest he had laid some ambush for him. Then after this he cunningly
carried the matter, that by counterfeit letters sent to them, he bred such
diffidence and distrust between them, that none trusting one another, and
every one fearing for himself, they distracted themselves. Afterward he set
on after them, having indiuidually accompanying him the Earl of Twomond, who
many times stood him in great stead: Then he surpised the titular Earl of
Desmond, whom notwithstanding the Rebels rescued again from him. Logher,
Crome, Gla^^^ Carrigfoyle, Courage, Rathmore, and Cahir Castles, were by forces
assaulted and taken by him, or fairly yielded. Charles Wilmot, Governor of
Kerrie, brought under his obedience, Lixnaw, Mainy Castle, and Listwill, and
Fr. Barclay, Glanemire* Greame one of the Commanders, did so turn the titular
Earl of Desmond, that a^ last he dro^e him out of the Province, and caused
many of the affrighted Rebels to fly to their loyalty to the Queen. To
conclude all, George Carew, that entered this Province but in the month of
April, when it was up in vproares and rebellion, brought it to pass that by
December it was all over in quietness; and not so much as one Fort defended
there against the Queen.

Whilst these affairs pass on thus in Ireland, A new proposition concerning a
peace to be made with Spain.
there are great consultations in England concerning making a Peace with the
Spaniard* This peace, Albert Arch-D^^ke of (...), having returned with the
Infant^ his wife from Spain, and rewarded with a consecrated sword by the
Bishop of Rome, propounded to the Queen. And although the Queen had denied to
make any de^ensiue league with the Spaniard, to deliver into his hands those
towns that were pawned to her, or to forbid trading with the Hollanders and
Zealanders, which the Spaniard vehemently urged her to do, or yield to him in
the Prerogative of her I^onor; yet still both he and the French King, with
their continual messages, gave not over their purpose of pursuing it. The
Spaniard, being the only occasion of it, who, by his quiet disposition, and
the advice of his Council gave himself to peace. For he well knew that his
father, having made a peace with France, desired nothing more then to make one
with England also, Upon what hopes this peace was propo^nded: gathered out of a
confe^ence held at Rome.
that so he might leave his kingdom glorified by a firm and solid peace
every where. Moreover he was persuaded, that a peace with England would be
very beneficial to the Roman Religion, (...) Honor and profit too. For
certainly there was at this time a great hope nursed up at Rome, that it would
come to pass that they in England would deal^ more favorably with the
professors of Popery, who now might return home again, and both preserve
their Religion, and also disperse and sow it abroad also, with less danger
then before. Also he esteemed that a conclusion of this peace, would be no
less glorious to him, then the discovery of a new world was to his ancestors;
That the inferior Princes now should be more obser^eable in all respects
toward him, if once he were not encumbered with any war; and so he might set
an Arbi^ator over all the world. The profit that thereby he expected, was,
that the States of Holland and Zealand would presently then be brought to
reasonable conditions. That he should save the charges of maintaining his
wars there, and of con^eighing home his Navy from the Indies yearly. That
they returning safe every year, would shortly infinitely enrich (...). That
the English by degrees would neglect their Nauigations, when once they
in^rea^ed (...) their esta^es with the Spaniards wealth; and so that at length,
being rockt in a long peace, disaccustomed to war either by sea or land, they
might the easier be invaded on a sudden.

Although the Queen was not ignorant of these things, yet after mature
deliberation, adiudging this Peace commodious and honorable both to England,
and her credit, having been lately importuned to it by the French King, left it
to his disposing, that he should appoint both the time and place of meeting.
The King of France appointed May the time, and Bolonia (a sea co^st of France,
Boull^n or Bullen.
anciently called Bononia) the place. A treaty made at Bononia.
But when it was foreseen that likely there would arise a contention, or
question about prioritie of place in sitting or going between England and
Spain, some men were selected that should make enquiry into that matter. They
observed out of the book of Ceremonies of the Court of Rome, Observations of
the precedence of England and Spain
(which as the Canons say, like a Lady, Mother, and Mistress directs others)
that among the Kings Temporal, the first place was due to the King of France,
the second to the King of England, and the third to the King of Casteell. That
the English quietly enjoyed that place in the General Counsels of Pisa, at
Constance, and at Basil too, although the Ambassador of Casteell somewhat
unmannerly opposed himself in the last. Out of Volateran.
Besides, that Casteell, which Title the Spaniard prefers before all his
other to be the King of, is but lately a Monarchy in respect of England: and
that it had neither Earls nor Kings, before the year of Grace, 1017. and that
those Kings are not anointed. Moreover, they found that the King of England, is
reckoned the third amongst those Kings that are titled, Most Illustrious, and
the Spaniard is reckoned the fourth. Also that Pope Julius the third, Bishop of
Rome, gave sentence for Henry the seventh of England, against Ferdinand King of
Casteele. Also, that the Queen of England is more ancient both in years and
Reign, and therefore before the Spaniard, by their own argument at the
Council at Basil, used by the Spaniard against Henry the sixth King of England.
Lastly, the Lawyers with one accord generally pronounced, that, that
Precedencie, whose Original exceeds the memory of man, is to be reckoned as
constituted and so ordained by Right.

Besides they observed, that in the first Session of the Council of Trent,
under Pope Paul the third, when there was one and the same Ambassador of
Charles the fi^t, Emperor, who was also King of Spain, and that that
Ambassador took place of the French, by reason of the Emperors right; that,
since the Spaniards have arrogated to themselves the prioritie, not only by
the virtue of the Emperor, but as they are Kings of Spain, because none ever
contradicted it. And at that time, the English found great want of discretion
in the French Ambassador, because he contradicted them not, and made no
public contesting with the Emperors Legate, if so be he had made, as he took
place of him in right of the Spaniard and not the Emperor. Besides they noted,
that the Spaniard by reason of his large and vast dominions spread far and
near, by reason of his power over other Princes, and his Merits from the
Church of Rome, of whom he well deserves, and by reason of prioritie before
the French, stolen in the Council of Trent, would challenge his higher place
to himself. But let us omit this.

On the day appointed, The Peores designed for the Queens party.
at Bolonia, came for the Queen, Henry Neuill the Leager in France; John
Herbert, newly made one of the Secretaries. Robert ^eale, Secretary to the
Northren Council, and Thomas Edmunds the Queens French Secretary. For the
Spaniard, came Balthazar Ds. de Z^niga Fonseca, one of the privy Council, and
Ambassador in the Low Countries, Ferdinand Carill, of the order of S. James,
and Counselor to the King at Casteele. For the Archduke came John Richardot,
President of the Council, and Lodouike Verre-Kei^e, The instructions of the
English.
chief Secretary.

The Instructions of the English, were, that before all things they would have
great care to the kingdom, and the Queens honor, safety, and profit. As
concerning the Honor, that in no case they give the more Honorable place to
the Spaniard, but directly, modestly, and from the foresaid arguments challenge
it themselves. If so be the Spaniard would not condescend, that then the
English should not altogether prefer Honor before Profit, but propose some
mean and equal debatement; as this, to cast lots for the prioritie of going
or sitting first. Then, as concerning the safety and profit of England and the
Queen, that they should have a care that no cosenage or deceit be put upon
England, or the Low Countries in their trafficks. That the English may have
liberty to trade at the Indies; by reason that was granted before in the
Treaty 1541. in all the dominions of Charles the fifth; but especially in those
places where the Spaniards are themselves seated and peopled; also to trade
with all the Indian Princes that are under the Spaniards government. That first
the Spaniard should propound their Conditions, because they invited the English
thither to a Treaty. That they should not speak a word of the Rebels and
Runawayes, (who according to the ancient Leagues made with the Burgundians,
were to be driven out on both sides; and restored again to those with the
French.) But if so be, they should propose that, that they should tell them
that there are no Low Country men in England, besides the Merchants and
handy-crafts-man; but, that in the Low Countries the English are hired with
Pensions to breed stirs and commotions.

The Copies of their Delegation, Exceptions in the Commissions of the delegates
on both sides.
being on both sides exhibited to each other; the Spaniards took exception at
that of the Queens, against the Epithet, Most Illustrious, in the title of
the Archduke, who being as they said, descended from Sacred Emperors, and was
both son in law and brother to the King of Spain, The title Illustrious.
and was also the husband and head of the most Puissant Princess Isabella
Infanta, eldest daughter to the Spaniard, was well worthy to be honored by
all Princes with the title of most Puissant. The English answered, that an
Archduke ought not to be equalled in Honorable Titles with a King: besides,
that he was no otherway titled then Most Illustrious, in the ancient treaties
between Philip the Archduke, the father of Charles the fifth, and Henry the
eight. The Spaniards answered, that it was no wonder, if that title only were
given to him, when the very same and no greater was also given to Henry the
eight himself. On the other side the English found these faults in their King:
that the form of their subdelegation was wanting, that it was much obscured by
the intermingling of other Commissaries: that it was sealed but with a Private
Seal, when the Queens was sealed with the Broad Seal of England: Lastly,
that this clause was wanting, that the King should ratify whatsoever was
concluded upon. They answered, that their formal subdelegation was
comprehended in those words, Par trattar y hazar trattar. That there is no such
name in Spain, as the Broad Seal, and the Private: but that this was their
Kings own handwriting, in the presence of the Secretary, and signed with the
public Seal of the King and Kingdom; and that lastly, by these words, Estar
y passar, y estare y passare, all was Ratified.

Within some few days after, The English challenge the first place.
the English desired that they should meet (for as yet they had only dealt
with the Archdukes Delegates, by writing) also demanding the prioritie of the
place for the Queen: the Spaniards being angry somewhat with that, that the
English should first challenge the first place, as if in such affairs, Le
premier demaundeur, estoit le vaincueuer. The Spanish will not yield them a
place equal with them.
They answered, that it was news for the Kings or Queens of England, to stand
upon the terms of Equality with the Catholic King; but that it was unheard
of to speak of Prioritie. The English answered, that the Precedencie of the
Kingdom of England was very well known to all the world, and strengthened
with good and sound reasons; and that besides, the Ambassador Resident for the
Queen having a double power ought to be preferred, before him that comes only
with the bare title of a Delegate. Edmonds was very earnest, and assured them
that before hand he had informed Richardot, that the Queen would not lose her
Prioritie, and when he urged him to answer, he indeed denied it not, but
said, that he would answer him when they met together; and, that he did not
think that the Treaty should have broke off for that matter. After this there
were inuitations on both sides to their private houses, under the pretense of
familiarity and talk together, but indeed to work them out of the conceit of
the Prioritie. But this effect was well enough shunned on both sides: although
the Low Country men had enough to do to mollify the Spaniards a little, who
would not endure to hear, that the Catholic King should once acknowledge the
Queen for his Equal; for because, that thereby he must necessarily
acknowledge the French his Superior; being it is on all sides confessed, that
England yields prioritie to France. The English still do continue strong in
their resolution, defending their ancient privileges, saying, that the
Spaniard has no cause to be angry thereat; For he that uses only his own
Right, not a whit preiudices another man's: and that there was no reason why the
Spaniard should not acknowledge the Queen as his Equal, since she is as
Absolute a Monarch as he is, and has as ample, if not more ample Jurisdiction
in her Majesty's Kingdoms.

Afterward Edmonds was sent over into England, New instructions to the English
from the Queen.
and returned with these Instructions, to their Demands: If there be any
equality in the Prerogative of honor, that is not deceitful or prejudicial
to the Queen, let it be admitted; and that they should not so strictly stand
upon their first Instructions. That the Peace should be perpetual both to the
party now contracting, as also the further Succession for ever. That there
would be no mention of T^uces. That traffiques and trading should be recalled
to the state wherein it was in 1567. That there should be a Covenant made, that
no ships be stayed without the consent of that Prince, whose subjects those
ships are. That they should no way admit of that the Spanish men of war
should come into any Havens of the Queens. That if the traffic into Indie
were denied, they should not stand upon it but pass it over; as the French did
at the Treaty of Cambray, and at Ve^uins: and so every man should venture
thither on his own peril; for by admitting of any Restriction or Limitation,
the voyages of many thither might much be prejudiced. That, as the French did
in the Treaty at Bloys and Veruins, they should hold their tongue in the
matter of Rebels and Runawayes: That they should promise that the English
Garrisons in the towns pawned to her, should only defend the said towns, and
not war against the Spaniard. And that they should inform them, that the
Queen had fully resolved that her Subjects might have free ^rading in the
Archdukes Provinces: and that the English serving now the States, should not
be recalled again. Lastly, that they should fit themselves to Time and Place,
and to businesses accordingly, which sometimes gives better counsel to the
men, then the men can to them; also; that they should carefully observe to what
end this Treaty tended, whither or no, it were to keep the Queen in
suspense, whilst they either invaded England or Ireland: or whether it were
not to draw to themselves the United Provinces, and dis^oyne them from England.

In the mean while the Archduke, being somewhat molested with his great
wars in Flanders, complains, that succor and Subsidy was sent by the
Queen to the States, and that ships were rigging for the Indies. The Delegates
made answer, that they knew not of any such matter; but if it were true, that
this was no Innovation of new stirs, but a continuation of those things that
were begun before the Treaty; and that therefore they must be borne withal
patiently, till such time as the peace be concluded: Blaming the Spaniards
again, that publicly they had furnished the Rebels in Ireland with provision
and money; that he had received of them Hostages, and promised his succor:
that these things were to be seen extant in the very letters themselves of the
Spaniards, which were sent over to curry favor from the Queen to the Rebels,
and could presently be produced. Besides, that that was a plain innovation;
For his Father never assisted them but secretly, if he did that. Whilst these
things were in controversy, and suspicion on either side daily increased, that
the peace indeed is propounded, but a worse thing treacherously intended, The
Spaniards declare, that their Master the Catholic King, would in no case grant
the Queen Prioritie; or admit of Equality: and that he had peremtorily
commanded them, to dissolve the Treaty.

This indeed much troubled the Delegates both of the Queen and the Archduke:
and the English, The Treaty is dissolved.
rather then the Treaty should be dissolved, propounded, that omitting that
question of priority, they might treat with them by writing, conferences, or
mess^ngers between. They again on the other side, proposed, that if there
were a meeting ordained in Holland, and the States would also meet there, that
they would treat with them in any place of Holland, so it were not under the
Queen* Or, if it should please them to meet in any place of the Spanish
Dominion, that they would entertain the English thither, as every one would a
stranger, at his own house. Besides, it was also propounded, that the Treaty
should be only prorogued for threescore days, and not absolutely dissolved,
that in mean time, every one might endeavor for this peace, if it shall
please both the Princes. But this was all in vain; for the Delegates of the
Spaniard and Archduke post home in all haste possible: and the Queen
forthwith recalled hers again, protesting beforehand, that out of her
sincerity she did omit nothing to her knowledge, that was or might be required
in any Christian absolute Princes, which tend to a true peace, strong, and
perpetual, the better to spare the effusion of Christian blood; as appears in
that after shroward suspicion of no fair dealing, by reason of aid sent by
the Spaniard into Ireland, she at their request sent her Delegates to this
Treaty; where, seeing no reason that she should give priority to the Spaniard,
as she before intimated to them by Edmonds, she was content with equality: and
if that were denied, she refused not to treat either by writings or Mesfingers
between both parties. And so expired this Treaty at Bullen, after three
months.

The States in the mean having all things according to their hearts desire,
The skirmish at New-port.
were so far from desiring peace with the Spaniard, that at this very time
they consulted to bring to their obedience the Seacoasts of Flanders, to
secure their Sea voyages the better, for Spinola's Galleys molested their Seas
sorely; and also to free Ostend, which was only brought into distress with
Castles being planted round about it. These things seemed very easy unto them,
considering the weakness and affliction of the enemy, and the reuolts and
seditons amongst their old Soldiers. Wherefore having pressed fourteen
thousand foot, and three thousand horse, under Maurice of Nassaw, to whom some
of the chief of the States themselves adjoined them too, determining to land
at Ostend. But the wind being cross, they were feign to land at Philippine in
Flanders, by flat bottom boats, drouen on shore by the tide; and there they
spread abroad the terror of them so far and near, that those in Garrison in
the way, and those in S. Alberts Fort, yielded themselves every where near to
Ostend, whither they also came eight days after, having waded over an Arm of
the Sea to Newport: the next day after, in their consultations about pitching
their Camps, comes news to them, that the Archduke with seven thousand foot,
and one thousand horse, came flying upon them; who indeed, night and day
following them, re-got most of their Fortresses again, and ouer-run eight
hundred Scots, that lay in his way, and brought his weary Army almost as far
as Newport. There it seemed good to the Spaniard to pitch a little, and recover
S^. Alberts Fort, and by making a trench hinder those of Nassaw's Army from
provision of all sorts. But the Archduke some what courageous by reason of his
late-happy successes, scorned that device, as unworthy the very thought of a
true Soldier.

On the otherside Maurice as quick as he, provides himself for battle,
committing the Troop on foot to Sir Francis Vere, (as Vere himself in his
Commentaries and observations reports) and the Troop of horse to Lodowicke
Nassaw: but it pleased all of them to wade back again over the arm of the
Sea, as soon as they could. Vere would not suffer any of his men to put off
their clothes, saying, that shortly they should not either have need of
clothes, or they should get better. Then he chose out a fit place for battle,
which was a narrow Plain between the sea and the sand hills: the sand hills
on either side, being somewhat higher then ordinary. In the highest of them he
placed of the English 1500. and 2500. Musketteers of the Frisons. Then Maurice
propounded, whither or no it were best to march on and meet the enemy, or
expect him still there. Many thought it best to march on, that so that might
fright them, and bring back victory: and that by expecting them, they should
but weaken their courages and increase their enemies, who had opportunity now
to stop their passages of victuals to them. But for all that, Vere was on the
contrary opinion, that the enemies armies being so suddenly mustred, was not so
provided with victuals and all kind of provision, that it could long continue
in a region wasted away with continual war; That the difficulty of stopping
their victuals was least of all to be feared, by reason that they had store
enough in the Ships, and the Seas lying so open for the conueniance of more
provision unto them. Also, that the enemy being wearied with the ascents and
descents of hills and valleys, and with the extreme heat of the Sun, would
easily be vanquished by their fresh Forces. Maurice embracing this counsel,
there made a stand: and chose some elect Bands to stop the breaking out of the
Garrison of Newport upon them: and whilst the Archduke takes one or two
hours for deliberation, whither or no he should make a stand there, to
refresh his Soldiers, and expect his troops that were to follow, he lost
both opportunity of time and place. But yet for all that, being as full of
hope as courage he marches forwards; and seeing that by reason of the tide
coming in, there was but small room for his Horsemen, and that he must
necessarily bend toward the Sand Hills, on set purpose he set forth one of
his prisoners or captives, that to put them in a flight, cried out that the
Scots were all murdered, and that there was no fighting now; but yet his mouth
was quickly stopped. Vere, seeing the Archduke drawing near on, willed the
Horsemen to be sent out upon him, but the Master of the troops of Horse would
not suffer them. Wherefore Vere, having assaulted them with Shot of his great
Piece of Ordnance, drove them to the mountanous Sandy Hills, where they
tarried for their Footmen, who coming alone by the shore, thundered upon the
Nassouians with their Ordnance. Vere he gets to the top of the Sand Hills to
observe the motion of the enemy; and shortly after, by reason of some five
hundred Spaniards that came to assault them, the combat grew dangerous;
wherein Vere was wounded first in the leg, and then in the thigh: afterward
drawing toward the shore, his horse fell under him, he also lying down upon
him till he was helped by Drury and Higame, and put upon Drury's horse; and in
good time, for the enemy was near hand. Vere coming th^ther, found his Brother
Horatio with three hundred foot; where he commanded the Ordnance to be
discharged upon the enemy, his Squadrons, and that of Baely to set upon them,
and his Brother Horatio to be at hand with the foot; who all so violently beat
upon the enemies with their shot, that they drove the enemy to flight. Many in
the flight were slain; in all about nine thousand. There were taken the
Admiral of Arragon, Vigilare, Sapena, and many more of great note, and
Nobility. The Archduke himself was sore wounded, Duke Aumale also, and
Alphonsus Dauales Master of the Camp, Rodericke Lasso, and many more. But let
the Writers of the Low Country affairs report these things at large. It is
enough for me to speak this out of Veres own observations, who has left to
us to consider what the valor of the English was, amongst one thousand five
hundred of them that there were but eight hundred slain and wounded, and eight
Commanders lurking, and all but two wounded.

The Spaniards were very loath to attribute their loss to the valor of the
English, but were contented rather to impute it to the greater number of them;
or to their toilesome weariness, by reason of their exceeding long journey: or
to the Sun, or the wind that blew the dust and sand in their eyes: or to the
lasinesse of their own Horsemen.

Amongst the English, they that best deserved in this service were Francis and
Horatius Vere brothers, Edward Cecill, Calisthenes Brooks, Thomas Knolles,
Daniel Vere, John Ogle, Yaxley, Fairfax, Valuasour, Holcroft, Denis, Tirrell,
Hammund, Sutton, Foster, Garnet, Morgan, and Scot.

In this year also, Contentions betwixt the English and French about prizes.
as in the former between the English and French, on both sides complaints
were heard concerning Prizes, which were become very many by the mutual
insolence of their Pirates, but by the care of Thumer Boisisse a grave man, and
then French Ambassador.

IT was agreed on that the Subjects of both Princes should be mutually
protected in the lawful exercising of Merchandise, according to former
Treaties, that sufficient heed might be taken concerning the sending out of
Merchants ships, and others, with warlike provision and Letters of M^rt, to
wit, with double quantity of furniture and victuals, but of the single
provision of those ships without Letters of Mart; also that the Officers of the
Admiralty should be bound to answer for all injuries happening by their fault,
if they had received none of a less convenient charge: That care should be
taken for the costs of Merchants: That if possible their cause may be
dispatched within six months: That in actions legally ^egun, hereafter might
be pronounced soundly: That sureties shall only discharge the stipulation,
satisfying the Creditor, if justice be denied three months after the demand of
the Prince or Ambassador there re^ident: That Letters of Mart shall be
granted: That no Armor or warlike munition of any sort be transported into the
Spanish Dominions, if any thing be taken or detained by the Kings Subjects, the
randsome not paid: That care might be taken by both Princes, that in due time
the just randsome may be paid: That ships sent forth by the immediate command
of the Prince, or assigned by the governors of the Kings Navy to public
wars, may be accounted the Kings ships, if any thing be by them committed,
that either Prince take care for the administering of justice: That Letters of
Mart be not only suspended, but on both sides called in: That Pr^clamation be
made that neither division, transpartation, or alienation of taken goods be
suffered* That no man may either by them receive them, or conceal them,
unless by the I^dge of the Adimralty they be thought a lawful prey: That
Pirates should not be received into Cities, Ports, or Villages, or suffered to
tarry not laid hands on, and bound over: That they be present upon pain of
lawful punishment, and make restitution notwithstanding, with this
protestation: That these things be not otherwise construed, but if any thing be
repugnant to ancient Leagues, that nothing be understood derogatiue from them,
but because of the injury of these times, That there may be better heed taken
against the depredation of Pirates: That this may be taken only by the way of
providing, until a larger Treaty may be held concerning these several
Articles, for the commodity of each Prince.

Controversies also arose concerning the new impositions put on English
Merchandise, contrary to the Treaties of Blois, concerning English cloth
deceitfully made, not without the discredit of our Nation, the Queen also
requiring the money she lent to the French King, and part of it was repayed
withal tokens of thankfulness.

Not only in France arose a fresh controversy, but also in Denmark,
concerning the traffic and their fishing on the shore of Norway, and by
Island. In the former year the Danes being angry with this fishing and the
English Piracy, Contentions with the Danes concerning traffic.
suddenly set upon the English of Hull, fishing not far from Norway,
confiskated their ships and goods to a great value, and put their Mariners to
the rack, having caused this punishment to be denounced two years before in
England, with an interdiction of fishing. These things (the cause unknown) the
Queen took heinously, and as proceeding from an enemy, who neither respected
her person, or Subjects, or his own ancient League she mediated for the men of
Hull, in Letters sent by Stephen Leisere, and Thomas Ferrar, acknowledging that
Whitfield and Bernicke had verbally pretended, that that fishing by Island, and
Norway, was used of the English, contrary to their League, but of this, that
they had showed no proof; she taught also, that many privileges of fishing
were granted to the English by the ancient Kings of Norway, before the
conjunction of Denmark and Norway, and that the same were confirmed by John
and Christianus Kings of Denmark, which was affirmed out of the Treaty with
John, that license of fishing from seven years to seven was to be asked; she
answered, that it had been omitted many years of them, that the Danes were in
fault, not the English; for until the expulsion of Christierne their King, in
the year 1521. this license was asked; since then, that neither Frederick the
Kings great Grandfather, nor Christian the Grandfather, nor Frederick the
Father had enacted it, who in the year 1585 promised by his Letters, that if
the English abstained from injury, they might enjoy the liberty which formerly
they had without any asking leave; wherefore that now the English were unjustly
dealt withal, since that of late they had not refused to ask license from
seven years to seven, as before also the most famous Lawyers had judged the
Sea to be common, not to be interdicted of any Prince by the Law of Nations. To
let pass many words, the Queen required the whole matter should be referred
either to Delegates on both sides, or to the Elector of Brandenburgh the Kings
Father in Law, the Duke of Mekelburgh, Henry Julius the D. of Brunswicke, Uncle
to the Kings Sister. But when neither Stephen Leisiere, nor Ferrar, nor
Nicholas Crage a learned man, the one sent into England, the other into
Denmark, could compose the matter; at length it was agreed on, that Delegates
should be sent to Embda, thither the Queen sent Ambassadors Richard Bancroft
Bishop of London, Christopher Perkins, and John Swale, who might parley with
the Delegates of Denmark. But when they came not at the appointed day, whether
hindered by the wind, or some other error, the Danes alleging, that the time
of their Delegates was out, went home, or as some thought, because they wanted
victuals, for the Danes give to their Ambassadors Captain victuals, not money
as other Princes, neither could endure to hear that they should require the
prolongation of that authority. Hence the English complained of the Danes, as
men proposing nothing else to themselves, then that things should remain as
they were, to wit, that they might exact new tribute daily in the Oresund Sea,
that by new decrees they might confiscate their ships and merchandise, that
they might hold their fishng in the Northern Sea, and then saying through the
same into Moscouia: notwithstanding about these times (for the better
furtherance of Navigations, the Trades increase, and the Kingdoms honor) the
Queen instituted the Company of East Indie Merchants, The East India company
instituted.
giving to them great privileges, they sent thither with three ships, James
Lancaster (of whom we before have spoken) that in the year 1594. he over came
Fernambucke in Brasil. Since that time (and not unluckily) they sent every
year a small Navy, and to their Kingdoms honor erected Markets in Lurat the
great Maguls Country, in Mossolupatan, Bantan, Patane, Siam, Sagad, Mecassar;
also in Iapan, crushing by happy victories as well the insolent enemy, as the
Turkish falsnesse: but whether so great a sum of money daily transported
hence, and so many Mariners wasted be for the common good, let wise men i^dge,
and posterity perceive. While the Queen thus prouides for her Subjects
inrichment, Clement the eight Pope understanding her to be well in years, Two
Breues sent pri^ily by the Pope of Rome against the King of Scots, next heir
to the Kingdom of England.
for the better restoring of the Roman Religion to its former height in
England, sent thither two Breues, one to the Clergy, the other to the Laity, in
which he admonished, that they should admit no one to the Scepter after her
decase, how near a kin soever, unless he were one who would not only grant
a toleration of the Romish Religion, but also with his best endeavor further
it. To the doing of which he must bind himself by an oath, after the manner
of his predecessors, but the contents of these were as sparingly revealed as
they themselves closely sent, notwithstanding hence was the original of the
monstrous powder plot: and as these Breues were sent from Rome to England, for
the easier excluding of King James, from his inheriting England; so at the same
time was prepared in Scotland a deadly Sword by the Rethuens Brothers, who in
revenge of the lawful punishment inflicted on the E. The treacherous plots of
Earl Gowries Sons against him.
of Gowry their Brother, in the Kings minority appointed the same good King to
die, treacherously seducing him to their house, and they had not come short in
the performing of this design, had not the Protector of Kings by these
instruments, the Kings fortitude, the loyal endeavor of John Ramsey, and
Thomas Areskins made themselves the authors of destruction on themselves, for
they were made as well partners in death, as in that plot, and by decree of the
State their goods confiscate, their house made level with the ground,
themselves quartered, and the Quarters hung on stakes through the Cities, and
as many as had to their surname Rethuen were commanded to leave it, for the
better obliterating both of name and memory, let it not be accounted fraud in
me to relate their punishment, since other Writers in this matter have been
profuse about this Prince: Great complaint in England for the scarcity of Corn.
through England arose great complaint of the scarcity of victuals, which also
increased by reason of the moist constitution in the heavens, at the end of the
former year, the vernall cold of this, and the private avarice of some, who by
the abuse of an obtained license transported great store into other Nations.
Hence the people moved no less with opinion, then if they had had more
rational proofs, by Libels railed on Buckhurst the Treasurer, as if he had
granted the license, but he not lightly regarding these things repaires to the
Queen, from whom by Proclamation his innocence was testified, a fault
transferred on the Hucsters of Corn, the Libellers apprehended and punished.
But such is the querulous envy of the people, that they complained the more,
and lashed him by private backe-bitings, as if he had acknowledged it.

And now Essex having been under the Lord Keeper of the great Seals custody
this half year, The Earl of Essex begins to repent him of his former
purposes and actions.
began (moved thereto by his natural inclination to goodness, and by this
physical affliction, and many of his friends, especially Henry Howard) began,
I say, to come to a better mind; also determining to send away far from him
those turbulent spirits that suggested him to all that was naught, Gill
Mericke, and Cuffe; he himself putting on such piety, patience, and modest
humility, that all his friends hoped well of him again, and his enemies envied
thereat.

The Queen in short time being pacified with his humble and submissue Letters,
Essex is commanded to his own house
commanded him to keep only his own house, under the free custody of Richard
Barckly; withal protesting, that these her punishments were not intended for
his overthrow, but for his amendment.

But the common people altogether pleading for his innocence, and thinking him
shrewdly wronged, it seemed good to the Queen to eschew all kind of severity,
injustice, or prejudice to her or her Council, that his cause should be heard,
yet not in the Star Chamber, lest he were too severely punished, but only
privately in the Lord Keepers house; the Judges thereof were allotted, the
Councell-table of the Queen, four Earls, two Lords, and four Judges, that
thereby he might only be censured alike, but with no mark of treachery, or
treason.

The sum of his accusation was, His appearance before the Lords Commissioners.
that having no such authority in his Commission he made Southampton leader of
the Horse; that he knighted many; that he drew his forces from Tir-Oen, whom he
should have prosecuted into Mounster; that he had private conference with
Tir-Oen, to the violation of the Majesty of the Queen, and the honor of the
the Deputy himself, and that this conference was the more suspected, because
it was private and secret. These things the Lawyers sorely aggrauated, bringing
in also abrupt sentences of his, out of Letters writ by himself some two years
before, the Copies whereof were dispersed by his followers up and down
England; such as these.

THat there is no tempest more raging then the indignation of an impotent
Prince. That the heart of the Queen is hardened. Cannot Princes err? Can they
not iniure their Subjects? I do know my duty as a Subject, and I know my
duty as Lord Marshall of England.

Out of these sentences they argued, as if he had thought the Queen very
weak, or void of reason; that he had compared her to Pharao's heart that was
hardened; that she now cared neither for truth or justice; and as though he
(besides his allegiance) owed neither loyalty or thankful^es unto the Queen;
also they objected some petty matters unto him, by reason of a Book concerning
the deposing of Richard the second, which was dedicated to him.

The Earl kneeling upon one knee at the boords end, The Earl makes answer for
himself.
gave great thanks to God for all his mercies bestowed upon him, and to his
most merciful Queen, that cited him not to the Star Chamber, but would have
that cup pass by him, (as he himself said) within these private walls.
Therefore professing that he would in no case contest with her, or altogether
excuse the errors of his weakness, or his inconsiderate youth; protesting
withal, that he was always a Subject very loyal, and that he not so much as
thought that, that might enfringe his loyalty; also, that in all things he
meant well, although perchance it fell out otherwise, and that now he had taken
lea^e of the world. Then shedding many tears, he forced most of the standers
by to accompany him in that doleful collachrymation; yet he could not contain
himself, but he must needs excuse his error, in making Southampton Master of
the Horse; which he did, he said, being erroneously persuaded, that the Queen
would admit of those reasons he could give her for it: but that, when he saw
she would not admit of them, he casheared him from that authority. The reason,
he said, that he knighted so many, was to retain with him more Voluntaries of
the Nobler sort. That the war in Mounster was undertaken by the indiscreet
opinion of the Irish Council, but that the chief of them, now, O^mond was
stricken with blindness, and Warham of S. Leager with a cruel death.

As he was going forwards, The L. Keeper interrupts his answer.
the Keeper interrupted him, admonishing him, that as he had begun, he should
betake himself to the Queens mercy, who indeed desired not to find him
guilty of treason, but only of Disobedience, and contempt, and that he should
not carry a show of obedience before him, but show his obedience indeed. That
by extenuating and lessening his offense, he would seem the more to extenuate
the Queens mercy. That it sounded very harshly for him to shadow his
disobedience, under a desire and will of obedience.

It were needless to repeat what every man said, when as they said little or
nothing, but what had been before said in the Star Chamber. Wherefore at
length the Lord Keeper pronounces this sentence; That he must be degraded of
his office of one of the Councillors, and suspended from his office of Earl
Marshall, and Master of the Ordnance, and remain in custody during the Queens
pleasure.

These things every one approved with his consent, and many notwithstanding
conceived great hope of his recovery and restoring to the Queens favor, in
that the Queen expressly commanded that be should not be suspended from being
Master of the Horse, as if she had intended to have used him again, and
withal, in that she would not have this censure past upon him registered.

These hopes, The hopes of his liberty gathered from the Queens natural
inclination to pity.
many that observed the consequent events and dispositions, both of the Queen,
the Earl, and his enemies, probably increased the same by this means. That
the Queen was borne to clemency and quietness. That in her wisdom she knew
that mercy was the pillar of her Kingdom. That she both would and could show
mercy, and yet with discretion. That she would not drive so great a man into
despair. That she would not, that any one should perish, that was any
commodity to the Commonwealth. That she had squared all her actions hitherto
to the rule of justice. That she intended not the overthrow, but the amendment
of the Earl. That such a word of a Prince was an Oracle; and as in God nothing
is that admits a contradiction, so neither in Princes. Besides, that she,
like Mithridates, hated the malicious that raged against virtue forsaken by
good fortune. That whom she loved once, she loved to the end. That many having
more heinously offended, have recovered, or yet not quite fell from her favor;
as Sussex, concerning the Irish treason. Norfolk not observing his Commission
in the siege of Lethe. Bacon having written a Book of the succession of the
Kingdom. Henry Arundel, Henry the Father of Southampton, and Lumley, for
secret conspiracies with the Q. of Scotland. And Croft for private conference
wit^ the Prince of Parma. Walsingham for surprising the K. of Scotland by
Gowry, unknown to her, or her Council. And Leicester concerning the affairs
in the Low Countries. These all were accused, and yet recovered again her
favor. But indeed, for the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, that they
were justly executed, for conspiring the destruction of this Kingdom with
foreign Nations. As also Norfolk who sinned against his oath of allegiance,
afterward again, by going about a marriage with the Queen of Scots; and by
concealing those things which he knew she dealt about with other Nations; and
by ayding the Scots that were proclaimed public enemies to England. Also that
the Queen of Scots indeed died, for all she seemed safe by the privilege, and
prerogative of her iniunction, in that she took such sinister courses for the
working of her liberty, that she endangered the safety of the Kingdom: and
when no better physic could be given the commonwealth to maintain its life,
then her death. But then, they considered, that no such matter was objected to
the Earl, who only having sinned out of ignorance, was free from treason,
both by the sentence of the Queen her self and her Council. The Queen all
this while (to call him back from despair) not preferring any of his noted
enemies in the time of his oppression, although they much affected higher
dignities.

Then they argued from the noblenes of the Earl (for a far off he was of the
blood Royal) his virtues, Next, from the nobleness and virtuous disposition
of the Earl.
and the choice of the Queen of him from amongst many into her favor; that he
suffered even a box on the ear at her bands; that he deserved exceedingly well
of his Country, at home and abroad; that there was not any one better
instructed in the arts of a Commander, or to manage a war, or frustrate the
violence of an approaching enemy; that there was not one more beloved of the
people that could appease any tumult if it were once raised, and that could
discreetly govern the affairs of the Realm; and that he was one that was
most worthy of the Queens love and favor; that the severity of the Queen, if
she should exercise it against one so well deserving, would also concern the
rest; that nothing does more joy the hearts of our enemies, then to see those
ill dealt withal, who are more famous then the rest, and indeed innocent; that
the Earl had no greater enemies then his own ornaments; and that his
adversaries complained of nothing in him, but his greatness. Thirdly* from the
diverse intents of his very aduersarins.
Then they argued from the diverse intents of his adversaries, who although they
all meant ill, yet used not the same means. Some of them when he was cited in
the Star Chamber, thinking it not best to deal rigorously with him; that
then the Secretary devised evil practices against him; that yet such
euill-minded men desire more then they dare attempt. Besides, that it was
wisdom to understand, that affairs in Court turn not always upon the same
wheel; that there are periods of hate, of love, of jealousy, of cruelty and
mercy, although we cannot define them. That no man knows whither or no he be
worthy, by to morrow, of love or hatred. That the determinations of Princes are
very intricate. That they are wont sometimes, even to sacrifice to the people,
for the redeeming of their credit, the chiefest of their servants, as appears
by the example of Empson, Dudley, Cardinal Woolsey, and Cromwell. Let men
wisely deem, that as Princes have shown themselves toward others, so they
will toward themselves too if occesion shall serve. Therefore, that hence his
adversaries ought to be wary lest they plunge* themselves too deep in this
business, and be not able to follow it, lest thereby they do themselves the
greatest hurt, in striving to burden him more, that already is too much laden
with hatred. Neither that they do too much exasperate the Queen terribly
against so brave a man: for if they do, howsoever men may be amazed at it, yet
God will be avenged of them, who being himself just, will in his best time
defend those that are unjustly afflicted.

So by these persuasions many were of opinion that the Earl would recover
favor again with the Queen, both now busiing them selves in consideration how
in this doubtful and dangerous time he might spend his life. Considerations in
what course of life the Earl (...) best to employ hims^^fe.
First, whether it were best for to put himself upon any free Embasy, and so
to withdraw himself into some foreign Country, till such time as the weather
grew a little clearer for him; secondly, whither it were better to addict
himself wholly to a contemplative life, that thereby he might lift up his
heavenly mind as his fortunes grow lower and lower. Or lastly, whither or no
he should take some midway between both, being ready provided for either
fortune.

The Earl in the mean time made show of his great humbleness of mind, The
great humility of the Earl.
protesting that, both by words and Letters, he had taken his leave of this
world, that with tears he had washed away from his heart his hot ambition. And
that now he desired nothing more then that the Queen would let her servant
depart in peace, (for these were his own his words.) These speeches so much
delighted the Queen, that she forthwith removed him from his keeper Barckley,
willing him to be his own man, and if (...) pleased, he might go into the
Country. Admonishing him withal, that he make himself and his discretion his
k^^pers, and willing him not to come near the Queen or (...) Court. Which
certainly if he had done, it had fared ^^tter with him, for he was never freer
(to wit) from evil councels, then when he was at custody.

For no sooner had the Earl this sentence of liberty pronounced, Cuffe railes
at the Earl.
but Cuffe (that always had persuaded the Earl never to confess himself
guilty, but stand in his own defense, and not to impair his honor with a
submission) now comes, and so vehemently nips him for a pusillanimous Earl,
and the rest that counseled him to it, for such indiscreet Counselors, that
the Earl commanded him to be cashiered out of service; but yet Mericke his
Steward that was of the same opinion with Cuffe, fulfilled not the Earls (...)

The Earl being now his own man, and about to go into the Country, signifies
by Howard to the Queen.

(...) The Earls message to the Queen.
(...) hers, which had been his stars whereby he sailed on happily, and kept his
course on at a just measure. That now he had resolved to repent earnestly, and
to say with Nebuchadonozor, That my habitation is amongst the wild Beasts of
the field, that I may eat Hay like an Ox, and be watered with the dew of
heaven, till such time as it shall please the Queen to restore my sense to me
again.

The Queen was so iocond at these words, The Queens answer.
that she would say,

I Wish his deeds and words would in iumpe together; He has long tried my
patience; and I have reasonable well tried his humbleness. Sure I am my Father
would not have borne with his perverseness. But I will not look back, lest
like Lots wife I am turned into a pillar of salt. All is not gold that
glisters, etc.

Shortly after, Cuffe again entertained by the Earl.
Cuffe having access again to the Earl, more boldly rings the same things
again into his ears, obiecting to him, that by his confession he had betrayed
his own cause; and that thereby he had lost more credit then his dearest blood
could buy again. That Howard and the rest, only seem trusty in these petty
matters to him, that they might the easier deceive him in weightier, and
resign him over to the prey of his enemies. That all hope of his former
liberty was looked up, and not to be purchased under desperation. Admonishing
him that therefore he would bethink himself to take some course to redeem
his credit and liberty, and his friends from servitude, and the whole Kingdom
from the tyrannous government of his notorious enemies. The Earl is deaf to
Cuffes bad counsel.
The Earl stopped his ears against any such council being assuredly persuaded
that he should recover his lost favor again with the Queen, and that gainful
Farm of Sweet Wines, the time of renewing which was now almost expired. The
Queen indeed by words and Letters gave him great hope of her favor, but
concerning the Farm, she a^swered here and there in several places,

That first she would see what it was, The Queen will not yield to Essex his
petitions.
and that such good turns are not to be bestowed blindfold.

Then shortly after she suffered others to have the profit thereof, saying,
That they must keep a wild horse without fodder, that intend to bring him
within compass. Also, she much used to recite and commend that physical
Aphorism,

That the more one feeds corrupt and diseased bodies, the more one hurts them.

The Earl being inwardly much discontented at the Queens answer, The Earl
is much disconted at his denial.
grew exceeding angry, and giving over his judgment to the moderation and rule
of his extrauagant affections and passions, he then began to give ear to
Cuffe, and any one that would blow the coals of sedition, that now had fully
persuaded him, that the Queen, the Council, and his adversaries, had
purposely resolved to beggar him quite, to make him live on the Almes-basket,
and of the crummes that fell from their tables. And that so being made poor,
neglected of the Queen, and forsaken by his friends, he might become the
laughing stock to his triumphing enemies.

Hereupon Southampton is sent for out of the Low Countries. He hearkens to bad
counsels.
And some Divines counsails in Oxford, demanded, but for what I know not; and
the Earl he himself returns to London.

And now S. Christ. Blunt being much discontented that he had brought the Earl
into these troubles, (for he persuaded him to come over out of Ireland but with
a few with him) having also understood that Hen. Howard had in vain made
intercession for the Earl with his potent adversaries, admonished him now (as
he himself afterward confessed) to make his own way to the Queen,
intimating, that besides many of the Nobility would secure him, his ingresse
and regresse. But the Earl answered, that that would breed a scruple in his
conscience, except he had the favorable opinion of Preachers thereto. Yet for
all that, he sent word to Blu^t by Cuffe, that shortly he would take some order
what to do, and impart the same to him, as soon as he had resolved on it.

And now the Earl kept open house, Mericke his Steward entertaining at board
all kind of Soldiers, audacious, and discontented persons, that would not
care whom they wounded with their tongues. Every day there was a Sermon by some
precise Minister or other; whither all the Citizens almost flock't daily; also
Rich the Sister of the Earl, that having lost the honor of her marriage bed,
found the great discontent of the Queen lying heavy upon her, frequented
thither also daily. And if any man thought ill of these things, why he is
presently noted as an injurious person, to the honor and freedom of the Earl.

In the last month of this year died Roger Lord North, Treasurer of the
Queens Court, Son to Edward Lord North; he was a man of a lively
disposition, and his wisdom equal to his courage. We have spoken of him
sufficiently in 1567. and 1574. Dudley North his Heir succeeded, being nephew
by the son, and Dorothy the daughter and heir of Valentine Dale, an excellent
Lawyer. In his Treasurership William Kn^lles succeeded him. Sir Edward Wott^n
shortly after succeeded him, being a man well tried in many affairs of the
Commonwealth.

THE FOUR and Fortieth Year OF HER REIGN.
Anno Domini 1601. 1601

IN the beginning of this year the Queen was wholly taken up with very
honorable ^mbassies; Ambassadors from Mauritania, and Russia.
from the South cam^ Hamets King of (...) ^ingitana; Diverse Princes resorted to
visit the Queen.
from the North (...) Pheod^riw^cke the Emperor of Russia's; She also very
(...) entertained (...) William the Son of (...) Count Palatine, Duke of
(...) and Virginius Vrsinus the Duke of (...) and the (...) (...) (...) for he
was beholding to him for it. Sir Ferdinando Gorge Captain of the Garrison at
Plimmouth. Sir John Dauis Superuisor or Ouerseer of the Engines under him, an
excellent Mathematician; and Sir John Littleton of Fra^kell, wise both in
council and war; I did purposely omit the genuine translation of these
words, because I understand they were interserted since the body of this
History was composed, as may be seen in the Manuscript of M. Cambden himself,
which is now in the hands of that famous and worthy Scholar M. John Seldom.
if so be all his other behauiours had been correspondent thereunto.

All these (to avoid suspicion) meeting covertly in Drury House; there Essex
first proposed to them a Catalogue of the Nobility that were all addicted to
him; wherein, of Earls, Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, he reckoned about one
hundred and twenty. After this, he wills them to consider, and tell him,
whether it were best to surprise the Queen, or the Tower, or both together;
and then what they should do with the City.

But it seemed best to them all to surprise the Court, and that after this
manner: S. C. Blunt with a choice company should seize on the Gate, Dauis the
Hall, Danuers the great Chamber of the Guard, (where they sit seeing who is
highest amongst them) and also the Presence Chamber; and then Essex should come
out of the Mues with some choice company, and having way made for him, come
humbly to the Queen, and demand that she would remove from her his potent
adversaries, whom he had afterward resolved (as was by some of them confessed)
to cite to appear before Judgment; and having assembled a Parliament, to
change the form of government in the State.

But whilst these Scottish ^mbassadours, Suspicion daily increased of Essex
his loyalty.
and a seasonable time for this matter were daily expected, suspicions
increased daily of him, by reason of a continual concourse of the Commonalty
to Essex house, under pretense of hearing Sermons; as also, by reason of some
words that fell from one of their Preachers, whereby he allowed that the great
Magistrates of the Kingdom had power in necessity to restrain the Princes
themselves. Hereupon, at small inckling of the matter on the seventh of
February, came Robert Sack^ill the son of the Treasurer, under pretense of an
honorable visitation, but indeed, out of a desire of information, by knowing
who used to come thither, and what they were. Presently after that, is Essex
sent for to the Lord Treasurers house, (where the Council met) there to be
admonished that he should moderately use the benefit of his liberty: and the
very same day, a little note was put into his hands, (he knew not how) wherein he
was warned to look to himself and provide for his own safety. But the Earl
fearing that somewhat had come to light, and so he might perchance be
committed again, excused himself by reason of some distemper in his health,
that he could not come to the Council.

And by this time his resolution (which had been four months a digesting)
failed: and he hasteneth again to some new plot. Wherefore having assembled
his intimate friends again, and intimated to them, that some of them would
shortly be imprisoned, he propounded to them, whither it were best or no
forthwith to seize upon the Court, or to try what the Citizens will do for
him, and so by their help set upon it: or whither or no they had rather
counsel him to fly, and secure himself that way. For the surprising of the
Court, He plots new matters.
they were unprovided of Soldiers and Engines; and besides, some affirmed that
there had been lately watch and ward duly kept there; besides, that to assault
the Court, was inexcusable treason against the Queen. Whilst they were
arguing about the love of the Citizens, and some objected the vnsta^^^
disposition of the common people, behold one comes in, as if sent from them,
that promised their utmost endeauours against all their enemies. Hereupon the
Earl being somewhat cheerful, began to discourse how much he was ^oued in
the City, by most that were much addicted to his ^ame and fortune; which he
believed absolutely to be true, by reason of their continual murmuring and
crying out against his hated enemies. Also, by other men's speeches, he was
persuaded that Thomas Smith then Sheriff of London, who was then Captain of a
thousand trained Soldiers, would be for him upon all occasions. Wherefore he
was resolved (by reason that such lingering is as dangerous commonly as
rashness) the next day, which was Sunday, to come through the City with two
hundred of the nobler sort, and so to pass to Paul's Cross, just about the end
of the Sermon, and there to declare to the Aldermen and people the reasons of
his coming, and demand of them aid against his adversaries. If so be the
Citizens were backward in the matter, then they would go on further presently;
but if they were willing to help, then with them* to invade the Court
presently, and make way for him to the Queen. So all that night there was
nothing but running up and down from Essex house, and crying that the Lord
Cobham, A great multitude assembled at Essex his house.
and Rawleigh laid wait for the Earl of Essex life. Hereupon, on Sunday,
which was the eight day of February, early in the morning, comes the Earls of
Rutland, and Southampton, the Lord Sands, Parker Lord Montaquile, and almost
three hundred more of the better sort. These the Earl courteously entertained,
and intimated to some, that there was wait laid for his life, that therefore
he had resolved to get unto the Queen, and tell of his dangers to her, by
reason she never hears of it from his adversaries, who abusing her sacred
ears with calumnies and false informations, have engrossed them only to their
stories belief. To others he signified, that the City stood for him, and that
therefore he would betake himself to them, and by their assistances re^enge
the enemies injuries. All this while the g^tes (...) up, and no man let in, but
he that was well k^own^, and no man let out that was once let in. ^et Sir
Ferdinando Gorge had leave and license to go to Sir Walter Rawleigh, that
expected him on the water, and sent thither for him; Blunt indeed persuaded
them there to surprise Sir Walter Rawleigh, but they did i^ not. Now indeed
there were some that reported that Gorge made there a discovery of all the
matter to Rawleigh; but that is uncertain: yet certain it is that Rawleigh
admonished him to take heed, that his absence from his Office at Plimmouth
without leave cost him not imprisonment, and that Gorge again admonished
Rawleigh that he should have a care to himself, seeing that many of the
Nobility had conspired against him, and some more that abused the Queens
authority.

At this very time the Queen commanded the Lord Mayor of London to see that
all the Citizens were ready at their doors at her command in an instant; and
to the Earl of Essex she sent the Lord Keeper, The Lords of the Privy
Council sent to the Earl of Essex.
the Earl of Worcester, William Knolles Controwier of the Queens Household,
Uncle to the Earl, and Popham Lord chief Justice of England, to know of him
the reason of such a concourse. They were all let in at a wicket, and their
servants shut out, only except him that carried the Seal before the Keeper.
In the yard there they found a confused multitude of people, and in the midst
of those the Earls of Essex, Rutland, and Southhampton, and many more, that
presently flockt about the Council. The Lord Keeper turning himself to the
Earl of Essex, signified to him, that he and the rest of the Lords with him,
were sent newly from the Queen, to know of him the cause of this concourse;
who promised, that if any injury had been done unto him, he should have Law
and Equity for it.

The Earl of Essex answered him allowed in this manner;

VVAit is laid for my life; Essex his complaint.
there were some hired that should murder me in my bed; I am traitorously
dealt with, and my Letters were counterfeited both with hand and Seal.
Wherefore, we have met here together to defend our selves, and preserve our
lives, since neither my patience, nor misery, will appease the malice of my
adversaries, except they drink my blood also.

Popham spoke to him to the same purpose, that the Lord Keeper had said already
before; promising, that if so be he would particularly tell what was
undertaken, or intended against him, that he would truly and honestly tell
the Queen, and he should be lawfully heard.

The Lord Keeper being very urgent with them, that if so be they would not tell
their grieuances publicly, they would retire in and tell them, the multitude
interrupting him, cries out,

LEt us be gone, The clam^ur of the multitude.
come; they abuse your patience; they betray you my Lord; the time hastens,
come.

Hereupon the Lord Keeper, turning about to them, charged them all on the
Queens name to lay down their weapons. Then the Earl of Essex goes into the
house, the Lord Keeper following him, and the rest of his company, that there
they might privately talk about the matter. In the mean time these harsh
^ounds fly about their cares.

KIll them, kill them; away with the great Seal; shut them up fast enough.

After they had come into the midst of the house, Essex commanding the doors
to be bolted, says unto them,

BE patient but a little, my Lords; I must needs (...) into the City, to take
order with the Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs, and I will return instantly.

The Lords of the Council being shut up there, were kept by John Dauis,
Francis Tresham, and Owen Salisbury an old bold Soldier, and some Gun-men. And
Essex having almost forgot his resolution by reason of their coming,
committing his house to Gill Mericke, issues forth with some two hundred with
him, who were not in battle array, or any military order, but only running
for the most part with their Cloaks wrapped about their arms, and Swords:
amongst whom were the Earl of Bedford, the Lord Cromwell, and some other
Nobles.

Having come into London he cries out every minute, Essex enters London.


FOr the Queen, for the Queen; there is wait laid for my life.

And so going through Cheape-side, he made all haste to Smith's house the
Sheriff by Fenchurch- street. And ever where he saw Citizens without weapons,
he requested them to arm themselves, or else they could do him no good. Yet
for all this, in so well trained a City full of soldiers, most popular, and
most addicted to him; there was not one, no not of the basest people, that
took Arms for him in his defense.

At length he got to the Sheriffs house, almost at the further end of the
City, so fretting and cha^ing in his mind, and so sweating (although the
weather was not then so hot) that there he was feign to change his shirt.

The Sheriff Smith, He is proclaimed Traitor.
in whom his too easy credulity had reposed such great confidencie, presently
withdrew himself out at a Posterne gate, to the Lord Mayors: and in the mean
time the Lord Burghley, Dethicke Garter King at Arms entering into the City,
proclaim Essex, and all his accomplices Traitors; although indeed some
withstood it, and offered violence. The Earl of Cumberland, Sir Thomas Gerard
Marshall did the like in other parts of the City. When the Earl of Essex
perceived that, he rushes out of the Sheriffs house, and his countenance much
changing often, he cried out, that England was to be divided for the Infanta
of Spain, exhorting the Citizens to take arms, but all in vain; for the
Citizens wealth, if nothing else, would keep them loyal. But when the Earl
saw that not any one took Arms for his defense, and that those that
accompanied him withdrew themselves away; and heard also that the Admiral came
with forces aagainst him, then he began to cast away all his hopes. Wherefore he
bethinkes of returning home again, The Earl thinks of returning home again.
and by the means of the Lord Keeper and the rest locked up at home, to procure
some hope of favor from the Queen. But when as Sir I. Leuison with a Band at
Ludgate denied Gorge passage for the Earl, which he demanded, Gorge being
careful of himself, in the care of the Councillors, comes and persuades the
Earl, Gorge sets the Councillors free that the Earl had locked into a room.
that he would send him to set the Councillors free, and then both he and
they might intercede with the Queen for his pardon, whilst yet there was
hope, and some comfort, no blood being yet shed, and whilst the Queen might
be in doubt of the success, or the Cities mind in any uncertainty what they
should do. The Earl gave him leave, but only willed that Popham might be set
free; but Popham denying his own liberty, except the Lord Keeper also were
delivered, Gorge set them all at liberty, and taking Boat with them, came by
water to the Court.

The Earl now about to return, A conflict near the Bishop of Londons.
finds his way chained up nearest the West gate of Paul's, and Pikemen, and
Muskets set against him, at the appointment of the Bishop of London, under the
command of Sir I. Leuison. Here first he drew his Sword, and commanded Blunt to
assault them. Which he did very manfully, having slain one Wait, and he
himself ^ore wounded was taken. There was slain also Henry Tracy a young man,
and very dearly loved by the Earl, besides one or two Citizens. The Earls
passage being stopped here, (...) having his hat shot through with a Bullet,
accompanied with a few that left him not yet, He takes Boat at Queenehith, and
gets home to fortify his house.
(for most had) making have down to Queene-hith, got Boats, and came home to
his house again by water.

Having returned, he was very angry that the Councillors were dismissed; so
he burns a many papers, lest (as he said) they should blab too much, and
prepares himself for his own defense, fortifying his house on all sides, and
and vainly expecting help from the Londoners.

Presently after the Lord Admiral comes, He is besieged.
and besieges it on the Land-side, setting in order the Earls of Cumberland,
and Lincoln, Thomas Howard, Lord Gray, Burghley, and Compton, with horse and
foot. He himself, with his Son Effingham, L. Cobham, Stanhope, Robert
Sidney, and Sir Fulke Greuile, on the Thames side, seized on his Garden. And
now being ready to assault the house, He is commanded to yield himself.
he commands them by Sidney to yield them up to him. The Earl of
Southhampton demands again to whom they should yield it; To their enemies?
that were indeed to deserve danger enough. To the Queen? that were indeed to
confess themselves guilty. But yet, says he, if the Admiral will give us
good pledges for our security, we will come and appear before the Queen. But
if not, that they had all resolved rather to lose their lives, then the credit
of their cause. The Admiral answered again, that there ought not to be
Pledges given, or any conditions offered to Rebels; but yet certified^ Essex,
that he should send out the Countess his Wife, his Sister the Lady Rich, and
some other Mayd-seruants, that with (...) and (...) made a terrible noise
within doors. The Earl took that for a great courtesy, and only desired
that he might have an hour or two^ respite to fortify the place where they
went out; which was granted.

But (...) hour being spent, The Earl ^etermines to ^^ue forth.
the Earl finding all his hopes come to a despair, determined to issue forth
upon them; which the Lord Sands somewhat ancienter then the rest, urged also
exceedingly, saying still, that the most valiant Councels are the most safe;
that it is far more honorable to die fighting with Noble men, then by the
hand of a hangman.

But Essex his mind being as unconstant as his fortune, He begins to think of
yielding.
began rather to think of yielding; and gave notice, that upon certain
Articles and conditions he would yield. But the Admiral denying any
conditions, he would not guie conditions, but only take, and they should be
but these.

First, To deal^ ciuilly with them; which the Admiral granted.

Secondly, To let their cause be fairly and lawfully tried; To which he
answered, that he ought not to doubt of that.

Lastly, That during the time of his imprisonment, he might have Ashton his
Chaplain with him, for his souls better comfort; The Admiral promised that
he would intercede with the Queen for these things.

And so forth with the Nobler sort kneeling down, They yield themselves.
deliliuered up their Swords to the Admiral, and themselves, at ten of the
clock at night. In this assault there died only Owen Salisbury, and one or
two flaine within with the Muskets, and as many of the Assaulters without.

The Earls of Essex and Southampton first of all are committed to the
Archbishop of Canterburies house at Lambeth, Essex and Southampton imprisoned.
and not streightway to the Tower, because it was late at night, and the water
not passable under London Bridge. But the next day, or very soon after, by
commission from the Queen, they were carried by boat unto the Tower: R^tland,
Sands, Cromwell, M^^taquile, and Charles Danuers, and Henry Bromley, were sent
after in more Boats: The (...) were all committed to common gaoles. And thus
within twelve hours was this commotion at rest, which some called a (...) in
the Earl, some an error, others a stubborn (...), and (...) revenge. But
they that made the worst of it, only called it an inconsiderate rashness,
(the Citizens being as loath to acknowledge a rebellion, as to cause one) and
scarcely was there one that thought it yet, treason.

The day after, The loyal care of the Citizens is highly commended.
the Queen by her Herald commended the loyal care of her Citizens,
acknowledging the same with very loving words. Also, then admonishing them that
they should maintain the public peace and tranquillity, by reason that the
infection of this new sedition was likely to lurk and break out somewhere:
also, that they should have an especial care to observe if any went about any
innouations, either by forcing the minds of the weak and simple people
thereto, or calumniating any of the Queens Servants.

Upon the twelfth of February Thomas Lee, Thomas Lee is taken.
Kinsman to Sir Henry Lee of the Order of Saint George, a Commander in Ireland,
very intimate with Tir-Oen, and as much devoted to Essex too, who the very same
night, that Essex had refused (being sent for) to go to the Privy Councellers,
proffered his service either to surprise or kill the Earl of Essex, now
intimated secretly to Robert Cross a Sea Captain, that it were a brave thing
if six tall fellows at once would set upon the Queen, and make her by force
release Essex and Southampton, and the rest out of prison. These things Cross
having betrayed to the Council, and Lee being sought up and down for, was
about twilight found about the Privy Chamberdore, very pale, and sweating, and
oftentimes having asked whither or no the Queen were ready to go to Supper,
or whether any of the Privy Council were there. There being taken, and then
examined, the next day being condemned by Crosses witness, Lee is hanged at
Tiburne.
and his own confession, he was hanged at Tyburne: and there indeed he
confessed that he had been a very wicked lewd fellow, but in this cause very
innocent: protesting that he never thought any thing in his life against the
Queen. This execution indeed might another time have been longer deliberated
on, but in these times necessity required such wholesome severity. And well was
it, to show how they would punish treason, though perchance they hanged no
traitor.

And now presently after, A proclamation against Vagabonds and run-awaies.
all their assemblies and consultations at Drewry house, were revealed by one
of the conspiratours, enticed it is likely with hope of his life: but who it
was, certainly I cannot tell. And this, when the rest being examined, The
conspirators complots are detected.
perceived to be found out, thinking also that all was known, and counting it
a foolish secrecy to conceal that which was already known, hoping for no
benefit of concealing, revealed all.

Hereupon Essex and Southampton, Essex and Southampton arraigned.
who thought that all was safe enough, were arraigned the 19. of February at
Westminster, before the Lord Buckhurst, Treasurer of England, Lord Steward for
that day: Their Peers were the Earls of Oxford, Nottingham, Shrewsbury,
Darby, Worcester, Cumberland, Sussex, Hertford, and Lincoln, Viscount Howard
of Bindon, the Lords Hunsdon, De-la-ware, Morley, Cobham, Stafford, Gray,
Lumley, Windsor, Rich, Darcie of Chech, Chandoys, Sir John of Bletnesh,
Burghley, Compton, and Howard of Walden, which was then Constable of the Tower
of London. Besides Popham Lord chief Justice of England, Periam Lord chief
Baron of the Exchequer, Gaudy, Fe^ner, Wams^ey, Clarke, and Kingsmill.

These all being called by name, Essex demanded if it were not lawful for him,
as it is for a private man in the like case, to take exception against any of
them. But the Judges made answer, that the credit and truth of the Peers of
the Kingdom of England is such, that in any Law-case, or judicial causes,
they can neither be put to their oath, nor yet excepted against.

Then are they jointly demanded, The heads of the accusations.
wherefore they intended to dispossess the Queen of her Throne, and take away
her life from her, which they intended in their resolutions of assaulting the
Court, of breaking into an open rebellion, and of imprisoning the Privy
Councillors, of stirring the Londoners to a rebellion, and of setting upon her
Majesty's trusty Subjects in the City, and by defending their houses against
the Queens forces. They being demanded whither or no they were guilty of these
crimes, denied: and submitted themselves to God and their Peers.

Eluerton at large unfolds the matter, They are unfolded by the Queens Lawyers.
showing that it is to be reckoned as treason, even to think any thing against
the Majesty of a Prince. Then he compares Essex with Catiline, by reason that
he heaped together in his rebellion men of al^ sorts, Atheists, Papists, and
the wickedest that were. Then he casts in his teeth the liberality and
goodness of the Queen toward him, that had bestowed upon him (an undeserving
young man) such untimely honors, accusing him for abusing them by hunting
after popularity, and the love of Soldiers, in an insatiable ambition of
glory, which never stinted, but still like the Crocodile grows as long as it
lives. Then he shows, that he much wonders that the Earls would plead not
guilty, when all the world could give evidence of their offenses.

Sir Edward Coke Solliciter, shows them out of Fitzherbert an English Author
among the Lawyers, that the very inward thought of any villainy against the
Prince, was indeed treason; although not to be judged so, till it brake out
into Word or Act. Then he shows that they intend the destruction of the Prince,
who run into rebellion, who draw together an armed Band, who being commanded to
dismiss them, refuse; or who think of bringing the City, the Tower, or the
Court, or the Prince under their own power. Then he runs through all the
graces and favors of the Queen bestowed upon him. That she had made him
Master of the Horse, and warlike Engines. That she had chosen him into her
Privy Council. That she had made him Earl Marshall of England, and Lord
Deputy of Ireland; and that in a small time she had most munificently given him
thirty thousand pounds of English money. Then he reckons up the imprisonment
of the Privy Councillors, the threatenings against them, the fears they were
put in; and then he objects his acquaintance to him with Danuers, Dauis, and
Blunt, all addicted to Popery. Then showed he, how that they chose rather to
go into the City then come to Court, because the glorious light of Majesty
glittering in the Queen, would have so blinded the eyes of their treachery and
treason, that they would never have dared to have come near. Then he commends
their confessions, which came out voluntary, and not being wracked out; and
also for the coherence of one with another: and having wouen into his discourse
an historical Narration of all the matter, about surprising the Queen, and
calling a Parliament, he concluded his speech with this bitter Epiphonema:

THat it were to be wished, that this Robert should be the last of this name
Earl of Essex, who affected to be Robert the first of that name King of
England.

The Earl cheerful in voice and countenance, The Earls reply.
answered to this, that indeed it was the propriety of Lawyers to speak well,
and be good Orators; who do think it a great glory in accumulated speeches,
to aggrauate the offense of people in a manner innocent. But for his Peers he
entreated them to consider of his case, not according to the vehemence of his
words, but the truth of the thing: protesting that for his own part he was
most sincere in his Religion, and that he knew no otherwise by Dauis, for he
went daily to Church. Concerning the threatenings to the Privy Councillors, he
answered, that he heard not any, by reason of the tumultuous concourse and
noise of the people, that he used them there as his best and chiefest friends,
but that he was compelled there to keep them in custody, by reason of the
people, and that he was necessarily drove thereunto in his own defense, after
that once he had heard, not by coniecturall thoughts, but by sure reason of
faithful messingers, that he was ready to be set upon suddenly by his enemies.
And concerning the Queen, he said, that he then did (and still does) keep
his loyalty to so well-deseruing a Prince, and that he nothing intended else,
then to prostrate himself at the Queens feet, and to lay open the dangers he
was in, and the danger that hangs over all the Kingdom.

Popham Lord chief Justice of England* He excuses his injuries done to the
Counselors.
being asked upon his oath, declared how unworthily and ill they had bin used
at his hands. The Earl made answer, that he intended no harm to those
Honorable persons, but respected them with great honor; but yet he saw that
the Queens command could not keep Southampton from injury, by reason that
Gray durst assault him publicly with his sword; and that there he provided
some safeguard for himself, from his friends and Clients to withstand the
violent fury of his enemies. And that there was such violence offered and
intended against him, He lays open the injuries done to himself.
would appear, if but from that, that Gorge was admonished by Rawleigh, that
as soon as he could he should separate himself from him, as a ship that was
now sincking. Then he complained, that some Papists were accusers of him, only
being hired thereto; as also, that they had counterfeited his handwriting,
(which indeed was done by an Impostor a cheater, to get money, as we shall
show.) So that hereupon Gorges testimony was brought in, who had confessed that
the Earl had determined to invade the Court, and to call a Parliament,
trusting to the helps of the Londoners, etc. And then Gorge himself was sent
for out of prison hard by, to witness this before his face. The Earl as soon
as he saw him, supposing, that either out of hope or ^eare he had betrayed all,
by reason his was the first testimony that was brought; and also, because he
came as a witness of his own accord, very passionately traduces him, The
Earl seeks to extenuate Gorges testimony. Southampton defends his own cause.
esteeming his testimony of no truth, by reason of his variable countenance,
which was by and by pale, and then red.

Then was objected their meetings and consultations in Drury house, about the
seizing of the Tower, or the Court. To which Southampton in a very mild
speech, protesting his true heart to the Queen, made answer, that such as
those things were indeed there proposed, but not determined, but only referred
to the Earl of Essex. Neither was that which was consulted put into practice,
but another, to wit, his going out into London, which was to no other end, then
to get thereby secure access unto the Queen, and complain freely to her of
his injuries. That all the day long he drew not his sword, neither that he
heard of any Proclamation, whereby he was proclaimed Traitor. That as much as
he could he hindered the shooting out of Essex house. Wherefore he requested
that they judge of the matter, not according to the rigor and letter of the
Law, but equity: And being demanded if he thought not, that to seize upon the
Court, and to bring the Queen under their power, was not Treason? He answered
him, asking him, what he thought in his conscience they would have done
against the Queen? The very same answered the Recorder, that Henry Duke of
Lancaster did to Richard the second: who humbly came into the Kingdom, under
pretense of remoouing away from the King some naughty Councillors; but having
brought the King himself under his power, he took from him his Crown, and
shortly after his life.

The Judges after this were demanded by the Peers, whether or no that
consultation in Drury house were Treason, by reason it came not to effect. They
all said it was; and the rebellion in the City, to be a prosecution of that
their consultation: for that, if so be they could have got aid enough at
London amongst the Citizens, they would have invaded the Court. Then it being
asked, whether Essex were the Author and occasioner of these meetings; Cases
propounded to the Judges assistants.
that was proved by many testimonies, by the contents of their meeting, written
with his own hand, and by his casting of some papers into the fire, for
babbling, as he said.

The Earl as soon as he heard these things, Essex accuses his adversaries.
which he hoped had been concealed; hope (said he) of getting their lives, or
escaping from punishment has wrought these testimonies out from some: and
indeed let them enjoy their lives as long as they can, or will. Death is more
desired to me then life; only the violence of Cobham, Cecill, and Rawleigh,
drove me to a necessary defense of my self; which was all, howsoever the
Lawyers interpret my going out into the City, my own conscience being clear
from any treachery, is my greatest comfort.

Cobham rising up, protested that he never did Essex any malicious office, but
only always disallowed of his ambion. Essex answered, but I with all my
heart, even with the loss of my right hand, would have removed such a
calumniator (and tale-teller) from the Queen.

Sir Francis Bacon politely, Bacon remoues the accusations.
and like an Orator, endeavoring to take away that color from their
rebellion, which they drew from the enmity that was between them, affirmed,
that both Cabham, Cecill, and Rawleigh, were so truly honest, and of so good
estates, that they would never hazard both of them in the attempt of any such
wicked act. Then he shows that those fictions of wait laid for his (...),
were false, by reason of the variety of them: sometimes, in that he would cry
out he should be murdered in his bed; then in the Boat; and lastly, by the
Jesuits. Then he accused him of great vanity, for crying out in London, that
the Kingdom of England was put to sale to the Spaniard, and to be divided for
the Infanta: adding, that it was an ordinary matter with Traitors, not indeed
directly to rise against their Prince, but only obliquely, and through the
sides of some of the Peers: Then he checkes him for his deep dissimulation,
in that he had put on such a Vizard of godliness: comparing him to the
Athenian Pisistratus, that would tear his own body, that he might show it to
the people, as if it had been rent and torn by his enemies, and so having got
aid of them, oppressed the whole Commonwealth. Essex interrupting him in his
proceedings, Essex interrupts his speech.
remember, how that but lately he himself had very efficaciously, and pithily
written Letters for him to the Queen against these his adversaries* adding
besides, that he understood that Secretary Cecil had said to one of the Privy
council, that the right of the Infanta to the Realm of England, was as good
and just, as any of the rest of the Competitors. Scarce had he said these
words, Cecill comes forth.
but Cecill that had stood hidden in a little Closet to hear all the
proceedings, straight way comes forth, and falling down on his knees,
beseeches the L. High Steward, that he would give him leave and license to
answer for himself to such a calumny, so foul and false. Leave being
granted, he speaks to Essex in this manner.

IN wit indeed I give you place, Cecill speaks to Essex.
wherein you are very excellent. In your Nobility I give you place, for I am
not reckoned amongst my Predecessors that were Nobles, although I my self am.
In your military affairs I give you place, I am no Soldier. But yet for all
this, my innocence shall protect me, and in this place am I free, where you are
guilty. Wherefore I challenge you, if you dare, to tell who was the Privy
Counselor, to whom I said these words.

Essex refused it. Therefore, says Cecill, it is but a fained tale. Essex
denied that. Wherefore Cecill turning to Southhampton, entreates him by all
their acquaintance, even since their youth, by their Christian profession of
the same Religion, and by the honor of his Family, and adiuring him by them
all, to name the man to them. Southampton referres it all to the Council, and
Cecill himself, if it were fitting with reason, and safe for his honor to
name him, when all thought it fit he should name him, he names William Lord
Knolles, Uncle to the Earl of Essex.

Cecill very earnestly entreating that he should be sent for, shortly after he
came, Knolles is sent for.
and acknowledged, that some two years ago he heard Cecill say, that one
Dolman in a Book had proved the right of the Infanta to the Crown, but that
he himself said no such matter. Essex replied, that the words were told him
after another sense. Cecill replied,

THe malice, Cecill inueighs against Essex.
whereby you have endeavored to bring me in hatred with all men, comes from
nothing else, but my desire of peace, and the good of my Country, and from your
hot desire of war, to the profit of the Soldiers, that they might be under
your beck. And hence was it that you set forth an Apology against the Peace.
And hence was it that all that spoke of peace were hated, as most addicted to
the Spaniard. But for my own part, I am so far from enclining toward the
Infanta of Spain, that I tremble even to think of it.

Whilst the Lord Knolles is expected, the Recorder accuses Essex of
dissembling hypocrisy, that professing publicly the Evangelical Religion,
yet he promised Blunt (a Papist) a Toleration. The Earl denied it; yet denied
he not but that he knew Blunt was a Papist, (for he when he was a Boy was
brought up in the Low Countries under Allen, that was afterward Cardinal) but
that he desired his conversion, and never indeed liked that any Christian
should be tormented in case of religion.

Southampton he forth with excuses himself, Southampton again excuses
himself.
by reason of his dear love to the Earl of Essex, and his ignorance of the
Laws. He modestly implores the mercy of the Queen, whom he always knew the
pattern even of Gods mercy, and whom he protested he never injured, not with
an evil thought.

The Judges Assistants being demanded, The Judges Assistants opinion concerning
the Peers protestations.
concerning these reiterated protestations of both the Earls, that they never
meant any wrong to the Queen, gave this sentence;

THat if any man shall attempt to strengthen himself so far, that the Prince
cannot resist him, he is guilty of rebellion. Also, that every rebellion the
Law construeth to be a plot against the Princes life, or a deposing of him, in
as much as the Rebel will not suffer the Prince to continue, or reign, that
shall hereafter punish or revenge such a rebellion.

This they confirmed by Law, where it is adjudged Treason, to do any thing
against the security of the Prince, by reason, that it cannot be, that he that
once prescribes to his King a Right, will ever suffer the King to recover his
authority to himself again, or to live, lest so he might chance to recover
it. Fetching examples from our own Chronicles, of Edward the second, and
Richard the second, who being by force of Arms brought under their Subjects
power, were after both deposed and murdered.

After that Sir John Leuison standing by, describes in many words against the
Earl of Essex the tumultuous fray near Paul's Churchyard. Then was read
through the confessions of the Earls of Rutland, the Lord Cr^mwell, and Sands.

Then began Essex to answer more mildly, that he thought of nothing but only
to repel force by force, and that he would not have gone into the City so
inconsiderately, but that he foresaw imminent danger over him. Afterward Sir
Francis Bacon repeats the opinions and sentences of the Judges, who all found
both the Earls guilty of Treason: showing, that they could not excuse
themselves, who being commanded by the Lord Keeper, and a Herald, to lay down
their weapons, yet did it not. Essex replied, that he saw no Herald but a lame
fellow, whom he took not for a Herald, saying, that if he had intended any
thing but only his defense against those his adversaries, he would not have
gone out with so small a company, so unarmed, (for they had nothing but Swords,
and Daggers, and Gunnes.) Bacon replying that that was done out of policy by
him, who indeed relied upon the Citizens arms, that they might furnish
himself, and his men too, and take arms themselves for him. Imitating Guise
in France, in this trick; who not long ago entering Paris with a few people,
so stirred up the people to take arms, that he made the King dispatch out of
the City.

By and by, were both the Earls removed aside: and the Peers that past upon
them, rising and separating themselves from the rest, conferred amongst
themselves, and weighing the matter, within an hour returned again to their
seats: every one having found both the Earls guilty. The Notary calls both
the Earls to the Bar again, according to the manner, and asks them
severally, if they had any thing to say, why sentence should not be pronounced
against them. Essex entreating the Peers, to make intercession for
Southhampton to the Queen, who might hereafter well deserve at her hands,
answered:

MY life, I take no care for that, there is nothing that I more earnestly
desire, then to lay down my life in loyalty toward God and the Queen,
whatsoever the Law make of me. Yet would I not that you should signify to the
Queen any contempt in me of her gracious mercy; which indeed all my smooth
language would never purchase. And I entreat you all, that since I never
thought ill against my Prince, ye would quit me in the Court of your
Conscience, although that ye have cast me and condemned me in this Court of
Justice.

The Earl of Southampton most demissely and humbly craved the Queens pardon,
entreating his Peers to intercede for it with the Queen, protesting again,
that he never conceived any ill thought against the Queen: insomuch that with
his pleasing speech, and ingenuous modesty, he moved all the standers by to
pity him.

The Lord High Steward having made now a very grave speech, Sentence pronounced
against Essex and Southhampton.
admonishes the Earl, to request the Queens mercy and pardon, pronouncing
upon him the doleful sentence of hanging, drawing, and quartering. And now the
Hatchet being turned toward them, that before was turned from them, Essex said,

THis body might have done the Queen better service, if she had pleased; but I
rejoice that it is used any way for her.

Requesting, that before his death he might receive the Communion, and that
Ashton a Minister might be still with him, for his souls health. Then he
asked pardon of the Earl of Worcester, and the Lord Chief Justice, for
keeping them in hold. And of Morley, and De-la-ware, for bringing their Sons
(that knew not of the matter) into such danger. And then, his staff being
broken, the Earl departed. These things, the Mr. Camden himself.
Author of the original being there present, makes worth belief, who, if he
have omitted any thing of note, wishes it imputed to the fault of his memory,
not of his will.

The next day Sir Robert Vernon, Others also arraigned.
Sir William Constable, Sir Edmund Baynham John Littleton, Henry Guffe
Secretary to the E. of Essex, and Cap. Whitlocke, John and Christopher Wright,
brothers, and Orell an old Soldier, were all arraigned. As Soon as (after the
fashion) they had held up their hands, the Queens Letters came in, who being
informed by Sir Fulke Greuill, that most of them were deceitfully enticed to
this villainy, commanded that only Littleton being sick, Bainham, who ran
headlong upon the matter, out of wantonness and contempt of the Magistrates,
and Orell, should come to trial; the rest she willed to be sent back to
prison again.

Bainham and Orell pleaded ignorance, in that they only followed the Earl to
testify their obseruancy. But Littleton being cast by the witness of Danuers,
who had brought him into the company, could not deny but that he was there at
their consultation. Then in his accusation being accused of thinking some
villainy and sedition, by reason of some Horses and Armor that he had in his
Inn; he answered, that his means would allow him to do it, and that he
always loved horses well. Being condemned with the rest, he said nothing, but
lifting up his eyes to Heaven, We praise thee O God* we knowledge thee to be
the Lord. But yet all their lives were spared: Bainham bought his of Rawleigh
for money, Littleton died very shortly by reason of his sickness, Orell only
continued some time in prison. The E. of Essex in the mean time, Essex desires
to speak with some of the Council.
whether or no out of his tender conscience voluntary, or whether or no he were
councelled into a conscience by the Minister that was with him, was so
molested, that he was persuaded he should be utterly damned if he concealed any
of the truth, and betrayed not all the conspirators. Wherefore he requested to
speak unto some of the Council, and particularly Cecill, who came to him,
with the Admiral, Treasurer, and Lord Keeper. And first he asks forgiveness
of the Lord Keeper, for keeping him in hold at his House; and then of Cecill,
for traducing him in the case of the Infanta: So that on both sides there was
made a charitable and christian reconciliation. And then he intimates unto
them, that as long as he lived, the Queen could not be safe. Wherefore he
desired to die privately within the Tower. Then he greatly condemns some of
his partakers in this matter, for pernicious men, viz. Blunt, and Cuffe, whom
he desired to speak with. And as soon as he saw Cuffe, he said:

O Cuffe, ask God and the Queen pardon, He accuses Cuffe.
and God grant thou may deserve it* I am now wholly thinking upon a better
life, having resolved to deal plainly before God and men: neither can I choose
but deal plainly with thee; thou were the first that brought me to this
treachery.

Cuffe being examined upon these words, in some few words had a fling only at
Essexes inconstancy, for betraying his friends, and then held his tongue.

Likewise Essex reueales Sir Henry Neuill not to be ignorant of this
conspiracy, Essex reueales others that knew of the conspiracy.
who was now Leager in France, and who thereupon returning about the confirming
of the Treaty at Bloys, and forbidding robberies on either side, was at his
return committed to the Lord Admirals custody.

Likewise he revealed some in Scotland, France, and the Low Countries, and Lord
Deputy Montioy in Ireland, as no strangers to his resolution, and besides many
in England: whom because they were so many, and because the Deputy prospered so
fortunately in Ireland, the Queen took no notice of. Neither was it
sufficient enough for him (as he thought) to declare these by word of mouth,
but also under his own handwriting: which being afterward showed to the King
of Scotland by his enemies, lost him much of his credit.

The 25. of February, which was allotted the time of his death, there were sent
unto him early in the morning Thomas Montford, and William Barlowe, Doctors of
Divinity, besides Ashton the Minister, to confirm and strengthen his soul in
her assurance of salvation. The Earl before these gave the Lord great thanks
from the bottom of his heart, that his purpose (that was so dangerous to the
Commonwealth) took no effect. That now God had enlightened him to see his
sins, it being to him a great cause now of his sorrow, that he had so
strongly defended his so unjust a cause. Then he gave hearty thanks to the
Queen, that she suffered him not to die publicly, le^t that by the
acclamation and noise of the people, his settled mind might have been drawn
from it is resolution; withal witnessing unto them, that now he had well
learned what popularity and affectation of it, were; confessing, that he ought
indeed now to be spewed out, (for that was his word) out of the Commonwealth,
by reason of his pernicious undertakings, which he compared to a Leprosy, that
had dispersed far and near, and had infected many.

The Queen, by reason of her good will always to him, somewhat now moved in
mind, commanded that he should not die, by Sir Edward Carry. But then on the
other side, weighing his contumacy and stubbornness, that scorned to ask her
pardon; and that he had said, that as long as he lived, the Queen could not
live in safety; she altered her resolution, and by Darcy commanded the
execution to proceed.

Wherefore on the same day was the Earl brought out between two Divines upon
the scaffold, Essex brought to execution.
in the Tower-yard: where sat the Earls of Cumberland, and Hartford, Viscount
Howard of Bindon, the Lords Howard of Walden, Darcy of Chile, and Compton.
There were also present some of the Aldermen of London, and some Knights, and
Sir Walter Rawleigh, to no other end (if we may believe him) then to answer
him, if at his death he should chance to object any thing to him, although many
interpreted his being there to a worser sense, as though he had done it only
to feed his eyes with his torments, and to glut his hate with the Earls blood:
wherefore being admonished that he should not press on him now he was dying,
which was the property of base w^^de beasts, he withdrew himself, and looked
out upon him at the Armoury.

The Earl, as soon as he had mounted the scaffold, uncovers his head, and
lifting up his eyes to Heaven, confesses, that many and grievous were the sins
of his youth, for which he earnestly begged pardon of the eternal Majesty of
God, through the mediation of Christ, but especially for this his sin, which
he said was a bloody, crying, and contagious sin; whereby so many men being
seduced, sinned both against God, and their Prince. Then he entreated the
Queen to pardon him, wishing her a long life, and all prosperity. Protesting,
he never meant ill toward Her. He gave God hearty thanks, that he never was
an Atheist, or Papist, but that always he put his trust in Christ's merits. He
bese^ched God to strengthen him against the terrors of death. And he entreated
the standers by to accompany him in a little short prayer, which with a fervent
eiaculation and hearty devotion he made to God. Then he forgave his
executioner, and repeated his Creed, and fitting his neck to the block,
having repeated the five first verses of the 51. Psalm, he said: Lord, He is
beheaded.
I cast my self down humbly and obediently, to my deserved punishment: Thou O
Lord, have mercy upon thy servant that is cast down: Into thy hands, O Lord, I
commit my spirit. His head after that was stricken off at the third blow, but
the first took away both sense and motion.

Thus (although Byron and the French scoffed at him, and this his devotion,
which they said was fitter for a Parson then a Soldier, as if the fear of
Hell were not the valor of a Christian) dyed Robert D'Euereux Earl of Essex,
at the age of four and thirty years; very godlily, and truly Christianly: in
as much, that his Fathers admonition proved not altogether vain, who bid him
have a care of his six and thirtieth year, when he lay a dying. He was a man
certainly very virtuous, His commendation.
for all parts that became any Noble man. His stock was very ancient, and
Noble. His surname was derived to him from Euereux, His stock and Ancestors.
as the vulgar call it, a City in Normandy. His title of a Lord came by
marriage with Cisely the Daughter of William Bourchier, whose Grandmother was
Sister to Edward 4. K. of England, whose great Grandmother was Daughter to Th.
of Woodstocke, the Son of Edward 3* borne of one of the Daughters of Humphrey
Bohune E. of Hartford and Essex, whereupon the Title of Viscount of Hartford
was bestowed upon his great Grandfather Walter by Edward 6, and the Title of
Earl of Essex bestowed upon his Father by Queen Elizabeth.

He being a young man, was brought up at Cambridge in the studies of learning
and Religion, and afterward commended by the Earl of Leicester (his Father in
Law) to the Queen, and made Master of the Horse, although with much ado he
obtained it of the Queen, she being somewhat grown strange to his mother. But
afterward, when by his obseruancy and duty, he had purchased her full favor,
she forgave him the debt which his Father owed; she made him one of the Order
of S. George, and of her Privy Council, when he was scarce 23. years old.
He was often Commander of Armies, although fortune failed him in good success,
Which I will not say was by reason of the Planet Mars, who in the 11. house of
Heaven shined most afflictiuely over him at his Nativity. And when as now he
had not alone the show of the Queens favor, but the excess thereof, in very
deed, he made all haste (as the Courtiers most did complain) to outgoe all his
Equals, and Superiors too, to speak euilly of the praise of any man that was
not wholly addicted to him; to take heinously if any man had gotten either
power or favor with the Queen; to hunt after the popular commendations, that
always is very short in durance, and military praises, which are as dangerous,
by his meekness and liberality. Also he began to be somewhat selfe-willed, and
stubborn toward the Queen, and rather out of his great mind, then pride;
especially, after that she out of her courtesy had renewed her favor to him,
which he once lost, and had opened a way for new benefits to him. But this his
contumacy and untowardness as it were, in wrestling out benefits from her, and
his loathsome neglect of obedience toward her, with the crafty undermining of
his envious adversaries, by little and little toled him out of the Queens
favor, and at length quite estranged him from it. Neither indeed was this
noble Earl made for a Courtier, who was slow to any wickedness, very wary in
taking of offense, and very loath to forget it, and one that could not cover his
mind. But as Cuffe often used to complain to the Author of the original of
this Story, he was (...) and (...)* one that could neither conceal his love,
nor his hatred, but always showed them in his countenance. His wife and issue.
He married Frances the Daughter of Francis Walsingham, the Widow of Sir
Philip Sidney, (the Queens advice not being taken, who was offended at it, as
if by that affinity he had debased Essexes family:) of whom he got Robert his
Son, Frances and Dorothy his Daughters; and Walter by the Lady Southwell.

On the fifth day of March, S. Christopher Blunt, Others are arraigned.
S. Charles Danuers, S. John Dauis, S. Gill. Mericke Knights, and Cuffe were
all arraigned at Westminster, before the Lord Admiral of England, Hunsdon
Chamberlain, Cecill Secretary, Sir John Fortescue Chancellor of the
Exchequer, the Lord chief Justice, and others: where they were accused of the
same faults as the Earls before were; to wit, that they intended mischief to
the Queens Majesty, by consulting of inuading the Court, and by rebelling in
the City.

The three first of them were demanded whether or no they could not deny one
part of their accusation, and confess the other: which they did, for they
denied that ever they intended any thing against the Queen. Mericke and Cuffe
being taken aside, the Judges, as before, declared;

THat he that intends to prescribe Laws to his King or Prince, whereby he
restrains his power, does intend mischief and destruction to his Prince; and
does intend both to take the Crown and Life from him. This they proved from
the examples of silly Countrymen, that were condemned for treason, even in the
memory of our forefathers, for that they took arms and met in Oxfordshire
and Kent: one, to increase their daily pay for their work; the other, to take
away the Enclosures of pasture fields.

For confirmation of this, they brought many things besides, showing also, that
it could not be, but that they must needs, bring in the Queen under
subjection; also offer violence to her, because that Conquerours are always
insolent: and the fury of a multitude cannot be restrained, who to provide for
their own security and safety, fear not the performance of any villainy.

Blunt he is urged with his own confessions, Blunt examined.
and the confession of the Earl himself, who but lately accused him as the
only entiser of him to all wickedness; when he heard it read, and signed with
the Earls own hand, as he saw it, he grew altogether amazed with admiration,
and greatly required, that in some other place he might talk with the Admiral
and Cecill concerning that matter: but lifting up his eyes, he cried out openly,

THou, O God, know well from what purposes and plots I dissuaded the Earl
of Essex.

Then was read the confession of Thomas Lee, who acknowledged, that by the
leave of Blunt who was then Marshall in Ireland, he had sent to Tir-Oen, and
again from him understood that Tir-Oen had said,

THat if the Earl of Essex would but hearken unto him, that he would make him
the greatest man in England.

It was also affirmed, that Lee had said, that he knew that both Essex, Blunt,
and Tir-Oen, thought all the same. Neither indeed did Blunt deny, but that he
gave leave to Lee to go or send to Tir-Oen, but it was by Essex's command. And
then are read many other things that were sent out of Ireland, to prove the
intimatenesse that was with Essex, with the Earl Tir-Oen.

Flemming then the Queens Solliciter, Danuers accused.
turning to Danuers, discourses out of the points of Law: how, that if a man
be ignorant of their determination of taking arms against the Prince, and yet
join himself in action with those that do it, he is guilty of Treason. That
then Danuers was much more guilty, who (as is proved by his own and others
confession) was a partner both in the consultation, and the conspiracy acted.

He answered little or nothing to this, only that his love was so great to the
Earl of Southampton, that for his sake he would neglect life and goods: for
the Earl had before entertained, and hid this Danuers that fled for a murder,
and afterward sent him over into France, where he followed the Camp with
great credit, till such time as the Queen being with much ado ouer-entreated,
gave him his par^don.

Sir John Dauis being in a manner convicted by his own conscience and
confession, held his peace, Dauis arraigned.
and being taunted by the way that he was a Papist, he denied not that at
Oxford he was instructed in the Romish Religion by his Tutor, and confirmed in
the same by Blunt, while he was in the Irish wars. At which words, when he
perceived Blunt was moved, he straight appeased him, affirming that he was
confirmed in that Religion not by Blunts persuasion, but by the example of his
Christian and religious life.

After this Cuffe and Mericke were arraigned, Cuffe arraigned.
and Cuffe is laid hard at with the confession of Essex and Danuers and Henry
Neuill. Danuers had confessed, that Cuffe knew of al^ the consultations and
meetings; and that he always persuaded them to assault the Court. Essex had
confessed before the Council, that he was the instigator of him to all this
treachery, and signed this truth with his own hand. Henry Neuill had
confessed, that Cuffe presently after his return from France, had suggested to
him, that the unfortunate success of the Treaty at Boloigne would be imputed
to him; that after that, he would diverse times come and see him, and persuade
him to come and see the Earl of Essex, which he once did. Afterward, when he
returned last, that he entreated him to come to Drury house, and hear what was
consulted on, protesting that he should hear of nothing there which was not
beneficial to the Kingdom, and the Earl of Essex, and what he might hear
with loyalty toward the Queen; that afterward he entreated him to be present
with him, and the Earl, at the invasion of the Court; and that then he opened
all the council unto him; which when Neuill disliked as dangerous, difficult,
and wicked, and said; that they were of those kind of purposes, that are never
commended till they are ended; that then Cuffe extenuated both the danger and
difficulty, intimating all London, and the Aldermen themselves to be for Essex
altogether, and ready at a beck; and that then he would use the verse of
Lucan, -- To him that holds up arms in sight,
He gives all things, that denies his right.


Neither could Cuffe deny any of this. Whereupon the Recorder Syllogistically
argues against him; and he so wittily and acutely answers him, that Cecill
called him a subtle Sophister. And Anderson chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
was so angry at it, that he cried they both made foolish syllogismes; and he
fell to urging the Law against Traitors in Edward the third. But to conclude,
Cuffe took upon him to answer his accusation, which consisted of two parts.
For that (first said he) I am accused of Treason for being in Essex house on
the day of the Rebellion, you might as well have accused one of the Lions too,
for lying in his Den. All that day I sorely lamented the ill fortune of my
Earl, neither did I do any thing else. I persuaded him, as I could to cry the
Queen mercy, which I could not compel him to, except he pleased. And then for
the consultation in Drury house, that is no more to be adjudged a piece of
Treason, when it never took effect, then an Embrion, or an imperfect creature
not full borne is to be adjudged a man. The Lawyers urged against him, that no
necessity lay upon him to continue in Essex house at the siege of it; besides,
that every one had his office allotted him; some to defend the House, whereof
he was one; and others to seize upon the City; who all did their endeauours
equally, and all were equally too guilty of Treason. Then they answered, that
the meeting of them at Drury house was of it self Treason, by reason there was
order taken against the Queen, which was also put in practice. Then they urged
out of the Law, That if more conspire against a Prince, and yet practice that
their conspiracy diverse ways, yet is the fault of Treason one and the same in
all, by reason of one and the same malice of the Conspirators. Their discreet
answers, with the confessions of Essex, Neuill, and Danuers, quite spoiled
Cuffes cause so, that all his wit and sophistry could not work it out again,
into an ambiguity.

Mericke he is accused for sending Letters to his brother Salisbury, Groyne,
and other audacious fellows; whom he drew to his side: also, for undertaking
the defense of Essex house against the Queen, for giving money, and causing an
old obsolete Tragedy of the deposing of Richard 2. to be acted publicly
before the Conspirators, which the Lawyers did judge of, as if he had shown
them now that upon the stage, which he would have them act the next day, upon
the Queen. The like judgment spent they upon a Book of Sir John Haywards, a
learned man, that was written about the same matter, as if it had been written
to encite and stir the Earl to depose the Queen: to the ill fortune of the
worthy Author, who lay long in prison, punished for his untimely Edition of
it: and these words in his dedicatory Epistle to the Earl of Essex,

TV magnus, spe mayor futuri temporis expectatione; that is to say, Thou art
great in hope, but far greater in the expectation of future times.

All this Mericke heard, and with a resolute silence said not any thing again,
but only this;

ESsex lifted me up, and Essex has thrown me down.

After this, every one of them are found guilty by the Jury of treason against
the Queen, and their sorrowful sentences were pronounced. The request of Sir
Christopher Blunt, and Sir Charles Danuers.
After that, Blunt and Danuers earnestly desired, that they might die like
Noblemen, (by being beheaded) and indeed they came of the Noble stock. For
Danuer's Mother was Daughter (and one of the Heirs) to Neuill Lord Latimer, by
the Daughter of Henry Earl of Worcester, his Grandmother the Daughter of the
Lord Mordant, and his great Grandmother of the Family of the Courtneyes. The
other descended from the Blunts of Kidderminster, who came from the same Family
that the Lords Montioy do^. Dauis requested, that although he were no Nobleman,
yet to suffer as they did; if not, not to be quartered into pieces, but to be
buried Christianly.

On the thirtieth day of March Mericke and Cuffe were drawn to Tibourne. Cuffe
Cuffes execution.
(to be short) at the Gallows spoke much to this purpose.

I Am brought hither to pay for my due to nature, my sins against God, my
Country, and my Prince. I do absolutely believe, that as I see the infinite
justice of God in beholding the multitude of my infinite sins; so I shall
find the infinite mercy of God, by reason of this greatness of my inflicted
punishment. Here are we the example and pattern of man's estate. The death
which we are to under go is indeed terrible; and which is worse, it is
ignominious: But yet it is common to the best of Gods Saints, with whom I have
great hope and certainty of rising again in Christ. Yet let not any man think
I put confidence in my own merits; away with them, I disclaim them; I put my
whole trust and assurance in my Savior Christ. And I am absolutely persuaded,
that whosoever is punished in this life, in the very same instant feels great
comfort from Heaven within him; and that God punishes him not as a Judge, but
as a Father. But to come to the occasion of my execution. There is scarce any
man but knows how great a tu^ult was raised the eight of February, under the
inconsiderate Earl of Essex; yet here I call God, the Angels, and my own
conscience to witness, that I was not guilty of it, but that all that day I
shut my self up, mourning and lamenting. Now, as concerning the Plot, or their
Machination, that was twofold.

And here being interrupted, and aduized, not to mock the truth with
distinctions, or few Figge-leaues over his fault,

I Confess (says he) that it is a great offense, nay, that it is treason, if
so be that a Subject (cast out of favor) should make open his way to the
Queen by force of arms; but I never encited a man to take arms against the
Queen. But for the danger I brought that noble Lord Neuil in, I am heartily
sorry, and I entreat him earnestly to forgive me. As for that which I said,
that of four and twenty of the Aldermen of London, one and twenty of them were
for Essex, that I meant of their good will and affection toward him, and not
as if they would take arms against their Queen for him.

Here again being stopped, and interrupted, he falls to prayer vehemently, and
professing faith in God, and loyalty toward hi^ Prince, and desiring pardon of
both, he died.

Sir Gill. Mericke and Mericks at Tiburne.
accompanied him, in the same kindd of death; but with a great undaunted
courage; and as weary of his life, he once or twice bid Cuffe let pass his
unseasonable wisdom, and make an end. Yet before he died, he excused Deputy
Montioy as ignorant of the matter altogether, and entreated the Nobles that
were by, to beg of the Queen not to proceed iudicially or rigorously with many
simple people, that ou^ of ignorance came into the company and number of the
Conspiratours.

Two days after Sir Christopher Blunt, and Sir Charles Danuers, were beheaded
Blunt and Danuers beheaded.
upon Tower hill. Danuers offered ten thousand pounds to redeem his life, and
to live in perpetual imprisonment; which being refused, with a very quiet
countenance, and mind, asking God and the Prince pardon, and the L. Gray, to
whom he had been a great enemy, not out of hate to him, but love to
Southampton, he ended his life.

Blunt having ascended up the Scaffold, speaks to the people much after this
manner.

ALthough the time require that (setting all other matters aside) I should now
fall a crying for mercy at Gods hands for my sins; Blunts confession.
yet by reason that I have been traduced as an instigator of the Earl of
Essex to all this villainy, as I desire the salvation of my soul, I will
speak the truth. Some three years ago, and more, I beheld the mind of the
Earl somewhat proane to ambitious desires; But lately in Ireland whilst I lay
wounded at Rheban Castle, and since at Dublin, the Earl then told me, that he
had resolved to send over some choice bands to seize upon Milford Haven in
Wales, and to march so up to London with greater forces. I then well
considering of the matter, thoroughly dissuaded him from it; as a thing that was
very dangerous, and that would cost England great store of blood. Therefore (to
deal truly) I persuaded him rather, with some choice company to seize upon
the Court, and get himself there fair and reasonable conditions. And yet,
truly, we never thought of doing any injury or wrong to the Queen; although
I must confess, I know not whether or no, if fortune had favored our
enterprise, the business would have been finished, with the death of the
Queen. Then, after the Earl was his own man, and at liberty again, he began
to consult with me again about these matters; but we never agreed upon any
thing determinately. Afterward he sent for me out of the Country, not long
before this Rebellion. The rest I have confessed before the Honorable the
Admiral, and the worshipful the Secretary: to whom to remember my service,
and salute them from me, I entreat you Sir Walter Rawleigh of whom I also ask
pardon. Then lifting up his eyes to heaven, he cries, God preserve the Queens
Majesty. And Lord, according to thy infinite mercy pardon the sins of my
heart, and my lewd life. And bear you witness all, that I die a Catholic,
but so that I put all my confidence and trust in Christ's merits alone, and so
good people pray for me. Then he bids the Lord Gray and Compton farewell, and
having prayed a little softly, he gives his neck to the block, and his life
to the executioner.

And so by the mature execution of the Earl of Essex, Cuffe, Mericke, Danuers,
and Blunt, the rebellion being well laid, peace was restored to the
Commonwealth: The minds of the rest being well appeased too, the richer
having sums for muscts laid upon them, which very few paid, and the rest
freely pardoned. Southampton being committed to the Tower, and with him Thomas
Smith Sheriff of London; but he either out of the Queens mercy, or his own
innocence, (being indeed calumniously informed of, rather then justly accused)
within a short time he was restored again to liberty.

On the eight day of July Sir Henry Neuill Sir H. Neuill committed.
was arraigned at York house before the Privy Council, and some of the
Judges, and was accused for having been present at the meeting in Drury house,
and for not having revealed their plots; and also for revealing to Essex the
secrets of his Embassy into France. He confessed indeed that he showed unto
Essex the whole Iournall of his Embassy, and what he did every day at his
earnest request, but that he was never but at one meeting, and then, that he
contemned their plots as idle dreams, but that he durst not accuse such men as
the Earl of Essex, fearing to be thought an Informer, and hoping that they
would quickly change such inconsiderate council, or at least thinking it would
be time enough to reveal it after his return from France. Yet for all this
was he greatly reprehended by all their voices, and as thought worthy of a
greater punishment, favored with imprisonment.

It is not to be forgotten that the Earl of Essex often complained that his
Letters were forged, and counterfeited. Now concerning this matter, there was
diligent inquiry made, The punishment of Daniel an Imposter.
and a notable cousenage found out. The Countess of Essex fearing the events
of this troublesome time, having put up into her Cabinet some love letters,
which she had formerly received of him, delivered them to the faithful custody
of a Dutch woman that lived with her, which I. Daniel her husband by mere
chance lighting upon, then read them, and observing somewhat to be contained
therein, which might bring the Earl into some danger, and incense the Queen,
he got the Letters counterfeited by a cunning Scriuener, very like the true
original. Afterward the good woman being to lie in, he came and told her that
he would deliver up those Letters into the hands of her Husbands enemies,
unless she would forthwith give him 3000. pounds. She straight way (to avoid
all danger) gave him 1170. pounds; and yet for all this money, received not the
Letters themselves, but only the counterfeited Copies: this same cousener
intending to wipe the Earls adversaries of a great deal more money, for the
originals themselves. This cousenage being found out, he was committed to
perpetual imprisonment, being fined three thousand pounds, two thousand pounds
whereof was to fall to the Earl of Essex, then his ears being nailed to the
Pillory, being made a spectacle to the people, he had this inscription, A
forger of writings, and a notable cousener.

Not long before the Ambassadors of the King of Scotland, The Queens answer to
the Ambassadors of Scotland.
namely the Earl of Mar and Kinlosse, came unto the Queen, who in the name
of their King gratulated unto her the happy and mature prevention of this
unhappy rebellion. They likewise somewhat expostulated with the Queen
concerning her not punishing of Valentine Thomas, who had sorely calumniated
the King of Scotland; as also, concerning William Eeuer, and Ashfield, two
Englishmen, that had lately conveyed themselves out of Scotland; and also, that
there might be made to their king an assignme^t of some Lands here in England.
To whom the Queen answered, that she thanked them heartily for their
congratulation concerning the rebellion; and wishes withal, that none such
may ever happen in Scotland, unless with the like success in the same day to
be both published and punished. But concerning this Valentine Thomas, she
answered, that she therefore spared his life, le^t by rubbing an old sore too
much, she should rather renew then remove the pain and anguish which would
daily accrue unto their Master, out of viperous and slanderous tongues, who
commonly when they want all show of proof, yet find belief. Concerning that
same Eeuer she made answer, that by reason of his peremptory denial and
protestation so against the truth, he had drawn upon himself the just
suspicion of an evil mind. But for Ashfield she answered, that as he had
cunningly put a trick upon the President of the borders of Scotland, and by
that means got license to go into Scotland; so that by another trick he was
fetched home again. That for her part she was so far from boulstering any ill
disposed subjects of his in their conceited discontents, that she esteemed the
favoring of another subjects in such a case, to be nothing else but an
enticement and occasion of causing her own to do the like, when they before
hand justly may expect a conniuence from the ^ands of the other Prince. About
the assignment of some Lands she answered only what she had before in the same
matter. But lastly, condescended to add to her yearly contribution toward
the King of Scotlands affairs, and her own, the sum of two thousand pounds
more, besides the principal, only upon condition, that the King would
maintain an inviolable unity and concord with her, and not submit his
discretion to their tuition, who use to increase their private Coffers with the
public losses. Much about this time was it, when (many of the Spanish Galleys
Galleys prepared.
at Scluse, much in^esting the Sea coasts of Kent, and those opposite of
Holland and Zeeland) the Queen also began to build her self some Galleys too,
and repriued many condemned persons, and other malefactors, and sent them to
work in the Galleys. But although both the cost and charges of the Queen, and
the honorable City of London (which did with great alacrity contribute much
to the effecting of the business) were very great, yet the use of them, and
the expected benefit was as little. The States think how to subdue Flanders.
Notwithstanding the States of the united Provinces carefully watching over
their great affairs, and desiring to prevent the evil which these Galleys
might do unto them, resolve now to transport some of their forces over into
Flanders again, and there seize upon some Fortresses by Ostend, that so they
might with better ease and liberty prey upon the Countries thereabouts, and
pillage them, and also reduce those parts of Flanders that lie by the Sea side,
under their own government, lest they should become a continual harbor for
the Spanish Galleys.

Yet at the very same time, that so they might both delude the enemy from
knowing their intent, and divert him from crossing it, if he should know it, it
seemed good unto them to send Grave Maurice into Gelderland to besiege
Rheinberge: of which matter they certified the Queen by Sir Francis Vere; of
whom they requested four thousand English to be mustered and transported at
their own charges: To which the Queen consented.

But before that Sir Francis Vere could return again out of England, Maurice
had already set forwards toward Rheinberge on the one side; They are prevented
by the Arch Duke.
and on the other side Albert Archduke of Austria had laid his siege to
Ostend: which did so molest the troubled thoughts of the Sta^es, that they now
begin rather to defend their own Holds, then offend their enemies. To which
purpose they send for twenty Companies of Englishmen from Reinberke, over whom
they appoint Vere the General both without and within Ostend: but Maurice sent
them only eight Companies of English, and those not very willingly, having
already begun the siege, and hourly expecting the enemy; and those eight were
conducted to them by Sir Horatio Vere; Vere made governor of Ostend.
yet Sir Francis Vere wanting not courage, though he did much Companies,
(causing them to swear to him that the other Companies should follow, and that
he should not want provision) about July next arrived at Ostend, over against
the old Town, at a place even within shot: where he had scarce no sooner
gotten, then Cecill a brave expert Soldier, even in this very first act of his
Chiualry almost, brought him both provision, and the rest of his Companies,
although with as great hazard indeed, as valor.

This same Ostend (which in our forefathers memory was nothing but poor
Cottages of silly fishermen that lived on the sea shore) by reason of continual
tumults and insurrections was at first fortified by the States with stakes and
piles, but afterward with trenches and other works, The description and
situation of Ostend.
which the Sea entering into the Town a pretty way, did easily afford them
matter for. At length there was an English Garrison placed there under the
conduct of Sir John Conway, and afterward under Sir Edward Norris, which upon
occasion did so molest Flanders with their diverse excursions, that both the
Duke of Parma in vain laid siege to it, to tame it a little, and Mottee also
in vain assaulted it by treachery, (although he lost his life at the
business) and the Archduke himself as much in vain, although he erected
about it seventeen strong Forts.

These Garrisons therefore being as thorns in the sides of those of Flanders,
and the Haven where they were placed, to wit Ostend, ^eeming to the Spaniard a
most commodious place for his Galleys to retire into, from whence he might
hinder the traffic both of the Zelanders, and the English; made the King of
Spain absolutely resolve one way or other to assault and get it to himself;
and indeed the States were as careful to defend, and still maintain it;
neither was there ever any assault and defense of a Fort (in our age) so
memorable, and so full of overthrows and slaughters. But it is not my
resolution to weaue together an Ephemerides, or a remembrancer of the siege
every day after day: it shall be enough for me only to note and observe some
passages therein. Sir Francis Vere in the fifth month of this siege, seeing
his forces much to be diminished by the continual eruptions of the enemy upon
them, and skirmishes, and the pestilence worse then both; seeing also that part
of the old Town was swallowed up as it were in Fordes; considering also the
want of Victuals, which daily increased, redress whereof he could not hope
for, by reason of cross winds which denied him hope of succor: and now
understanding that the enemy was ready to assault them on every side; A parley
about the yielding up of Ostend.
he required a parley with the Archduke about surrendering: and having given
hostages on both sides, the Archduke sent Delegates thither to the same
purpose. But Vere* Vere breaks it off.
by his continual delaying time, cunningly nursed them on with hopes of
yielding, till such time as he had auxiliary Forces sent over to him; and then
sent back the Delegates without doing any thing concerning yielding, excusing
himself out of that Military axiom,

THat to delude the enemy by tricks, is not only lawful, but also
commodious, and sometimes very fruitful.

And wittily by^ing in a scoffing sort, he did entreat them to pardon him, if
by reason of urgent necessity, he should do so again, since that with the
safety of his honor he could do no otherwise, by reason that now he had
received aid, and other necessaries for the war.

The Archduke being hereupon sorely vexed, cast in Veres teeth, that he knew
better how to overcome by deceit then by valor; and the 14. day after he
thundered upon the Fortresses before the walls with 18. great pieces of
Ordinance; about the evening the Sea ouerflowing, he drove out 2000. old
trained Soldiers against their wills, to set upon the old Town, the Horsemen
following them close at the back. But General Vere, and Sir Horatio his
brother, who with a choice Band was every where as occasion served, drove them
back thrice very valiantly. They that set upon the Eastern part, being it was
somewhat late before they began, in seasonable time, and yet not without some
damage retired back again, by reason the Tide came vio^ently in upon them.
They that were allotted to assault Helmont, and Erinace, the two Fortresses,
and the trench of the English, easily took them, by reason that the Soldiers
were called forth from thence to defend other places; two thousand of them
being sent to the Western arm of the Sea (which they call Gullet) did
presently take Semilunula, which was forsaken; from whence they were driven out
again presently, many of them being lost, whilst they fled confusedly, for
fear the water should rise and hemme them in. Nine great pieces of Ordnance
placed against the West gate, thundering forth not single Bullets, but chained
together, like a tempest, and sometimes Lead and Iron tools, did so overcome
the Assaulters of the West gate, and the Sand hill, that they received a very
miserable overthrow: and in the midst of the assault, the Sea coming in upon
them, and the Scouts showing themselves, they were so affrighted, that casting
away their Arms, Ladders, and draw bridges, they gave themselves over either
to the slaughter of the Garrisoners that sallied out upon them, or the fury of
the Sea that followed closevpon them. The Archduke not a whit amazed with this
loss of his men, lay very hard still at the siege, although with very small
hope of obtaining his desires, by reason that he could not hinder provision,
nor new supplies of Soldiers which daily came in; neither could he find any
place for undermining, there being so many Fortresses placed every where. And
now Sir Francis Vere having repaired the breaches that were made, being
recalled by the States, who every five months adiudg^d it fit to send a new
Governor, and fresh Soldiers, resigned his place to Frederick Dorpe, who
(even as all his Successors) for three whole years, and about a hundred
days, valiantly and laboriously more defended himself against the furious
assaults of the Seas, then the enemies, who but a little molested him.

Certainly, happy had it been with that warlike Nation, if so be that the Sea
had utterly swallowed it up; for whilst the most warlike Soldiers of the Low
Countries, Spain, England, France, Scotland, and Italy contended for a barren
piece of Sand, it became their common Sepulcher, although to their eternal
honor. But these things belong properly to the writers of the Low Country
affairs; but yet it may belong to us to know and remember those worthy
Englishmen that died there: the chiefest among them were the Veres Brothers,
Sir Edward Cecill, Sir John Ogle, Sir Charles Fairfax, Coronell Lawrence
Dutton, and Coronell Drake, Carpenter, Serieant Mayor, Captain Holcroft,
Galfred Dutton, Greuill, Wilford, Humphreyes, Drake, Broughton, Herbert, Frost,
Madeson, Gerard, Butler, Rogers, and Dennis Connigraue. Neither let us forget
the valor of John Carew, a Cornish young man, who having his arm burst off by
the force of a great piece of Ordnance, and shot a good way from him, with an
undaunted mind (all his fellows sorely lamenting) he went and brought it in
his other hand into the Town, and showing it to the Surgeon, Behold, said he,
the arm that to day at dinner served all my body.

This siege brought the King of France to Cales, from whence is a short journey
over into England, on purpose to provide and strengthen the borders of his
Kingdom. which when the Queen understood, she sent over to him Sir Thomas
Edmonds to see him, and congratulate his health with him. He again to
acknowledge this courtesy, sent over into England to the Queen, Marshall
Byrone, Marshall Birone sent over to England.
Aruerne, and Aumont, and many other Noblemen. These the Queen entertained at
Basing with such humanity, and dismissed them so courteously, that they much
blazoned forth her meek affablenesse, seasoned both with wisdom and
eloquence. That truly which the French Writers report, that the Queen showed
to Marshall Byrone, and the rest of the French, the brains of the Earl of
Essex in her privy Chapel; or as others will have it, fastened to a post or
stake, is most ridiculous, for his brains and body were truly both buried
together. Indeed, certain it is, that amongst her talk with them, she very
sharply blamed the Earl of Essex, concerning his ingratitude toward her, and
his unadvised consultations, and his scornful contumacy, in not begging pardon
for his offense; and that she wished that the most Christian King of France,
would rather use toward his Subjects a mild kind of severity, then a
dissolute clemency; and that he would in time cut off the heads also of those
that intend or plot any innouations in the state or disturb the public quiet.

This advise of the Queen might have well frighted Marshall Byrone from his
wicked designs, which he had already plotted against his King, had he not
been bewitched: But the force of his destiny rushing on him so besotted his
blind understanding, that within few months after he suffered the same
punishment, that the Earl of Essex had lately done before him.

Shortly after, the Queen having returned out of the Country, assembles a
Parliament, A Parliament at Westminster.
wherein she makes good and wholesome Laws, concerning the poor, the weak;
and lame Soldiers, and Mariners, concerning fraudulent overseers of Wills and
Testaments. Concerning the deceit of Clothiers, and the preying that were wont
to be on the borders of Scotland. But when as there did come grievous
complaints into the Lower house of Parliament, against Monopolies: Monopolies
restrained.
(for many had bought to themselves the power of selling some certain
commodities alone, confirmed by Letters Patents, under pretense of the public
good, but truly to the great loss of the Land) The Queen presently set forth
a Proclamation, wherein she made all her formerly granted Letters Pa^ents void,
partly, and of no effect, and partly to be examined according to the Law. And
this was so pleasing to the Lower house, that 80. of them chosen out came unto
her, and by the Speaker of the House humbly gave her thanks. The Queen
entertaining their ^oues very joyfully, spoke to them much after this manner*

IOwe to you all a peculiar thanks and commendations for your large good wills
toward us, The Queens speech concerning them.
not in silent thought conceived, but in deeds amply and really expressed, in
that ye recalled my error, which was out of ignorance, and not wilfulness.
These things would have been turned to my disgrace and infamy, if such Harpies
and Horse-leaches as those had not been made known by you. I had rather be
maimed either in my hand, or my mind, then to give consent with either to
these privileges of Monopolies. The brightness of a Princess Majesty has
not so blinded my eyes, that liberty or licentiousness should prevail with me
more then Justice. The glory of the very name of a King may deceive unskillful
and indiscreet Kings, as gilded pills do a sick patient. But I am none of
those, for I know that the Commonwealth ought to be governed for the good only
of the^ that are committed to it, and not of him to whom it is committed; and
that the King must give account of it before another Judgment seat. I think my
self most happy, that by Gods help I have so governed my Kingdom as I have
done; and that I have such Subjects, for whose good I would leave Kingdom, or
life it self. I desire, that what other men have trespassed in by false
suggestion, be not imputed to me, to whom the testimony of my clear conscience
is a sufficient excuse for me. You cannot choose but know that Princes servants
are always most intent for the good of their own affairs; and that truth is
concealed often from Princes, neither can they look through all things, who
are continually troubled with great throngs of greater businesses.

About the beginning of this year died Henry Herbert Earl of Pembroke, The
death of Henry Earl of Pembroke.
the son of William, made Knight of the Garter in 1574, President of the
Council in Wales after the death of Henry Sidney his Father in law. By whose
Daughter Marie he begat William now Earl of Pembroke, and Philip now Earl of
Montgomery, and Anne that died in the very flower of her youth.

Also there died Henry Lord Norris of Ricot, And of the Lord Norris.
restored to his Lands after the death of his Father, but upon some strict
conditions about the inheritance of his Grandmother, which was one of the
Heirs of Viscount Louell. But the Queen made him more completely Lord, after
his Embasie into France, finished with great commendation of his wisdom. He
begat of his wife Marie, one of the Heirs of John Lord Williams of Tame, (who
was in the time of Henry 8. Treasurer of the Augmentation Office, and privy
Counselor to Queen Marie) a warlike progeny. William his eldest son
Marshall of Barwicke, that died in Ireland; to whom was borne Francis that
succeeded in his Uncles honor: the second was John so often spoken of before:
the third was Thomas President of Mounster, and sometimes Justice of Ireland,
that died by reason of neglect of a small wound: the fourth Henry that died the
same death, about the same time and place: the fifth Maximilian, slain in the
wars of Britain: and Edward Governor of Ostend, who alone suruiued his
Parents.

Within a few days after died Peregrine Berty Lord Willoughby of Eresby, The
death of the Lord Willoughby.
Governor of Barwicke, who had undergone all the Offices of a Captain, both
in the Low Countries, and in France, and Robert his son by Mary Sister to
Edward Earl of Oxford, succeeded him.

And now let us return a little to Ireland: A Proclamation against
transporting money into Ireland.
And then we shall observe, that about this time there came out a Proclamation
(which also Henry 7. had forbad by Law) that no man should transport English
money into Ireland, by reason that either the Rebels get it to themselves, and
purchase their provision with it; or the Merchants convey it into other
foreign Nations, to the great loss and detriment of this Kingdom.
Deliberation about altering the Irish Coin.
Wherefore now there was great deliberation about altering the money in
Ireland, and mingling some Brass with it, by reason that the war in Ireland
stood them in yearly 160000. pounds sterling. Hereupon others thought the
charge of the war would be less, and that all good and lawful money in
Ireland would be put away in exchange in England; and that so the Rebels being
destitute of good and lawful money, would be barred of all trading with
foreign Nations, and be necessarily much thereby weakened. Others argued,
that this change of Coin would be very prejudicial to the Queens credit, and
good report, and the loss of Subjects be much thereby increased. That the good
money could not be transported over without great charges of the Queen; and
that the gain of this new Coin in England, would not answer the charges of
the very bringing over of it (if the account should be cast up right) much
less, if so be the money were coined in Ireland, where a Mint were with great
charges to be erected, and mony-makers hired at far greater expenses. Also,
that thereby they could not hinder the Irish Traffic with Foreigners, when
the Merchants know there is Silver in the new Coin, which they know for to
separate from Brass easily, and who care not whether they take one piece of
money, or three of the same value; urging, that besides there was a doubt
whether the Soldiers would not mutiny, for their pay would then be shortened.

But for all that Buckhurst Lord Treasurer, very skillful in money matters,
with much ado got of the Queen, that the money might be altered for a while,
but afterward recalled to it is greatest value, which he urged by reason of
necessity (for that was the Law of the time:) and which the Queen (although
she was feign to grant it) yet could say, that it would be prejudicial to her
credit, but worse to her Army. The Soldiers pay altered without any tumult or
mutiny.
But yet for all that, it was finished without any tumult or commotion in all
the Army, to the great happiness of the Queen, which exercised her strict
authority over her Soldiers, and yet lost not her love. Certainly the Army did
sustain great loss by this alteration of Coin, and the Queen got but very
little good, if any at all: If any got, it was those that had let moneys out,
whose only covetousness was thought first to have broacht this business. The
Lord Deputy, The Lord Deputy sets on toward the Rebels.
as soon as he had received this their Deliberation, the better to keep his
Army from mutining, kept them from idleness: and at the beginning of the
Spring, assembleth his Forces, and before all of them met together he marches
toward Moghery, where he kept his Soldiers to hard work, who by cutting
down a wood, had made a very difficult way easy and passageable; and then he
built a Fort. He expelled the usurping Mac-Genises out of Lecall, and subdued
all the Castles of the Rebels, even as far as to Armach, and there also he
strengthened the Garrison. And he proceeded so far this Summer, that he
removed Tir-Oen from his Fort of Blacke^water, where very skilfully he had
pitched his Camp.

In the mean time John O-Doghert being dead in Tir-Conell, the Deputy
declares his Son Heir, And Henry Docwray on the other part.
because his Father possessed some lands in the English right; and he delivered
over his Inheritance to Hugh Boy and Phelim Reaugh, his Guardians. This so
heinously molested O-Neale Garue, that forthwith he flies upon the young man's
inheritance, out of an imaginary right he thought he had, as if all the Land
that was in Tir-Conell belonged to him; and he took it as heinously that the
Deputy thought not so too, although he promised indifferently to hear both
parties. Yet at length Henry Docwray with fair promises asswageth O-Neale
Garue, and at last enticeth him to the English party: and lest he should be
idle, having assaulted Mac-Swine Fanagh, he drove away a brave prey: but at his
earnest suite, and swearing fealty he restored it again, and received
Hostages, whom a little after, Mac-Swine breaking his faith, he hung up.
Afterward wasting his Country, he brought him to that pass, that having
given Hostages again, he was glad to keep his promise better. After that, he
laid waste the Country of Sleugh-Art, woody and boggish, of some fifteen
miles extension, O-Neale Garue being still his conduct. Then he took
Dery-Castle, and strengthened Newton and Ainogh with Garrisons. And now the
Deputy having come to Black^water, sent for him thither: but when as by reason
of necessities which he wanted, and the enemy that blockt up his passage, he
could not come to the Deputy, the Deputy checking him, admonished him that he
would repair this his negligence with some famous exploit, which, having
gotten opportunity, he did accordingly. For being informed by O-Neale Garue,
that there were Soldiers mustered out of Tir-Conell against the Deputy, and
that Donegall Monastery near Ballashanon, was peopled but with a few religious
persons, he sent thither 500. English, 500. English surprise Donegall Monastery.
who easily made themselves masters of that place.

O-Donell at the returning of the Lord Deputy comes with all his Forces to
Donegall, fiercely armed and provided for the destruction of the English. He
eagerly besets it thirty whole days, shooting continually as if they had
gotten victory: The Monastery being by chance set on fire in the night: and yet
for all that the English valiantly sustained the siege.

Whilst these things succeed so prosperously in these quarters, behold many
write unto the Lord Deputy, Rumors concerning the Spaniards sailing toward
Mounster, calls the Deputy back.
and daily fame confirmed it, that the Spaniard had hoised sail toward
Mounster. Wherefore they entreat him that he would leave prosecuting the
Rebels within the Realm a little, and prevent the enemy without as well.

The Deputy therefore (not to loose that which he had gotten) strengthened the
Garrisons at Vlster, and made all speed possible into Mounster with one or two
wings of Horse, commanding the foot to follow; and thither also hastened
Tir-Oen, and Odonell, having raised the siege at Donegall.

And now scarce were they sooner removed from thence, but Docwray by
land-iournies comes and relieues the Garrisons there with provisions: and
places two colors in Asherow under Edward Digges, after which in a short time
Ballashanon Ballashanon seized on.
(that was so long looked for) was seized on: And then did he liberally revenge
himself on the perfidious Irish, who had before betrayed Newton and Derry.

And now the war being removed into Mounster, calls us thither too.
Tir-Oen, and the Rebels of Mounster, by their spies Matthew Ouied a Spaniard,
the Archbishop of Dublin, made by the Pope Bishop of Clonfort, the Bishop of
Killaloe, and Archer a Jesuit, had obtained of the Spaniard, by much
entreating, praying, and protesting, that he would send over to them the
Rebels in Mounster, some aid under John D'Aquila, being certainly persuaded
that then all Mounster would revolt from the Queen to them, and that the
titular Earl of Desmond, The President intercepts the titular Earl of Desmond.
and Florence Mac-Carty, would join great Forces with them. In the mean time
Sir George Carew to prevent this, having found the titular Earl in his lurking
hole, forsaken of all his followers, arraigned him forthwith, lest that dying
uncondemned, his goods (without the authority of a Parliament) might not fall
to the Exchequer. He being condemned of treason, protested, that he took Arms
out of love to the Romish Religion, and hope of recovering the Patrimony of his
Grandfather; as also, by reason of the exaction of the English in Plow-land,
and their Jury of twelve men. Carew also found out, how that it had been
debated and consulted of between Tir-Oen and the Archbishop, in what part of
Ireland the Spaniard could most conveniently land; He finds out their
consultation about the Spaniards convenient landing.
and that they agreed that Mounster was the fittest place; but that they agreed
not yet in what Haven they should land. Some judged it best first to seize upon
Limricke, as neighboring upon Conaugh and Leinster, and not very far from
Vlster: But then he heard that Donat Mac-Cormac affirmed, that Florence
preferred Cork before that, as being a Haven more opportune, a City weaker,
and therefore the easier to be assaulted, and that from thence the Spaniard
might be ready at hand to Barry, Roch, Cormac-Macdermot, and Mac-Carty Reogh,
who yet continued in loyalty; whom they might either drive into a taking of
their sides, or else spoil their goods. He makes preparation to go against
them.
Hereupon Sir George Carew thought nothing better then any way to surprise
Florence, although before he had given him a Protection for his life; and at
length surprising him, he sent both him and the titular Earl too over into
England.

And now being certified that the Spaniards were upon coming, which before he
could by no means persuade the Deputy, and the English Council to believe, he
causes provision to be brought into Cork, and calls an assembly of the
Province there. He lays hands on some turbulent persons whom he suspected, to
keep them from doing mischief: from others he took Hostages: and had
generally such a provident care of his affairs, that he abounded both in
provision, and all necessaries to sustain a siege for many months. And
besides, there came over a new supply of 2000. Soldiers out of England, in
very good time.

The President about the midst of September, The President informs the Deputy
of the affairs.
being certainly informed, that the Spaniards had struck sail, certifies the
Deputy of it as soon as he could. He as soon as ever he came to Kilkenny, sent
for the President. But behold, while he makes haste in his journey, being
recalled by Messengers that informed him that the Spa^ish Navy was in sight,
he made Sir Charles Wilmot President of Cork, and he himself makes all haste
to the Deputy. A consultation whether the Deputy should enter Mounster without
his forces.
At his coming a Council is held, whether or no the Deputy (who had scarce
guard enough for his own person) should return, or tarry at Kilkenny, till
his Forces were met together. Some thought it fittest for him to return,
because it was not for the credit of the Lord Deputy to go forward with so
small a company. President Carew contends on the other side, that he could
neither return, nor stand still without suspicion of sluggish^esse, and danger
of defection throughout the whole Province; and so at length profering 200.
Horse to guard him, and informing him how well Cork was furnished with all
things necessary for war, he brought him along thither with him, cheerfully,
although there were some that would have had the Lord Deputy gone no farther
then Clonmell, a place bordering close upon that Province.

In the mean time the Spanish Navy, which by reason of a slack wind could
not reach Cork Haven, The Spaniards land in Ireland.
the 23. of September puts in at the mouth of Kinsale Haven, and landeth their
Soldiers. Presently hereupon Sir Richard Percy who with 150. Soldiers
governed there, being unequal for to resist, retires back to Cork. The
Spaniards with 35. displaied Banners having the Gates open, are gratefully
received by the Inhabitants. The chief Magistrate going with a staff before
them, and disposing of their several Lodgings. The President Carew commands
hereupon all the Sheep and Cattle to be driven on this side the River Auerley,
and sends Flower with 400. ready furnished Foot, to waste and depopulate the
neighboring Countries: and, which seemed very convenient to do, he musters up
all the Citizens and Townsmen he could get into his Army, although they stood
him in no stead, but only so to keep them as Hostages with him, lest that
having lain and lurkt idely at home, out of love to the Romish Religion, and
inbred favor to the Spanish Nation (out of the opinion of being descended from
the same original) they should think upon reuolting, or yielding up the
Towns to the Spaniard.

Don John D'Aquila, The reasons of their coming published.
who was Governor of the Spanish Forces (with the Title of Master General,
and Captain of the Catholic King, in the defending of war for God, for the
maintenance of Religion in Ireland:) Having published many writings, endeavored
to persuaded the simple people, That Queen Elizabeth was deposed by the
judgment of the Pope: that her Subjects were freed from their oath of
Allegiance; and that now the Spaniards were come to deliver them from the jaws
of the Devil: (for those were the very words) and certainly he drew many
wicked Irish to him under this fair pretense.

The Deputy having drawn together all the Forces which possibly he could, The
English beset them.
prepares himself for the siege; and having pitched his Camp, he resolved
first to reduce to obedience Rincurran Castle The Spaniards drove aut from
Rincurran Castle.
by the Haven, wherein were 150. Spaniards left: because it seemed very
convenient for them, either to protect the English Navy there, or infest from
thence the Spanish. This Carew did; (having set to his great Engines, and kept
back the Spaniards succor by Sea and Land both) and shortly brought it to an
absolute yielding.

And now Sir Richard Leuison Vice Admiral of the Seas, having been sent out
of England to stop the passage of the Spaniards, and come too late, blocks up
the Spaniards in the Haven: whereupon the English (both by Sea and Land) begin
to batter the Town, and hardly to besiege it: But it was grown a great deal
more remiss after, by reason that Sir Richard Leuison with his Mariners set
forth after two thousand Spaniards, who were landed at Bear Haven, Baltemore,
and Castle Haven, five ships of whose he kept in great awe.

All the same time was Carew sent out from the Camp with some troops, to
prevent Odonell from joining forces with the Spaniard: but he, having the
benefit of frosty weather, got through the Deserts to the^ in the night time.
And within a few days after Tir-Oen himself, Tir-Oen comes into Mounster.
O-Rorke, Reimond Burke, Mac-Mahon, Randall Mac-Surley, and Tirell Lord of
Kerry, the choicest of all the Rebels drew near too, to whom Alphonso Don
O-Campo having joined the new come Spaniards, made in all an Army of six
thousand foot, and five hundred horse, being triumphing in the hope of a sure
victory, by reason they were more in company, and better provided: and on the
otherside, the English were sore wearied with a winter siege, and shut up from
provision, and almost spent with poverty and hunger.

The Deputy, for all these difficulties, plies the siege as strongly as he
can, and fortifies the Castles with new works. On the 21. of December Tir-Oen
shows himself from a Hill some mile from the Camp, and the next day again.
The night following the Spaniards rush forth of the Town, and the Irish
endeavor to get into it; but both failed of their purpose. On the 23. of
December there were Letters surprised sent from Don John D'Aquila to Tir-Oen,
wherein he entreats him that the Spaniards newly come might be let into the
Town, that so the English Camp might be assaulted on either side.

The Moon shining the next night, the Lord Deputy commanded Sir Henry Poor to
lead forth eight troops of old Soldiers, and to set them in battle array at
the West part of the Camp. Sir Henry Greames that was Master of the watch that
night, early in the morning certifies the Lord Deputy that the Rebels The
R^bels determine to bring their forces into the Town.
would certainly march on, because he had seen their matches kind^ed already
in a great number. So that hereupon they cry to take Arms; and troops are
disposed every where, The English hinder them.
where there was any passage to the Town.

The Lord Deputy, with President Carew, and Sir Richard Wingfield Marshal,
comes toward those that lay at watch and ward; and taking Council with Sir
Oliver Lambert, consults of a fit place to combat with the enemy. Whether
afterward were brought the Regiments of Sir Henry Folliot, and Sir Oliver
Saint-Iohns, with 600. Mariners, under conduct of Sir Richard Leuison. But in
the mean time Tir-Oen having resolved, by the help of darkness, to bring the
fresh Spaniards, and 800. Irish into Kinsale, as he was leading them on, espied
at the peeping of the day, the Marshall, and Sir H. Danuers with the regiments
of Horse, and Poor lying at the bottom of the hill, with his troops of old
Soldiers. The Rebels retire.
Whereupon being quite out of hope of finishing his resolved intent, he for a
while makes a stand, and presently after caused his Bagpipes to sound a retreat.

As Soon as the Lord Deputy was made acquainted with this half confused a
retreat he commands his to pursue them; The English pursue them.
and he himself goes to mark the manner of their recoiling; but there arising
so great a mist, that ouer-spread the earth, he could not discern any thing of
them. Shortly after the heavens being cleared a little, he observed them to
fall back somewhat fearfully in three great troops, having the Horsemen at
their backs: wherefore (sending back Carew with three wings of Horse into the
Camp, to hinder the Spaniards breaking out upon them, out of the Town) he so
earnestly persued Tir-Oen, that he compelled him to make a stand on the brinke
of a gul^ie and plashy boggish place, to which, but only by wading, there was
no access. But those Horsemen that kept this Foord being vanquished by the
valor of the Marshall, They fight the 24. of December: The same day the
Earthquake was in London.
and the Earl of Clan Richard, the English valiantly assault the troops of
Horse of the Enemy: and after Sir William Godolphine that led the Deputies
wing, Henry Danuers, Minshaw, Taffe, Flemings, and John Barcley Campe-Master,
had joined themselves together, they reiterated their assault so courageously,
that they put to flight the Enemies Horse. The English thought it not good to
follow them; but having drawn together all their forces, they rush into the
midst of the Enemies Army, and break through them. Tirell yet with the
Spaniards stood firmly in their places, wherefore the Deputy marches on
toward them; and not only to show himself a Captain in commanding, but also
a Soldier in fighting, he rushes upon them with three Regiments of Sir Oliver
Saint-Iohns, which Roe led, and forthwith so brake the Ranks of them, that the
Spaniards begin to betake themselves to the Irish, who left them exposed to
slaugher, providing for their own safety.

For Tir-Oen, The Rebels fly.
Odonell, and the rest, presently betook themselves to flight, casting away
their Arms. Don Alphonso O-Camp^ being taken prisoner, and three other Spanish
Captives, and six of their Alferez.
Standerd-bearers, 1200* slain: nine Ensigns taken, whereof six were Spanish.
Very few of the English being wanting, but many wounded: and amongst those Sir
Henry Danuers, Sir William Godolphin, and Croft. This great victory costing
them only so little loss.

The Deputy having ^ounded a retreit, and given thanks* to God for this
victory, amongst the Carcasses of the slain* knighted the Earl of Clan
Richard for his valiant service; and after that returning to his Camp with
great shoutes of the people, finding the Camp safe and sound from any hurt
from the Spaniard. For they in the Town finding all things so well fortified
with Garrisons, and finding by experience that their eruption out of the Town
was very dangerous, being weary with expectation of the Irish, departed home
again, leaving behind shame to the Irish, and victory to the English.

This victory was great, and full of various commodities; The commodities of
the victory.
for thereby Ireland that was now even bowing under rebellion, was held up
again: The Spaniard removed out of it, the Arch-Rebell Tir-Oen driven to his
lurking^hole again in Vlster, and Odonell into Spain; the smaller Rebels
slain every where. The Queens authority restored to its former perfection,
the insolency of the enemy much abated, and the minds of honest minded men
(who before were depressed much) were now confirmed again, and peace concluded
every where.

The day after that, the Lord Deputy causes Sir Josias Bodley ouerseer of the
Trenches, (who had behaved himself bravely both in their works, and battle)
to finish those things which he had left imperfect, and bring his Rampires
nearer to the Army. And when six days had been spent in this business, Don
John D'Aquila having sent Letters to the Lord Deputy by his Trumpeter,
requested that some Nobleman, or man of credit, might be sent to him into the
Town to parley with. The Spaniards desire a Parley.
The Deputy sent Sir William Godolphine; to whom D'Aquila signifies, that he
much honored the Lord Deputy, yea, though he were an enemy; complaining that
the Irish were weak, and impotent, unaccustomed to military exercises, and
(which he feared) perfidious. That he indeed was sent only in succor of two
Noble Earls, but by reason that he doubted what was become of them, whether
they lived or no, by reason that the tempest of war drove one, and the Sea
the other, clean out of sight* that therefore he would treat concerning
peace, which might only not be deceitful to the Spaniard, and useful to the
English; although (if he pleased) he could endure the siege longer, lacking
nothing thereto, and although he expected aid daily the better to perform it.
But to be short, other talk had on both sides, it was at last agreed between
the English and Spaniards, both weary, one of besieging, the other of being
besieged;

First, Articles concerning yielding.
That the Spaniards should yield to the Deputy Kinsall, the Castles and Forts
at Baltamore, Berehauen, and Castlehauen, and depart with their lives, goods,
and Banners displayed.

Secondly, That at a set rate the English should furnish them with ships to go
home to Spain with, and that D'Aquila should go out last.

Thirdly, That they should offer no violence, or take Arms against the Queen,
till such time as that they had been landed in Spain.

Fourthly, That if they arrived at any English Haven, they should be
courteously used: and if they chanced to light upon any English ships, that
they should not molest them.

And lastly, That whilst they expected a wind in Ireland, they should have
provision for their money, without any impeach; and that for those ships that
were to bring them to Spain, the Lord Deputy should choose out pledges amongst
them for his security.

THE FOUR and Fortieth Year OF HER REIGN.
Anno Domini 1602. 1602

THese Articles being put upon Record the second of January, and confirmed on
either side by oath, the Spaniards in fit season having their troops much
impaired, put from Ireland; the Irish greatly fretting that they had delivered
up to the English again the Castles and Forts. But being about to deliver up
Dunboy, O-Suilliuant Bear, that had before resigned it to the Spaniards
protection, invaded it suddenly, and strengthened it with works, and with very
suppliant Letters recalled the Spaniards. But Carew fearing lest by such a
commodious Haven, Dumboy Castle assaulted by the President.
and fit receptacle for the Rebels, the war might be awakened again, made
haste thither by Sea (for by Land the passage was most difficult) and having
assaulted the Castle with a cruel siege, razed it down to the ground; thereby
taking away the fear of the Spaniards return again, who were daily expected
at the Haven.

Yet for all this Eugenius O-Hegan made Bishop of Rosse by the Pope, having
brought moneys and munition out of Spain, and putting them in hope of help
besides, so imboldened the well-allaied stomach of rebellion, that the Irish
still continued in the same. The Rebels reduced into order.
But Sir Charles Wilmot in Kerry, Roger Gawyn, and the two Haruies in Carbery,
did quickly lay it again, by taking their Castles, drawing away their Cattle,
and putting many to the sword. The President himself surprised Mac-Dermot a
Nobleman of Muskerie, and of a great retinue, whom he committed to prison;
although in a very short time he escaped forth. But when he saw how his
Territory lay wasted by the English, and his Castles seized on by them, (for
Sir Charles Wilmot at the time of his escape from prison, had beset Muckron one
of his chiefest seats, which by chance got fire, and took it:) when he saw
likewise that his Son was in England, his Wife in Cork, and both prisoners;
and himself on the very edge of greater danger, he began to supplicate and beg
for pardon, which (upon good surety) he at last obtained. Marshall Bagnall in
the mean time vanquished that English Rebel Tirell, who with a troop of
mercenary Rogues and Vagabonds, had entered Muskerry: him he spoiled of his
Castles which he possessed, forcing him into the closer Mountains of Desmond.
And Sir Charles Wilmot, he did so sorely persecute the Knight of Kerry, and
some of his accomplices in the rebellion, that they were glad to come to him
howling, and begging for admission, to swear him fealty. Tirell by this time
being narrowly prosecut^d by the Lord of Barry, and Wilmot, as secretly^ as
possibly he could, steals into Leinster. And presently after that William a
Burgh and O-Su^lliuant Bear, being oppressed and frighted with too many
ensuing dangers, leave, and render up Bear and Bantre to the pleasure of the
English.

On the other side Captain Taffe being sent out by the President, did so
molest Euge^y Mac^Car^y* and Donat Keagh in Carbery, Bishop O-Hegan slain.
that Eugeny O-Hegan the Bishop, fighting amidst the Rebels, was slain, and
found with a kind of a Register in one hand, and a Sword in the other.

Although that now the Spaniards were quite removed out of Ireland; A Navy
dispatched to the Spanish shore.
yet notwithstanding the Queen bearing a provident eye over the affairs of
her Kingdoms, furnishes a Navy of eight of her own great ships, with some
lesser Vessels, which she sent Sir Richard Leuison, and Sir William Mounson in
charge with, to roaue about the Spanish coast, and to keep them from another
Voyage toward Ireland. Leuison set forth the 19. of March, and Mounson having
expected some ships from the Hollanders, a few days, put forth after him, when
he perceived that no Hollanders ship would come to join with him. In the mean
time Leuison lighted upon a Spanish Navy of 38. ships, that brought silver out
of America; but by reason of their small number, though their stomachs were
great, they set upon them, but in vain.

After that Mounson had come with the rest of the Navy, for many days together
they kept out all trading from the coasts of Portugal: afterward they
certainly understood, that a great Caracke of 1600. Tun, richly laden, from
the East Indies, had newly arrived at Cezimbra against Barbaru^, the Promontory
in Portugal* and that there were ele^uen Galleys there in the Bay, The Galleys
and Caracke set upon in the Haven of Cezimbra.
eight whereof were allotted to Spinola, for his war in the Low Countries*
and the other three Portugals.

Cezimbra is a little City within the Bay, all built with stone, and fortified
with a Castle, with twelve pieces of great Ordnance. A Caracke and Galleys are
set upon.
Under the Castle rode the Caracke; the Galleys lay in the West part of the Bay
under a wall: turning their Deck upon them, with five pieces of Ordnance on a
side; insomuch that from them the Caracke that seemed like a Castle, and the
Castle it self, there was great show of danger to the English. Yet Leuison
resolved with the general consent of the Mariners to assault them, and to set
fire on the Caracke, if they could not take her.

The day after, having a brave gale, he in the Admiral hoised up his Ensign
to the midst of the Mast, Mounson in the Rere^Admirall, to the Foremast; by
and by with five of the Queens ships, they cast anchor against the Galleys,
upon whom they so thundered, that after seven hours the Marquess Sancta Croce
withdrew himself, and those Portugal Galleys which he governed. The Galleys
are put to flight.
But Spinola not following, he returned again. But these Galleys being not
able to withstand the violence of the English, most of them saved themselves
from their enemies. Two of them were taken and burnt, Some of them taken.
having great store of Gunpowder to be carried into the Low Countries: the rest
pitifully battered, and the Gally-slaues most slain, got with much ado to
the mouth of the River Tagus. And Mounson now began to set upon this great
Caracke, A parley.
and to fire it. But Leuison forbad it, but sent to the Master of it, and
certified him how that the Galleys wherein he trusted were all now vanquished,
and two of them taken: and that now he was Master of the Island, that the
Castle it self was not able to withstand the English forces, much less his
Caracke, that relied only upon it. Wherefore, if so be that they refused mercy
when it was offered* that he would deal very severely with them.

The Master of the Caracke required, that some Noble man might be sent, with
whom he might deal about it.

Mounson was the man was sent* to whom these conditions were propounded: That
all that were in the Caracke (for there were 300. of the Nobler sort, that had
met there to defend her) should be forthwith dismissed with their weapons; that
their Colors should not be taken down; that the ship and Ordnance should come
to the King of Spain again, but all the Merchandise to the English.

Mounson condescended, that within three days all should be dismissed: that
Spanish Colors should be displayed in the sight of the English, but only, at
the Poope of the ship; but for granting the Ship and Ordnance back to the King
of Spain, that he would not hear of.

Afterward it came to this agreement, They yield.
that within two days the Portugals there should be dismisse^, having their
Matches put out; their Colors should be laid down; that the Ship, Ordnance,
and Merchandise should be safely delivered up to the English; and that in the
mean time there should be no shooting from the Castle out, upon, or against
the English.

The same night all were dismissed out of the Caracke, except the Master, and
some few more, that were set a shore early in the morning. And the very same
day the English put forth with the Caracke, having a good wind, brought home a
lusty prey, having not lost above five of their Mariners; the prey being
valued by the Portugals at 1000000. Crowns.

After their return, Mounson being sent back again toward the coasts of
Spain continued thereabouts, till the midst of Winter, to hinder any attempt
upon Ireland. While he launcheth out into the deep, toward Spain,
Frederick Spinola with six Galleys, that had gotten out safe at the skirmish,
coming along by the French shore, came at last to the British Ocean on the 23.
of September, The rest of the Galleys are for Flanders.
with intent to enter at some Haven or other in Flanders. Sir Robert Mansell
ley in wait for him with one or two of the Queens ships, and four Hollanders
that were dispersed here and there. They resolved to set on two Galleys first
espied by the Hollanders: but having espied one of the Queeenes ships aloof
off* they turn them only the other way, so to spend the day, and by the
benefit of the night put into Haven.

Sir Robert Mansell persued them from eight of the clock^ in the morning, till
Sun set; besides two Hollanders with him: but the Galleys upon the approaching
of night, taking their course toward England, came so near, that some of
their Gallie sl^ues that were chained to their Oars, having shook off their
Fetters, and leaping forth, swoome to the land; the Galleys unawares came to a
place, where one of the Qu^^nes ships* and some Hollanders, lay at anchor.
Hereupon (...) being sure to light upon them, the b^tter to come to them, he
turns sail on purpose t^ put himself between the shore of Flanders and the
Galleys. But they light upon one of the Queens ships, They light upon the
Queens ships.
called the Answer. Broadgate Master of the ship, who by reason of the noise
of the Ordnance he heard a far off* had prepared himself for battle, gave
them 38. shot and the Hollanders forthwith thundered upon them too.

The Galleys having not answered one piece of Ordnance, as speedily as they
could escaped away; and fainting in a most ^empestuous night, one of them
chanced to light upon Mansell: They skirmish.
he discharges all his Ordnance against it, feld the Mast, and ^earing a
lamentable noise, and coming near, by an Interpreter he offered them mercy.
But five other Galleys coming in to help, he turned his broad side, and
discharged all his Ordnance amongst them. What slaughter he made, a^though ^he
night were a clear one, cannot be told: neither after that was heard the noise
of a piece of Ordnance, till such time as a Hollander fastening upon one of the
Galleys, so scoured her Stern, that presently after she ^^ncke with all her
passengers.

Another Hollander by chance driven upon one of the Galleys, sorely battered
it, and almost was split it self. Another of the Galleys by the negligence of
the Mariners, Their Galleys vanquished.
whilst it made have to get to Calis, was cast away. Two of them recovered
Newport. Spinola in the Admiral with great store of wealth escaped into
Dunkerke: but the next year, being wounded with a great piece of Ordnance in a
Sea fight against the Hollanders, died with great praise.

We have heretofore said that the Voyage of the Bishop of London, Christopher
Perkins, and I. Swall Doct. of the Law, whom the Queen had delegated at Embden
in 1600. to treat with the Danes Delegates, was to no purpose. And now again
are sent to Bremen by the Queen concerning the same matter, The treaty at
Bremen with the Danes.
Ralph Lord Euers, Sir John Herbert secondary Secretary, Daniel Dun Doctor of
the Law, and Master of Requests, and Stephen Leisiure adjoined Assistant. The
King of Denmark delegated Ma^derope Persberge, Arnold Whitfield Chancellor of
the Realm, and Jonas Charise Doctor of the Law. They complain of too much
tribute paid for passing the Sounds.
The English complained, that their free sailing to M^sco^y through the
Northern Sea, and their fishing about the shore, and the Islands was denied
them; and that there was too great an exaction of tribute and tolls, only for
their passage of the Sound. They required that the ancient Leagues between
Henry 7. King of England, and John King of Denmark in the year one thousand
four hundred and ninety: Their demands.
also, that, that between Henry 8 of England, and Christierne of Denmark in
1523. should be reuiewed again, and applied to these times: that this
manifold exaction of new tolls should either be taken away, o^ lessened: and
that the set rate should be in a book, with a certain reason of confiscation
of goods: that then the ships should not be detained at Sea longer then was
fitting and that the complaints of private men should be quickly composed.

After this arose a disputation whether or no it be lawful for a Prince
against ancient Leagues to increase his toll and tribute according to his good
pleasure.

Whether or no it be not against equity, a^though it be usual, A controversy
discussed about the freeness of the Sea.
since that custom ought to wait upon truth and equity.

Whether or no those things that have been ordained by grave council, and for
a while tolerated, can be abrogated without injury to the Princes authority.

Then, whether or no those tolls that were imposed upon all foreign traders
in the Reign of Queen Mary, for bringing in, or carrying o^t of Merchandise,
were not more just then those that the Da^es require for a passage only in the
Sea; who for charges to secure their sailing, exact a Rose-Noble for every
ship; and one piece of money for every hundred, besides Lastage.

Whether or no tolls ought to be exacted for passage, which elsewhere are not
paid, but only for landing and selling of merchandise.

Whether or no it be not free for the E^glish to fish in the North Sea, and the
Islands thereabouts, or to sail to Moscouy, since the Sea is free for all men;
since that Princes have no Dominion over the Sea, which they can no more hinder
men from, then from the air; according to that of Ant^nin^^ the Emperor,

I Truly am Lord of all the earth: but the Law i^ of the Sea. Wherefore i^dge
ye according to the Law of Rhodes.

Therefore, is it not against the Law of Nations, to usurp such authority over
the Sea; when Princes have not any Jurisdiction, unless of the Sea adjacent to
their coasts? and that only, that saylings might be secured from Pirates and
enemies, since that the Kings of England did never hinder sailing and fishing
in the Irish Sea, between England and Ireland, although they were Lords of
those shoares, as well as the King of Denmark is of Norway and Island, who
under no other color challenges this right? But yet, if the Danes will exact
tolls from the English for their passage, the Queen might as well exact as much
of those Danes that sail within her Dominions, Kingdoms, or Islands.

Hereupon the Danes propounded, that since their Kings Father allowed of their
Nauigations, which was very full of damage to him, for the Queens sake; that
now the Merchants of the English should redeem the same for two hundred Rose
Nobles yearly, for the life time of the Queen.

That goods surprised on each side might be restored according to equity and
honesty.

They grievously complained then of the English Pirates; requesting, that
although (by reason of the heat of the war) the Pirates insolency could not
well be repressed; yet, that by severity of punishment they might be kept under
a little: or that otherwise they must allow of Arrests to repair their
injuries and losses; because it should principally concern the King, to see
that his Subjects suffer no losses.

Lastly, that the English ought not to complain of their transporting warlike
munition into Spain, by reason that they transport so little, that the
Spaniard was but little the better for it, and might easily want for all their
supply.

Now, The treaty breaks off.
after that they had spent two months in these disputations by writings on
both sides exhibited, the Danes beyond all expectation certify the English,
that they had no power to take notice of, or to reform the Leagues, or taking
away, or lessening the tolls; or of granting leave for fishing in the Norway
and Island Seas, without the special license of the King, and some certain
conditions. Withal, (which moved much admiration) they gave warning to the
English not to fish at the Island Fer^e, under the pain whereby other fishings
have been heretofore inhibited.

The English on the other side made protestation in express words concerning
the nullity and inualidity of this Inhibition; as also of any other declaration
which should be made contrary to the League. Lastly, when they could no
otherwise agree, then to refer to the Princes on both sides, what had been
done, and what had been gone through with; and that the Danes had promised
their diligence to intercede with the King for the publication of Tolls
registered in a Book, whereby they might be certain of measure, number, and
weight; and not fear to have them altered according to the pleasure of the
Toll-takers: And that in case of confiscation, those goods should be seized
upon, and confiscated, that were concealed, and not named: The Englishmen being
content with these promises of the Danes, the whole matter (the right of the
Queen, and the Realm not any way infringed) was suspended, and prorogued till
another time.

Whilst these things were in controversy between both Princes, Disagreements
betwixt the Jesuits and Secular Priests.
the Ecclesiastical Papists in England are together by the ears at home: For
the Jesuits against the Secular Priests, with sharp Pens, and poisoned
tongues, and contumelious Books, fought continually. For they took it very
heinously that Blackwell of Trinity College in Oxford, sometimes fellow there,
who was altogether at Garnets beck, the General of the Jesuits through
England, was now made their Archpriest: insomuch that they much detracted from
his authority. Hereupon he degraded them of their faculties, and afterward,
they appealing to the Pope of Rome, he caused them in a Book to be declared
Schismatickes and Heretics.

This aspersion they soon wiped off, having the censure of the Vni^ersity at
Paris approving the same. And setting forth Books upon Books, they highly
commended the Queen, in that from the very beginning of her reign she had
dealt with Catholics very mercifully. For first they showed, that in the
first 11. years of her reign there was not one brought in question of his
life for matter of conscience or religion. And that not for whole 10. years
together after the Bull of Pius Quintu^ published against her, above 12.
Priests were executed: and that some of them were convicted Traitors, even
since the year 1580. when the Jesuits first crept over into England.

Then they showed, that their mischievous practices against the Commonwealth
had disturbed all, and much empaired the Catholic religion, and that they
were the occasion of the severe Laws made against Catholics.

Then they showed, that for all this in 10. years following there were but 50.
Priests executed; and that out of her mercy the Queen banished five and fifty
more, against whom she might have proceeded Legally, and executed them too.

Then they showed, that from that time, there were Seminaries erected in
Spain, at the care of Parsns an English Jesuit, to entertain English
run-awayes in: and how that from thence came yearly into England turbulent
Priests.

How that Parsons incited the Spaniard to invade England, or Ireland again:
that he confirmed the right of his Daughter to the Crown of England, in a
Book set forth to the same purpose; and that an oath was exacted of all
Students in the Seminaries to approve and maintain the same.

Then they declared, how that Holt of that society had suborned Hesket to a
rebellion, and enticed C^llin, York, and Williams to kill the Queene^ and how
that Walpole the Jesuit had persuaded Squire to make away the Queen by
poison. Insomuch that the Queen, although she never lo^ed to offer violence to
the conscience, yet could she not choose but use necessary severity upon these
kind of men, unless she would betray to her (...) the safety and security of
her own Realms.

Then they abused Parsons (whom they called Cowbucke) for a bastard, See
Watsons Quodlibets of Stat^.
and one of the dregs of the Commonalty; a fellow of a most seditious
disposition; a sycophant, an Aequiuocator, and one that would set Kingdoms to
sale.

Then they much condemned these Libells of the Jesuits set out against the
Queen, of falsities, accounting the Authors traitors both to God, and the
Queen. And having discoursed and argued very solidly, that the true Religion
was to be propagated not by the sword, but the spirit of meekness and
mildness. They concluded, beseeching the English Papists not to send their
children to the Jesuits Seminaries, who use in the very tenderness of their
years to infuse the poison of Treason, even with their elements of Learning.

In the midst of this combating with Books, (whether in earnest, Jesuits
and Secular Priests banished.
or deceitfully undertaken) the Council came to find out, that both the
Jesuits and the Priests in this matter secretly conspired to withdraw the
Subjects of the Queen from their obedience to her, and to excite the
Commonalty to the maintenance of the Romish Religion, even with Arms.

Hereupon the Queen by Proclamation commanded the Jesuits and Secular Priests
belonging to them, to depart the Kingdom: as for the rest that seemed to be
mediators between both, they had two months allotted to resolve whether or no
they would profess loyalty to the Queen; if not, to he gone; and neither of
both sorts ever to return again, except they will hazard the punishment of
the Law* and without doubt this Proclamation came out by the great providence
of God, to auert a great meditated mischief. For amongst these affairs Thomas
Winter (as he himself afterward confessed) and Tesmund a Jesuit, being sent
for by some of them into Spain, underwent most pernicious consultations to cut
off the Queen, and to exclude James of Scotland from his Right of inheritance.

And not only these in England, but also in the Low Countries, seditious
Soldiers conspired against the Archduke, and in France also some st^^red up
commotions against the King* insomuch that a storm seemed by some Star to be
raised against all Christian Kings and Princes.

In France Marshall Byrone, Marshall Byron beheaded.
who had practiced wicked counsels against his Country, and with pricking
words wounded the Majesty of the King, was now beheaded.

I do not well know whom the Marshalls confession detected; but amongst
others, it so aimed at the D. of Bulloigne, that being commanded to show
himself before the King, he appeared not; but fearing the anger of the King,
and the power of his adversaries about the Court; he withdrew himself into
Germany.

The French King made his great complaint of him to Queen Elizabeth, The
French King complains of the D. of Bullen.
accusing his marriage with his Sister Mary of Florence as unlawful, and the
Popes dispensation as ineffectual, and that thereby his Son was illeg^timate.

That he had allotted the Prince of Conde to succeed in the Kingdom.

That he conspired the destruction of the chiefest Catholics in France.

That he had conspired to betray the united Provinces to the Spaniards that
would give most for them.

That he detracted from the Judgment of the Parliament at Paris, by appealing
to the Court of War, which indeed had no Jurisdiction in such matters as
those.

That he took exception against his accusers, which in case of Treason is not
lawful to do.

Concluding, that these things were nothing but tergiuersations in detracting
all Judgments, He asks Q. Elizabeth's counsel what he should do with him.
and arrogating to himself the Kings authority.

Wherefore he asks council of the Queen what he should do in this matter.

She answers him by her Leager in France, that she was exceeding sorry to
hear of these things; and that she esteemed it great honor done to her, that
he would impart it unto her.

She much commended his moderate mind, which being suggested by so great
dangers, yet was rather guided by the council of his friends, then the
affection of his own self.

As concerning the council which he required, she made answer, The Queens
answer.
that if the proofs were as manifest against him, as the objections were
odious, he should do well to proceed legally against him; but that it was
dangerous for her to council him to any thing, till such time as the proofs
were clear against him, left perchance she should offend God, if so be he were
innocent; or offend the King, if he should suspect his own safety to be
neglected; wherefore, that she held it most fitting in so^doubtfull a case, to
be silent. Yet withal, she requesteth the King to use both judgment and
conscience in his council, and accurately examine both the accusations and
confessions, to see whether or no they come from men of trust, uncorrupted, and
no way suspected of partiality; by reason that commonly no man's innocence can
protect him from others base calumny. Withal informing him, that bare
assertions are but slender proofs to inform the conscience of a just Judge,
against a man of so well-tried virtue and valor: As also, that those objected
crimes, being not amply proved, did seem as incredible to be fathered on such
a man, as they are in their own nature execrable. For, who would believe (said
she) that he, being brought up in the fear of God, and continuing so long in
an unspotted loyalty, even in greatest dangers both toward his King and
Country, should even imagine now such mischievous villainy against so well a
deserving Prince: or ever join council with men both of lost estates and
hopes, with whom there was never any conformity of manners, or religion; and
from whom he could not but expect perfidious dealing? Wishing him rather to
suspect, that these suggestions were coined in the Spanish Mint, to set the
French again together by the ^ares.

The King hea^d this with discontented ears, and forthwith burst out into
these words, The French Kings reply.


THe Queen thinks better of Bouillon the^ he deserves. For he was amongst the
chiefest of Essexes conspiracy: neither dissembled ^e it, when I objected it
to him; but smiling, put me off without an answer.

Then he constantly affirmed, that those things obiec^ed, were most true. Then
he recalls the benefits he had be bestowed on him, as first, that he numbered
him amongst his Family; then that he procured him a rich match with the heir
of the Family of Bouillon; that he had set him in the possession of Sedan; that
he honored him amongst the Nobles of the Inward Admission; that he made him
Duke, and Marshall: and that once he had resolved to show mercy to him, if he
would come ask pardon; but now, since he scorned it, and out of an ill
conscience, since he fled away he saw no reason of showing mercy now again to
him.

Then he added, how that in the like case he interceded with the Queen for the
Earl of Essex, till he understood the ^einousnesse of his fact, and then he
gave over.

The Ambassador returned, that the Queen only thought well of the Duke,
because hitherto he had shown his loyalty and valor toward his King and
Country; but that she would be very sorry if that the objections should be
found true, as it was in Essexes case; and that then she would detest and hate
him from her very heart. Concluding, that this her admonition proceeded from no
other ground, then her mind troubled, as well for the Kings safety and security
as her own.

If we may believe the French Writers, The opinion of others concerning this
matter.
and the politick'st English, Byrone, Bouillon, and others, persuading
themselves, that by their loyalty and valor they had brought the King to the
Crown; and now perceiving that the King was indulgent toward the Conspirators
against his life, and believed them soonest, as men best deserving, and
recompencing their offense by duty, and disposing of honors, giving them those
Offices now in peace, which before they possessed in time of war. They (I
say) took it very heinously, as if the King suspected their loyalty; and
hereupon being also moved with other suggestions, thinking themselves to have
deserved better, they began for to conspire to (...) their Offices hereditary
to them and their heirs; and when they could wring out that which they would,
they became ^iercer then the very enemies.

Of this number were they, whom the King in his Letter^ ^o the Queen was not
ashamed (...) defame very sharply, not only as ungrateful, but of a faint
courage, not having ever overcome the enemy by any warlike valor, but
reconciled them rather by pay and promises.

But the Queen being very desirous of the safety of the King* pitying the
often and neadlesse reuolts of the French, never gave over celebrating him, as
the only preserver of the fading French Monarchy.

These things I have weaued into my discourse, that posterity may hereafter
judge of the wisdom of the Queen in councelling the King, and of her
constant good will to her ancient friend and Professor of the same Religion.

Also, at this time the Queen succored Geneua, Geneua relieved.
the Seminary of the Reformed Religion, which was now assaulted by tricks and
open Arms by the Duke of Sauoy, and great store of money was gathered to that
intent throughout all England, which was liberally bestowed both by the Clergy
and Commonalty of the Land.

This year in February Alexander Nowell Doctor of Divinity, The death of
Alexander Now^ll.
and Deane of Paul's, surrendered his soul to God. In the days of Queen Mary
he was banished into Germany for the truth of the Gospel, which afterward
both in his laborious Sermons, and his learned works, he strongly did
maintain. He bestowed upon Brasen-nose College in Oxford (where he was brought
up) 200. pounds yearly, to maintain therein 13. Fellowships; seconding this
his godly example with a religious life and conversation. (...) Ouerall
succeeded him, professor of Divinity in Cambridge, a general learned
Scholar, preferred to this Deanery by the commendations (to the Queen) of Sir
Fulke G^euill his Patron.

And now Ireland recalls me to an account of what has passed there this year.
Tir-Oe^ fears both his own power and his armies.
For after that the Spaniards were driven out of Ireland, Tir-Oen in a
fearful affright retires himself as fast as he could into his lurking holes
in Vlster, nimbly posting through the Deserts belonging thereunto; but he lost
many of his company, whom the Rivers (increased with the Winters rain)
swallowed up. And yet, for all that, could he not rest in quiet, without great
care, but worthily oppressed with the iniqui^y of his conscience, he
distrusted every man; insomuch that he still changed holes, and sought for new.

The Deputy, The Deputi^ persues him.
to refresh his Army that was wearied, having setl^d his affairs in Munster,
returned to Dublin; and after the hard time of the year was past over, he
returned back again (by small iourneyes) with a puissant Army unto Vlster;
with intent (as before he had resolved) to gir^ the Rebels in their Forts, by
placing Garrisons about them. He brings over his Army at Blackewater over the
Floats; and at the first (the Foord being unknown) having found an old
Fortress a little below, there he erects a Bulwark, which, according to his
own Christian name, he called Charlemont. He builds Charlemont.
Hereupon Tir-Oen being ^orely affrighted, fired his own house at Dunganon,
and lest it should be ransacked, he burnt it. The Deputy still marches
forwards* and as soon as Sir Henry Docwray with his Forces had come from Logh
Fo^l, he distributed Soldiers into all quarters, who burnt up the Corn, set
fire on the Houses, and Villages, driving home preyes daily. Presently after
the Forts in Logh-Carew, Logh-Reah, and Moherlecow, (where S. John Barclay was
shot through with a Bullet) were yielded up to the Deputy; who placed a Fort at
Logh-Eaugh, or Logh Sidney, which after his name of Honor, he called
Montioy-Fort; And Fort Montioy.
making Sir Arthur Chichester (a man worthy to succeed him in his Office)
Governor thereof. He sends back Sir Henry Docwray to Diry, Docwr^ay chaseth
the Rebels.
who receives to mercy O-Chanan, after great part of his Dominions had fell to
the Queen, only upon condition, that by her Letters Patents he might quietly
possess the rest.

After that, at the Deputies command he ouer-runs Omie with a miserable
slaughter, he drives away the Cattle of Cormac-Baron, although with some
danger. And after that, being sent for by the Deputy, and Agar Castle being
taken, he sends him and Sir Henry Folliot home. First making Folliot of
authority under him; and shortly after (beyond all expectation) making him
absolute President of Ballashanon, to the wonder of the English, that he should
be preferred before Docwray, who by his great pains and industry had recovered
Ballashanon. Yet he is slightly regarded.
And at the same time (to the much admiration of the Irish) receives into
protection Rodoricke O-d^^ell a most famous Rebel, as yet neglecting O^ Neale
Gar^e a faithful friend to the English. Insomuch as that O-Neale took it so
heinously, that he assumed to himself the title of O-donell, and exercised
tyranny over the people, compelling them to swear fealty to him, and not to
the Queen.

Now toward the end of the year, Sir Arthur Chichester and Docwray determined
to set upon Tir-Oen on this side, and on that side in the Valleys where he lay
lurking. But all their on-sets were so frustrated with the boggish grounds,
with the uncertainty of the weather, and the perfidiousnesse of the spies, that
they were feign to give over their enterprise. But, in a word, the Garrisons
disposed so by the Deputy on every side, with great Military skill, and greater
courage, so vexed the Rebels with often onsets, and cross expeditions on this
side and that side, that at last seeing themselves begirt, and all things
harder and harder every day, and that now they must lurk like wild Beasts in
the Deserts, More of the Rebels submit themselves.
many of them changed their loyalty to Tir-Oen, with their fortune, and
secretly submitted themselves to the Deputy; muttering speeches, that Tir-Oen
had exposed the whole Nation to ruin, only upon his private hatred; and that
all this war was onel^ necessary for him alone, but hur^full and lamentable
to all the rest. And truly the Deputy somewhat respected these yeelders more
then was looked for, neglecting those against his own promise, that had
faithfully stuck to the Queen; but it is likely he favored them so out of
his Judgment, rather then affection: knowing that it was better for the
Kingdom being so wounded, to be at rest, then to have those wounds green
again with a severe cure.

This yielding daily increased so much, that Tir-Oen easily perceived, that by
reason of his ill successes, the loyalty and force of his Army much diminished;
wherefore being weary of his miseries, he now resolved to prevent more, upon
hope of life, which even will discourage the valiantest minds that are:
Wherefore he sent most humble Letters both to the Queen, Tir-Oe^ craves pardon.
and the Deputy, both with tears and prayers craving pardon for his offense;
bearing so great signs of sorrow before him, by reason of his offense toward
God and his Prince, that the Queen gave the Deputy authority to receive him
into favor, if so be that he did suppliantly crave it, according to that
humility which his Letters made show of.

THE YEAR OF OUR LORD GOD M.DC.III.
Containing not fully three Months of her REIGN.
As Soon as Tir-Oen understood the mercy of the Queen so amply extended
toward him, he made all means possible (and dealt with Arthur Ma^-Baron his
Brother, and others) to obtain it, and being often put by it, at last, he
promised that he would submit both his life and fortune to the judgment of
the Queen. The Deputy that had secretly understood from some of his friends
the doubtfulnesse of the Queens health, Tir-Oen absolutely submits himself.
by reason of her age, gave Tir-Oen leave to come to Melli-Font, whither he
presently came; and being admitted into the Privy Chamber, (where the Deputy,
encircled with a multitude of warlike men, sat in his Throne) in the very
threshold with a dejected countenance falls Tir-Oen upon his knees. And having
kneeled a while, he was wished by the Deputy to come nearer; whereupon arising,
and having come some few steps, he falls again down upon his knees; saying,

I Acknowledge, and ask pardon for my offenses against God, and my most
gracious Prince and Mistress; to whose Princely clemency I do now fly as to
an holy Anchor; entreating her to dispose of my life and fortunes as she
pleases; and yet humbly wishing, that as heretofore I have felt her
beneficency, and but lately her power; so now I may feel her mercy and
mildness, and become an everlasting example and pattern of her clemency:
Truly, my age is not so far come upon me; neither is my body so much
decayed, or my courage impaired, but that by my future valiant, and loyal
service, I may expiate the sin of my rebellion.

In process of his speech, when he began to complain against the envy of some
toward him, that occasioned most of his offenses, the Deputy interrupted him,
telling him very maiestically (which was eloquence enough for a Soldier) that
no excuse ought to be sowed over such a great fault; after that he commanded
him to depart aside; and the next day after he carried him with him to Dublin,
with intent to send him from thence over into England to the Queen, to let her
deal with him as she pleased.

Thus the rebellion of Tir-Oen which began out of private discontents mingled
with ambition, and was nursed up with the contempt and parsimony of England,
till such time that (under pretense of restoring the Roman Religion) it spread
over all Ireland, being strengthened with many men's too much credulity, and the
secret favor of some in authority, and one or two happy successes, Spanish
succor, and the Popes Indulgences. Thus (I say) this rebellion, that also was
still lengthened and prolonged by the envy of the English one against another,
by the bipartite command, by the avarice of the old Soldiers, by the craft of
Tir-Oen, and his counterfeit submissions and Truces, and by the protections
bought by villains for money, and by the great difficulty of the places, and
the desperateness of the ^rish, safer in their swiftness of flight, then
abode in war, now at length in the eight year after its first breaking out,
under the happy command of the Lord Montioy Deputy, (created afterward E. of
Devonshire) was most fortunately finished.

The Queen, The Queen falls sick.
who hitherto, by reason of her abstinence from wine, and moderate diet, which
she said was the chiefest part of physic, enjoyed perfect health, now entering
into her Climactericall year, to wit seauenty, began somewhat to be sensible
of defect of health and strength, which the indisposition of the air toward
the end of January, being a filthy windy and rainy day, much improoued, when
she removed from Westminster to Richmond, on purpose to refresh her old age
with quietness, and to give her self to godliness wholly. Upon which day, as
if she were about somewhat else, (I know not whether she thought upon, or
prophesied of her death) she said to the Admiral, whom she dearly loved,

MY Throne is a Throne of Kings, neither ought any but my next Heir to succeed
me.

The Courtiers observed her more then ordinarily to frequent prayers and
Sermons; and they also report, that she then commanded a Ring (with which at
her Inauguration she married her self to her Kingdom) to be cut off from her
finger, which having been never pulled off, had even grown into her flesh. This
they took for ill luck to come, expecting a divorce shortly between her and
her Kingdoms, to whom that Ring married her. In the beginning of her sickness
the Almonds of her Jaws did swell suddenly, and grew lancke again suddenly;
then her appetite to meat grew sensibly worse and worse; whereupon she became
exceeding sad, and seemed to be much grieved at some thing or other: whether or
no it were by reason of the violence of her sickness, or out of her want of
Essex, (as many of his admirers believed) or rather, that (after so great
charges of war) because she was persuaded to pardon Tin-Oen the Author; or
rather, because that by some whisperings, and Letters from the King of France,
she had heard that most of her Nobility in private Letters and Messengers
curried favor already with the King of Scotland, adoring him as the rising
Sun, and neglecting her as ready to set. And this certainly she too much
believed, (by reason of the vice of her Sex, and old age, which is always
suspicious.) Neither indeed was it a bare suspicion in her, for many of her
Courtiers, besides some Ladies, who least of all ought to have done it, by
reuolting from her, almost forsook her; (when indeed she was nothing altered
in her self from what she was, but they only in their opinion.) Whether or no
it were that they saw her near her end, or whether or no they were weary with
her long Reign, (for so pleasing is alteration and change to the nature of
man, that there is an irkesomnesse even of good things of long continuance;) or
whether or no out of too credulous covetousness of novelties and alterations,
they despised the present case, and expe^cted better: some forgetting her but
late benefits, and finding fault with the times, it may be out of a
Court-mystery, only to curry favor with the Successor, and all this, in a
half opinion and conceit, that the discrediting of the deceased would prove a
great delight to the Successor. Insomuch that some under this pretense found
fault with others, and others propounded the sending for a Successor, whilst
the Queen was yet but of sickly health, being run-wayes in mind, though they
stayed at home.

These things so grieved the Queen, that she accounted her self a wretch
forsaken, and the indignation of her sickness, wrackt out such words from her.

THey have yoaked my neck; I have none now to trust: my estate is turned
topside turuey.

And so witty was their more civil disloyalty and treason, that to increase
this great discontent in the Queen, they would put in her head, how that her
authority grew weaker and weaker amongst the people, when as only the people
(always envying the command and authority of some great ones) only complained
against the irregular power and might of some, if not above, yet grown as
great, as the Princess her self.

Afterward, when the rumor began to be common, that her sickness increased,
and that she (as always heretofore she had done) refused all Physic; It is
impossible to believe, with what nimble have the more zealous, and Papisticall
sorts, and all ambitious kind of men, and flatterers, every man in conceit to
perfect his own hopes, posted night and day to Scotland, both by Sea and Land,
to worship the rising King, and to curry grace and favor; whose succession
indeed the Queen, although, in policy, she forbore in public to speak of
it, yet in her heart she always favored; even as all men of all sorts, who
had cast their affections and eyes upon him, the apparent Heir of the Crown;
for all that false rumor of the marriage of the Lady Arabella the Daughter of
his Uncle; for all the French Ambassador thought to hinder the uniting of both
Kingdoms into one Dominion, in one King.

About the beginning of March a kind of numnesse and frowardness usual to
old age, began continually to possess her; insomuch that she would sit and
say nothing, eat no meat, and wholly give her self to meditation; being very
impatient if any spoke to her but the Archbishop of Canterbury, with whom she
used very often, and very devoutly to pray, till such time as her speech failed
her: and after that, she willingly heard him, and within her heart prayed, when
she could not speak. At which time the Lord Admiral telling the rest of the
Council what the Queen departing from Westminster spoke by the way concerning
her Successor: it seemed good to them that he, the Lord Keeper, and the
Secretary should go to her, and recall it to her mind again, signifying that
the intent of their coming was to understand her pleasure for her Successor.

The Queen almost out of wind, made answer, I have said,

MY Throne is the Throne of Kings; no ordinary man shall succeed me.

The Secretary asking what she meant by those words.

I Will, said she, that a King succeed me, and what King, but my nearest
Kinsman the King of Scots?

Then being admonished by the Archbishop, to have her thoughts only upon God.

I Do, said she, neither goes my mind astray from him.

And when she could not use her tongue as an Instrument of prayer, with her
hands and eyes she directed to God the devotion of her heart; praying even in
this, that she seemed to grieve because she could not pray.

Shortly after, upon the 24. of March, being the Eve of the Annunciation of the
blessed Virgin Mary, (being the very same day whereon she was borne) being
called out of the prison of her flesh, into her heavenly Country, she quietly
departed this life, in that good manner of death as Augustus wished for
himself; being now in the five and fortieth year of her Reign, and of her
age the seuentieth; an age, and a Reign, to which not any one King of England
before her, ever reached unto.

The sad desire of her, which her death bequeathed to all England, was amply
paralelled with the hopes conceived of the virtues of her famous Successor, who
within few hours after her death was (with the acclamations and joyful
shoutes of the people) proclaimed King. But yet let no oblivion ever rot the
perpetuity of her fame and glory; but let her live in the very hearts of all
true Englishmen, and flourish in the happy memory of posterity. Being that she
was a Queen, who has so long, and with so great wisdom governed her
Kingdoms, as * In the Kings preface to the Reader in his Basilicon Doron.
to use the words of her Successor, who in sincerity confessed so much;) the
like has not been read or heard of, either in our time, or since the days of
the Roman Emperor Augustus.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICALL INDEX, OF THE CHIEFEST MEN OR MATTERS THAT ARE COMPREHENDED
WITHIN THIS HISTORY.
A
AGar Castle in Ireland taken by the Lord Deputy. Page 376 Ainoth in Ireland
fortified with a Garrison by Sir Henry Docwray. 349 A^len the Cardinal, his
acquaintance objected to the Earl of Arundell. 4. His mischievous plots
against the Kingdom. 5. His Book of admonitions. 8. He had a hand in setting
out the Book of Titles, fathered upon Dolman. 101. His death. 113. He had the
bringing up of Sir Christopher Blunt, afterward beheaded in the cause of the
Earl of Essex. 318 Alane Fergant Earl of Britain, from whom the right of the
Infanta to England should descend. 101 Albert Cardinal of Austria, married to
Isabell the Daughter of Philip King of Spain. 225. He proposes a peace
between England and Spain. 269. His consecrated Sword. ibid. He posteth to
Newport. 279. His proceeding there* and overthrow. 280. He besieges Ostend.
339. He is deluded by General Vere about a truce. 341 S. Alberts Fort yielded
up to Count Maurice of Nassaw. 278 Alenzon, and his German Horsemen vanquished
by the Duke of Guise. 19 Alanzon recovered again by the English, for the King
of France. 24 Conde de Altemira intends to succor the Groine. 13. But is
prevented by General Norris. ibid. America, the expedition of Hawkins thither.
110. Another of Captain Hawkins, and Sir Francis Drake. 130. Sundry Towns
taken there, and fired. 132 Anderson Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
angry at the arguing of the Recorder and Cuffe, at his arraignment. 331 Andrada
assembles Forces at Puerte de Burgos. 13 Andrew of Austria, the Son of
Ferdinand, deals for a peace between England and Spain. 251 Anjou dies
without issue. 18. Leaves his Brother King. ibid. The Earl of Anguish
subscribes to Blankes, to be sent to the King of Spain. 67. He is prosecuted
by the King of Scots. 80 Les Anglois, a byword used by the French, to mock
the English with. 36 The Prince of Anhault General of the German Forces. 30
Anne the Daughter of Frederick the second, King of Denmark, betrothed to
James King of Scotland. 25 Antonio of Portugal, his voyage thither with the
English. 11. The acclamations of the poor Portugesses at his entrance of the
Suburbs of Lisbon. 14. The richer sort will not revolt to him, 15. which makes
the English depart for all his earnest entreaties. 16 D'Aquila arriues with the
Spanish Forces at Blawet. 35. He was to succor Crodon the very same day it was
taken. 109 He arriueth with the Spanish Navy at Kinsale Haven in Ireland, 352.
He publishes the reason of his coming thither, 353. He is beset, ibid* He
desires a parley, 357. He is glad to depart Ireland again, upon some
conditions. 358 Archer a Jesuit, an Agent for the Rebels in Ireland. 350
Arques battle, where the King discomfited the Leaguers. 23 Earl of Arroll, an
Agent in a mutiny in Scotland, 2. He subscribes to Blanckes sent over to the
King of Spain, 65. He is prosecuted by the King of Scots. 80 Arthington a
Disciple of Hackets, 50. His prophesies dedicated to a Nobleman, 5^. He is
willed to anoint Hacket with the holy Ghost, 52. He runs about the streets,
ibid. He is apprehended, 53. He begins to repent; and sets forth a a Book to
declare his follies, and true conversion from them. 54 The Earl of Arundell
arraigned at Westminster, 3. The heads of his Indictment, 4. His observation,
that none could be an absolute Papist but must needs be a Traitor, 6. His
answer for himself, 7. He is found guilty, 10. His life pardoned by the
Queen, ibid. His death afterward in the Tower. 140 The Admiral of Aragon
taken prisoner at the battle of Newport. 281 D'Aumale wounded at the same
battle. ibid. The Earl of Argile sent out against some Scottish Earls. 99
Ashton a Minister, and Chaplain to the Earl of Essex, requested to be still
with him in the time of his imprisonment, 321. He comes along with the Earl to
the scaffold. 324 Auerley a River in Ireland. 353 D'Aumont not yet come into
Britain, 85. He deceives the English of their promise concerning Morlay, 107.
which the Queen takes very ill, 109. He is sent over with Marshall Birone
into England, 344. and honorably entertained at Basing. ibid.
B
BAbington a Priest, his confession urged against the Earl of Arundell, 6. The
Queen of Scots commends the Earl of Arundell to him, as the chief head of
all the English Catholics. 7 Bagnall Marshall of the Irish Forces, 93. Grudges
betwixt him and Tir^Oen, ibid. The reasons about the marriage of his Sister,
ibid. He accuses Tir-Oen, and prefers articles against him. 118 Ballemure,
the House of Feagh-Mac-Hugh, 119. from whence the Lord Deputy drives him. ibid.
Baltimore lately possessed by the Spaniard, at the arriuell of John D' Aquila,
surrendered again unto the English. 358 Bancroft Bishop of London, sent by the
Queen to Embden, about a Treaty with the Danes, 284. He effects nothing, 285
Banton, a place whether the English Merchants travel. 285 Bantre in Ireland,
rendered up to the English. 361 Sir Francis Barcley subdueth Glanemire in
Ireland. 269 Sir R. Barclay made keeper to the Earl of Essex. 287 Sir John
Barclay Campe-Master in Ireland, 356. He is slain with a Bullet at Moher-lecow
Fort. 376 Bainham one of the Earl of Essex accomplices arraigned, 321. His plea
of ignorance, 322. His life bought for money of Sir Walter Rawleigh. ibid.
Bacons proceedings in the arraignment of the Earl of Essex. 316 Barlow Doctor
of Divinity, sent to the Earl of Essex the same morning that ^e suffered. 324
Barneuelts Oration in the behalf of the Low Countries. 205 Barowes, a
Secretary, hanged. 79 Basing, a place where the Queen used to lie in the
Summer time. 344 Sir Thomas Baskeruill made Colonel of the Forces that went
into France. 23 Bear in Ireland forsaken, and left to the English. 361 Bennet
a Priest, one of the witnesses against the Earl of Arundell. 9 Bere-hauen,
that was lately gotten by the Spaniard, surrendered again unto the English. 358
Bertrand a Castro sets upon Hawkins, 111. Hawkins yields to him on
conditions, ibid. His honesty in endeavoring to have him set at liberty.
ibid. Bingham President of Conaught, 41. He vanquished Brian Ororke, ibid. He
was sent for over into England, upon the complaints of some of his Provinces,
and committed, 235. but afterward sent thither again with greater honor;
where he died presently after his arrival. ibid. Birone appointed by the King
of France to help at the siege of Roan, 47. He appears not, as expected,
ibid. He scoffs at the Earl of Essex, for his religious manner of dying, 325.
He Is sent over to the Queen, 344. His plots against the King, ibid. He is
beheaded. 371 Blackwater assaulted and taken by Tir-Oen, 142. He is removed
again from it. 348 Blackwell the Archpriest in England, 368. The Secular
Priests detract from his authority. ibid. Bloise, the King is compelled to
retire from Paris thither, 19. He causes Guise then to be slain. 20 Sir
Charles Blunt made Governor of Portsmouth, 92. Afterward Lord Montioy, 117.
He is thought upon by the Queen as a fit man for to be Lord Deputy of Ireland,
237. Essex puts him by it, ibid. After Essex, he is made Deputy of Ireland,
255. See Montioy. Sir Christopher Blunt disswades the Earl of Essex from
coming over from Ireland with his Army, 244. He admonishes him to make his
way to the Queen, 296. His Office allotted him in assaulting the Court, 301.
He is arraigned, 327. He requesteth to be beheaded, 332. He suffers upon
Tower Hill, 334. His confession. 335 Sir Thomas Bodley destinated by Essex for
the Queens Secretary, 168. He is put by by Cecill, ibid. His care in the
affairs of the Low Countries, 224. He restores the public library at Oxford.
ibid. Sir Josias Bodley his proceedings in Ireland. 357 Bullen, the place
appointed by the King of France, for a Treaty betwixt England and Spain, 263.
The proceedings therein, 265, etc. It is dissolved. 277 Cardinal Bourbon
committed to prison, 20. He is proclaimed King of France. 22 Henry Bourbon
Prince of Dumbare, requesteth aid from England. 35 Sir John Borough Colonel
of the English in France, 23. He stays Sir William Drewry in a single combat,
24. He persueth a Spanish Caracke. 72 The Lord Borough sent Ambassador into
Scotland, 81. He is made Lord Deputy of Ireland, in the room of Russell, 197
He dies shortly after. 199 Bothwell an agent in the rebellion of Scotland, 2.
He assaults the Kings Court, 63. His second assault, 66. He lurketh in
England, 80. He is demanded of the Queen, 82. He returns, and is pardoned,
83. He rebelleth again, 97. His protestation published, 98. He is put to
flight. 99 Sir Henry Bromley conveyed by boat to the Tower. 309 Sir Calisthenes
Brooks a commander in Ireland. 232 I. Brose Duke of Estampes. 35 Broughton
slain at the Battle at Ostend. 343 Brown Viscount Montague, his death. 76
Buckhurst Delegate in the case of Sir John Perot, 67. He is made Lord high
Steward of England, for the hearing of the case of the Earl of Essex, 311.
Chancellor of Oxford. 74 Bulls of the Pope sent into Scotland, one to the
Clergy, and another to the Laity, 285. Another sent into Ireland to encourage
the Rebels, and the form of it. 256 ^ulloine accused by Birone at the time of
his execution, 371. The King sends for him, ibid. He refuses to come, 8.
Appealeth to the Chamber at Castres, ibid. The King complains of him to the
Queen, ibid. Her answer, 372. The French Kings reply. 373 Burgess a Priest,
Letters sent by him to Cardinal Allen, 4. He confesses the Earl of Arundell
of his sins. 6 Burghley one of the ^eeres of the Earl of Arundell, 4.
Deputed to the keeping of the great Seal, 61. He lamenteth the cause of Sir
John Perot, 68. He would not entertain Don Antonio Perez, 106. He causes the
Queen to call in her moneys from the States, 133. His inclination to a peace
with Spain, 217. His presage about the Earl of Essex, 218 His death, 220. The
History of his life. 221 Buzenuale sent over from France to the Queen, 22.
Moneys lent the French King on his Bond. 30
C.
CAhir Castle taken by the Earl of Essex, before he dispatched into Vlster.
240 Cardinal Caietans endeauours to promote the king of Spaines cause, 24. His
success. 25 Callice besieged by the Cardinal of Austria, 156. It is taken,
ibid. the noise of the Ordnance heard to Greenwitch. ibid. Canary in vain
attempted by Captain Baskeuile. 131 Chancellor of Scotland removed from the
Court by the means of Bothwell, 83. Recalled again. ibid. Carackes espied by
Borough, 72. Fired, ibid. Another called the Mother of God, taken by the
English, 73. The value of the spoil, ibid. Another assaulted in the Haven of
Cezimbra in Portugal, 361. It yields upon conditions. 363 Carbery reduced into
obedience by the two Harueyes, Roger and Gawen. 36^ Carboyle assaulted by the
Duke of Parma, by which means he relieueth Paris. 34 Carew, President of
Mounster, 268. His acts there, 269. He surpriseth the titular Earl of Desmond,
and arraignes him, 351. sends him over to England. ibid. Carew's Embassy into
Polony, 191. The matter of it, ibid. What he effected with them of Dantzicke,
192. And with them of Elbing, ibid. He refuses to receive Letters for the
Queen, because the superscription was not completely for her honor. ibid.
Carlisle the famous Nauigator dies. 92 Carigfoile, yielded up to the English,
by the means of Carew. 269 Carlingford slaughter, where many Irish were
slain. 259 Charles King of Sweden, excuses himself to the Queen about
complaints of him. 252 Carsey a Commander, slain in the skirmish at Portugal.
15 Calcayes taken by the English. 16 Casteele, the antiquity of the Kingdom of
it. 263 Castillon in France taken by Sir John Norris. 45 Castle Raven yielded
up again to the English. 358 Cauendish, his voyage to the Magellan streights*
59. He dies. ibid. Caudobec taken by the Duke of Parma. 70 Charle-mont, a Fort
built in Ireland. 375 Clan-Hattens, the Family of them great friends to the
Earl of Murray. 66 Clement a Monk kills Henry of France. 21 Chattroe
Governor of Deep. 45 Cherburgh, a Port for the English Navy to ride in. 44
Clifford made Knight of the order of S. Michael by the King of France, 112. His
honor not approved at Rome. 113 Cobham helps the Admiral to seize on
Essex's garden. 308 Compton dies, 27. The Lord Compton besieges Essex house,
with others. 308 Conde, the Prince of Conde, Heir to the Crown of France. 19
Counselors shut up in Essex house by the Earl, 306. They are let out by Sir
Ferdinando Gorge. 307 Counstable accompanies the Earl of Essex, going to meet
Tir-Oen at parley. 242 Copinger a good Gentleman, seduced by Hacket, 51. He is
bid by Arthington to anoint Hacket, 52. apprehended, 53. He starues himself
in prison. 54 Cork Haven appointed for the Spaniard to enter at. 351 Cowbucke,
the name of Parsons the Jesuit. 369 Courtney, a Family from whence Sir Charles
Dauers comes. 332 Croft, Sir James Croft dies, 39. Another wounded. 356
Cromwell accompanies the Earl of Essex through London. 306 Creicton a
Jesuit, his practices in Scotland. 1 Crodon assaulted by the English, 108.
Parades Governor thereof slain, 109. It is taken. ibid. Cross first comes
aboard the Mother of God, a Caracke. 73 A piece of Christ's Cross kept in the
Monastery of Typarara in Ireland. 255 Cuffe brings letters from the E. of
Essex to the Queen, 242. The Earl intends to cashiere him, 287. He vpbrayds to
the Earl his pu^illanimity, 233. He advises the Earl to break but to a few,
300. The Earl accuses him much, 323. He is arraigned, 327. He defends
himself, 331. His execution, and confession. 333 Culline an Irish man hanged,
for being hired to kill the Queen. 105 Cumberland, three of his ships wait for
a Spanish Caracke by the Island Flores, 72. He proclaims the Earl of Essex
Traitor, 306. one of his Peers. 311 Custom House farmed by Sir Thomas Smith,
31. The rents raised, ibid. from fourteen thousand pounds a year, to fifty
thousand, by the means of one Caermardine. ibid.
D
LOrd Dac^es his death. 116 Danes treaty with the English about Merchandise,
283. disagreements between them, ibid. A treaty with them at Bremen, 365. An
Embassy thither. 224 Danuers comes over with the Earl of Essex from
Ireland, being not yet recovered of a wound he had received, 244. He is made
partaker of all their proceedings, 300. The place in Court allotted for him to
seize on, ibid. He is arraigned, 327. desires to be beheaded, 332. dies. 334
Darcy of the North, one of the Peers for the Earl of Arundell. 4 Darcy of
Chiche, one of the Peers of the Earl of Essex and Southampton. 311 Dauis made
privy to the Earl of Essex plots, 301. taunted for a Papist, 329. he excuses
himself, 330. he requesteth not to be quartered after his death. 333 Dennis a
Commander slain at Ostend. 343 Derry Castle in Ireland taken by Sir Henry
Docwray. 349 Derry fortified by Docwray, and Capt. Morgan. 258 Desmond; James
Fitz Thomas created by the Rebels Earl of Desmond, 234. he receiving honor
from Tir-Oen, 255. he is called the Titular Earl, 269. he is persued, ibid. he
is taken, 351. sent into England. ibid. Docwray comes over with the Earl of
Essex from Ireland, 245. he fortifies Derry, 258. he takes Derry Castle, 349.
he is yet neglected, and others preferred before him. 376 Dolman, a Book set
forth by Parsons and others, about the right of the Spanish Infanta, 101.
Parsons excuses it to the King of Scotland. 103 Donegall Monastery taken, 349.
it is burnt. 350 Donell Spaniah reduced into order by the English. 268 Dorpe
succeeds Sir Francis Vere in the general ship of the States Forces. 343
Drake his expedition for Spain, 10. he is blamed, 15. his expedition into
America, 130. he dies. 132 Drury slain by Borough in a single combat. 24 Sir
Robert Drury helps Vere on his Horse, when his own was slain. 280 Dudley
Earl of Warwick dies. 37 Duke sent to relieve the Garrison at Ineskilline
with provision. 117 Dumboy is possessed by Osuilliuant Bear, 359. razed to the
ground by the Lord Deputy. ibid. Duncanon Haven fortified by the Queen. 29
E
EAst Indie Company instituted. 285 Edicts or Proclamations against
transporting Corn to the French Leaguers, 45. against transporting Corn into
Spain, 59. against the Priests and Jesuits, 60. about making of Ordnance none
bigger then Minions, 74. against transporting gold or silver out of the
Kingdom, 255. against Jesuits. 370 Edmonds the Queens French Secretary, 272.
Delegated by the Queen to the treaty at Boloigne, ibid. Earnest for the
priority of the Queen, 275. sent over into England, ibid. returns with new
instructions from the Queen, ibid. he is sent over into France, to
congratulate the Kings health at Callice. 344 Effingham Son to the Lord
Howard Admiral, 308. he helps his Father to seize on Essex Garden by the
Thames. ibid. Egerton Solicitor to the Queen, 8. his proceedings against the
Earl of Arundell; he finds him guilty of treason three times. ibid. Elbing
reconciled by Carew, who in his Embassy went thither after he had been at
Dantzicke. 192 Elizabeth, she allayeth a mutiny in Scotland, 3. she was angry
at the Earl of Essex voyage to Portugal, 13. the reason, 14. she answers
the complaints of the Ha^se-townes, 18. she aydeth the King of Navarre, ibid.
she aydeth the King of France, 22. she proposes marriage to the King of Scots,
25. she fortifieth sundry Havens, 29 she allotteth yearly charges for her Navy,
30. she raises the rate of the Custom House, 31. her care of the States, 32.
she restores ships to the Venetians, 33. she makes peace between the Turk
and the Polacke, ibid. her observation about France, 37. she sends Essex into
France, 46. her Jurisdiction in spiritual matters is impugned, 54. defended,
55. she visits the University of Oxford, 74. she calls a Parliament, 77.
the sum of her speech, 78. she sends Borough Ambassador into Scotland, 81.
she makes peace between the Turk and the Transiluanian, 84. she translateth a
Book of Boethius, 89. her Letter to the king of France, 88 she fortifies
Gernsey and Iersey, 91. she sends Zouch Ambassador into Scotland, 96. she
christeneth Prince Henry, 103. distaste between her and the States, 133. the
reason of it, ibid. delating about it, 135. it is reconciled, 136. she
answers the Ha^se-townes, 137. her prayer for the Navy that went to Cadiz,
158. her censure about Honors conferred by a foreign Prince, 174. her speech
to D. Ialine Ambassador from Poland, 188. she strikes the Earl of Essex,
219. she translateth Salust de Bello Iugurthino, 231. and most of Horace de
Art Poetica, and Plutarch de Curiositate, 231. she is angry at the proceedings
of Essex in Ireland, 242. she confines him to his Chamber, 245. she is visited
by diverse Princes, and honorable Personages, 297. she would have pardoned the
Earl of Essex, 324. she answers the Ambassadors of Scotland, 337. her
speech concerning Monopolies 345. her answer to the King of France, about the
Duke of Bouillon, 372. she falls sick, 380. her Ring sawed off her finger,
381. she dies. 383 Embden, the place appointed for a Treaty. 284 English
arrive at Portugal, 13. they march to Lisbon, 14. the Spaniards sally forth
upon them, 15. they beat them back, and return* ibid. they are subject to
diseases in Spain, 17. the reason thereof in nature, ibid. they arrive in
France to aid the French King, 23. they return, 24. they receive an overthrow
from the Rebels in Ireland, 232. the greatest they ever received in Ireland,
233. wearied with the first expedition of the Earl of Essex, 240. they are
oppressed with too much tribute by the Danes for passing the Sounds Sea, 285.
their valor in France, 24. at the siege of Ostend, 341. their famous
victories, 108. their exposing to slaughter blamed by the Queen, 109. their
privileges of fishing granted by the ancient Kings of Norway, empeached by the
Danes, 284. their commendation even of the Spaniards themselves. 165 England, a
more ancient and eminenter Kingdom then Castile, or Spain. 263 English
Merchants, their covetousness taxed. 74 Ernest Archduke of Austria, 105. the
Queen wishes him to acquaint his Master the Spaniard with the treacherous
plots of Ibarra, and other of his servants. 106 Espina^ joins Forces with Sir
John Norris. 85 Essex joins with the English Fleet that was for Portugal,
13. his honor got there, 14. he is sent over to France with 400. English, 46.
he knighteth too many, 47. he lies idle by reason of the Frenches not coming
to join, ibid. he approaches Roan, ibid. he loses his brother Sir Walter
Deuereux, ibid. he is dispatched into Champaigne, 48. he challenges Villars
Governor of Roan, 69. he returns into, England, ibid. he is made General of
the Forces that went to Gadez, 156. he throws away his Hat for joy, 160. he
lands his Forces, 161. enters the Town, 162. he would expect the return of
the Spanish Fleet at the Azores, 166. but overcome with most voices, he
returns, ibid. he is made General of the Forces for the Islands Azores, 178.
his resolution before he went, 179. the Islands Gratiosa and Flores yield unto
him, 183. he returns, 185. grudges between him and Rawleigh, 186. and
between him and Cecill. ibid. he is made Earl Marshall of England, 187. he is
against a peace with Spain, 217. he writes an Apology in his own defense,
218. he is stricken by the Queen, 219. he flings away from the Court, ibid. he
is made Lord Deputy of Ireland, 238. the number of his Army, 239. he marches
to Mounster, and neglects his Commission, 240. he parlies with Tir^Oen almost
an hour, 242. he makes a Truce with him, ibid. the Queen s^nds him an angry
Letter at it, 243. he is discontented upon the receipt of it, ibid. he returns
unlooked for to London, 244. kneeles before the Queen at Nonesuch, 245. is
committed, 246. to his own house, 287. he is cited before the Lords of the
Council, and appears, 288. the Queen denies him his Farm of the Sweet
Wines, whereat he is discontented, and entertaines ill counsel, 295. his
consultations at Drury house 300. multitudes flock to Essex house, 303. the
Lords of the Council come thither, 304. they are shut up, 306. let out, 307.
the Earl besieged, 308. he yields, 309. is arraigned, 311. condemned, 321.
reconciled to Cecill, 322. executed in the Tower, 324. his Elogie. 326 The Lord
Euers dies. 117 Exceptions against any of a Jury (in case of Treason) are
unlawful. 371 Expedition into Spain, 10. into Portugal, 13. another to
Cadiz, 156. their victory and spoils, 163. another to the Islands of Azores,
178. Towns taken, 182. and their safe return home again. 185 Another
Expedition into the East Indies by Ryman, 58. to the Magellan streights by
Cauendish, 59. to Guiana by Rawleigh, 129. into America by Rawleigh, 72. to the
Spanish coasts under Sir Richard Leuison, 361. another into America under
Hawkins. 110
F
FAiall a Town taken by Sir Walter Rawleigh, 181. Essex angry at it, 182.
Rawleigh pleads for himself, and at last is received into favor. 183 Fairfax
a Commander in the battle at Newport, 281. slain at Ostend. 343
Feagh-Mac-Hugh sorely persued by the Lord Deputy, 119. his head is cut off by
Serieant Milbourne, and sent to Dublin. 155 Ferdinand Carill, delegated by the
Spaniard to the Treaty at Bullen. 272 Ferdinand Archduke and Cardinal,
Brother to Maximilian the Emperor. 251 Feroll, the place appointed for the
English Navy, to expect the return of the Spaniards from the Indies. 178
Fernambuc in Brasil taken by Lancaster. 112 Ferrena his treason against the
Queen, 103. his confession. 104 Fitzwilliams Deputy of Ireland, 28. he
apprehends Hugh-Ro^-Mac-Mahon, and arraigned him; he causes him to be
hanged, ibid. he is recalled over into England. 117 Fitz-Thomas created Earl
of Desmond. 255 Flemmings Leader of the Horse in Ireland, 232. his valor. 356
Flemming the Queens Attorney, his accusation of Danuers. 329 A Fleet sent to
Spain, 10. to Cadiz, 156. to the Islands of Azores, 178. to the East Indies,
58. to the Magellan streights, 59. to Guiana, 129. to the Spanish coasts, under
Leuison. 361 Another Fleet sent to America under Sir W. Rawleigh. 72 Fletcher
Bishop of London, the Queen discontented with him, and wherefore, 175. he
dies. ibid. Flores the Island yields to the Earl of Essex. 183 Flushing in
Holland termed by King Philip one of the Keys of the Spanish Empire. 225
Folliot a Commander in Ireland, 355. he is sent home by the Deputy, 376. but
first made Governor of Ballashanon. ibid. Fonseca one of the Spaniards privy
Council, and his Ambassador in the Low Countries, del^gated at the Treaty of
Bullen. 272 Forts in Ireland, Blackwater besieged, 232. yielded to the Rebels,
233. at Moghery, 348. and Fort Montioy erected in Ireland, 376. Fort
Charlemont, 375. Fort Mont-Norris. 259 Fortescue Master of the Wardrobe to the
Queen, 27. a good Grecian, and Tutor to the Queen, ibid. Delegated to hear
the cause of Sir John Perot, 67. Delegated again for the Queen about making
new covenants with the States. 223 Fourbisher has part of the Navy committed
to him by Rawleigh, 72. he expects General Norris in the Bay with ten
Englishmen of war, 108. shot through the Hip with a Bullet, 109. dies at
Plimmouth. ibid. France in great troubles, 18. it was to descend to the King of
Navarre; but the Catholic Princes would exclude him, because he was a
Protestant, 19. the holy League in France, ibid. Henry the third of France
slain, 21. the Duke of Maine declared Lieutenant General of the Crown and
State of France, 22. her priority before Spain, 272. why not in the Council
of Trent. ibid. Francis the first of France, incorporated the Duchy of
Britain to the Crown of France. 35 French Law, that whatsoever is once
annexed to the Crown of France, can never be dismembered from it. 35 Frederick
Spinola Leader of some Galleys into Flanders. 252 Fuentes deals with Lopez,
and Ferreira, and Lowise, about poisoning the Queen. 104
G
GAdiz termed by King Philip one of the Keys of the Spanish Empire, 225. the
expedition of the English thither, 156. they enter the Town, 162. their
victory and spoils. 163 Galleys, at their first making caused great
admiration, 252. the Queen also makes her some. 41 Gardener Lord chief
Justice of Ireland. 200 Gates knighted at the expedition to Gadiz. 164 Garnet
superior of the Jesuits in England. 368 Garnsey Island fortified by the
Queen. 91 Gaueloc the base son of Shan-O-Neale, strangled by Tir-Oen
himself, 40. the reason. ibid. Gaunt Duke of Lancaster his expedition into
Spain, dangerous and hurtful to the English. 17 Geneua succored by the
Queen, 374. the Commons liberality in contribution, and the Clergies. ibid.
Gemeticensis cited against the Book of Doleman. 101 Gerard, a Knight, witness
against the Earl of Arundell, 9. the custody of the Isle of Man committed to
him, 115. and why, ibid. two ships, St. Andrew, and St. Philip preserved by his
care. 161 Gertrudenbergh delivered up to the Spaniard by the English Garrison,
11. at which the States are angry with Sir John Wingfield the governor of it.
ibid. Gill. Mericke knighted at Gadez voyage. 164 Gifford knighted at the
expedition to Gadez. ibid. Giffard a Divine, an English fugitive. 106 Gilbert
knighted at Gadez voyage. 164 Gilpin succeeds Sir Thomas Edmonds in Council
for the States. 224 Godolphin sent to Don Ivan D'Aquila about his yielding. 357
Gorge sets the Counselors of the Queen at liberty, 307. a report that he
discovered all to Rawleigh. 304 Gordon of Achindon subscribes to Blanks sent
into Spain. 67 Gowries brothers, their treason against the K. of Scots. 286
Goodman Deane of Westminster, 223. ouer-seer of the Lord Burghley's Will. ibid.
Glanuile, a Port, nominated for the English, by the French King. 44 Glamise,
surprised by the Earl Huntley, 2. he is afterward dismissed. 3 Glanemire
Castle yielded to the English. 269 Greenuil, Captain of the Reare-Admirall,
56. he is assaulted, ibid. grievously wounded, 57. he is sent into the Spanish
Admiral, where, within two days he dies. 57 A Glove sent to Hawkins, upon
which he yields. 111 Gourney taken by Essex and Birone. 47 Graham Fentree a
favorer of the Spanish party punished. 100 Gratiosa yields to the Earl of
Essex. 183 Gratley a Priest, Letters of his produced, 6. he reconcileth the
Earl of Arundel to the Romish Church. ibid. Grave, a Master of a ship. 183
Greames, his valor in the Irish wars, 269. he certifieth the Deputy of the
enemies approach. 355 Lord Gray, one of the Earl of Arundels Peers. 4 Gray
knighted at the expedition to Gadez. 164 Gray of Wilton, an enemy to the Earl
of Essex. 245 Gauran a Priest, accompanies Mac-Guire in his rebellion, 93. he
is made by the Pope Primate of Ireland, 94. he is slain. ibid. Greuill helps
to besiege Essex house, 308. he informs the Queen of many that were
ignorantly lead into danger by the Earl of Essex. 322 Greene-Castle reuolts
from the Queen. 197 Gregory the thirteenth, Bishop of Rome, leauieth an Army
under the Duke Mont-Martin, against the K. of France. 44 Groining desires the
Queen to be their Protectrix, she being loath to distaste the States of the Low
Countries, will not receive that honor. 32 Groine assaulted by the English,
11. they take the base town, 12. they assault the high town in vain, and
depart. 13 Guerch surrendered up to the English. 85 Guise his valor shown at
Poitiers, 19. he is called the Hammer of the Protestants, ibid. upon his entry
at Paris the King was feign to retire to Bloys, 20. where shortly after he
caused the Duke of Guise to be slain. ibid. Guiana, Rawleighs voyage thither.
129
H
HAdington in Scotland, the battle there. 39 Hacket, his education, 49. his
revelation, ibid. his disciples, 50. his hatred to the Queen, 51. he sends his
disciples abroad, 52. he is apprehended, and condemned, 53. his blasphemy at
the time of his execution. 54 Hamet King of Morocco, promises assistance to
Antonio, to recover Portugal, 11. but sends none. 15 Hagan comes to the Earl
of Essex for a parley with Tir-Oen, 241. the second time also. ibid.
Hanse-Townes, threescore of their Hulkes taken by the English, 16. they
complain thereof to the Queen, 17. their privilege granted by King Edward
the first, how to be understood, and what clause was in it, 18. they complain
to the Emperor of Germany, concerning the English that break their Customs
and privileges, 137. the Queen satisfies the Emperor in that matter by
Perkins, ibid. notwithstanding they cease not complaining, 190. they cause the
Emperor by Proclamation to forbid all Merchants traffiques in Germany, 191.
the Queen deals in vain to suspend this Edict, ibid. Wherefore she also
banisheth all the Hanse-Townes men out of London. 191 Haruey knighted at Gadez,
164. he lands with Rawleigh at Fayall. 181 Hatton L. Chancellor of Engl. 60.
the Papists commend him, ibid. his death, education, parentage, and preferment,
ibid. Harington receives an overthrow from the Rebels in Ireland. 250 Hawkins
his Navigations to America, 110. he r^acheth the streights of Magellan, ibid. he
is taken prisoner, and sent into Spain, 111. his second expedition, 130. his
death. 131 Hay a Jesuit, his practices in Scotland. 1 Haywards book of the
life of Henry the fourth called in, 332. exceptions taken at some words in the
dedication, ibid. he is imprisoned. ibid. Heneage Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster, dies, 140. his daughter married to the Finches. ibid. Henebon a
Sea-town in France, seized on by the Spaniard. 35 Henry the third of France
slain by a Monk, 21. Henry the fourth proclaimed King, 22. the Queen aides
him, 23. conditions between them, 44. he is reconciled to the Church of Rome,
86. the Articles proposed to him by the Pope and his Conclaue of Cardinals,
128. he rec^uereth Amiens again from the Spaniard. 194 Henry la Tour Duke of
Bouillon. 170 Henry Prince of Scotland borne, 103. christened by Queen
Elizabeth. ibid. Herbert, son of the Earl of Worcester, 162. afterward
knighted, 164. Sir John Herbert Secretary. 365 Hesket condemned and executed,
for persuading the Earl of Darby to claim the Crown of England. 91 Heidon
follows Essex toward the Town of Gadiz. 162 Hill an Englishman sent over
from the King of Swethland, to excuse him to the Queen. 252 Hobby Ancient at
Cadiz. 162 Holland Duke of Exeter. 102 Holcot an English fugitive, and Jesuit.
106 Holcroft* a Commander in the battle at Newport. 281 Ho^t a Jesuit,
promises forty thousand Crowns to kill the Queen. 122 Honfleare reduced to
obedience to the K. of France. 24 Honorius the Emperor, his observation. 68
Honor conferred by a foreign Prince, not to be admitted of at home, 172. and
113 Howard would feign rescue Greenuill, 57. made with Essex General of the
Fleet for Gadiz, 157. William son to the Admiral knighted, 164. Howard of
Walden called to the Parliament, 197. Charles Howard Earl of Nottinghams
declaration against the Earl of Essex in the Star Chamber. 249 Horatio
Pallauicine lends money to the Queen, 30. it is demanded of the States to whom
it was lent. 133 Hulkes threescore, taken by the English. 16 David Humes slain
by Bothwell. 65 Humes removed from the Court, and the Lord Humes. 83 Hunsdon
delegated in the cause of Sir John Perot, 67. delegated between the French and
the Queen, 44. his death. 175 Huntingdon, Henry Hastings E. of Huntingdon,
dies. 17^ Huntley rebelleth in Scotland, 2. the King persues him, 3. makes him
yield, and pardons him, ibid. he assaults the E. of Murray in his house, 66.
the E. of Murray is slain, and Huntley thereupon imprisoned, ibid. he
subscribes to Blanks sent over to the King of Spain, 67. is prosecuted by the
K. of Scots, 80. he flies over into France. 100 Hutton removed from the
Bishopric of Durham, succeeds Piers in the Archbishopricke of York, 114.
he is made President of the Council in the North. 176 Hugh Boy possesses the
Inheritance of S. John Odogherty's son, by the Deputies appointment. 349 Hugh
Roe-Mac-Mahon apprehended, and hanged, by the Lord Deputy Fitzwilliams, 41. the
reason. ibid. Hugh Odonell escapes out of prison, 62. he surprizeth
Mont-Rosse Castle, 93. he submits, and gives in Hostages, 146. his
complaints. 148 Humphrey Duke of Gloucester first founder of the public
Library in Oxford. 224 Hurst by the Sea side fortified. 169
I
IAckson a Commander ^laine in the assault of Crodon. 108 James of Scotland the
sixth, writes his Book of Basilicon-Doron, 231. he marries Anne of Denmark,
25. ^he proclaims Bothwell traitor, 64. his answer to the Queens
Ambassadors, 97. he prosecuteth the Papists, 99. he is accused by Valentine
Thomas at the time of his execution, 228. Books written on his behalf. 229
Ibarra his treason against the Queen. 104 Iersey Island fortified by the
Queen* 91 Jesuits banished by Proclamation, and Secular Priests. 370 Indy
voyage by Lancaster. 58 Infanta, her right to the Crown proved by a Book of
Parsons the Jesuit. 101 Ingratitude, a sin against the holy Ghost. 207
Inglefield a Doctor, had a hand in setting out Doleman. 101 Ineskelline near
the lake Erne, beset and taken by Dowdall, 94. the English Garrison in it
besieged by Mac-Guire, and the English that came to help them vanquished, 117.
it is freed by the Deputy, and a Garrison placed in it. 119 John Don Aquila
arriueth with the Spaniards Forces at Blawet in France, 35. he is made
Governor of the Spanish Forces, and arriues with them at Kinsale Haven in
Ireland, 352. he desires a parley, 357. Articles concerning yielding to the
English. 358 Isabella Daughter to Philip King of Spain, espoused to the
Cardinal of Austria. 225 Iulians Fort well fortified with Ordnance. 15
Jurisdiction of the Queen in spiritual matters impugned, 54 maintained by her
Lawyers. 55
K
KAkaze sent over by the King of Swethland to the Queen, 84. his Embassy. 85
Kerry Doctor of Law prepares to leave Scotland, 66. he is stayed by the
Scottish Ministers. 67 Kildare an Irish Earl, dies. 199 Killegrew of Counsel
to the Earl of Essex in France. 46 Kinlosse sent an Ambassador to the Queen
of England. 337 Kinsale Haven in Ireland possessed by the Spaniards, 352. yielded
again by the Spaniards to the Deputy. 358 Kerry, the rebellion allaied there.
360 Knight of Kirry sorely persecuted by Sir Charles Wilmot. 360 Knolles, the
Lord Francis dies. 175
L
LAigny assaulted and ransackt by the D. of Parma. 34 Lamballe in vain
assaulted by the English. 45 Lambard Governor of the Garrison at Brenny. 268
Lancaster his voyage to the East Indies. 58 Lancerata taken by the Earl of
Cumberland. 226 Lanfranc a Mediator for a peace between Spain and England.
251 Lasso taken in the battle at Newport. 281 Latham a Commander, helps to
assault Crodon. 109 La ware restored to his ancient place in Parliament. 196
Latware Doctor of Divinity, slain. 2^9 Holy League in France, 19. the sum of
it. ibid. Leaguers, they cause a new Seal to be made, 20. they are seconded by
fair Parliaments, 21. they are defeated at Arques. 23 Lee apprehended about
the privy Chamber door, 310. hanged at Tiburne. ibid. Lecalle, the Mac-Genises
expelled thence. 348 Leicester a hinderer of Caermardine in the business of
the Custom House, 31. the first that preferred Essex to the Queen. 326
Leighton of Council to the Earl of Essex in France. 46 Leuison sent forth
with eight of the Queenes^ships, 361. he assaults a Caracke in Cezimbra Haven,
362. it yields unto him. 363 Libels made, the case of Balenger about them, 6
more against the Queen in Germany. 84 Liffer Castle seized on by Sir Henry
Docwray. 268 Listwill Castle taken. 269 Littleton one of the confederates of
the E. of Essex, 301. he is arraigned, 321. he dies in prison. 322 Lixnaw
Castle in Ireland taken. 269 Logh Reagh yielded up to the Lord Deputy. 376
Lofthose Archbishop of Dublin. 200 Londoners, their care commended by the
Queen. 310 Lopez a lew, his treason against the Queen, 103. his confession,
and execution. 104 Louell, Viscount Louell. 346 Lodowike Nassaw has a troop
of Horse committed to him at Newport battle. 279 Lour yielded up to the King of
France. 24 Lumley, Lord Lumley, one of the Peers of the Earl of Essex. 311
M
MAc-Baron uses means for Tir-Oen to obtain the Queens mercy. 378 Mac-Carty
continues still loyal. 351 Mac-Conell give caution for their loyalty. 42
Mac-Cowley parlieth with the Earl of Essex. 242 Mac-Dauy his complaints, what
they were. 92 Mac-Genises expelled out of Lecalle. 348 Mac-Guire rebelleth, 93.
lays siege at Monaghan Castle, 119. comes with Tir-Oen to parley with the
Earl of Essex, 242. is slain by Warham St. Ledger. 255 Mac-Mahons, a great
house in Ireland. 41 Mac-Phelim his c^mplaints, what they were. 149 Mac-Swine
Fanagh assaulted by Sir Henry Docwray. 349 Madeson a worthy Commander at the
battle of Ostend. 343 Magellan streights, Hawkins the sixth that ever reached
them. 110 Main made Lieutenant of the Crown of France, 22. he marches
against the King. ibid. Maitland Chancellor of Scotland. 2 Isle of Man, a
contention about it. 115 Mar, Earl of Mar Ambassador from the King of
Scotland. 337 Mass of the holy Ghost, said for the prosperity of the Spanish
Navy. 4, and 8. Maurice of Nassaw, General of the Forces of the States of
Holland, 278. his proceedings at the battle of Newport. 280 Medkercke a Low
Country man, Colonel. 13 Meilery Creah Archbishop of Casseiles. 62 Meluill
comes to demand Bothwell of the Queen. 82 Mendoza, an Agent with the Leaguers
for the Protectorship of the King of Spain, of all France. 24 Merceur, his
pretended right to the Duchy of Britain. 35 Merchants traffic forbid in
Germany. 190 Their covetousness forbid by Proclamation. 74 Mericke, one of
Essex his retainers, 181. he incenseth the E. of Essex against Sir W. Rawleigh,
182. knighted at Cales voyage, 164. he entertaines all manner of people into
Essex house, 296. he is arraigned, 327. his execution at Tiburne. 334 Metz
formerly annexed to the Empire of Germany. 36 Milford haven fortified by the
Queen. 29 Mildmay dies, 26. Founder of Emanuel College in Cambridge, 27.
Antony Mildmay Leaguer in France, 171. his eager expostulation with the King.
194 Ministers of Scotland, their zeal in case of religion. 66 Minshaw, a
Commander in the Irish wars. 356 Moherlecow yielded to the Deputy. 376
Moghery, the Pass of Moghery. 259 Money changed in Ireland. 348 Mont-Martine
sent with an Army from the Pope against the King of France. 44 Mont-Pensier
appointed to besiege Roan. 47 Monopolies restrained by act of Parliament, 345.
the Queens speech in behalf of them. ibid. Mother of God, the name of a
Caracke. 72 Morley yielded to the King of France. 107 Morley, Lord Morley, one
of the Peers of the Earl of Arundel. 4 Morney du Plessis, sent over to the
Queen. 48 Mortimers Earls of March, their possessions in Ireland. 92 Moro
gives to Lopez a precious Jewel to poison the Queen. 104 Mottee assaulteth
Ostend in vain. 340 Mouie sent over to the Queen. 89 Mounson his expedition
to the Spanish coasts, 361. his successes. 363, etc.
N
Navarre excluded by the Leaguers, from succeeding in the Kingdom of France.
19 Neale Garue a friend to the English. 376 Neuill called into question, and
committed. 336 Newnham Castle taken by the Archduke. 158 New Castle taken by
the Duke of Parma. 70 New-Hauen to be brought to subjection. 46 Newport battle,
and the manner of it. 278 Newton, a house of the E. of Huntly, demolished. 100
No-cle the French Kings Ambassador Ordinary in England, 44. sent with Letters
to the Queen, 48. Delegated for the King. 70 Nombre de dios taken and burnt by
the Englishmen. 132 Norfolk, the title of Philip Duke of Norfolk, objected
against the Earl of Arundel. 8 Norris his expedition for Spain, 10.
undermines the high Tower, 12. meets the Forces of the Spaniard, 13. drives
them back, ibid. marches to Lisbon, 14. he is sent over into France, 45. he
is recalled home again, 85. he is again sent over into France, 107. recalled
again, 109. sent over into Ireland, 141. he is too much addicted to Tir-Oen,
144. he parlies with him, 145. Tir-Oen makes a counterfeit submission to him,
ib. deluded by Tir-Oen, 152. his death. 198 North, one of the Peerles of the E.
of Arundel. 4 Nottingham made Lord Admiral. 187 La-Noue dies of a wound at
the siege of Lamballe. 45 Nowel Deane of Paul's dies. 374
O
O-Brien his complaints, and what they were. 92 Ocean, a discourse about the
freeness of it for all Passengers. The nature of the British Ocean. O-conor
Dun, his complaints, what they were. 92 O-Dogherty dies. 349 O-Donell his
mutinies in Ireland, 62. he surprizeth Montrosse Castle, 93. he submits,
146. he is put to flight, 356. he flies into Spain. 357 O^hanlon,
Standerd-bearer to the King in Vlster. 268 O-Hegan made Bishop of Rosse by the
Pope, 360. he is slain in battle. 361 O^maden an Irish rebel besieged by the
Deputy. 152 O^my, the Country laid waste by the English. 128 D-Onaw Governor
of the German forces. 19 O-Neale Garue a faithful friend of the English, for
all his service neglected. 376 O^Quine, one of them that parlies with the E. of
Essex. 242 O-rals, Rebels in Brenny. 150 Order of sitting amongst the Delegates
for Engl. and Spain. 274 Oroughan an Irish Priest, whose life Sir John Rewet
before had pardoned, an Informer against Sir John. 68 Ororke rebelleth, 41.
sent into England by the King of Scots, 42. is arraigned at Westminster Hall,
61. executed at Tiburne. 62 Ostend, the description of it. 340 Osuilliuant
Bear seizes upon Dunboy Castle. 349 O-Tooles tumultuary kindred give in
H^stages. 268 Ouerall Deane of Paul's. 375 Ouington, one that parlies with the
E. of Essex. 242 Ouny-Mac-Rory-Og-O-More is slain. 258 Oxford visited by the
Queen in her Progres^e, 74. the sum of her speech at her departure. ibid.
P
PAget dies at Brussels. 27 Palmer surprizeth thirteen ships returning from
Noua Francia. 45 Panama determined to be seized on by Sir W. Rawleigh, 71. the
voy^age of the English thither. 132 Paris the Kings Court there, robbed, 20. it
yields up to the King. 107 Parliament at Paris causes the Popes Bull to be
hung on a gibbet. 45 A Parliament assembled, 77. another assembled, 195.
another at Westminster. 344 Count Palatines, who boast themselves to be. 174
Parma, the Earl of Arundel intended to serve under him, 8. he enters France,
34. he takes New Castle, 70. and Caudebec, ibid. he dies. 71 Papists banished
the Realm in Scotland. 99 Peace with the Spaniard proposed, 210. argued for,
211. against. 213 Peniche in Portugal taken by the English. 14 Pembroke the
Earl dies. 346 Perez the Spaniards Secretary lurkes in England, 106. he is
entertained by the Earl of Essex, who made use of him, ib. his Motto, what it
was. ibid. Periam Lord chief Baron of the Exchequer. 311 Perkins employed by
the Queen, to answer the complaint of the Hanse-Townes, 137. Delegated to
Embden. 284 Pero^ called into question, 67. the heads of his Indictment, ibid.
he is condemned of treason; but dies of a disease in the Tower. 68 Parsons the
Jesuit of too intimate acquaintance with the E. of Arundle, 4. he sets forth
the book of Dolemans, 101. his excuse afterward, 103. abused by his own
Priests. 369 Pharo, a Town ransackt. 165 Philip King of Spain dies. 225
Pierre-pont Castle in France, in vain besieged. 47 Piers Archbishop of York,
dies. 114 Proclamation against transporting provision into Spain, 59. against
Bothwell. 64 Plague in London, whereof in a year there died 17890. people of
the City. 91 Po^ters valiantly defended by the Duke of Guise. 19 Polacke, and
the Turk reconciled by the Queens means. 33 Pope of Rome sends a Bull into
Ireland to grant a pardon of all their sins to the Rebels. 256 Popham his
proceeding against the Earl of Arundel, 6. he is made Lord chief Justice. 76
Porto-Rico, the voyage thither, 131. taken by the Earl of Cumberland. 226
Portland fortified by the Queen. 169 Powlet Marquess of Winchester, dies.
197 Practices of the Spaniard in Scotland against England. 1 Preston a Captain
burns the Isle Puerto Sancto. 130 Protections hurtful to the Commonwealth in
Ireland. 234 Providence, a ship of the Queens maintains fight with a Caracke
three whole hours. 73 Puckering dilates upon the cause of the Earl of
Arundel, 5. he is made Keeper of the great Seal, 61. he dies. 175 Counterfeit
Purseuants and Apparitors, punished. 171
Q
QVinpercorentine taken by Marshall D'Aumont, and General Norris. 168
Quodlibets by Watson a Priest. 369
R
RAtcliffe Earl of Sussex, dies. 92 Ratcliffe of Orsdall slain. 241^ Ramsey
rescues the King of Scots. 286 Randolph a Captain slain in France. 85 Sir
Thomas Randolph dies. 38 Rawleigh his expedition into America, 71. to Gadiz,
157. to the Azores, 180. he is called in question by General Essex, 182. taken
into favor again, 183. he grudges the Earl of Essex upon it. 186 Reaux sent
over to the Queen, to crave more aid. 46 Rebellion in Scotland, 2. in France,
19. in Ireland extinguished. 379 Religion the cloak of Rebellion. 98 Rewthwens
the Brothers of Gowry conspire to kill the King. 286 Rhise Wife to
Feagh-Mac-Hugh, her courage. 119 Richardot very importunate for the liberty of
Religion for the Low Countrymen. 32 Richard the second his law, concerning the
Crown of England, 9. the poorer sort exempted in his time from Subsidies,
which was multiplied on the rich. 3^ Rich the Lady, Sister to the Earl of
Essex. 296 Riman his voyage to the East Indies. 58 Richmond, the place where
the Queen dies. 380 Rich one of the Peers of the Earl of Arundel. 3
Rincurran Castle, the Spaniards drove out from thence. 353 Roe Lord Mayor of
London dies of the plague. 91 Rogers, a worthy Commander slain at the battle
of Ostend. 343 Rohans come to visit the Queen. 298 Roan assailed by the Earl
of Essex. 47 Russel made Lord Deputy of Ireland. 117
S
SAlique Law in France, what? 35 Sands one of the Peers of the Earl of
Arundel. 4 Sandford fortified by the Queen. 169 Sansie delegated for the King
of France's business. 70 Sapena taken in the battle at Newport. 281 Savages
confession urged against the Earl of Arundel. 6 Savage, a worthy Commander at
the siege of Amiens. 194 Scrope of Bolton dies. 76 Shelley condemned for
treason, a witness against the Earl of Arundel. 9 Sherley a Commander in
France, under Sir John Norris, 45. made Knight of the order of S. Michael. 1^2
Sidney sent over to the King of France, 90. his valor at the battle of
Turnholt, 177. put out of pay, wherefore. 182 Silley Islands fortified by the
Queen. 90 Sl^ugh. Art, a country in Ireland, laid waste by Sir Henry Docwray.
349 Smith Master of the Custom House, 31. his rents raised by the means of
one Caermardine. ibid. Smith Sheriff of London committed to the Tower. 336
Southampton made Governor of the Horse by the Earl of Essex, 239. is present
at the parley with Tir-Oen, 242. the Queen offended with him, and why, 244. he
comes over with the Earl of Essex, ibid. assaulted by the Lord Gray in the
open street, 299. imprisoned, 309. arraigned, 311. condemned, 321. committed to
the Tower. 336 Southwell. 327 Southsey fortified by the Queen. 169 Spencer the
famous Poet dies. 232 Spinola comes with Galleys to Scluce, 252. dies. 365
Squire his treason, 226. his execution. 228 Steward sent into Germany by the
King of Scots. 34 Sussex the Countess dies, 26. the Earl of Sussex dies. 92
Countess of Sutherland Aunt to the Earl of Huntley. 100 Synod at Dunbarre. 98
Somerset Earl of Worcester, sent into Scotland. 33 Stanley Earl of Darby
dies, 91. another Earl of Darby dies, 114. the witchcraft used upon him.
ibid. Stapleton dies. 231
T
TAffe a Captain in Ireland, his proceedings. 361 Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury
sent over into France. 171 Thames dried up strangely, 75. a discourse about the
natural reason thereof. ibid. The Term removed to Saint Albanes. 91
Tempests raised by Witches. 26 Tesmond a Jesuit, his treason against the
Queen. 370 Theodosius the Emperor, his saying. 68 Throgmortons confession
urged against the E. of Arundel. 6 Tyrell Lord of Kerry, 354. put to flight by
the Deputies forces. 356 Tir-Oen strangleth Hugh Gaueloc, 40. he is pardoned by
the the Queen, ibid. he submits to Norris and Fenton, 145. he presents his
grieuances before the Earl of Ormond, 200. he has a Fether of a Phoenix sent
unto him by the Pope of Rome, 248. he is removed from his fort at Blackwater,
384. he joins Forces with Alphonso Don-Ocampo, conducter of the Spaniards,
354. he is put to flight, 356. his last and absolute submission to the Queen.
379 Toul formerly a part of Germany. 36 Tours, the Parliament at Tours causes
the Bull of Pope Gregory to be hanged, and burnt on a gibbet. 45 Tragedy of
Richard the second acted before the Conspirators, by the means of Sir Gill.
Mericke. 332 Treaty at Boullen, 263. at Embden, 284. at Bremen, 365. breaks
off. 367 Truces in Ireland very hurtful, and why. 146 Turlogh Lenigh a great
man in Ireland, 41. he dies. 94 Turnholt battle. 177 Turk and the Polacke
reconciled by the means of the Queen, 33. and with the Vayuod of
Transiluania, by her means too. 84 Twomound the Earl, an individual
companion of S. George Carew, who stood him in great stead. 269
V
VAlerian's saying about conferring Honor. 173 Vallelodid, the English
Seminary there. 60 Valentine Thomas accuses the King of Scots, at the time of
his execution, 219. he is repriued. ibid Vayuod of Moldauia beholding to the
Queen, 33. and the Vayuod of Transiluania. 84 Vere made Governor of the
Brill, 168. his valor at the battle of Tournholt in Brabant, 177. he is made
Governor of Ostend, 340. his success there. 342 Vendosme taken by the
English. 24 Verdune heretofore belonging to the Empire of Germany. 36 Veruins,
the Treaty there. 208 Saint Victors in Paris. 23 Vigo a Town fired by the
English. 16 Villa-Franca taken by the English. 185 Villars Governor of Roan,
challenged to a single combat by the Earl of Essex. 69 Vitruvius his
observation about diseases in Armies. 17 Vmpton the Queens Leaguer in France,
127. he dies there. 171 University founded by the Queen at Dublin. 62
W
WAlton brings in evidence against Sir John Perot. 68 Wallop Treasurer of the
Army in Ireland. 142 Walsingham a hinderer of Caermardine in the business of
the Custom House, 31. he dies. 37 Warwick dies. 37 Weston a Priest, alias
Burgess. 4 Wentworth, Lord Wentworth dies, 40. another Lord Wentworth dies.
92 Willoughby sent over into France, with Forces to aid the King, 23.
sometimes Governor of Normandy. 24 Wilford one of the Colonels of the English
in France. 23 Wingfield Governor of Geertrudenbergh, 11. he assaults the base
Town at Groine, 12. dies. 108 Wilkes sent Ambassador into France, 86. he
dies in France. 203 Westmerland, a factious Earl. 42 Wiginton a Minister, one
of Hackets confederates. 49 Whitaker of Cambridge dies. 140 Williams passes
over to Deep with 600. English, 45. his brave behavior in France, ibid. his
challenge, ibid. his commendations to the Queen. 70 Wilmot made President of
Cork. 352 Williams sometimes Secretary to Sir John Perot, one of his chief
accusers and informers. 68 Williams a Traitor, apprehended, 105. executed. 122
Wolley d^legated in the cause of Sir John Perot. 67 Worthington a fugitue
Divine. 106 Whitfield Chancellor of Denmark* his Embasie into England, 193.
Delegated by the King to Embden. 284 Wray Lord chief Justice, dies. 76 Warham
St. Leiger slays Mac-Guire. 255 Walpole makes Squire undertake to poison the
Queen, 227. he is accused for it by Squire at his execution, 228. he writes a
book, wherein he for swears the matter. ibid.
Y
YAxley, A famous Commander in the battle of New-port. 281 York sent over to
the King of France. 43 Yurie in France, the Leaguers discomfited there. 34
Yuecot in France, the Leaguers there discomfited. 76 York a Traitor
apprehended, 105. he is executed. 122
Z
ZAnziber the place where Lancaster wintered. 59 Zeile thither came Lancaster
also. ibid. Zelanders, the Queen offended with them, and wherefore. 32 Zouch
s^nt Ambassador into Scotland. 96 Zutphen Fort recovered by Sir Francis Vere.
168
FINIS.
AN APPENDIX: CONTAINING ANIMADVERSIONS UPON SEVERAL PASSAGES, CORRECTIONS OF
sundry errors, and Additions of some remarkable matters of the History, never
yet imprinted.
RObert Bruce a Priest.] Page 1. lin* 10.
Whether or no he were a Priest, is somewhat uncertain; but, which gives some
probability to the matter, certain it is, he had his education under the
Jesuits beyond Sea; and the occasion of his coming to Scotland, was in this
wise: Philip King of Spain presently after the death of Mary Queen of Scots
in England, willed the Duke of Parma (the Governor of his Forces in the Low
Countries) in his name to promise to the King of Scots both money and munition
good store, if so be he would attempt the Queen of England, and her Dominions,
to revenge the death of his Mother the Queen of Scots. The Duke of Parma to
effect^ this business, sends over this Robert Bruce, or Brusse, a Scottish man
by birth, and of a Noble Family, with great sums of moneys, the better to
quicken his purposes. It chanced that at the very same time (by the appointment
of Sixtus Quintus Bishop of Rome) the Bishop of Dublin also was dispatched over
thither, to promise to the King of Scots the Infanta of Spain in marriage, if
so be he would but change his Religion, and turn Catholic. But the Bishop
(by reason of the faithful loyalty and industry of the Chancellor Metellan,
to whom the King owed the preservation of himself and Kingdom from
destruction) being frustrated of his hopes, returned home again with little
thanks for his labor. Amongst those whom he retained at the time of his
coming over, was one William Creicton a Jesuit, and a Scottish man too, who
had heretofore been Rector of the College of the Jesuits at Leiden: who,
seeing his Bishop come short of his expectation, determined to stay behind
himself, to see what he could do with some of his friends there. The first
whom ever he broke withal concerning his mind, was this Robert Brusse, whom
he would feign have persuaded to have murdered the Chancellor of Scotland,
who, as he said, alone nullified and dispersed all their plots and
machinations. Brusse being startled with the horror of so ^oule a deed,
absolutely denied to consent thereunto as a cruel and unconscionable demand.
Afterward (the King and the Chancellor both being invited to a Banquet by a
Nobleman of Scotland, but much addicted to the Romish Religion) this same
Creicton assailes Robert Brusse again, that if so be he himself would not do
the business, he would give him some of the Duke of Parma's money, to give to
the Nobleman, where the Banquet was, to tempt him to the fact. But Brusse also
denied that, alleging, that he had other business to do there with the
moneys; and also, that if it should be done, it would be a great scandal and
disgrace to them, and occasion of their greater fear. After many other
passages, the Jesuit Creicton at last was very instant with the said Brusse,
if so be he would have no hand in the business, to deliver to him the
fifteen hundred Crowns which he received of the Duke of Parma, to distribute
amongst three of the Scottish Nobility, that should undertake and effect the
business; by which means all scandal and fear should be removed from them,
as having nothing to do in so foul a murder. But Brusse was very loath also
to condescend even to that, esteeming it an equal ^inne to commit one, or hire
another, to a murder. Insomuch, that at last, after the death of the Duke of
Parma, He accused this Brusse for a Traitor, because indeed he would not
commit treason; whereupon poor Brusse was imprisoned for fourteen months,
and had much ado^ a^ last to regaine his liberty.

They that desire information in more particular circumstances, may advice with
Lodouicus Lucius, where they may have the story at large; in these words
dilated on.

Rex Hispaniarum Philippus haud dii^ post mortem Mariae Regi^^ Scotorum, Duci
Parmensi, Gubernatori suo in Belgio, mand^rat, vt suo nomine, Regi Iacobo
Scotiae, pecunias and exercitum adversus Regin^m Angliae promittere^, quo
facilius Matris mortem ulci^ei poss^^* ^a de causa Parmensis Nobilem Scotum
Robertum de Brusse, qui ^ iuventute apud Jesuit as educatus fuerat, in Scotiam
multa cum pecunia ablegauit. Eodem tempore advenit etiam in Scotiam jussu Six^i
Quin^i Pon^^^ieis is Romani, Dublini Episcopus, qui Infantem Hispanicam Scotiae
Regi in matrimonium offerret; sed ea condition, si Romanam Religionem amplecti
vellet. In hujus Episcopi comitatu fuit etiam Iesuita Gulielmus Creictonus
Scotus, qui Lugduni aliquamdiu Rector in Iesuitarum Collegio fuerat: Repulsam
autem passus Episcopus, consilio, virtute, and fidelitate Iohannis Metellani
Magni Cancellarij Scotiae, (qui Regi suadebat ut sibi ab hujusmodi dolis and
fallacibus promissis caveret) domum reversus est: post cujus discessum mansit
in Scotia Creictonus Iesuita, and Brusseo sese junxit: eique persuadere conatus
est, ut Cancellarium obtruncaret* quod molitionibus Iesuiticis, eor^mque
parricidijs, vel solus resisteret. Ad quae Brusseus totus exhorruit: ejuque
postulatis iniquis and crudelibus consentire noluit. Post modum, cum a Magnate
quodam Pontificio Rex una cum Cancellario suo ad convivium invitatus esset,
hortatur Iesuita Brusseum, det sibi pecunias, quibus Magnatem illum
conciliaret, ut Cancellario e medio tollendo operam praestaret. Sed and hoc
Brusseus negat* non solum, quod alijs de causis Legatum ibi ageret; verum etiam
propter magnum dedecus, atque periculum quod exinde metuendum esset. Regem enim
imprimis id pessime laturum, si latrocinium id non modo present ipso, s^d
etiam in tali viro patraretur, cui Rex ob fidem and prudentiam singularem
intime faveret: ade^que Regem contra Catholicos, tanquam^ sicarios and
latrones, Deique and hominum nefarios proditores, irritatum iri, quos tamen
ille adhuc gratiose benigneque ^abuisset. Ad quae Iesuita Brusseum rogat, det
ergo solum 1500. Coronatos, quos a Parmensi accepisset, tribus Nobilibus, qui
in necem Cancellarij conjurarint; ita ut non multum inde scandali oboriri
possit. Sed ne hoc quidem sibi per suaderi passus est Brusseus, inquiens, unum
and idem esse, sieve quis sua manu int^rficiat aliquem, sieve pecunia conducat
alium, ad caedem faciendum. Et quoniam quaestio esset, Quaratione Catholica
Religio promoveri deberet* Totam potius illam deperditum iri, si per latrocinia
quis promovendam susciperet, tanto cum omnium offendiculo, ipsiusque sancti
Iesuitici ordinis perpetua infamia. Iesuitam vero acrius adhuc instantem rogat
Brusseus, number ergo bona conscientia ipse in facinus ejuscemodi consentire
posset? aut number Iesuita secum ea in re dispensaret? Respondet Creicton; caede
patrata, si ad se confessurus veniret, tum se ipsum absoluturum esse. Cui
Brusseus: siquidem confessione sibi opus foret, utique prius peccandum esse: I
am vera incertum esse utrum Deus post commissum illud peccatum, sibi gratiam
eam facturus sit, ut confiteri queat. Credere se, confessionem mali, quod
destin^to proposito fiat, parum profecturam: ideoque in huj^sce modi periculum
se conijcere nolle. Ita ergo tum, Iesuita ille cum suo parricidiali consilio
frustra fuit: sed egregie postea id in Brusseo vindicavit. Mortuo enim
Parmensi, and Comite Fuente Hispano Albani Ducis nepote, in ejus locum
subrogato, Creictonus Brusseu^ apud hunc accusat, primum, quod pecunias Regias
male dilapidasset: deinde, quod Proditor esset, quia pecunias ad caedem
Cancellarij Scotiae procuranda^, Lod. Lucius li. 4. Historiae Iesuiticae, ca.
4. pa. 517. Basil. 1627.
denegasset. Atque id maximu^, in Iesuitico hoc regimine, peccatum fuit: ob
quod, miser Brusseus in carcerem conijcitur, and menses quatuordecim in eo
detinetur, ac tandem quidem inde liberatur. Iesuita interim impunitus evadit:
ut nulla, vel honoris vindicandi, vel ignominiae referendae, vel damni
recuperandi, ratio illi superfuerit.

Page 2. Lin. 4. The Natural Son.] By Natural Son, is understood the Base
Son, or Bastard Son; for the word Naturalis is more often used in the worse
then in the better sense, although there are many other words also, which
signify as much: as Nothus, Spurius, Illegitimus; nay, and the word Bastardus
also, which is sometimes used by ancient Historians, as by our Matthaeus
Westmonasteriensis, in his Flores Historiarum, lib. 2. fol. 180. Rex Siciliae
supradictus, fuit filius, sed Bastardus Petri, quondam Regis Arragoniae. And by
the Author of the Paraleipomena Rerum Memorabilium, added to Conradus Abbas
Vrspergensis, who uses the word twice in one sentence; Papa (says he) fautor
Bastardorum, pro quibus longissimam, fere trium horarum prolixam fecit
orationem, dum Ferdinandi Bastardi lauds Mantuae personaret. The word Natural
is also to be understood in the same sense in the 40. page of this Book, and
the 12. line.

Page 11. Lin. 25. Landed within a Mile of the Groine.] Groine is the vulgar
word, and best understood: the true name is Corunna, a port Town in Galitia,
or as others Galecia; which by Ptolomy is termed Flavium Brigantium; and by
Antoninus, Brigantium only. It looks into the Cantabrian Sea: It is exceeding
strong, and the chief Bulkwarke of all Galitia, and the Northern parts. It is
divided into High and Base Towns, which are severally fortified; of which
there is mention in the passages of this History.

Page 14. Lin. 19. Up the River Tagus.] By that name the River may well enough
be understood, although there are more ordinary names amongst the Inhabitants,
as the River Teio, as the Portuguesse call it; or Taio, as those of Castile.

Page 14. Lin. 27. The Suburbs of Lisbone.] The Genuine name which the
Inhabitants thereof use is Lisboa, corruptly Vlissipona: which by Pliny was
called Foelicitas Iulia: Oliosypon by Ptolomy: Olisipon by Antoninus: Olyssippo
by Solinus. It was once a Municipium of the Romans; and afterward made a
Kingdom of the Moors; afterward the Seat of the Kings of Portugal, being
first surprised by Alphonsus the first. It is now only the Seat of the
Archbishop, situate upon the right shore of Taio, and some five miles from the
Ocean; and with the Suburbs and all is about seven miles in compass. Much over
against this City is the Promontory de Sancto Vincente, named from the
relics of that holy Martyr, which were brought thither by some persecuted
Christians: but by Strabo and Ptolomy called Promontorium Sacrum, wherein (as
many grave Authors, though in this case very fondly, conceive) there are
certain Mares which at a set time conceive by the wind, and bring forth
Foales, but they never live about three years. Of this opinion (although it
never deserved so many Patrons) were Colu^^ella cap. 15. lib. 7. Plin. lib. 8.
cap. 42. Lactant. lib 4. cap. 12. and Varro lib. 2. cap. 1. whose words the
Reader may poise if he please.

Res est incredibilis in Hispania, sed vera, says he, quod in Lusitania ad
Oceanum, in ea regione ubi est oppidum Olysippo, Monte Sacro, quaedam e vento
certo tempore concipiunt Equae, ut his Gallinae quoque solent, quarum Ova
Hyponemia appellant: sed ex his Equis nati pulli non amplius tri^nnio vivunt.
Varro de Re Rustica. Nay, Pliny comes in with his Constat, as if he were very
sure of the matter. Constat (says he) in Lusitania circa Olyssipponem oppidum
and Tagum amnem, Equas Favonio flante obversas animalem concipere spiritum,
idque partum fieri, and gigni pernicissimum ita, sed triennium vitae non
excedere.

Page 21. Lin. 6. Jacques Clement, a Monk to murder him.] This is that murder
which gave the first breath to the damnable doctrine of King-killing: which
first quickened from the mouth of Antichrist himself, and after that* budded
in his subordinate Impes, the Jesuits: for as soon as this horrible murder
was committed, and the news of it flowne to Rome, our Lord God Sixtus Quintus
could not but bewail the Kings death, in this lamentable Elegy; Facinus hoc
esse (which before he had styled Rarum Insigne, and Memorabile) Non sine Dei
Opt. Max. particulari providentia, and dispositione, and spiritus Sancti
suggestione, designatum; and long majus esse, quam illud S. Judith, quae
Holofernem e medio sustulit.

This spark did quickly kindle, and what effect it took, you may easily judge
by this of the Jesuit Franciscus Verona Constantinus, in his Apology for John
Casteele, etc. Cum eo tempore intolerabilis factus sit Rex, condemnatio
Clementis, neque de Iure, neque de Facto comprobari potuit: propter tyrannidem
Henrici Regis contra Statum and Ecclesiam, tam quoad homicidium Blesis
perpetratum, quam hostili impetu hodierno, quo ad oppressionem religionis est
prolapsus, mactando Sacerdotes, profanando Sacramenta, repudiando censuras, and
fauendo haereticis. Quibus de causis totum se priuatum reddidit, and subjectum
utrique Iuri, tam Civili, quam Canonico. Actio igitur Clementis neutiquam
Illicita fuit: quippe quae perpetrat^ contra hostem publicum, and condemnatum
Iuridice* in (...) omnis obligatio reverentiae atque debiti, sublata fuit^
Part. 2. cap. 2. etc. I cannot but English it.

The King being become now absolutely intolerable it was neither lawful de
Iure, or de Facto* to condemn this act of Clement* by reason of the tyranny of
this Henry both in the Church and the Commonwealth; and not only by reason of
those horrible murders he caused at ^loys* but also, by reason of his
oppressing Religion, murth^ring of Priests, profaning the Sa^raments, re^using
submission to Ecclesiastical censures, and openly favoring of Heretics; by
which means he became only a private man, and subject both to the Civil and
Canon law. And that upon these considerations, this act of ^lement, could not
be judged unlawful, being committed upon the body of him that was an open
enemy, and Legally condemned; and from whom all obedience and alleagiance of
his Subjects was taken away.

I know that some of their Historians would make the world believe that his
Clement did the deed, without any instigation, but of his own Genius* and of
that opinion is Platina, or Cicarella rather adjoined to him; and he would make
it also the common opinion, Communis erat opinio (says he) ^um a nemine ad hoc
factum subordinatum; sed a s^ips^ postquam duobus aut tribus mensibus in hoc
animi concept^ persev^raverat, ad hoc ar^uum opus permotum esse and instigatum;
post jejunia longa, post orationes ad Deum continuas, sese certissimum hoc
periculum adijsse, etc. in vita Sixti Quinti, page 480.

But there Johannes Mariana a Spanish Jesuit, one that has made the best of
this deed, that ever any could, is not yet of that opinion; who in a Narration
and prosecution of the Story says: Cognito a Th^ologis quo^ ^^at sciscitatus,
Tyrannum iure interi^i posse, etc. For this Jacques Clement, although he had
often premeditated the matter with himself, yet at length he imparted it to
some Divines, who concluded that it was lawful for him to do it, because it
is lawful for any man to kill a King that is a Tyrant, Marian. lib. 1. de Rege
and Regis Institutione, cap. 6. page 53. So little do they regard the express^
Canon of the Council of Constance to the contrary, of Si quis Tyrannus, etc.
which does strictly forbid any man either by deceit, or policy, or open arms
to take away the life of his Prince, yea, though he be a Tyrant.

Page 32. Lin. 6. Which we call Pound-men.] In the Original the words are, The
Pound-men: but both the Translation, and the Original are false: for the words
should be thus; which we call the Three-pound men; as may appear in the true
Manuscript of Mr. Cambden himself; as also, because that the words may very
well be so, by reason that no man is a Subsidy man, whose goods are valued
under the rate of Three-pounds: at which rate most of the meaner sort valuing
their goods and estates, gave occasion of the name to be called Three-pound men.

Page 35. Lin. 29. In the Reign of Francis the first.] For indeed, Francis the
first, King of France, and the third of that name, Duke of Britain, in the
right of his wife Claude, that was eldest daughter to Lewis the twelfth* King
of France* and Anne, in the year of our Lord God 1532. with the consents of
the States of Britain, inseperably united the Dukedom of Britain to the
Crown of France.

Page 36. Lin. 13. That this business concerned her more then that of Edward
the third.] P^^er de (...)* in the right of his wife Alice daughter of
Constance by the second marriage, was the first that (being Duke of Britain)
made that Dukedom subject unto the Sovereignty and homage of the French Kings.
After him was John the first, Son to Peter de Dreux; after him John the
second, Son to John the first; after him Arthur the second, Son to John the
second; after him John the third* Son to Arthur the second. This John the
third^ dying without he^res, caused the Right to the said Dukedom to be
controuerted between John Earl of Montfort, the younger Son to Arthur the
second, and Charles de Bloys, Husband to Ioane la Boi^^use, Daughter to Guye
second Son to Duke Arthur the second, Edward the third King of England, aided
the first, to wit, John Earl of Mont^ort: and Philip de Valoys King of France,
aided the other, to wit, Charles de Bloys* to maintain his wars. But neither
side yet prenailing, it chanced that John of Montfort died, whose Son John
the fourth (surnamed the Valiant) after the decease of Charles de Bloys, who
was overthrown by him, and the valor of the English that assisted him, at the
battle of Auray, became sole Duke of Britain, and so the controversy ceased.

Page 39. Lin. 22. John Basilides Emperor of Russia.] The familiar Translation
of these words, in the Language which Merchants and Travelers in those
Countries use, is* ^van Vasilowicke, Emperor of all Russia* although indeed,
before Basilieus, Father to ^van, that first took upon him the title of
Emperor, they were only styled great Dukes, and not Emperors; but now, they
stand much upon their style* and will scarcely admit of any conference or
negotiation either with their own, or strange people, unless they use before
the uttering of their business, their whole title from the beginning to the
ending; which runs after this manner. Ivan Vasilowicke, by the grace of God,
great Lord and Emperor of all Russia, great Duke of Volodemer, Mosco, and
Novograd, King of Cazan, King of Astracan, Lord of Plesko, and great Duke of
Smolensco, Bulghoria, etc. Lord and great Duke of Novograd in the Low
Countries, of Chernigo, Rezan, Polotskoy* Rostoue, Yaruslauely, Bealozera,
Liefland, Oudoria, Obdoria, and Condensa; Commander of all Siberia, and of the
North parts, and Lord of many other Countries, etc. This Emperor is of most
absolute and entire authority himself: he suffers not any Jurisdiction in
matters Judicial, to be held by any of his Subjects, not so much as by
Cha^ter; but all is at his own pleasure and appointment. Nay, to show his
sovereignty over the lives of his Subjects, (in his ordinary walks) if he had
misliked the face or person of any man whom he met by the way, or that looked
upon him, he would command his head to be struck off; which was presently
done, and the man's head forthwith laid before him.

Page 39. Lin. 17. Earl of Shropshire.] Read, Earl of Shrewsbury: for that
is his peculiar and proper title. This George Talbot was the sixth Earl of
Shrewsbury; the Son of Francis Talbot, that was the Son of George, that was
the Son of John the second Earl of Shrewsbury, that was the Son of John,
the first of that Name that was created Earl of Shrewsbury, in the days of
Henry the sixth; who being slain in the battle at Bourdeaux, has this
honorable Elogy graven on his Tomb:

Here lies the Right Noble Knight John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, Earl of
Weshford, Waterford, and Valence, Lord Talbot of Goodrich, and Orchenfield,
Lord Strange of Blakmer, Lord Verdon of Acton, Lord Cromwell of Wingfield, Lord
Louetoft of Worsop, Lord Furnivall of Sheffield, Lord Faulconbridge, Knight of
the Noble Order of St. George, St. Michael, and the Golden Fleece, great
Marshall to King Henry the sixth, of his Realm of France: who dyed in the
battle at Bourdeaux 1453. A multitude of Titles indeed, which many perchance
in this Age may parallel, but few deserve.

Page 40. Lin. 3. His latter Wife Elizabeth.] Add these words, The Daughter of
John Hardwike of Hardwike in Derbishire, Esquier; which were omitted by reason
of the imperfections of the words in the Original.

Page 40. Lin. 12. Hugh Gauiloc, etc. accused Hugh Earl of Tir-Oen.] It is
reported by some Historians, that pretend to have good ground for what they
write, that not this Hugh-Ne-Gaviloc bastard Son to Shan-O-Neale, but
Con-Mac-Shane the true and legitimate Son of Shan-O-Neale, exhibited these
Articles against Tir-Oen. But there is a way to reconcile both opinions, which
may be thus. That the Petition was exhibited by the hands of Hugh-Ne-Gaviloc,
but in the behalf, and in the name of Con-Mac-Shan; and so there is no
falsehood or error in the story.

Page 40. Lin. 24. Where he pro^essed a peace, etc.] The words in the
Original run very obscurely, thus pointed, and spelled: Coramque ipsa, ad
Regiam Grenuici Honorem ut Nobiles solent, potestatus sanctissime in se
recepit, pacem, etc. Of which words, it was very long before I could tell what
to make off; by reason that I expected some more then ordinary signification in
the word Potestatus, being printed in both the Editions of Mr. Cambden, in a
different Character, and being referred in the Index of the Book, under the
letter H, with Honor potestatus. But it was not only the error of the
Printer, but even of the Manuscript it self, which I have seen; and upon good
advice judge it thus to be corrected: Coramque ipsa, ad Regiam Grenvici,
Honorem, ut Nobiles solent, protestatus, sanctissime in se recepit, etc. Which
may be rendered thus; Where he protested upon his Honor, as the Noblemen use
to do before the Queen, that he would keep peace with all his Neighbors,
etc.

Page 41. Lin. 18. (as the Irish complain) condemned and ^anged him.] This
Hugh-Roe-Mac-Mahon was Brother to Mac-Mahon, Chieftaine of Monaghan, who in his
lifetime surrendered his Country of Monaghan, (which he held by Tanistry the
Irish Law) into the hands of the Queen, and received a Re-grant of it again
under the great Seal of England, to him and his Heir males, and for default
of such, to his brother Hugh-Roe-Mac-Mahon, with other remainders. Shortly
after, Mac-Mahon dying, this Hugh came up to the state, that he might be
settled in his inheritance, and become the Queenes^ Patentee. But it seems, as
the Irish say, he could not be admitted to his Right, till he had promised to
give about six hundred Cowes (for such only are the Irish bribes:) shortly
after, for failing in some part of this payment, he was imprisoned, and within
few days after, set again at liberty. But, not long after, upon his very
entrance into Monaghan (where he thought the Lord Depuputy would have se^led
him in his possessions) he was clapped up, indicted, arraigned, and executed, all
within two days. The Irish say, he was found guilty by a ^ury of none but
Soldiers, and that of them foure^English Soldiers only were suffered to go
up and down at pleasure, but the rest being Irish, were kept straight, and to
be sterued, till they found him guilty. The Treason, it should seem, for which
he was executed, was, because some two years before, he pretending a Right
due unto him out of the Ferney, upon that, levied his Forces, marched thither
in a warlike manner, and made a distress for the same; which indeed, in
England may be thought treason perhaps, but in Ireland never before acquainted
with subjection to any Law, it was thought but a poor offense.

Page 44. Lin. 32. Pope Gregory the thirteenth of that name.] This is an error
in both the Latin Editions; for Pope Gregory the thirteenth was dead long
before this time. It must needs be mended therefore thus. Pope Gregory the
fourteenth, who at that time was Bishop of Rome: of whom their Cicarella
writes in this manner, thus. Non multo post tempore constituit generalem S.
Ecclesiae Comitem Sfondratum Nepotem suum, eumque cum exercitu in Galliam
misit; ad quod bellum Gregorius dicitur, quinquies centena aureorum
contribuisse, praeter alia quadraginta millia, e proprio suo peculio desumpta.
Sea antequam nepotem suum in Franciam mitteret, dedit illi uxorem, filiam
principis Massae, quo de matrimonio agi caperat, priusquam ad Pontificatus
fastigium erat assumptus: nunc autem continuatum est, and conclusum. Creavit
etiam illum ducem montis Martiani, qui status, eo quod magnus Dux Florentinus
Alphonsum Piccolominaeu^, sibi and Ecclesiae Rebellem, captum supplicio
sceleribus suis digno e medio abstulerat, per confiscationem vacabat, etc. His
Holiness belike was very eager for the promotion of the Catholic cause in
France, when he could be willing to contribute to a war in that behalf, no
less then five hundred thousand Crowns, besides forty thousand more out of
his private Coffers. I wonder (indeed) how he should be of so hot a spirit,
that used so cool a diet; for (as the same Author observes on him) for
eighteen years together he drank nothing but fair water, Cicarella in vita
Greg. 14. page 499.

Page 49. Lin. 27. Much given to reading the Scripture.] Here some words should
have been interserted, which indeed are omitted also in the Latin Editions;
but are upon reuiew put into the original Manuscript, which I have perused.
The words are these:

Ante omnia vero miro and peregrino quodam fervore preces fundebat, in faciem
concidens, and veluti extasi correptus, and cum Deo quasi expostulaus; Attamen
unum ex ejus asseclis caeteris forte perspicatior^m, abaliena vit formula
quadam orationis quae illi erat familiaris: Nam cum omnes soleant Dei
presentiam in invocando implorare, Illesolus De^m rogare consueverat, ut a
caetu precantium abesse, and s^ subtrahere vellet: quod licet auditores ejus ad
excessum quenda^ humilitatis trahebant, tamen potuit quoque vox esse plane
satan^ca, ^ daemo^^ malo, qui eum obsidebat, dictata. In English thus:

But especially he used a strange and monstrous kind and manner of praying:
sometimes falling upon his face, sometimes as if he were in an ecstasy, and
sometimes even e^postulating with God himself. Yet notwithstanding, this
strong devotion estranged from him one of his Associates and hangers on, wiser
(it seems) then the rest* and yet not that so much, as another form of
Prayer, which was altogether as ordinary and familiar with him; For, whereas
the aim and scope of other men's devout prayers and ^iaculations is only to
obtain the sweet comfort of Gods heavenly presence, this same Hac^et, was
always wont in his ho^^est zeal to entreat God to depart from him* and not to
come among such sinful creatures. Which manner of prayer, although that most
of his disciples construed the effect of his rare and excessi^^ humility, yet
they might as well have adiudge^^^ (as in t^^th it was) the voice not of man,
but Satan, dictated only to him, from that ^uill spirit that possessed him.

Page 55. Lin. 21.] The Statute of Circumspecte ^gatis.] This Statute was made
in the Reign of King Edward the first, and the 13. year of his Reign. The
form whereof runs thus:

The King to his Judges sende^h greeting: Use your self circumspectly in all
matters concerning the Bishop of Norwich, and his Clergy, not punishing them if
they hold plea in Court- Christian, of such things as be merely spiritual,
that is, to wit, of penance enjoined for deadly sin, as Fornication,
Adultery, and such like; for the which many times corporal penance, or
pecuniary, is enjoined, especially if a free man be con^ict of those things,
etc. And ends with this clause annexed: In all causes before rehearsed the
spiritual Judge shall have power to take Knowledge, notwithstanding the Kings
prohibition.

Page 59. Lin. 16. The Island Nona.] The corruption of the Translation should
be mended thus: The Island Mona; or as we in English ordinarily use to render
it, Anglesey Island. Indeed Polydor Virgil in his History of^ England* Lib. 1.
page 11. is of opinion, that this Insula Mona is that which we call the Isle of
Man; and to that purpose notes out of Tacitus (in the Life of Julius Agricola)
that when the Romans began to subdue that Island, they waded from the Land
thither, without the use of shipping: but at length, having noted and admired
the eating cruelty of time, (which has made that Island at this present about
25. miles distant from the English shore, which before was not abo^^^ a mile)
he concludes at last with this prouis^^* Ex quo sunt, qui audeant affirmare*
Monam esse eam, quam Angliseam appellant quae Walliae adiacet, estque
Bangoriensis Diocesis: cujus loci naturatalis est etiamnum qualem ex Tacito
habuisse docuimus.

Page 60. Lin. 6. For the Spaniard had lately erected a Seminary for the
English fugitives at Vallad^lid.] This Seminary was erected by the King of
Spain, at the instigation of many English Fugitives; who, when he had finished
it, requested of Clement^ the eight then Bishop of Rome, a Bull, to confirm it
to that use* which the same Clement* in the very first year of his Popedom*
granted unto him* The form of the said Bull, runs after this manner.

CLEMENS PAPA OCTAVVS.
(...) istud pie ac attente Charissimus noster in Christo filius, Philippus Rex
Hispaniarum Catholicus cujus excel^lentem benignitatem, and liberalitatem Rege
Catholico absque dubio dignam, multi Anglicani exules adolescentes fuerunt
experti, qui ex misorabili Angliae regno (quod alias tantopere floruit, erga
fidem Catholicam devotissimum fuit, nunc autem haer^seos gravissimo infortunio
affligit^^ atque opprimitur) in Hispaniam transfugerunt, in Civitat^ quae in
Dioce^^ Valen^^^ est* Collegium Anglicanum, ad D^i omnipotent is glo^iam and
honorem, ac corundem Anglorum receptaculum extruxit; qui profide Catholica
s^^^pte sponte dictum regnum deseruerunt, constituentes suo tempore in illud
reverti, and ad veritatis viam Gentiles suos miserrime occ^catos reduc^re.
C^mque dictus Rex Catholicus singulis annis ^^^tos reditus ad fludiosorum,
aliorumque hominum ^o in Collegio (...) nobis humiliter per dilectum filium and
Nobilem Dominum Antonium Ducem de Sesa and de Soma Legatum suum supplicavit,
quatenus benignitate (...) tam F^cti quam Iuris, qui fortasse possint
intervenire, etc.

You have the College confirmed now, if you will you shall see it furnished
with turn-coate Englishmen. But then, all kind of Englishmen are not admitted
into this College; No, that were to put the King to a great deal of charges
to as little purpose. But, as their Rabadineira tells us, (and we may believe
him in this matter) ^i tantum, qui ad finem illoru^ consequendum aptiores esse
videntur: they only are entered, that are most likely to serve their turns and
purposes. And they not presently too, they must be Probationers first, for some
few days, and afterward, upon their Admission, swear before God, that they
will take Orders in due time, return home to England again, and bid fair for
a hanging, if so be it be their fortune. The form of their Oath runs in this
manner.

Ego A. B. hujus Anglicani Collegij Alumnus, con^iderans quantis me Deus
beneficijs affecerit, tunc autem praes^rtim, quando expatriam^^ ab (...) ^deo
nunc aflicta eduxit, ac (...) Eccle^^^ Catholicae membrum effecit, fimulque tam
immensam Dei miseri^ordiam grato animo prosequi volens, totum me illius
servitio in quantum possum ed hujus Collegij (...) adimplendum offerre
constitui. Promitto igitur et coram Omnipotente Deo juro, paratum me ex (...)
esse* (...) me illius gratia adi^^eri^, sacros Ordines suo tempore recipere, et
in Angliam reuertere, illic ut animas gentilium et proximorum conuertam,
quoties et quan do huius Collegij Superiori instituto suo conform esse
^idebitur, Domino mihi illud imperante.

I did not intend, but because of some of my silly countrymen that are to
travel thither shortly, I will translate it for their sakes, that they may the
better know what they swear to.

I A. B. student of this English College, considering what infinite favors
and benifits God has bestowed upon me, but more especially, in that he has
brought me out of my miserable country, sorely afflicted and groaning under the
burden of Heresy, and made me now a member of his Holy Catholic Church, and
being desirous to make the best use I can of this gracious mercy of God, and
giving my self over wholly to fulfill those ends, for which this College was
erected, Do here faithfully promise and swear before Almighty God, that I am
ready in heart and mind, and by the assistance of his Grace, ever will be, to
take my Holy Orders in due time, and return to my native country, to convert
as many of my countrymen and kins^olkes, as I can: whesoeuer I shall be called
thereunto, by the appointment of my Superior: whose command I will be always
ready to execute, as beleiuing that not He so much, as God himself, does put me
on that errand.

And now, before they come over again into England, they first go and take a
blessing of his Holiness the Pope, and after that, are the better prepared for
their journey. But how come they into England? not indeed, as if they would
seem, what indeed they are, but rather in disguises, and dumb Aequiuocations,
that by their bare habit no man can understand them. And indeed, it is very
lawful for them in such a ca^e as this, says their Rabadineira, modo
militem, modo mercatorem, modo nautam, aut aliud vitae genus mentiri: To
counterfeit themselves either a Soldier, or a Merchant, or a Mariner or any
thing else, to keep themselves from the danger of an Inquiry. For they do
this by very good authority, says He, even of that famous Bishop Eusebius
himself, who in the time of the Emperor Constantius that was an Arrian, went
apparelled like a Soldier, to the Assemblies and Congregations of the
Catholics: where he taught them and instructed them privately so long, till
at last he became a glorious Martyr. Docuit hoc illos, says the Jesuit,
Sanctus Eus^bius Episcop^s Samo sat (...), Rabad. Append. schismat. Anglican.
cap. 23. page 98.
qui temporibus Imperatoris Constantij Arriani, militari vest ac habitu,
Ecclesias Catholicorum visitabat, confirmabat, and instruebat, quippe ad
extremum, glorioso, pro Fide Christana, ^olerato Martyrio, vitam consummauit.

Page 101. Lin. 29. This Constance died without Issue.] The Author cited for
the truth of this story, is Gulielmus Gemeticensis; whom, though M. Cambden
nether specify where any one may find, either Him, or his Testimonial, I have
here displayed to the view of the Reader. I found him, after some Enquiry,
among the Scriptores Rerum Anglicarum and Normanicarum, and there, a Tractate
also of His, De Ducibus Britanniae: Wherein, in the seventh book and the
four and thirty chapter, I find these words: -- De filiabus Primi Willelmi
Regis Anglorum, sororibus Inclyti Regis Henrici -- Secunda fuit Constantia
Alano Feregant, Comiti Minoris Britanniae, (Filio scilicet Hoell^, qui Conano
successerat,) matrimonio iuncta, Absque LIBERIS MORTV A EST. Vnde factum est vt
Idem Comes, post Ipsam, duceret Filiam Fulconis Rechin, Comitis Andegauorum, ex
quagenuit Co^anum Iuniorem, qui ei successit. By which is very apparent, that
the Genealogy deduced from this Constance, must needs be very fabulous, and as
void of truth, as this Constance was of Issue.

Page 103. Lin. 3. And cousened him of his money.] To this answer of Lopez,
there is much more annexed, which was never printed in both the Latin
Editions; which I have taken out of M. Cambdens own Manuscript, and here set
down word for word.

Ad fidem faciendam etiam, ea usus est circumstantia, quod Reginae se in syrupo
venenum exhibiturum dixisset, cum satis (ut ajebat) notum esset, Reginam in
cura corporis nunquam syrupis usam fuisse, sed ab eis maxim abhorrere. Verum
cum plane liqueret, idque ex confessione propria, eum, cum Monile illud Reginae
monstrasset, nullam prorsus veneni mentionem fe^isse, sed tantum per aenigma,
Reginam interrogasse, an non fraudem fraud, tanquam laqueum laqueo intercipere
liceret, (quod tamen ipsum Regina ut prudens and cauta foemina rejecisset,
sibique minime placere respondisset) cumque insuper testatum esset, ^um serio
defuga facienda, seque ad cognatum quendam and gentilem suum, Salamonem
Iudaeum, qui Constantinopoli habitabat, and praedives erat, confer
deliberasset, idque in animo habuisset, Impostoris ei larva detracta est, and
Proditoris merito adhae^it.

The translation of these words the Reader may make after this manner. And to
get the better credit to his falsehood, he used this circumstance, that he
would give the Queen poison in some syrrope or other, as he says he told
them, when indeed all the world knew, the Queen never would take any syrupes,
but did always dislike and distaste them. But for all this, when as it plainly
appeared, and that, out of his own confession, that when he showed the Chain
to the Queen, he never mentioned any matter of poisoning her, but only asked
her in general terms, whether or no, To deceive the deceiuer were deceit,
(which also the Queen disliked, and held unlawful,) as also, when it was
evidently proved that he had in sober sadness intended to have departed and
fled the Kingdom, and have betaken himself to a Countriman and Kinsman of
his, one Solomon a rich Jew dwelling at Constantinople, then was this mask of
knavery quickly put off, and that fouler of treason and treachery stuck as
close unto him.

Page 106. Lin. 23. Essex gave him entertainment, and supplied him with great
cost, etc.] It should seem their acquaintance was so great, that there passed
between them above threescore Letters at the least, besides those of the Earl
of Essex to him, in his time of residing here in England; the Letters are all
printed, with this Frontispiece, Antonij Perezij Epistolae ad Comitem Essexium,
Magnatem Angliae, etc. Amongst which, there was one, that was sent to the
Earl, presently upon his return from Ireland, but was intercepted, before
ever it came to his hands. The form was thus.

ANTONIUS PEREZIVS MYLORDO ESSEXIO.
EX literis amicorum intellexi tuum ex Hibernia adventum. Nondum voco illum
Reditum, donec per te omnino pacato regno, deaito tuae Reginae, and in gratiam
ejus Majestatis restitutis omnibus, gloriosus iterum redeas. Interea
congratulor Reginae tuae, vestrae Angliae, mihi tuo, postremo Tibi, qui omnia
illa tibi anteponis semper: (no vite) arripio calamum, quod Regnum infirmum,
and fere desperatum tibi commissum eo perduxeris. Non tu Comici sequutus es
confilium, qui omnia prius experiri, quam armis sapientem decere, consulebat.
Quod ego non supremis Ducibus, sed supremis Principibus consuli intelligo. Nam
Imperatores, praefectosque excercituum, arma, potentiam sui Principis,
virtutemque propriam prius experiri, qua^ Collocutiones audire, decet:
Gloriosae enim illis deditiones, quae ab Armis proveniunt. Vnde ex consuetudine
Lacaedemoniorum, Gallum gallinaceum and Bovem, (Gallos and Boves dicerem
potius, cum plures pluribus suis actionibus debeantur) Iovi immolari oporteret,
quandoque arma tuae Reginae, and fortitudinem brachij tui expertus prius, tua
prudentia, and istius tuae personae ubicunque jam per sonantis, anthoritate,
and industria, negotium postea perfeceris, and ad deditionem rebels
deduxeris. Lege Plutarchum in Marcello, and ibi quid tibi velim, quid tibi
deberi intelligam, videbis. O invidia, virtutis aemula, Principum pernicies,
Regnorum exitium, qua erumpes modo? Cede, cede saltem prae Timore, (quis non
sibi cavit?) pro Honor, (quis hanc humanae vitae animam sprevit?) pro Communi
Bono (quis salutem suorum membrorum non desider at?) Novi te, novi tuam
naturam, novi quoties te metus repressit, novi quoties idem te praecipitaverit.
Cave ne judiceris tuo Conservatori, in majorem ejus gloriam, etiam tibi odioso
ingrata: tuo supremo Principi Infida: in graviorem ejus contra te
indignationem: tuo Regno inimica in ultimam in te vindictam. Quo in statu sint
meaeres in Hispania, vel potius, quo in cursu, quo potius in motu lento, ex
literis ad amicos meos intelliges; quem vero ad exitum tendere videantur,
judicet alter, si inveniri potest exitus in tali Labyrintho. Vale, and cave a
Labyrinthis. Nihil aliud Labyrinthi nobis significant, nisi Aulas, and Favores
Principum. Id nos docere voluerunt Majores Nostri. Ea de causa, credas referri
quatuor fuisse Labyrinthos in quatuor mundi partibus, ut ad omnes orbis parts
notitia, and Admonitio perveniret, quam timendi essent, atque noscent omnes,
tot ambagibus, tot foveis, tot praecipitijs undequaque esse plenos, ut qui eo
semel intrasset, de exitu dubitaret, and qui semel inde evasisset, timeret
iterum eodem reverti.


Page 112. Lin. 29. Knights of St. Michael.] This Order of S. Michael was first
instituted by Lewis the eleventh of France, in the year of Grace, 1469. and
was then named, The order of my Lord S. Michael. To every Knight of this Order
the King gives a Collar of Gold, made of Scallops enterlaced one within
another, and doubly banded, fastened on small chains or mailes of gold. At the
midst of the same Collar, upon a Rock must be an Image of my Lord S.
Michael, which must hang down upon the breast of him that wears it; which they
are bound to wear daily and openly about their neck, on pain of causing a
Mass to be said, and to give (for Gods sake) the sum of seven Sols, and six
Deniers Tournois, if they be delinquent.

If any man be desirous to see the form of the Kings Letters Patents, whereby
this Order was instituted, they shall find it thus.

LEwis by the grace of God, King of France: To all present, and to come,
greeting. We make known, that for the most perfect and sincere love which we
bear to the Noble Order and estate of Knighthood, whereof (in most ardent
affection) we desire the honor and increase, that according to our hearty
wish, the holy Catholic Faith, the blessed condition of our Holy Mother the
Church, and posterity of the Commonweal might be kept, and maintained, as
they ought to be, We, to the glory of God our almighty Creator, and reverence
due to the Glorious Virgin Mary, as also in the honor and reverence of Saint
Michael, the prime and chief Knight, who in Gods quarrel fought against the
ancient enemy of mankind, and made him fall from Heaven; who has likewise
always kept his place, preserved and defended his Oratory, named the Mount S.
Michael, without suffering it at any time to be taken, subdued or brought into
the hands of this kingdoms ancient enemies* and to the end that all good,
high, and noble courages should be incited, and moved the more to virtuous
Actions, -- Constitute, and Ordain, and by these Presents do constitute and
ordain, an Order of Brotherhoode, or loving Company of certain number of
Knights, which we will shall be named, The Order of my Lord Saint Michael the
Archangell; in, and under the Form, Conditions, Statutes, Orders, and
Articles, as hereafter are set down, etc.

The chiefest reason that can be found of the Institution of this Order, to the
honor of S. Michael, was certainly the ancient opinion that the French have,
who believe that S. Michael is the Tutelary Angel and Guardian of all France:
Wherefore he is called by them, Princeps imperij Francorum: which name he
received ever since he appeared to Aubert Bishop of Auranches, commanding him
to build a Church upon a Rock in his Diocese called the Tomb, or
Tombe-Helene. Besides, they celebrate two great deliverances, which they
attribute to Saint Michael, namely, when the English besieged Orleans, in the
year of Grace, 1428. where the Archangell S. Michael (they say) visibly
appeared upon the Bridge of the City, and fought against the English, and
overthrew them. And secondly, when Henry the Great reduced to obedience the
City of Paris, where there was (...) near unto his Majesty, Saint Michael the
Arch^ngell, in the shape of a young child, about six or seven years old,
clothed all in white, who (all the time the King rendered thanks to God upon
his knees, for this happy reduction) stood close by his right side, and when he
had done, immediately vanished. But concerning this order, it is to be observed,
that before any Knight elected come to the Sovereign of that Order, he must
deliver these or the like speeches unto him, at his presentation.

SIR, (or, if he be of the blood) My most gracious Lord, I have observed by
these Letters, that of royal Grace in you, and Love in the most honor able
Brethren and Companions, of the worthy and noble Order of S. Michael: I have
been, and am elected into that Order, and Company, whereby I hold my self to
be very highly honored. I have reverently received, and made acceptance
thereof, and do most heartily thank you, so much as in me possibly remains,
for so great Grace and Favor: tendering mine obedience and serviceable duty in
the said Order, so much as in me lies to do.

The form of the Oath given unto the Knight of the Order of St. Michael.
YOu shall swear, that to your Loyal power you shall assist, guard, maintain
and defend the Eminency, Rights, and Greatness of the Crown of France, of the
Majesty Royal, and Authority of the Sovereign, and of his successiue
Sovereigns. So long as you live, and shall be of the said Order, you shall
employ your self to your uttermost power to maintain the said Order, and
Honor thereof; taking what pains you can to augment it, without suffering it
to decay or diminis^, so long as your strength may remedy and support it.

And if it shall so come to pass, (which God defend) that in you there shall
be found some such fault, whereby (according to the Statutes of the Order) you
are to be deprived, summoned, and required to re-deliuer back the Collar; in
such case, you must send it to the Sovereign, or the Treasurer of the Order,
without evermore (after the said summoning) wearing the said Collar: and all
penalties, pains, and corrections, which (in meaner matters) may be censured
and appointed to you, you are to undergo and bear patiently, without rancour,
spleen, or hatred, (for, or in that respect) in you, either against the
Sovereign, Brethren, or any Officers of the said Order.

You must, over and besides this, duly appear at the Chapters and Assemblies
of the Order: or else must send thither (according to the Statutes and
Ordinances thereof) your sufficient Deputy or Attorney, as testifying thereby
your obedience to the Sovereign, and to his Deputies or Committies, in all
things reasonable, concerning the Duties and Affairs of the Order, and your
own loyal power, for the accomplishing of all the Statutes, Points, Articles,
and Ordinances, which you have seen and read in writing, and shall hereafter
be read unto you. To them you shall promise and swear, as well generally, as
particularly, and to each Point you are to take an especial Oath. All these
things, as you are a Knight of the Order, you must swear and promise on the
Sovereigns hand: by your Faith, Oath, and Honor, and on the Cross, and holy
Gospels of our Lord.

Page 139. Lin. 3.] The River of Elbe.] There is indeed such a River in
Germany, which has it is head near unto the Town Aust in Bohemia, and it
falls into the German Ocean below Hamburgh: it is called by some Albis; by
Strabo, Albium; and has no less then three or four great Rivers that do
empty themselves into it. But yet, this is not that River which should be here
understood; neither is that the true words in the Latin Edition, which should
signify it. For indeed, for Flumen Amasim I suppose should be read Flumen
Amasium, or Flumen Amisium, or Amisiam; for according to those three several
pronunciations Ptolomy, Pomponius, and Strabo read them; by which we understand
the River Eims, which arises in Westphalen out of a ridge of hills, and
emptieth it self in the German Ocean.

Page 140. Lin. 16. By Anna Parre.] By reason of the likeness of the Letters,
and the naughtiness of the written Translation, Anna Parre was mistaken for
Anne Dacres. This Anne Dacres was Daughter to Thomas Lord Dacres and Sister and
Co-heire of George Lord Dacres of Gillefland. She married to the said Philip
Howard Earl of Arundel, and bare him Thomas Howard his only Son, now Earl
of Arundel.

Page 140. Lin. 33. Whether a true and iustifyng faith may be lost.] This was
that question which at that time did, and even at this present does, disquiet
the unity and peace of our English Churches. A little before the death of this
worthy Whitaker, it fell so out, that by the Private, and Public maintaining
of this Opinion, by one Doctor Baro a Frenchman, it came to such an unhappy
perfection, that most, and those not the meanest, of that University, submitted
their belief unto it; Insomuch that Doctor Whitaker, at that time Regius
Professor in the University, employed the extremity of his endeauours, in his
Lectures, and Sermons, and Disputations, to crush the same, from getting
farther Credit: as is to be seen, in his learned Lecture concerning Universal
Grace, his Concio ad Clerum concerning Predestination, and the Certainty of
Divine Grace, and other of his Exercises. After Him, rose up these famous
Worthies of that University, Doctor Tindall, Some, Chatterton, Willet, and
Perkins, who by their Works and Labors, both in Latin* and English;
endeavored the like. But it seems the root was too deep ^etled, and a
stronger hand was to be employed to pluck it up. Hereupon, the Archbishop of
Canterbury (that famous Prelate Whitgift) is acquainted with the matter; and
his Pastoral care requested in the purging of these corruptions. The good
Archbishop, willing to impart the honor of this attempt to him that he best
thought worthy of it, sends presently to his Colleague Hutton, his Grace of
York; to whom he sends also the questions controuerted at Cambridge, and for
his opinion in the decision of them. The Archbishop of York, in the year of
1595. returned to his Grace of Canterbury, the sum of his opinion in brief,
collected in a written Treatise, which was called De Electione,
Praedestinatione, and Reprobatione commentatio: wherein he most divinely and
acutely expressed his mind, and the Truth.

The Epistle prefixed to the Treatise I thought worth the Transcribing, if the
Reader think it, the perusing.
ACcepi jam pridem literas tuas (Reverendissime Praesul) veteris illius
benevolentiae, and amoris erga me tui plenas, in quibus effiagitas opinionem
meam de Articulis quibusdam nuper Cantabrigiae agitatis, non sine aliqua piorum
offensione, qui graviter molesteque ferunt Matrem Academiam jam multitudine
liberorum, and quidem doctissimorum florentem, ea dissentione filiorum non
nihil contristatam esse: Sed fieri non potest quin veniant offendicula, neque
desinet Inimicus homo inter triticum zizania seminare, donec ^um Dominus sub
pedibus contriverit. Legi Articulos, and Relegi, and dum pararem aliquid de
singulis dicere, visum est mihi multo potius de ipsa Electione, and
Reprobatione (unde illa dissentio orta esse videtur) meam sententiam, and
opinionem paucis explicare, quam singulis sigillatim respondendo, fratrum
forsitan quorundam animos, (quos in veritate diligo) exacerbare. Meminisse
potes, (Ornatissime Antistes) cum Cantabrigiae una essemus, and sacras Literas
in Scholis publicis interpretaremur, eandem regulam sequuti, eam semper fuisse
inter nos consensionem in omnibus religionis causis, ut ne minima quidem vel
dissensionis, vel simultatis suspicio unquam apparreet. Igitur hoc tempore, si
Iudicio Dominationis tuae, id quod nunc pinzui Minerva s^ripsi, probatum iri
intellexero, multo mihi minus displicebo. Deus te diutissime seruet incolumem;
ut tum Reginae serenissimae, and toti Regno fidelissimus Consiliarius, tum
etiam Ecclesiae huic nostrae Anglicanae Pastor utilissimus, multos adhuc annos
esse possis.

Vale, e Musaeo meo apud Bishop-Thorpe. Calend. October. Anno Domini. 1595.
Dignitatis tuae Studiosissimus, Matthaeus Eboracensis.


Upon the receipt whereof, his Grace of Canterbury being desirous to compose
these controversies, appointed an Assembly at Lambeth; where were present his
Grace himself, Richard of London, Richard Elect of Bangor, besides Doctor
Whitaker, Doctor Tindall, and other learned Divines. The conclusion of it was,
that by them there were nine Articles drawn into several heads, and from the
place where they were established, named, The Articles of Lambeth; which set
all things right again, and reduced the University to an unanimity of belief:
for, upon their arrival at Cambridge, my French Doctor presently vanished; and
shortly after that, one Barret Fellow of Trinity College, having preached some
of that new Doctrine lately before, was compelled to recant publicly at Saint
Mary's, by the appointment of Dr. Duport Vice Chancellor of the University.
The Articles, by reason I know very many have been desirous to see them, I
thought good to Transcribe out, as they were printed beyond Sea.

Assertio seu Articlus I. DEus ab aeterno pr^destinavit quosdam ad vitam,
Quosdam reprobavit ad mortem. Articulus II. CAusa Movens aut Efficiens
Praedestinationis ad vitam, non est praevisio fide^, aut perseverantiae, aut
bonerum operum, aut ullius rei quae insit in personis pr^destinatis, sed sola
voluntas beneplaciti Dei. Articulus III. PR^destinatorum praefinitus and certus
est numerus, qui nec augeri nec minui possit.
(...) reasons: as first, because perchance in a sudden Translation I might
err in not rendering the words according to the ^enour of them as they run in
the printed Statutes* and secondly (which was my greatest motive) because I
find in the Book of the (...), which are here mentioned as if they were: as
also, because that some of them, which are here expressed, are there made to be
enacted in the next Parliament to this, to wit, in the (...), as particularly,
The Act to redress the mis-imployment of Lands, Goods, and Stocks of money,
heretofore given to charitable uses; and also, An Act against fraudulent
Administrations (...). (...) desirous to read the Statutes Verbatim
translated, he may have them thus:

The States of the Kingdom being assembled (...)

An Act against the Decaying of Towns, and Houses of Good Husbandry. (...)

(...)

^

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...) Duce Austriaco, and solutionem obsessis frustra pollicente. This
Ambianum, or (as others read it, Ambiana, or Civitas Ambianesis, as Antoninus,
or, as the vulgar, Amiens) is the chiefest City in Picardy, and a Bishops See.
It is compassed with the River Some, from which it had first a Name, as some
imagine, and indeed, nothing but imagine. This City, having been betrayed
into the hands of the Spaniards, by the Governor thereof, was most valiantly
(and as fortunately) besieged, and recovered again by Henry the fourth, even
in the sight of Albert the Archduke of Austria, who fed the hungry desires of
the besieged Citizens, only with a bare expectation of victuals and relief.

Page 203. Lin. 32. Surrendered into their hands Nannetu.] This word Nannetu
should have been printed Nantes; b^t it was the oversight of the Ouerseer. It
is one of the chiefest Cities in Britain, which the Duke of Merceur
pretending a Right to the whole Durchy, had now made himself Master of (...)
observes of it, that it is Metropolis Superioris Britanni^, and he calls it Vrbs
Nannetica, vulgo Nantes: Ptolomaeo (...) Nannetum, vt censet S^^liger. He
obser^ers moreover, that heretofore it was the chiefest Seat of the Dukes of
Britain, bearing the Title of a County, and formerly one of the Titles of the
first borne Son of the Duke of Britain, whereby he was distinguished.

Page 244. Lin. 18. Whether or no the Queen had inckling of this matter, I
know not.] Upon those words follow many other, which (upon what ground I know
not) are omitted in both the Latin Editions, and therefore also, in the body
of this Translation: but finding them in an Authentic Copy, and under M.
Cambdens own hand, I thought good to impart them to the Reader. The words are
these.

Etenim eodem tempore increbuerunt rumores, and per totum regnum peruulgati
sunt, quales spargi solent, (cum Principe volente volitant,) adesse classem
Hispanicam potentem, and optime instructam, ad oras occidentales regni
conspectam esse, neque quam partem peterent certum esse; Itaque delectus
acriter ubique habiti, provinciae maritimae armari and in procinctu esse
jussae; Nuncij ad aulam assidue missi, quin etiam exercitus Regius sub Duce,
Comite Nottinghamiae Admirallo Angliae conscriptus. Evulgata etiam fab^lla,
quae vel prudentiores capere and fallere possit, Regem Hispanum expeditionis in
Lusitaniam, non oblitum, cui idem Es^exius adfuerat, Cum certior factus esset,
tantum exercitum ad motus Hibernicos compesce^dos apparari, sub Duce tam
eminenti and florenti, in suspicionem venisse, haec, praetextu rerum
Hibernicar^, ad Hispaniae pa^tem aliquam invadendam designata esse: atque
id^irco in defensionem Regnorum suorum classem numerosam, atque etiam
terrestres copias parasse. Postqum au^em comperisset exereitum in Hibernia
reuera (...) ansmissum esse, atqu^ illis rebus implicitum, submonitum a
concilio suo, ut cum tantam classem and copias magnis impesis, and rerum motu
jam collegisset, and paratas baberet, ne e^s inutiliter dimitteret, sed in
Angliam impressionom ^aceret, eo magis, quod flos militiae Anglicauae cum
Essexio transportatus esset, and Regina nihil tale eo tempore expectaret. Haec
omnia eo fiebant, ut Essexius certior fact ^s regnum in armis esse, ab aliquo
conatu exercitum Hibe^nicum in Angliam transportandi injecto metu desisteret.
Attamen baec Reginae consilia, etiam vulgo in suspicionem venerant: and in
pejorem partem accipiebantur: cum dicerent anno Octogesimo Octavo, ab Hispania
appulisse classem illorum Invincibilem, and ho anno, alteram classem
Invisibilem; atque mussarent, si huju smodi Ludi Florales a Consilio Angliae,
ineunte Maio celebrati ^uissent, magis congruum existimari potuisse; verum ut
plebs a mess sua avoc^retur (erat enim adultus autumnus) nimis serias ineptias
esse: In English thus.

For about the same time there flew about very strange rumors over all the
Kingdom, (such indeed as use to fly when the Prince himself lets them loose)
that there was a Spanish Navy prepare^ (...) having now all things in a
readiness, and the very flower of Chiualry of the English, being now absent
from home, and gone over with the Earl of Essex; and the Queen her self
little or nothing suspecting any such matter. All this hurly burly was indeed
nothing else, but to give the Earl of Essex to understand, that the Kingdom
being now in a readiness, it would be but little profitable for him to bring
over his Forces hither again, to make his way to the Queen. But all these
plots could not escape the censure and mock of the common people: who stuck
not to say, that in Eighty eight indeed the Spaniard sent hither an Invincible
Navy, but now only, an Invisible one. Nay, they began to mumble, that the
Council might do well indeed to make such May-games for them at the time of
the year, when they were in season; but, that it was now but a serious folly
in them, to call them from their Harvest to look after such idle matters.

Page 252. Lin. 11. Passing by the French shore.] Upon these words follow these
in the Original Copy, Et etesis fauenti^us qui nostro coelo ab occasu Brumali
diebus (...): which I left (...) an error to be in the word (...), which
should have been (...), which Strabo calls (...), ab (...) Annus, a year,
because every year they have a set time of blowing, which is about the
beginning of the Dog days; as also, because it seems by Lucretius, that they
blow not out of the East, or West, but out of the North, for he calls them, --
Etesi^ Flabra Aquilonum --. Of these winds Pliny speaks in these words, --
Post biduum autem, ijdem Aquilones constantius perflant quadraginta diebus,
quos Etesias vocant: Molliri eis creditur solis vapor, geminatus ardore
syderis: Nec ulii ventorum magis stati sunt lib. 2. Not. Hist. cap. 47. Again,
Mollit sydera aestate media, mutatque nomen, and Etesias vocatur, lib. 18. cap.
34. And in his 37. Book, and 15. Chapter, speaking of several sorts of
precious stones, he has these words, -- Proximam laudem sicut and sedem,
habent Bactriani, quos in commissuris saxorum colligere dicuntur, Etesijs
flantibus: tunc enim tell^re internitent, quia eis ventis maxim moventur
arenae.

Page 256. Lin. 10. His Indulgence out of the Churches Treasury, as our
Adversaries speak.] For indeed it is only they that speak so, or conceive
any such matter; and but some of them neither; for, although their learned
Cardinal Bellarmine be of opinion, that there is in the custody of the Church
a spiritual Treasury, mixed of the Passion of Christ, and of his holy Saints,
which is the foundation of all Indulgences; yet he will give leave to others,
who in spite of him, will take it, to believe no such matter: For, Non
defuerunt ex antiquis (says he himself) Theologis Scholasticis, qui tametsi
Indulgentias admitterent, tamen de Thesauro dubitarunt. There have been some
it seems, who, though they have admitted of such godly deceits, as Indulgences
are, yet they much have doubted of this pretended Treasury, which should be the
foundation of them. But, who were they that durst offer this affront to this so
common opinion? why, no less men of their own Jury, then their Major on the
Sentences, did. 19. quaest. 2. And their Durand. in Distinct. 4. quaest. 2, 3.
as they are both arraigned for it by Bellarmine, in Lib. 1. de Indulgent. cap.
2. This was a chip of that block which was first hewn by Pope Boniface the
eight, of whom their own Agrippa observes, Bonifacius octavus primus in
Purgatorium extendit Indulgentias: That he was the first, that ever extended
the benefit of Indulgences, as far as the Purgatory flames. And indeed, this
rare Bird did first spring out of that fire: For, as their Bishop Fisher
observes, Caeperunt Indulgentiae, postquam ad Purgatorij cruciatus aliquandiu
trepidatum est, in his 18. Article against Luther. There was no great use of
Indulgences, before they had blown up Purgatory flames to such an height, that
silly proselytes began to swet to think on it, and buy up Indulgences to keep
them cool from it. Then, as Polydor Virgil lib. 8. de Inventor. Rerum cap. 1.
complains, Huiusmodi venia (speaking of Indulgences) plena manu non
concedebatur mod^ aliquoties, verum etiam, test Platina, velut quaepiam merces
quotidi^ vendebatur, non absque recipientis detrimento; quando per haec, ut
remedia animae morborum venialia, minus permulti a malefactis abstinebant, and
clavium Authoritas multo vilior erat: nec id quidem temere accidebat, quia (ut
ait Hieronimus) ubi merces media est, dona spiritualia viliora siunt.
Quaeutinam nam non nisi illa vidisset aetas. Pope Boniface received Revenues
from this pretty cheat; for in his time, these kind of Indulgences, were not
only now and then, upon especial occasions, but even sold up and down, as good
and current Merchandise. Hence came the Power of the Keys presently out of
reputation: to the so great scandal of the Church, that, I wish, none but that
Age only, had ever known it. Polydore, indeed, was too bitter against his
friends; and therefore they have pared his tongue off, and hung it up in their
Index Expurgatorius; but if the Reader would feign hear him speak, let him
enquire for him at Basil, A. D. 1570. and there he shall understand more of the
business.

Page 258. Lin. 25. The Rebels of Lagen^.] The Translation should have run, The
Rebels of Leinster; for so the word has been often translated before, as page
235. lin. 18. page 200. lin. 34. and in other places. But the Composer not
being well able to read the Translation, and taking counsel of the Latin
Copy that lay by him, translated it Lagene, from the Latin word Lageria. This
Lagenia, or as others call it Laginia, or as Polyd. Virgil. hist. Ang. pa. 221.
Liginia, is one of the five great Provinces of Ireland: by the Inhabitants
thereof for the most part it is called Leighnigh, and by others Lein, more
contracted* by others Lemster, but by us, Leinster. The same error is likewise
committed in the 268. page, and the 13. line, which, by this the Reader may
correct.

Page 263. Lin. 21. At Constance.] This is that Council which was called by
Balthazar Cossa, afterward named Pope John 24. who found it most true, which
some of his friends only before suspected, as their Platina notes, Quod
vererentur n^ cum Pontifex accederet, privatus reverteretur; quod etiam
contigit. Who indeed councelled him not to go thither; lest he that went a Pope
thither, should perchance come a Private man home again; which indeed ^ell out
accordingl^: for there were many things, and quidem gravissima (for so Platina
calls them) laid to his charge; which he not being able to answer, was feign
to change his habit, and steal away from Constance, for fear of worser
troubles. But it seems he did not escape so safely, but that he was quickly
caught again, and being brought back to Constance, was laid up in prison; not
long after he was cast out of his Popedom; to which Act, he with his own hand
consented. Having been four years a prisoner, he was at last dismissed, but
upon the payment of very chargeable Fees; and afterward of a Pope he became an
humble Cardinal to Otho Columna, otherwise called Pope Martin the fifth, and
ever afterward was called Johannes Papa Quondam; which was even part of the
superscription that was written on his Tombe-stone at Florence.

In this Council there was a peculiar decree made for the placing of the
Ambassadors of Casteele, but with a memorandum, that it should not prejudice
any other, which was in this manner.

Sacro sancta Synodus Constantiensis, considerans, quod ad suam, and suorum ad
hoc deputatorum instantiam, Oratores Charissimorum Ecclesiae Filiorum lacobi
and Ioannae Regis and Reginae Jerusalem, and Siciliae Illustrium, requisiti
fuerunt, ut quoniam expectantur, Oratores Charissimi Ecclesiae Filij Regis
Castellae and Legionis Illustris, ad hanc Synodum ventu^i, ad perficiendam cum
ipsa Synodo Ecclesiae unionem, placeret eisdem oratoribus dictorum Regis and
Reginae dimittere locum, quem in loco sessionis iam tenent, tanquam qui eisdem
Oratoribus dicti Regis Castellae venientibus debitum, ut dura^ti praesenti
consilio, vadant ad partem sinistram immediate post Ambassiatores Charissimi
Filij Regis Angliae Illustris. etc. Conc. Constant. Sess. 22. sub hoc titulo:
Decretum Locationis Ambasia torum Regis Aragonum, ex Binio page 916. post: edit.

P. 263. L. 27. Not Kings before the year of Grace, 1017.] The first original
of the Monarchy of Casteele, was in this manner. Ordonius making war against
the Sarazens, expected aid from four of the Earls of Casteele; who (it
seems) neglected his desires, and contributed not to the war. Hereupon
Ordonius having overcome the Sarazens, sends for these four Earls, giving
them his word and promise for their safety and security; but having had them
once within his fingers, he put them all to death. The Castellians, that had
heretofore been subject to the King of Lions, put themselves hereupon in a
rebellion, to revenge this persidious dealing of the King; and choosing and
making to themselves Judges and Magistrates of the Commonwealth, they became
in short time their own Governors, from whence afterward their Kings
descended. The story is plain in Volateranus his Commentaries, to this effect.
Post haec Ordonius quatuor Castellae Comites, qui id bellum detrectaverant
jussos adse venire, and in columes fore pollicitus, necari mandavit. Ob quam
perfidiam Castellani, qui tunc suberant Regi Legionensi, rebellaverant,
factisque inter se Magistratibus ac Iudicibus, remipsi administrabant; e^
quibus postea Reges descenderunt. But how long was this first, before they had
Kings of their own? why it is expressly added. -- Circiter annum millesimum
decimum septimum; nam ad hunc usque diem Castella per Comites regebatur: cum
titulus tantum Hispaniae Regni, etc. For before the year of Grace 1017. there
were no Kings of Casteele, but only Earls that governed it. Which being
considered* I cannot but wonder at the endeauours of their Iacobus Valdesius,
who has written a Book on purpose of a good size, only to prefer his
Country Spain before the ancient and eminent Kingdoms of France, and England.

Page 272. Lin. 13. Because none ever contradicted it.] For indeed, this is all
the answer they will give us, as may plainly appear. Obijciunt, says their
Valdesius, primo quod orator (Sc. in Concilio Tridentino) non ut orator Regis
Hispaniarum adstitit, sed ut Orator Imperatoris, cum idem Carolus Quinous and
Imperator esset, and Rex Hispaniarum: and ut Imperator is Legatus, oertum ost
quod praecedere debet: at postquam obijt in victissimus Carolus quintus, and
pro rege Catholico maximo Philippo secundo, Marcchio Pescariae, and loco ejus,
Claudius Fernandez Quignones Comes Lunensis fuit, tunc Regis Galliae Legatus,
non concessit locum superiorem, immo nobiliorem sibi postulavit; and orta fuit
inde contentio inter utri^sque Legatos, Philippi secundi Hispaniarum, and
Francisci Regis Galliarum, ita ut suspenderent celebrationem concilij; quod
neimpediretur, and adeo reipublicae utilissimum remedium cessaret, Legatus
Regis Catholici Hispaniarum apud Concilij secretarium sedit, decreto Concilij
ordinate, ne praejudicium aliquod sequeretur, ex loco regibus concesso, etc.
Sed satisfaciendo objection irespondetur, quod Legatus Imperatoris, fuit and
Imperatoris, and Regis Hispaniarum Legatus, and absque aliqua Protestatione
Francisci Regis Galliarum Protestantis, quod ne ei in loco praecedere
videretur, ut Legatus Regis Hispaniarum, sed solum ut Legatus Imperatoris, etc.
It may be (says he) they will object, that in the Council of Trent the
Ambassador of the Emperor was also the Ambassador of the King of Spain,
because the same man Charles the fifth, was both Emperor and King of Spain. So
that, to the Emperors Ambassador they had no reason to take exception,
because he ought always to have the precedence; but when as once the Emperor
Charles dyed, and that Claudius Fernandez was substituted in the state of the
Marquess of Pesara for the K. of Spain, Philip the second, then the
Ambassadors of the French King, would not only not grant them place, but
challenge it of them: Whereupon, the controversy grew so hot, that it
disturbed the quiet proceeding of the Council. To prevent which mischief, the
Ambassador of the Spaniard abased himself as low as the Secretary of the
Councels seat; but not without the decree of the Council, that no prejudice
from thence should arise unto his Master. To satisfy this objection, we
answer, says Valdesius, that as the Ambassador took place being the
Ambassador of the Emperor, so he should do also being the Ambassador of the
King of Spain, because the Ambassador of the French in the time when the
Ambassadors of Spain took place by reason of the Emperor, made no
protestation against it, nor desired that it might not be prejudicial to them
hereafter. A worthy answer without question, and as good as another of his to
as strong an argument; who being convinced with the Precedence given from the
Spaniard to the French in the Council of Constance that took the upper hand,
answers very confidently, Quod sedere ad dextram vel sinistram non arguit
semper eminentia^ loci, ut ex Varonio oftendimus. That to sit on the right
hand, argues no precedence or superiority of place. I wonder what then does
with him? Certainly, if it does not, he ought not so much to commend the
magnanimity of his Johannes Sylva, nor ought John himself to think he had got
much, besides the estimation of being impudently unmannerly, who finding his
Arm stronger then his Cause, pulled the Ambassador of the King of England out
of his seat, which he had taken on the right hand of him, and there far
himself as Ambassador of Casteele. Nam cum Henrici Regis Angliae Legatus,
says he, dexteram occupasset, sua valida dextra eum a loco divulsum dejecit,
ibidemque ut Legatus Castellae, sedit, ut rem gestam etiam memoriae prodidit,
Ferdinandus Pulgar. cap. 8, Illustrium virorum. Valdesius de dignit. Hispaniae,
in prooemio, page 14.

Page 371. Lin. 23. By appealing to the Court of war.] Although in rendering
the Latin words, after this manner, I followed the advice of so discreet a
judgment, that I might almost better errare with it, then with another, been
sentire: yet, having, upon stricter examination found that the words bear
another Translation, I shall willingly acquaint the Reader also with it. It
seems the words ad Cameram Castrensem should not have been translated to the
Court of War, as they are in the body of this History, but they should be
rendered thus, to the Chamber at Castres; as appears by part of a Letter sent
by the Duke of Bouillon to the King in this business, which I found thus
translated.

-- I Most humbly beseech your Majesty to send my Accusers, and my Accusations;
thinking the imputation which is laid upon me heavy, and the time tedious,
until your Majesty may be fully satisfied of mine innocence. For the speedy
effecting whereof I will attend at Castres, the justification of my Fault, or
Innocence; judging that the time which I should have spent in going to your
Majesty, would have but prolonged the affliction of my soul remaining accused,
seeing that your Majesty was to send me back to the Chambers, to condemn or
absolve me, being the Judges which your Edict has given me. That it would
therefore please you to relieve my mind speedily, in giving me the means to
make my innocence known, and that by this proof you may rest assured of my
faithful service, and I of your favor, the which shall be above all things
desired of

your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful Subject and Servant Henry
de la Toure.


Page 379. Lin* 8. I acknowledge, and ask pardon.] This is not Tir-Oens
submission verbatim collected, neither was it done as it is here specified,
before the death of the Queen. For the Queen dying on the 24. of March, the
Lord Deputy Montioy understood thereof, not till the seven and twentieth. So
upon the 28. day, the Lord Deputy being at Mellifant, wrote to Sir William
Godolphin to cause Tir-Oen to dispatch his coming to submit himself; which he
presently did, having met Tir-Oen on the 29. of March at Toker, some five miles
beyond Dunganon. On the 30. of March, Tir-Oen, and all of them came to
Mellifant in the afternoon, where Tir-Oen (admitted into the Lord Deputies
Chamber) submitted himself unto him; but the next day signed this submission
following with his own hand, and delivered it up to the Lord Deputy. The form
was thus.

I Hugh O-Neale, by the Queen of England, France and Ireland her most gracious
favor, created Earl of Tir-Oen, do with all true and humble penitency
prostrate my self at her Royal ^eet, and absolutely submit my self unto her
mercy, most sorrowfully imploring her gracious commiseration, and appealing
only to her Princely clemency, without presuming to justify my vnloyall
proceedings against her sacred Maies^y; only most sorrowfully and earnestly
desiring, that it may please her Majesty rather in some measure to ^itigate her
just indignation against me, in that I do religiously vow that the first
motives of my unnatural rebellion were neither practice, malice, or ambition,
but that I was induced first by fear of my life (which I conceived was sought
by my enemies practice) to stand upon my guard; and afterward, most unhappily
led, to make good that fault with more heinous offenses, which in themselves I
do acknowledge deserve no forgiveness, and that it is impossible for me in
respect of their greatness, in any proportion, even with my life to make
satisfaction. I do most humbly desire her Majesty to pardon them* that as I
have already been a sufficient argument of her Royal power, having little
left but my life to preserve it self, so that it may now please her Majesty to
make me an example of her Princely clemency, the chiefest ornament of her high
dignity. And that I may be the better able hereafter, with the uttermost
service of my life, to redeem the foulness of my faults* I do most humbly sue
unto her Majesty, that she will vouchsafe to restore me to my former dignity
and living, in which estate of a Subject I do most religiously vow to continue
for ever here after loyal, in all true obedience to her Royal Person, Crown,
Prerogative, and Laws, and to be in all things as far and as dutifully
conformable thereunto, as I or any other Noble man of this Realm is bound, by
the duty of a Subject to his Sovereign, or by the Laws of this Realm;
utterly renouncing and abiuring the Name and Title of O-Neale, or any other
authority, or claim, which has not been granted or confirmed unto me by her
Majesty, and that otherwise by the Laws of this Realm I may not pretend just
interest unto. And I do religiously swear to perform so much, as is above
mentioned, and the rest of these Articles subscribed by my own hand, as far
as shall any way be in my power, and to deliver such pledges for the
performance thereof, as shall be nominated unto me by the Lord Deputy.

I do renounce and abjure all foreign power whatsoever, and all kind of
dependancy upon any other Potentate but her Majesty the Queen of England,
France and Ireland, and do vow to serve her faithfully against any foreign
power inuading her kingdoms, and to discover truly any practices that I do,
or shall know against her Royal person, or Crowns: and namely, and especially
I do abjure and renounce all manner of dependancy upon the King or State of
Spain, or Treaty with him or any of his forces or confederates, and shall be
ready with the uttermost of my ability to serve her Majesty against him, or any
of his forces or confederates.

I do absolutely renounce all challenge or intermedling with the Vriaghts, or
fostering with them, or other neighbor Lords or Gentlemen out of my Country,
or exacting any Black Rents of any Vriaghts, or bordering Lords.

I do resign all claim and title to any Lands, but such as shall now be
granted unto me by her Majesty's Letters Patents.

Lastly, as the only being a Subject does include all the duties of a Subject,
so will I be content to be informed here, and advised by her Magistrates, and
will be conformable and assisting unto them, in any thing that may tend to the
advancement of her service, and the peaceable government of this Kingdom; as
namely, for the abolishing of all barbarous customs, contrary to the Laws,
being the seeds of all inciuility, and for the clearing of all difficult
passages and places which are the Nurseries of Rebellion, wherein I will employ
the labors of the people of my Country, in such sort, and in such places, as I
shall be directed by her Majesty, or the Lord Deputy, or Council in her Name;
and will endeavor for my self, and the people of my Country, to erect civil
habitations, and such as shall be of great effect to preserve us against
thieves, and any force, but the power of the State, by the which we must rest
assured to be preserved, as long as we continue in our duties.

And thus ended this long and tedious war: the very charges whereof, within
these four last years and a half, amounted to no less then 1198717 pounds,
9 shil. and a penny, besides great Concordatums, Munition, and other
extraordinaries which happened.

FINIS.

