THE DESCRIPTION OF A MASK, Presented before the Kings Majesty at
White Hall, on Twelfth Night last, in honor of the Lord HAYES, and his Bride,
Daughter and Heir to the Honorable the Lord DENNYE, their Marriage having
been the same Day at Court solemnized. To this by occasion other small Poemes
are adjoined.

Invented and set forth by THOMAS CAMPION Doctor of Physic.

LONDON Imprinted by JOHN WIN^ET for JOHN BROWN and are to be sold at his
shop in S. Dunstones Churchyeard in Fleetstreet. 1607.



To the most puisant and Gracious JAMES King of great Britain.
THe disunited Scithians when they sought
To gather strength by parties, and combine
That perfect league of friends which once being wrought
No turn of time, or fortune could untwine,
This rite they held: a massy bowl was brought,
And every right arm shot his several blood
Into the mazar till 'twas fully fraught,
Then having stird it to an equal flood
They quaft to th'vnion, which till death should last,
In spite of private foe, or foreign fear,
And this blood sacrament being known to have past
Their names grew dreadful to all far, and near.
O then great Monarch with how wise a care
Do you these bloods divided mix in one,
And with like consanguinities prepare
The high, and everliving Union
Tweene Scots, and English: who can wonder then
If he that marries kingdoms, marries men?
An Epigram.
MErlin, the great King Arthur being slain,
Foretold that he should come to life again,
And long time after weild great Britains state
More powerful ten-fould, and more fortunate.
Prophet it is true, and well we find the same,
Save only that thou did mistake the name.
Ad Inuictissimum, Serenissimumque IACOBVM Magnae Britanniae Regem.
ANgliae, and vnanimis Scotiae pater, anne maritus
Sis duhito, an neuter, (Rex) vel vterque simul.
Vxores pariter binas sibi iungat vt vnus,
Credimus hoc ipso te probibente nephas.
Atque, maritali natas violare par entem
Complexu, quis non cogitat esse scelus?
At tibi diuinis successibus vtraque nubit,
Vna tamen coninx, coniugis vnus amor.
Connubium O mirum? binas qui ducer, and vname
Possis? tu solus sic Iacobe potes:
Diuisa, leuiterterras componis in vnam,
Atque vnam aeternum nomine, reque facis:
Natisque, and nuptis, pater and vir factus, vtrisque es
Vnitis ceniux vere, and amore parens.
To the Right Noble and Virtuous Theophilus Howard, Lord of Walden, son and
Heir to the right Honorable the Earl of Suffolk.
IF to be sprung of high and princely blood,
If to inherit virtue, honor, grace,
If to be great in all things, and yet good,
If to be facill, yet to have power and place,
If to be just, and bountiful may get
The love of men, your right may challenge it.
The course of foreign manners far and wide,
The courts, the countries, Cities, towns and state,
The blossom of your springing youth has tried,
Honored in every place and fortunate,
Which now grown fairer does adorn our Court
With princely reuelling, and timely sport.
But if th'admired virtues of your youth
Breed such despairing to my daunted muse,
That it can scarsely utter naked truth,
How shall it mount as ravished spirits use
Under the burden of your riper days,
Or hope to reach the so far distant bays?
My slender Muse shall yet my love express,
And by the fair Thames side of you she will sing,
The double streams shall bear her willing verse
Far hence with murmur of their ebb and spring.
Bnt if you favor her light tunes, ere long
She Will strive to raise you with a loftier song.
To the Right Virtuous, and Honorable, the Lord and Lady HAYES
SHould I presume to separate you now,
That were so lately ioyn'de by holy vow?
For whom this golden dream which I report,
Begot so many waking eyes at Court,
And for whose grace so many nobles changed,
Their names and habites from themselves estranged?
Accept together, and together view
This little work which all belongs to you,
And live together many blessed days,
To propagate the honored name of HAYES.
Epigramma.
Haeredem (vt spes est) pariet noua nupta Scot' Anglu^,
Quem gignet post hac ille, Britannus erit.
Sicnoua posteritas ex regnis orta duobus,
Vtrinque egregios nobilitabit auos.
THE Description of a Mask presented before the Kings Majesty at White Hall,
on twelft night last, in honor of the Lord HAYES, and his Bride, daughter, and
heir to the Honorable the Lord DENNYE, their marriage having been the same day
at Court solemnized.
AS in battles, so in all other actions that are to be reported, the first,
and most necessary part is the description of the place, with his oportunities,
and properties, whether they be natural, or artificial. The great hall
(wherein the Mask was presented) received this division, and order: The upper
part where the cloth and chair of State were placed, had scaffoldes and seats
on either side continued to the skreene; right before it was made a partition
for the dancing place; on the right hand whereof were consorted ten Musitions,
with Basse and Mean Lutes, a Bandora, a double Sack-bott, and an Harpsicord,
with two treble Violins; on the other side somewhat nearer the skreene were
placed 9. Violins and three Lutes, and to answer both the Consorts (as it were
in a triangle) six Cornets, and six Chapel voices, were seated almost right
against them, in a place raised higher in respect of the pearcing sound of
those Instruments-eighteen foot from the skreen, an other Stage was raised
higher by a yearde then that which was prepared for dancing: This higher Stage
was all enclosed with a double vale, so artificially painted, that it seemed as
if dark clouds had hung before it: within that shrowde was concealed a green
valley, with green trees round about it, and in the midst of them nine golden
trees of fifteen foot high, with arms and branches very glorious to behold:
From the which grove toward the State was made a broad descent to the dancing
place, just in the midst of it; on either hand were two ascents, like the sides
of two hills, dressed with shrubbes and trees; that on the right hand leading to
the bower of Flora: the other to the house of Night; which bower and house were
placed opposite at either end of the skreene, and between them both was raised
a hill, hanging like a cliffe over the grove below, and on the top of it a
goodly large tree was set, supposed to be the tree of Diana; behind the which
toward the window was a small descent, with an other spreading hill that climed
up to the top of the window, with many trees on the height of it, whereby
those that played on the Hoboyes at the Kings entrance into the hall were
shadowed: The bower of Flora was very spacious, garnisht with all kind of
flowers, and flowrie branches with lights in them; the house of Night ample,
and stately, with black pillors, whereon many stars of gold were fixed:
within it when it was empty, appeared nothing but clouds and stars, and on
the top of it stood three Turrets underpropped with small black starred pillars,
the middlemost being highest and greatest, the other two of equal proportion:
about it were placed on wire artificial Battes, and Owls, continually moving:
with many other inventions, the which for brevity sake I pass by with silence.

Thus much for the place, and now from thence let us come to the persons.

The Maskers names were these, (whom both for order and honor I mention in the
first place.

1 Lord Walden. 2 Sir Thomas Howard 3 Sir Henry Carey, Master of the Jewel
house. 4 Sir Richard Preston, Gent. of the K. privy Chamber. 5 Sir John
Ashley, Gent. of the K. privy Chamber. 6 Sir Thomas Iarret Pentioner. 7 Sir
John Digby, one of the Kings Caruers. 8 Sir Thomas Badger, Master of the Kings
Hariers. 9 Master Goringe.
Their number Nine, the best and amplest of numbers, for as in Music seven
notes contain all variety, the eight being in nature the same with the first,
so in nu^bring after the ninth we begin again, the tenth being as it were the
Diappason in Arithmetic. The number of 9. is famed by the Muses, and Worthies,
and it is of all the most apt for change, and diversity of proportion. The
chief habit which the Maskers did use, is set forth to your view in the first
leaf: They presented in their feigned persons the Knights of Apollo, who is the
father of heat, and youth, and consequently of amorous affections.

The Speakers were in number four.
FLORA the Queen of Flowers, attired in a changeable Taffatie Gown, with a
large vale embrodered with flowers, a Crown of flowers, and white buskins
painted with flowers. ZEPHYRVS in a white loose robe of sky colored Taffatie,
with a mantle of white silk prop't with wyre, still wauing behind him as he
moved; on his head he wore a wreath of Palm decked with Primmeroses and
Violets, the hair of his head and beard were flaxen, and his buskins white,
and painted with flowers. NIGHT in a close robe of black silk and gold, a
black mantle embrodered with stars, a crown of stars on her head, her
hair black and spangled with gold, her face black, her buskins black, and
painted with stars, in her hand she bore a black wand, wreathed with gold.
HESPERVS in a close robe of a deep crimson Taffatie mingled with sky color,
and over that a large loose robe of a lighter crimson taffatie, on his head he
wore a wreathed band of gold, with a star in the front thereof, his hair and
beard red, and buskins yellow.
These are the principal persons that bear sway in this invention, others
that are but secunders to these, I will describe in their proper places,
discoursing the Mask in order as it was performed.

As soon as the King was entered the great Hall, the Hoboyes (out of the wood
on the top of the hill) entertained the time till his Majesty and his train
were placed, and then after a little expectation the consort of ten began to
play an Air, at the sound whereof the vale on the right hand was withdrawn,
and the ascent of the hill with the bower of Flora were discovered, where Flora
and Zepherus were busily plucking flowers from the Bower, and throwing them
into two baskets, which two Siluans held, who were attired in changeable
Taffatie, with wreathes of flowers on their heads. As soon as the baskets were
filled, they came down in this order, First Zepherus and Flora, then the two
Siluans with baskets after them: Four Siluans in green taffatie, and
wreathes, two bearing mean Lutes, the third a base Lute, and the fourth a
deep Bandora.

As soon as they came to the descent toward the dancing place, the consort of
ten ceac't, and the four Siluans played the same Air, to which Zepherus and
the two other Siluans did sing these words in a base, Tenor, and treble voice,
and going up and down as they song, they strowed flowers all about the place.

Song.
Now has Flora robbed her bowers
To befrend this place with flowers;
Strowe about, strowe about,
The Sky rayn'd never kindlyer Showers.
Flowers with Bridalls well agree,
Fresh as Brides, and Bridgromes be,
Strowe about, strowe about,
And mix them with fit melody.
Earth has no Princelier flowers
Then Roses white, and Roses red,
But they must still be mingled.
And as a Rose new plucked from Venus thorn
So does a Bride her Bride grooms bed adorn.
Diverse diverse Flowers affect
For some private dear respect,
Strowe about, strew about,
Let every one his own protect.
But he is none of Floras friend
That will not the Rose commend.
Strew about, strew about,
Let Princes Princely flowers defend.
Roses the Gardens pride,
Are flowers for love, and flowers for Kings,
In courts desired, and Weddings.
And as a Rose in Venus bosom worn,
So does a Bridegroom his Brides bed adorn.
The Music cease, and Flora speaks.

Flora FLowers and good wishes Flora does present,
Sweet flowers, the ceremonious ornament
Of maiden marriage, Beauty figuring,
And blooming youth, which though we careless fling
About this sacred place, let none profane
Think that these fruits from common hills are taken,
Or Vulgar valleys which do subject lie
To winters wrath, and cold mortality.
But these are hallowed and immortal flowers
With Floras hands gathered from Floras bowres.
Such are her presents, endless, as her love,
And such for ever may this nights joy prove.

Zeph. FOr ever endless may this nights joy prove, Zephyrus. The western wind,
of all the most mild, and pleasant, who with Venus the Queen of love is said
to bring in the spring, when natural heat and appetite reuiueth and the glad
earth begins to be beautified with flowers,

So eccocs Zephyrus the friend of love.
Whose aid Venus implores when she does bring
Into the naked world the green leau'd spring.
When of the Suns warm beams the Nets we weaue
That can the stubborn'st heart with love deceive.
That Queen of beauty, and desire by me
Breaths gently forth this Bridal prophecy.
Faithful and fruitful shall these Bedmates prove,
Blessed in their fortunes, honored in their love.

Flor. ALL grace this night, and Siluans so must you,
Offering your marriage song with cha^ges new

The song in form of a Dialogue.

Can. WHO is the happier of the two,
A maid, or wife?

Ten. Which is more to be desired
Peace or strife?

Can. What strife can be where two are one,
Or what delight to pine alone?

Bas. None such true friends, none so sweet life,
As that between the man and wife.

Ten. A maid is free, a wife is tied.

Can. No maid but feign would be a Bride.

Ten. Why live so many single then.
It Is not I hope for want of men?

Can. The bow and arrow both may fit,
And yet it is hard the mark to hit.

Bas. He leuels fair that by his side
Lays at night his lovely Bride.

Cho. Sing Io: Hymen, Io: Io: Hymen.

THis song being ended the whole vale is suddenly drawn, the grove and trees
of gold, and the hill with Dianas tree are at once discovered.

Night appears in her house with her 9. hours, apparrelled in large robes of
black taffatie, painted thick with stars, their hairs long, black, and
spangled with gold, on their heads coronets of stars and their faces black,
every hour bore in his hand a black torch, painted with stars, and lighted.
Night presently descending from her house spoke as follows.

Night VAnish dark vales, let night in glory shine
As she does burn in rage, come leave our shrine
You black hair'd hours, and guide us with your lights, Diana. The Moon and
Queen of Virginity, is said to be regent and Empress of Night, and is
therefore by Night defended as in her quarrel for the loss of the Bride, her
virgin.

Flora has wakened wide our drowsy sprights
See where she triumphs, see her flowers are thrown,
And all about the seeds of malice sown?
Despightfull Flora is it not enough of grief
That Cynthia's robbed, but thou must grace the thief?
Or did not here Nights sovereign Queen complain
Hymen had stolen a Nymph out of her train.
And matched her here plighted henceforth to be
Loves friend, and stranger to Virginity
And make thou sport for this?

Flora. Be mild stern night
Flora does honor Cinthia, and her right,
Virginity is a voluntary power,
Free from constraint, even like an untouched flower
Meet to be gathered when it is thoroughly blown.
The Nymph was Cinthias while she was her own,
But now another claims in her a right
By fate reserved thereto, and wise foresight.

Zeph. CAn Cynthia one kind virgins loss bemone?
How if perhaps she brings her ten for one?
Or can she miss one in so full a train?
Your Goddess does of too much store complain.
If all her Nymphs would ask advise of me
There should be fewer virgins then there be.
Nature ordaind not Men to live alone,
Where there are two, a Woman should be one.

Night. THou breathe sweet poison wa^ton Zephyrus
But Cynthia must not be deluded thus.
Her holy Forests are by thieves profaned,
Her Virgins frighted, and lo, where they stand
That late were Phoebus Knights, turned now to trees
By Cynthias vengement for their injuries
In seeking to seduce her Nymphs with love:
Here they are sixth and never may remove
But by Dianaes power that stuck them here.
Apollos love to them does yet appear,
In that his beams has guilt them a they grow,
To make their misery yield the greater show.
But they shall tremble when sad Night does speak,
And at her stormy words their boughs shall break.

Toward the end of this speech Hesperus begins to de^cend by the house of
Night, and by that time the speech was finished he was ready to speak.

Hesp. Hesperus. The Fu^ning star foreshews that the wished marriage night
(...) hand, and for that cause is supposed to be the friend of Bridegroomes,
and Brides.
HAyle reverend angry Night, hail Queen of Flowers,
Mild sprited Zephyrus hail, Siluans and Hours.
Hesperus brings peace, cease then your needless iarres
Here in this little firmament of stars.
Cynthia is now by Phoebus pacified,
And well content her Nymph is made a Bride*
Since the fair match was by that Phoebus graced
Which in this happy Western I Will is placed
As he in heaven, one lamp enlightening all
That under his benign aspect does fall*
Deep Oracles he speaks, and he alone
For arts and wisdoms meet for Phoebus throne.
The Nymph is honored, and Diana pleased:
Night be you then, and your black hours appeased*
And friendly listen what your Queen by me
Farther commands, let this my credence be,
View it, and know it for the highest gemme,
That hung on her imperial Diadem.

Night. I know, and honor it lovely Hesperus,
Speak then your message, both are welcome to

Hesp YOur Sovereign from the virtuous gem she sends us.
Bids you take power to retransforme the friends
Of Phoebus, metamorhpos'd here to trees,
And give them straight the shapes which they did leese.

This is her pleasure.

Night. HEsperus I obey,
Night must needs yield when Phoebus gets the day.

Flo. Honored be Cynthia for this generous deed.

Zep. Pity grows only from celestial seed.

Night. IF all seem glad, why should we only lowre?
Since to express gladness we have now most power.
Frolike graced Captives, we present you here
This glass, wherein your liberties appear,
Cynthia is pacified, and now blithe Night
Begins to shake off melancholy quite.

Ze. WHo should grace mirth, and revels but the night,
Next love she should be goddess of delight.

N. It Is now a time when (Zephyrus) all with dancing
Honor me, above day my state advancing.
I Will now be frolic, all is full of heart,
And even these trees for joy shall bear a part.
Zephyrus they shall dance.

Zeph. Dance Goddess? how?

Night. Seems that so full of strangenes to you now?
Did not the Thracian harp long since the same?
And (if we ripp the old records of fame)
Did not Amphions lyre the deaf stones call,
When they came dancing to the Theban wall?
Can music then joy? joy mountains moves
And why not trees? joys powerful when it loves.
Could the religious Oak speak Oracle
Like to the Gods? and the tree wounded tell
TO Aeneas his sad story? have trees therefore
The instruments of speech, and hearing more
Then th'aue of pacing, and to whom but Night
Belong enchantments? who can more affright
The eye with magic wonders? Night alone
Is fit for miracles, and this shall be one
Apt for this Nuptial dancing iollitie.
Earth then be soft and passable to free
These fettered roots? joy trees the time draws near
When in your better forms you shall appear.
Dancing, and music mnst prepare the way,
There Is little tedious time in such delay.
This spoken, the four Siluans played on their instruments the first strain
of this song following: and at the repetition thereof the voices sell in with
the instruments which were thus divided, a treble and a base were placed near
his Majesty, and an other treble and base near the grove, that the words of
the song might be heard of all, because the trees of gould instantly at the
first sound of their voices began to move, and dance according to the measure
of the time which the musicians kept in singing, and the nature of the words
which they delivered.

Move now with measured sound
You charmed grove of gould, Song.

Trace forth the sacred ground
That shall your forms unfold.
Diana, and the starry night for your Apollos sake
Endue your Siluan shapes with power this strange delight to make
Much joy must needs the place betide where trees for gladness move,
Afairer sight was nere beheld, or more expressing love.
Yet nearer Phoebus throne
Mete on your winding ways,
Your Brydall mirth make known
In your high-graced Hayes.
Let Hymen lead your sliding rounds, and guide the^ with his light,
While we do Io Hymen sing in honor of this night
Join three by three, for so the night by triple spel decrees
Now to release Apollos knights from these enchanted trees.

This dancing song being ended, the goulden trees stood in ranks three by
three, and Night ascended up to the grove, and spoke thus, touching the first
three severally with her wand.

Night BY virtue of this wand, and touch divine,
These Siluan shadows back to earth resign,
Your native forms resume, with habit fair,
While solemn music shall enchant the air
Presently the Siluans with their four instruments, Either by the simplicity,
negligence, or conspiracy of the painter, the passing away of the trees was
somewhat hazarded the patterene of them the same day having been shown with
much admiration, and the 9 trees being left vnsett together even to the same
night.
and five voices, began to play, and sing together the song following at the
beginning whereof that part of the stage whereon the first three trees stood
began to yield, and the three foremost trees gently to sincke, and this was
effected, by an Ingin placed under the stage. When the trees had sunk a yard
they cleft in three parts, and the Maskers appeared out of the tops of them,
the trees were suddenly conuayed away, and the first three Maskers were raised
again by the Ingin. They appeared then in a false habit, yet very fair, and
in form not much unlike their principal, and true robe. It was made of green
taffatie cut into leaves, and laid upon cloth of silver, and their hats were
suitable to the same.

Song of transformation.
NIght, and Diana charge,
And The Earth obayes
Opening large
Her secret ways,
While Apollos charmed men
Their forms receive again.
Give gracious Phoebus honor then,
And so fall down, and rest behind the train
Give gracious Phoebus honor then and so fall etc.

When those words were sung, the three maskers made an honor to the King, and
so falling back the other six trees three by three came forward, and when
they were in their appointed places Night spoke* again thus

Night THus can celestials work in humane fate,
Transform, and form as they do love or hate.
Like touch, and change receive: the Gods agree
The best of numbers is contained in three.
The song of transformation again.

Night and Diana, etc.

THen Night touched the second three trees and the stage suncke with them as
before. And in brief the second three did in all points as the first: Then
night spoke again.

Night THe last, and third of nine, touch magic wand,
And give them back their forms at nights command

Night touched the third 3. trees and the same charm of Night and Diana was
sung the third time, the last three trees were transformed, and the Maskers
raisd. When presently the first Music began his full Chorus.

Again this song revive and sound it hie,
Long live Apollo Britains glorious eye.

THis Chorus was in manner of an Echo, seconded by the Cornets, then by the
consort of ten, then by the consort of twelve, and by a double Chorus of voices
standing on either side, the one against the other bearing five voices a piece,
and sometime every Chorus was heard severally, sometime mixed, but in the end
altogether: which kind of harmony so distinguished by the place, and by the
several nature of instruments, and changeable conveyance of the song, and
performed by so many excellent masters, as were actors in that music, (their
number in all amounting to forty two voices and instruments) could not but
yield great satisfaction to the hearers.

While this Chorus was repeated twice over, the Nine maskers in their green
habitts solemnly descended to the dancing place, in such order as they were
to begin their dance, and as soon as the Chorus ended, the violins, or
consorte of twelve began to play the second new dance, which was taken in
form of an Echo by the cornetts, and then cat'cht in like manner by the
consort often, sometime they mingled two musickes together; sometime played all
at once; which kind of ecchoing music rarely became their Siluan attire, and
was so truly mixed together, that no dance could ever be better graced then
that, as (in such distraction of music) it was performed by the maskers.
After this dance Night descended from the grove, and addreste her speech to
the maskers, as follows.

Night PHoebus is pleased, and all rejoice to see
His servants, from their golden prison free,
But yet since Cinthia has so freendly smilde,
And to you tree-borne Knights, is reconcild,
First ere you any more work undertake,
About her tree solemn procession make,
Dianas tree, the tree of Chastity,
That placed alone on yonder hill you see.
These green leau'drobes wherein disguisde you made
Stelths to her Nymphs through the thick forests shade
There to the goddess offer thankfully,
That she may not in vain appeased be.
The night shall guide you, and her hours attend you
That no ill eyes, or spirits shall offend you.

At the end of this speech Night began to lead the way alone, and after her an
Hour with his torch and after the hour a masker, and so in order one by one,
a torch-bearer and a masker, they march on toward Dianas tree. When the
Maskers came by the house of Night, every one by his hour received his helmet,
and had his false robe plucked off, and bearing it in his hand, with a low
honor offered it at the tree of Chastity, and so in his glorious habit, with
his hour before him marched to the bower of Flora. The shape of their habit
the picture before discouers, the stuff was of Carnation satin laid thick
with broad silver lace, their helmets being made of the same stuff. So
through the bower of Flora they came, where they joined two torch-bearers, and
two Maskers, and when they past down to the grove: the hours parted on either
side, and made way between them for the Maskers, who descended to the dancing
place in such order as they were to begin their third new dance. All this time
of procession the six Cornets, and six Chapel voices sung a sollemne motet
of six parts made upon these words.

WIth spotles minds now mount we to the tree
Of single chastity.
The root is temperance grounded deep
Which the coldiewc't earth does steep:
Water it desires alone,
Other drink it thirsts for none:
Therewith the sober branches it does feed,
Which though they fruitless be,
Yet comely leaves they breed,
To beautify the tree,
Cynthia protectresse is, and for her sake,
We this grave procession make.
Chaste eyes and ears, pure hearts, and voices
Are graces wherein Phoebe most reioyces.
The motet being ended the Violins began the third new dance, which was lively
performed by the Maskers, after which they took forth the Ladies, and danced
the measures with them, which being finished, the Maskers brought the Ladies
back again to their places: and Hesperus with the rest descended from the
grove into the dancing place, and spoke to the Maskers as follows.

Hesperus KNights of Apollo proud of your new birth,
Pursue your triumphs still with joy and mirth,
Your changed fortunes, and redeemd estate
Hesperus to your Sovereign will relate,
It Is now high time he were far hence retired,
Th'ould Bridal friend, that vshers Night desired
Through the dim evening shades, then taking flight
Gives place and honor to the nuptial Night.
I that wished evening star must now make way
To Hymen's rights much wronged by my delay.
But on Nights princely state you ought to attend,
And t'honour your new reconciled frind.

Night HEsperus as you with concord came, even so
It Is meet that you with concord hence should go
Then join you that in voice, and art excel,
To give this star a musical farewell.

A Diologue of four voices two Bases and two trebles.

1 Of all the stars which is the kindest
To a loving Bride?

2 Hesperus when in the west
He does the day from night divide.

1 What message can be more respected
Then that which tells wished joys shall be effected?

2 Do not Brides watch the evening star?

1 O they can discern it far:

2 Love Bridegroomes revels?

1 But for fashion.

2 And why?

1 They hinder wished occasion.

2 Longing hearts and new delights,
Love short days, and long nights

Chorus. HEsperus since you all stars excel
In Bridal kindness kindly farewell farewell.

WHile these words of the Chorus (kindly farewell farewell) were in singing
often repeated Hesperus took his leave seue ally of Night, Flora, and
Zephyrus, the Hours, and Siluans, and so while the Chorus was sung over the
second time, he was got up to the grove, where turning again to the singers,
and they to him. Hesperus took a second farwell of them, and so past away by
the house of Night: Then Night spoke these two lines, and therewith all retired
to the grove where they stood before.

Night. COme Flora let us now withdraw our train
That th'ecclipst revels may shine forth again

Now the Maskers began their lighter daunces as Currantoes, Leualtas and
galliards, wherein when they had spent as much time as they thought fit, night
spoke thus from the grove, and in her speech descended a little into the
dancing place.

N. HEre stay, Night leaden-eied, and sprighted grows
And her late hours begin to hang their brows
Hymen long since the Bridal bed has dressed,
And longs to bring the turtles to their nest.
Then with one quick dence sound up your delight,
And with one song we will bid you all god-Night.

At the end of these words, the violins began the 4. new dance, which was
excelle^tly discharged by the Maskers, and it ended with a light change of
music and mesure: After the dance followed this dialogue of 2 voices, a base
and tenor sung by a Siluan, and an Hour.

Ten: Siluan. TEll me gentle hour of night
Wherein do thou most delight?

Bas. Hour. Not in sleep,

Sil. Wherein then?

Hour In the frolic view of men?

Sil Love thou music?

Hour O it is sweet.

Sil. What Is dancing?

How. Even the mirth of feet

Sil. Joy you in Fayries and idelues?

How. We are of that sore our selves,
But Siluan say why do you love
Only to frequent the grove?

Sil. Life is fullest of content
Where delight is innocent.

How. Pleasure must vary not be long,
Come then lets close, and end our song.

Chorus YEt ere we vanish from this princely sight,
Let us bid Phoebus, and his states god-night

This Chorus was performed with several Echoes of music, and voices, in
manner as the great Chous before. At the end whereof the Maskers putting off
their visards, and helmets, made a low honor to the King, and attended his Ma:
to the banqueting place

To the Reader.
Neither buskin now, norbayes
Challenge I, a Ladies praise
Shall content my proudest hope,
Their applause was all my scope
And to their shrines properly
Revels dedicated be:
Whose soft ears none ought to pierce
But with smooth and gentle verse,
Let the tragic Poem swell,
Raising raging seendes from hell,
And let Epicke Dactils range
Swelling seas and Countries strange.
Little room small things contains
Easy praise quites easy pains.
Suffer them whose brows do sweat
To gain honor by the great.
It s enough if men me name
A Retailer of such fame.
Epigramma.
Quid tu te numeris immis^es? anne medente^
Metra cathedratum ludicra scripta decent
Musicus and medicus, celebris quoque Phoebe Poeta e^
Et lepor aegrotos art rogante i^uat.
Creed mihi doctum qui carmen non sapit, idem
Non habet ingentum, nec genium medici.
FINIS.
These Songs were used in the Mask, whereof the first two Airs were made
by M. Campion, the third and last by M, Lupo, the fourth by M. Tho. Giles, and
though the last three Airs were devised only for dancing, yet they are here
set forth with words that they may be sung to the Lute or Violl.
A Tenor part to the first song.
^
Now has Flora robde her bowres to be friend this place with flowers
Flowers with Bri-dals well agree fresh as Brides and bridegrooms be
^
strew about strew about the sky rainde never kindlier showers,
strew about strew about and mix them with fit melody,
^
earth has no princelier flowers the^ roses white and roses red, but they must
^
still be mingled and as a rose new plucked from Venus thorn so does a bride
^
her bridegrooms bed adorn.
I.
^
Now has Flora robde her bowres to befrend this place with flowers,
Flowers with bri- dals well agree: fresh as brides and Bridegroomes be.
^
^
strew about strew about the sky rainde never kindlier showers,
strew about strew about and mix them with sit melody,
^
^
earth has no princelier flowers the^ roses white and roses red,
^
^
but they must still be mingled and as a rose new plucked from
^
^
Venus thorn so does a bride her bridegrooms bed adorn.
^
^he Basse. I.
^
^
^
II.
^
Move now with measurd sound you charmed groves of gold
Trace forth the sa-cred ground that shall your forms un fould
^
^
Di-a na and the starry night for your Apollos sake
much joy must needs the place betide where trees for gladness move
^
^
en- due your siluan shapes with power this strange delight to make
a fayrer sight was near be- held or more expressing love.
^
Finis.
The Basse II.
^
Move now with mesur'd sound you charmed grove of gold, Dia na and
Trace forth the sacred ground that shall your forms unfold, much joy must needs
^
the starry night for your Apollos sake endue your Siluan shape with power this
the place be-tide where trees for gladness move, a fayrer fight was near
be-held or
^
strange delight to make,
more expressing love.
^
^
^
Shows and nightly revels signs of joy and peace fill royal
Fair and princely branches with stro^ arms increase from that deep
^
^
Britains court while cruel war far off does rage for ever hence.
rooted tree whose sacred strength and glory for-ren malice has.
^
^
ex-iled Our divided kingdoms now in friendly kindred meet
be-guiled Truly recon- ciled grief appears at last more sweet
^
^
and old debate to love and kindness turns our power with double force v-
both to our selves and faithful friends our vn-der-mi- ning foes af-
^
^
niting.
frighting.
^
The Basse III.
^
^
^
^
Triumph now with Joy and mirth the God of peace has
We en- joy the fruits of earth through fa-uour of his
^
^
blessed our land we through his most lo uing grace a King and king ly
bounteous hand Like a son with lesser star^ or careful shepsheard
^
^
seed be-holde Triumph then and yield him praise that gives us blessed and
to his fold.
^
^
joyful days.
^
The Basse. IIII-
^
^
V
^
Time that leads the fatal round has made his center in our ground
And there at one stay he rests and with the fates keeps holy feasts
^
^
with swelling seas em- braced Light Cupids there do dance and
with pomp and pastime graced Their so^gs are al of joy no sign
^
^
Venus sweetly singes with heavenly notes tuned to sound of
of sorrow there but all as stars glistring fair and
^
^
silver strings,
blithe appear.
^
FINIS.
The Basse V.
^
^

