The history of Cambria, now called Wales: A part of the most famous Yland of
Brytaine, written in the Brytish language above two hundredth years past:
translated into English by H. Lhoyd Gentleman: Corrected, augmented, and
continued out of Records and best approved Authors, by David Powel Doctor in
divinity.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.

To the Right worshipful Sir Philip Sydney knight.
IT is the manner of most writers (Right worshipful) in dedicating of their
books, to praise and extol the virtues and noble qualities of such men as
they choose to be the patrons of their works, whereby to win some credit and
countenance to themselves: the which thing I see to be done by a great number
of writers (as well strangers as countrymen) who have set out the praise and
commendation of your noble gifts: I am therefore at this time to direct my
style the rather to admonish you how to emploie and use the same, to that end
that they are bestowed upon you, than otherwise vainelie with suspicion of
flattery to speak of them. And first I would have you to consider with your
self, that you have received all the good gifts you have at the hands of
almighty God, who is the giver of all goodness, for the which your duty is
to render most humble and hearty thanks unto his divine majesty. The end also
for the which they are given unto you, is at no time to be forgotten, that is,
the setting forth of the glory of God, and the benefit of your country. Call
also to remembrance, that they be talents delivered unto you of credit to use
for a time, for the which you must render an account whenever it pleases the
owner to call you to it: the more you have, the greater your account will be;
for he that has received five talents is further to be charged than he which
has received but one; and he that has received ten, deeper than he that has
received but five. Use them therefore and hide them not in a napkin, for they
are the better for the wearing; the more you use them, the more they will
increase; the more you lay out, the richer you shall be. Have always before
your eyes the glory of God, never forget the same in any thing you do: seek
the weal public of your country, labor to do it good in any thing you
may, while you have time so to do: for you have but a while to remain here,
away you must go after the common course of nature. Let the remembrance of
your account when your stewardships is ended, be never out of your mind. These
be the chief points leading the right path to true nobility: these you shall
find set out at large in that book, wherewithal you are most delighted.

For the putting of these things in practice, I am to lay down two examples
for you to imitate, the which (because they are domestical) ought to move you
to be the more willing to follow them. The one in your own noble father, who
always has been and yet is more inclined and bent to do good to his
country, than to benefit or enrich himself, as Wales and Ireland, beside his
own can bear him witness. The other in your honorable father in law, Sir
Francis Walsingham, her Majesty's chief Secretary, a man for his zeal of
Gods glory, and love toward them that fear God unfeignedly, well known to
the world. Follow their steps, with the remembrance of that noble house, out of
the which you are descended by your honorable mother, and then you cannot do
amiss. Labor by the example of your father to discover and bring to light,
the acts of the famous men of elder times, who with conference of the estate
and government of all ages, will bring you to the perfect experience of those
things that you have learned out of Aristotle, Plato, and Cicero, by your
travel in philosophy. Your father, with his great expenses and labor, having
procured and gotten to his hands the histories of Wales and Ireland (which
countries for many years with great love and commendation he governed)
committed unto me this of Wales, to be set forth in print, with direction to
proceed therein, and necessary books for the doing thereof. And although I
was insufficient for doing of it, yet I have done mine endeavor, and now do
present the same unto your worship, as by good reason due to the son and
heir of him that was the procurer and bringer of it to light: desiring you to
accept it with as good will as the same is offered unto you, and so following
the godly zeal, love of the common wealth, and care to do it good, of so
noble and worthy parents, to bear countenance and favor to the country of
Wales, which heartily wishes you honorable preferment in the fear of God.
The Lord increase his gifts in you to his glory, the benefit of the
commonwealth, and your endless comfort. From my lodging in London the 25. of
March. 1584.

Your worships ready at commandment, David Powel.

CAradoc of Lancaruan (gentle Reader) collected the successions and acts of
the Brytish Princes after Cadwalader, to the year of Christ 1156. Of the which
collections there were several copies afterward kept in either of the Abbeis
of Conwey and Stratflur, which were yearly augmented as things fell out, and
conferred together ordinarily every third year, when the Beirdh which did
belong to those two Abbeis went from the one to the other in the time of their
Clera, Clera is their ordinary visitation which they use every third year.
wherein were contained besides, such notable occurrences happening within this
I Will of Brytaine, as they then thought worthy the writing: which order of
registring and noting continued in those Abbeis until the year 1270. which
was a little before the death of the last Lhewelyn who was slain at Buelht.
These collections were copied by diverse, so that there are at this day of the
same in Wales a hundred copies at the least, whereof the most part were written
two hundred years ago. This book Humffrey Lhoyd gentleman (a paineful and a
worthy searcher of Brytish antiquities) translated into English, and partly
augmented, chiefly out of Matthew Paris, and Nicholas Trivet: but before the
book was polished (having yet many imperfections, not only in the phrase,
but also in the matter and substance of the history) it pleased God to take
him away in the flower of his time: who (if God had spared him life) would not
only have set out this history absolute and perfect, but also have opened
unto the world other antiquities of this land, which now lie hidden and
unknown. The copy of his translation, the Right honorable Sir Henry Sidney
Lord President of Wales (whose disposition is rather to seek after the
antiquities, and the weal public of those countries which he governs, than
to obtain lands and revenues within the same, for I know not one foot of
land that he has either in Wales or Ireland) had lieng by him a great while,
and being desirous to have the same set out in print, sent for me in September
last, requesting me to peruse and correct it, in such sort as it might be
committed to the press. But I (knowing my self to be far unable to perform
and accomplish those things which are requisite to the publishing of such an
history, and being otherwise called and employed) was very loath any thing
to meddle therein, and so excused my self; yet he conceiving a better opinion
of me than there was cause, would needs have me to do mine endeavor in that
behalf. Whose request I was not of duty to gainesaie or withstand, and
thereupon I promised to do my best, which travel two things have caused me to
be the more willing to take it in hand.

First, because I see the politic and martial acts of all other inhabitants
of this Island, in the time of their government to be set out to the uttermost,
and that by diverse and sundry writers: and the whole doings and government of
the Brytaines the first inhabitants of the land, who continued their rule
longer than any other nation, Rob. Caenal. li. 2. Par. 2.
to be nothing spoken of nor regarded of any, especialie sithence the reign
of Cadwalader, having so many monuments of antiquity to declare and testify
the same, if any would take the pains to open and discover them to the view of
the world.

The second thing that moved me thereunto, is the slanderous report of such
writers, as in their books do enforce every thing that is done by the
Welshmen to their discredit, leaving out all the causes and circumstances of
the same: which do most commonly not only eleuate or dissemble all the
injuries and wrongs offered and done to the Welshmen, but also conceal or
deface all the acts worthy of commendation achieved by them. Search the
common Chronicles touching the Welshmen, and commonly thou shall find that the
King sends some noble man or other with an army to Wales, to withstand the
rebellious attempts, the proud stomachs, the presumptuous pride, stir,
trouble and rebellion of the fierce, unquiet, craking, fickle and unconstant
Welshmen, and no open fact laid down to charge them withal, why war should
be levied against them, nor yet they swaruing abrod out of their own country
to trouble other men. Now this history does show the cause and circumstances
of most of those wars, whereby the quality of the action may be judged. And
certeinlie no man is an indifferent witness against him whom he counts his
enemy or adversary, for evil will never speaks well. The Welshmen were by
the Saxons and Normans counted enemies, before the twelfth year of Edward the
first, while they had a governor among themselves: and afterward, when king
Edward had brought the country to his subjection, he placed English officers
to keep them under, to whom most commonly he gave the forfaits and
possessions of such Welshmen as disobeied his laws, and refused to be ruled by
the said officers: the like did the other Kings that came after him. The said
officers were thought oftentimes to be ouer-seuere and rigorous for their own
profit and commodity: which things caused the people often to disobeie, and
many times like desperate men to seek reuengement, having those for their
judges which were made by their overthrow, and also wanting indifferency in
their causes and matters of griefs: for the Kings always countenanced and
believed their own officers, by them preferred and put in trust, before their
accusers, whom they liked not of. Whereupon the inhabitants of England favoring
their countriemen and friends, reported not the best of the Welshmen. This
hatred and disliking was so increased by the stir and rebellion of Owen
Glyndoure, that it brought forth such grievous laws, as few Christian kings
ever gave or published the like to their subjects. These things being so, any
man may easily perceive the very occasion of those parentheseis and brief
notes of rebellion and troubles objected to the Welshmen, without opening of
cause or declaration of circumstances.

The Normans having conquered England, and gotten all the lands of the Saxon
nobility, would feign have had the lands of the Welshmen also, whereupon
diverse of them entered* Wales with an army, so that the Welshman were driven
for their own defense to put themselves in armor: for the which fact they are
by some writers accused of rebellion, whereas by the law of Nature it is lawful
for all men to withstand force by force. Vim vi repellere licet.
They were in their own country, the land was theirs by inheritance and
lawful possession: might they not therefore defend themselves from violence
and wrong, if they could? What right or lawful title had the Earl of Chester
to Ryuonioc and Tegengl? or the Earl of Salope to Dyuet, Caerdigan, and Powys?
or Rob. Fitzhamon to Glamorgan? or Barnard Newmarch to Brechnoke? or Ralph
Mortimer to Eluel? or Hugh Lacy to the land of Ewyas? or any other of them to
any country in Wales? By what reason was it more lawful for those men to
dispossess them of these countries with violence and wrong, than for them to
defend and keep their own? Shall a man be charged with disobedience, because
he seeks to keep his purse from him that would rob him? I mean not by
this to charge those Noble men, which wan these countries by the sword: but I
speak it to note the parcial dealing of the writers and setters forth of
those histories, that should have reported things indifferently, as they were
done, and laid down the causes and circumstances of every action truly, who
being altogether parciall, favoring the one side and hating the other, do
pronounce of the fact according to their private affections, condemning
oftentimes the innocent, and justifying the wrong doers.

These considerations I say, besides my bounden duty, caused me to venture to
take this thing in hand. The translation of H. Lhoyd I have conferred with the
Brytish book, whereof I had two ancient copies, and corrected the same, when
there was cause so to do. And after that the most part of the book was
printed, I received another larger copy of the same translation, being better
corrected, at the hands of Robert Glouer Somerset Herald, a learned and
studious Gentleman in his profession, the which if I had had at the beginning,
many things had come forth in better plight than they now be. Again, I got
all the authors that I could come by, which have any thing written of the
affairs of Wales, as Gildas, Asser Meneuensis, Galfride, William of Newborow,
Matthew Paris, Matthew Westminster, Thomas Walsingham, Ponticus Virunnius,
Polydor Virgil, Io. Leyland, Io. Bale, I. Prise, Matthew Parker, Io. Caius,
William Lambert, and all the English Chronicles printed. In written hand I had
Gildas Sapiens alias Nennius, Henry Huntington, William Malmsbury, Marianus
Scotus, Ralph Cogshall, Io. Euersden, Nicholas Trivet, Florentius Vigorniensis,
Simon of Durham, Roger Houedon, and other which remain in the custody of I.
Stowe citizen of London, who deserves commendation for getting together the
ancient writers of the histories of this land. I had also the Brytish books of
petegrees. I. Castoreus, and Syluester Giral. Cambrensis, which with diverse
other rare monuments of antiquity, I received at the hands of the Right
Honorable the Lord Burghley high treasurer of England: who also directed me by
his letters to all the offices where the Records of this realm are kept, out
of the which I have gathered a great part of this history, and more would have
done, if the time had permitted. The copy I have conferred with the aforenamed
authors, and where I found them to entreat of the matters therein contained, I
have noted them in the margin, and in such authors as are printed I have most
commonly directed thee gentle Reader to the page or chapter of the book where
thou shall find the same history treated of. Again, where I found any thing
of Wales worthy the noting in the said authors being not contained in the
copy, I have inserted the same in a smaller letter with this mark * before
it, whereby it may be discerned from the copy it self. Further, such things
as were breefly set down in the copy without signification of cause or
declaration of circumstances, if I found the same in any of mine authors
treated of and further opened, I have likewise inserted it in his due place. In
the possession and succession of families, I have sought what I could for the
time, and have laid down most of the noble families of England, which had
lands in Wales, or descended out of that country. I was greatly furthered in
this work by the painful and studious travel of the right worshipful Sir
Edward Stradling Knight, Thomas Powel of Whittington park, and Richard
Broughton Esquires.

In the description I have taken the less pains, looking daily for the
coming forth of the painful and studious travel of some other, who has
labored in that behalf, and studied all the Roman and Brytish histories
concerning the ancient names of nations and places within this Island, so that
my labor were superfluous in that behalf. Herein if happily I have swarued
or omitted any thing, which should have been laid down in this history, I
neither did it wittinglie nor willingly: and therefore being ready upon
better information to amend that which shall be found to be amiss, if any so
shall be, I am the rather to be born withal, because I am the first setter out
in print of this history: for things can never be so well done at the first
when there is but few that do travel therein, as they may in process of
time, when every man puts to his helping hand, which courtesy I am to
desire of thee gentle Reader for the perfecting of this work.

Concerning the alteration of the estate, there was never any thing so
beneficial to the common people of Wales, as the uniting of that country to
the crown and kingdom of England, whereby not only the malady and hurt of
the dissension that often happened between the Princes of the country, while
they ruled, is now taken away, but also an uniformity of government
established; whereby all controversies are examined, heard and decided within
the country: so that now the country of Wales (I dare boldly affirm it) is
in as good order for quietness and obedience as any country in Europe: for if
the rulers and teachers be good and do their duties, the people are willing to
learn, ready to obeie, and loath to offend or displease. And if it please God
once to send them the Bible in their own language according to the godly
laws already established, the country of Wales (I doubt not) will be
comparable to any country in England.

A description of Cambria now called Wales: Drawn first by Sir John Prise
knight, and afterward augmented and made perfect by Humfrey Lhoyd Gentleman.
FOr as much as it is necessary for the understanding of this history, to
know the perfect description of the country of Wales, to the end the acts
atchiued and done in the same may be the better known; I thought good
somewhat to travel therein, and so to lay down the same as it was in those
days, and as it is now: that the reader by conference of both times may the
better understand this work. Therefore after the three sons of Brutus had
divided the whole I Will of Brytaine into three parts; that part contained within
the French seas, with the rivers of Seauerne (called in Brytish Hafren) Dee and
Humber, fell to the eldest son Locrinus, which was after his name called
Lhoyger, which name it has in the Brytish tongue to this day, and in English
now it is called England, and is augmented Northward to the river Tweed. The
second son Albanactus had all the land Northward from Humber to the sea
Orkney, called in the Brytish tongue Mor Werydh, and in Latin Mare Caledonicum.
The third son Camber had to his part all that which remained undivided, lieng
within the Spanish and Irish seas, and separated from England, Cambria.
with the rivers Seauerne and Dee, and this part was after his name called
Cambria, and the inhabitants thereof Cambry, and their language Camberaec, and
so are at this day. So that they have kept the same country and language this
2690. and odd years, without commixtion with any other nation, especially
in Northwales, as it shall hereafter appear.

And because the name of this country is changed, or rather mistaken by the
inhabitants of England, and not by them called Cambry, but Wales: I think it
necessary to declare the occasion thereof, which is, that where the Saxons a
people of Germany were the first that after the Brytaines inhabited and ruled
the greatest part of this I Will, and drove the Brytains to that corner, which
according to the manner of their country they called Wales, and the people
Welshmen, and the tongue Welsh, that is to say Strange, or not of them
understood. For at this day the inhabitants of the low countries call their
next neighbors language of Henegaw, or other that speak French, Walsh, as a
language to them unknown. Likewise the dwellers of Tyroll and other the higher
countries of Germany do name the Italian their next neighbor a Welshman, and
his language Walsh. And this is an evident proof, that they which harped upon
a Queen Gwalaes, and of a Prince Wala (of whom neither Brytish, Latin, nor
English history makes mention) were fowlie deceived: and so likewise was a
great historiographer of late days, which says, that it was called Walia,
quasi Italia, because the rest of the Romans which remained in the I Will were
driven thither. Neither is this any new invention, although Polydore Virgil
with an Italian brag does glory himself to be the first that espied it out,
for diverse ancient writers do allege the same cause of the name of Wales, of
whom Syluester Giraldus is one, who wrote in the time of Henry the second
after the conquest, before 380. years passed: which is an evident token, that
the said Polydore did either never see nor read the ancient histories of this
realm, or dissembleth the same to the advancement and praise of himself and
his country: which to the learned and indifferent reader shall appear to be
the only occasion he took that work in hand, for all his book redoundeth
only to the praise and honor of the Romans, as well spiritual as temporal,
and to blase forth their acts and deeds within this realm: and upon the other
part does either openly slander, or else privily extenuate, or shamefullie
deny the martial prowess and noble acts, as well of Saxons, Danes, and
Normans, as of the Brytains, all inhahiters of this I Will. Which thing he that
list to prove, let him read and confer Caesar's Commentaries, Cornelius
Tacitus, Herodianus, and other ancient writers, as well in Latin as in Greek,
with his work. As for the ancient writers of the Brytish history, as the
Brytish chronicle, the history of Gildas, Ponticus Verunnius, yea the golden
work of Matthew Paris moonke of Saint Albon, which wrote from William
Bastard, to the last years of Henry the third; I dare well say he never saw
them, they be in diverse places to be had, so that the truth may be easily
proved. To make an end I say, that he being first a stranger borne, and also
ignorant as well in the histories of this realm, as of those toongs and
languages wherein the same were written, could never set forth the true and
perfect Chronicle of the same. But he having a good grace and a pleasant style
in the Latin tongue, and finding himself in a country where every man either
lacked knowledge or spirit to set forth the history of their own country,
took this enterprise in hand, to their great shame, and no less dispraise,
because he a blind leader shall draw a great number of indiscreet and rash
folowers, as well Geographers and Cosmographers, as Chroniclers and
Historiographers, to the dark pit of ignorance, where I leave them at this
time, remitting the reader to the apology of Sir John Pryse knight, and his
Brytish history, written by him of purpose against the envious reports and
slanderous taunts of the said Polydor, where he shall see a great number of
his errors confuted at large. And to return to my former matter of the name of
Wales, Wales.
which name to be given of late by a strange nation may be otherwise proved:
for the Welshmen themselves do not understand what these words Wales and
Welsh do signify, nor know any other name of their country or themselves
but Cambry, nor of their language but Cambraec, which is as much to say as
Cambers language or speech. So likewise they know not what England or English
means, but commonly they call the country Lhoyger, the Englishmen Sayson, A
Locrino. A Saxonib.
and the English tongue Saysonaec. Which is an evident token that this is the
same language which the Brytaines spoke at the beginning: for the works of
Merdhyn and of Taliessin, who wrote above 1000. years past, are almost the
same words which they use at this day, or at the least easy to be
understood of every one which knows perfectly the Welsh tongue,
especially in Northwales.

Beside this, where at this day, there do remain three remnants of the
Brytaines, divided every one from other, with the seas which are in Wales,
Cornwall (called in Brytish Cerniw) and little Brytaine, yet almost all the
particular words of these three people are all one, although in pronunciation
and writing of the sentences they differ somewhat, which is no marvel, seeing
that the pronunciation in one realm is often so diverse, that the one can scant
understand the other. But it is rather a wonder, that the Welshmen being
separated from the Cornish, well nigh these 900. years, and the Brytaines from
either of them 290. years before that, and having small traffike or concourse
together sithence that time, have still kept their own Brytish tongue. They are
not therefore to be credited which deny the Welsh to be the old Brytish tongue.
And here I cannot pass over what one of these fine Chroniclers wrote of late,
of the name of Brytaine, affirming that it should be so called of Brytaine in
France, as the elder of that name. But surely he had either never seen
Ptolomie nor Caesar, nor any other ancient writer, or read them with small
judgment and memory. For there he might have learned, that when this land was
called Brytaine, the other was called Armorica, and how in Maximus time, Rob.
Caenal. li. 2. Per. 2.
Conan Meriadoc was the first that gave it that name, and inhabited it with
Brytaines out of this I Will* Other deriuations of these words Brytania, and
Albion, out of Greek and Latin, I am ashamed to rehearse; for unto such
errors do they commonly fall, that either puffed up with vain glory of
their own wits, or pinched with despite and envy at other men's works; or
blinded with ignorance, do go about to write and set forth any history or
chronicle. But passing over this matter until an other time, The meares and
bounds of Wales.
I will return to the description of Wales, which (as I said) was of old time
compassed almost about with the Irish seas, and the rivers Dee and Seauerne,
although afterward the Saxons wan by force from the Brytaines all the plain
and champion country over the rivers, and specially Offa king of Mercia, who
made a ditch of a great breadth and depth, to be a meare betwixt his kingdom
and Wales, which ditch began at the river Dee, by Bassing work between
Chester and Ruthlan, and ran along the hills sides to the south sea a little
from Bristowe, reaching above a hundredth miles in length, and is in many
places to be seen at this day, bearing the name of Clawdh Offa, that is to
say, Offas ditch, and the country between it and England is commonly called
in Welsh Y Mars, although the greatest part of it be now inhabited by Welshmen,
namlie in Northwales, which yet keeps the ancient limits to the river Dee,
and in some places over it. Other (as Syluester Giraldus) make the river VVy,
called in Welsh Gwy, to be the meare between England and Wales on the South
part called Southwales; who measures the breadth of Wales, from Salowe or
Willoweford called Rhydyrhelig upon VVy, to Saint David's in Meneuia 100. miles,
and the length from Caerlheon upon Vsce in Gwentland, to Holihead called
Caergybi in Anglisey, in Welsh called Mon, above 100. miles, and these be the
common meares at this day, although the Welsh tongue is commonly used and
spoken Englandward, beyond these old meeres a great way, as in Herefordshire,
Glocestershire, and a great part of Shropshire. And thus for the general
description of Wales, which afterward about the year of Christ 870. Rodericus
Magnus, king of Wales, divided it into three territories which they called
kingdoms, which remained until of late days.

These three were, Gwynedh, in English Northwales, Deheubarth, in English
Southwales, and Powys land; in every of the which he ordained a princely seat
or court for the Prince to remain at most commonly: as in Gwynedh (which some
old writers call Venedotia for Gwynethia) Aberffraw in the I Will of Mon or
Anglesey. Aberfraw.
In Deheubarth called in Latin Demetia Caermardhyn, from whence it was
afterward removed to Dineuowr, Dinevowr.
eight miles thence. In Powys Pengwern, called Y Mwythic, and in English
Sherewsburie, from whence it was removed to Mathraual in Powys land. Mathraval.
And because this history does as well entreat of wars betwixt these three
provinces, as betwixt them and the Saxons, Normanes and Flemings: I think it
good to set forth the particular description of every part by it self. And
first of Northwales as the cheifest part, which he gave his eldest son,
ordeining that either of the other two should pay him yearly 200. pound of
tribute, Northwales.
as it appears in the laws of Howel Dha, which are to be had in Welsh, and
also in Latin. Therefore Gwyneth (called Northwales) had upon the Northside
the sea, from the river Dee at Basingwerke to Aberdyui, and upon the West and
South west the river Dyui which divides it from Southwales, and in some places
from Powys land. And on the South and East it is divided from Powys sometimes
with mountains, and sometimes with rivers, till it come to the river Dee
again. This land was of old time divided to four parts, of which the cheifest
was Mon, Mon.
in English called Anglesey, where the Princes chief house was at Aberfraw,
which is an Island separated from the maine land, with an arm of the sea called
Maenai, and had in it self three Cantreds or hundreds, which were subdivided
to six comots, as Cantref Aberfraw, to comot Lhion, and comot Malhtraeth,
Cantref Cemais, to the comots Talebolion and Twr Celyn. Cantref Rossyr to the
comots Tindaethwy and Maenai. And at this day there is a trim town in that
I Will called Beumarish, and a common passage to Ireland at Caergybi, called in
English Holyhead. But here I cannot wink at that notable error of Polydor,
which (after his accustomed fashion) denies this I Will to be called Mona, but
Anglesia, or Anglorum insula, because it is called in English Anglesey, and
gives this name Mona to Man, and so has lost the names of both Isles: which
ignorance and forgetfulness might be forgiven him, if he had not drawn a great
number to this error with him, which in their charters do daily wrong name
these Isles, which may be easily proved. First, because the inhabitants of the
I Will do know none other name but Mon: and it is called through all Wales, Tir
Mon, that is to say, the land of Mon unto this day. So that neither by memory
of man, neither by any monument in writing in the Brytish ^^ong can it
appear, that ever it had any other name but Mon, yet there be manifest
monuments for these 1000. years. It is also grown to a proverb through
Wales, for the fertility of the ground, Mon mam Gymry, that is to say, Mon
mother of Wales.

The ancient history of Cornelius Tacitus (which belike age had beaten out of
Polydors head) says, that the soldiers of Paulinus Suetonius, and afterward
of Julius Agricola, after they had passed through Northwales, then came over
against Mona, where they did swim over an arm of the sea of 200. pases, and so
by force wanne the I Will. Now whether is it more reasonable thus to swim over
200. pases, or 20. miles? I know there is no man that believes Polydor in this
point: let all men therefore by this judge the rest. As for that which he
says of the great woods, it is nothing: for both the Romans, and after when
the Christian faith took place in this realm, the Christians did fall and
root them out, for the idolatry and absurd religion which was used there:
that the king of Man sent for timber to Mon: read the life of Hugh Earl of
Chester; which also is evident by the great beeches and other trees found in
the earth at these days. His other reason is, because it is called Anglesey in
the English tongue: so is Lhoyger England, and Cambry Wales, are those therefore
the old names? No surely. And what if the inhabitants called it so? (as they
did not) had it not a name before the Angles wanne it? Yes I warrant you, but
he had forgotten that. Now to the name of Man, it was ever, or at the least
these 1000. years named in Brytish Manaw, of which comes the English name
Man. The inhabitants thereof call it so, and no nation about it did ever call
it Mon, no nor any writer but Polydor, which was too young a godfather to name
so old a child. For Gildas who wrote above 900. years passed, whose writings
Polydor never saw, but untruly fathers upon him his own devise; Giraldus in
his description of Ireland to Henry the second, and Henry Huntington, do
plainly call Man in Latin Eubonia, adding thereto either Manaw or Man, for
the better understanding of the name: will you believe them or Polydor? Other
arguments there are which I will pass over, till I have more leisure and
occasion to write of this matter.

Aruon.
The second part of Northwales was called Aruon, which is as much to say, as
over against Mon: and had in it four Cantreds, and ten comots.

Cantref Aber had in it three comots, Y Lhechwedh vchaf, Y Lechwedhisaf, and
Nanconwy.

Cantref Aruon had two comots, Ywch Gwyruai, and Isgwyruai.

Cantref Dunodic had two comots, Ardudwy and Euionyth.

Cantref Lhyyn contains three comots, Cymytmayn, Tinlhayn, and Canologion.
This is now called Carnaruonshire, as Mon is called Anglesey shire, and have
the same division at this day. In this shire are Snowdon hills, called Eryri,
neither in height, fertility of the ground, wood, cattle, fish and foul,
giving place to the famous Alps, and without controversy the strongest
country within Brytaine.

Here is the town of Caernarnon, called in the old time Caer segonce: and
there also is Conwey called Caergyffyn. And the sea of Bangor, with diverse
other ancient castles and places of memory, and was the last part of Wales,
that came under the dominion of the kings of England. It has on the North the
sea and Maenai, upon the East and Southeast the river Conwey, which divides it
from Denbighshire, although it now pass the river in one place by the sea
shore. And on the Southwest and West, it is separated from Merionyth by high
mountains and rivers, and other meares.

The third part of Gwyneth was Merionyth containing three Cantreds, Merionyth.
and every Cantred three comots.

As Cantref Meyreon has three comots, Talybont, Pennal, and Ystumaner.

Cantref Arustly had these, Vwchcoed, Iscoed, and Gwarthrenion.

Cantref Penlhyn had these, Vwchmeloch, Ismeloch, and Micnaint, and this
keeps the said name till this day, but not within the same meres, and is
full of hills and rocks, and has upon the North the sea, notable at this day
for the great resort and number of people that repair thither to take
herrings. It has upon the East Aruon, and Denbighland, upon the South Powys,
and upon the West Dyui, and Caerdiganshire.

In this country stands the town of Harlech, Tegyd.
and a great lake called ^hyn Tegyd, through which the river Dee runs, and
mingleth not with the water of the lake, which is three miles long, and also
the salmons, which are commonly taken in the river hard by the lake, are never
seen to enter the lake. Likewise a kind of fish called Gwyniaid, which are
like to whitings, and are full in the lake, are never taken in the river. Not
far from this lake is a place called Caergay, which was the house of Gay,
Arthurs foster brother. This shire as well as Aruon, is full of cattle, foul,
and fish, with great number of read dear and roes: but there is great
scarsitie of corn.

The fourth part of Gwyneth, Y Bervedhwlad.
was called Y Beruedhwlad, which may be Englished, the inland or middle
country, which contained five Cantreds and 13. comots, as Cantref Ryuonioc had
in it these comots, Vwchalet and Isalet.

Cantref Ystrat, had Hiraethoc and Cynmeirch. Cantref Ros these, Vwchdulas,
Isdulas, and Creuthyn, which all are in the lordship of Denbigh, saving the
Creuthyn which is in Carnaruonshire, wherein the castle of Dyganwy did stand,
which was the Earls of Chester, and is commonly called in the Latin and
English chronicle Gannoc.

Dyffryn Clwyd.
The fourth Cantref was Dyffryn Clwyd, which may be Englished the vallie of
Clwyd, and now is called the lordship of Ruthyn, and has these comots,
Coleigion, Lhannerch and Dogueilyn.

The fifth Cantref is Tegengl, and is now a part of Flyntshire, having these
comots, Counsylht, Prestatyn, and Ruthlan. And in this part is one of the
fairest valleys within this I Will, containing 18. miles in length, and 4.5.6. or
7. in breadth, as the hills either draw inward together, or backward asunder,
which high hills do enclose it on the East, West, and South parts, and
Northward the sea. It is plentiful of cattle, fish, and foul, corn, hey,
grass, and wood, and divided along in the midst with the river Clwyd, to
whom runs Clywedoc, Ystrat, VVhilar, Elwy, and a great number of other
rivers from the hills. In this vallie two miles from the sea, is the town and
castle of Ruthlan, An. 12. Ed. 1.
where sometimes a parliament has been kept. And two miles above it is the sea of Saint Asaph, between the rivers Clwyd and Elwy, called in the old time
the bishops see of Lhan Elwy. Four miles thence, and two miles from the river,
is situate upon a rock the town and castle of Denbigh, where is one of the
greatest markets in the marches of Wales, and one of the fairest and strongest
castles within this realm, which being the house of David brother to Lhewelyn,
the last Prince of the Welsh blood, See this hist. page 377.
was enlarged and strengthened by Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, to whom king
Edward gave the same lordship; it is also the shire town of that Shire. Five
miles above this, is the town of Ruthyn with a fair castle, which sometimes
belonged to the Lords Gray Earls of Kent. This part of Northwales has upon
the North the river Dee, and the sea. Upon the West Aruon, and the river
Conwey. South and East, Merionyth, and the country then called Powys. And
these be the meeres and bounds of Gwyneth or Venedotia, for the name of
Northwales contains beside this all Powys at these days. So there was under
the territory of Aberfraw 15. Cantreds, and in them 38. comots.

The second kingdom was Mathraual, Mathraval or Powys.
which in right order was the third, as that which came to the third brother,
yet for the better understanding of the history following, I have placed it
here. To this kingdom belonged the country of Powys, and the land betwixt Wy
and Seauerne. Which part had upon the South and West, Southwales, with the
rivers Wy and Tywy, and other meeres. Upon the North Gwyneth, and upon the East
the marches of England, from Chester to Wy, a little above Hereford: and
therefore it was most troubled with wars, as well of the Saxons, as afterward
of the Normanes Lords marchers, who daily wanne some part thereof, and by that
means it was the first part that served the kings of England, and therefore
less esteemed of all the rest. This part called Powys, was divided again into
Powys Vadoc, and Powys Wenwynwyn. Powys Vadoc contained in it self five
Cantreds and 15. comots.

Cantref Y Barwn, which has three comots, Dynmael, Edeyrneon, and Glyndourdwy,
which be now in Merionithshire (saving Dinmael which is in Denbighshire.)

Cantref Y Rhiw, whose comots were these, Yal now in Denbighshire: Stratalyn
and Hop now in Flyntshire.

Cantref Vwchnant has these comots, Merfforth in Flyntshire, Maelor Gymraeg,
in English Bromfield, now in Denbighshire, and Maelor Saesneg in Flyntshire.

Cantref Trefred contains these comots, Croesvain, Tref Y VVayn, in English
Chirke, and in Denbighshire. Croes of Wallt, English Oswestree and in
Shropshire.

Cantref Rayder with his comots Mochnant Israider, Cynlhaeth and Nanheudwy all
in Chirke land, and in Denbighshire. Also the lordship of Whytington now in
Shropshire, was in this part of Powys, which part at this day has lost the
name of Powys, and is situate in diverse shires, as it appears by the
discourse before passed. In this part is the castle of Holt in Bromefield, and
the castle of Chirke in Chirkeland. Likewise the lordship and castle of
Whytington, which came by marriage to Fulke Fitzwarren. There is beside these,
the lordship of Oswesire, of the which the Fitzalans have been lords these 300.
and odd years, and of diverse other lordships in those marches, as Shrarden,
the eleven towns, Clun, and many others, which be all now in Shropshire.

The second part called Powys Wenwynwyn, had likewise five Cantreds, and twelve
comots.

Cantref Y Vyrnwy had these comots, Mochnant vwch Rayader, Mechain Iscoed, and
Lhannerch Hudol.

Cantref Ystlyc had these, Devthwr, Gorthwr Isaf, and Strat Marchelh.

Cantref Lhyswynaf had these, Caereneon, and Mechain Vwchcoed.

Cantref Cydewen had comot Conan and comot Hauren.

Cantref Conan had Cyueilioc and Mouthwy, which is now in Merionyth shire. Of
all these, the three first Cantreds do only at this day bear the name of
Powys, which are upon the Northside of Seauerne, and are all five (saving the
comot of Mowthwy) in Mongomry shire.

This is a country full of woods, hills, and rivers, and has in it these
towns, the Poole, Newtowne, and Machynlhaeth. Arustly was in old time in this
part, but afterward it came to the Princes of Gwyneth. These lordships came by
just descent from the Princes thereof, to a woman named Hawys, the daughter of
Owen ap Gruffyth, as appears in the history following, page 215. Arustly and
Cyuelioc came to the Baron of Dudley, and afterward it was sold to the king.

The third part belonging to Mathraual, was the land between Wy and Seauerne,
containing four Cantreds, and 13. comots.

Cantref Melienyth has these comots, Ceri, Swythygre, Riwalalht, and Glyn
Ieithon.

Cantref Eluel has these, Vwchmynydh, Ismynydh, and Lhechdhyfnog.

Cantref Yclawdh these, Dyffryn Teyueydiat, Swydhynogen, and Pennwelht.

Cantref Buelht has these, Swydhyvam, Dreulys, and Isyrwon. Of this part there
is at this day some in Mountgomerie shire, some in Radnorshire, and some in
Brechnockeshire. In this part and in the lordships marching to it, which
although at the time of this division, which was in the time of the last
prince, were not in his subjection, yet to this day speak Welsh, and are
called Wales, and in these comots are these towns and castles. Mountgomerie
called in Welsh Treualdwyn, a pretty town and a fair castle. The castle of
Clunn called Colunwy, which is the Earls of Arundell. The town of Knighton,
in Welsh Trefyclawd. The castle of Cymaron. Presteyn in Welsh Lhanandras. The
town and castle of Radnor, in Welsh Maesyuet, at this day the shire town.
The town of Kyngton and the castle of Huntingdon, called in Welsh Y castelh
Mayn, which were the Bohunes Earls of Hereford, and after the dukes of
Buckingham. Castle Pain, Hay, Lhanuair in Buelht. These lordships with
Brechnock and Abergeuennie, were belonging to the Bruses lords of Brechnock,
and after came diverse times, and by sundry means to the Bohunes, Neuels, and
Mortimers. And so (as I have rehearsed) in this territory or kingdom were
found 14. Cantreds, and 40. comots. Two of these parts, which are Powys and
Gwyneth, are at this day called Northwales, and divided into six shires. Mon
called Anglesey, Caernaruon, Merionyth, Denbigh, Flynt, and Mountgomerie shire,
and are all on the Northside Seauerne, saving a piece of Mountgomerie shire.

And here I think it good to let the reader understand what the Brytish
chronicle says of Northwales, which affirms that three times it came by
inheritance to women. First to Stradwen, daughter to Caduan ap Conan ap Endaf,
and wife to Coel Godeboc, mother to Cenaw, Dyvyr and Gwawl. The second time to
the same Gwawl wife to Edeyrn ap Padarn, and mother to Cunetha Wledic: which
Cunetha inhabiting in the North parts of England, about the year 540. after
the incarnation of Christ, and hearing how the mingled nations of Irish Scots,
and Pictes, had over run the sea shore of Caerdigan, which was part of his
inheritance, sent his sons thither to enioie their inheritance, of the which
Tibiaon his eldest son died in Man, which land the said Irish Scots had
won. For Gildas says, that of the children of Glam Hector, which peopled a
great part of Ireland, Yscroeth with his people inhabited Dalrienda, which is a
part of Scotland: Builke with his people came to Man. But I think it good to
put in Gildas words, which says: Builke cum filijs suis inhabitauit Euboniam
insulam vulgo Manaw, quae est in meditullio maris inter Hyberniam and
Brytaniam; that is to say, Builke with his children inhabited the I Will Eubonia,
commonly Manaw (for so it was and is named in Brytish) which lies in the
middle of the sea, between Ireland and Brytaine. This was not called Mona, as
Polydor faineth. The children of Bethoun inhabited Demetia, which is
Southwales, with Gwyr and Cydweli, till they were chased thence by the children
of Cunetha. Thus far Gildas. Therefore the sons of Cunetha, being arrived
in Northwales (as well I think being driven by the Saxons, as for their
inheritance) divided the country betwixt them. And first Meireaon the son of
Tibiaon, the son of Cunetha, had Cantref Meireaon to his part. Arustel ap
Cunetha, had Cantref Arustly. Caredic ap Cunetha, had Caerdigion, now Caerdigan
shire. Maelor the son of Gwran, son to Cunedha had Maeloron, that is, the
two Maelors, Maelor Gymbraeg, called Br. and Maelor Saesneg.
Dunod had Cantref Dunodic. Edeyrn had Edeyrnion. Mael had Dynmael. Coel had
Coleyon. Doguael had Dogueilyn. Ryvaon had Ryuonioc, now Denbighland. Eneon
Yrch had Caereneon in Powys. Vssa had Maesvswalht now Oswestree. For surely
that they say commonly of Oswald king of Northumberland, to be slain there,
and of the Well that sproong where his arm was carried, is nothing so. For Beda
and all other writers testify that Peanda slew Oswald at Maserfelt, in the
kingdom of Northumberland, and his body was buried in the abbey of Bardney,
in the province of Lhyndesey. But to my former matter. These names given by the
sons of Cunetha, remain to this day. After this the Irish Picts or Scots,
which the Brytains called YGwydhyl Phictiaid, which is to say, The Irish
Pictes, did ouerrunne the I Will of Mon, and were driven thence by Caswalhon
Lhawhir, that is Caswalhon with the long hand, the son of Eneon Yrch ap
Cunedha, who slew Serigi their king with his own hands, at Lhany Gwydhyl which
is the Irish church at Holihead. This Caswalhon was father to Maelgon Gwyneth,
whom the Latins call Maglocunus, Prince and king of Brytaine.

In his time was the famous clerk and great wiseman Taliessyn Ben Beirdh, that
is to say, the cheifest of the Beirdh or wisemen: for this word Bardh in
Caesar's time, signified (as Lucan bears witness) such as had knowledge of
things to come, and so it signifies at this day. This Maelgon had a son
called Run, in whose time the Saxons invited Gurmond into Brytaine from
Ireland, See after in the hist. pa. 6.
who had come thither from Affrike, who with the Saxons was the utter
destruction of the Brytaines, and slew all that professed Christ, and was the
first that drove them over Seauerne. This Run was father to Beli, who was
father to Iago, (for so the Brytaines call James) who was father to Caduan, and
not Brochwel called Brecyual (as the English chronicle says:) for this
Brochwel Ysgithroc, See in the hist. page 22.
that is; long toothed, was chosen leader of such as met with Adelred alias
Ethelbertus Rex Cantiae, and other Angles and Saxons, whom Augustine had moved
to make war against the christian Brytaines, and these put Brochwel twice to
flight, not far from Chester, and cruelly slew a 1000. preests and monks of
Bangor, with a great number of lay brethren of the same house, which lived by
the labor of their hands, and were come barefooted and woolward to crave
mercy and peace at the Saxons hands. And here you shall understand that this
was not Augustine bishop of Hippona the great clarke, but Augustine the moonke,
called the apostle of England.

Then this Brochwel retired over Dee, hard by Bangor, and defended the Saxons
the passage, till Caduan king of Northwales, Meredyth king of Southwales, and
Bledrus or Bletius Prince of Cornwall, came to succor him, and gave the
Saxons a sore battle, and slew of them the number of a 1066. and put the rest
to flight. After the which battle, Caduan was chosen king of Brytaine, and was
chief ruler within the I Will; after whom his son Cadwalhon, who was father to
Cadwalader, the last of the Brytish blood, that bare the name of king of
Brytaine, was king.

See the history following, page 24.
The third time that Northwales came to a woman, was to Esylht the daughter of
Conan Tindaythwy, the son of Edwal Ywrch, the son of Cadwalader. She was
wife to Meruyn Vrych, and mother to Roderike the great, as shall be hereafter
declared. By this you may understand, that Northwales has been a great while
the cheifest seat of the last kings of Brytaine, because it was and is the
strongest country within this I Will, full of high mountains, craggie rocks,
great woods, and deep valleys, strait and dangerous places, deep and swift
rivers, as Dyui which springs in the hills of Merionyth, and runs Northwest
through Mowthwy, and by Machynlaeth, and so the sea at Aberdyui dividing North
and Southwales a sunder. Dee called in Welsh Dourdwy, springing also in the
other side of the same hills, runs East through Penlhyn and the lake Tegyd,
down to Corwen and Lhangolhen, between Chirkeland and Bromefield, where it
boweth Northward toward Bangor, to the Holt, and to Chester, and thence
Northwest to Flynt castle, and so to the sea.

There is also Conwey, rising likewise in Merionyth shire, and dividing
Caernaruon from Denbigh shire, runs under Snowdon Northeast, by the town of
Aberconwey to the sea.

Also Clwyd, which rising in Denbigh land, runs down to Ruthyn, and plain
North, not far from Denbigh to Saint Asaph, and so by Ruthlan and to the sea.
There be many other fair rivers, of which some run to the sea, as Mawr at
Traethmawr, and Auon y Saint at Caernaruon, and other that run to Seauerne,
as Murnwy in Powys, and to Murnwy Tanat; some other to Dee, as Ceirioc betwixt
the lordships of Chirke and Whittington: Alyn through Yal and Moldes dale, and
Hope dale, and so to Dee, a little above Chester. And this shall suffice for
the perfect description of that which in old time was called Gwyneth and Powys,
and at these days the six shires of Northwales.

Now remains the last kingdom of Wales, called Dineuowr, Dinevowr.
which although it was the greatest, yet was it not the best, as Giraldus
witnesses, chiefly because it was much molested with Flemings and Normans,
and also that in diverse parts thereof, the lords would not obey their Prince,
as in Gwent and in Morganwc, which was their own confusion, as shall hereafter
appear. Caredigion.
This was divided into six parts, of the which Caredigion was the first, and
contained four Cantreds, and ten comots, as Cantref Penwedic had in it these
comots, Geneurglyn, Perueth and Creuthyn.

Cantref Canawl had these, Meuenyth, Anhunoc, and Pennarth.

Cantref Castelh had these comots, Mabwynion and Caerwedros.

Cantref Syrwen had these, Gwenionyth and Iscoed: and this part is at this day
called in English Caerdiganshire, and in Welsh Swydh Aberteiui. This is a
champion country without much wood, and has been diverse times overcome with
Flemings and Normans, which builded many castles in it, and at the last were
beaten out of them all. It has on the East Northwales, with the river Dyui and
part of Powys, upon the South Caermardhynshire, upon the West Penbroke shire,
with the river Teiui, and upon the North the Irish sea. In this part is the
town of Caerdigan upon Teiui, not far from the sea. The town of Aberystwyth
upon the river Ystwyth, by the sea, and Lhanbadarn Vawr, which was a great
sanctuary, and a place of religious and learned men in times past. And in this
shire were a great number of castles, as the castle of Stratmeyric, of Walter,
of Lhanrysted, of Dynerth, of the sons of Wyneaon, of Aber Reidol, and a great
number more, with the towns of Tregaron, Lhandhewibreui, as you shall
understand in the history following.

The second part was called Dyuet, Dyuet.
and at this day Penbroke shire, and had in it eight Cantreds, and 23. comots,
which were these. Cantref Emlyn that had these comots, Vwchkuch, Iskuch and
Leuethyr.

Cantref Arberth had these, Penrhyn ar Elays, Esterolef, and Talacharn.

Cantref Daugledhev had these, Amgoed, Pennant, and Euelfre.

Cantref YCoed has these, Lhanhayaden, and Castelh Gwys.

Cantref Penvro has these, Coedyr, haf. Maenor byrr, and Penvro.

Cantref Ros has these, Hulfforth, castelh Gwalchmai and Ygarn.

Cantref Pubidioc has these, Mynyw, Pencaer, and Pebidioc.

Cantref Cemais has these, Vwchneuer, Isneuer, and Trefdraeth.

In this part are diverse towns and havens at this day, as Penbrooke Tenbie,
in Welsh Dynbegh y pyscot, Herefordwest, in Welsh Hulfforth, with the fair
haven of Mylford, called in Welsh Aberdaugledheu. Saint David's or Menevia,
called in Welsh Mynyw, the cheifest see in all Wales. Then Fiscard called
Abergwayn, and Newport named Trefdraeth: these be along the sea coast, or not
very far off. Besides these there be diverse castles, as Cilgerran, Arberth,
Gwys, Lhanhayaden, Walwyn, and diverse other. This part was won first by
Mountgomerys Earls of Sherewsburie, and after given Marshalls, and so to
Valence, and from thence were the Princes of Wales most troubled with the
Normans and Flemings, who do remain and inhabit about Tenbie, Penbrooke, and
in Ros to this day, which can neither Welsh nor good English as yet. Dyuet
(for so will I call it hereafter) has on the West and North the Irish sea,
upon the South the Spanish sea, and upon the East Caermardhynshire, and on the
Northeast Caerdiganshire. The third part was Caermardynshire, Caermardhyn
having four Cantreds, and 15, comots, as Cantref Finioc with the comots of
Harfryn, Deruedh, and Isgeneny.

Cantref Eginoc with these, Gwyr, now in Glamorganshire, Cydweli, and
Carnwilheon.

Cantref Bachan with these, Malbaen, Caeo, and Maenor Deilo.

Cantref Mawr with these, Cethineoc comot mab Elvyw, comot mab Vchdryd and
Wydigada. In this shire are the towns and castles of Caermardhyn, Dyneuowr,
which was the Princes seat of the country, Newtowne, Lhandeilo, Lhanymdhyfry,
Emlyn, Swansey, now in Glamorganshire, called in Welsh Abertawy upon the sea,
the castle of the sons of Vchtryd, of Lhanstephan, and others. It has upon
the West, Dyuet or Penbrooke shire, on the North Caerdiganshire, upon the
Southweast the sea, and upon the Southeast Glamorgan, and upon the East
Brecknockshire. This is counted the strongest part of all Southwales, as that
which is full of high mountains, great woods, and fair rivers, specially
Tywy. In this, and in the other two parts of Southwales, were the notablest
acts that this history entreats of, atchiued and done.

The fourth called Morganwc, Morganwc.
now Glamorganshire, containing four Cantreds, with 15. comots. As Cantref
Croneth, with these comots Rwngneth ac Avan, Tir yr Hwndrwd, and Maenor
Glynogwr.

Cantref Pennythen with these, Meyskyn, Glynrhodny, Maenor Talauan, and Maenor
Ruthyn.

Cantref Brenhinol, with these, Cibowr, Senghennyth, Vwchcaeth, and Iscaeth.

Cantref Gwentlhwg, which is now in Monmouthshire, with these comots, Yrhardh
Ganol, and Eithafdylygion. In this part are these towns and castles, Lhandaf
the Bishops sea, Caerdyffe called Caerdhydh, Cowbridge called in Welsh Y bont
vaen, which is as much to say, as Stonebridge, Lantwyd, Caerffyli, and others,
and has diverse rivers which run to the south sea, as Lay, Taf, Tawy, Neth,
Avan, Ogwr, and Lhychwr: it has on the south the sea of Seauerne, which
divides it from Devonshire and Cornwall; upon the Weast and Northweast,
Caermardhynshire; upon the Northeast Brechnockshire, and upon the East
Monmouthshire. See the history following, page 119.
Of this you shall read very little, for one Iestyn being chief of the
country, and having war with his neighbors, called one Robert Fitzhamon,
with a great number of strangers to his succoures, which after they had
atchiued, the enterprise liked so well the country, that they found occasion
to fall out with Iestyn, and inhabited the country themselves and their heirs
to this day.

The fifth part was called Gwent, and now in Monmouthshire, which had three
Cantreds, and ten comots, as Cantref Gwent, which had these comots, Y mynyth,
Iscoed Lhefnydh, and Tref y grug.

Cantref Iscoed these, Brynbuga, Vwchcoed, Y Teirtref, and Erging acewyas, now
in Herefordshire.

Cantref Coch was the seventh Cantred of Morganwc, which is now in
Glocestershire, and is called the Forest of Deane.

In this part is the ancient city of Caerlheon upon Vsk, where was the
Archbishops of Wales: here are also diverse towns and castles, as Chepstowe,
Glyn Strigul, Ros, Tyntern upon the river Wy: there is also Newport, called Y
castelh Newydh, Vysc called Brynbuga, Grosmont, Raglan, White castle,
Abergeuenny, and many other. This is a fair and a fertile country, of which
likewise the Gentlemen were never obedient to their Prince, which was the cause
of their own destruction. It has on the West Glamorgan and Brechnockshires,
upon the North Herefordshire, upon the East Glocestershire, with the river Wy,
and upon the South and Southeast Seauerne.

Brecheinoc.
Last of all comes Brecheinoc, now Brechnockeshire, which has three Cantreds,
and eight comots. As Cantref Selef which has these comots, Selef and Trahayern.

Cantref Canol these, Talgarth Ystradyw and Brwynlhys or Eglwys yail.

Cantref Mawr these, Tir Raulff, Lhywel and Cerrig Howel. In this part is the
town of Brechnock upon the meeting of Vsck and Hodni, and is called Aberhodni,
and Hay called Y Gelhy, with Talgarth, Buelht, Lhangors: it has West
Caermardhynshire, with the river Tawy, upon the North Radnorshire with Wy, upon
the East Herefordshire and Monmouth, upon the South Glamorgan. This for the
most part is full of mountains, woods and rivers, especially Buelht. And the
lords of this country called Bruses with the Mortimers, most of all others
lords Marchers, sometimes by might, but oftener by treason, have molested and
grieved the Princes of Wales, as you shall understand by the history following.
This land came after the Bruses to the Bohunes Earls of Hereford, and so to
the Staffords dukes of Buckingham.

These six shires being subject to the territory of Dynevowr with Radnorshire,
which was belonging to Mathraual, are now commonly called Southwales, which
country is both great and large, with many fair plains and valleys for
corn, high mountains and rocks full of pasture for cattle; great and thick
woods, with forests and parks for red dear and fallow; clear and deep
rivers full of fish, of which Seauerne is the cheifest, which with Wy and
Reidol spring out of a high mountain called Pymlhymon, in the edge of
Caerdiganshire, and are called commonly the three sisters. Seauerne runs
full East through Cydewen by the poole and under the castle of Shraden to
Shrewesburie, from whence it turns Southward and run-to Bridgenorth, Bewdley,
Worcester, Gloucester, and so to the sea by Bristowe. The second sister is Gwy
in English Wy, which took her journey Southeast by Rayader Gwy to Buelht,
where Irwon meets her, thence to Glasburie and so to Hereford and Monmouth,
and to the sea of Seauerne at Chepstow: for so they call Mor Hafren the sea
which seuereth Wales from Somersetshire, Devonshire, and Cornwale. The third
sister named Reidol, ran Northward to the sea being not far off, at
Aberystwyth. There be other fair rivers as Vsk, which rising in a high
mountain called Y Mynydh duy in the Southwest part of Brechnockshire runs
to Brechnocke, and so through Monmouthshire to the town of Vsk, Caerlheon and
Newport and so to the said South sea. Tywy also rising not far from Wy
runs South to Lhanymdhyfri, and thence Southwest by Lhandeilo and Dinevowr
to Abergwily and Caermardhyn, and so by Lhanstephan to the sea.

Teivi likewise which rises in the edge of Caermardhynshire, and runs
Northwest by Emlyn Cilgerran, (...), Greek. Fiber, Lat. Beauer, En. Auanc,
Bryt. Giraldus in Itiner.
Caerdigan, and so to the North sea. In Teiui above all the rivers in Wales,
were in Giraldus time a great number of Castors, which may be englished Beuers,
and are called in Welsh Auanc, which name only remains in Wales at this
day, but what it is very few can tell. It is a beast not much unlike an Otter,
but that it is bigger, all hearie saving the tail which is like a fish tail,
as broad as a man's head. This beast uses as well the water as the land, and
has very sharp teeth, and biteth cruelly, till he perceive the bones
crack, his stones be of great efficacy in physic. He that will learn what
strong nests they make, which Giraldus calls castles, which they build upon
the face of the water with great bows, which they cut with their teeth and how
some lie upon their backs holding the wood with the forefeet, which the other
draws with a cross stick, the which he holds in his mouth to the water
side, and other particularities of their natures, let him read Giraldus in his
Topographie of Wales. There be besides these a great number of rivers, of which
some run to the South, and some to the West and Northsea, as Tywy in
Glamorganshire, Tafalso in Caermardhynshire which runs to Cledheu, two
rivers either called Cledheu which do give Mylford the name of Aberdavgledhev
in Penbrookshire, Arth, Aeron, and Ystwyth in Caerdigan. There be also diverse
lordships which be added to other shires, and were taken heretofore for parts
of Wales, and in most part of them at this day the Welsh language is spoken,
as Oswestre, Knocking, Whittington, Elsmer, Masbrocke, Chirburie, Caurs, Clynn,
which are now in Shropshire, Ewyas Lacy, Ewyas Haroald, Clifford, Winsorton,
Yardley, Huntyngdon, Whytney, Loghardneys in Herefordshire. Also this country
of Southwales as all the rest of Brytaine, was first inhabited by the Brytains,
which remain there to this day, saving that in diverse places, specially
along the sea shore, they have been mingled with Saxons, Normans (which the
Welsh history calls Frenchmen) and Flemings: so that the Princes of Wales,
since the conquest of the Normans, could never keep quiet possession thereof,
but what for strangers and what for disloyalty of their own people, vexation
and war, were for the most part compelled to keep themselves in
Caermardhynshire.

This shall suffice for the description of the country, and therefore let us
now proceed to the Brytish copy.
Cadwalader.
The beginning of the Principality and government of Wales.
CADWALADER 680
the last King of the Brytaines, Galfr. Mon.
descending from the noble race of the Troianes, by extreme plagues of death
and famine, was driven to forsake this his Realm and native Country, and to
soiourne with a great number of his nobles and subjects with his cosen Alan,
King of little Brytaine, which is called in the Brytish tongue Lhydaw.

Little Brytaine is a country in France, called in Caesar's time, Armorica, and
after inhabited by Brytaines, Little Brytaine, or Brytaine Armorike.
who about the year of Christ 384. under the conduct of Conan Lord of
Meriadoc, now Denbighland, went out of this I Will with Maximus the tyrant, to his
aid against the Emperor Gratianus, Galfr. Mon.
and winning the said country of Armorica, I. Cast.
(which Maximus gave Conan and his people) slew and drove out all the old
inhabitants thereof, Math. West.
planting themselves in the same, Fabian.
where they to this day speak the Brytish tongue, being the third remnant of
the ancient Brytaines. Caxton.


The names of the kings of little Brytaine.
R. Caen. lib. 2. Per. 2.
1 Conan. Meriadoc. 2 Gradlonus. 3 Solomon. 1. 4 Auldranus. 5 Budicus. 1. 6
Howelus Magnus. This Howel was with King Arthure in his wars. 7 Howelus. 2. 8
Alanus. 1. 9 Howelus. 3. 10 Gilquellus. 11 Solomon. 2. 12 Alanus. 2. Of whom,
mention is made in this place, who descended of a daughter of Rune, the son
of Mailgon Gwyneth, king of great Brytaine, which was married to the forenamed
Howel the second, King of little Brytaine. 13 Conobertus. 14 Budicus. 2. 15
Theodoricus. 16 Rualhonus. 17 Daniel Dremrost, id est, Ruhicunda facie. 18
Aregstanus. 19 Maconus. 20 Neomenius. 21 Haruspogius. 22 Solomon. 3. Who was
slain by his own men, and then was that Kingdom turned to an Earledom,
whereof Alan was the first Earl, who valiantly resisted the Normans, and
vanquished them oftentimes.
Cadwalader being in Brytaine, was certified that a great number of strangers,
as Saxons, Angles, and Iuthes, Galfride. I. Castor.
had arrived in Brytaine, and finding it desolate, and without inhabitants
(saving a few Saxons which had called them in, and certain poor Brytaines
that lived by roots in rocks and woods) had ouerrunne a great part thereof,
and dividing it into diverse territories and kingdoms, inhabited that part
which was then, and now at this day is called Lhoyger in the Brytish or Welsh
tongue, and in English England, with all the cities, towns, castles, and
villages, which the Brytaines had builded, ruled, and inhabited by the space of
1827. years, under diverse Kings and Princes of great renown: whereupon he
purposed to return, and by strength of Brytish Knights to recover his own
land again.

After he had prepared and made ready his navy for the transporting of his
own men, A fable confirmed with blind prophesies.
with such succors as he had found at Alans hand, an Angel appeared unto him
in a vision, and declared that it was the will of God that he should not take
his voyage toward Brytaine, but to Rome to Pope Sergius, where he should make
an end of his life, and be afterward numbered among the blessed: for GOD had
appointed that the Brytaines should have no more the rule and governance of the
whole I Will, until the prophecy of Merlin Ambrose should be fulfilled.

Which vision, after that Cadwalader had declared to his friend Alan, he sent
for all his books of prophesies, as the works of both Merdhines, or Merlines,
to wit, Ambrose, and Syluester, surnamed Merdhin Wylht: and the words which the
Eagle spoke at the building of Caer Septon, now called Shaftsburie; and after
long study, found the time to be now come whereof they had prophesied.

Of this admonition given to Cadwalader there be diverse opinions. Some hold
that this was signified to him in a dream: of the which mind is Polydore
Virgil, and diverse other.

Some other do think, that (if any such vision were) it was some illusion of
a wicked spirit, or a fantastical conceit of Cadwalader himself, being a
man of a mild and quiet nature, and wearied with troubles and miseries. Other
reject it altogether as a fable, Hol. pa. 183.
not worthy to be recorded in books: but howsoever it was, certain it is,
that after his going over to Alan, he never returned again to Brytaine. Of
these two Merlines thus writes Girald. Camb. in suo Itinerario.

Erant Merlini duo, vnus qui and Ambrosius dictus est, quia binomius fuerat,
and sub rege Vortigerno prophetauit, ab incubo genitus, and in vrbe ab ipso
denominata Caervyrdhin. 1. vrbs Merlini, inuentus. Alter de Albania oriu^dus,
qui Calidonius dictus est, a Calidonia sylua, in qua prophetauit: and
Syluester, quia cum inter acies bellicas constitutus, horribile monstrum nimis
in era suspiciendo prospiceret, dementire caepit: and ad syluam transfugiendo,
syluestrem vsque ad obitum vitam perduxit. Hic autem Merlinus tempore Arthuri
fuit, and long before and apertius quam alter prophetasse perhibetur. Haec
Cambrensis.

In English thus.

There were two Merlines, the one named also Ambrose (for he had two names)
begotten of a spirit, and found in the town of Caermarthen, which took the
name of him, and is therefore so called, who prophesied under King Vortigerne.
The other borne in Albaine or Scotland, surnamed Calidonius of the forest
Calidon, wherein he prophesied, and was called also Syluestris, or of the wood,
for that he beholding some monstrous shape in the air being in the battle
fell mad, and flieng to the wood, lived there the rest of his life. This
Merline was in the time of king Arthure, and prophesied fuller and plainer than
the other.

Concerning the words of the Eagle at the building of Caer Galf ride
Septon in Mount Paladour in the time of Rudhudibras, Cast.
in the year after the creation of the world, 3048. some think that an Eagle
did then speak and prophecy. Other are of opinion, that it was a Brytaine
named Aquila that prophesied of these things, and of the recovery of the whole
I Will again by the Brytaines, bringing with them the bones of Cadwalader from
Rome, as in the said prophesies is to be seen.

By these toies and fables, men may learn what folly and vanity the wit of
man, being not stayed and directed by the word of God, is prone and subject
unto. And certain it is, that the simple and ignorant have bin in all ages
deluded and brought to great errors and blindness by the practice of satan,
with these fained revelations, false prophesies, and superstitious dreams of
hypocrites and lewd persons: whereof (as it is manifest in histories) much
bloudshead and mischief has ensued, and many relieng upon the same, have
been utterly overthrown and perished. Wise men therefore will never regard or
esteem such things.

Alan therefore counseled Cadwalader to fulfill the will of God, who did so,
and taking his journey to Rome, lived there eight years in the service of God,
and died in the year of Christ, 688. So that the Brytaines ruled this I Will,
with the out Isles of Wight: Mon, in English called Anglesey: Manaw, in English
Man: Orkney, and Ewyst, 1137. years before Christ, until the year of his
incarnation, 688. And thus ended the rule of the Brytaines over the whole I Will.

The Brytaines being sore troubled with the Scots and Picts and denied of aid
at the hands of the Romans, sent for the Saxons to come to defend them against
their enemies: 450
who coming at the first as friends to the Brytaines, liked the country so
well, that they became their mortal enemies, and drove them out of the same.

About the year of Christ, 590. Gurmundus an archpirate and captain of the
Norwegians, Galfrid.
after that he had conquered Ireland, Cast.
being called by the Saxons to their aid against Careticus King of the
Brytaines, overcame the same Careticus in battle, and compelled him and his
Brytaines to flee beyond the rivers of Seauerne and Dee to Cambria, now called
Wales, and to Cornewale, and some to Brytaine Armorike, where they remain to
this day, and gave Lhoegria, now England, to the Saxons. And albeit that
Caduan, Cadwalhon, and Cadwalader were sithence entitled Kings of all
Brytaine, yet they could never recover again the quiet possession of the whole
Island afterward. After the departure of Cadwalader out of the land, the
Brytaines were governed within the country of Wales or Cambria by those men,
whereof this history following does entreat, which were commonly called
Kings of such provinces and countries as they possessed, until the time of
Owen Gwyneth, H. Lhoyd.
who being in the days of King Stephen, and Henry the second, was the first
that named himself Prince of Wales, and so the rest after him kept that title
and style: and yet nevertheless, they are sometimes called Princes before him,
and Kings after him, as I have observed by diverse charters and old records
which I have seen in the Tower of London, and elsewhere. Howbeit, this author
calls the chiefest of them Kings, till the time of the said Owen, and
sithence, Princes.

IVOR.
IVOR, the son of Alan.
AFter that Cadwalader had taken his iourneie toward Rome, 688
as before is declared, leaving his son named Edwal Ywrch, that is to say,
Edwal the Roo, and his people, with his cosen Alan, Galfrid. Io. Cast.
which Alan taking courage to him, and not despairing of the conquest of
Brytaine, manned his ships as well with a great number of his own people, as
with those which Cadwalader had brought with him, and appointed Iuor his son,
and Ynyr his nephew to be the leaders and chiefetaines of the same, who
sailing over the narrow seas, landed in the west parts of Brytaine, of whose
arrival, when the Saxons were certified, they gathered a great army, and gave
Iuor battle, where they were put to flight, and lost a great number of their
people: and Iuor wan the countries of Cornwall, Devonshire, and Somersetshire,
and inhabited them with Brytaines.

Whereupon, Kentwinus King of Westsex gathered a great number of Saxons and
Angles together, and came against the Brytaines, which were ready to abide the
battle: and as the armies were both in sight, they were not very desirous to
fight, but fell to a composition and agreement, that Iuor should take
Ethelburga to wife, which was cosen to Kentwyn, and quietly enioie all that
he had, during the reign of Iuor.

H. Lhoyd.
This Iuor is he whom the English Chronicles do call Iue or Jew King of West
Saxons, that reigned after Cedwall, and they say that he was a Saxon, for
Kentwyn reigned but five years after Iuors coming to England, and after him,
his nephew Cedwall, who after he had reigned over the West Saxons two years,
went to Rome, and left his kingdom to Iue his cosen. This Iue or Iuor, (whom
the Brytaines call the son of Alan, and the Saxons the son of Kenred) being
King of the Saxons and Brytaines which inhabited the west parts of England,
after many victories achieved against the Kings of Kent, Southsex, and
Mertia, left his kingdom to Adelred, or as some call him Adelerdus his cosen,
and took his journey to Rome, where he made a godly end, about the year of
our Lord, 720.

Of Cadwalader, Cedwall, and Iuor, there be diverse opinions. Some hold, that
Cadwalader and Cedwall are the selfsame man; and that the Saxon writers call
him Cedwall whom the Brytaines do name Cadwalader: who (as the Brytish
Chronicles do affirm) after his foresaid vision, did resign all his right,
title, and interest in great Brytaine, to the said Alan king of Brytaine
Armorike, and so despairing that either he or his should ever have any thing
to do there, leaving his son Edwal Ywrch and his people to the ordering of
his cosen Alan, went to Rome. But this opinion seems to vary from the
assertion of Bernardus Guidonius. But certainly in mine opinion it is more
probable that this Cedwall was Edwal the son of Cadwalader, for the name
Edoal, which in the ancient Brytish copy is written Etoal, may well agree with
that which Guidonius writes: and an easy matter it were especially in proper
names for the C. capital to creep in, which is almost all one with that
character which the Lawyers do call a paraph,
and is used commonly in all old text hands at the beginning of periods or
sections. Of this matter, thus writes Guidonius, In suo pontificali Catalogo,
sub Sergio primo.

Per idem tempus Ethoal rex Brytonum, Rob. Caenal.
cum per december annos multis regulis obuiasset, and plura mala illis irrogasset,
tandem ipsis in pacem deuenientibus, super occidentales Saxones regnauit annis
duobus. Videns autem Brytanniam multis miserijs contritam, regnum spreuit
terrenum propter aeternum, and Romam veniens, paucis diebus transactis migrauit
ad Christum. Et paulo post. Hic ex toto illud regnum antiquissimum Brytonum
corruit, quod omnibus fere regnis diuturnius fuit. A tempore Heli Sacerdotis
vsque ad hoc tempus, per annos 1825. Rob. Caenalis lib. 2. per. 2.

That is.

At the same time Ethoal King of the Brytaines, when he had by the space of ten
years warred with diverse Kings, and often put them to the worse, at length
growing to an agreement with them, he reigned over the West Saxons two years,
and then perceiving Brytaine to be ouerworne with miseries, preferring the
heavenly kingdom before the earthly, came to Rome, and within few days
died: and in him ended wholly that ancient kingdom of the Brytaines, which
continued in a manner longer than any other, from Helie the priest to this
time, by the space of 1825. years.

Further, it is not like that Iuor coming to the aid of Edwal his cosen,
would ever seek the kingdom to himself and defeat the right heir: but
very well it may be (if this Iuor be that man whom the Saxon writers call
Inas or Iue) after these Brytaines had arrived in the south part of this
realm, and fought diverse times with the Saxon kings, and continued in
Cornwall, Devonshire, and Somersetshire by the space of two years, that they
should afterward meet Centwyn in the field, and so fall to an agreement, that
Iuor taking Ethelburga the cosen of Centwyn to wife, should enioie the
kingdom of the West Saxons after Centwyn, and that thereupon Edwal resigning
his title and interest to Iuor, departed to Rome, and so died: as Guidonius
says.

Beda.
All this notwithstanding, it seems by the report of other writers of very
good account, H. Hunt.
that Inas or Iue king of the West Saxons (whose laws are extant in print, set
out by master) William Lamberd Esquier, Cast.
a worthy searcher and preserver of the antiquities of this land) was not a
Brytaine, W. Lamb.
but a Saxon, who had war against the Brytaines diverse times, and vanquished
them.

Matthew. West. reports that Inas or Iue fought with Gerent King of the
Brytaines.

I have an ancient book written (as John Leland thinks) by John Castoreus or
Beuer, sometimes Monk of Westminster, who lived in the time of Edward the
third, which reports the history of Inas in this sort.

About the year of grace 689. Iuor and Henyr sons of the daughter of
Cadwalader sometime King of Brytaine, I. Cast.
came over from Ireland, and taking to their aid the two Kings of Wales,
destroyed the province of Chester, and sent messengers to the Saxon Kings,
commanding them to restore again to the Brytaines the country of Lhoyger, The
request of the Brytaines.
out of the which they had wrongfullie expelled their parents and ancesters:
adding, that if they would not so do within fifteen days, they should not
enioie it any longer. The which message, Inas the noble King of Westsex,
signified unto all the other Saxon Kings, who soon met together in Mount
Campeden, to whom Sibertus King of Essex spoke thus:

Dear friends and companions, The oration of Sibertus to the other Saxon Kings.
let us wey and consider not only what we are our selves, but also what our
enemies are which come against us: they are the very Brytaines, whose fathers
and ancesters, our fathers have beereft of their inheritance, and expelled out
of their own land: and now they justly come against us, to claim that which
our ancesters by violence have taken from theirs. Let us therefore like other
nations, choose unto us a head, to lead, direct, and govern us, whom, as
chief lord in time of peace and war, we as members may obeie and stick to,
since without a head, there is no victory to be looked for. Have not the
Brytaines after two years of their dispersion set upon the ancient Saxons (a
more valiant people than we are) fifteen times within seven years? Did they
not spoil their kingdoms, killed their people, and left such as remained
alive sore wounded and maimed at their departure?

The rest of the Saxon kings agreed unto his mind, and with one assent chose
that worthy Knight Inas King of Westsex to be their sovereign, who having
taken their homage, advanced his standard, and marched forward against Iuor and
Henyr, and set upon them, so that they were feign to forsake their tents and
fly into Wales.

Thus Inas having obtained the victory, with the other Saxon Kings (saving
Sibertus, who by reason of his age and impotencie had departed home before)
returned to South hampton, where his cosen Adelard informed him that Iuor and
Henyr had gathered and leauied a puissant army afresh to set upon the Saxons:
where upon, Inas foreslowed not the matter, but went against them, and laid
seege to the Castle of Snowdon, compelling the Brytaines to fly to their
ships* and while he was at Bangor with the other Saxon Kings, and the nobles of
Wales, he kept the feast of S. David, and then dismissed the other Kings home
to their country, until they should be called for again: and departed
himself with Adelard his cosen, to Queen Ethelburga being then at
Manchester, and continued there almost three months.

In the mean while, Adelard minding to travel about all Wales, met three
spies, of whom (being by him taken and examined) he learned that Iuor and
Henyr were returning again with a huge army, of such strength and force, as
all the Saxon Kings were not able to resist. Then went he and showed Inas what
he had heard: wherefore Inas forthwith certified the other Saxon Kings of the
same, commanding them without delaie to be ready at Chester with horse and
armor to go against their enemies, and to defend their country from violence.
Who accordingly met at Chester, and following the Kings standard, gave the
Brytaines battle, and put them to flight. Howbeit, the Brytaines eftsoons
invaded England, and made seven roades in two years, destroieng towns and
villages wheresoever they came, and never returning without great and rich
booties. Inas after this victory returned home, and reigned over the West
Saxons 36. years, and then bequeathed his kingdom to his cosen Adelard. Thus
much out of Castoreus.

This Iuor made the fratrie of Glastenburie, called in the Brytish tongue Ynys
Aualon.

Joseph of Aremathia being sent by Philip the Apostle, as Gildas reports,
Gildas.
came into this Island in the days of Aruiragus King of Brytaine, Polydore.
about the year of Christ 53. and instructed the Brytaines in the doctrine of
salvation, in the I Will of Aualon, where he builded a Church for the Christians:
which Church, this Iuor (if it be he that governed the West Saxons) converted
to an Abbey, and endowed the same with large possessions, Bale.
which was the more famous, because the bodies of the said Joseph of Aremathia
and king Arthur were there buried.

He gave also great lands to the Church of Winchester. In the second year of
Iuors reign, Brythe a subject to Egfride King of Northumberland, did ouerrun
and destroy a great part of the country of Ireland. In the fourth year of
his reign there was a great earthquake in the I Will of Man: and the year
following, it reigned blood in Brytaine and in Ireland. The milk likewise and
the butter turned to the color of blood. Math. West.
The second year after that the Moon appeared all bloody.

After the departure of Iuor to Rome, Adelard or Adelred took the rule of the
Saxons. And Rodericus, or Roderi Molwynoc the son of Edwal Ywrch, did take
the rule of the Brytaines in the west part of England.

Roderike Molwynoc.
Roderike or Rodri, the son of Edwal Ywrch.
ROderike, over the Brytains began his reign an. 720. 720
against whom, Adelred King of Westsex raised a great army, and destroieng the
country of Devonshire, entered Cornwall, where Roderike with the Brytaines
gave him battle, This battle is called Gwaeth Heilyn.
in the which, the Brytaines had the victory. The year after, the Brytaines
obtained two other victories against the Saxons: one in Northwales, at a place
called Garth Maelawc: and another in Southwales at Pencoet. At this time Belin
the son of Elphin, a noble man amongst the Brytaines died. The year
following, died Celredus King of Mertia, Ethelbald King of Mertia.
and Ethelbaldus was made King after him, who being desirous to annex the
fertile soil of the country lieng between Seuerne and Wye, to his Kingdom
of Mertia, gathered an army, and entered into Wales, and destroieng all before
him, he came to the mountain Carno, not far from Abergeuenny, where a sore
battle was fought between him and the Brytaines in the year 728.

The year 733. 733
died Beda priest, brought up in the Abbey of Wyrnetham, Or Iatewe
a great clearke that wrote many works, among which, there is one entitled,
The Ecclesiastical history of the English nation, dedicated unto Cleolwolfe
King of Northumberland. This year, Adelard King of Westsex, and Ethelbald King
of Mertia, joined their powers against the Brytaines, and gave them battle,
and after a long fight and great slaughter upon either part, obtained a bloody
victory. The year 735. 735
Adelard King of Westsex died, and Cudred reigned in his place. And the year
following died Edwyn King of the Pictes. And in the year 746. Hol. pa. 193.
there was a great battle fought at Hereford betwixt Cudred and Ethelbaldus,
where after a long fight, Cudred had the victory. Also the next year ensuing
he gave the Brytaines and overthrow and died shortly after.

H. Hunt. Hol. page 189. and 193.
The Brytaines seeing they could little prevail against the Saxons, joined in
league with Cuthred King of the West Saxons, who then was out with Ethelbald
King of Mertia, whereupon, the said Ethelbald entered into Wales with a strong
army, and the Brytaines met him, and were there discomfited. After that,
Cuthred and Ethelbald met in the field, where Ethelbald was put to flight: but
anon after they two were made friends, and joined together their powers against
the Brytaines and overcame them.

Math. West.
After Cuthred, in the year 749. was Sigebert created King, 749
who for his evil behavior, was expelled by his nobles out of his Kingdom,
Sigebert King of Westsex. Kenulph.
and was miserably slain by a swineheard, after whom, Kenulph was made King
of West Saxons, the year 750. 750
About the same time died Theodor the son of Belin, a man of great estimation
among the Brytaines. Not long after, there was a great battle fought betwixt
the Brytaines and the Pictes at a place called Magedawc, where Dalargan King of
the Pictes was slain. Within a little after, Roderi or Roderike Molwynoc was
driven by the Saxons to forsake the west country, and to come to seek his own
inheritance in Northwales, where ruled at that time the children of Bletius or
Bledericus prince of Cornewal and Devonshire (who was one of them that gave
Adelred and Ethelbert the overthrow at Bangor upon the river Dee) who enioied
the governance of Northwales, ever sithence Caduan was chosen King of Brytaine,
until this time.

By this history it should seem that the Brytaines continued their
government in the west part of Lhoegria until this time. But surely, the
consent (in a manner) of all writers is, that the Brytish kingdom ended in
Cadwalader, after whom, the Brytaines had nothing to do beyond Seuerne, being
constrained to keep themselves within the countries of Cambria and Cornubia.
It is also written by diverse, that Iuor and Ynyr at their first arriving in
Brytaine, were repelled by the Saxons, and driven to Wales, where Iuor ruled as
Prince many years, whom this Roderi or Roderike the son of Edwal the son
of Cadwalader succeeded.

When Roderike king of the Brytains had reigned about 30. years, he died, the
year 750. leaving two sons after him, Conan Tindaythwy, and Howel.

Conan Tindaethwy.
Conan Tindaethwy the son of Roderike.
COnan Tindaethwy did begin his reign over the Brytaines the year of our
Lord 755. 755
About two years after, there was a great battle fought at Hereford betwixt
the Brytaines and the Saxons, where Dyfnwal the son of Theodor was slain.
And this year died Athelbert King of Northumberland, and Oswold reigned in his
stead. About this time, there was an order taken for the right keeping of the
feast of Easter in Wales, by Elbodius a man both godly and learned: I. Bale,
Cen. 1. page 67.
for the Brytaines ever before that time varied from the church of Rome, in
celebrating the feast of Easter, and the variance was this. The church of Rome
by order of a general Council holden at Nice, had appointed, that ever the
next sundaie after the 14. day of the moon should be Easter day, so that
Easter should be ever either the 15.16.17.18.19.20. or 21. day of the moon,
and never the 14. day it self, nor never pass the 21. And the Brytaines did
use to keep their Easter upon the 14. day, and so to the 20. as it fell, so
that sometimes when it was Easter day with the Brytaines, it was but
Palmesunday with the Saxons: of which diversity grew a great contention
betwixt Colman and Hylda upon the one part, defending the rites of the
Brytaines; and Gilbert and Wilfride upon the other part, about the year 660.
660
wherein they seem scant to call the Brytaines and Scots christians, because
they keep not Easter within the days appointed.

Leland. I. Bale, Cen. 1. page 81.
I read that this Hylda (which was the niece of Edwine King of Northumberland,
brought up by Pauline and Aedan) in a public synod did withstand Wilfride and
other superstitious moonks in these toies and trifles, all edging for her out
of Polycrates the fact of Irenaeus, who withstood Victor Bishop of Rome in that
behalf, and the custom of the church of Asia observed by S. John the
Evangelist, Philip the Apostle, Polycarpus and Melito, and taught in this Island
of Brytaine by Joseph of Arimathea, who first preached the Gospel in the same.

763
In the year 763. was Offa made King of Mercia, and Brichtrich King of West
Saxons. In the which year died Fermael the son of Edwal: and the year
following, Cemoyd the King of the Pictes. The year 776. the men of Southwales
destroyed a great part of Mercia with fire and sword. And the summer following,
all the Welshmen gathered themselves together, and entered the Kingdom of
Mercia, and did much hurt there.

Io. Caest.
The Saxons, which bordered upon the country of Cambria or Wales, did daily
incroch so upon the lands of the Welshmen beyond Seauerne, that they had gotten
much of the same into their hands, especially toward the south part of the
country. Wherefore the Welshman put themselves in armor, and set upon the
Saxons, and chased them over Seauerne again, and then returned home with a
great prey, and thus they did oftentimes, killing and destroieng all before
them, and always bringing home with them much cattle, which thing caused Offa
to conclude a peace with the other Saxon Kings, and to bend his whole force
against the Welshmen.

Whereupon Offa King of Mercia caused a great ditch to be made, Io. Caestor:
Matthew. West.
large and deep from sea to sea, betwixt his kingdom and Wales, whereby he
might the better defend his country from the incursions of the Welshmen. And
this ditch is to be seen in many places as yet, and is called Clawdh Offa,
Clawdh Offa.
which is, Offas ditch at this day.

King Offa, calling to his aid the other Saxon Kings, gathered a huge army,
and came over Seauerne into Wales: upon whose coming, the Welshman (being not
able to encounter with such a multitude of armed soldiers) left the plain and
even country by Seauerne side, and the land between it and the river Wye,
and withdrew themselves to the mountains and rocks, where they might be most
in safety, until the enemies were avoided out of the country; yet
nevertheless, continually they made diverse invasions by stealth into the land
of Mercia, and always returned with advantage, so that the Saxons by keeping
themselves encamped could do no good, for they durst not pursue the Welshman
to the mountains and woods, for fear of intrapping, by such as kept the
streights and passages.

When Offa perceived that by open war he could do no good, he expelled all
the Welshmen out of the plain and even country between Seauerne and Wye, and
planted Saxons in the same: and annexing it to his own kingdom of Mercia,
caused this great and famous ditch (whereof mention is in this place) to be
made, to save his people from the invasions of the Welshmen. Whereupon the seat
of the Kings of Powys was translated from Pengwern, now called Salop, to
Mathrual, where it continued long after.

795
In the year 795. the Danes came first into England, Matt. West. page 289.
and six years after they came again, and destroyed a great part of Lindsey
and Northumberland, and ouerran the most part of Ireland, and destroyed
Rechreyn.

Also about the same time there was a battle fought at Ruthlan, between the
Saxons and the Welshmen, where Caradoc King of Northwales was slain. This
Caradoc was the son of Gwyn, the son of Colhoyn, the son of Ednowen, the
son of Blethyn, the son of Blecius or Bledricus prince of Cornwall and
Devonshire. Also this year died Offa King of Mercia, and Egfert his son
reigned in his stead.

In the year of our Lord 800. Egbertus was made King of Westsex: and Kenulphus
the year following treated King of Mercia. Arthen also the son of Sitsylht,
the son of Clydawc King of Caerdigan, died the same year. Likewise Run King
of Dyuet, and Cadelh King of Powys died in the year 808. 808


This was a troublesome time, and as yet no stayed government established in
Wales, and therefore such as were chief lords in any country, are here
called kings.

Io. Bale.
The next year after died Elbodius Archbishop of Northwales, before whose
death, the sun was sore eclipsed. In the year 810. 810
was the moon eclipsed upon Christmas day. The same year, S. David's was
burnt by the West Saxons. There was also a general morreine and death of
cattle throughout all Wales. The next year ensuing, Owen the son of
Meredyth, the son of Terudos died: and the Castle of Degaunwy was destroyed
with thunder. Conan prince of Wales, and his brother Howel could not agree,
insomuch that they tried the matter by battle, wherein Howel had the victory.

This Howel the brother of Conan, King or Prince of Northwales, did claim the
I Will of Mon or Anglesey for part of his fathers inheritance, which Conan refused
to give him, and thereupon they fell at variance, and consequently to make
war the one against the other, which is unnatural amongst brethren.

Here I think it fit to say somewhat of the custom and tenure of Wales,
whereof this mischief grew, that is, the division of the fathers inheritance
amongst all the sons, commonly called Gauel kind. Gauel is a Brytishe
term, signifieng a hold, because every one of the sons did hold some
portion of his fathers lands, as his lawful son and successor. This was the
cause not only of the overthrow of all the ancient nobility of Wales (for by
that means, the inheritance being continually divided and subdivided amongst
the children, and the childrens children, etc. was at length brought to
nothing) but also of much bloudshead and unnatural strife and contention
amongst brethren, as we have here an example, and many other in this
history. This kind of partition is very good to plant and settle any nation
in a large country not inhabited, but in a populous country already
furnished with inhabitants, it is the very decaie of great families, and (as I
said before) the cause of strife and debate.

And the next year there was much hurt done by thunder, and in diverse places
many houses burnt to the earth. The same year died Gruffyth the son of Run,
and Griffri the son of Kyngen was slain by the treason of Elice his brother.

Howel gave his brother Conan another battle, and slew a great number of his
people, whereupon, Conan leauied an army, in the year 817. and chased his
brother Howel out of the I Will of Mon or Anglesey, compelling him to fly into
Man. And a little after died Conan, chief King of the Brytaines or Welshmen,
leaving behind him a daughter called Esylht, which was married to a noble man,
called Mervyn Vrych, the son of Gwyriad, or Vriet, the son of Elidur, and so
forth in the right line to Belinus the brother of Brennus King of the
Brytaines, and his mother was Nest, the daughter of Cadelh King of Powys, the
son of Brochwel Yscithroc, (that fought with the Saxons at Bangor,) who was
prince of Powys.

Galfride. I. Cast. Matthew. West.
This Brochwel is called of the Latin writers Breciuallus and Brochmaelus, of
whom I find thus written in Historia diuae Monacellae.

Fuit olim in Powysia quidam princeps illustrissimus nomine Brochwel Yscithroc,
Consul Legecestriae, qui in vrbe tunc temporis, Pengwern Powys, nunc vero
Salopia dicta est, habitabat: cuius domicilium seu habitaculum ibi steterat,
vbi collegiu^ diui Ceddae nunc situm est.

That is.

There was sometimes in Powys a noble Prince, named Brochwel Yscithroc, Consul
or Earl of Chester, who dwelt in a town then called Pengwerne Powys, and now
Salope, whose dwelling house was in the very same place where the College of
Saint Chad now stands. This man with Caduan king of Brytaine, Galfrid. Cast.
Morgan king of Demetia, and Bledericus king of Cornewal, gave an overthrow to
Ethelfred king of Northumberland, upon the river of Dee, Anno gratiae 617. of
whom, the ancestors of diverse in Wales living at this day, are known (by
ancient books and records) to have descended.

Mervyn Vrych, and Esylht.
Mervyn Vrych, and Esylht the daughter of Conan.
Matthew West. Sim. Dunel. H. Hunt.
THE first year of the reign of Mervyn Vrych, and Esylht his wife, Egbert King
of Westsex entered into Wales with a great army, and destroyed the whole
country unto Snowden hills, and seized to his hands the country of Rhyvonioc
in Denbighland. About this time, there was a sore battle fought in Anglesey,
called the battle of Lhanuaes.

In the year of Christ 819. 819
Kenulph King of Mertia destroyed West Wales, and the summer following, he
ouerranne Powys land, and did much hurt, and soon after died, and Kenelme
reigned in his place. About the same time also Howel King of Man died. The
year 825. Ceolwulph was made King of Mertia, and reigned two years. After
whom, Bernulph was created king, who was overthrown at Elledowne by Egbert
king of the West Saxons, who also brought to his subjection the countries of
Kent and West Angles. Not long after, about the year 828. 828
Bernulph was slain by the East Angles. After that, there was a great battle
fought at a place called Gauelford, betwixt the Brytaines, and the West Saxons
of Devonshire, and many thousands cruelly slain upon either side, and the
victory uncertain. The year 829. 829
Egbert overthrew Wyhtlafe King of Mertia, and made him subject to his
Kingdom. He also passed Humber, The Kingdom of England began.
and wan the land, and so was the first Monarch of the Saxons, and brought the
seven kingdoms into one, and changed the name of Brytaine into England, and
called the people Englishmen, and the language English: for the people that
came into this I Will from Germany, were Saxons, Angles, and Iuthes. And of the
Saxons came the people of Eastsex, Southsex, Middlesex, and West Saxons. Of the
Angles came the East Angles, middle Angles or Mertians, and all on the North
side of Humber. And of the Iuthes came the inhabitants of Kent, and the I Will of
Wight. And the seven Kingdoms were these: The seven Saxon kingdoms.
1 The first Kent. 2 The second Southsex, containing Sussex and Southerie. 3 The
third East Angles, containing Northfolke, Southfolke, and Cambridgeshire. 4 The
fourth Westsex, containing Barkeshire, Devonshire, Somersetshire, and
Cornwall. 5 The fifth Mertia, containing Glocestershire, Herefordshire,
Worcestershire, Shropshire, Staffordshire, Chesshire, Warwikeshire,
Leycestershire, Darbishire, Notinghamshire, Lincolneshire, Northamptonshire,
Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, and half Hertfordshire. 6 The sixth
was East Saxon, containing Essex, Middlesex, and the other half of
Hertfordshire. 7 The seventh Kingdom was all the lands upon the North side of
Humber, which was also divided into two kingdoms, Deyra and Bernicia. Deyra
was the land betwixt Humber and Tine, Bernicia from Tine, to the Scottish sea.


All these were brought under subjection by Egbert king of West Saxons, and
this realm called England the year after the coming of Brutus to this I Will
1968. after the coming of Hengist 383. and after the departure of Cadwalader
149. years. Which name, although it has continued to this day for the space
of 755. years, yet was it not very luckie or fortunate to the Saxons
inhabitours of this realm. For even upon this change of their name, and
unition of the kingdom, followed the terrible and cruel invasion of the
Danes: and after that, the conquest of the Normanes, of whom, the Kings of
this time have descended. But to return to my matter again. The year 833. 833
the Danes in great companies landed in diverse places of this realm, and
fought diverse battles with Egbert, wherein sometimes they, and sometimes he had
the victory. Afterward in the year 836. they landed in West Wales, and so
passed through Wales to England with many of the Brytaines, which joined with
them against Egbert, but they were all overthrown by Egbert at Hengestdowne,
who died the year following.

Raunlph. Cest.
This Egbert king of England wan the city of Caer lheon, ar Dhowrdwy, or
Chester (which was the chief city of Venedotia,) out of the hands of the
Brytaines, in whose possession it remained until that time. He caused also (as
some writers do affirm) the brazen image of Cadwalhon king of Brytaine,
Matthew. West. Chron. Wig.
to be thrown down and defaced, commanding that no man upon pain of death,
should set up any such again, forbidding this land to be called Brytain any
more, but England, and the people Englishmen. He also made proclamation (by the
setting on of Redburga his wife, who bearing malice toward the Brytaines could
not abide any of that nation) that no Brytaine should remain within the
confines of England, Io. Castor.
commanding that al and singular which were of the Brytish blood, should within
six months avoid with their wives and children out of his kingdom, upon
pain of losing their heads.

After the death of Egbert, his son Ethelwulph reigned in his place, who gave
his daughter in marriage to Berthred his tributarie, king of Mertia. He had
great wars and much adoo with the Danes, which destroyed with fire and sword
the sea coast of England. The year 841. 841
died Idwalhon a noble man of Wales. And two years after was the battle of
Kettell betwixt Burchred king of Mertia, and the Brytaines: wherein, as some
do write, Mervyn Vrych king of the Brytaines was slain, leaving behind him a
son called Rodri Mawr, that is to say, Roderike the Great.

Roderike the Great.
Roderike the Great, son to Mervyn and Esylht.
ROderike the Great began his reign over Wales, the year after Christ his
incarnation 843. This prince divided all Wales to the three territories, of
Aberffraw, Dineuowr, and Mathraual. He had great war with Burchred King of
Mertia, which by the aid of Ethelwulph, entered Northwales with a great power,
and destroyed Anglesey, and fought with the Welshmen diverse times, and slew
Meyric a great prince among them.

The year 846. 846
the Danes did ouerrunne a great part of England, Matt. West. I. Castor.
and fought with Athelstan king of Kent, brother to Ethelwulph, and remained
that winter, and wintered in England. This year also was Ithel king of Gwent
or Wentland slain in fight by the men of Brechnock. This year 854. 854
Kongen king of Powys died at Rome, being slain of choked (as some say) by
his own men. And two years after died Cemoyth king of the Picts, and Jonathan
Lord of Abergeley. About the year 856. 856
Ethelwulph took his iourneie to Rome, and made his kingdom tributarie to the
Pope, and paid the Peter pence to the church of Rome.

The Old Saxons do bring the genelogie of this Ethelwulph to Adam, Matt. West.
after this manner. Ethelwulph the son of Egbert, the son of Alcmund, the
son of Eaffa, the son of Eoppa, the son of Ingils, the brother of Inas,
the son of Kenred, the son of Coelwalde, the son of Cudwine, the son of
Ceawlin, the son of Kenrick, the son of Cerdicke, which was the first king
of the West Saxons, the son of Esly, the son of Gewise, of whom the people
were called Gwysses, the daughter of Gewyn, the son of Wingy, the son of
Freawyn, the son of Fridagare, the son of Brendy, the son of Beldegy, the
son of VVoden, of whose issue came the kings of many nations, the son of
Frethewold, the son of Freolaffe,, the son of Frethewolfe, the son of
Finny, the son of Godulph, the son of De quo Sedulius in. Paschali carmin^.
Geta, the son of Teathwy, the son of Bean, the son of Sceldy, the son
of Seafe, which reigned in a country called Anglia, lieng betwixt the Goths
and the Saxons, from whence the Angles came first to Brytaine, he was the son
of Heremod, the son of Itermod, the son of Hadey, the son of VVale, the
son of Bedwy, the son of Sem, the son of Noe, and so forth to Adam.

Matthew. West. page 275.
There is another petigree laid down by the same author, of Offa king of
Mercia, ascending even to Adam, not in all points agreeing with this; so that
the author writing the latter, seems oftentimes to forget what he had written
in the former. The like also I find in John Castoreus, I. Castor.
at the end of the history of Edward the confessor. And an other in Matthew.
Paris, Matt. Paris. page 126.
in the history of King Henry.2. Anno. 1155. And these four genelogies seem
to ascend by the same men, although the names do sometimes vary.

This genelogie have I set here, that the reader may understand thereby, that
not only the Brytaines, or Welshman, but all other nations have been ever
desirous to set forth their antiquity and progeny, which was not very hard
to such nations as were not mingled with other, and that had ever among them
such as did only from time to time profess that art, and customablie did
write the progeny, wives, and children, of all such as were of any estimation
in the country. In the which two things, Wales had ever passed all other
countries, as they which have not mingled with any other nations, until of
late years with Englishmen, and also have ever had such as did profess the art
of genelogie, Beirdh.
who although they have sometimes erred, or rather have willingly flattered in
learuing false genelogies, yet surely are able by their books to bring any
Gentleman's genelogie of that country, to such as have lived nine hundred
years passed, and but few further, except such as descended of the kings of
Brytaine.

The Italians, before they mingled with the Vandales, Goths and Lumbards,
brought their genelogies to Aeneas. The Spaniards to Hesperus, before the
Goths and Mores ouerranne the land. The Saxons to VVoden, before they mingled
with the Danes and Normans. Yea the Frenchmen and Turks reioise at this day,
to bring themselves to the Thracians; and the Germans to the children of
Gwyston: and it is possible they may so do, because they have not mingled with
any other, and have not been ouerrun with any other nation. H. Lhoyd.
Therefore let such disdainefull heads, as scant know their own Grandfathers,
leave their scoffing and tawnting of Welshman, for that thing that all other
nations in the world do glory in; and let them read the ancient writer
Berosus, to whom the wise Graecians, for the knowledge they learned at his
hands, made an image of copper, and set it up in Athens in memory of him, and
there they shall find the beginning of the most part of all the nations in the
world; and if they believe him, let them not deny ours; and if they credit him
not, let them believe no more but what they see with their eyes, or that
pleases their fond fantasies. But to the matter.

This year the Danes chased Burchred out of his kingdom, Io. Castor.
who also went to Rome, and there died. The year 857. died Ethelwulph, 857
and left behind him his sons, Athelbald King of Westsex, and Athelbright
king of Kent, and of the East Saxons.

John. Cast. Sim. Dunel. Matt. Park. A Kings son and heir Bishop. 10. Cast.
Of this Ethelwulph it is written, that he was so well learned and so devout,
that the clerks of the church of Winchester did choose him in his youth, to be
their Bishop, which function he took upon him, and was Bishop of Winchester,
for seven years before he was king. It is reported also that he conquered the
kingdom of Demetia or Southwales, and gave the same with the kingdom of
Southsex, to Alfred his son; and that the said Alfred should bring a thousand
soldiers out of Wales, to the aid of his brother Ethelbert to Winchester, and
there put the Danes to flight, and destroy a great number of them. Athelbald
the son of Ethelwulph, after the death of his father, kept his mother in law
for his concubine, and afterward married her in the city of Chester.

After Athelbald had reigned eight years, he died, and Athelbright his brother
took the rule of his kingdom. And that year the Danes spoiled Winchester,
Fabian.
and after a great fight were driven out of the land: but returning to Tenet,
they remained there for that winter, and spoiled by incursions all the sea
shore. This year also was the battle of Gweythen, betwixt the Brytaines and
the Englishmen, and a great number slain on either side. The year 865. died
Conan Nant Niuer, 865
a worthy captain, H. Hunt.
and a noble warrior. And the year following, came Hungare and Hubba, with a
great army of Danes into England. In the year 867. died Athelbright, 867
and Ethelred his brother reigned in his stead. The Danes the next year
ensuing, spoiled York, H. Hunt. Fabian. Ran. Cest.
and slew the two Kings of Northumberland, Osbright and Elba, and afterward
they ouerran all the country unto Notingham, spoiling and destroieng all
before them, and then returned to York, and from thence to East Angle, where
they slew Edmund the King. The sixth year of Ethelred came another host of
Danes through VVestsex, and to Reding, with Basrecke and Alding, and fought
five battles with Ethelred and Alfred his brother, in two of the which the
Danes were overcome at Henglefild and Estondowne, and in the three other the
Englishmen were overthrown at Reding, Basing, and Mereton. The year 871. King
Ethelred died, 871
and Alfred his brother reigned in his stead.

Alfred as soon as he had taken the kingdom upon him, considering with
himself, what a heavy burden he did sustain, inquired after the wisest and
the best learned men that he could hear of, that he might be directed by them,
whom he worthily entertained, using their advise as well in the public
government of the commonwealth, as in his private studies and conference of
learning. He sent for two famous learned men out of Wales; Bale. Cent. 2. Cap.
24.
the one named John De Erigena surnamed also Scotus, borne at Meneuia or S.
David's, brought up in that college, who having for learning sake traveled to
Athens, and bestowed there many years in the study of the Greek, Hebrew,
and Chaldie toongs, and the secret mysteries of Philosophy, came from thence
to France, where he was well accepted with Carolus Calnus and Ludouicus Balbus,
1. Castor.
and there translated the works of Dionysius Areopagita, De coelesti
hierarchia, out of the Greek into the Latin tongue; and at the last being
returned home to Wales, was sent for by this King Alfred, who then founded and
erected the university of Oxford, and was the first that professed learning,
Polydor, lit^.
and read publikelie in the said University. The other was Asserius or Asser,
Hol. pa 218.
of whom I shall have occasion to speak hereafter. He would not suffer any to
bear office in his court, but such as were learned, exhorting all men
generally to embrace and honor learning and learned men.

Alfred in the first year of his reign, fought two battles with the Danes
upon the south side of Thames, and slew of them one King, and nine Earls.
About this year, died Gwgan King of Caerdigan.

This was that noble Gwgan ap Mevric ap Dunwal ap Arthen ap Sitsylht, King or
prince of Caerdigan, who as some Brytish books have, was at this time drowned
by misfortune.

At this time the Danes destroyed the town of Alclyde, and wan London and
Reding, and all the inland and kingdom of Mercia. And one King or leader of
them took the country of Northumberland, and he and his people did much
trouble the Pictes. Likewise the year following, three Kings of the Danes went
from Cambridge to Warham in Dorcetshire, and Alfred would have given them
battle, but the Danes desired peace, and foresware England, which they never
did before, and the same night their horsemen took their journey toward
Excester, and their footmen which went to the sea were all drowned at
Sandwitch. When the Danes had thus abiured England, they bent their force
against Wales, and entered the I Will of mon with a great army, in the year of
Christ 873. 873
where Roderike gave them two battles, one at a place called Bangole, Matt.
West.
and another at a place called Menegid in Anglesey.

S^ Dunelm. Matt. West.
I find also that about this time Halden and Hungare, two Captains of the
Danes, arrived in Southwales, and ouerran the whole country, destroieng all
before them with fire and sword, neither sparing churches nor religious houses,
but within a while after, they received their deserved reward at the hands of
the West Saxons, who meeting with them on the coast of Devonshire, slew both
Halden and Hungare, with 1200. of their people.

At this time, Eneon Bishop of Meneuia or S. David's died, and Hubert was
installed in his place. And within two years after, Dungarth king of Cornwall
was drowned by a mischance. In the year 876. 876
the Englishmen entered into Anglesey, and fought with the Welshman a sore
battle, who, in the year following, slew Roderike king or prince of Wales,
and Gwyriad his brother, or as some say, his son. This Roderike had by his
wife Engharad the daughter of Meyric the son of Dyfnwal or Dunwal the son of
Arthen ap Sitsylht, diverse sons, as Anarawd his eldest son, to whom he
gave Aberfraw with Northwales; Cadelh the second son, who had Dinevwr with
Southwales, and also took Mathraual and Powys land by force from his brethren,
after the death of Mervyn the third son, to whom his father had given the
same.

Roderike the Great is counted of all writers to be the undoubted owner and
possessor of all Wales. Venedotia or Northwales descended unto him from his
mother Esylht, the daughter and sole heir of Conan Tindaethwy, as is evident
by this history. Demetia or Southwales (as some do affirm) came to him by
his wife, the daughter and heir of Meyricap Dyfnwal ap Arthen ap Sitsylht king
of Caerdigan: her brethren (who are thought to be illegitimate) holding of her
husband. Powys he had by Nest, the sister and heir of Congen ap Cadelh King of
Powys, which was his fathers mother. These three dominions he appointed under
their meares and bounds, with a princely house in every of them, which he
named Y tair Talaeth, and left the same unto three of his sons, Anarawd,
Cadelh, and Mervyn, which were called Y tri twysoc Talaethioc, that is, The
three crowned princes, because every of them did wear upon his bonet or
helmet a coronet of gold, being a broad lace or headband indented upward, set
and wrought with precious stones, which in the Brytish or Welsh speech is
called Talaeth: and so to this day nurses do name that broad headband,
wherewith a child's head is bound uppermost upon some other linen clothes,
Talaeth. Aberffraw was the chief house of the prince of Gwyneth, whose
dominion was therefore called Talaeth Aberffraw: Dinevowr the princely house of
Dehevbarth, whereof that part is named Talaeth Dinevowr: and in like manner
Talaeth Mathraval is so called, of the princely seat of Powys, called
Mathraval.

Girald. Came.
Giraldus Cambrensis in his book entitled Descriptio Cambriae, is of opinion,
that Mervyn was the eldest son of Roderike, to whom Venedotia was given, and
was the father of Anandhrec, which was the father of Meyric, which was the
father of Edwal, which was the father of Iago, etc: and that Anarawd had Powys,
and died without issue. But the common opinion of all other writers is to the
contrary, agreeable to that which this Author affirms.

Roderike had also Roderike, Meyric, Edwal or Tudwal, Gwyriad and Gathelic, of
whom you shall hear in the history following.

ANARAWD.
Anarawd the son of Roderike.
ANarawd the son of Roderike began his regiment over Wales the year of
Christ 877. 877
In whose time, Rollo with his Normans came to France, and wan the country of
Neustria, which of the Normans is called to this day Normandy. At that time
the Danes which had fled to Excester, Matt. West.
having broken the truce whereunto they were sworn, were so pursued by Alfred,
that they were glad to give him pledges for performance of the articles agreed
upon between him and them; but the year following, they wan all the land upon
the Northside of Thames, and held it themselves, and after they passed the
river to Chipenhame in VVestsex, and the Englishmen fled before them, yet
Alfred fought with a number of them, and slew their prince, and wan their
standard, which they called Raven. Matthew. West. Io. Cast. Polychroni. Will. Malm.
After that, he overthrew them at Edendowne, where, after they had given him
pledges, their Captain Godrun, alias Gurmond received the christian faith, and
then reigned in East Angle. The year 878. 878
died Aedan the son of Melht, a noble man of Wales: and the second year
following, there was a great battle fought by the Danes, and the Englishmen of
Mercia, against the Welshmen upon the river Conwy, where the Welshmen had the
victory, and this was called the revenge of the death of Roderike. Dial Rodri.
After that, about the year 882. 882
the Danes that lay at Fullenham by London passed the sea to France by the
river Seyn, Si. Dunelm. H. Hunt. Matthew. West.
and spoiled the country about Paris, and overthrew the Frenchmen in battle,
but afterward they were all slain and drowned by the Brytaines of Armorica.
Then Alfred got London, and chased away the Danes that beseeged Rochester,
but at the same time he lost a great navy of ships, which the Danes took, and
drowned at Sturmutham. In the year 889. 889
Submon Cubin the greatest clearke in Scotland died. And the year following
the black nation (for so the Brytish book calls the Danes and Normanes)
came to Northwales, and did much hurt. Here I think it necessary to let the
reader understand, from whence such a wonderful number of Danes and Normanes
came. The kingdom of Denmark had under it not only Denmark, which is a
small country separated with the sea into Isles and half Isles, as that which
ioineth to Saxony and Holesake, and runs like an arm of the sea called
Chersonesus Cymbrica, and the I Will of Sealand and Finnen, with a piece of the
maine land ioining to Swethland; but also Norway, and the great country of
Suetia or Swethen land, which reaches to Moscouia, and welnigh to the North
pole. This country being scant known to the world at that time, Io. Cast.
powered out of it self (as the Trojan horse) diverse people, that at diverse
times ouerran and spoiled all Europe, with a great part of Africa, like a
sudden tempest or hideous storm, filling every country whereunto they came.
From thence came the Goths, which ouerran Germany, France, Spain, Afrike, and
Italy. From thence came the Vandals of no less worthiness. From thence came
the Lombards, the Alans, the Switzers, the Burgundians, the Danes, and the
Normans, which came of Norway and the seashore of Eastland by Prussia, from
whence the Vandales came. He that is desirous to understand the marvelous
history of Swethinland, let him read the works of Olaus Gothus, and Ioannes
Magnus. And from these countries (as I declared before) came the people which
were called the Danes, and not only from Denmark. The year 890. 890
there came from these countries 250. sails, and landed at Lymene in Kent,
Matthew. West. li. 1. pa. 345.
hard by the great wood called Andreslege, and builded a Castle at Auldre or
Apledor, as some books have. The same time also came Hasting with 80. sails
to Thames mouth, and builded a Castle at Mydlton, and made an oath to Alfred,
that he never would annoie him nor his subjects: but shortly after he builded
a Castle at Beamfleete, and invaded the country about him. Wherefore Alfred
overthrew his Castle, and took his wife, and two sons, which he christened,
and sent to their father again.

Matthew. West. li. 1. pa. 342.
Other kingdoms and countries of Europe were disquieted with this persecution
of the Danes as well as England. For of this Hasting it is written, that laieng
seege to the city of Limogis in France, and despairing of the speedy winning
of the same, he devised this train to get it. He fained himself to be
dangerously sick, and sent to the Bishop, and the Consul of the same city,
desiring them most instantly, that he might be admitted to the christian
faith, and be baptized before his departure out of this world. The Bishop and
the Consul (suspecting no guile) were very glad, not only to be delivered
from the present trouble, but also to win such a worthy man to the
congregation of Christ. Whereupon, firm peace being made between both
nations, Hasting is baptized, the Bishop and the Consul being his Godfathers,
which thing being done, he was carried by the soldiers to his ships in very
weak case, as he outwardly pretended. About midnight he caused himself being
armed in his complet harness, to be laid upon a beer, commanding his
soldiers to be armed, and to carry their weapons with them under their upper
garments, and so to be ready when he should give them a sign. The day
following, all things being in a readiness, he was brought solemnly by his
people with great clamor and counterfeit moorning to be interred in the chief
church of the city, where the Bishop and the Consul accompanied with all the
worship of the same city came to honor the burial: but as soon as the Bishop
had made himself ready to bury the corpse (most of all the towns men being
in the church) Hasting stepped up all armed with his sword drawn, and first
killed the Bishop and the Consul, and then fell with his armed soldiers upon
the naked people, and destroyed them in a manner every one, putting all to the
sword, neither sparing age, sex, or infirmity. And when he had sacked the
town, he sent messengers to Charles the French King for peace, which he
obtained, and withal, the city of Charters toward his charges to be quiet.

About this time Evneth the son of Bledryd a Baron of Wales died. And the
year 893. 893*
Anarawd King or prince pf Northwales, came with a great number of Englishmen,
and made war against his brother Cadelh, and spoiled the countries of Caerdigan
and Ystradgwy. In those days the Danes beseeged Excester, Matthew. West.
against whom, when Alfred went, they which were at Auldre passed over to
Essex, and builded a Castle at Scobrith, and from thence took their journey
to Budington upon Seauerne. And when Alfred came to Excester, the Danes fled to
the sea, and spoiled the seacoasts of Wales. And they which were in Budington,
hearing of the kings coming, fled back to their Castle in Essex. Another
company of them came to Leycester, where Alfred did beseege them, till they
were driven to eat their own horses. Afterward the year 895. 895*
the Danes that were in Leycester, with all the rest of them which were in
Northumberland, passed by the North seas to Meresige an I Will in Essex, H. Hunt.
and the year following, they entered the river Line with the Thames, and there
builded a Castle twenty miles from London: and as they came to spoil the
country, they were ouerthrown, and lost four of their princes, and fled to
the Castle. Then Alfred divided the river into three parts, so that the water
was so diminished, that their ships could not return to the sea, which thing
when the Danes saw, they left their wives and children in Essex, Matt. West.
and passed spoiling the land to Quadbryge upon Seauerne, and so passed the
river, and spoiled the countries of Brecknocke, Gwentland, and Gwentlhwg. Also
this year went a great number of them to France by the river Seyn, and another
company of them spoiled the coasts of Devonshire, where they lost six ships
after a long conflict. The summer following, the country of Ireland was
destroyed with strange woormes having two teeth, which consumed all that was
green in the land. These seem to be Locusts, a rare plague in these
countries, but often seen in Afrike, Italy, and other hot regions.

900
About the year 900. Igmond with a great number of soldiers came to Anglesey,
and the Welshmen gave him battle at Molerain.

There be some Brytish copies of this history, which affirm, that this
battle between Igmond captain of the black nations and the Brytaines,
wherein Mervyn was slain, was fought at a place called Meilon, of the which it
was called Maes Rhos Meilon.

The same year died Alfred, which some call Alured, making (v) a vowell, which
should be a consonant. This prince translated the ancient laws of Dyfnwal
Moelmut king of Brytaine, and the laws of Marsia Queen of Brytaine, and wife
to Cyhelin, out of Brytish into English, and called it Marsian law, which law
was afterward called Westsaxon lex, and kept in a part of Mercia, and in all
the countries on the south of Thames, for the other part of the land had
another law called Dane lex, and these remained till Edward the Confessors
time, who of these two laws made one. Also this Alfred did divide the day in
three parts by a taper which burnt continually in his chapel, Io. Cast.
and endured just 24. hours. The first part of that time he bestowed at his
book and in prayer: the second in the affairs of the common wealth: and the
third part to take his rest and refresh himself: after whose death, Asser
Men^ven.
a certain clearke made his Epitaph, as here follows.

Nobilitas innata tibi probitatis honorem
Armipotens Alfrede dedit, probitasque laborem,
Perpetuumque labor nomen, cui mixta dolori
Gaudia semper erant, spes semper mixta timori.
Si modo victor eras, ad crastina bella pauebas,
Si modo victus eras, and crastina bella parabas,
Cui vestes sudore iugi, cui sica cruore
Tincta iugi, quantum sit onus regnare probarunt.
Non fuit immensi quisquam per climata mundi,
Cui tot in aduersis vel respirare liceret:
Nec tamen aut ferro contritus ponere ferrum,
Aut gladio potuit vitae finisse labores.
I am post transactos regni vitaeque labores,
Christus ei fit vera quies, sceptrumque perenne.
After Alfred reigned Edward his son, against whom, Adelwulph his brother
made cruel war, who flieng to Northumberland, stirred the Danes against him.
He was chosen King as well of the Danes as of the Angles, which at that time
had grown to be one people: and after he subdued the East Saxons, and with a
great army spoiled Mercia, and passing over Thames at Crickland, destroyed
Brythend, and returned home with great spoil. At this time, Evneth was slain
in Arwystli. King Edward also pursued his brother, H. Hunt.
and ouerran all the land betwixt Ouse, and the dike of S. Edmund, and returned
back with all his army, saving the Kentishmen which tarried to spoil, Matt.
West. Io. Cast.
against whom the Danes came and fought a sore battle, and slew a great number
of them, and put the rest to flight. The Danes about the year 905. 905
entered into Ireland and fought with the Irishmen, and slew Carmot King and
Bishop of all Ireland, and the son of Cukeman, a man both godly and
religious, and Kyrnalt son of Murgan King of Lagines. About a year after
died Asser Archbishop of Wales.

Bale, Cent. 2. page 125. Giral. Camb.
There were two of this name at the same time both countriemen and kinsmen; the
one being the uncle, was Archbishop of S. David's, of whom mention is made in
this place. The other Asser the nephew was a man of excellent learning and
wisdom, and for that cause being Chancellor to his uncle, was sent for by
King Alfred to teach his children, who wrote the acts of the same Alfred, and
was afterward Bishop of Shireburne, of whom mention is made in the English
Chronicles.

About this time, Edward sent a great army to Northumberland, which spoiled
the country, and then returned home: nevertheless, the Danes followed them,
and destroyed a great part of Mercia. But within a while after, Edward gathered
an army, and giving them battle, overthrew them, and slew their kings Alden
and Edelwulph, and a great number of their nobles. This year, died Edelred
Duke of Mercia, Matt. West. page 354.
which had long been sick, after whom, Elfleda his wife enioied the country
of Mercia, saving the cities of London and Oxford, which king Edward seized
into his own hands. The year 907. 907
died Cadelh King or Prince of Southwales, second son of Roderike the great,
leaving behind him three sons, Howel Dha (that is to say, Howel the good)
who succeeded his father in the kingdom of Southwales, Meyric and Clydawc.
About two years after, King Edward did build the Castle of Hartford betwixt
the rivers Benefic, Matthew. West.
Minier, and Lige; and also the borough of Wytham in Essex, and lay at
Wealdyne, where he subdued those countries. The year following, the Danes of
Leycester and Hampton slew a great number of Englishmen at Hochnorton, and in
their return homeward, spoiled all Oxfordshire. The next year after that,
there came a great navy from Tydwike, with Other and Rahald, and past by the
western sea to Wales, and destroyed S. David's, and there fought the battle of
Dinerth, where Mayloc (the son of Peredur Gam) was slain. And afterward they
entered Herefordshire, where they were fought withal, and Rahald slain, and
the rest compelled to forswear the Kings land. Then the King caused the
southside of Seauerne to be kept with a great army; yet did the Danes twice
enter his land, once by the East at VVerd, and another time at Portogan, but
they were at either time overthrown by the Englishmen. And from thence they
departed to the I Will of Stepen, from whence they were driven by hunger to
Southwales, where they were beaten, and constrained to depart into Ireland. The
year ensuing, there was a great battle fought betwixt the Kentishmen and the
Danes at Holme, but who had the victory, is not certainly reported. In the
year 913. 913
Anarawd chief King of Wales died, and left behind him two sons, Edwal
Voel, which reigned after him, and Elise.

Edwal Voel.
Edwal Voel son of Anarawd.
AFter that Edwal Voel began his dominion over Northwales, Howel Dha being
king or prince of Southwales and Powys land, a terrible comet appeared in the
firmament. At which time, or the year following, Leycester was new built.

Matt. West. page 354.
I think that the name of Leycester is here mistaken for Legecestria, that is,
Chester, called of the Romans Legionum Cestria, which being destroyed by the
Danes, was about this time by the procurement of a Adelred Duke of Mercia, and
Elflede his wife, repaired and reedified, as Matthew. Westminster. writes, and as the
ancient records of the city of Chester do testify. Besides that, I find no
mention of the reedifieng of Leycester at this time, neither in the Brytish
Chronicle, nor yet in any ancient English writer.

The next summer after, the men of Deuelyne did destroy the I Will of Mon or
Anglesey. And the year 917. 917
Clydawc the son of Cadelh was slain by the hands of his brother Meyric, and
about the same time, Io. Castor.
the Englishmen did overthrow the Danes after a great fight at Tottenhale.

The year 919. Edelfled or Elfled Duches of Mercia, Edelfled.
the wife of Edelred Duke of Mercia, Matt. West. page 357.
and sister to King Edward, died, who builded the boroughes of Strengat and
Bruge, by the forest of Morph: Anno Domini. 913. The next year after the
building of that, she builded Tamworth and Stafford; and the year after that,
Edelburgh; and the winter following, Cherenburgh and Wadeburgh; then the next
summer Runcofe or Runcorne, as some think. After that, Ran. Cest. Matthew. West.
Hol. pa. 222.
she sent her whole army to Wales, and fought with the Welshmen, and wan
Brecknocke, and took the Queen and 33. men. This was it which is called in
Welsh Gweyth y Dinas Newydh, Gweyth y Dinas Newydh.
that is to say, The battle of the new city. Also she wan the town of Derby,
with all that country, from the Danes: nevertheless, she lost there four of
her chiefest captains.

Io. Cast.
Io. Castoreus reports this story in this manner. Huganus Lord of Westwales,
perceiving King Edward to be occupied in the Danish war, far enough from
him, gathered an army of Brytaines, and entered the Kings land. Whereupon
Elfled, Lady of Mercia, the sister of King Edward, came to Wales with a
strong army, and fought with the Welshmen at Brechnocke, and putting Huganus
to flight, took his wife and 34. men captives, and lead them with her to
Mercia. Huganus thus discomfited, fled to Derbie, and there being peaceably
received of the countriemen with fifteen men of war, and two hundred soldiers
well appointed, joined himself with the Kings adversaries the Danes, of which
thing when Elfled was certified by the men of Derby, she followed him with a
great army, and entered the gates of that town, where Huganus resisted her,
and slew four of her chief officers. But Gwyane Lord of the I Will of Elie her
Steward, set the gates on fire, and furiously running upon the Brytaines,
entered the town. Then Huganus being ouermatched, and choosing rather to die by
the sword, than to yield himself unto a woman, was there slain. Thus out of
Castoreus.

The year ensuing, Elfled wan Leycester, and subdued to her all the Danes that
lay there. The Yorkeshiremen also did her homage and service: she died at
Tamworth, after that she had worthily ruled Mercia eight years, and lies
buried at Gloucester by S. Peter's porch, upon whose toombe, this Epitaph was
written. H. Hunt.
O Elfleda potens, o terror virgo virorum,
O Elfleda potens, nomine digna viri.
Te quoque splendidior fecit natura puellam,
Te probitas fecit nomen habere viri.
Te mutare decet sed solum nomina sexus,
Tu regina potens rexque trophea parans.
I am nec Caesareos tantum mirere triumphos,
Caesare splendidior virgo, virago vale.
After the death of Elfled, Matthew. West.
Edward disinherited her daughter Alfwyen, and seized the land of Mercia to his
own hands.

The cause why Edward disinherited this young Lady his niece, Io. Cast.
whose mother Elfled, being his own sister, had done so much for him, was (as
Castoreus writes) for that Alfwyen not making the king her uncle (whom her
mother had appointed guardian and ouerseer of her) privy to her doings, had
promised and contracted marriage with Raynald king of the Danes: whereupon, king
Edward, to prevent his enemy, entered the land of Mercia, and seized the same
to his own hands, and carried also the said Lady with him into Westsex. The
same Author also reports, that about this time, Leofred a Dane, and Gruffyth
ap Madoc, brother in law to the prince of Westwales, came from Ireland with a
great army to Snowdon, and minding to bring all Wales and the marches thereof
to their subjection, ouerran and subdued all the country to Chester, before
King Edward was certified of their arrival. Whereat he was very sore
offended, and being loath to trouble his subjects in that behalf, made a vow
that he and his sons, with their own people, would be revenged upon Leofred
and Gruffyth, and thereupon came to Chester, and wan the city from them. Then
he divided his army into two batels, whereof he and his son Athelstan lead
the first, and Edmund and Edred the second, and so followed them with as much
celeritie as he could, and ouertooke them at the forest of Walewode, now
Sherwode, where Leofred and Gruffyth set upon him fierselie, so that the king
in the beginning was in some distress, until Athelstane stepped in between
his father and Leofred, and wounded the Dane in the arm, in such sort, that he
being not able to hold his spear, was soon taken, and committed to the
custody of Athelstane. In the mean time, Edmund and Edred incountring with
Gruffyth, slew him, and brought his head to their father. Then Athelstane
caused Leofred to be headed, and so both their heads were set up together on
the top of the tower of Chester, and Edward and his sons returned home with
great triumph.

Then Edward, after he had builded Glademutham, died at Ferandyne, whose son
named Alfred died also the same time at Oxford, and were buried both at
Winchester, Anno 924. 924
After whose death, Adelstane his base son reigned King of England, which was
the woorthiest prince of Saxon blood that ever reigned. He did overcome Cudfryd
the father of Reynald King of the Danes, at York. He gathered also the second
year of his reign, a great army against Hawlaf King of Ireland, Io. Castor.
who came with the whole power of the Scots and Danes against him, and gave him
battle at Brimestburie, where Adelstan gate the victory, and slew the said
king Hawlaf and the king of Scots, and five kings of the Danes and Normanes,
and twelve Earls, so that he brought all the land of England and Scotland in
subjection to him, which none of his predecessors had ever attempted. The year
933. 933
Owen the son of Gruffyth was slain by the men of Caerdigan. Then Adelstan
did enter Wales with a great army, Will. Malms. Hol. pa. 225. Io. Cast.
and brought the kings of the country to subjection, and received yearly of
tribute 20. pound in gold, and 300. pound in silver, and 200. head of cattle:
Matthew. West. Ran. Cest.
yet the laws of Howel Dha appointed to the king of Aberfraw to pay yearly
to the king of London no more but 66. pound for a tribute: and that the prince
of Dinevwre and the prince of Powys should pay a like sum 66. pound yearly
to the king of Aberfraw. To this Adelstan, the kings of Norwaie and France did
send great and rich gifts to win his friendship and good will. 936
In the year 936. died Evneth the son of Clydawc, and Meyric the son of
Cadelh. At this time also Adelstan did remove the Brytaines that dwelt in
Excester and thereaboutes to Cornewale, Matt. West. Hol. page 226.
and appointed the river Cambia to be the utter mere toward England, as he had
before appointed the river Wy to be the mere of England and Wales. In the year
of Christ 939. 939
the noble prince Adelstan died, and was buried at Malmesburie, and his brother
Edmund borne in wedlock reigned in his place, who in the first year of his
reign, wan five cities from the Danes, Io. Castor.
Leycester, Darby, Stafford, Lincoln, and Notingham. Then Aulafe King of the
Danes sent to Edmund to desire peace and baptism, which Edmund granted unto
him, and so the Danes, which then were called Normanes, took first the
christian faith, Edmund being their godfather, who making peace with them,
returned to Westsex with much honor. This year died Abloic chief King of
Ireland. The year following, Cadelh the son of Arthvael a noble Brytaine was
imprisoned, and Edwal Voel the son of Anarawd and Elise his brother were
slain in a battle, which they fought against the Danes and Englishmen. This
Edwal had six sons, Meyric, Ieuaf or Ieuan, Iago which is James, Conan,
Edwal Vachan, and Roderike. After whose death, Howel Dha his coosen germane
ruled all Wales for his life time. Elise also had issue, Conan, and a daughter
named Trawst, which was mother to Conan ap Sitsylht, Gruffyth ap Sitsylht, and
Blethyn ap Convyn, which two last were afterward princes of Wales.

Howel Dha.
Howel Dha, cosen germane to Edwal Voel.
THis Howel Dha king or Prince of Southwales and of Powys long before this
time, after the death of Edwal Voel his coosen, took upon him the rule and
government of all Wales, about the year of Christ 940. 940
who (notwithstanding the sons of Edwal did somewhat murmur against him) was
for his godly behavior, discreet and just rule beloved of men. This Howel
constituted and made laws to be kept through his dominions, which were used in
Wales, till such time as the inhabitants received the laws of England, in the
time of Edward the first, and in some places thereof long after. These laws
are to be seen at this day both in Latin and in Welsh.

Howel Dha king or prince of all Wales, perceiving the laws and customs of
his country to have grown unto great abuse, sent for the Archbishop of
Meneuia, and all the other Bishops and chief of the clergy, to the number of
140. prelates, and all the Barons and nobles of Wales, and caused six men of
the wisest and best esteemed in every Comote to be called before him, whom he
commanded to meet all together at his house called Y Tuy gwyn ar Taf, that is,
The white house upon the river Taf. Thither he came himself, and there
remained with those his nobles, prelates, and subjects all the Lent, in prayer
and fasting, craving the assistance and direction of Gods holy spirit, that he
might reform the laws and customs of the country of Wales, to the honor of
God, and the quiet government of the people. About the end of Lent he chose
out of that company twelve men of the wisest, grauest, and of the greatest
experience: to whom he added one clearke or doctor of the laws, named
Blegored, a singular learned and perfect wise man. These had in charge to
examine the old laws and customs of Wales, and to gather out of those such as
were meet for the government of the country: which they did, reteining those
that were wholesome and profitable, expounding those that were doubtful and
ambiguous, and abrogating those that were superfluous and hurtful, and so
ordained three sorts of laws. The first, of the ordering of the kings or
princes household, and Aberffraw, and the third at Dinevowr, that all the three
provinces of Wales might have the use of the same when need required. And for
the better observation of these laws, he caused the Archbishop of S. David's to
denounce sentence of excommunication against all such of his subjects, as
refused to obeie the same. Within a while after, Howel (because he would omit
nothing that could procure countenance and authority to his said laws) went
to Rome, taking with him the Archbishop of S. David's, the Bishops of Bangor and
S. Asaph, and thirteen other of the learned and wisest men in Wales, where
the said laws being recited before the Pope, were by his authority confirmed:
then having finished his devout pilgrimage, and emptied his purse, he returned
home again with his company.

1 By these laws they might not morgage their lands but to one of the same
family or kindred, which were De eadem parentela.

2 Every tenant holding of any other than of the prince or lord of the fee,
paid a fine Pro defensione regia, which was called Arian ardhel, in Latin
Aduocarij.

3 No legacy of goods by will was good, otherwise than those which were given
to the church, to the lord of the fee, or for payment of debts.

4 Every man might distraine as well for debts, as for rent of lands, any
goods, or cattle, saving horses, which were counted to serve for a man's
necessary defense, and were not distrainable without the prince his license.

5 Causes of inheritance were not heard or determined but from the ninth of
November, till the ninth of February; or from the ninth of May, until the
ninth of August. The rest of the year was counted a time of vacation, for
sowing in the spring, and reaping in the harvest.

6 This also is to be observed, that all matters of inheritance of land were
determined and adjudged by the King or Prince in person, or his special
deputy (if he were sick or impotent) and that upon view of the same land,
calling unto him the freeholders of that place, two elders of his counsel, the
Chief justice attending always in the court, the ordinary judge of the
country where the land lay, and the priest. The manner of their proceeding was
thus. The king or prince sat in his Judicial seat higher than the rest, with
an elder on his right hand, and another on his left, and the freeholders on
both sides next unto them, which for this cause (as I think) were called
Vchelwyr. Before him directly a certain distance off, and a little lower,
sat his Chief justice, having the priest on his right hand, and the ordinary
judge of that country on the left. The court being set, the plaintiff came in
with his advocate, champion, and Ringylh or sergeant, and stood on the left
side: then came in the defendant in like manner with his advocate, champion and
Ringylh, and stood on the right side: and last of all, the witnesses of both
parties came, which stood directly before the Chief justice at the lower end
of the hall, until they were called up to testify the truth of their
knowledge in the matter in variance.

The figure of the which I thought good here to lay down, as you see, in the
page next following.



After the hearing of the books read, the depositions of the witnesses, and
full pleading of the cause in open court, upon warning given by the Rhinghylh,
the Chief Justice, the priest, and the ordinary judge, withdrew themselves
for a while to consult of the matter, and then Secundum allegata and probata,
brought their verdict, the court sitting. Whervppon the king or prince after
consultation had with the elders or seniors which sat by him, gave definitive
sentence; except the matter was so obscure and intricate, that right and truth
appeared not: in the which case it was tried by the two champions, and so the
cause ended. This shall be sufficient for this time. Now therefore let us go
forward in the history.

At this time the foresaid kings Aulafe and Regnald entered the land of Edmund,
who gathering his strength together, followed them into Northumberland, and
overcame them in plain battle, and chased them out of the land, and so
remained a whole year in those parts, setting things in order, and quieting of
that country. And because he could not by any means bring the inhabitants of
Cumberland to live in any honest order, he spoiled that country, and
committed it to the rule of Malcolme king of Scotland, upon condition, that he
should send him succors in all his wars both by sea and land.

Matt. West. Hol. page 228.
Some other write, that king Edmund being accompanied with Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht,
which was after prince of Wales, entered Cumberland, and taking the two sons
of Dummaile king of that province, Buchan. li. 6. fol. 53.
put out their eyes, and then gave that country to Malcolme to be holden of
him, with condition to keep the North part of the realm from incursion of
enemies, the which condition was afterward but slenderly performed. This
Malcolme was the son of Donald King of Scotland, and was the next king after
Constantine the third, being in number the 76.

942
In the year 942. died Hubert Bishop of S. David's: the year also following,
Marclois Bishop of Bangor, and Vssa the son of Lhavyr died. The year 944. 944
the Englishmen did enter Wales with a strong army, and spoiled Strad Clwyd,
and returned home. Matt. West. Hol. page 222.
At which time, Conan the son of Elise was put in danger of death by poison,
and Everus Bishop of S. David's died. The year after, Edmund King of England
was slain by treason, Matt. West.
as some writers say, upon S. Augustines day, as he was at dinner. Other
say, that he espied an outlawe sitting in the hall, and as he drew him from
the table, the outlaw slew the King with a knife.

Io. Cast.
And some be of opinion, that as the King would have rescued a man of his from
an officer who had arrested him, the same officer slew him, not knowing that he
was the King: he lies buried at Glastenburie.

After whose death, Edred or Edfred his brother was crowned in his place, who
made an expedition to Scotland and Northumberland, and subdued them both, and
received fealty and homage of the Northumbers and Scots by oath, which was not
long kept. In the year 948. died Howel Dha the noble and worthy King or
Prince of Wales, 948
whose death was sore bewailed of all men, for he was a prince that loved peace
and good order, and that feared God. He left behind him four sons, Owen,
Run, Roderike, and Edwyn, betwixt whom, and the sons of Edwal, there was
great wars, for the chief rule of Wales, as shall appear in the history
following.

Ievaf and Iago.
Ievaf and Iago the sons of Edwal Voel.
AFter the death of Howel Dha, his sons did divide Southwales and Powys
betwixt them: and Ievaf and Iago the second and third sons of Edwal Voel
ruled Northwales, (because their elder brother Meyric was not a man worthy to
rule) who coming of the elder house, would have had the chief rule of all
Wales, which the sons of Howel Dha denied them. And thereupon Iago or James
and Ievaf entered Southwales with a great power, against whom came Owen the
son of Howel and his brethren, and fought together at the hills of Carno,
where Iago and Ievaf had the victory: and the year following, the same
brethren did twice enter into Southwales, and spoiled Dyuet, and slew Dwnwalhon
the Lord thereof. And within a while after, died Roderike one of the sons of
Howel Dha. In the year 952. the sons of Howel gathered their strength
together against Ievaf and Iago, 952
and entered their land to the river of Conwy, where they fought a cruel
battle at a place called Gwrgustu, or Lhanrwst, as some think, where a great
number were slain upon either side, as Anarawd the son of Gwyriad, or Vriet
the son of Roderike the Great, and Edwyn the son of Howel Dha: in the which
battle were overthrown the sons of Howel, whom Ievaf and Iago pursued to
Caerdigan, and destroyed their country with fire and sword. About this time
Yarthyr the son of Mervyn was drowned: and the year following, Congelach
King of Ireland was slain. But to return to Edred King of England. As soon
as he was returned to his own land, Aulaf with a great army landed in
Northumberland, and was received of the people with much gladness; but anon
after, like fickle and unconstant men, they banished him the land again, and
took to their king one Hircius the son of Haroald, whom likewise after
three years they expelled, and willingly submitted themselves to Edred, who
after he had ruled the whole land eight years, died, and was buried at
Winchester. After him reigned Edwyn son of Edmund, in whose time chanced
nothing worthy to be put in writing, but that he married another man's wife,
her husband being alive. This man, after he had governed the realm four
years, died, leaving his kingdom to his brother Edgar, who was crowned king
of England in his stead. In the year 958. 958
was a wonderful hot summer, when Gwgan the son of Gwyriad the son of
Roderike died. After the which heat, there followed a great plague in March
following. In those days Iago and Ievaf by force and strength ruled all Wales
as they thought good: and yet for all their power, Abloic king of Ireland
landed in Mon, and having burnt Holyhed, spoiled the country of Lhyyn. In the
year 961. 961
the sons of Edwyn the son of Colhoyn were slain, after they had destroyed
all the country to Towyn. About this time, Meyric the son of Cadvan,
Rytherch Bishop of S. David's, and Cadwalhon ap Owen departed out of this
transitory world. Not long after, the country of Northwales was sore spoiled
by the army of Edgar king of England.

Io. Cast.
The cause of this war was the non payment of the tribute that the King of
Aberffraw, by the laws of Howel Dha was to pay to the king of London. Hol.
page 232.
In the end, there was a peace concluded: for king Edgar understanding what
hurt the countries of England and Wales received daily, by reason of the great
multitude of Woolues that then abounded (especially in Wales) which destroyed
much sheep and otherwise did great harm, released the tribute in money
appointed by the said laws of Howel Dha, and bound the prince of Northwales to
pay him yearly certain Woolues for his tribute, and so to be released of
that other tribute in money, Wolves destroid by the prince of Wales.
which the said prince performed, until he had left never a Woolfe in Wales or
England.

In the year 966. Roderike the son of Edwal Voel was slain by the Irishmen,
966
by whom Aberfraw was destroyed. The next year, there fell a great debate
betwixt the two sons of Edwal, Iago, and Ievaf, which had ruled jointly
together from the death of Howel Dha, to that time: and shortly after Iago,
having taken his brother Ievaf by force, very cruelly kept him in prison a
long time: about the which time, Eneon the son of Owen prince of Southwales
wan and seized to himself the land of Gwyr. And in the year 969. 969
Mactus the son of Haroald with an army of Danes did enter the I Will of
Anglesey, and spoiled Penmon. These Danes were suffered by Edgar to inhabit
quietly through all England, till they were as strong as the Englishmen, and
then they fell to such riotousnes and drinking, that much mischief insued
thereof: whereupon Edgar made a law, A law against immoderate drinking.
that every man should drink by measure, and caused a certain mark to be
set in every pot how deep they should drink, and so by these means he
somewhat stayed that immoderate ingurgitation. Not long after that, Godfryd the
son of Haroald did subdue to himself the whole I Will of Anglesey, which he
inioied not long. King Edgar likewise in the year 972. 972
did send a great navy to Caerlheon upon Vsc, which shortly turned back,
Ran. Cest. Fabia^.
without doing any notable act. The next year following, Howel the son of
Ievaf raised a great power against his uncle Iago, for the deliverance of his
father out of prison, and overcame his uncle in fight, whom he chased out of
the land, and took his eldest uncle Meyric the son of Edwal, and put out
both his eyes, and kept him in prison, where he died shortly after, leaving
behind him two sons, Edwal and Ionaval, of the which Edwal came afterward the
most worthy princes of Wales. Howel notwithstanding he had set his father at
liberty, yet took upon himself the whole rule of the land for his life
time. He had three brethren, all men of great estimation, Meyric, Ievaf, and
Cadwalhon, whose lives shall ensue hereafter.

Howel ap Ievaf.
Howel the son of Ievaf.
AFter that Howel the son of Ievaf had expelled his uncle from the land, he
took the rule of it himself. And at that time Dwnwalhon prince of Stradclwyd
took his journey to Rome. Then died Edwalhon the son of Owen. Likewise Edgar
king of England passed out of this transitory world, after that he had builded
many monasteries. After him, Edward his son was king, who when he had
reigned four years, was traiterouslie slain through the malice of his
stepmother, that her son Edred or Edelred might enioie the kingdom; who
after his brothers death, was crowned king of the land. The year 976. 976
Eneon the son of Owen king of Southwales destroyed the land of Gwyr the
second time. The year ensuing, Howel the son of Ievaf with a great army
both of Welshmen and Englishmen, made war against such as succored and
defended his uncle Iago, and spoiled the countries of Lhyyn and Kelynnoc Vawr,
whereby shortly after Iago was taken by Howels men, who enioied his part of
the land peaceably. About the year 979. 979
Edwal Vachan the son of Edwal Voel was slain by his nephew Howel. At this
time, Custenyn Dhu, that is, Constantine the black, son to Iago (which then
was prisoner) hired Godfryd the son of Haroald with his Danes, against his
cosen, and they both together destroyed Anglesey and Lhyyn: whereupon, Howel
gathered his army together, and setting upon them at a place called Gwayth
Hirbarth, overthrew them, where Constantine was slain. About this time, the
Danes landed with vij. ships at Southhampton, and spoiled the town.

Sim. Dunel. Hol. pa. 238. Io. Vowel in Catal. epist. Exon.
They ouerranne also and spoiled the whole country of Deuon and Cornewale,
burned the town of Bodman, and the cathedral church of S. Petrokes, with the
Bishops house. Whereupon the Bishops sea was removed from thence to S.
Germans, where the same continued, until the remoouing and uniting thereof
unto Crediton.

About this time died S. Dunstane, who prophesied of much mischief and great
destruction of the land by the Danes. The year 981. 981
Godfryd the son of Haroald did gather a great army, and landed in
Westwales, where spoiling all the land of Dyuet, with the church of S. David's,
he fought the battle of Lhanwanoc. Likewise in the year next ensuing, Duke
Alfred with a great power of Englishmen spoiled and destroyed Brechnock, and a
great part of the lands of Owen prince of Southwales, against whom, Eneon the
son of the said Owen, and Howel king of Northwales did raise all their power,
and overthrew them in battle, where the greatest part of Alfreds army was
slain, and the rest put to flight. The year following, the Gentlemen of
Gwentsland rebelled against their prince, and cruelly slew Eneon the son of
Owen, which came thither to appease them. This Eneon was a worthy and noble
Gentleman, who did many notable acts in his fathers time, and left behind him
two sons, Edwyn and Theodor or Tewdor Mawr, of whom came afterward the kings
or princes of Southwales. In the year 984. 984
Howel the son of Ievaf king of Wales entered England with an army, where he
was fought withal, and slain valiantly fighting. This Howel had no son,
but his brethren reigned in his place.

Cadwalhon ap Ievaf.
Cadwalhon the son of Ievaf.
AFTER the death of Howel, his brother Cadwalhon, the second son of Ievaf
took in hand the governance of Northwales, and first made war with Ionaval his
coosen the son of Meyric, and right heir to the land, and slew him, but
Edwal the youngest brother escaped away privily. The year following, Meredyth
the son of Owen king or prince of Southwales, with all his power entered into
Northwales, and in fight slew Cadwalhon the son of Ievaf, and Meyric his
brother, and conquered the land to himself. Wherein a man may see how God
punished the wrong, which Iago and Ievaf the sons of Edwal Voel did to their
eldest brother Meyric, who was first disherited, and afterward his eyes put
out, and one of his sons slain. For first Ievaf was imprisoned by Iago, then
Iago with his son Constantine, by Howel the son of Ievaf: and afterward the
said Howel, with his brethren Cadwalhon and Meyric, were slain and spoiled of
all their lands.

Meredyth ap Owen.
Meredyth the son of Owen ap Howel Dha.
THis Meredyth ap Owen, having slain Cadwalhon, obtained the rule and
government of Northwales. In the year 986. 986
Godfryd the son of Haroald, the third time entered the I Will of Anglesey,
where having taken Lhywarch the son of Owen, with 2000. prisoners besides, he
cruelly put out his eyes. Whereupon Meredyth the prince, with the rest escaped
and fled to Caerdigan. And the same year there was a great mooren of cattle
through all Wales. Then the Danes again entered England with diverse armies,
and at Westport and Witest overthrew the Lords of England, Godan and
Britchwould: so that the king was compelled to hire the Danes with the payment
of 10000. pound to live quietly in the land: Dane gelt. Hol. page 239.
and yet within a while after, the king himself brake the peace, and prepared a
great navy to meet the Danes by sea, where he was overcome, and lost all the
ships, which were taken with Alfricke Earl of Mercia the captain of the same.
After this the Danes spoiled York, with Lyndsey, and went to Northumberland,
where they were put to flight by Godwyn and Fridgist. About the same time
Aulaffe and Swayn, sailing up the Thames, with 94. sails, beseeged London,
which was valiantly defended. Wherefore the Danes left their ships, H. Hunt.
and entered the land, and cruelly with fire and sword destroyed all Kent,
Sussex, Surreie, and Hampshire. Whereupon king Edelred sent to them for peace,
which he obtained with great sums of money and victual; so that they lay
peaceably at Hampton that winter. Then Aulaffe upon composition came to
Edelred, who received him worthily, and did so entertain him, that he
promised to depart the land, and never to return, which promise he faithfully
kept.

987
The year 987. died Ievaf the son of Edwal, which had lived many years a
private life. The same year also died Owen the son of Howel Dha, Prince of
Southwales. This Owen had three sons, Eneon which died in his fathers time,
Lhywarch which lost both his eyes, and Meredyth which (as before is declared)
had won Northwales, and after his fathers death took also to his possession
all Southwales, having no respect to his brother Eneon his sons Edwyn and
Theodor or Tewdor. About the same time the Danes sailed from Hampton along
the coast, spoiling Devonshire and Cornewale, and so at the last landed in
Southwales, and destroyed S. David's, Lhanbadarn, Lhanrystyd, and Lhandydoch,
(which were all places of religion) and did so much hurt in the country
besides, that to be rid of them, Meredyth was feign to agree with them, and to
give them a penie for every man within his land, which was called The tribute
of the black army.

At this time Elwmaen the son of Abloic king of Ireland was slain, and a great
number of people died for hunger. The year 989. 989
Owen the son of Dyfnwal was slain. Within a year after Meredyth king of
Wales destroyed the town of Radnor, at what time his nephew Edwyn the son of
Eneon, having to his aid duke Adelf, and a great army of Englishmen and Danes,
spoiled all the land of Meredyth in Southwales, as Caerdigan, Dyuet, Gwyr,
Kydweli, and S. David's: where Edwyn took pledges of the chief men of those
countries. In the mean time, this Meredyth with his people did spoil
Glamorgan, so that no place was free from sword and fire: but at the last
Meredyth and Edwyn fell at an agreement, and were made friends. Soon after
Cadwalhon the only son of Meredyth died. Meredyth being thus occupied, had
so much to do in Southwales, that Northwales lay open for the enemy: which
thing when the Danes perceived, they arrived in Anglesey, and destroyed the
whole I Will. Whereupon the inhabitants of that country received Edwal the son
of Meyric the right heir of Northwales, Matthew. West. page 383. Io. Castor.
for their prince, in the year 992. 992
After these great troubles, there followed within a year after such famine
and scarsitie in Southwales, that many perished for want of food.

Edwal ap Meyric
Edwal ap Meyric the son of Meredyth.
THis Edwal being in possession of the principality of Northwales, studied to
keep and defend his people from injuries and wrongs. But Meredyth gathered
together all his power, intending to recover again Northwales, with whom
Edwal met at Lhangwm, and overthrew him in plain battle, where Theodor of
Tewdor Mawr, Meredyth his nephew was slain, who left behind him two sons
Rees and Rytherch, and a daughter called Elen. Matthew. West.
A little after this Swayn the son of Haroald destroyed the I Will of Man: and
entering to Northwales slew Edwal the prince thereof, who left behind him a son
called Iago.

In the year of Christ 998. 998
the Danes came again to S. David's, destroieng all before them, and there they
slew Morgeney or rather Vrgeney Bishop of that sea. The same year also died
Meredyth the son of Owen king or prince of Wales, leaving behind him one
only daughter called Angharad, which was married to Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht, and
after his death to Conuyn Hirdref, or as other do think, to Conuyn ap
Gwerystan, who had children by either of them, which was the cause of much
war and mischief in Wales, as shall appear hereafter.

Aedan ap Blegored.
Aedan the son of Blegored.
THe death of both these princes (for so much as Meredyth had no issue male,
and Edwal left behind him a child within years, not able to take the charge of
a common wealth) did cause much trouble to ensue: for in Northwales diverse did
aspire to the government, and sought the rule of the land, as Conan the son
of Howel, and Aedan the son of Blegored, who tried the matter in open field,
where Conan was slain, the year 1003. 1003


I do not know, neither could I ever find, what color or pretense of title,
this Aedan ap Blegored had to the principality of Northwales, nor yet of whom
he descended, or who came of him: whereas all the other princes are
notoriously known, of what families they descended, and who came of them.
Neither yet do I read of any Blegored, whose son he might be, except it be
that doctor of Law, of whom mention is made in the laws of Howel Dha, whose
estate was too mean to challenge the principality. He is reported to have
governed about xij. years. Of this acts by him achieved, there is very little
written, saving of those two battles, the one wherein he overcame Conan ap
Howel, and the other wherein he was overcome himself, and slain with his four
sons, by Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht.

In the year 1004. 1004
Gulfath and Vbiad Irish Lords, were taken by the Scots, and their eyes put
out, which Scots did also destroy the country and town of Deuelyn. Likewise
the Danes, which had destroyed again Westwales, went to England, and there
spoiled and burned the land all before them, especially Somersetshire,
Dorsetshire, and so through Hampshire and Sussex, Matt. West.
they came toward the river of Thames, without any let or stay, and so
sailed along the river, to the place where the river Mydwey enters to the
Thames, along which water, they came to Rochester, where they overthrew the
Kentishmen that bade them battle. Edelred king of England was at this time in
Cumberland the chief den of the Danes, which land he brought to his
subjection: but in the mean while, another army of Danes fought again with
the men of Somersetshire, and got the victory, and ruled the country at their
pleasure. Then Edelred hearing of the great worthiness of Richard Duke of
Normandy, sent to him for his daughter Emma in marriage, thinking thereby to
have succor: but God intending to punish the great sins and enormities of
the Saxons, did move the king thereto, that like as they being instruments of
Gods wrath, under the color of friends and hired soldiers, had traiterouslie
and cruelly slain the Brytaines, and driven them out of their land, so should
the Normanes by color of this affinity, first enter the land as friends, and
bring succor against the Danes, and afterward come as foes, and be the utter
destruction of the Saxons and Angles: which was then foreseen and told the
king by an Anachoret, who inspired with the spirit of God, saw the plagues
which he had certainly appointed to fall upon the Saxons. But the king puffed
up with pride, and hope of his affinity, did privily write to all the english
rulers through the realm, The Danes murdered. Matt. West. page 391.
to kill the Danes in one night, which then lived peaceably, which murder was
cruelly executed upon S. Brices day at night. But yet the Danes would not
give over so with loss. Therefore the year following, there came an army of
them to Devonshire, and ouerran the land with fire and sword, sparing nothing
that had life, that they might revenge the murder of their coosens. Matt.
West. page 393. H. Hunt. Sim. Dunel.
They rased the city of Excester, and slew Hugh the Normane, whom the Queen
had appointed governor there. Then Almarus Earl of Deuon gathered a great
army of Hampshire, Wilshire, and all the country about, and met the Danes:
but he and his were put to flight, and the Danes pursued them to Wilton and
destroyed it and Salisburie, and returned to their ships with rich spoils and
great triumphs.

Io. Cast. Si. Dunelm. Hol. page 243. Io. Vowel.
Some are of another opinion, which affirm, that the said Hugh the Norman
entised and procured the Danes to come and beseege the city of Excester, which
they did burn, and used the people with great cruelty, until in the end the
said Almarus Earl of Deuon, and the Gentlemen of the country submitted
themselves, and so obtained peace.

And the year following, being 1004. 1004
Swayne a mighty prince of Denmark, to whom God predestined the crown of
England, came with a great number of sails, and laid siege to Norwich, and
spoiled it, Hol. page 243.
with whom Wolfkettel duke of the land made peace: yet the Danes, after they
had rested a while, went to Thetford, which they also spoiled, and returned to
their ships with their pray, and ouerthrewe duke Wolfkettel (who had gathered
and prepared an army to fight with them) and so failed to their country, and
two years after returned again with their companions, fire, sword and spoil,
Hol. page 244.
and landed at Sandwich and burned it, and made England quake as a reed in the
wind, and thence sailed to Wight, where they wintered till Christmas, and then
entered Hampshire, and passed in diverse bands along the land to Reding,
Wallingford and Colsey, devouring such victuales as they found in the houses,
paieng therefore with sword and fire at their departing. Io. Cast.
And at their return they met near Essington, the army of the Westsaxons,
which did nothing but trouble them with killing, and laded them with spoil,
and so passed the gates of Winchester, with much triumph to Wight; and all this
while was king Edelred at his manor in Shropshire full of cares and troubles.
And then the nobility of England bought peace of the Danes for 30000. pound.
In the which time of peace Edelred took an order, that of every 300. hides of
land through the realm, H. Hunt.
there should be a ship made and furnished, and of every 8. hides, a corselet
and a helmet. An hide contains as much ground as a plough may ear by the
year. Besides these the king had a navy from Normandy, which being all
together at Sandwich, was one of the greatest that ever was seen in Brytaine.
But it happened so, Io. Cast. Matt. West.
that where the king had banished one Wilnot a noble man of Sussex, he fell a
rouing upon the sea, and troubled all passages and victualers. 1008
Then Brightrych brother to the traitor Edric Earl of Mercia, promised the king
to bring before him Wilnot either alive or dead, but it happened otherwise: for
there fell such a tempest, that he was driven of force to the shore, where
many of his ships were lost, and the reast Wilnot and his company did set on
fire, and burned them. Then Brightrych, being abashed of this unfortunate
beginning, returned again along the Thames to London.

Shortly after there landed a navy of Danes at Sandwich, Io. Castor.
and so passed by the land to Canturburie, minding to destroy the city: but
the citizens bought peace for 30000. pound. And the Danes passed first through
Kent, Sussex, Hampshire, and Barkshire, where king Edelred with all the power
of England met them: notwithstanding being persuaded by the traitor Edric, he
would not fight with them, so that they returning back by London, (which city
defended it self manfully) went to their ships. But in the year following
they landed again at Ipswich upon the Ascension day, and there overcame and
put to flight Duke Wolfkettel who fought with them. Then passsing from thence
to Cambridge, they met the kings sisters son with his army, whom they slew,
and with him Duke Oswyn, with Edwyn and Wolfrike Earls, and after took their
way by Essex toward Thames, 1010
leaving no part of cruelty unpracticed by the way. And along the
riuer-side they went to Oxford, Hol. page 245. Io. Cast.
which they had burned the year before, and so to the three castles upon Ouze,
Buckingham, Bedford and Huntingdon, and destroyed Godmanchester, which was then
a fair town, and burned Northampton, and at Christmas returned to their
ships. The next year following, when they had spoiled all the land from Trent
southward, they laid siege to the city of Canterbury, 1011
and wan it by treason of one Almarike (whom Alfege the Archbishop had
delivered from death) and left nothing behind them, Io. Cast. Hol. page 246.
but blood and ashes, carieng the Archbishop with other to their ships, Matt.
Park. page. 68.
whom they cruelly slew afterward. Within a while after, Swayne king of
Denmark came along Humber to Gainesbourgh: to whom Vitred Duke of
Northumberland with all his people and all Lynsey with the countries North of
Watlingstreete became subjects, and gave him hostages. Whereupon Swayne finding
his enterprises fortunate and luckie, committed his navy to Cnute his son,
and went him self to Oxford and Winchester, which cities with all the
countries about aknowledged him for their king. Then he came to London, where
king Edelred was, but the citizens defended the city so manfully and
valiantly, that Swayne returned to Walingford, and so to Bath, and received
homage of all Westsaxon, and afterward coming to London, received the city to
mercy, and was called king throughtout the land. Hol. page 249. Io. Castor.
Then Edelred perceiving all things to fall against him, fled to Normandy, to
his wife and his two sons, Edward and Alfred, whom he had sent thither
before. And Swayne, as soon as he had brought the whole land to his obeisance,
Sim. Dunel.
died suddenly, after whose death, the Danes chose Cnute his son for their
king; but the Englishmen sent for Edelred home again, who coming with a great
army, destroyed Lynsey, because that province was become subject to Cnute.
Hol. page 248.
Which thing when Cnute understood being at Ipswich, he cut off the hands and
noses of all the pledges that he had, and returned to Denmark. About this
time, Brian king of Ireland, and Murcath his son, and other kings of that
land to him subject, did gather a great power against Sutric the son of
Abloic king of Dyuelyn, and Mailmorda king of Lagenes, which Sutric hired a
number of strangers, all armed men, and rouers upon the seas, to his succor,
and gave Brian battle, where the said Brian and his son weer slain, and on
the other side Mailmorda and Broderike captain of the strangers. In the year
1013. 1013
Cnute came again from Denmark, and landed in Westsex, and spoiled all the
country. Io. Cast.
Then Edric with Edmund king Edelreds bastard son, gathered an army, but yet
they durst not give him battle. Then went Edmund to Vitred duke of
Northumberland, and together they spoiled Staffordshire, Leycestershire, and
Shropshire. Cnute likewise, upon the other side, came down through
Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Hutingdonshire, and so by Stafford passed toward
York, to whom Vitred came and yielded himself, yet he lost his life, whose
possessions Cnute gave to one Egricke, and made him duke in his stead,
whereupon Edmund went to his father which lay sick at London. Then Cnute
returned to his ships, and sailed to Thames mouth, and up the river toward
London: but before he came thither, Edelred was departed, after he had reigned
with much trouble and misery 37. years. After whose death, the Englishmen
chose his base son Edmund, surnamed Ironside for strength and tolerance in
war, to be their king. This Edmund went to Westsex, and brought all that
country to his subjection. Then the Danes laid siege to London, Edmund battle
(who came to raise the siege) at Proman by Gillingham, where Edmund had the
upper hand. The second Caerstane, Io. Castor. Matthew. West. page 498.
in the which Edric, Almar and Algar used themselves traitorously against
Edmund, where after long fight, the night departed both the armies. The third
battle was at London, where Edmund pursued the Danes to Brenford, from whence
Edmund bare the honor away, and went to gather a new army, whiles Cnute did
besiege London by water and land, but it was manfully defended. Then Edmund
with his army passed the Thames at Brenford, and entered into Kent, and fought
the fifth battle, where the Danes fled as sheep before him, but he stayed
Edric, whom he had received to mercy and made steward of the land, the which
battle was fought at Essedowne in Essex with all the whole power of the Danes
and Englishmen, where Edmund showed his prowes, Matthew. West. page 399.
and forsaking his place, which was betwixt the Dragon and the Standard, he
entered the army of his enemies, and brake the thickest ranks of them, and
compelled the prowdest of them to turn their backs. Which when Edric saw,
fearing the overthrow of the Danes, cried alowd Fledd Engle, Fledd Engle, Dead
is Edmund: and thereupon fled with his people, whom all the army followed to
the great murder of Englishmen, Hol. page 255. Matthew. West. page. 399.
and there were slain Edmund, Alfric, Godwyn, and Vlfkettel, all Dukes, and
all the cheualrie of England. After which victory, Cnute entered London, and
was crowned king of the land. And Edmund gathered his army together, and they
met in Glocestershire, but either army fearing other, were loath to fight, but
moved the kings to make an end of this cruel bloodshed by combat, Hol. page
256. Matt. West. page. 400. Io. Castor.
whereunto either prince agreed, and the place being appointed, fought together
manfully, and either of them were found so valiant and worthy men, as few the
like. But Cnute fearing the incomparable strength of Edmund moved him to
accord, whereunto he agreed. Thereupon peace was concluded with much joy, that
Edmund should reign in Westsex, and Cnute in Mercia: and so they departed,
Cnute to London, and Edmund to Oxford, S^m. Dunel. Fabian. Matthew. West. page
401.
where he was traitorously murdered by a son of Edric with a sharp knife, as
he was at the privy. Edric being quickly certified of the deed, came to Cnute
(with much joy) and greeted him as only king of England, declaring how
Edmund was slain at Oxford. To whom Cnute replied, that for his good service
he would reward him as his deserts required, Matt. West. page. 402.
and set him above all the nobles of England. Therevppon forthwith he caused
his head to be cut off, and to be set upon a pole, on the highest tower in
London, and then he caused execution to be done upon all the other, that were
consenting to the murder. In the year 1015. Lhewelyn the son of Sitsylht did
raise a great power against Aedan, 1015
who by force had taken upon him the rule of Northwales, and slew him with his
four sons in battle, and (having no respect to Iago or James the son of
Edwal the right heir) took upon him the name and authority of king of Wales.
This Lhewelyn was descended from the kings of Wales by his mother side, whose
name was Trawst, daughter to Elise second son to Anarawd, which was the
eldest son of Roderike the great: who also had to wife Angharat, the only
daughter of Meredyth prince of Southwales, and so by these means he claimed
and enioied the right of either country, as hereafter shall be declared.

Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht.
Lhewelyn the son of Sitsylht: and Angharad the daughter of Meredyth.
AFTER that Lhewelyn son of Sitsylht had taken into his hands the governance of
Wales, all things did prosper in the land: for the earth brought forth double
to the time before passed, the people prospered in all their affairs, and
multiplied woonderfullie, the cattle increased in great number, so that there
was neither beggar nor poor man from the South to the North sea, but every
man had plenty, every house a dweller, and every town inhabitants. Now in
this time Cnute married Emme sometimes wife to Edelred, and mother to Alfred
and Edward, and sent Edmund and Edward the sons of Edmund Ironside to
Hungary to be slain, R^n. Cest. lib. 6. cap. 18.
howheit, the king of Hungary cherished them as his own children. King Cnute
also seized upon the land a great subsidy of 72000. pounds, besides 11000. li.
which the citizens of London paid. 1019
In the year 1019. Meyric the son of Arthpoel did raise a great army
against Lhewelyn king or prince of Wales, which met with him in the field, and
manfully slew him, and discomsited his people. Ran. Cest. ibi.
Also this year Cnute with a great navy sailed to Denmark, and made war
against the Vandales, which had a great army in the field, whom Cnute
overthrew by the prowes of Earl Godwyn, and the Englishmen, wherefore he loved
them the better ever after.

In the year 1020. a certain Scot of low birth came to Southwales, 1020
and named himself Run the son of Meredyth their late king, whom the
nobility, which loved not Lhewelyn, exalted to the regal throne, and took
him for their king, which thing when Lhewelyn heard, he gathered his power in
Northwales, and came toward Run, who had gotten all the strength of Southwales
together at Abergwili, where with great pride he abode the coming of Lhewelyn.
But when both armies were ready to join, Run full of brags and crakes
encouraged his people to fight, promising them the victory: yet he himself
(following the proverb, which bids a man to set on his dog, and not to run
after him) set on his people to fight it to the uttermost, and withdrew
himself privily out of the way: whereas upon the contrary part Lhewelyn,
like a bold and courageous prince, came before his people, calling for the vile
Scot Run, that durst so beelie a princes blood, and so both the armies joined
together with much malice and hatred, for the one party were not so courageous
to defend the quarrel of so worthy a prince of their own blood, as the other
were obstinate in the cause of a stranger: in the end, after great slaughter
upon either part, the Northwales men remembering their old victories, and
encouraged by the prowes of their prince, put their enemies to flight, and
pursued Run so narrowly, that all his Scottish shifts could not save his life,
and so returned home with great spoil and prey. Then Lhewelyn ruled all the
land quietly, but the year following he was slain by Howel and Meredyth the
sons of Edwyn, leaving behind him a son named Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn.

Iago ap Edwal.
Iago the son of Edwal ap Meyric ap Edwal Voel.
AFter the death of Lhewelyn, Iago or James the son of Edwal took upon him
the rule of Northwales as right heir thereof. And Rytherch the son of
Iestyn, governed Southwales by strong hand. Ran. Cest. lib. 6.
Cnute king of England about this time made a viage to Denmark and Swethen,
against Vlf and Alaf, who had stirred the Findlanders against him, with whom he
had a cruel fight, and lost a great number of his army, as well Englishmen as
Danes, and after his return to England, he made his journey to Rome with much
pomp and glory, Io. Cast.
not because he thought by that journey to be cleansed from his sins, but that
his ambitious mind might have the praise and fame of the world, for his rich
gifts and princely behauior, and what holiness he learned there, it appeared at
his return. For forthwith he entered Scotland with a great army, against
Malcolme the prince thereof, who desired peace, and became his subject, with
two other kings of the Orkneys, and Ewist, Molbeath and Iermare.

1031
About the year 1031. the Irish-scots entered Southwales, by the means of Howel
and Meredyth, the sons of Edwyn ap Eneon ap Owen ap Howel Dha, who hired them
against Rytherch ap Iestyn, whom they discomfited and slew, and by that means
attained unto the government of Southwales, which they two ruled jointly, but
yet with small quietness, for the sons of Rytherch gathered a number of such
as were their fathers friends to revenge his death, with whom Howel and
Meredyth met at Hyarthwy, and after long fight put them to flight. But in the
year following, Meredyth was slain by the sons of Conan the son of Sitsylht,
brother to the worthy prince Lhewelyn to revenge their fathers death, whom
Meredyth and his brother had slain. The year next ensuing, certain
Englishmen entered the land of Gwent, with whom, Rytherch ap Iestyn fought, and
was by them slain. Not long after died Cnute the most famous and mightiest
prince in the West parts of the world, as he that had under his dominion the
great country of Swethen, from Germany to the Northpole, H. Hunt. Io. Castor.
Matthew. West. Ran. Cest. li. 6 Al^. Crantz.
with Norway and Denmark, and all the noble I Will of Brytaine. After whom
Haroald Harfote his son begotten upon Alwyn the daughter of Duke Alfelyn, was
created king. For Hardy Cnute his other son by Emma was then in Denmark.
This Haroald in the first year of his reign banished Emma his stepmother out
of the realm.

In the year 1037. 1037
Gruffyth the son of Lhewelyn ap Sitsylth sometimes king of Wales, raised a
great number of people against Iago then enioieng the principality or kingdom
of Northwales, whom Iago likewise provided for, as well as he could: but the
more part and the better soldiers were of Gruffyths side, for the love they
bare to his father, which afterward well appeared: for after the armies once
met, Iago was soon overthrown and slain. This Iago left behind him a son
called Conan, by his wife Auandred daughter to Gweir the son of Pylh.

Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn.
Gruffyth the son of Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht and Angharat.
GRuffyth ap Lhewelyn, after he had slain Iago, governed Northwales worthily
in all things, following his fathers steps, who overcame both the Danes and the
Englishmen diverse times, and defended his country and people manfully all
his reign. In the first year of his government he fought with the Englishmen
and Danes at Crosford upon Seauerne, and put them to flight, and from thence he
lead his army to Lhanpadarn vawr in Caerdiganshire, and destroyed it utterly,
and from thence passed all Southwales through out, and received the people to
his subjection. For Howel ap Edwyn their king fled before his face, and
forlooke the land.

Hol. page 272.
This Howel procured Edwyn the brother of Leofrike Earl of Chester or Mercia,
to come with an army of Englishmen and Danes to his aid against prince
Gruffyth, who met his enemies in the field, and overcame them, and slew the
said Edwyn, Matt. West.
but Howel escaped by flight. After the which victory, Gruffyth made sundry
invasions upon the marches toward Hereford, and always returned with great
spoils.

When Gruffyth had brought all Wales under his dominion, he returned to
Northwales again. The year ensuing, 1038. 1038
Hernun Archbishop of Meneuia or S. David's died, a man both learned and godly.
The year next following, Howel king of Southwales gathered a great power of
his friends and strangers, and entered the land, intending to recover it again.
Wherefore Gruffyth like a worthy prince came with all speed to succor his
people, and meeting with Howel at Pencadair, after he had encouraged his
soldiers, gave him battle, and overthrew him, and pursued him so narrowly,
that he took Howels wife, whom he had brought to the field to see the
overthrow of Gruffyth (which chanced otherwise) whom Gruffyth liked so well,
that he kept her for his concubine.

About this time, Haroald king of England died, and his brother Hardycnute
reigned in his stead, a noble and a liberal prince, who (as it is reported)
caused his tables to be covered and furnished four times every day, H. Hunt
for strangers and all comers, and after he had reigned two years, Matt.
West. Sim. Dunel.
he died at Lambeth in the flower of his age. After whose death, the Englishmen
sent for Alfred the eldest son of Edelred from Normandy, but that message
pleased not Earl Godwyn, which was the mightiest man in the land, because he
knew the young prince to be courageous and stout, and therefore one that would
not suffer him to rule the land as he intended to do. Therefore he persuaded
the people that Alfred, who had come well accompanied with Normanes, had
promised them the whole rule of the land, and thereupon they took all the
Normanes, and bound them, and afterward tithed them, putting every tenth man
to death. And yet they thought there were too many, wherefore they tithed them
the second time: and lead Alfred from Gilford (where this cruelty was
committed) to Gillingham, and there put out his eyes, and removed him thence to
Ely, where he was pitifully murdered. Afterward they sent for Edward the
younger son, whom they received as king the year following, after that he had
married Godwynes daughter, who in the first year of his reign banished Earl
Swayne, son to the said Earl Godwyn, who was received of the Earl of
Flanders. In the year 1041. Howel came again to Southwales, 1041
and remained there awhile: and shortly after a number of strangers landed in
Westwales and spoiled the country, against whom Howel gathered a number of
people, and fought with them, and drove them to their ships with much loss.

At this time Conan the son of Iago (who had fled to Ireland to save his
life) with the power of Alfred king of Deuelyn, whose daughter Ranulph he had
married, entered Northwales, and by treason had taken Gruffyth the king, and
carried him toward the ships: but when it was known, the country upon the
sudden followed the Irishmen, and ouertaking them rescued their prince,
requiting their foes with much slaughter to their ships, who returned straight
with Conan to Ireland. The year following, Howel the son of Owen Lord of
Glamorgan died, being a man full of years. Then Howel ap Edwyn called to his
succor Danes and Englishmen, with all the power he could make in Southwales.
Whereof Gruffyth being certified, gathered his power together in Northwales,
and came courageously to meet his enemies, (whom he had twice before
discomfited) and overcame them, and chased them, as far as the spring of the
river Towy, where after a long and dangerous battle Howel was slain, and his
army discomfited, and so narrowly pursued that few escaped alive. After whose
death Rytherch and Rees the sons of Rytherch ap Iestyn aspiring again to the
rule and government of Southwales, Hol. page 270. Matt. West.
which their father had once obtained, gathered a great army, as well of
strangers as out of Gwentland, and Glamorgan, and met with Gruffyth king of
Wales, who after his accustomed manner detracting no time, but courageously
animating his men with the remembrance of their former fortune and diverse
victories under his standard, joined battle with his enemies, whom he found
disposed to abide, and to win againt the honor which before they had lost:
wherefore when they met, the fight was cruel and bloody, and continued till
night, which easily departed both armies being werie with fighting, and either
fearing other, returned to their countries, to gather more strength. This year
Joseph bishop of Teilo or Landaf died at Rome. The land being thus quieted,
Gruffyth ruled al Wales without any trouble: till about two years after, the
Gentlemen of Ystrad Towy did by treason kill 140. of the Prince his best
soldiors, to revenge whose death the king Gruffyth destroyed all Dyuet and
Ystrad Towy. Here is also to be noted, that such snow fell this year, that it
lay upon the earth from the kalends of January, to the 14. of March. About
this time, Lothen and Hyrling landed at Sandwich with a great number of Danes,
and after they had spoiled the town, they returned to their ships, and sailed
to Flanders, and sold their booties, and so sailed to their country. At this
time also Earl Swayne returned to England, and came to his fathers house at
Pevenese, and humbly besought his father, and his brethren Haroald and Tostie,
to procure him the kings favor. So Earl Beorned promised to entreat the king
for him, and went with Swayne to his ships, where he was traitorouslie
murdered, and his body left upon the shore, until his friends, being
certified of the same, fetched him away, and buried him at Winchester, where
his uncle king Cnute had been buried before. Swayne having committed this
wicked fact, sailed again to Flanders, and continued there, till his father
made peace with the king, and brought him in favor again about a year after.

1050
In the year 1050. Conan the son of Iago did gather an army of his friends
in Ireland, minding to recover his inheritance again, and as he sailed toward
Wales, there arose such a tempest, that it scattered his navy abroad, and
drowned the most part of his ships, so that he was disappointed of his purpose,
and lost his labor. Shortly after, Robert Archbishop of Canturburie accused
Earl Godwyn and his sons Swayne and Haroald of treason, and the Queen of
adultery, who because they refused to appear, being called before the king,
were banished the land, and the Queen put away from the king, whereupon,
Godwyn with Swayne fled to Flanders, and Haroald to Ireland.

Will. Malms. Hol. page 270. and 271.
Eustace Earl of Bologne, the father of Godfrey, having married Goda king
Edwards sister, the widow of Walter de Maunt, came to England to his brother in
law, and as he was returning home again, one of his servants killed a man at
Canturburie (or at Dover as Matt. Westminster. has) whereof grew a great
inconvenience and slaughter on both sides: Matt. West. page. 419.
whereupon Eustace returning again; made a grievous complaint to king Edward
upon the Kentishmen, whose part Earl Godwyn took, because they were of his
county. But Eustace by the suggestion of Robert Archbishop of Canturburie (who
hated Godwyn and his sons) so incensed king Edward against him and the
Kentishmen, Matt. Park.
that Godwyn and his sons were sent for, to answer the matter before the king
at Gloucester. Whereupon Godwyn fearing the kings displeasure (who could never
brook him sithence the death of his brother Alfred) gathered an army out of
Kent and other countries where his sons ruled, and so came toward Gloucester,
reporting abroad, that all this preparation was made to resist Gruffyth prince
of Wales, who (as they affirmed) was ready with an army to invade the
marches. But king Edward being certified by the Welshmen, that there was no
such things in hand, commanded Godwyn to send back his army, and to come
himself to answer, according to the order of law. Which when he refused to
do, the king by the advice of Earl Leofrike appointed a Parliament and
meeting at London, to take order in these matters, where the king came with a
great army out of Mercia and other western countries. Then Godwyn remaining
with his army in Southwerke, and perceiving how that diverse of his friends
disappointed him, and other daily forsook him, and went to the kings part,
despairing to be able to withstand the kings proceedings against him, conveyed
himself away privily with his sons, and fled out of the land. Whereupon
king Edward proclaimed him and his sons outlawes, confiscated their goods, and
gave their lands to other of his nobility.

Then the king gave to Adonan the earldome of Devonshire and Dorsetshire, and
to Algar son of Earl Leofrick the earldome of Haroald. Nevertheless Godwyn
and Swayne got men and ships in Flanders, and sailed to the i will of Wight, which
they spoiled, and so they did Portland. At the same time Haroald coming from
Ireland, and wafting along the shore, spoiling the country as he went, at
length met with his father and brother, who being together, burned P^euenese^y,
Romney, Heath, Folkston, Dover, and Sandwich, and entering the Thames destroyed
Sheppey, and burned the kings houses at Mydltowne, and afterward sailed up
toward London, where by the way they met with the king and so sailed with him,
and when they were ready to fight, an accord was made by means of Bishop
Stigand, in such sort that the king restored them their lands and goods, took
home the Queen, and banished the Archbishop with all the Frenchmen, which had
put that suspicion in the kings head.

Mat. Westminster. writes, that about this time, to wit, An. 1053. Rees the brother
of Gruffyth king of Wales was slain in a place called Bulendune, Matt. West.
page. 420.
whose head was presented to king Edward, the day before the Epiphanie, the
king being then at Gloucester.

A little after that, Oswald Earl of Northumberland, when he heard that his
son was slain in Scotland, whither his father had sent him to conquer it,
asked whether his deaths wound was in his breast or in his back; and they said
in his breast: and he answered, I am right glad thereof, for I would not wish me
nor my son to die otherwise. Then king Edward entered Scotland, and overcame
the king in battle, and subdued the whole land to him self. The year
following, Earl Godwyn died at the kings table, choked with a piece of bread,
whose Earldome Haroald his son had, and Algar Earl of Chester had the
Earldome of Haroald.

Hector Boet. lib. 12. cap. 5.
About this time Makbeth king of Scotland caused a noble man of his named
Bancho, to be cruelly murdered, whereupon Fleance the son of the said
Bancho escaping the hands of Makbeth, Buchan. li. 7. page. 62.
fled to Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn prince of Wales, where being ioifullie received
and entertained courteously, he grew into such favor with the said Prince,
that he thought nothing too good for him. But in process of time Fleance
forgetting the courtesy to him showed, Hol. page 247.
fell in love with the princes daughter, and gat her with child. Which thing
the prince took in so ill part, that he in a rage caused Fleance to be killed,
holding his daughter in most vile estate of servitude, for so suffering her
self to be defloured by a stranger. At length she was delivered of a son,
which was named Walter, who in few years proved a man of great courage and
valiancie, in whom from his childhood appeared a certain noblenes of mind,
ready to attempt any great enterprise. This Walter on a time fell out with
one of his companions, who in that heat of contention objected unto him, that
he was but a bastard begotten in unlawful bed. Which reproach so grieved
Walter, that he fell upon the other, and slew him; whereupon fearing the
punishment of the law, he fled into Scotland, where he fell into the company
of those Englishmen which were come thither with Queen Margaret the sister of
Edgar Edeling, amongst whom he showed himself so discreet and sober in all his
demcanor, that he was highly esteemed of all men: and so attaining to higher
reputation and credit, was afterward employed in the affairs of the common
wealth, and at length made Lord Steward of Scotland, receiving the kings
revenues of the whole realm. Of the which office he and his posterity
retained that surname of Steward ever after, from whom descended the most noble
kings of Scotland of the family of Stewards, besides many other Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, and Barons of great fame and renown.

Also at this time, Siward that worthy Earl of Northumberland, being brought
to the point of death with the bloody flux, bewailed his mischance, that he
had escaped in many a dangerous battle, and now should die such a filthy and
cowardly death, and calling his friends and his men about him, commanded them
to set him in his chair, and to arm him at all points, and put his shield in
the left hand, and so made an end of his worthy life. Whose Earldome, because
his son was within years, was given to Tosty Godwyns son.

1054
In the year 1054. Gruffyth the son of Rytherch ap Iestyn, did gather a great
number, as well strangers as others, against Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn king or prince
of Wales, but commonly called king of Northwales; who detracting no time,
meeting him, fought with him, and slew him. Shortly after, Algar Earl of
Chester, Matt. West. page. 421.
being convicted of treason against the king, fled to Gruffyth king or prince
of Wales, who gathered his power to revenge the often wrongs, which he had
received at the Englishmens hands, who ever succored his enemies against him.
Hol. page 272 276. and 277.
Therefore he together with Algar entered Herefordshire, and spoiled all the
way with fire and sword, to the city, whither all the people had fled, Matt.
West. page. 422. Io. Castor.
and they boldly issued forth (Earl Randulph being their leader) and gave him
battle, which Gruffyth wished for above any other thing, This Randulphe was
K. Edwards nephew, by his sister Goda, the wife of walter De Maunt.
as he that had won five set fields; and courageously receiving his enemies,
fought with them. Which fight was long and doubtful, till such time as
Gruffyth encouraged his people with the remembrance of the prowess and worthy
acts of the ancient Brytaines their forfathers, saying that they were the same
enemies, whose backs they had so oftentimes seen before: which doubled their
strength and force, and so they pressed forwards, that their foes were
compelled to forsake the field and trust to their feet, where their hands
prevailed not, and thought to have taken the town for their defense. But
Gruffyth and his men pursued them so hard, that they entered with them, and
after a great slaughter returned home with many worthy prisoners, great
triumph, and rich spoils, leaving nothing in the town, but blood and ashes,
and the walls rased to the ground.

Hol. page 276. Io. Castor.
There be some which affirm, that king Edward by evil counsel (as it is
thought) banished Algar the son of Earl Leofrike, whereupon he gat him into
Ireland, and there providing xviij. ships of rouers, returned and joined
himself with Gruffyth king or prince of Wales, who both together invaded the
country of Mercia, Matt. West. page. 423. Si. Dunelm.
about Hereford, where Ranulph Earl of that country (who was son to king
Edwards sister named Goda, by her first husband Walter de Maunt) came against
them with a great army, and met them about two miles from Hereford, where
after a sore fight by the space of three hours, Ranulph and his army were
discomfited, and about 500. of them slain, and the rest put to flight, whom
Gruffyth and Algar pursued to Hereford, and entering the town, set the
cathedral church on fire, and slew the Bishop named Leogar, with seven of the
canons, spoiled and burnt the town miserably. Whereupon, king Edward being
advertised hereof, gathered an army, and sent Haroald the son of Earl
Godwyn against them, who pursuing the enemies to Northwales, passed through
Stradclwyd to Snowdon: but Gruffyth and Algar being afraid to meet Haroald,
got them again to Southwales, whereof Haroald being advertised, left one part
of his army in Northwales, to resist the enemies there, and returning with the
residue to Hereford, caused a great trench to be cast round about the town,
with a high rampire strongly fortifieng the gates of the same. After this, by
means of a parle had with Gruffyth and Algar, at a place called Biligelhag, a
peace was concluded, whereupon Algar being pardoned by the king, and restored
again to his Earldom, returned home to Chester. About two years after,
Algar was accused again of treason, so that he was the second time exiled the
land, and repaired to his old friend Gruffyth prince of Northwales, Io. Cast.
Hol. pa. 277.
by whom he was received ioifullie, and restored again to his Earldom by
the aid of certain strangers, which came by chance from Norwaie. Whereupon king
Edward being sore offended with Gruffyth, sent Haroald again with power to
Northwales, to be revenged upon him, who coming to Ruthlan, burned the palace
of Gruffyth, and his ships, and then returned back to the king at Gloucester.
About this time, Edward the son of Edmund Ironside, came to England with his
wife and children, Edgar Edeling (which signifies in the Brytish tongue, a young
Lord or a Prince) and Margaret which was afterward Queen of Scots, and mother
to Mawd, wife to Henry the first king of England. About two years after came
Roderike, son to Haroald king of Denmark, Matt. West.
with a great army to Wales, and there being friendly received of king
Gruffyth, ioining his power to Gruffyths, entered England, and cruelly spoiled
and burned a great part of the land. But shortly after, Roderike was compelled
to return to his ships, and to sail to Denmark, and Gruffyth returned with
spoils.

This year, Matt. Park. Matt. West.
as Haroald Godwyns son would have sailed to Flanders, he was driven by force
of a tempest to land in Poytiers, where he was taken, and conveyed to William
Bastard, duke of Normandy: to whom Haroald declared his journey thither, to be
only to offer him his service in the affairs of England, and took a solemn
oath, first to marry the Dukes daughter, and after the death of Edward to
reserve the crown to the dukes use. Then shortly after receiving rich gifts,
with much honor he returned to England. This year died Owen the son of
Gruffyth ap Rytherch. Also Haroald and his brother Tosty, Matt. West. page. 427.
by the procurement of Caradoc ap Gruffyth ap Rytherch, and others, gathered a
great power, and entered Southwales, and subdued a great part thereof, and
wrought so with those that were about Gruffyth the king, that as soon as he had
gathered his people in Northwales, and took his journey to meet with Haroald,
he was cruelly and traitorouslie slain by his own men, and his head brought
to Haroald: who appointed and placed Meredyth the son of Owen ap Edwyn,
prince and ruler in Southwales, and he with his brother Tosty returned home.

Hol. page 277. Matt. West. page. 427.
Some do report, that Haroald, about the rogation week by the kings
commandment, went against the Welshmen, and taking the sea, sailed by
Bristowe, round about the coast, compassing in manner all Wales. His brother
Tosty, that was Earl of Northumberland, met him by appointment with an host of
horsemen, and so ioining together, they destroyed the country of Southwales,
in such sort, that the Welshmen were compelled to submit themselves to deliver
hostages, and conditioned to pay the ancient tribute, which before time they
had paid. The people of that country, because Gruffyth their prince fled at
the coming of Haroald, and left them to be a prey for the enemy, hated him
fore, whom, as soon as he returned to them again, they slew, and sent his
head to Haroald, which he sent to the king. After whose death, king Edward
granted the principality of Northwales to Blethyn and Rywalhon the sons of
Convyn, brethren to Gruffyth by the mothers side, who did homage unto him for
the same.

This Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn governed Wales 34. years valiantly and woorthilie,
he never fought but he bare away the victory, he was gentle to his subjects,
and cruel to his foes, looued of the one, and feared of the other: liberal to
strangers, costly in apparel, and princely in all his doings, and
unworthy of that cruel death, that the ambitious desire of rule did provoke
his unkind subjects, and unnatural coosens, to prepare for so noble a prince,
and so gentle a master as he was.

Blethyn and Rywalhon.
Blethyn and Rywalhon the sons fo Convyn.
AFter the decease of king or prince Gruffyth, Meredyth the son of Owen ap
Edwyn (which Edwyn as some writers say was the son of Howel Dha) did take
upon him the government of Southwales, and Blethyn and Rywalhon the sons of
Convyn, and half brethren to king Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn (as they which were
borne of Angharat daughter to Meredyth king of Wales) did govern Northwales,
Conan the son of Iago being all this time with his father in law in Ireland.
About this time it fortuned, that as Haroald served the king with drink at
Windsor, his brother Tofty moved with envy that his younger brother should be
preferred before him, Matthew. West.
pulled him by the hair of the head, and ouerthrewe him. Then departing
thence, full of rancor and malice, to Hereford, where Haroald had prepared
great cheer for the king, he slew all Haroalds servants, and cut off their
heads, arms, legs, noses, feet, and hands, and filled all the vessels of wine,
mead, beer, and ale therewith: and sent the King word, that he should want no
powdered and sowsed meats, when he came thither; as for other things, let him
make provision himself. For which heinous offense the king banished him the
land for ever.

Caradoc ap Gruffyth ap Rytherch was the first that procured Haroald for to
come to Wales against Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn, hoping by him to atteine unto the
government of Southwales. But it fell out otherwise, for when Haroald
understood that he should not get that at the hands of Caradoc which he looked
for, which was a certain lordship within Wales nigh unto Hereford, and knowing
also Caradoc to be subtle and deceiptfull man, compounding with Meredyth ap
Owen for that lordship, he made him king or prince of Southwales, and banished
Caradoc out of the country. Matt. West. page. 429. Mar. Scotus.
Afterward Haroald having obtained that lordship, builded there a princely and
sumptuous house at a place called Portaslyth, and diverse times earnestly
invited the king to come to see the same, and at the length the king being then
at Gloucester not far off, granted him his request: whereupon, Haroald made such
preparation as is before mentioned for him* which was thus most horribly abused
by Tosty. Soon after this wicked act, the said Caradoc ap Gruffyth came to the
same house, and to be revenged upon Haroald, killed all the workmen and
laborers that were there at work, and all the servants and people of Haroald
that he could find, and defacing the work, carried away those things that
with great labor and expenses had been brought thither, to set out and
beautify the building.

Haroald and his brother were chief Iusticers of the land, Matt. West. page.
430.
and they used, when they saw any manor house or farm that pleased them, to
cause the owner to be murdered by night, with all his children and household,
and then to seize the land into their own hands. Now when the people of
Northumberland heard the exile of Tosty, which was their Earl, they reioised
much; for they hated him to the death. Wherefore coming to York, they slew all
his family, as well Englishmen as Danes. Then ioining to them the men of
Lincolneshire, Notingham, and Derbyshire, they made Marcher son of Earl
Algar their captain, and to them came his brother Edwyn with his people, and a
great number of Welshmen, and they went burning and spoiling to Hampton; where
Haroald met with them, sent from the king to know their wills; and they said,
they would have Marcher Earl over them, which the king granted and confirmed.
Whereupon they returned, Matt. West.
the one to the North, the other to Wales, spoiling and burning all the
country, and lead with them many thousand prisoners.

The year following being 1066. 1066
king Edward died, and was buried at Westminster. This was the last King of
Saxon or English blood, that reigned in this land, which from Cerdicke king of
Westsaxons had continued 544. and from Egbert the first Monarch 171. years.
After the death of Edward, some would have preferred Edgar Edeling as right
heir to the crown: but Haroald being of great power, more rich, and better
freended, obtained it: nothing weieng his oath and promise to William Duke of
Normandy, which Duke calling all his nobles together, declared them the wrongs
he had received at Haroalds hands. First the death of his coosen Alfred, then
the banishment of the Archbishop Robert, and Earl Odan, with all the Normanes;
and thirdly, his oath and promise broken: declaring also the titles he had to
England, as well by the former promise of Edward made to him in Normandy; that
if ever he enioied the crown of England, Very weak titles of themselves.
William should be his heir; as also by cosinage, and by the oath and promise
of Haroald. Which matter considered by the nobility of Normandy, with all the
dangers and difficulties of this expedition, brought them to such perplexity,
that the more part feared the end. Then William Fitzosbert the Dukes sewer,
seeing how they were bent, dissuaded them from that viage: wherefore they agreed
all, that he should declare their minds to the duke. Then he came to him and
said, I with all my men and power am ready to live and die with thee in this
journey: which when the other heard upon their promise, they were ready to
follow, and so made ready a great navy. In the mean while Tosty entered
Humber with 40. sail, but Earl Edwyn met with him, and put him to flight,
who, as he failed toward Scotland, met with Haroald king of Norwaie with 300.
sail coming toward England, and ioining with him they both entered Humber,
and having landed their army, they came to York, where both Earls Edwyn and
Marcher gave them battle, upon the south part of the town: but Haroald and
Tosty bare away the victory, and spoiled the city, and then marched
forwards, toward Stamfordbridge, where Haroald king of England and all his
power did meet with them. And after a long fight and many valiant acts
achieved on both sides, even from morning till noone, Will. Malms. H. Hunt.
Matt. West. page. 434.
at what time the Norwaies began to retire back over the water, one of them,
worthy not to be forgotten, kept the passage upon the bridge, with his axe,
against all the army of England, till three of the clock, and slew 40. men;
but at the last one got under the bridge, and with his spear gave him his
deaths wound through the bridge. Then the army passed over the bridge, and put
the Norwaies to flight, and slew Haroald their king, and Tosty, where not one
man escaped of all the number, that was not either killed or burned. Then
Haroald entered York with great joy and triumph, and as he sat at dinner,
there came a post, who told him how Duke William was landed at Suwerhide, and
had fortified himself with a trench at Hastings. With which tidings Haroald
being nothing dismayed, made expedition thitherward. Where William dividing his
army into five battles, The exhortation of W. Conqueror to his Soldiers.
made a long oration unto his soldiers: wherein he declared the worthiness of
their forefathers the Danes and Norwaies, as well against the Englishmen (which
were never able to abide their force) as against the Frenchmen and other
nations, and how they were accustomed to overcome at all times, and being well
horssed, well armed, and good archers, had now to do with a nation only
taught to trust to their feet, evil horssed, unarmed, and such as knew not
how to occupy their bows. Then he brought his people to the field, but
Haroald couched all his army in one battle, as nigh together as they could
well stand, and so set upon his enemies. And after long fight William caused
his men to retire, as if they fled; then the Englishmen followed apase, and
brake their araie: which when William perceived, he brought in a battle of
fresh Normanes, who entered Haroalds battle, and fought so sore, that Haroald
was hurt with an arrow, and afterward slain: and so the Englishmen left the
Normanes both the field and the victory.

Then W. Conqueror went straight to London, William Conqueror.
where he was received peaceably, and crowned at Westminster king of the
land. This last battle and utter destruction of Englishmen was fought the 14.
day of October, in the year 1066. 1066
Which change was before declared by a Comet that appeared in the beginning of
this year, of the which one made these verses: Anno milleno sexageno quoque
seno,
Anglorum metae flammas censere Cometae.


Matt. Paris. page. 7.
The year following, William passed the sea to Normandy, then Edgar Edeling
came out of Scotland to York, for the people of the country had slain
Robert, to whom William had given that Earldome, and 900. men with him, and
had received Edgar for their king. But William returning from Normandy
destroyed all the North country, and chased Edgar to Scotland again.

Matt. West. lib. 2. page 1. Hol. page 297.
Also Edrike Syluaticus, the son of Alfrike Earl of Mercia, refusing to
submit himself as other had done, when he saw that the king was departed to
Normandy, rose against such as were left in his absence to keep the land in
obedience; whereupon, those that lay in the castle of Hereford, Richard fitz
Scrope, and others, oftentimes invaded his lands, and wasted the goods of his
tenants; but as often as they came against him, they always lost some of their
own men: at length, he calling to his aid the kings of Wales, Blethyn and
Rywalhon, wasted the country of Hereford, even to Wye bridge, and then
returned with a marvelous great spoil.

This year also, 1068
being 1068. Meredyth and Ithel, the sons of Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn, raised a
great power against Blethyn and Rywalhon kings of Northwales, and met with them
at a place called Mechain, where after long fight, there were slain upon the
one part Ithel, and upon the other part Rywalhon, and Meredyth put to flight,
whom Blethyn pursued so straightly, that he starued for cold and hunger upon
the mountains, and so Blethyn the son of Convyn remained the only king of
Powys and Northwales.

About this time, Swayne king of Denmark, and Osburne his brother, Matt.
Paris. page. 8. Matt. West. lib. 2. page 3.
came to Humber with 300. sails, and to them came Edgar Edeling, and Earl
VValtelfe, who all together came to York, and wan the castle, and lay that
winter betwixt Ouse and Trent, till the king came thither, and chased the Danes
to their ships, and destroyed the inhabitants of the country, but Earl
VValtheof he received to mercy.

At this time Caradoc son to Gruffyth ap Rytherch ap Iestyn caused a great
number of Frenchmen (for so the Brytish book calls the Normanes) to enter
Southwales, to whom he joined his power of Gwentland, and gave Meredyth the
king of that country an overthrow, and slew him upon the river of Rympyn. At
the same time also, Dermot Maken Anel, the worthiest and noblest prince that
ever ruled in Ireland, was murdered. The two Earls Edwyn and Marcher with
Hereward gathered an army against the king, Matt. Paris.
but Edwyn was slain of his own people, and the other took the I Will of Elie;
which the king so sore besieged, that he shortly took Marcher and his
accomplices, but Hereward escaped his hands manfully, Matthew. West. lib. 2. page 4.
whom the king followed to Scotland, and made Malcolme king of the land his
subject and vassal. Then after the king passed to Normandy, and received
Edgar Edeling to his mercy. And about this time the Normanes did lead a great
power to VVestwales by sea, and destroyed Dyuet, and the country of Caerdigan,
and carried away much spoil, and did so likewise the year following. Bleythyd
Bishop of Meneuia or S. David's died at this time, and Sulien was Bishop in his
place. Matt. West. li. 2. page 6. Matt. Park. page. 11.
Not long after this time, Radulph Earl of Eastangles conspired against the
king, with Roger Earl of Hereford, and Earl VValtheof, and at the marriage of
the said Radulph with Rogers sister in Essex, the matter was opened, but it
pleased not the rest. Therefore Radulph took shipping in Norwich, and fled to
Denmark, and the king suddenly coming, ouertooke VValtheof and Roger, of
whom VValtheof was beheaded, and Roger committed to prison, and the people all
slain, among whom there were a great number of Welshman.

Matt. Paris. page. 11. Matt. West. lib. 2. page 6.
This Radulphs mother came out of Wales, which was the cause of the Welshmens
being there: for Radulph sent for many of his mothers friends and kinsmen to
come to this marriage, meaning, through their aid and procurement, to get the
princes and people of Wales to join with him in this enterprise. He also and
his accomplices sent to Cnute king of Denmark, promising him the kingdom of
England, to aid him against William the bastard. But William being advertised
of all these things, overthrew all their devises: for by his sudden coming
upon them out of Normandy, he took Roger his coosen, and VValtheof, whom he
committed to prison, and caused to be executed afterward, but Radulph escaped
and departed the realm. Of the Welshman, which were at this marriage,
William hanged some, put out the eyes of others, and banished the rest.

After that, in the year 1073. 1073
Blethyn ap Convyn king of Wales was traitorouslie and cowardly murdered by
Rees ap Owen ap Edwyn, and the gentlemen of Ystrad Tywy, after he had worthily
governed Wales 13. years. This man was very liberal and merciful, and
loved justice and equity in all his reign. This Blethyn had by diverse women
many children; first Meredyth by Haer daughter to Gylhyn, Lhywarch and Cadogan
by another woman, Madoc and Riryd by the third, and Iorwerth by the fourth.

Trahaern ap Caradoc.
Trahaern the son of Caradoc.
AFter the death of Blethyn, Trahaern ap Caradoc his coosen germane took upon
him the rule of Northwales, and Rees ap Owen with Rytherch ap Caradoc did
jointly rule Southwales. Then Gruffyth son to Conan son to Iago or James
right inheritour of Northwales came from Ireland, with succor which his
brethren Encumalhon king of Vltonia and Ranalht and Mathawn had delivered him,
and he landed in the I Will of Mon or Anglesey, and brought it to his subjection.
At this time Kynwric ap Rywalhon a noble man of Maelor, or Bromefield, was
slain in Northwales.

This year also, Gronow and Lhewelyn the sons of Cadogan ap Blethyn did join
their powers with Caradoc ap Gruffyth ap Rytherch, against Rees ap Owen, and
Rytherch ap Caradoc, to revenge their grandfathers death; and then fought at a
place called Camdhwr, where the sons of Cadogan obtained the victory.
Shortly after, Gruffyth ap Conan passed over the water from Mon to the maine
land, and Trahaern ap Caradoc met with him at Bronyrerw, where Gruffyth was put
to flight, and retired back to the I Will. In the year 1074. 1074
Rytherch ap Caradoc was slain by treason of his coosen germane Meyrchaon ap
Rees ap Rytherch, and Rees ap Owen ruled Southwales alone. Nevertheless, the
sons of Cadogan gathered their powers and came against him, and fought with
him the second time at Gwaynyttyd, where he was put to flight: but yet he
gathered a new power, and kept the land still. Then Trahaern ap Caradoc king of
Northwales moved his power against Rees, who boldly met him with all the
power of Southwales, at a place called Pwlhgwttic, where after long fighting,
Rees was put to flight, and after great slaughter of his men, he fled from
place to place, fearing all things, like a stag that had been lately chased,
which mistrusteth every noise: but at the last, he with his brother Howel fell
into the hands of Caradoc ap Gruffyth, who slew them both in revenge of the
death of the wise and noble prince Blethyn ap Convyn. At this time, Sulien
Archbishop of S. David's did forsake his Bishopric, and Abraham was chosen
Bishop in his place. In the year 1077. 1077
Rees the soon of Theodor, the son of Eneon, the son of Owen, the son of
Howel Dha, as right inheritour to the kingdom of Southwales claimed the same,
and the people received him with much joy, and made him their prince. The next
year after, Meneuia was all spoiled and destroyed by strangers, and Abraham
the Bishop died, after whose death Sulien was compelled to take the Bishopric
again. In the year following, Gruffyth the son of Conan did bring a great
army of Irishmen and Scots into Wales, and joined with Rees ap Theodor, as two
right heirs of the whole country: Gruffyth of Northwales, and Rees of
Southwales; descending both linealie fro Roderike the great, against whom came
Trahaern ap Caradoc, and Caradoc Gruffyth and Mailyr, the sons of Rywalhon ap
Gwyn his coosen germans (for Gwyn ap Blethyn was their grandfather) who in
those days were the chief rulers of all Wales. And after they had met at the
mountains of Carno, they fought a cruel battle, and were the more eger,
because upon that days work lay the lives and honor of either party. But at
the length the victory fell to Gruffyth and Rees, and Trahaern with his
coosens were all slain, and the most part of their people: then the kingdoms
of Wales came under the rule of the right heirs again. At this time also a
noble man of Wales called Vrgeney ap Sitsylht was slain by the sons of Rees
Sais, which is to say Rees the Englishman; for so they used to name all such
as had served in England, and could speak the English tongue.

Gruffyth ap Conan.
Gruffyth the son of Conan.
AFTER the death of Trahaern, Gruffyth ap Conan did quietly rule Northwales,
and Rees ap Theodor Southwales. About this time, Malcolme king of Scots spoiled
Northumberland, and carried a great number of prisoners with him, and the people
of Northumberland slew Walter Bishop of Durham, and 100. men with him, as he
sat keeping of court. Robert Curthoys also the son of William Bastard
overthrew his father in battle. 1079
In the year following, Io. Castor. Matt. West. Matt. Paris.
William entered Wales with a great army, till he came as far as S. David's,
where he offered and took homage of the kings and princes of the land. About
this time, Thrustan Abbot of Glastenburie did cause three of his moonkes to be
slain beside the high altar.

Io. Castor.
This Thrustan coming from Rome, brought with him a new kind of note for the
ordinary service of the church, which he would have had his moonks to use in
their daily service: but they not willing to change their old Mumpsimus for
his new Sumpsimus (as the priest said to the Bishop of his mass) did stoutly
withstand their Abbot, and thereof came this moonkish brall, wherein these
three moonks were slain, and eighteen more hurt.

Matt. Paris. page. 17.
About this time, or not long after, the sepulcher of Walwey, king Arthurs
sisters son, was found upon the sea shore in the country of Ros: the body
by estimation, upon viewing of the bones, was thought to be xiiij. foot in
length. Io. Castor.
Walwey in his life time was a right noble and valiant warrior, of very good
reputation, who ruled that country, which to this day of him is called
Walwethay.

And this year Sulien forsook his Bishoprike the second time, and Wylfred was
stalled in his place. At this time also the town of Caerdyff was built. In the
year 1087. 1087
William Bastard king of all Brytaine and Duke of Normandy died, when he had
left never a noble man of English blood within England, but had robbed, spoiled
and slain or banished them all, Io. Castor.
and given their lands to his own men: for God had brought in the Normanes to
revenge his anger upon the Angles and Saxons, which Normanes were counted the
cruellest people in the world: for ever when they had brought their enemies to
subjection, that they were not able to rebel against them, they commonly
destroyed one another, and so ever exercised their cruelty upon themselves; as
it appeared in England, Normandy, Apulia, Calabria, Sicilia, and Antiochia,
which countries they brought to their subjection.

John Rous. Io. Cast.
It is noted also by John Rous and Castoreus, that no Englishman bare office of
any credit or countenance in the Conquerours days: and that it was counted a
great reproach and shame for a noble man or gentleman to be called an
Englishman, or to join in affinity by marriage with the English nation, they
hated them so sore; whereby it appears, that all the ancient noble men, and
gentlemen within this land, are descended either from the Normans and French,
or from the Brytaines.

When William had obtained full possession of the realm, John Rous.
he appointed and ordained such officers as spoiled the whole land by color of
justice: Matt. Paris. H. Hunt.
yet he brought the land in such awe of him, that a child might have carried
gold openly through all England without danger of thieves, Matt. West. lib. 2.
page 9.
for all such oftenders lost their hands: and if any man forced any woman, he
should lose his stones. This William left England to William Rufus his son,
and Normandy to his eldest son Robert, and his treasure he gave to Henry
his third son.

The same year all the sons of Blethyn ap Convyn sometimes king of Wales,
gathered their strength together against Rees ap Tewdor, who not being able to
meet with them, fled to Ireland, and there he purchased himself great
friends, and got an army of Irishmen and Scots, to whom he promised great
toward, when he should obtain his kingdom, and so landed in Southwales with
these strangers. Which when his friends hard of, they drew to him, and the
other came in all have, thinking to fight with him before his power should
increase, and at Lhechryd they gave him battle, where they were discomfited,
and two of the brethren slain, to wit Madoc and Riryd, and the other fled, and
forsook the country. As soon as Rees was in quiet possession of his
kingdom, he sent home his strangers with great rewards. About this time, the
shrine of S. David was stolen out of the church, and when all the jewels and
treasures were taken away, the shrine was left where it might be found again.
The Normanes rebelled against the king in diverse places at one time: for Odo
Bishop of Bayon, Matt. Paris. page 18.
chief governor of England, began the rebellion in Kent, and burned the kings
towns: so did Roger lord Mortimer at Peuenest. Bishop Galfride destroyed Bath
and Berklay, Roger did his endeavor in Northfolke and Southfolke, Hugh in
Leycester and Northamptonshires, and the Bishop of Durham was not behind in his
quarter. Likewise the Earls of Hereford and Shrewesburie, Matt. Paris. page.
19.
with the Welshmen, burned all Worcestershire and Glocestershire, to the gates
of Worcester. Then the king gathered his strength together, and promising the
people their ancient liberties, proceeded toward his enemies, and first wanne
the castle of Tynbridge, and after besieged Odo, and Roger Mortimer in the
castle of Peuenest vj. weeks, at which time his brother Robert came with an
army from Normandy, and would have landed, but he was driven back by such as
kept the sea coasts. Then Odo yielded Peuenest to the king, and promised to
depart the land, and so did. Afterward the king wan the castle of Rochester,
and lead his army to Durham, and took it, and banished all his enemies the
land. In the year 1088 there was a terrible earthquake through all the land:
and the year following died Sulien, the godliest and wisest man, and the
greatest clerk in all Wales, being 80. years old. About this time certain
strangers, which were rouers upon the seas, landed at S. David's, and robbed it,
and burned the town. At which time also Cadiuor the son of Calhoyn lord of
Dyuet died: whose sons Lhewelyn and Eneon moved Gruffyth the son of
Meredyth to make war against their lord and prince Rees ap Theodor, and so
ioining all their strength together, came against him to Lhandydoch, where Rees
was, who gave them battle, and putting them to flight, pursued them so sore,
that he took Gruffyth ap Meredyth and put him to death. But Eneon son to
Cadiuor ap Colhoyn, fled to Iestyn lord of Morgannwc, (who likewise rebelled
against Rees ap Theodor) and promised upon condition to have Iestyns daughter
in marriage, and certain other covenants then agreed upon between them, to
bring to their succors an army of Normanes, for he had served in England
before, and was well known and acquainted with all the English nobility;
which things being thus concluded, they were fully minded to be revenged upon
Rees. 1090
And so Eneon went to England, Robert Fitzhamon.
and wrought such means, that he procured Robert Fitzhamon, with twelve other
knights, to gather a great army of Frenchmen or Normanes to come to their aid,
who shortly after landed in Glamorganshire, where Iestyn ap Gurgant lord of
the land received them with much honor, and ioining his power to theirs, burned
and spoiled prince Rees his land, and destroyed his people. Which thing being
declared to Rees, grieved him sore, whereupon he suddenly gathered his power
and met them, Ran. Cest. lib. 7. cap. 7. Marianu^ Scotus.
not far from Brechnock, where after a terrible fight he was slain, with whom
fell and decayed the kingdom of Southwales. This Rees had by his wife the
daughter of Rywalhon ap Convyn, a son called Gruffyth, who at his fathers
death was but a very child, and one Grono that was in the kings prison. These
Normanes, after they had received their promised salarie and great rewards of
Iestyn, returned to their ships. When Eneon burdened Iestyn with the promise
of his daughter in marriage, Iestyn laughed him to scorn, and told him that he
would bestow his daughter otherwise: whereupon Eneon full of anger and despite
followed the Normanes. And when he came to the shore, they were all a
shipboard; then he shouted to them, and made a sign with his cloak to call
them back, and they turned again to know his meaning. Then he went to the
chiefest of them, and showed of his abuse at Iestyns hands: declaring withal,
how easy it was for them to win that fair and pleasant country from
Iestyn, whom for his treason to Rees none other prince of Wales would succor:
whereunto they were easily persuaded, and so vngratefullie turned all their
power against him, for whose defense they had come thither, and at whose hands
they had been well entertained, and recompensed with rich gifts and great
rewards. And first they spoiled him of his country, who mistrusted them not,
and took all the fertile and valey ground to themselves, and left the barren
and rough mountains to Eneon for his part. The names of those twelve knights
that came and accompanied Robert Fitzhamon, were these: Londres or London, as
the Brytish book names him; Stradlyng, S. John, Turberuile, Grenuile,
Humffreuile, S. Quintine, Soore, Sully, Berkeroll, Syward, and Fleming. These
men and their heirs have enioied that country to this day, who were the
first strangers that ever inhabited Wales, since the time of Camber.

The history of the winning of Glamorgan, in manner agreeing with this author,
is particularly set in writing by some skillful and studious Gentleman of that
country, wherein he continues not only the use and possession of the same
Lordship in the heirs of those noble men, which wan it; but also shows their
progeny and issues even to our time. The copy whereof being delivered unto me
by the right worshipful Mistres Blanch Parry, (one of the Gentlewomen of the
Queens Majesty's privy chamber, a singular well willer and furtherer of the
weal public of that country,) I thought good here to insert, as follows.

The winning of the Lordship of Glamorgan or Morgannwc out of the VVelshmens
hands, and first of the description of the same Lordship.
IN primis, the said Lordship in length from Rymny bridge on the east side, to
Pwlh Conan on the west side, is 27. miles. The breadth thereof from the haven
of Aburthaw alias Aberdaon, on the southside, to the confines of Brechnock
shire, above Morleys castle, is 22. miles.

Iura regalia: that is, the trial of all actions, as well real as personal,
with plees of the crown, and authority to pardon all offenses, treason only
excepted.

Senghennyth, Myskyn, Ruthin, Lhanblethian, Tir Iarlh, Glyn Rothney, Auan,
Neth, Coyty, Talauan and Lhantuit, alias, Bouiarton, that were members of the
said Lordship of Glamorgan. In every of the members were the like Iura regalia
used in all things, saving that if any wrong judgment were given in any of
the courts of the said members, it should be reuersed by a writ of false
judgment in the county court of Glamorgan, as superior court to the same
members. Also all matters of conscience happening in debate in any of the said
members, should be heard and determined in the chancerie of Glamorgan, before
the Chancellor thereof.

Item, the body of the said Lordship of Glamorgan, was (before Wales) a
county of it self: wherein the Lord had two castles, and three market towns,
to wit, the castle and town of Kynfigs alias Kefnffigen, in the west part
thereof, and Cowbridge town, alias Pont vaen, in the midst. And the town
and castle of Cardyff, or Caer-Dhydh in the east part, in which castle of
Cardyff, the Lord did most inhabit; and therein he had his Chancerie and
Exchequer, and a fair court house, wherein the County court was monthly kept
on the mondaie for all the suitors of the Sherffee, that is, of the body of the
said Lordship it self, without the said members.

Item, within the said Sherffee, or body of the said Lordship, Glamorgan by
knights service, besides a great number of freeholders.

Item, in eight of the said members were ten castles, and

Item, the annual revenues of the said Lordship, with the The value of the
Segniorie, before the purchase thereof.
was one thousand marks, whereof was allowed in fees 400. marks; of the which
members aforesaid, master John Gamage Esquier occupies one at this day,
descended unto him from the Turberuiles his ancestors, that is to wit, the
Lordship of Coytie: and the heir of John Basset enioieth an other, to wit, the
Lordship of Talauan, by purchase from king Edward the sixth. The other nine
members, with four of the foresaid knights fees, and all the castles, market
towns, and borough towns, with the demeanes of the same; and all the lands
that were in the Lords hands, parcel of the said Lordship, and members, The
value of the Segniorie now.
the Earl of Penbroke has purchased. So that there remains now to the
segniorie of the said Lordship of Glamorgan (being in the Queens Majesty's
hands) but the moitie only of the manor of Dynaspowys, of the value of xxvj.
pounds by the year.

The manner of the winning of the said Lordship.
1091
IN the year of our Lord 1091. and in the fourth year of the reign of King
William Rufus, one Iestyn the son of Gungant, being Lord of the said Lordship
of Glamorgan, Rees ap Theodoc Prince of Southwales, that is, of Caermarthyne
shire, and Caerdigan shire, made war upon him, Whereupon the said Iestyn,
understanding himself unable to withstand the said Rees without some aid
otherwise, sent one Eneon, a Gentleman of his, to England, to one Robertus
Fitzhamon, a worthy man, and knight of the privy chamber with the said King,
to retain him for his succor. The which Robert, being desirous to exercise
himself in the feats of war, agreed soon with him thereto for a salarie to
him granted for the same. Whereupon the said Robert Fitzhamon retained to his
service for the said journey, twelve knights, and a competent number of
soldiers, and went into Wales, and ioining there with the power of the said
Iestyn, fought with the said Rees ap Tewdor, and killed him, and one Conan his
son. After which victory, the said Robert Fitzhamon, minding to return home
again with his company, demanded his salarie to him due of the said Iestyn,
according to the covenants and promises agreed upon between him and the
aforesaid Eneon, on the behalf of the said Iestyn his master. The which to
perform in all points, the said Iestyn denied: and thereupon they fell out, so
that it came to be tried by battle. And for so much as the said Eneon saw his
master go from diverse articles and promises, that he had willed him to
conclude with the said Robert Fitzhamon, on his behalf, he forsook his
master, and took part, he and his friends, with the said Robert Fitzhamon. In
the which conflict, the said Iestyn with a great number of his men were slain:
whereby the said Robert Fitzhamon wan the peaceable possession of the whole
Lordship of Glamorgan, with the members, of the which he gave certain castles
and manours, in reward of service, to the said twelve knights, and to other his
Gentlemen.

The Names and Sirnames of the said twelve Knights were these.
1 WIlliam de Londres, alias London. 2 Richardus de Grana villa, alias
Greenfeeld. 3 Paganus de Turberuile. 4 Robertus de S. Quintino, alias S.
Quintine. 5 Richardus de Syward. 6 Gilbertus de Humfreuile. 7 Rogerus de
Berkrolles. 8 Reginaldus de Sully. 9 Peter le Soore. 10 Johannes le Fleming. 11
Oliuerus de S. John, a yoonger brother of the Lord S. John of Basing. 12
William le Esterling, whose ancestors came out of Danske to England with the
Danes, and is now by shortness of speech called Stradling.
The parcels given by the said Robert Fitzhamon, to the said twelve Knights and
others, in reward of service.
IN primis, to the said William de Londres, Robert Fitzhamon gave the castle
and manor of Ogmor, Ogmor.
being four knights fees; now parcel of the possessions of the duchy of
Lancaster.

Item to the forenamed sir Richard Greenfeeld, he gave the Neth, Neth.
being one of the members aforesaid; and now parcel of the possessions of the
Kight honorable the Earl of Penbroke.

Pain Turberuile, he gave the castle and lordship of Coyty, Coyty.
being another of the said members: and now parcel of the possessions of M.
John Gamage esquire.

Robert S. Quintine, he gave the castle and lordship of Lhan Blethyan, Lhan
Blethyan.
being another of the said members: and now parcel of the possessions of S.
William Herbert of Swansey knight.

Richard Syward, he gave the castle and lordship of Talauan, Talauan.
being another of the said members: and now parcel of the possessions of
Anthony Maunsell esquire.

Gilbert Humfreuile, he gave the castle and manor of Penmarke, Penmarke.
being three knights fees: now parcel of the possessions of the Right
honorable Lord saint John of Bledso.

Reginald de Sully, he gave the castle and manor of Sully, Sully.
so since called after his name, being two knights fees: now divided betwixt
the Earl of Penbroke, and the lord S. John of Bledso.

Roger Berkrolles, he gave the manor of East Orchard, East Orchard.
being one knights fee: now parcel of the possessions of S. William Herbert of
Swansey.

Peter le Soore, he gave the castle and manor of Peterton, Peterton.
so now called after his name, being one knights fee: now parcel of the
possessions of the Earl of Penbroke.

John Fleming he gave the castle and manor of S. George, S. George.
being one knights fee: and holden of his posterity the Flemings to this day.

John S. John he gave the castle and manor of Fonmon or Fenuon, Fonmon.
being one knights fee: and now parcel of the possessions of the Lord S. John
of Bledso.

William le Esterling alias Stradling, he gave the castle and manor of S.
Donats, S. Donats.
or S. Denwit, being one knights fee: now parcel of the possessions of sir
Edward Stradling knight that now is.

Sum. Four Lordships Members, and xiiij. Knights fees.
ITem he gave to the aforesaid, Eneon that Senghennyth, being an other of the
said members.

Item he gave the castle and Lordship of Auan, an other Caradoc Fitz Iestyn,
the eldest son of the said Iestyn.

Item he gave the Lordship of Ruthyn, an other of the said Iestyn.

Item the rest of the foresaid Knights fees being 22. and an Welshmen right
owners of the same.

The Portion that the Lord kept for himself and his Heirs.
THe castle of Cardyff and Kenfigg, with the foresaid three market towns of
Cardyff, Kenfigg and Cowbrige, and the Sherfee, being the body of the said
Lordship of Glamorgan, and all the demeanes of the same, with the rest of the
said members; to wit, Miskyn, Glynrothney, Tyr Iarl, and Boviarton, alias
Lentwit: and the chief seigniorie of the whole, the said Robert Fitzhamon kept
to himself. And in the said Lordship of Boviarton he had a large graunge or
house of husbandry, with lands to the same belonging, that served him for the
provision of corn to his house. He dwelt himself most in the said castle or
town of Cardyff, being a fair haven town. And because he would have the
aforesaid twelve Knights and their heirs give attendance upon him every
County day, (which was always kept by the Sheriff in the utter ward of the
said castle on the Mondaie monethlie as is before said) he gave every one of
them a lodging within the said utter ward, the which their heirs, or those
that purchased the same of their heirs, do enioie at this day.

Also the morrow after the County day, being the tuesdaie, the Lord his
Chancellor sat always in the Chancerie there, for the determining of matters
of conscience in strife, happening as well in the said Sherfee as in the
members: the which day also, the said Knights used to give attendance upon the
Lord: and the wednesdaie every man drew homeward, and then began the courts of
the members to be kept in order, one after another.

The Petegree of Robert Fitzhamon, and of his heirs, Lords of Glamorgan.
Some do affirm that he was lord of Astreuile in Normandy.
THe said Robert Fitzhamon, was son to Hamon a great Lord and kinseman of
William the Conqueror, who came into the realm with him. This Robert (as is
before said) was knight of the privy chamber with king William Rufus: who (as
it appears in the Chronicles) dreamed the night before the king was killed,
Matt. West. lib. 2. page 21. I. Castor Matt. Paris. page. 72.
that he saw the king torn in pieces by Woolues: and therefore, by his
persuasion he willed the king, to forbear to go abroad that forenoone. But
the king, when he had dined, there was no man able to stay him, but that he
would ride forth a hunting into the new Forest, where he was slain by Walter
Tyrrell, by the glansing of his arrow shooting at a red dear.

Mawd the only daughter and heir of the said Robert, was married to Robert
Earl of Gloucester, base son to king Henry the first.

William Earl of Gloucester son to the said Robert and Mawd, died without
issue male, leaving behind him three daughters: of the which Isabel the eldest
was married to king John, then Earl of Oxenford and Lancaster, (as some
Chronicles do declare) who so soon as he was made king was divorced from her.
And then she was married to Geffrey Mandeuile Earl of Essex, and died without
issue, as far as I can find.

Amicia, was married to Sir Gilbart de Clare, then Earl of Clare, by whom he
had the Earldom of Gloucester. And Mabil the third daughter was married to the
Earl of Eureux.

Gilbart de Clare, son to the said Gilbart, was the fourth Earl of Gloucester.

Richard de Clare his son was the fifth Earl.

Gilbart his son was the sixth Earl.

Gilbart his son, who married Jane de Acres, daughter to king Edward the
first, was the seventh Earl.

Gilbart de Clare their son was the eight Earl, and he was slain by the
Scots, in king Edward the seconds time: and then the Earldome fell between his
three sisters. Of the which Elianor the eldest was married to Hugh Spencer the
son, in her right Earl of Gloucester. Margaret the second was married to
Peires Gaueston, and after to the Lord Awdeley. Elizabeth the third was married
first to William Lord Burgh Earl of Vlster, and after to Ralph Roch Baron of
Armoy in Ireland: she was married the third time to Theobald L. Verdoun, and
lastly to Sir Roger Damory, and had issue by every one of them.

Hugh Spencer had to his wives purpartee the said Lordship of Glamorgan.

Hugh Lord Spencer their son enioied the same, and died without issue.

Edward Lord Spencer son to Edward, brother to the said Hugh, succeeded the
said Hugh therein.

Thomas Lord Spencer his son succeeded him.

Richard Lord Spencer his son, succeeded him and died inward.

Isabell sister to Richard succeeded him, and married with Richard Beauchamp
Earl of Worcester, and Lord Burgauenny, who had issue by her a daughter
only, and died. The which daughter was married to Edward the son of
Dawraby, Ralph Neuel Earl of Westmereland. And after the death of the said
Earl of Worcester, she said Isabell married with Richard Beauchamp, Earl of
Warwick.

Henry Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, and after Duke of Warwick, their son
died without issue.

Anne his sister of whole blood succeeded him, and married with Richard Neuel
after Earl of Salisburie, and in her right Earl of Warwick: and had issue
two daughters, Marie married to the Duke of Clarence, and Anne married first to
Prince Edward slain at Teuxburie, and after his death with Richard Duke of
Gloucester, who was afterward king of England.

Anne and king Richard (being then Duke of Gloucester) had the said lordship
given unto them by the said Anne, Countess of Warwick her mother.

Henry the seventh enioied the same after the death of king Richard.

Jasper Duke of Bedford enioied the same by the gift of king Henry the
seventh, and died without issue: and by reason thereof it remained to the king
again.

Henry the eight enioied the same after his Father.

Edward the sixth succeeded him therein, and sold almost all the lands thereof.

Marie succeeded him in the Segniorie.

Queen Elizabeth our most dread sovereign Lady that now is, does succeed her
in the same Segniorie, and has sold the Lordship of Neth from it: so that now
there remain no more lands appertaining to the Segniorie, but the moitie of
the manor of Deinaspowys only.

The Petegree of Londres, Lord of Ogmore, one of the said twelve.
WIlliam Londres Lord of the castle and manor of Ogmore, (as is before said)
wan afterward the lordships of Kydwelhey and Carnewilhion in Caermarthen
shire, from the Welshmen: and gave to sir Arnold Butler his servant the castle
and manor of Dunreeven in the lordship of Ogmore aforesaid. The which ever
sithence has continued in the heirs male of the said Arnold Butler, until
within these few years, that it fell to Walter Vaghan, sisters son to Arnold
Butler, the last of the Butlers that was owner thereof.

Simon de Londres his son succeeded him.

William de Londres succeeded his father Simon, and had issue one son.

Moris de Londres his son succeeded him, and had issue one only daughter.

Seward, a man of great possessions.

Henry Earl of Lancaster, brother to Thomas Earl of Lancaster.

Henry their son, made afterward Duke of Lancaster did succeed them: and so
the said three Lordships, Ogmore, Kydwelhey and Carnewilhion, became parcels of
the duchy of Lancaster ever after.

The Petegree of Greenefeeld.
SIr Richard Greenefeeld before said (to whom the lordship of Neth was given in
reward) was lord of the castle and manor of Bydyford in Devonshire; at the
time he came into Wales with the said Robert Fitzhamon, and founded an abbaie
of white moonkes in Neth, and gave the whole lordship to the maintenance of the
same; and then returned back again to Bydyford, whereas the issue male of his
body does yet remain, and enioieth the same.

The Petegree of Turberuile, Lord of Coyty.
Pain Turberuile, Lord of Coyty, as is before said.

Simon Turberuile, succeeded him, and died without issue.

Gilbart Turberuile, succeeded his brother.

Pain Turberuile his son, succeeded him, and married Mawd, daughter and sole
heir to Morgan Gam, one of the nephews of the aforesaid Iestyn.

Gilbart their son, quartered Iestyn his arms with Turberuiles.

Gilbart his son succeeded him.

Richard his son succeeded him.

Pain his son succeeded him, who married with VVenlhian, daughter to Sir
Richard Talbot knight, and had issue by her, two sons, that is to wit,
Gilbart and Richard; and four daughters, namely, Catharine, Margaret, Agnes,
and Sara.

Gilbart succeeded Sir Pain his father.

Gilbart his son succeeded him, and died without issue.

Richard his fathers brother succeeded him, and having no issue, entailed the
Lordship of Coity to the heirs male of Sir Roger Berkerolles, knight.

Roger Berkerolles knight, son to Sir William Berkerolles knight, and
Phelice his wife, one of the daughters of Veere Earl of Oxenford, which said
Sir Roger had married Catharine, the eldest sister of the said Sir Richard. And
for default of such issue, the remainder to the heirs male of Sir Richard
Stakpoole knight, who Margaret, second sister of the said Richard. John de la
Bear, knight, and Agnes his wife, the Richard. And for lack of such issue
male, the remainder to the heirs male of William Gamage, and of Sara his wife,
the fourth sister to the said Sir Richard Turberuile.

The said Berkrolles, Stakepoole and De la Bear, died without issue male, by
reason whereof, after the death of sir Laurence Berkerolles, knight, son to
the said sir Roger, and Catharine, his wife; the said Lordship fell to sir
William Gamage, son to Gilbert, son to the foresaid William Gamage, and
Sara. The said William, was son to sir Robert Gamage knight, son to Pain
Gamage, Lord of the manor of Rogiade, in the county of Monmowth. The foresaid
sir William had issue Thomas, Thomas had issue John, John had issue Morgan,
Morgan had issue sir Thomas Gamage knight; and Margaret, wife to Ienkin Thomas;
and Anne, wife to Robert Raglan; and Catharine, wife to Reginald ap Howel; and
Wenlhian, wife to Thomas ap Meyric.

The said sir Thomas Gamage had issue, Robert Gamage, that late was; Catharine
his eldest daughter, wife to sir Thomas Stradling knight; Marie the second
daughter, wife to Matthew Herebert; Margaret the third daughter, wife to the
Lord William Howard; and Elizabeth the fourth daughter, wife to Richard Hogan,
of Penbrooke shire, esquier. The said Robert Gamage had issue, John Gamage,
that now is.

Roger Berkrolles, knight, and Catharine, one of the four sisters, and heirs
general to the aforesaid sir Richard Turberuile, knight, is sir Edward
Stradling knight, that now is.

Richard Stakepoole, of Penbrooke shire, and Margaret his wife, another of the
four sisters, and heirs general to the said sir Richard Turberuile knight,
is sir George Vernon knight.

John de la Bear knight, and Agnes his wife, an other of the four sisters,
and heirs general of the said sir Richard Turberuile knight; are Oliver S.
John, Lord S. John of Bledso, and William Basset of Glamorgan esquier, that now
is.

John Gamage, esquier that now is, is as well heir general lineallie
descended from Sara the fourth sister, and heir to the said sir Richard
Turberuile knight, as also heir by the entaile aforesaid, to the whole
Lordship of Coyty.

Robert de S. Quintine, his Petegree.
SIr Robert de S. Quintine, to whom the lordship of Lhanblethian was given; and
his issue male enioied the same, until king Henry the third his time. And
then, or in short time after, his issue male failed, of whom is descended sir
William Parr, late Marquis of Northampton.

Richard de Syward, his Petegree.
SIr Richard Syward, to whom the lordship of Talauan was given; and his issue
male enioied the same, until king Edward the thirds time: at which time the
heirs thereof having other lands in Somersetshire, sold the said lordship to
the Lord Spencer, then Lord of Glamorgan, and went into Somersetshire to dwell
there, where his issue male continues yet.

Gilbert de Humfreuile, his Petegree.
SIr Gilbert Humfreuile aforesaid, to whom the castle and manor of Penmarke
was given; and his issue male enioied the same, till the said king Edward the
thirds time: and then the inheritance of the said castle and manor descended
to sir John S. John of Fonmon knight, to whom the forenamed lord S. John of
Bledso is sole heir.

Roger de Berkerolles knight, his Petegree.
SIr Roger Berkerolles before said knight, to whom the manor of East Orchard
was given; and his issue male enioied the same, till the 13. year of Henry
the fourth. That sir Laurence Berkerolles knight died, whom sir Edward
Stradling knight, as sole heir did succeed, being son to sir William
Stradling knight, son to sir Edward Stradling knight, and Wenlhian sole
sister and heir to the said sir Laurence, of whom Edward Stradling knight
(that now is) is lineallie descended.

Reginald de Sully knight, his Petegree.
SIr Reginald de Sully, to whom the castle and manor of Sully was given; and
his issue male enioied the same, until about king Edward the first his time.
And then it fell to a daughter married to sir Morgan de Avan, Lord of the
lordship of Avan above named: whose son sir John de Avan had but one
daughter, of whom sir George Blunt of Shropshire is lineallie descended, as
sole heir, whose ancestor gave the said lordship of Avan, and the castle and
manor of Sully to the Lord Spencer in exchange, for other lands in England.

Peter le Soore knight, his Petegree.
SIr Peter le Soore knight, to whom was given the castle and manor of Peter's
town; and his issue male enioied the same, until king Henry the fourth his
time, and then died without issue, and his inheritance fell between diverse.

John le Fleming knight, his Petegree.
SIr John le Fleming knight, to whom the castle and manor of S. George was
given; and his issue male enioied the same, until king Henry the fourth his
time: and then it fell to Edmond Malefant, who had married a daughter to the
last Fleming. And in king Henry the seventh his time, the Malefants issue by
Flemings daughter failed: and then it fell to John Butler of Dunreeven above
named Esquier; and after the death of him and of Arnold his son, both the
inheritances of Fleming and Butler, fell to Walter Vaghan of Brodeward in the
County of Hereford Esquier now living, sisters son to the said Arnold Butler.

Oliver de S. John knight, his Petegree.
SIr Oliver S. John knight, to whom the castle and manor of Fonmon was
given; and his heirs male have ever since enioied the same, to whom the above
named lord S. John of Bledso, that now is, is sole heir; whose ancestors from
the winning of the said lordship of Glamorgan out of the Welshmens hands, have
continually dwelt at Fonmon aforsaid, until the latter time of king Edward
the fourth. That John S. John esquier had the said lordship of Bledso, and
many other possessions besides, by the death of dame Margaret Beauchampe his
mother, who was also mother to Margaret, Duchess of Somerset, mother to king
Henry the seventh. Sithence which time, the said John S. John, and sir John S.
John knight, father to my Lord that now is, have always dwelt in Bledso, but
they do keep their lands in Wales still in their hands.

William le Esterling alias Stradling, his Petegree.
William Esterling knight, to whom the castle and manor of S. Donats was
given.

John le Esterling knight, his son succeeded him.

Moris le Esterling knight, his son succeeded him.

Robert le Esterling knight (most commonly called Stradling by shortness of
speech and change of some letters) succeeded him.

Gilbert Stradling knight, his son succeeded him.

William Stradling knight, his son succeeded him.

John Stradling knight, his son succeeded him. It does not appear in what
stock or surname any of these seven knights above named, did marry: but the
christian names of the wives of William the first, Robert, and John the second,
were Hawisia, Mathilda, and Cicilia.

Peter Stradling knight, his son succeeded him: who in the beginning of king
Edward the first his time and reign married Julian, sole daughter and heir of
Thomas Hawey. By whom he had three manours, Hawey, and Comhawey in
Somersetshire yet remaining to his heirs, and Compton Hawey in Dorcetshire
sold of late years.

Edward Stradling knight their son succeeded them: and he quartered the Hawey
his arms with his: and married with Elianor, daughter and heir to Gilbert
Strangbow, a yoonger brother: whose wife was daughter and heir to Richard
Garnon, and had by her two manours in Oxefordshire.

Edward Stradling knight his son succeeded him, and married with Wenlhian,
daughter to Roger Berkrolles knight, and sole sister and heir to sir Laurence
Berkrolles knight, as it happened afterward.

William Stradling knight, his son married with Isabel daughter and heir to
John S. Barbe of Somersetshire: but he had no lands by her, for it was entailed
to the heirs male. This sir William, in king Richard the seconds time, went a
pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and received there also the orders of knighthood of
the sepulcher of Christ.

Edward Stradling knight his son succeeded him, who, because he was sole
heir general to the said S. Barbe, did quarter S. Barbes arms with his. To
whom also (in the 13. year of king Henry the fourth) fell the whole
inheritance of the Berkerolles, and the right of the fourth part of Turberuiles
inheritance, Lord of Coyty aforesaid: the which for lack of issue male of the
said Berkerolles remained to Gamage, and to his heirs male, by the especial
entaile aforesaid. The which sir Edward did quarter not only the said
Berkerolles arms with his, but also the Turberuiles and Iestynes arms: of
whom the Turberuiles had in marriage one of the inheritours, as is before
said; because the said sir Edward was one of the four heirs general to sir
Richard Turberuile, to wit, son to sir William Stradling, son to Wenlhian
sister and heir to the said Laurence Berkerolles, and daughter to Catharine,
eldest sister, and one of the four heirs general to the aforesaid sir
Richard Turberuile.

The said sir Edward married with Jane daughter to Henry Beauford, afterward
Cardinal, begotten (before he was Priest) upon Alice one of the daughters of
Richard Earl of Arundell: and in the beginning of king Henry the seventh his
reign, he went likewise on pilgrimage unto Jerusalem, as his father did, and
received the order of the sepulcher there.

This sir Edward had to his brother sir John Stradling knight, who married with
the heir of Dauncy in Wiltshire: and had issue sir Edmond, who had issue John
and Edmond. John had issue Anne, lady Davers, of whom the Davers,
Hungerfordes, Fynes, and Leuet, and a great progeny of them are descended: and
of the said Edmond comes Carnysoyes of Cornewal.

The said Edward had an other brother called William, of whom Stradling of
Ruthyn and others are descended: the same William had a daughter named
VVenlhian, who by the Earl of Ryuers had a daughter, married to sir Robert
Poynes, of whom comes all the Poynes, the Newtons, Perots, and others.

Harrie Stradling knight his son succeeded him, and married with Elizabeth
sister of whole blood to sir William Herebert knight, Earl of Penbroke; and
had issue by her one son, and two daughters: one of them was married to Miles
ap Harry, of whom Mistress Blanch ap Harrie, and her brethren and uncles are
descended: the other daughter was married to Fleming of Monton, in Wales.

This sir Harrie, in the sixteenth year of King Edward the fourth, went in
like manner on pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and received the order of the sepulcher
there, as his father and grandfather did; and died in the Isle of Cypres, in
his coming home; whose book is to be seen as yet, with a letter that his man
brought from him, to his Lady and wife. The saying is, that diverse of his said
ancestors made the like pilgrimage: but there remains no memory in writing
but of these three.

This sir Harrie, sailing from his house in Somersetshire, to his house in
Wales, was taken prisoner by a Brytaine pirate, named Colyn Dolphyn, whose
redemption and charges stood him in 2000. marks; for the payment whereof he
was driven to sell the castle and manor of Basselek and Sutton in
Monmouthshire, and two manours in Oxfordshire.

Thomas Stradling, esquier, his son succeeded him, and married Ienet,
daughter to Thomas Matthew of Rayder Esquier: and had issue by her two sons,
Edward and Harrie, and one daughter named Jane, and died before he was xxvi.
years of age. After whose death, his wife married with sir Rice ap Thomas,
knight of the garter. Harrie married with the daughter and heir of Thomas
Iubb, learned in the law, and had issue by her Francis Stradling, of S.
George, by Bristow, yet living. Jane was married to sir William Gruffyth, of
Northwales knight, and had issue by her three sons, Edward, sir Rice Gruffyth
knight, and John; and seven daughters. The eldest married to Stanley of
Houghton, the second to sir Richard Buckley, knight, the third to Lewys, the
fourth to Moston, the fifth to Conwey, the sixth to Williams, the seventh to
Pers Motton, and after to Simon Theloal, esquier, whose wife at this time she
is; the eight to Philips. Of which daughters there be a wonderful number
descended. Edward married Jane, daughter to sir John Puleston knight, and had
issue by her, three daughters. Jane married to William Herebert of S. Julian;
Catharine married to William Herebert of Swansey, and an other daughter
married to sir Nicholas Bagnoll knight.

Edward Sradling knight, succeeded his father, and married with Elizabeth, one
of the three daughters of sir Thomas Arundell of Lanheyron in Cornwall knight.
The other two were married to Speak, and S. Low, and had issue four sons;
Thomas, Robert, Edward, and John. Robert married VVatkyn Locher his daughter,
and has by her many children; Edward married with the daughter and heir of
Robert Baglan of Lantwit, and has also diverse children; and John is a priest.
Also the said sir Edward had two daughters; Jane married to Alexander Popham,
of Somersetshire, of whom is a great number descended; and Catharine married to
sir Thomas Palmer, knight of Sussex, who has a son named William.

Thomas Sradling knight, his son succeeded him, and married Catharine, the
eldest daughter to sir Thomas Gamage of Coyty knight, and to dame Margaret his
wife, daughter to sir John S. John, of Bledso knight; by whom he has living
yet two sons, Edward and David; and five daughters, Elizabeth, Damasyn, Jane,
Ioice, and Wenlhian.

Edward Stradling knight, that now is, married Agnes second daughter to sir
Edward Gage, of Sussex, knight, and as yet in the year 1572. has no issue.

Memorandum, that of the heirs male, of the aforesaid twelve knights (that
came with sir Robert Fitzhamon, to the winning of Glamorgan, the Lordship
aforesaid) there is at this day but the Stradling a live, that dwells in
Wales, and enioieth the portion given in reward to his ancestors.

There be yet of the yoonger brothers of the Turberuiles and Flemings.

Greenefeeld and Syward do yet remain, but they dwell in England, and have
done away their lands in Wales.

The Lord S. John of Bledso (although he keeps his ancient inheritance in
Wales) yet he dwells in England.

Thus far the copy of the winning of Glamorgan, as I received the same at
the hands of mistress Blanch Parrie, collected by Sir Edward Stradling knight.
There were besides with the said Robert Fitzhamon in this voyage, diverse other
noble men and gentlemen, some out of England, some out of Dyuet, and other
places in Wales, which came thither with the said Eneon against Rees ap
Theodor, of whom Robert Sitsylt was one, who albeit he had no part of the said
Lordship of Glamorgan (that I can read of) yet nevertheless, he was in respect
of his good service there done, preferred to the marriage of an inheritrice of
great possessions in the land of Ewyas, and the country near adioining. Of
which Robert Sitsylt I find this that follows, recorded in a very ancient
writing, containing his whole genelogie of 16. descents of heirs male
lineallie; which writing for the more credit of the history, I thought good
here to insert, as follows.

1091. Robert Sitsylt came with Robert Fitzhamon to the conquest of the
country of Glamorgan, and after wedded a Lady, by whom he had Halterennes
and other lands in Hereford and Glocestershires: he had a son called James
Sitsylt.

4. Stephan. having then upon him a vesture, whereon was wrought in needle
work his arms or ensigns, as they be made on the toombe of Gerald Sitsylt in
the Abbeie of Door, which are afterward truly blazed, in a judgment given by
commission of king Edward the third, for the ancient right of the same arms.
This James had a son called James Sitsylt, and four daughters.

6. Stephani, he paid for his ransom 400. marks, and therefore sold his
lordship of Beauport, and all his lands in the county of Gloucester: he took
to wife a Lady, called Mawd de Frenes, and had issue Eustace.

Eustace Sitsylt the son of John, was wedded

Baldwin Sitsylt the son of Eustace, was moonks freedom of common and
pasture, and other liberties in his woods.





died young: he had also Robert Sitsylt, and John Sitsylt; and five daughters,
that is to say, Alicia wedded to Walter Monington, Grace wedded to Roger son
of William Blunt, Elianor wedded to Thomas Pain, Margerie wedded to Morgan ap
Meredyth, and Sislie married to Howel ap Blethin, and after to sir Hugh Bruge.

Gerald Sitsylt son of James, took to wife Chron. de Dor.
and had no issue, as the register of the Abbeie of Door makes mention.

John Sitsylt the son of Gerald, took to wife wife he had sir Richard
Baskeruile knight, that took to wife Jane the daughter and heir of George
Sitsylt second son of this John Sitsylt, and had by her sir John Baskeruile
knight.



In the time of the wars that King Edward the 3. made against Scotland, at a
place called Halydon hill near Barwick anno 6. Edward 3. there arose a great
variance and contention between Sir William de Facknaham knight, on the one
side approouant, and this Sir John Sitsylt knight, on the other side defendant,
for an ensign of arms, that is to say; The field often barrets silver and
azure, supported of 5. scocheons sable charged with so many lions of the first
rampants incensed geuls, which ensign both the parties did claim as their
right. But as both the parties put themselves to their force to maintain their
quarrel, and vaunted to maintain the same by their bodies; it pleased the king
that justice should be yielded for trial of the quarrel, without shedding of
blood: and so the bearing of the ensign was solemnlie adjudged to be the right
of the said Sir John Sitsylt, as heir of blood lineallie descended of the body
of James Sitsylt, Lord of Beauport slain at the siege of Walingford, as before
is declared. The final order and determination of which controversy is laid
down by John Boswel gentleman, in his book entitled The concords of Armorie,
fol. 80. This Sir John Sitsylt had a charge of men at arms, for the custody
of the marches of Scotland, in the 11. year of King Edward the third.

John Sitsylt, the son of sir John Sitsylt knight,

Thomas Sitsylt married Margaret the daughter

Philip Sitsylt married Margaret, the daughter

Richard Sitsylt or Cecill, married Margaret

These petegrees and descents I gathered faithfully out of sundry ancient
records and evidences, whereof the most part are confirmed with seals
autentike thereunto appendant, manifestly declaring the antiquity and truth
thereof; which remain at this present in the custody of the right Honorable
Sir William Cecill, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, Lord Burghley, and
Lord high Treasurer of England, who is lineallie descended from the last
recited Richard Sitsylt, father to David Cecill, grandfather to the said Sir
William Cecill now Lord Burghley: and at this date William Sitsylt or Cecill
Esquire coosen germane to the said Lord Burghley, removed by one degree
only, is possessed of the foresaid house of Halterennes in Ewyas land as the
heir male of the house of Sitsylts, and is descended of Philip Cecill, elder
brother to the said David.

Giral. Camb. in Itinerario Cambrie.
About the same time, or shortly after, Barnard Newmarch, a noble man also of
Normandy, obtained by conquest the Lordship of Brechnock, containing three
cantreds, and married Nest, the daughter of Nest, daughter to Gruffyth ap
Lhewelyn, Prince of Wales, by whom he had issue Mahael, and a daughter. This
Mahael being a worthy knight, was disinherited by the malice of his own
mother, who contrary to matrimonial duty, kept unlawful company with a
knight, whom she set more by than her husband. Whereupon Mahael being offended
with the dissolute life of his mother, warned her to avoid infamy; and on a
time meeting the said knight coming from her, fought with him, and hurt him
sore. Wherefore Nest to be avenged of her son for that fact, went to king
Henry the first, and solemnly (rather of malice and reuengement, as Giraldus
notes, than of any truth) swear upon the Evangelists, that the said Mahael
her son was not begotten by Barnard Newmarch her husband, but by another
lover of hirs. By reason of the which oath, (or perjury rather as mine author
thinks) Mahael was disinherited, and his sister (whom her mother affirmed to
be the very daughter of the said Barnard) was by the said king, with the whole
inheritance, bestowed upon Milo, the son of Walter Constable, who was after
created Earl of Hereford, Lord of Gloucester, Brechnocke, and the forest of
Deane. This Milo Earl of Hereford, and Lord of Brechnocke (as the same
Giraldus writes) told king Henry the first, of the singing and triumphing of
birds by the poole called Lhyn Sauathan, at the passing by of Gruffyth ap Rees
ap Theodor, the said Milo and Pain Fitz John, Lord of Ewyas land being
present. Whereunto the King answered; that It was not a thing to be woondered
at so much, for in truth (says he) although we by our great force and strength
do offer injury and violence to that nation, yet are they well known to be
the lawful inheritours of that country; the words of Giraldus be these.
Quibus auditis, Rex respondisse memoratur; Illud non-adeo esse admirandum, quia
licet gentibus illis per vires nostras magnas iniuriam and violentiam
irrogemus, nihilominus tamen in terris ijsdemius haereditarium habere noscuntur.

Milo had by his said wife five sons, to wit, Roger, Walter, Henry, William
and Mahael, which were all successively (except William) Earls of Hereford,
and Lords of Brechnocke, and died all without issue. He had also three
daughters. Margaret the eldest married to Humfrey de Bohune, the son of
Humfrey Bohune, Steward in house to William Rufus, which was the son of
Humfrey le Bohune, that came into Enlgand with William Conqueror. This Humfrey
was in her right Earl of Hereford, and Constable of England. Bertha the second
daughter was married unto Philip Bruise, created by King Stephan Lord Bruise of
Gower, Bold, and Brimber; and in his wives right, lord of Brechnock. W.
Paston. Chapter Lanthon.
Lucia the third daughter was married to Herebert the son of Herebert, a base
son to King Henry the first, who was in her right Lord of all the forest of
Deane, of whom descended the Fitz Herebert of Derbishire.

The castle of Brechnock being first built by the said Barnard Newmarch, was
greatly augmented and beautified by the last Humfrey Bohune, Earl of
Hereford, Essex, Northampton, and Constable of England, Earl Constable.
who had issue two daughters his heirs; Elianor the elder was married unto
Thomas Plantagenet, alias Thomas of Woodstock, the sixth son of Edward the
third, who was by King Richard the second, created Earl of Buckingham, and
after duke of Gloucester, and in her right Earl of Essex, Northampton, and
Constable of England. Marie the second daughter was married to Henry
Plantagenet, alias Bolingbrooke, Earl of Derbie, who was afterward King of
England, by the name of Henry the fourth.

The said Thomas Plantagenet, Duke of Gloucester and Lord of Brechnock, had
issue Humfrie Plantagenet Earl of Buckingham, Lord of Brechnock, etc: who died
without issue; and 4. daughters, which were heirs after their brother. Anne the
eldest was married to Edmund Stafford, Earl of Stafford, who by her had issue,
Humfrie Earl of Stafford, Hereford, and Northampton, Lord of Brechnock, etc.
And afterward the said Anne was married to William Viscount Burgcher, created
Earl of Ewe in France by King Henry the fifth, father of Henry created Earl
of Essex by King Edward the fourth. This Humfrie Earl Stafford, was by King
Henry the sixth, created Duke of Buckingham, and so this Lordship of Brechnock
came to the Dukes of Buckingham, and by the attaindour of Edward the last Duke
of Buckingham, is come to the crown.

There came many Gentlemen with the said Barnard Newmarch, at that time to
Brechnock, upon whom he bestowed diverse manours, which their heirs do
possess and enjoy even to our time; as to the Awbreyes the manor of
Abercynuric and Slowch, to the Walbiefes the manor of Lhanhamlach and Taly
Lhyn, to the Gunters the manor of Gilston, to the Havards the manor of
Pontwilym, etc. But now having long digressed, let us return again to our
author.

About this time William Rufus and Robert his brother being made friends, came
both together into England, and lead an army into Scotland against Malcolme
the king, Matt. Paris. page. 20.
who had entered Northumberland, and spoiled it in the kings absence: and he
yielded himself to William, and by oath became his vassal and subject. Matt.
West. page. 16.
Then William reedified Carlisle, and brought people from the South part of
England to inhabit it. But shortly after, Malcolme came again into England,
spoiling the land, Ran. Cest. lib. 7. cap. 7. Buchan. li. 7. page 64.
who being fought withal, was slain, and his son Edward also: then Edgar
his son, which was pledge with king William, was crowned in his steed. At
this time Cadogan ap Blethyn ap Convyn destroyed all Dyuet in the end of
April; and shortly after, the same summer, the Normanes in great companies
landed in Dyuet or Westwales and Cardigan, and builded castles there, and so
began to inhabit the country upon the sea shore.

The Normans having gotten into their hands all the lands and livings of the
nobility of England, began to spy out the commodities of Wales: and seeing
that Robert Fitzhamon, and the other knights that went with him, had sped so
well, they made sure to the king to grant them the lands of the Welshmen.
Whereupon the king, thinking that to be the best way for him, as well to
encourage them to be the more willing to serve him, as also to provide for them
at other men's cost, granted to diverse of his nobles sundry countries in Wales,
to hold of him by knight service: for the which they did homage and swear
fealty unto him, as follows.

1 Roger Mountgomery, Earl of Arundel and Salope, did his homage for the
lordships of Powys and Caerdigan. 2 Hugh Lupus Earl of Chester did his homage
for Tegengl and Ryuonioc, with all the land by the sea shore, unto the river
of Conwey. 3 Arnulph a yoonger son of Roger Mountgomery for Dyuet. 4 Barnard
Newmarch for Brechnock. 5 Ralph Mortimer for Eluel. 6 Hugh de Lacie for the
land of Ewyas. 7 Eustace Cruer for Molde and Hopedale, and many other for
other lands.
Then Roger de Mountgomery, to whom the Conqueror had given the Earldome of
Arundell and Salopsburie or Shrewsburie entered into Powys land, and wan the
castle and town of Baldwyn, which he fortified, and called it Mountgomery
after his own name. Matt. Paris. page. 23.
Also this year William Rufus went to Normandy against his brother Robert,
and sent to England for 30000. footmen, of whom when they came to the sea
shore the king took ten shillings a piece, 15000 pound easily gotten.
and sent them home. But shortly after he made a voyage into Northumberland
against the Earl, H. Hunt. Matthew. West. lib. 2. page 16.
which rebelled, and after he had taken Newcastell and Bamborough, he took
the Earl at Tinmouth, and returned homeward. The same year Gruffyth ap Conan
king of Northwales, with Cadogan ap Blethyn, who then ruled Southwales, entered
the land of Cardigan, and killed a great number of Normanes, being not able
any longer to suffer their great pride and cruelty. But after their return,
the English captains sent for more men to England, and thought privily to
make a road to Northwales. Which journey was discovered to Cadogan, who
gathered his power, and met with them in the wood or forest of Yspys, and set
upon them with great hew and cry: and they defended themselves manfully, but
in the end they were compelled to flee with great loss; and Cadogan followed
them hard, and spoiled the country of Cardigan and Dyuet, and destroyed all
the castles saving two, which were Penbrooke and Rydcors, which he could not
get, and so returned to Powys with much joy.

1093
In this year 1093. the Normanes that inhabited the country of Glamorgan,
spoiled the countries of Kydwely and Ystrad Tywy, and left them without any
inhabitors. Then William Rufus being informed of the great slaughter of his
subjects as well in Chesshire, Matt. West. lib. 2. page 17. Matt. Paris. page 24.
Shropshire, Worcestershire, and Herefordshire, as within Wales, which
Gruffyth ap Conan and the sons of Blethyn ap Convyn had done, gathered his
power together, and entered Wales at Mountgomery, which castle being lately
overthrown by the Welshman, Matt. Paris.
he reedified again; but the Welshman kept so the straites of the mountains
with the woods and the rivers, Hol. page 326.
that the king did no good, but lost his labor and his men: therefore he
returned back to his great dishonor. 1094
In the year 1094. died William the son of Baldwyn, who (at the kings
commandment) had built the castle of Rydcors, after whose death the castle
was forsaken by his men; and the inhabitants of Gwyr, Ran. Cest. li. 7. cap. 8.
Sup. Mar. Scot.
Brechnock, Gwent and Gwentlhwc cast from their necks the burden of the
Normanes that had won their countries and held them in subjection, and chased
them out of their countries, but they returned again with great strength of
Englishmen and Normanes. Then the country men, which abhorred their pride and
cruel rule, met with them at a place called Celly Tarvawc, and fought with
them manfully, so that they put them to flight with great slaughter, and
chased them back again out of the land. Nevertheless, the greedy Normanes
would not give over, but doubling their strength, returned again to
Brechnockshire, making a vow to leave no living thing within that country. But
it happened otherwise, for the people fled before them, and staid at a strait,
and killed a great number of them.

About this time Roger Mountgomery Earl of Salop and Arundell, William
Fitzeustace Earl of Gloucester, Arnold de Harecourt and Neale le Vicount, were
slain between Cardyf and Brechnock by the Welshmen. Also Walter Eureux Earl
of Sarum, and Hugh Earl Gourney were there hurt and died after in Normandy.

Therefore when the Normanes saw that they had all the loss, they manned and
victailed the castles which they had before time builded there, and returned
back: but in their return, Gruffyth and Ivor the sons of Ednerth ap Cadogan
met them upon the sudden at Aberlhech, and falling upon them slew the most part
of them, and the rest escaped to England. But the Normane captains defended
the castles manfully, and kept them, until they were driven by force for
safeguard of their lives to forsake them: then the ancient dwellers enioied
their countries again quietly. Moreover certain lords of Northwals, namely
Vchthed the son of Edwyn ap Grono, and Howel ap Grono with the children of
Cadogan ap Blethyn of Powys land, gathered a number of men, and passed through
Cardiganshire to Dyuet (which country the king a little before had given to
Arnulph son to Roger Mountgomery, who had builded there the castle of
Penbrooke; and appointed keeper and steward of the same, one Gerald de
Windsore) and there burned, spoiled and destroyed all the country, saving the
said castle of Penbrooke, which they could not win, and so returned home
with great booty. After the return of these lords, Gerald issued out of the
castle, and spoiled the lands of S. David's, and took many prisoners, and
returned to the castle.

Io. Castor. Mar. Scotus.
The year following, William Rufus returning from Normandy to England, and
hearing of the great slaughter of his men done by the Welshmen, gathered all
his power, and with great pomp and pride entered Wales. But the Brytaines
fearing the great strength of the king, put their hope only in the almighty
Lord, turning to him in fasting, prayer, and repentance of their sins: and he
that never forsakes the penitent and contrite heart, heard their prayers; so
that the Normanes and Englishmen durst never enter the land, but such as entered
were all slain, and the king returned with small honor, after he had built
certain castles in the marches.

The year following being 1096. 1096
Hugh de Mountgomerie Earl of Arundell and Salopsburie, Matt. Paris. page. 59.
whom the Welshmen call Hugh Goch, that is to say Hugh the read headed,
Fabian, par 7 cap. 225. Mar. Scotus.
and Hugh Vras, that is, Hugh the fat Earl of Chester, and a great number of
Nobles more, did gather a huge army, and entered into Northwales, being thereto
moved by certain Lords of the country. But Gruffyth ap Conan the Prince, and
Cadogan ap Blethyn took the hills and mountains for their defense; because
they were not able to meet with the Earls, neither durst they well trust their
own men. And so the Earls came over against the I Will of Mon or Anglesey, where
they did build a castle of Aberlhiennawc. Then Gruffyth and Cadogan did go to
Anglesey, thinking to defend the I Will, and sent for succor to Ireland: but they
received very small. Then the treason appeared, for Owen ap Edwyn (who was the
Princes chief counselor, and his father in law, whose daughter Gruffyth had
married, having himself also married Everyth the daughter of Convyn, aunt to
Cadogan) was the chief caller of those strangers into Wales, who openly went
with all his power to them, and did lead them to the I Will of Anglesey: which
thing when Gruffyth and Cadogan perceived, they sailed to Ireland, mistrusting
the treason of their own people. Then the Earls spoiled the I Will, and slew all
that they found there. And at the very same time, Magnus the son of Haroald
came with a great navy of ships toward England, minding to lay faster hold
upon that kingdom than his father had done, and being driven by chance to
Anglesey, would have landed there, but the Earls kept him from the land. And
there Magnus with an arrowe, stroke Hugh Earl of Salop in the face, that he
died thereof, and suddenly either part forsook the I Will, and the Englishmen
returned to England, and left Owen ap Edwyn Prince in the land, who had allured
them thither.

1098
In the year 1098. returned Gruffyth ap Conan, and Cadogan ap Blethyn from
Ireland, and made peace with the Normanes, and gave them part of their
inheritance: for Gruffyth remained in Mon, and Cadogan had Cardigan, and a
piece of Powys land. About this time the men of Brechnock slew Lhewelyn the
son of Cadogan. Then Howel ap Ithel of Tegengel, went to Ireland. Also
Rythmarch Archbishop of S. David's, son to Sulien (bishop) died, the godliest,
wisest, and greatest clerk that had been in Wales many years before, saving
his father, who had brought him up, and a great number of learned disciples.

King William Rufus, after he had walled the city of London, and builded
Westminster hall, went to Normandy, and after he had brought all the country
to his subjection, returned home, and was slain with an arrow by Walter Tyrell
as he shot at a stagge in the new forest. Matt. Paris. page 71.
Then Henry his brother was crowned in his steed, for Robert the elder
brother was all this while in the holy land, who shortly returned and landed
at Portsmouth, against whom Henry came with a great power; but in the end they
were agreed, that Henry should pay yearly to Robert 3000. marks, and the
longer liver should be the others heir. This Henry married Mawd the daughter
of Malcolme king of Scots, by Margaret the daughter of Edward son to Edmund
Ironside. Also this year died Hugh Earl of Chester, and Richard his son was
made Earl in his place; at this time also died Grono ap Cadogan, and Gwyn ap
Gruffyth. In the year 1101. 1101
Robert de Belesmo son to Roger de Mountgomery Earl of Salope, and Arnulph
his brother Earl of Penbrooke did rebel against the king, Matt. Paris. Ran.
Cest.
which when the king heard, he sent for them to come to him, but they made
blind excuses, and gathered their strength, and fortified their castles, and
then gave great gifts and made large promises to the sons of Blethyn ap
Convyn, Iorwerth, Cadogan and Meredyth, and intised them to join their powers
to theirs. Robert had fortified four castles, Arundell, Tekinhill, Shrewsburie
and Brugge, which castle was the cause of the war: for Robert had builded it
without the kings leave, and Arnulph fortified his castle of Penbroke. Then
they entered the kings land, and burned and spoiled it, carieng away rich
booties. And Arnulph to have more strength, sent Gerald his steward to Murkart
king of Ireland, to desire his daughter in marriage, which he obtained, with
promises of great succors, which did encourage him the more against the king.
1102
Then the king gathered a great army, and first beseeged the castle of
Arundell and wan it, Matt. Paris. page. 78. Matt. West. lib. 2. page 26.
and likewise he did with Tekinhill, and afterward lead his power before
Brugge, which for the situation and depth of the diches, being also well manned
and victailed, the king doubted the speedy winning thereof. Wherefore he was
counseled to send privily to Iorwerth ap Blethyn, Io. Castor.
promising him great gifts, if he would forsake the Earl and serve him,
remembering what wrongs the Earls father Roger and his brother Hugh had done
to the Welshmen. Also the king to make him more willing to stick unto him,
gave him all such lands as the Earl and his brother had in Wales without
tribute or oath; Ran. Cest. li. 7. cap. 13.
which was a piece of Powys, Cardigan and half Dyuer, and the other half had
the son of Baldwyn with Stradtywy and Gwyr. Iorwerth being glad of these
offers, received them willingly, and then coming himself to the king, he
sent his power to the Earls land, which doing their masters commandment,
destroyed and spoiled all the country, for the Earl had caused his people to
conueie all their cattle and goods to Wales, little remembering the mischiefs
that the Welshmen had received at his fathers and brothers hands. But when
these news came to the Earl to Cadogan and Meredyth Iorwerths brethren, they
were all dismayed, and despaired to be able to withstand the king: for Iorwerth
was the greatest man of power in Wales. And at this time Arnulph was gone to
Ireland for his wife and succor. Also a little before, Magnus again had landed
in Mon, and received of Gruffyth ap Conan, and hewed down as much timber wood
as was needful for him, and so returning to the I Will of Man, which he had
won, he builded three castles there, and sent to Ireland to have the daughter
of Murcart in marriage for his son, which he obtained, and made his son king
of Man. Then Earl Robert hearing this, sent to him for help, but received
none: therefore seeing no remedy, he sent to the king, desiring him that he
might forsake the realm, which thing the king granted, and he sailed to
Normandy. And likewise the king sent word to his brother Arnulph, that either
he should follow his brother and depart the land, or yield himself to the kings
mercy and pleasure: but he chose to depart the land, and so he did.

After this, when the king was returned home, Iorwerth took his brother
Meredyth, and sent him to the kings prison: for his brother Cadogan agreed with
him, to whom Iorwerth gave Caerdhydh, and a piece of Powys. Then Iorwerth
himself went to the kings court, to put the king in remembrance of his
promise: but the king, when he saw all quiet, Brwnt yw'r gwr, ni sai in ei air.
forgate the service of Iorwerth, and his own promise, and contrary to the
same took Dyuet from Iorwerth, and gave it to a knight called Saer; and
Stradtywy, Cydewen and Gwyr he gave to Howel ap Grono: and so Iorwerth was sent
home empty.

At this time King Henry gave diverse castles and lordships in Wales to
Normanes and Englishmen, of whom there is mention oftentimes hereafter in this
history.

This year died Grono son of Rees ap Theodor in prison. Also at this time
Magnus the son of Heroald entered the country of Lenoux in Scotland, and
after he had gotten a great prey returned to his ships, but the inhabitants
pursued him so hard, that they put his people to flight, slew him, and rescued
their goods and cattle. In the end of this year the king did send diverse of
his council to Shrewesburie, and willed Iorwerth ap Blethyn to come to meet
them there to consult about the kings business and affairs. Now when he came
thither, all the consultation was against him, who^ contrary to all right and
equity they condemned of treason, because the king feared his strength, and
that he would revenge the wrongs that he had received at the kings hands, and
so they committed him to prison.

Those Noble men that were sent by the King to Shrewesburie, were Richard de
Belmersh, (or de Beleasmo as some do call him) who being chief dooer about
Roger Mountgomery, Earl of Salop, was preferred to the Bishopric of London,
and afterward appointed by this King Henry, to be warden of the Marches, and
governor of the county of Salop: Walter Constable, the father of Milo Earl
of Hereford, and Rayner the kings lieutenant, in the county of Salop. About
this time (as Bale notes) the church of Meneuia or S. David's, Io. Bal. Cent.
cap. 58. in append.
began to be subject to the sea of Canturburie, being always before the
Metrapolitane church of all Wales.

1103
In the year 1103. Owen ap Edwyn died, after great misery and long sickness.
Then also Richard the son of Baldwyn did fortify the castle of Ridcors, and
chased Howel ap Grono out of the country, to whom the King had given the
custody of that castle, who nevertheless returned shortly after, and burned
all the country, houses, corn, and haie, and slew a great number of the
Normanes, as they returned homeward, and kept all the country in his
subjection, except the castles, and these garrisons. At this time the King did
take the rule of Dyuet from Saer, to whom he had committed the same, and gave
it to Gerald, who had been sometimes Steward there under Arnulph. Then the
Normanes, who were in the castle of Rydcors, and other castles there abouts,
seeing they could not have the upper hand of Howel ap Grono in open fight, fell
to their accustomed practice of treason, and so obtained their purpose in this
manner. There was one Gwgan ap Meyric, who had nursed a son to Howel ap
Grono, and therefore very well trusted and loved of him, as the manner of
Wales is. This traitor (being corrupted by the Normanes) procured his masters
death, bidding him one night to his house to make merry, whither he came
gently. Then Gwgan gave notise thereof to the garrisons of the castles, who in
the dawning of the day entered the town, and coming about the house, gave a
great showte, wherewith Howel awooke, and coragiouslie leapt out of his bed,
and sought his weapons, but the traitor Gwgan had conveyed them away when he
was asleep. Then he called for his men, but they were all fled to save their
lives: and as he would have gotten away, he was taken by Gwgan and his
company, and strangled, whose body he delivered to the Normanes, which cut
off his head, and brought it to the castle of Rydcors. And this traitorous
murder of the kings lieutenant was left unpunished. For whatsoever fault the
Normanes committed, was always winked at: and if the Welshmen did never so
little offend the laws of the king, it was thought an heinous fault: which was
the cause that afterward they rebelled against the king, who sought nothing
but their utter destruction.

Ran. Cest. li. 7. cap. 13.
About this time Anselme Archbishop of Canturburie called a synod at London,
where among other things, Si. Dunelm.
it was ordained and decreed, that priests should not marry, which was not
before that time forbidden in Brytaine. This ordinance or decree seemed to some
very cleanly and honest; but of other it was thought perilous and dangerous,
least they seeking to be clean and honest (as they termed it) should fall into
horrible uncleanlinesse and dishonestie, abominable to a christian man: 1100
and this was a thousand one hundred and odd years, after the incarnation of
Christ.

King Henry, in the fifth year of his reign, sailed with a great power to
Normandy, Matt. Paris. page 83.
where his brother Robert, with Robert de Belesmo, Arnulph and William Earl of
Mauritania gave him battle: but the King got the victory, and took the Duke
his brother and William de Mauritania prisoners, and carried them to England,
whom he committed to perpetual prison, and caused his brothers eyes to be put
out. Matthew. West. lib. 2. page 25. Matt. Paris. page. 84.
Then shortly after died Edgar king of Scots, and Alexander his brother was
crowned in his place, by consent of king Henry. At this time Meyric and
Gruffyth the sons of Trahaern ap Caradoc were both slain by Owen ap Cadogan
ap Blethyn. Also Meredyth ap Blethyn brake the prison, where he had been a long
time, and came home, and gat his own inheritance again, and enioied it
quietly. 1108
The year 1108. the rage of the sea did ouerflow and drown a great part of
the low country of Flanders, Ran. Cest. lib. 7. cap. 13. Polydor. Iac. Mayer.
in such sort that the inhabitants were driven to seek themselves other
dwelling places, who came to King Henry, and desired him to give them some
void place to remain in: who being very liberal of that which was not his
own, gave them the land of Ros in Dyuet or Westwales, where Penbrooke, Tenby
and Hauerford are now built, Hol. page 347.
and there they remain to this day, as may well be perceived by their speech
and conditions, far differing from the rest of the country. At that time
Gerald steward did build again the castle of Penbrooke, in a place called
Congarth Vechan, and brought thither all his household stuff, and other goods,
with his wife and children. Then also Cadogan ap Blethyn made a great feast in
Christmas, and bad all the Lords of the country to his house in Dyuet, among
whom came Owen his son, who being at his fathers house, and hearing the
beauty of Nest wife to Gerald steward of Penbrooke praised above all the women
in the land, was marvelous desirous to see her. And for so much as Gladys wife
to Rees ap Theodor or Tewdor, and mother to Nest, was the daughter of Rywalhon
ap Convyn, and coosen germane to Cadogan his father; he with a few, under the
color of freendship and coosenage, went to see her: and finding the truth to
surmount the fame, he came home all inflamed with her love, and in that doting
mood the same night returning thither again, with a sort of wild companions
entered the castle privily, and compassed the chamber about, and set the house
on fire, wherewith Gerald and his wife awoke; and he would have issued out to
know what that noise meant, but his wife fearing some treason, stayed him, and
counseled him to go to the privy, and so pulling up the board she helped him
out that way, and then she came to the chamber door, and said that there was
none but she and her children, yet they entered in and sought al about; but when
they could not find him, they took her and her two sons, and a son and a
daughter borne by a concubine to Gerald, and carried them away to Powys, and so
burning the castle they spoiled all the country. Now when Cadogan hard this,
he was very sorry and feared the kings displeasure, and forthwith went to
Powys, and willed his son to send home to Gerald his wife and children with
his goods: but Owen in no wise would depart with the woman, yet at her request
he sent to Gerald his children again. And when Richard bishop of London, whom
the king had appointed Warden of the Marches being at Shrewsburie hard of this,
he was very sore offended, and sent for Ithel and Madoc the sons of Riryd
ap Blethyn: to whom he promised rich gifts and great rewards, besides the rule
of the whole country, if they could take or kill Owen, to revenge the dishonor
that he had done to the king: and to them he added Lhywarch the son of
Trahaern ap Caradoc, (whose two brethren Owen had slain) and Vchtryd the son
of Edwyn: which four promised the bishop to bring him Owen and his father
either alive or dead; and thereupon forthwith gathered their power to destroy
the whole country: but Vchtryd sent privy word before, that all such of the
people, as would have their lives saved, should come to him. And when the
country heard this, some fled to Arustly, some to Melienyth, some to
Stradtywy, and some to Dyuet, where Gerald was destroieng the country. And at
that time Walter bishop of Hereford did gather an army to defend Carmarthyn,
and met with such as fled to Arustly and Melienyth, and destroyed a great
number of them. Those that went to Stradtywy were gently received by Meredyth
ap Rytherch: and Vchtryd saved all such as came to him: and so these four came
with their powers to the castle of Rydcors, and thought best to have entered
the country by night, and to take Cadogan and Owen his son unawares. But
Vchtryd dissuaded them from that, and thought it dangerous to enter the
country by night, for fear of ambushment, but counseled them to enter in by
day with their men in good order. In the mean while Cadogan and Owen gat a
ship at Aberystwyth, which was lately come from Ireland and escaped away: and
the day after, when they entered into the land, they found none of them that
they sought. Therefore putting all the fault upon Vchtryd, they burned and
spoiled all the country, saving the Sanctuaries of Padarn and Lhandhewi Breui,
yet they took diverse men out of those places, and carried them prisoners to
their countries, and then returned to their own castles again. Then Owen,
with such as had been with him at the burning of the castle, fled to Ireland
to king Murcart, who received him ioiouslie: for he had been there before in
the time of the war of the two Earls in Anglesey or Mon, and had brought the
king rich gifts from Wales. But Cadogan kept himself privily in Powys, and
sent to the king to declare his innocence. Tehn the king was content, he
should remain in the country, and enjoy the town and lands that he had by
his wife, for she was daughter to a Lord of Normandy called Pygot de Say. Then
Madoc and Ithel his two nephews divided such lands as he and his son Owen
had in Powys betwixt them, and ruled it very evil, for they could never agree
among themselves: within a while Cadogan made such friends to the king, that
paieng a 100. pound fine, he should enjoy again his lands in Caerdigan, and
that the inhabitants should return again to their houses and till the ground,
for the king had given commandment, that no Welshman nor Normane should dwell
within Caerdigan. When they that were in Ireland understood this, they returned
home privily, and hid themselves in their coosens houses, and shortly after
Owen returned again to Wales; but not to Caerdigan: for his father had
received that land upon such condition, that he should not suffer Owen to come
therein, nor succor him, either with counsel, money or men. Nowbeit, Owen
came to Powys, and would feign have sent messengers to the king, but he could
get no man that durst venture to speak for him. Also at that time there
happened some variance betwixt Madoc ap Riryd, and the bishop of London,
lieutenant of the Marches, about certain felons of England that had fled to
him for succor, whom the bishop sent for, but could not get: wherefore he was
sore offended with him. Then Riryd understanding of that, sent to Owen, and
desired his freendship, whose greatest enemy he was before: and by this means
they were made friends, and swore either to other, that none of them should
betraie the other, nor agree by himself with the king or with his officers,
without the other: and thereupon they burned and spoiled the lands of such as
they loved not, 1109
and destroyed all things that they met withal. Matt. West. lib. 2. page 26.
Ran. Cest. lib. 2. cap. 14. Matt. Paris. page. 85.
At this time also the Emperor Henry did send his ambassadors to entreat of
a marriage with Mawd the daughter of king Henry, and had her to his wife. And
shortly after the king banished and disinherited Peter de Bruise, William
Mallet, and William Baynard, and put to death the Earl of Main. That year
appeared a terrible Comete. Matt. West. lib. 2. page 27.
Then also the king remembered Iorwerth ap Blethyn, whom he had kept long in
prison, and sent to know of him, what time he would pay to have his liberty;
and he promised the king 300. pound, or the worth thereof in cattle or horses:
then the king set him at liberty, and gave him his land again, and gave ten
pound of that money to Henry, son to Cadogan by the daughter of Pygot. All
this while Owen and Madoc were burning and spoiling the Englishmen and
Normanes, and ever withdrew themselves to the land of Iorwerth, which thing
grieved him greatly; whereupon he sent word of his danger, desiring them to
spare his land, and Cadogans: for if it were known that they came in any of
theirs, the land was forfeited to the king. When Owen and Riryd heard this,
they used his country more often than they were wont: then Iorwerth seeing
that, chased them out of his country. Then they went to the country of
Vchtryd in Merionyth shire, and the sons of Vchtryd sent word to their people
to keep them out of their country, and so they did: for meeting them by the
way, they set upon them, and Owen and Madoc defended themselves manfully: but
at the last they and their men were driven back, and so they fled, Owen to
Caerdigan to his fathers country, and Madoc to Powys. Then Owen with his
companions made diverse roades to Dyuet, and spoiled the country, carieng
away the men and the cattle to the ships that they came in from Ireland, and
after ransomed them, and gathered a great number to him, and set upon a town
of Flemings and burned it, and returned to Caerdigan, nothing esteeming his
fathers danger, nor the kings displeasure. At this time it chansed that Owens
men among other mischeefes laid wait for a bishop that was toward the king,
whose name was William de Brabant, and slew him and all his men. Then Iorwerth
and Cadogan were at the court to speak with the king, concerning certain
business of their own: and as the king talked with them, behold there came in
a Fleming, brother to the dead bishop, who made an exclamation, declaring how
Owen ap Cadogans men had slain his brother and a great number more, and how
they were succored in Cadogans land. Then the king being therewith sore
displeased, asked Cadogan what he could say to the matter, and he putting all
the fault in his son, excused himself as well as he could. Then said the king
to Cadogan; Seeing thou can not keep thine own, but that thy son and thy
companions shall be received and succored therein in disorder, I will give it one
that will keep them out, and I will keep thee at my charges all thy life,
charging thee upon thine allegiance, that thou enter not within Wales, until
such time as I have taken further order. And so the king gave him twenty
days, and set him at liberty to go whither he would, saving to Wales. When
Owen and Madoc heard this, they departed to Ireland. Then the king forthwith
sent for Gilbert surnamed Strangbow Earl of Strygill, which was a noble,
valiant and a worthy knight, to whom he said thus; Thou have been diverse
times a suter to me to have some lands in Wales, and now I give thee all the
lands and inheritance of Cadogan ap Blethyn, win it and take it. Gilbert
received it ioifullie, and thanked the king, and gathered all the power he
might, and landed in Caerdigan shire, and brought the country to his
subjection without any contradiction. Then he builded two fair castles there,
one toward Northwales upon the river Ystwyth at the sea shore, a mile from
Lhanbadarn: another toward Dyuet upon the river Teiui, Cilgarran, as some
think.
at a place called Dyngerant, where Roger Mountgomery had begone a castle
before time. And shortly after Madoc ap Riryd returned from Ireland, because
he could not well away with the manners and conditions of the Irishmen, and
being arrived came to the country of his uncle Iorwerth, who hearing that, and
fearing to lose his lands (as his brother Cadogan had done) made proclamation
that no man should dee for him, but take him for his enemy. Which when Madoc
understood, he gathered to him a number of unthrifts and outlawes, and kept
himself in the rocks and woods, devising all the means he could to be
revenged upon Iorwerth, for that unkindness and discourtesie as he took it, and
so entered freendship privily with Lhywarch ap Trahaern, who hated Iorwerth to
the death. Then having knowledge that Iorwerth lay one night at Caereneon,
they two gathered all their strength, and came about the house at midnight,
then Iorwerth and his men awoke, and defended the house manfully, until their
foes set the same on fire: which when Iorwerths men saw, every one shifted for
himself, so that some escaped through the fire, and the rest were either burnt
or slain, or both. Then Iorwerth himself seeing no remedy, adventured rather
to be slain than burned and came out: but his enemies received him upon sharp
spears, and overthrew him in the fire, and so he died a cruel death. As soon
as the king understood this, he called Cadogan before him, and gave him his
brothers land, which was Powys, and promised Owen his pardon, willing his
father to send for him to Ireland.

About this time king Henry preferred his base son Robert to the marriage of
Mabil, daughter and sole heir of Robert Fitzhamon Lord of Glamorgan, in whose
right the said Robert was Lord of Glamorgan, and was also at the same time by
his said father, created Earl of Gloucester: he builded the castle of Cardyff.

Now when Madoc saw his other uncle Cadogan rule the country, he hid himself
in rough and desert places, and adding one mischief upon another, determined
also to murder him by one way or other. Therefore after that Cadogan had
brought the country to some stay of quietness, and saw right and justice
ministered therein, having ever an eye and respect to the king, he came to the
Trallwng (now called the Poole) and the elders of the country with him, and
minding to dwell there, began to build a castle. Then Madoc pretending nothing
but mischief, hearing this, came suddenly upon him, and Cadogan thinking no
hurt, was slain before he could either fight or flee. After this Madoc sent
straight to the bishop of London the kings lieutenant at Shrewesburie, and
prayed him to remember what he had promised him before time, when he chased
Owen out of the land, for the bishop hated Owen and Cadogan, and gave Madoc all
such lands as his brother Ithel was possessed of. Now Meredyth the son of
Blethyn hearing of the death of both his brethren, sped himself to the king,
desiring of him the lands of Iorwerth, which Cadogan had lately obtained, and
the king gave him the rule thereof, till such time as Owen son to Cadogan was
come from Ireland: who came shortly after, and went to the king, who received
him to his peace, and gave him his lands. Whereupon Owen promised to the king a
great fine, and gave pledges for paiement of the same. Likewise Madoc did fine
to the king for his peace and lands: nevertheless, the king bad him take heed
of the kinsfolks of such as he had murdered, upon his own peril.

In the year 1111. Robert de Belesmo was taken by the king in Normandy, 1111
and committed to perpetual prison in Warham, too gentle a punishment for so
cruel and bloodthirstie a man as he was: for all his delight was therein, in so
much that he put out both the eyes of his own child with his thumbes for a
pastime, as the boy played under his gown. 1112
The year after Meredyth ap Blethyn sent a number of his men to make a road
into the country of Lhywarch ap Trahaern ap Gwyn, who was Meredythes and Owens
enemy, as he that succored Madoc to kill his uncles Iorwerth and Cadogan,
Meredyths brethren. These men, as they passed through the country of Madoc in
the night, they met with a man which belonged to the said Madoc, whom they
took, and examined him where his master was: and he first said that he could
not tell; but being put in fear of death, he confessed that he was not far
from thence. Therefore they lay quietly there all the night, and in the
dawning they came suddenly upon Madoc and his men, where they slew a great
number of them, and taking Madoc prisoner, they brought him to their Lord, who
was right glad thereof, and put him in safe prison, till he had sent word to
his Nephew Owen, who came thither straight, then Meredyth delivered Madoc unto
him. And albeit he had slain Owens father being his own uncle, yet Owen
remembering the freendship and oath that had been betwixt them two in times
past, would not put him to death, but putting out his eyes let him go. Then
Meredyth and Owen divided his lands betwixt them, which was Caereneon, Aberhiw,
and the third part of Devthwr.

1113
The year following, king Henry prepared an army against Wales, Matt. Paris.
page. Matt. West. lib. 2. page 27. Ran. Cest. li. 7. Io. Castor. Polydor. lib.
11.
being thereto provoked by such as would have the Welshmens lands, that was
Gilbert Strangbow Earl of Strygill, to whom the king had given Caerdigan, who
made sore complaints upon Owen ap Cadogan, declaring that he received and
maintained such as robbed and spoiled in his country. Also Hugh Earl of
Chester said no less by Gruffyth ap Conan prince of Northwales, how that his
men and the men of Grono ap Owen ap Edwyn Lord of Tegengl spoiled and burned
the country of Cheshire, adding, to aggrauate the matter, that Gruffyth did
neither owe service nor paid any tribute to the king: wherefore the king
swore that he would not leave one living creature in Northwales and Powys land,
Hol. page 352.
but destroy the land utterly and put in new inhabitants. Then parting his
army into three bands: the leading of the first he committed to Gilbert Earl
of Strigill, wherein was the whole power of all the fourth part of England and
Cornwall against Southwales: the leading of the second had Alexander king of
Scotland and Hugh Earl of Chester, wherein the power of Scotland and the North
was, who went against Northwales: and the king lead the third himself, wherein
was the strength of middle England. Then Meredyth ap Blethyn hearing this, came
and yielded himself to the king.

But Owen fearing to commit himself to them which were so greedy of his
lands, fled to Gruffyth ap Conan to Northwales: whereupon the king turned all
his strength that way, and came himself as far as Murcastelh, and the king of
Scots as far as Pennant Bachwy: but the people fled to the mountains and woods
and carried all their victuals and cattle with them, so that the king could not
follow them; and such of his men as entered the land, were either slain or
galled in the straites. Then the Scottish king did send to the prince to come
and yield him to the king, and promised him the kings peace, but he was
acquainted with such promises and would not. Then the king, because he would
not return without owing of some thing, sent to Owen to come to him, and to
forsake the prince who was not able to defend himself, but was ready to make
peace with the Scottish king and the Earl of Chester. Yet for all this Owen
would not trust the king, until such time as his uncle Meredyth came from the
king to him, and counseled him not to forsake the king of Englands offer, but
to trust his promise, and to make have before the prince agreed with the king,
who offered him all his lands without tribute. Then Owen hearing this came to
the king, who received him thankfully, and told him; that because he had
trusted the kings word and promise, he would not only perform that, but also
exalt him above all his kin, and give him his lands without tribute. The
Prince also hearing of this sent to the king to have his peace, which (because
the king could not come by him) he obtained for a great sum of money.

Some Brytish copies affirm, that the submission both of Gruffyth ap Conan and
also of Owen ap Cadogan, was procured by the subtle policy of Meredyth ap
Blethyn and the Earl of Chester: the one working with Gruffyth, and bearing
him in hand, that Owen had submitted himself to the king, and made his peace
with him, before it was so in deed: so that the prince somewhat yielding to
the Earls request, if Owen had so done contrary to his oath (for they were
sworn either to other, the one not to agree without the assent of the other)
seemed to incline to peace. On the other side Meredyth going himself in person
to his Nephew Owen, affirmed for a truth, that the Prince and the Earl of
Chester were thoroughly agreed concerning peace, and that the Prince was on his
journey toward the king to make his submission: and in the mean time all
messengers between Owen and the Prince were (by the procurement of Meredyth
intercepted: whereupon Owen willingly yielded himself to the King.

Then the king having finished his business in Wales, called Owen unto him, and
told him that if he would go with him to Normandy, and be faithful unto him,
he would perform all his promises with him. Whereupon Owen went with the king
to Normandy, where he was made knight, and had all promises performed at the
kings hand, at his return from Normandy the year following. At this time
died Griffri bishop of Meneuia, and the king made one Barnard a Norman bishop
in his place, The Prerogative of the Kings of England, in appointing of
Bishops, brought to Wales.
contrary to the minds of all the Clergy of Wales, who were always
accustomed to choose their bishop. At the same time there was a talk through
Southwales of Gruffyth the son of Rees ap Theodor, who for fear of the king
had been of a child brought up in Ireland, and had come over two years
passed, which time he had spent privily with his friends, kinsfolks, and
affines; as with Gerald steward of Penbrooke his brother in law, and others.
But at the last he was accused to the king, that he intended the kingdom of
Southwales as his father had enioied it, which was now in the kings hands: and
that all the country hoped of liberty through him; therefore the king sent to
take him. But Gruffyth ap Rees hering this, sent to Gruffyth ap Conan prince of
Northwales, desiring him of his aid, and that he might remain safely within
his country* which he granted, and received him ioiouslie for his fathers sake.

At this time also Howel the brother of this Gruffyth, being committed to
prison by Arnulph Earl of Penbrooke, in the castle of Mountgomery, where he
remained prisoner a great while, made an escape, and being sore hurt and
maimed, fled to Gruffyth ap Conan, where his brother was.

Which things when the king heard, he sent gentle letters to the Prince,
desiring him to come and speak with him, which Gruffyth ap Conan did, whom the
king received honorably, and gave him rich gifts and precious jewels, after
the usage of the Normanes, who make much of men for to serve their turn. Then
afterward he talked with him of Gruffyth ap Rees, promising him mountains of
gold, to send the said Gruffyth or his head unto him; the which thing the
Prince (being deceived with the fair words of the king) promised to do, and
so returned home ioifullie. But Gruffyth ap Rees and Howel his brother had
counsel given them, to withdraw themselves out of the way awhile, until they
understood what the Prince would do, for their friends suspected the kings
message. The Prince, as soon as ever he came to his palace at Arberffraw,
inquired for Gruffyth ap Rees, and learning where he was, sent certain
horsemen for him to come to his court: and as they came toward the house where
he was, he had warning of their coming, and with much adoo escaped to the
Church of Aberdaron, and took Sanctuary there. Then the messengers returned
again, and declared to the Prince how all things fell out, and the Prince
being sore offended, commanded him to be pulled out by force: but the Clergy
of the whole country withstood that, and defended the liberties of the Church.
That night some that pitied to see that young innocent to be sought as a lamb
to the slaughter, conveyed him away out of Northwales to Stratywy in
Southwales, where he was compelled for safeguard of his own life to rebel
against the king: and so gathering all the power he could to him, made war
against the Flemings and Normanes.

The next year after, to wit 1116. 1116
Gruffyth ap Rees did gather his power together, Polydor. lib. 11. Hol. page
353. Mar. Scotus.
and laid siege to a castle that was over against Arberth, and wan the same,
and made it plain with the ground: then he came before the castle of Richard
de Pwns at Lhanymdhyfry, to whom the king had given the Cautref Bychan, and
would have burnt it; but Meredyth ap Rytherch ap Caradoc lieutenant of the same
and the garrison defended it manfully: yet Gruffyth burnt the vtterward, and
slew many of the garrison, and likewise lost many of his own men, and so
returned without profit. From thence he went to Abertawy, and laid siege to the
castle which Henry Beumount Earl of Warwick had built, and likewise burned
the vtterward and the court house, and destroyed the country to Stratywy. Then
a great number of wild young men drew to the said Gruffyth from every place,
so that he began to wax strong, and made roads into Ros and Dyuet, spoiling
and robbing all the country. Wherefore the Normanes and Flemings consulted how
to remedy that mischief, and called to them all such as were the kings
friends and lords in the country, as Owen ap Rytherch, and Rytherch ap
Theodor, and his sons Meredyth and Owen, whose mother was Heynyth the
daughter of Blethyn ap Convyn, and Owen ap Caradoc whose mother was Gwenlhian
another daughter of Blethyn ap Convyn, and Meredyth ap Rytherch; and asked
whether they were true and faithful to the king of England, and they said they
were. If you be (said they) you must keep and defend the kings castle of
Carmarthyn, and that after this manner: first Owen ap Caradoc shall keep it a
fortnight, and Rytherch ap Theodor and his sons another fortnight, and so by
course, which they were content to do. Then Owen took upon him the keeping of
the castle, and the castle of Robert Courtmaine in Abercomyn or Abercorran
was committed to Blethyn ap Gadivor. Shortly after, Gruffyth ap Rees sent
spies to understand the estate of Caermarthyn and the castle, who vewed it,
and brought him good tidings: therefore he came with his power suddenly upon
the town, and gave a great shout; and Owen ap Caradoc, which kept it, ran to
the place where the shout was given, thinking that his men would have followed
him, but the most part of them fled, and so Owen was stain fighting manfully,
and the town won and destroyed all save the castle, which was sore defaced.
So Gruffyth returned to his accustomed place with great spoil and booty:
whereupon a great number of lusty young men drew unto him, and served him,
thinking that all was his. After that he went to Gwyr, and wan a castle and
burnt it. Then William de Londres forsook his castle, and fled with his men,
but Gruffyth destroyed the castle, and carried away all the cattle and spoil
of the country: and when the men of Caerdigan heard this, they sent for
Gruffyth, choosing him rather to be their head and ruler, being their coosen
and country man than any other. Wherefore he went thither unto them, and was
well received of Cadiuor ap Grono, and Howel ap Dinerth, and Trahaern ap Ithel,
who had forsaken Dyuet, and left it full of Normans, Flemings, and Englishmen.
There were also many strangers in Caerdigan, which ruled that country, but
yet the people hated them, not forgetting the wrongs that they had received at
their hands. Notwithstanding, Henry king of England had brought all that
country to his subjection, some by force, some by vanishment, and some by
gifts and rewards. Whereat Gruffyth was nothing dismayed, but boldly came to
Caerdigan Iscoed, and laid siege to a strong hold which Earl Gilbert and the
Flemings builded at Blaen Porth Gwithan. Where after long fight, and diverse
assaults, with the slaughter of diverse within, and but one of his men, they
burned the town, and brought the country to subjection. Then all the
strangers fled away and left their houses, which the Welshmen burned and
destroyed all to Penwedic. Then they assaulted the castle in Stradpythylh,
(which belonged to Raphe Earl Gilberts steward) and got it, and slew the men
that were within. And from thence they camped at Glasgryg a mile from
Lhanbadarn, where they did wrong to the church, for they took out some of the
cattle to vittaile themselves, Privilege of sanctuary claimed for cattle.
that were within the compass of the Sanctuary: then they purposed to lay
siege to the castle of Aberystwyth the day following. Which being declared to
Raphe steward, he sent privily to the castle of Stratmeyric (which Gilbert
had built) for succor, which he conveyed from thence by night. The day
following Gruffyth came toward the castle out of order, fearing nothing, and
did not understand what number of men was within the castle, and so stood upon
a hill (the river being betwixt him and the castle with a bridge to pass
over) where he and his men stayed and consulted concerning the making of
engines to assault it, until it was the evening, at which time the Normanes
(seeing their disorder) sent archers to the river side, to skirmish with them,
to entice the Welshmen to the bridge, that the armed horsemen might suddenly
issue out and set upon the naked footmen. Then the Welshmen approached near to
the bridge and skirmished with them, and suddenly issue forth one horseman,
and would have passed the bridge, but his horse was wounded with a pike and
began to fail, and as he returned to the footmen he fell of his horse, and
the Welshmen pursued him over the bridge. When the Englishmen saw that, they
fled toward the castle, and the Welshmen followed to the hill top, and
suddenly the ambush of horsemen that lay under the hill thrust betwixt them
that had passed over and the bridge, and they that fled turned back with more
strength, and so the Welshmen were compassed on either side, and the bridge so
kept that no rescue could come to them, where they were slain for the most
part all, being all naked men. Then the rest seeing the great number of the men
armed which they looked not for, turned back, and departed the country. Now
when the king heard of all these slaughters and spoils, he sent for Owen ap
Cadogan to him, to whom when he came the king said: Owen I have found thee true
and faithful unto me, therefore I desire thee to take or kill that murderer
Gruffyth ap Rees, that does so trouble my loving subjects; I assure thee my
chief trust is in thee, and in Lhywarch ap Trahaern, who shall go with thee,
and you two shall wait upon my son Robert, whom I will send shortly against
that traitor with an army. And look how thou seruest me at this time, so
will I recompense thee without fail. Then Owen being wonderful glad that the
king put such confidence in him, encouraged his men to do their endeavor at
this time to pleasure the King, as they had done heretofore to offend him: and
so ioining with Lhywarch, they went toward Stratywy, to meet with the kings
son. And when they came to the confines of the country, they made a vow
that neither man woman nor child should escape their hands alive. When the
people understood of this cruel band, they fled out of the country, some to
woods, some to rocks and caves, and some to the kings castles to save their
lives. Then they divided their people to enter the woods and straits, which be
very many in that country. And Owen himself took with him about 100. men,
and entered the wood, and perceived that men and cattle had passed that way,
whom he followed and ouertooke, and slaieng some of them, put the rest to
flight: then taking their cattle returned back toward his company. But at
that instant, behold, Gerald steward of Penbroke, with all his power of
Flemings was coming to meet the kings son, and met with them that fled, who
cried out unto him for help, and declared that Owen ap Cadogan had spoiled
them of all their goods. Now when Gerald and the Flemings understood that Owen
was there with so little company, they thought it a meet time to be revenged
of their old wrongs, and so pursued him to the woods. Owen being warned by his
men, that a great number pursued him, and counseled to make have away, would
not so do, because he understood them that followed to be the kings friends,
and nothing doubted of them. But when they came nigh, they began to shoot at
his men, who would have had Owen to flee, but he turned manfully to his
enemies, and encouraged his men to fight, affirming, that although their
enemies were seven to one, This reproach and defacing of any nation does never
come to good end. Ric. 3. at Bosworth field.
yet they were but Flemings and such as feared their names, and were good for
nothing but to empty cups, and with that set upon them courageously. And it
chanced that at the first meeting Owen was stricken with an arrowe to the
heart, and slain: which thing when his men saw they fled, and brought word to
Lhywarch ap Trahaern and their fellows, who suspecting the kings army, seeing
they could not trust them in the kings service, returned to their country.

Polydor. lib 11. Hol. page 354.
About this time, the order and court of Parliament began first in England. The
kings of elder time did never lightly call together all the states of the
realm, unless it were in the beginning of their government, to settle things
in quietness at their Coronations, or when some great war was in hand:
otherwise in the ordering of the common wealth the kings did all things by
their officers, with directions and edicts, or by such of the nobility as were
chifee rulers in their several counties.

After the death of Owen, his brethren divided his lands between them, saving
that which he had taken by force from his uncle Meredyth, being the lands of
Madoc ap Riryd ap Blethyn. The names of his brethren were these: Madoc whose
mother was Gwenlhian the daughter of Gruffyth ap Conan, The children of Cadogan
ap Blethyn.
Eneon whose mother was Sanna the daughter of Dyfnwal: Morgan whose mother was
Evelhiw or Elhiw the daughter of Cadivor ap Colhoyn lord of Dyuet: Henry and
Gruffyth whose mother was the daughter of the lord Pigot Cadogans wedded wife,
Meredyth by Evrvron Hoedliw, Owen was the son of Inerth the daughter of
Edwyn. After this, Eneon ap Cadogan and Gruffyth ap Meredyth ap Blethyn did
lead their power against a castle that Vchtryd ap Edwyn had built at Cymmer in
Merionyth, for Cadogan had given to his coosen germane Vchtryd, Merionyth and
Ceuilioc, upon condition that he and his should be friends to his friends, and
foes to his foes in all causes: but contrary to that condition, he and his
sons were ever against Cadogans children, in every enterprise that they went
about. Therefore after they had set upon the castle, and slain diverse of the
garrison, the rest yielded to them, and so when they had won all the country
they divided it betwixt them. Thus Gruffyth ap Meredyth had Mowthwy, Cyuelioc,
and half Penlhyn; and the other half of Penlhyn and Merionyth came to Eneon.

An. 1116. 1116
king Henry sailed into Normandy with a great army against the French king,
Hol. page 355. Matt. Paris. page 89.
who with the Earl of Flanders and others went about to make William son to
Robert Curthoise duke of Normandy; but at king Henry's arrival they returned
home without honor. This year died William Strangbow of a consumption. The
next year after fell a great variance between Howel ap Ithel Lord of Ros and
Ryuonioc, now Denbighland, and Riryd and Lhywarch the sons of Owen ap Edwyn.
Then Howel sent to Meredyth ap Blethyn and to Eneon and Madoc Cadogans sons
for succor, who came down from Merionyth with 400. men well appointed and met
with the sons of Owen in the vallie of Clwyd their own land, which sons of
Owen sent for their coosines the sons of Vchtryd to come with their powers to
succor them: and all these met together with cruel hearts, and fought
manfully, but in the end after great slaughter Lhywarch the son of Owen ap
Edwyn was slain, and with him Iorwerth the son of Nudh which was a noble man
and a worthy soldiour, and Riryd fled: and so Howel ap Ithel had the victory,
but he was so sore wounded that he died within forty days after. Then
Meredyth ap Blethyn and the sons of Cadogan made speed home for fear of the
Frenchmen, which lay in garrisons about Chester.

1120
In the year 1120. died Murcart the worthiest and greatest prince in all
Ireland. And the same time there was a great battle fought between king
Henry, Matt. West. lib. 2. page 29.
and the French king who was overthrown and a great number of his nobles
taken. Matt. Paris. page 89. and. 91
And shortly after, as king Henry returned toward England, Matt. Paris.
page. 92.
by misgouernment of the shipmaster, there was a ship drowned, Hol. page 357
Matthew. West. lib. 2. page 30.
wherein perished the kings two sons William and Richard, with his daughter
and niece, and many other to the number of 150. Matt. Paris. page 92. Hol.
page 358.
The next year after, the king did marry Adelyce daughter to the duke of
Louaine and forthwith prepared a great army against Wales, and came to Powys
land: which when the lords of the land, Meredyth ap Blethyn, and the three sons
of Cadogan, Eneon, Madoc and Morgan saw, they sent to Gruffyth ap Conan prince
of Northwales to desire succors at his hands: and he answered that they should
not receive any of him, nor enter within his lands, for he had made peace with
the king. Thus having no hope of aid from him, they purposed to defend
themselves within their own land after the best manner they could, and set men
to keep and defend the straits whereby their enemies must needs pass. And as
it chanced, the king himself with a small number came unto one of those
defended places, for his whole army had goone a further way about, because of
their carrages: at whose coming the men which kept the straits skirmished with
the kings men, and with their arrows having the advantage of the ground slew
some, and hurt many. Among these one drew his bow, and shooting toward his
foes, by fortune stroke the king a great blow upon the breast, but by mean of
his maze the arow hurt him not; nevertheless he was wonderfully dismayed
withal, and considering how rashly by misfortune he might lose in that wild
country the honor and fame which he had won before, did send to parle with
them, that kept the passage, and to will them under assurance to come and
speak with him: which they did. Then he asked them whose men they were, and
how they durst be so bold as to put the king in such danger; and they said that
they were Meredyth ap Blethyns men, and did nothing but their masters
commandment in keeping the passage. Then the king willed them to go to their
master, and counsel him to go to the kings peace, and he should receive no
hurt, which he and his coosins did, 1122
and fined to the king for their offenses 1000. heads of cattle, and the king
returned to England.

King Henry having thus quieted Wales, Io. (...)
leaving the lord Fitzwaren warden or lieutenant of the Marches, returned to
England, where he held three Parliaments this year, the first about
Christmasse at Norwych, the second about Easter at Northampton, and the third
after Whitsuntide at London.

The year ensuing Gruffyth ap Rees ap Theodor did kill Gruffyth ap Sulhaern,
and Eneon the son of Cadogan died, and gave his part of Powys and Merionyth
which he had won to his brother Meredyth: but Meredyth ap Blethyn his uncle
put him back by force, and took it to himself. At this time the king did set
at liberty Ithel ap Riryd ap Blethyn, whom he kept in prison many years, who
came home, thinking to have enioied his own lands. Now when Gruffyth ap Conan
prince of Northwales heard, how that Meredyth ap Blethyn had taken by force the
lands of his Nephew Meredyth ap Cadogan, he sent his sons Cadwalhon and Owen
with a power to Merionyth, who brought all the country to their subjection,
and carried the chief men and the cattle to Lhyyn: and afterward the sons of
Cadogan destroyed the land of Lhywarch ap Trahaern, because he joined with the
sons of the prince. Matt. West. lib. 2. page 31. Ran. Cest. lib. 7. cap. 16.
Hol. page 359 To. Houeden. H. Hunt. lib. 8.
About this time there came one Johannes Cremensis a cardinal from the Pope,
who after he had gotten many rich gifts and rewards of Bishops and Abbots, held
a synod at London at the nativity of our Lady, where he inueied bitterly
against the marriage of priests, declaring how unseemly a thing it was to come
from his woman to the altar, and the same night he was found with a whore in
bed with him.

1125
The year 1125. Meredyth ap Blethyn did kill his brothers son Ithel ap Riryd.
And shortly after Cadwalhon ap Gruffyth ap Conan slew his three uncles, Grono,
Riryd, and Meilyr, the sons Owen ap Edwyn, and also Morgan ap Cadogan slew
his brother Meredyth with his own hands. Matt. Paris. page, 94.
About this time died Henry the Emperor, who had married Mawd king Henry's
daughter and heir. In the year 1127. 1127
the king sent his daughter to Normandy, Hol. page 361*
to be married to Geffrey Plantagenet, son to the Earl of Aniow, and followed
himself shortly after. Gruffyth ap Rees was put beside the lands, which the
king had suffered him quietly to possess, by the false accusations of the
Normanes, which dwelled in the country with him. And then also Daniel
Archdeacon of Powys died, a man both learned and godly, who traveled all his
time to set peace and concord betwixt his countriemen. An. 1128. died Gruffyth
ap Meredyth ap Blethyn, and the same year Lhewelyn the son of Owen ap
Cadogan took Meredyth ap Lhywarch, and delivered him to Pain fitziohn to be
kept safe in the castle of Brugenorth. This Meredyth had slain Meyric his
coosen germane, and had put out the eyes of his two coosen germans the sons
of Griffri. The year ensuing Ieuaf the son of Owen put out the eyes of two
of his brethren, and banished them the country, also Lhewelyn ap Owen slew
Iorwerth ap Lhywarch. And Meredyth ap Blethyn took the same Lhewelyn his
nephew, and putting out his eyes gelded him, to the end he should get no
children, that he might have his lands, and slew Ieuaf ap Owen his brother.
Also Meyric slew Lhywarch and Madoc his son, his own coosens, who himself
was so served, shortly after. Then Morgan the son of Cadogan repented him
greatly for the murder of his brother Meredyth, wherefore he took his
journey to Jerusalem, and died in his return at Cyprus.

1132
In the year 1132. Robert Curthoise the kings brother died in the castle of
Cardiffe. Matt. Paris. page 97.
The year following Cadwalhon son to Gruffyth ap Conan was slain at
Nanhewdwy, Matt. West. lib. 2. page 34.
by Eneon the son of Owen ap Edwyn his uncle (whose three brethren he had
slain) with Cadogan ap Grono ap Edwyn. That year also died Meredyth ap Blethyn
ap Convyn, the greatest lord and cheifest man in Powys, as he that had gotten
his brethren and nephews lands by hook and by crook into his own hands. In
the year 1135. died Henry king of England, one of the worthiest and
victoriousest princes that ever reigned in the I Will of Brytaine. 1135
After whom Stephen Earl of Boloigne son to the Earl of Bloys his sisters
son, a stout and a hardy knight reigned king of England, Tho. Walsh. Hol.
page 365
for (by the means of Hugh Bygod steward to king Henry) the Archbishop of
Canturburie, and all the nobility of England, contrary to their former oath
made to Mawd the Empress, created and crowned him king. Matt. Paris. page. 100.
Then shortly after David king of Scots wan by treason Carlisle and Newcastell,
against who^ Stephen lead an army, to whom David yielded himself, and restored
Newcastell, and kept Carlisle by composition: but he would not swear to him,
Fabian. Io. Cast. Hector Boet.
for he had sworn alredie to Mawd his nice. Yet Henry his son swear to
Stephen, and had the Earldom of Huntingdon given him. This year Richard and
Gilbert his son were slain by Morgan ap Owen. And shortly after Cadwalader
and Owen Gwyneth the sons of Gruffyth ap Conan (in whom remained the hope of
all Wales, for they were gentle and liberal to all men, terrible and cruel to
their enemies, meek and humble to their friends, the succor and defense of
widows, fatherless, and all that were in necessity: and as they passed all
other in good and laudable virtues, so they were paragons of strength, beauty
and well proportionat bodies) gathered a great power against the Normans and
Flemings, who entering Cardigan, wan, destroyed and burned the whole country
with the castle of Walter Espec, the castle of Aberystwyth, which was very
strong and well manned. And thither came Howel ap Meredyth and Rees ap Madoc ap
Ednerth, who went forward and rased the castle of Richard de la Mare, and the
castle of Dinerth and Caerwedros, and returned home with much honor.
Afterward, toward the end of the same year they returned again with 6000.
footmen, John Stowe. page. 188.
and 2000. horsemen well armed, and to them came Gruffyth ap Rees and Howel ap
Meredyth of Brechnoke and his sons, and Madoc ap Ednerth, who subdued the
whole country to Aberteivi, placing again the old inhabitants, and chasing
away the strangers. Against them came Stephen constable of Aberteivi, Robert
Fitzmartyn, the sons of Gerald, and William Fitziohn, Florentius Wigorn. Sup.
Mar. Scot.
with all the power of the Normanes, Flemings and Englishmen that were in Wales
or the marches. Now after a cruel and bloody fight, the strangers after their
accustomed use put all their hope in their forts, and forsook the field, and
the Welshmen followed hard, that besides 3000. that were slain, a great number
were drowned, and taken and carried away captives. After this victory, Owen
and Cadwalader ouerran the whole country, and returned home with rich spoils,
as well in armor and horse, as in other things with great triumph. And at this
time the pride of the nobles of England began to appear, for first Hugh Bigod
kept the castle of Norwich, but forthwith, sore against his will, he restored
it to the king himself.

Matt. Paris. page. 100.
The cause of this tumult of the nobles, was rumor which went abroad of the
death of the king, who was then sick of a lethargy. Those which bare him no
good will, verified the rumor as much as in them lay, and stirred the people
in the behalf of the Empress. Such as were his friends took strong castles
to save themselves: as this Hugh Bigod, for fear of the friends of the
Empress, took the castle of Norwich, and afterward being certified that the
king was well again, he was loath to deliver the same out of his posession,
unless it were into the kings own hands.

After that, the king did besiege Excester, which Baldwyn de Reduerijs kept
against him, W. Pamus. lib. 1. cap. 15. Matt. Paris, ibidem.
and wan it; and so he did the I Will of Wight, which was the said Baldwynes, and
banished him out of the land. The year 1137. died Gruffyth ap Rees ap Theodor,
Tho. Walsh.
the light, 1137
honor and stay of Southwales, who had by his wife Gwenlhian the daughter of
Gruffyth ap Conan, Rees commonly called the lord Rees, and others.

Sup. Mar. Scotus.
Florentius moonke of Worcester, in his supply to Marianus Scotus, says; that
This Gruffyth ap Rees Prince of Southwales, died by the deceitful practice of
his wife. He writes also of a noble knight named Pain, a man of great
valiancie, who being very earnest in pursuing of the Welshmen, was at this
time hurt with a spear, and so died, and was carried to Gloucester and there
buried.

Also toward the end of the same year died Gruffyth ap Conan king or prince
of Northwales, the only defense and sheeld of all Wales, after he had escaped
many great dangers by sea and land in Ireland and Wales, and after many
worthy victories, and after he had brought Northwales, which he found full of
strangers, to peace and quietness, having ruled the same worthily 50. years.
This prince had many children by diverse women: first by Angharat the daughter
of Owen ap Edwyn, he had sons Owen, Cadwalader, and Cadwalhon who was slain
before his father died; and daughters Marret, Susanna, Ranulht, Agnes and
Gwenlhian. And by another woman he had Iago, Ascain, Edwal Abbot of Penmon,
Dolhing who was also a priest and well learned, and Elen the wife of Hova ap
Ithel Velyn of Yal. He reformed the disordered behauior of the Welsh minstrels,
by a very good Statute which is extant to this day.

There are three sorts of minstrels in Wales.

1 The first sort named Beirdh, which are makers of songs and odes of sundry
measures, wherein not only great skill and cunning is required; but also a
certain natural inclination and gift, which in Latin is termed Furor
poeticus. These do also keep records of Gentlemen's arms and petegrees, and
are best esteemed and accounted of among them. 2 The second sort of them are
plaiers upon instruments, theefelie the Harp and the Crowth: whose music for
the most part came to Wales with the said Gruffyth ap Conan, who being on the
one side an Irishman by his mother and grandmother, and also borne in Ireland,
brought over with him out of that country diverse cunning musicians; into
Wales, who devised in a manner all the isntrumental music that is now there
used, as appears as well by the books written of the same, as also by the
names of the tunes and measures used amongst them to this day. 3 The third
sort called Atcaneaid are those which do sing to the instrument played by
another, and these be in use in the country of Wales to this day.
This statute or decree here mentioned, does not only prescribe and appoint
what reward every of the said minstrels ought to have, and at whose hands: but
also of what honest behavior and conversation they ought to be, to wit, no
make bates, no vagabounds, no ale-househanters, no drunkards, A very good law
against abuses in Musicians.
no brallers, no whoorehunters, no thieves, nor companions of such. In which
things if they offend, every man by the said statute is made an officer, and
authorized to arrest and punish them, yea and take from them all that they have
then about them. They are also in the same statute forbidden to enter into any
man's house, or to make any song of any man without special license of the
party himself. And this statute or decree has been oftentimes allowed by
public authority of the chief magistrates of that country, as appears by
sundry commissions directed to diverse Gentlemen in that behalf.

Owen Gwyneth.
Owen Gwyneth the son of Gruffyth ap Conan.
AFTER the death of Gruffyth ap Conan, his sons divided the land betwixt them
after the manner of Wales. And Owen surnamed Gwyneth the eldest son was made
prince of Northwales (for the name of king is no further used in the Brytish
book) who in the beginning of his reign together with his brethren made the
third expedition into Southwales, and overthrew the castle of Stradmeyric, and
castle Stephen, and Humffreys castle, and burned the town of Caermarthyn,
and returned home with much honor. At this time died John Archpriest of
Lhanbadarn, who for his godly life is counted amongst the Saints. This year
went king Stephen to Normandy, Any wealthy man may be canonized a saint at
Rome if his Executors will go to the charges thereof.
and made peace with the French king and with the Earl of Aniow, and then
returned home. The year following, being 1138. king Stephen made a viage
against David king of Scots, who had burned and spoiled a great part of
England, who as soon as he heard of of the kings coming returned home; and
Stephen followed him, destroieng all the South part of Scotland. 1138
In the summer ensuing, diverse noble men of England fortified their castles,
Matt. Paris. Tho. Walsh. Io. Cast.
and rebelled against the king, as William Earl of Gloucester fortified Ledes
and Bristow, Matt. Paris. page 101.
Ralph Lunel Cari, William Fitzalen Shrewesburie, Paganellus Ludlow, William de
Moyun Dunestor, Robert de Nichol Warham, Eustace Fitziohn Merton, and Walklyn
Dover, which castles the King got, some by assault, some by fair promises, and
some by treason. Also at this time the Scots hearing this business entered
England again, against whom William Earl of Abemarle, William Pyppel of
Notingham, Walter Espec, and Gilbert Lacie gathered the power of the North, and
being animated with an eloquent oration made and pronounced to the whole army
by Ralph Bishop of Orkneys, set upon the Scots manfully at Almerton, and after
great slaughter of them, put the king to flight, and returned with great
triumph. In the beginning of the next year, king Stephen took the castles of
Ludlowe and Leeds, and kept the bishops of Salisburie and Lincoln fasting, W.
Parnus. Matt. Paris. page, 103. Tho. Walsh. Io. Castor.
till they had delivered him the castles of Vises and Shirburne, which the
bishop of Salisburie had builded, and Newerke upon Trent and Sleeford, which
two likewise the Bishop of Lincoln had built. 1139
The same year Mawd the Empress, daughter and heir to king Henry (to whom
king Stephen with all the nobles of England had sworn fidelity) landed at
Arundell with her brother Robert Earl of Gloucester, Matt. Paris. page 103.
and there was received honorably of William de Albineto, who had lately
married Adeliz the Queen, late wife of king Henry, to whom the same king had
appointed and given the Earldome of Arundell for her iointer. Then king Stephen
laid siege to the castle, but seeing it was impregnable, he raised his siege,
and suffered the Empress and her brother to escape to Bristow, where they were
received.

In the year 1140. Cynwric the son of Owen was slain by the men of Madoc ap
Meredyth ap Blethyn ap Convyn, 1140
and the next year after king Stephen with a great army did besiege Lincoln,
W. Parnus. lib. 1. cap. 8. Matt. Paris. page 104. Matt. West. lib. 2. page 36.
against whom came Ranulph Earl of Chester, and Robert Earl of Gloucester
with his father in law, and the Barons which were disinherited to raise the
siege. But before they came, the town was won: then passing a dangerous
marrish, they camped hard by the king, ready to give him battle; who likewise
brought forth his men in three battles. In the first were these, Alan Earl of
Brytaine, the Earl of Mellent, Hugh Bygod Earl of Norfolk, Simon Earl of
Hampton, and Earl Warren. In the second the Earl of Albemarle, and William of
Ypres a noble man and a worthy soldier. And in the third the king, with
Baldwyn Fitzgilbert, and a great number of nobles more. And of the other part
the disinherited Barons had the first place, Matt. Paris. ibidem.
the Earl of Chester with his succors of Wales (better couraged than armed)
had the second place, and the Earl of Gloucester lead the last battle. These
after a cruel fight took the king prisoner, W. Parnus. lib. 1. cap. 9. Matthew.
West. lib. 2. page 37. Matt. Paris. page 105.
and afterward the Queen and William of Ypres, Bryan Fitzcount. But within a
while after that, William Martell and Geffrey de Mandeuile gathered a new
army, and fought with the Empress and her brother at Winchester, and put her
to flight, taking Earl Robert prisoner, for exchange of whom the king was set
at liberty. The year following the king had an overthrow at Wilton, W.
Parnus. lib. 1. cap. 10. Matt. West. page. 38. Matt. Paris. ibidem.
after the which he besieged the Empress the same year at Oxford, who
escaping thence fled to VValingford. The same year also Madoc ap Ednerth a man
of great estimation in Wales died, and the sons of Blethyn ap Gwyn slew
Meredyth ap Howel.

1142
Also the year 1142. Howel ap Meredyth ap Rytherch of the Cantref Bychan, and
Rees ap Howel were slain by treason of the Flemings. Likewise Howel ap
Meredyth ap Blethyn was murthred by his own men. Then also Howel and Cadogan
the sons of Madoc ap Ednerth did either kill other. And shortly after there
fell a variance betwixt Anarawd son to Gruffyth ap Rees prince of Southwales,
and his father in law Cadwalader the son of Gruffyth ap Conan and brother to
prince Owen Gwyneth, who from words grew to fight: where Anarawd was slain,
the hope and stay of Southwales. For the which thing prince Owen took such
displeasure at his brother, that he and his son Howel gathered an army
against him, and destroyed all his country, and burned his castle at
Aberystwyth; for Cadwalader himself had fled to Ireland, and had hired Octer
(son to Octer) and the son of Turkel, and the son of Cherulf, with a
great number of Irishmen and Scots for 2000. marks to his succor, and landed
at Aberinenay in Carnaruonshire, against whom the prince came with a great
power: but before the armies met there was a peace concluded betwixt the
brethren. Which when the Irishmen understood, then withheld Cadwalader as
prisoner for their wages, and he delivered them 2000. heads of cattle, besides
many prisoners and spoils that were taken in the country. But as soon as
the prince knew his brother set at liberty, he fell upon the Irishmen, and
slew a great number of them, and recovered all the cattle with the prisoners
and other spoils: then as many as escaped alive returned home with great
shame and loss.

About the same time Hugh Earl of Chester, fortified his castle of Cymaron,
and wan Melienyth to himself, and likewise the castle of Clun was fortified
by a lord Normane, and all Eluel brought to their subjection. W. Parnus. lib.
1. cap. 11.
At that time king Stephen took Geffrey Mandeuile prisoner at S. Albon, where
the Earl of Arundell was like to be drowned by default of his horse. Matt.
Paris. page. 105.
The Earl Mandeuile gave to the king for his liberty the tower of London,
with the castles of Walden and Plassey, Matt. West. lib. 2. page 38.
who afterward lived by spoil of abbers, and was slain in a slurmish against
the king, 1143
whom he had sore anoied: and his son Arnulph was banished the realm. Matt.
Paris, page 107.


This year Hugh de Mortimer took Rees ap Howel in a skirmish, and diverse
other with him and imprisoned them. At the same time Howel and Conan the sons
of prince Owen gathered an army against the Flemings and Normanes, and gave
them an overthrow at Aberteiui, and keeping the town, returned home with great
honor. Also this year died Sulien ap Rythmarch a man of great knowledge, one
of the College of Lhanpardarn.

About this time Gilbert Earl of Clare came with a great power to Dyuet, and
built the castle of Carmarthyn, and the castle of the sons of Vchtryd. Then
also Hugh Mortimer slew Meyric ap Madoc ap Riryd, and Meredyth ap Madoc ap
Ednerth. Cadelh the son of Gruffyth ap Rees prince of Southwales gat the
castle of Dyneuowr, which Earl Gilbert had built, and after he and his
brethren Meredyth and Rees gathered their powers, and laid siege to the castle
of Carmarthyn, which was yielded unto them, reserving only the lives to those
of the garrison: and from thence they brought their army before the castle of
Lhanstephan, where the Normanes and Flemings meeting with them had a great
overthrow, and so they wan the castle. Whereupon all the Flemings and Normanes
inhabiting that country all about, gathered their powers together, and their
captains were the sons of Gerald and William de Hay, who laid siege to the
same castle upon the sudden. But Meredyth ap Gruffyth, to whose custody the
castle was committed, encouraged his men to fight and to defend the place, and
that which lacked in him of strength (for he was of great years) he supplied
in courage and discretion. He suffered his enemies to scale the walls, and when
the ladders were full, he gave the watchword, and his soldiers did manfully
with engines ouerturne all the ladders, and maimed a great number of armed men
and tried soldiers, and put the rest to flight. Shortly after died Run the
son of prince Owen of Northwales, a fair and a goodly young man, whose
death when it came to his fathers ears did so trouble him, that no kind of
pleasure could comfort his heavy heart, so that he led the night in tears and
the day in heaviness, till God who took compassion upon the poor leauings
and remnants of the Brytaines, even as he had discomforted the prince with the
death of his son, so he did glad his sorrowful heart with the overthrow of his
enemies: for there was a castle at the Mould very strong and well manned,
which did trouble the whole country about, and had been oftentimes besieged,
but never won. Prince Owen levied a power and laid siege to it, but the
garrison defended it manfully, and abode diverse assaults: but at the last,
mauger their heads, the sight of the prince did so encourage his men, that they
entered by force, and slew a great number, and took the rest of the defendants,
and rased the fort to the earth: which victory achieved did so please the
prince, that he left his solitary plaints, and fell to his accustomed pastimes.

At the same time king Stephen overthrew his enemies at Farendon. Matthew. West.
lib. 2. page 38 Matt. Paris. page. 107.
But in the year ensuing Rondel Earl of Chester and king Stephen were made
friends, 1145
nevertheless the king took him prisoner, and kept him so (contrary to his
promise) until such time as the Earl had delivered to the king the castle of
Lincoln, with all other fortes of the kings that he had in his custody. At
this time Cadelh, Meredyth, and Rees the sons of Gruffyth ap Rees ap Theodor
did lead their powers against the castle of Gwys, which after they saw they
could not win, they sent for Howel the son of Owen prince of Northwales to
their succor, who for his prowess in the field and his discretion in
consultation, was counted the flower of chivalry, whose presence also was
thought only sufficient to overthrow any hold; who being desirous to win
honor, gathered his men, and came to these lords before the castle of Gwys,
who^ they received ioifullie. Now when he had vewed the place, he caused
engines to be made to batter the walls with force of men, and other to cast
great stones to their enemies, and to disquiet the garrison. Which preparations
when they within beheld, their stomachs failed, and forthwith they yielded the
fort, then Howel returned home with great honor. Shortly after, there fell a
great dissension betwixt Howel and Conan prince Owens sons, and Cadwalader
their uncle; whereupon they called their strength unto them, and entered the
country of Merionyth: where the people fled to the sanctuaries to save their
lives. These two young Lords made proclamation, that no man should hurt those
that would yield to them: whereupon the people which had fled, returned to their
houses without hurt. Thus they brought all the country in subjection to them,
and lead their army before the castle of Cynvael, which Cadwalader had built
and fortified, wherein was the Abbot of Tuygwyn, or Whitehouse, to whom the
Lord had committed the defense of his castle. Then Howel and Conan summoned
the fort with great threatenings, but they within defied them: whereupon Howel
and Conan promised the Abbot Meruyn great rewards, to let them have the house.
But he (like a faithful servant, whom neither terrible manaces, nor pleasant
proffers could move to untruth, but as his lord trusted him so would he
continue still, and not deceive his expectation) denied them of the same,
choosing rather to die with honor, than to live with shame. With which answer
the young Lords were greatly offended, that a priest should stay their
prosperous proceedings, and thereupon assaulted the castle so sore, that after
they had beaten down the walls, they entered by force, and slew and wounded
all the garrison, saving the Abbot, who escaped away privily by means of
friends whom he had in Howels army.

The year 1147. 1147
died Robert Earl of Gloucester and Gilbert Earl of Clare, and Vchthred bishop
of Landaff, after whom Nicholas ap Gurgant was made bishop. And the year 1148.
1148
died Barnard bishop of S. David's or Meneuia, Girald. Came.
and after him came David Fitzgerald to be bishop there, who was before
Archdeacon of Caerdigan. Castell^ y Rodwyth.
The year ensuing Owen prince of Northwales did build a castle in Yale, and
his brother Cadwalader built another at Lhanrystyd, and gave Cadogan his son
his part of Caerdigan. Toward the end of this year, Madoc the son of
Meredyth ap Blethyn did build the castle of Oswestrie, The castle of
Oswestrie.
and gave his nephews Owen and Meyric the sons of Gruffyth ap Meredyth his
part of Cyuelioc. The year after, prince Owen did imprison Conan his son for
certain faults committed against his father: also prince Owens son took his
uncle Cadwalader prisoner, and brought his country and castle to his
subjection.

At this time also Cadeth the son of Gruffyth ap Rees fortified the castle
of Carmarthyn, and from thence lead his army to Cydwely, where he destroyed
and spoiled all the country, and after his return he joined his power with
Meredyth and Rees his brethren, and entering Caerdigan wan the part called Is
Aeron. Not long after, there fell a variance betwixt Rondel Earl of Chester,
and Owen prince of Northwales. Then Rondel gathered a great power of his
friends and hired soldiers, from all parts of England: to whom Madoc ap
Meredyth prince of Powys, disdaining to hold his lands of Owen, joined all his
power: and they both together entered prince Owens land, who like a worthy
prince not suffering the spoil of his subjects, met them at Counsylht, and
boldly bad them battle, which they refused not, but being more in number and
better armed and weaponed, were glad of the occasion: yet before the end they
threw away weapon and armor, and trusted their feet, whom the Northwales men
did so pursue that few escaped, but were either slain or taken, saving the
chief captains, whose horses carried them away clear. In the year 1150. 1150
Cadelh, Meredyth and Rees, the sons of Gruffyth ap Rees Prince of
Southwales, wanne all Caerdigan from Howel the son of prince Owen, saving the
castle of Lhanvihangel in Pengwern, and at the castle of Lhanrystyd they lost
many of their men, therefore they slew all the garrison when they wan it, and
thence they went to the castle of Stratmeyric, which they fortified and
manned, and then returned home. This Cadelh had a great pleasure in hunting,
and used much that pastime; which thing when the inhabitants of Tenby or
Denbigh y pyscot in Penbrooke shire knew, they laid in ambushment for him, and
so when this lord had uncoupled his hounds, and pursued the stag with a few
companions, they fierslie set on him and his company, and seeing they were but
few and unarmed, they easily put them to flight, and wounded Cadelh very
sore, yet he escaped their hands, and came to his house, where he lay a long
time like to die. Then his brethren Meredyth and Rees entered Gwyr, where
burning and destroing all the country, they wan the castle of Aberlhychwr and
rased it to the ground, and then returning home with great booty, reedified
the castle of Dynevowr. The same year also Howel the son of Owen prince of
Northwales fortified Humfreys castle in the vallie of Caletwr.

In the year 1151. 1151
Owen Gwyneth took Cunetha his brother Cadwalhon his son, and put out his
eyes, and gelded him, least he should have children to inherit part of the
land. Lhewelyn also the son of Madoc ap Meredyth slew Stephen the son of
Baldwin. About the same time Cadwalader the brother of Prince Owen escaped out
of his nephew Howels prison, and subdued part of the I Will of Mon or Anglesey to
himself: but his brother Owen sent an army against him, and chased him
thence, who fled to England for succor to his wives friends, for she was the
daughter of Gilbert Earl of Clare. Matt. Paris. page 113. Matt. West. lib. 2.
page 41.
The same year Galfride Arthur was made bishop of Lhanelwy, now called in
English Saint Asaph. Also Simon Archdeacon of Cyuelioc, an man of great
worthiness and fame, dyed at the same time. And the year ensuing Meredyth and
Rees, the sons of Gruffyth ap Rees, did lead their powers to Penwedic, before
the castle, which did belong to Howel the son of Prince Owen, and with great
pains got it. Shortly after, privily by night they came to the castle of
Tennbie, which was in the keeping of Fitzgerald, and scaled it upon the sudden,
and got it, and did so revenge their brothers hurt. Then returning thence they
divided their army, and Rees went to Stratcongen, which he destroyed and
spoiled, and went thence to Cyuelioc, which he destroyed in like manner. But
Meredyth laid siege to the castle of Aberavan, and wan it, and came home with
rich spoils. Ran. Cest. lib. 7. cap. 20.
At this time died Rondle Earl of Chester, and Hugh his son was created
Earl in his place.

1153
In the year 1153. died Meredyth ap Gruffyth ap Rees Lord of Caerdigan and
Stratywy, in the 25. year of his age, a worthy knight, and fortunate in
battle, just and liberal to all men. Also the same year died Geffrey bishop
of Landaff. The year ensuing, Henry Shortmantel the Empress son entered
England, and wan diverse castles, as Maluesburie, Matt. West. page. 41. Matt.
Paris. page. 114.
Walingford, and Shrewsburie. About the same time Eustace the son of king
Stephen was drowned, whereupon the king and Henry concluded a peace.

1154
In the year 1154. died Stephen king of England, Matt. West. lib. 2. page 52.
Matt. Paris. page. 115.
and Henry Plantagenet the Empress son was crowned in his steed. This Henry
was wise and learned and besides a worthy knight, he never ware glove except
he bare a hawke on his fist, and never sat but at his meat, and delited in
hawking, hunting, riding, and in all honest exercises. In the beginning of his
reign, and in the year 1155. 1155
Rees ap Gruffyth ap Rees, whom the Welsh book surnameth Lord Rees, and all
the Latin and English writers of that time name King of Southwales, did gather
all his strength together to defend his country from Owen Gwyneth, whom he
heard to be leuieng of men to conquer Southwales. So Rees came as far as
Aberdyvi over against Northwales, and perceiving the rumor to be false, built
a castle there, and so returned back. At the same time Madoc ap Meredyth
prince of Powys did build a castle at Caereneon besides Cymer. Castelh
Caereneon.
At that time Meyric his nephew escaped out of prison, where he had been long
kept; then also Eglwys vair in Myvot was built, also Terdelach king of Conacht
in Ireland died.

At this time king Henry banished the Flemings, Io. Cast.
whom king Stephen had brought in, and sent some of them to their coosins in
Westwales; likewise the king bannished Wiliam Peuerell of Notingham. Matt.
West. page. 43. Matt. Paris. page. 126.
And Hugh Mortimer fortified the castle of Cleberie against the king, which
the king took and rased, and Hugh yielded to the king, and delivered to his
hands the castles of Wygmor and Brugge. Likewise Roger the son of Miles of
Gloucester Earl of Hereford delivered to the king the tower of Gloucester, and
died shortly after, and his brother Walter enioied his land; but the king kept
the Earldom of Hereford, and the town of Gloucester in his own hands. The
year following, Conan Earl of Richmond sailed to Brytaine, where he was
received of the most part for their duke. Shortly after king Henry and his
brother Geffrey were agreed in Normandy, and the king being returned into
England, Matt. West. page. 44.
received of the Scottish king Carlisle, Newcastell, and Banburgh, with the
country about, and gave him the Earldome of Huntingdon. Also William Earl of
Egle and Northfolke, base son to king Stephen, delivered Henry the castles
of Peuensey and Norwich, and the king confirmed to him his other lands.

At this time Caradocus Lhancaruan, who is reputed and taken of all learned men
to be the author of this present history, ends his collections of the
successions of the Brytaines, from Cadwalader until this time, of whom some
studious antiquarie wrote these verses following: Historiam Brytonum doctus
scripsit Caradocus,
Post Cadwalladrum regia sceptra notans.


In those two Abbeis, the Princes and Noblemen of Wales were buried.
The successions and acts of the princes of Wales after this time, until the
year 1270. were kept and recorded from time to time in the Abbeis of Conwey in
Northwales, and Stratflur in Southwales, as witnesses Gutryn Owen, who being
in the days of Edward the fourth wrote the best and most perfect copy of the
same.

1157
About this time the king gathered all his power together from all parts of
England, W. Parnus. lib. 2. cap. 5. Matt. West. ibidem. Matt. Paris. page 129.
Io. Castor.
intending to subdue all Northwales, being thereunto procured and moved by
Cadwalader, whom the Prince his brother had banished out of the land, and
bereaved of his living, and by Madoc ap Meredyth prince of Powys, who envied at
the liberty of Northwales, which knew no lord but one. And so the king led
his army to Westchester, and camped upon the marsh called Saltney. Likewise
Owen, like a valiant prince, gathered all his strength, and came to the utter
meares of his land, purposing to give the king battle, and encamped himself
at Basingwerk. Which thing when the king understood, he chose out of his army
diverse of the cheifest bands, and sent certain Earls and Lords with them
toward the princes camp: W. Parnus lib. 2. cap. 5.
and as they passed the wood called Coed Eulo, David and Conan the princes sons
met with them, and set upon them fearslie, and what for the advantage of the
ground and for the suddennes of the deed, the Englishmen were put to flight,
and a great number slain, and the rest were pursued to the kings camp. The
king being fore displeased with that foil, removed his camp along the sea
coast, Hol. page 397.
thinking to pass betwixt Owen and his country; but Owen foreseeing that,
retired back to a place which is called to this day Cil Owen (that is, the
retire of Owen) and the king came to Ruthlan.

W. Parnus. lib. 2. cap. 5.
In this first viage of king Henry against the Welshmen, he was put in great
danger of his life in a strait at Counsylth not far from Flynt, where Henry of
Essex, whose office by inheritance was to bear the standard of England, cast
down the same and fled: which thing encouraged the Welshmen in such sort, that
the king being sore distressed, had much a do to save himself: and (as the
French Chronicle says) was feign to flee; of whose part Eustace, Fitz-Iohn,
and Robert Curcie two worthy knights, with diverse other noble men and
gentlemen, were slain.

After that, Owen encamped and entrenched himself at Bryn y pin, and
skirmished with the kings men daily, and in the mean while that the King was
fortifieng the castle of Ruthlan; his navy, which was guided by Madoc ap
Meredyth Prince of Powys, anchored in Mon or Anglesey, and put on land the
soldiers, which spoiled two churches, and a little of the country
thereabouts. But as they returned unto their ships, all the strength of the I Will
set upon them and killed them all, so that none of those which robbed within
the I Will brought tidings how they sped. Then the shipmen seeing that, liked not
their lodging there, but waid up anchors and went away to Chester. In the
mean time there was a peace concluded betwixt the king and the Prince, upon
condition that Cadwalader should have his lands again, and his brother should
be his friend. Then the King leaving the castles of Ruthlan and Basywerke well
fortified and manned, after he had built a house thereby for the templers,
returned to England.

At that time also Iorwerth Goch ap Meredyth got the castle of Yale, and
burned it. The year following, Morgan ap Owen was traitorously slain by the
men of Ivor ap Meyric, with whom died the best poet in the Brytish tongue of his
time, called Gurgan ap Rees: and his brother Iorwerth got the town of
Caerlheon, and the lands of Owen. Then the king made peace with all the princes
and lords of Wales, except Rees ap Gruffyth ap Rees prince of Southwales, which
Rees fearing the kings power, caused his people to remove their cattle and
goods to the wilderness of Tywy, and he still made war against the king.
Therefore the king sent for him to come to his court, to conclude a peace
before the power of England and Wales were sent for him: whereupon Rees after
consultation came to the king, and an order was taken that Rees should enjoy
the Cantref Mawr, as it should please the king, so that his land should be
whole together, and not in diverse places and shires: but the king did
contrary to his promise, appointing Rees lands in diverse places, and
lordships intermingled with other men's lands. Which deceit although Rees
perceived well enough, yet he received it peecemeale as it was, and lived
quietly, until Roger Earl of Clare hearing this, came to the king, and
desired his highness to give him such lands in Wales as he could win, which
the king granted. Then he came with a great army to Caerdigan, and first he
fortified the castle of Stratmeyric, and afterward the castle of Humfrey, of
Dyuy, of Dynerth, and Lhanristyd. When these castles were well manned and
fortified, Walter Clyfford, who had the keeping of the castle of Lhanymdhyfri,
made a road to the land of Rees, and returned with a booty, after he had
slain diverse of Reeses men.

Then Rees sent to the king to complain, and to have a redress, who had
only fair words and nothing else: for the king winked at the faults of the
Englishmen and Normanes, and punished the Welshmen cruelly. Rees seeing this,
laid siege to Lhanymdhyfri, and in short space wan the castle. Also Eneon the
son of Anarawd Reeses brothers son, being a lusty gentleman, and desirous
to make his country free from servitude, and perceiving his uncle to be
discharged of his oath to the king, laid siege to the castle of Humfrey, and by
force wan it, slaieng all the garrison, wherein he found horses and armor to
furnish a great number of men. Likewise Rees, seeing he could enjoy no part of
his inheritance but that he wan by the sword, gathered his power, and entering
Caerdigan, left not a castle standing in the country, of those which his
enemies had fortified, and so brought all to his subjection. Wherewith the king
being sore offended, returned to Southwales, and when he saw he could do no
good, he suffered Rees to enjoy all that he had gotten, and took pledges of
him to keep the peace in his absence. Then returning to England, he took his
journey to Normandy, and made peace with the French king. But the next year
Rees prince of Southwales did lead his power to Dyuet, and destroyed all the
castles that the Normanes had fortified there, and afterward laid siege to
Caermarthin. Which thing when Reynold Earl of Brystow the kings base son
heard, he called to him the Earl of Clare, and his brother in law Cadwalader
the brother of prince Owen, with Howel and Conan prince Owens sons, and two
other Earls, and came to raise the siege with a great army: whose coming
Rees abode not, but got him to the mountains called Kefn Rester, and there kept
himself, and they camped at Dynwyl her, and builded a castle there, who after
they could not hear of Rees, returned home without doing of any notable act.
King Henry remained in Normandy all this year, where he made war against
the Earl of S. Giles for the city and Earldom of Toulouse.

1160
In the year 1160. died Madoc ap Meredyth ap Blethyn prince of Powys at
Winchester. This man was ever the king of Englands friend, and was one that
feared God, and relieved the poor, his body was conveyed honorably to Powys,
and buried in Myuot. This man had by his wife Susanna the daughter of Gruffyth
ap Conan prince of Northwales three sons, Gruffyth Maylor, Owen, and Elise,
and a daughter called Marred: he had base sons, Owen Brogynton, Kynwric Euelh,
and Eneon Euelh, which base sons were not baselie esteemed, who with the
other had part of their fathers inheritance, and so had other through Wales,
especially if they were stout and of noble courage.

And here I think it convenient to declare how Powys land came to be divided
in many parts, and thereby weakened and so brought under the Normanes, before
the rest of Wales. Meredyth son to Blethyn ap Convyn prince of Powys had two
sons, Madoc of whom we speak, and Gruffyth, between whom Powys was divided.
Madoc had that part which was called Powys Vadoc, which part again was divided
betwixt his three sons, Gruffyth Maylor, Owen Vachan, and Owen Brogynton after
this manner. Gruffyth Maylor had Bromfield, Yale, Hope Dale, Nanhewdwy, Mochnant
is Rhayard, Chirke, Cynlhayth, and Glyndouerdwy. Owen Vachan had Mechain
Iscoyd. And Owen Brogynton had Dynmael, and Edeyrneon. The other part of Powys
called afterward Powys Wenwynwyn, was the part of Gruffyth ap Meredyth, after
whose death his son called Owen Cyuelioc enioied it, as it shall be at large
hereafter declared.

The lordship of Powys.
Powys before king Offas time reached Estward to the rivers of Dee and
Seauerne, with a right line from the end of Broxen hills to Salop, with all
the country between Wye and Seauerne, whereof Brochwel yscithroc (of whom
mention is made before, page 22.) was possessed: but after the making of Offas
ditch (as it is said before page 19.) the plain country toward Salop, being
inhabited by Saxons and Normans, Powys was in length from Pulford bridge
Northeast, to the confines of Caerdigan shire, in the parish of Lhanguric in
the Southwest; and in breadth from the furthest part of Cyuelioc Westward, to
Elsmere on the Eastside. This country or principality of Powys was appointed
by Roderike the Great for the portion of his third son Anarawd, and so
continued intierlie until the death of Blethyn ap Convyn. After whom, although
the dominion was diminished by limiting parts in seueraltie amongst his sons
Meredyth and Cadogan, yet at length it came wholly to the possession of
Meredyth ap Blethyn, who had issue two sons Madoc and Gruffyth, between whom
the said dominion was divided, Madoc married Susanna the daughter of Gruffyth ap
Conan prince of Northwales, and had that part, which was after called after his
name Powys Vadoc, which dominion and Seigniorie was divided betwixt the three
sons of the said Madoc, to wit, Gruffyth Maelor, Owen ap Madoc, and Owen
Brogynton, which Owen Brogynton although he was baselie begotten, yet for his
valiancie and noble courage he had part of his fathers inheritance, to wit,
Edeyrneon and Dinmael, and had issue Gruffyth, Blethin, and Iorwerth. Owen ap
Madoc had to his portion of inheritance limited the territory of Mechain Is
coed, and had issue Lhewelyn and Owen Vachan. Gruffyth Maelor the eldest son
lord of Bromfield had to his part the two Maelors and Mochnant is Rayadr, he
married Angharat the daughter of Owen Gwyneth prince of Northwales, by whom he
had issue one son named Madoc, who held his fathers inheritance wholly, and
had issue Gruffyth called lord of Dinas bran (because he dwelled in that
castle) who married Emma the daughter of James lord Audley, and had issue
Madoc, Lhewelyn, Gruffyth and Owen. This Gruffyth ap Madoc took part with king
Henry the third and Edward the first, against the prince of Northwales, and
therefore for fear of the prince he was feign to lie for his own safeguard in
his said castle of Dinas bran, which stands on the top of a very steep
hill, to the which there is no way but one to come. He died, his children
being within age, whereupon shortly after ensued the destruction of two of
them: for the said king Ed. 1. gave the wardship of Madoc (who had for his part
the lordships of Bromfield and Yale, and the said castle of Dinas bran, which
the reuersion of Maelor Saesnec after his mothers decease, who had the same to
her iointer) to John Earl Warren; and granted the wardship of Lhewelyn, (to
whose part the lordships of Chirke and Nanhevdwy came) to Roger Mortimer third
son to Roger Mortimer the son of Ralph Mortimer Lord Mortimer of Wigmor.
These guardians forgetting the service done by the father of the wards to the
king, so guarded their wards with so small regard, See the records in the Tower.
that they never returned to their possessions. And shortly after the said
guardians did obtain the same lands to themselves by charters of the king.
This John Earl Warren began to build the Holt castle, and William his son
finished the same. The lordship of Bromfield and Yale continued in the name of
the Earl Warren three descents, John, William and John that died without
issue, and then the said lordship together with the said Erldome of Warren,
descended to Alice daughter of the said William Earl Warren, and sister and
heir of the said last John Earl Warren, which Alice married Edmond Fitzalan
Earl of Arundell, in the which house of Fitzalanes it remained three descents
after the said Edmond and Alice, to wit, to Richard Earl of Arundell, and to
Richard Earl of Arundell his son, and to Thomas Earl of Arundell son of
the said last Richard. And then for want of issue of the said Thomas Earl of
Arundell and Warren, the said lordship fell to two of his sisters, whereof one
named Elizabeth was married to Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, the other named
Ioane was married to William Beauchamp lord of Abergauenny, whose part
afterward came by a daughter to the Neuil lord of Abergauenny: and sithence it
came to the hands of Sir William Stanley knight, by whose attaindor it
escheated to the crown, and so remains parcel of her majesty's possessions
at this day.

Roger Mortimer Justice of Northwales, Chirke.
builded the castle of Chirke, and married Lucia the daughter and heir of Sir
Robert de Wafre knight, by whom he had issue Roger Mortimer, who married Ioane
Turberuile, and had issue John Mortimer lord of Chirke. This John sold the
lordship of Chirke, to Richard Fitzalan Earl of Arundell, son to the said
Edmond, and so it was annexed again to Bromfield and Yale.

The third son of Gruffyth lord of Dinas bran, named also Gruffyth, had for
his part Glyndowrdwy, Glyndowrdwy.
which Gruffyth ap Gruffyth was father of Madoc Crupl father of Madoc Vachan
father of Gruffyth father of Gruffyth Vachan, father of Owen Glyndowr, who
rebelled in the time of king Henry the fourth, by whose attaindor that part
also came to the kings hands, which was purchased of the king by Robert
Salisburie of Rug, of whom Salisburie the lord of Glyndowrdwy that now is
descended. Owen the fourth son of Gruffyth lord of Dinas bran had for his
part Cynlhaeth, which at this day together with the lordship of Chirke land is
parcel of the possessions of the right honorable the Earl of Leycester.

The other part of Powys, containing the countries of Arustly, Cyuelioc,
Lhannerch hudol, Caereneon, Mochnant vwch Rayader, Mechain vwch Coed, Mouthwy,
Deuthwr, and Teirtref or the three towns, rightfullie descended to Gruffyth ap
Meredyth ap Blethyn before mentioned, who was by King Henry the first created
Lord Powys, he married Gweyryl or Weyryl the daughter of Vrgene ap Howel ap
Ieuaf ap Cadogan ap Athlestan Glodryth, and by her had issue Owen surnamed
Cyuelioc.

Owen Cyuelioc enioied his whole inheritance as his father did, and married
Wenlhian the daughter of Owen Gwyneth, Prince of Northwales, by whom he had
issue Gwenwynwyn or Wenwynwyn: after whose name that part of Powys was
afterward called Powys Wenwynwyn. He had also a bastard brother called
Caswalhon, to whom he gave the territories called Swydh Lhannerch Hudol and
Braniarth.

Gwenwynwyn succeeded his father in the whole segniorie, saving Lhannerch,
Hudol and Braniarth, which were given to his base brother Caswalhon Maelrhy,
during his life time only. Which Gwenwynwyn married Margaret daughter to Rees
ap Theodor Prince of Southwales, and by her had issue Gruffyth ap Gwenwynwyn.

Gruffyth ap Gwenwynwyn succeeded his father in all his possessions, and had
issue six sons, among whom his inheritance was divided as follows. Owen the
eldest son had for his part, Arustly, Cyuelioc, Lhannerch hudol, and the
moitie of Caereneon. Lhewelyn the second son had Mochnant vwch Rayader and
Mechain vwch Coed. John the third son had the fourth part of Caereneon.
William the fourth son had Mouthwy. Gruffyth Vachan the fifth son, had
Deuthwr, Strat marchelh and Teirtref. David the sixth son had the other fourth
part of Caereneon.

Owen ap Gruffyth had issue one only daughter his heir, Hawys Gadarn, that
is, Hawys the hardy, against whom her uncles Lhewelyn, John, Gruffyth Vachan,
and David arose, challenging the lands of their brother Owen, and affirming
that a woman was not capable of lands in that country. Whereupon Hawys made
such friends in England, that the matter being opened unto King Edward the
second, the said King bestowed her in marriage upon a servant of his named John
Charleton, termed Valectus Domini Regis, borne in Appley, a little off from
Welinton 1268. in the county of Salop, whom he made Lord Powys in her right.

This John Charleton Lord Powys, being aided by the king Lhewelyn, David and
John, whom he laid up fast in the kings castle of Hardlech, and obtained a
writ from the King of the Shirife of the county of Salop, and Sir Roger
Mortimer Lord of Chirkland and justice of Northwales, for the apprehension of
Gruffyth Vachan, with Sir Roger Chamber, and Hugh Mountgomerie his two sons
in law, which then were in armor against the said Charleton and Hawys.
Whereupon the said Gruffyth Vachan and his brethren, having then lost their
greatest stay, which was Thomas Earl of Lancaster, submitted themselves to
the kings order, touching all matters in variance between them and their
niece: who finding by records, that Gruffyth ap Meredyth, auncestor to the said
Hawys, upon his submission to King Henry the first, became subject to the King
of England, and thereupon was by the said King created Baron of Powys, which
Baronie he and his heirs held afterward of the king in Capite, as other Barons
of England did. And therefore the said Hawys (as it seemed unto him) had more
right to her fathers possessions, being in her uncles hands, than they to hirs.
But to make a final end between them, order and composition was taken, that
Hawys should enioie her inheritance, in fee simple to her and to her heirs for
ever, after the tenure of England. And that her uncles Lhewelyn, John, David,
and Gruffyth, should hold their portions to them and to their heirs male for
ever. And in default of such issue male, the same to descend and remain to the
said Hawys, and to her heirs for ever.

Mowthwy.
William Lord of Mowthwy, otherwise called Wilcocke Mowthwy, being the fourth
son, (because he did not trouble his said niece Hawy about her inheritance,)
had his lands confirmed and assured in fee simple to him and to his heirs
general male or female forever. He married Alianor the sister of Elen, Owen
Glyndowres mother, the daughter of Thomas son of Lhewelyn son of Owen son
of Meredyth son of Owen son of Gruffyth son of Rees son of Gruffyth
son of Rees ap Theodor prince of Southwales, by whom he had issue John de
Mowthwy.

John the son of William Lord of Mowthwy had issue Elizabeth his daughter and
sole heir, which was married to Sir Hugh Burgh knight.

Sir Hugh Burgh knight in the right of his wife lord of Mowthwy, had issue Sir
John Burgh.

Sir John Burgh lord of Mowthwy, married Jane the daughter of Sir William
Clopton knight lord of the manours of Clopton and Radbrooke in the county of
Gloucester, and by her had issue four daughters, Elizabeth, Ancreda, Isabell
and Alianor. Elizabeth married to Thomas Newport father of John, father of
Thomas father of sir Richard Newport knight late deceased father of Francis and
Andrew now living. Ancreda married to John Leighton of Stretton father of Sir
Thomas Leighton of Watelsborough knight, father of John Leighton, father of
Edward Leighton Esquire, eldest son: and of Sir Thomas Leighton knight second
son now living. Isabell married to John Lingen, father of Sir John Lingen
knight. And Alianor married to Thomas Mytton, father of William Mytton, father
of Richard Mytton, who by partition had amongst the said coheires enioied the
said Seigniorie and Lordship of Mowthwy.

The said John Charleton first of that surname had issue by the said Hawys
John, and died An. 1353.

John Charleton the second lord Powys held that Seigniorie John.

John Charleton the third lord Powys succeeded his father, John and Edward.

John Charleton the fourth lord Powys possessed his fathers

Edward Charleton brother and heir to the said John, succeeded Powys, and held
the same 19. years, he married Alianor daughter and one of the heirs of of
Thomas Earl of Kent, being the widow of Roger Mortimer Earl of March, and
mother to Anne countess of Cambridge, the mother of Richard duke of York, and
had issue by her two daughters his heirs, Jane eldest daughter married to Sir
John Gray knight, and Joyce second daughter married to John lord Tiptoft, by
whom she had issue John lord Tiptoft, created by king Henry the sixth Earl of
Worcester, who died without issue: and four daughters, Philip, Joyce, Ioane,
and Margaret: the first Philip, married to Thomas lord Ros. The second Joyce,
married to Edmond Dudley son and heir to John baron Dudley. The third Ioane,
married to Sir Edward Inglethorp knight, who had issue Isabell married to John
Neuill Marquis Montague.

After the death of the said Alianor, this Edward lord Powys married Elizabeth
the daughter of Sir John Barkley knight, and died An. 1420. After whose death
the lordship of Powys was divided into three parts: first the said Elizabeth
had for her dowry Lhannerch hudol, Strat marchelh, Deuthwr and Teirtref, and
married to her second husband the Baron of Dudley. The said Jane the eldest
daughter had for her part Caereneon, Mecham, Mochnant and Plasdinas. The third,
Joyce the yoonger daughter had Cyuelioc and Arustly.

Henry Gray the son of Sir John Gray knight, and Jane daughter and one of
the heirs of Edward Chareleton lord Powys, was in the right of the said Jane
his mother lord Powys, he was also by king Henry the fifth created Earl of
Tanqueruile, and married Antigone base daughter to Humfrey duke of Gloucester,
fourth son to king Henry the fourth, and had issue Richard, Humfrey, and
Elizabeth the wife of Sir Roger Kinaston.

Richard Gray lord Powys married Margaret the daughter of James lord Audley, and
by her had issue John and Elizabeth, the wife of John Ludlow son of sir
Richard Ludlow knight, which John and Elizabeth had issue two daughters, Anne
and Alice. Anne the elder married Thomas Vernon, second son of Sir Henry
Vernon of Haddon in the Peke, of whom Henry Vernon of Stokesay now living is
descended. Alice the second daughter married Humfrey Vernon third son of the
said sir Henry, and brother to the said Thomas, of whom John Vernon of Hodnet
now living is descended.

John Gray lord Powys had issue John.

John Gray lord Powys had issue Edward.

Edward Gray lord Powys married Anne the daughter of Charles Brandon duke of
Suffolk, and died without lawful issue.

The same year Cadwalhon ap Madoc ap Ednerth was taken by his brother Eneon
Clyd, and delivered to Owen prince of Northwales, who sent him to the kings
officers to be imprisoned at Winchester, from whence he escaped shortly after,
and came to his country. Henry king of England remained in Normandy all this
year, Matt. Paris. page 130.
whose son named also Henry married Margaret the daughter of Lewys king of
France. The year next following died Meyric bishop of Bangor. Then king Henry
and the French King fell at variance; Matt. West. page 46.
whereupon shortly after, King Henry went to Gascoyne to chastise certain
rebels there. But in the year 1162. 1162
there was a peace concluded between the kings of England and France. Matt.
Paris. page 131.
At that time Howel the son of Ieuaf ap Cadogan ap Athlestan Glodrydh, got the
castle of Walwern in Cyuelioc, and rased it: which thing when it was told Owen
Prince of Northwales, it displeased him wonderfully, at the which he was so
grieved, that nothing could make him merry, until such time as he had
gathered his power, and came to Lhanthinam in Arustly, and thence fet great
spoils. Then the people of the country came all to their Lord Howel ap Ieuaf,
who followed the spoil to Seauerne side, where the Princes camp was: whereof
the Prince seeing such an occasion of revenge offered him, was right glad, and
set upon his enemies, and slew the most part of them, and the rest with their
Lord escaped to the woods and rocks. Then the Prince being ioifull of this
revenge, built up his castle again, and fortified it strongly. The year
following, Owen the son of Gruffyth ap Meredyth, named Owen Cyuelioc, Castelh
Caerec Houa.
and Owen ap Madoc ap Meredyth got the castle of Carrechoua by Oswestrie, and
wasted it.

About the same time, 1163
there was a combat fought between Robert Mountfort, Matthew. West. page. 46.
and Henry de Essex, to try which of them had begun the flight in the voyage
against the Welshmen in the marches. Either of them accused the other, but in
the trial Henry was overcome, and afterward disinherited, and shaven a moonke
at Redding. Then the king gathered a great power against Southwales, and came
himself as far as Pencadayr beside Brechnock, where Rees came to him and did
him homage, Matt. West. page. 47. Matt. Paris. page. 134.
and gave him pledges, and then the king went to Ireland again. About this
time Eneon the son of Anarawd ap Gruffyth nephue to prince Rees was murdered
in his bed by a man of his own named Lhywarch. Also Cadogan ap Meredyth was
slain after the like manner by one Walter ap Riccart. Then the lord Rees (as he
is called in Welsh, or king Rees as the Latin authors name him) took the
Cantref Mawr (which is a great country) and the land of Dynevowr, and enioied
it. And this year died Cadiuor ap Daniel Archdeacon of Caerdigan; and Henry
ap Arthen, which was the worthiest clerk that had been many years in Wales.
The year ensuing, the lord Rees seeing he was not able to maintain his estate
with such lands as the king had appointed him, entered the lands of Roger de
Clare Earl of Gloucester, (for by the Earls means was his nephue murdered)
and wanne the castles of Aberheidol and of the sons of Wynyaon and rased
them. And so in short time he brought all Caerdigan to his subjection, from
thence he made many roades against the Flemings, and got great spoils in
their country. Then all Wales agreed to forsake the rule of the Normanes
(whose treason and cruelty they could not abide) and to serve princes of their
own nation. This year Hamelyn base brother to king Henry married the
Countess of Warren, which was wife to William Earl of Egle, base son to
king Stephen, and daughter and heir to William Earl Warren. Also this year
died Walter Gifford Earl of Buckingham without heir, and therefore the
Earldom fell to the kings hands.

In the year 1165. 1165
David the son of Owen prince of Northwales did destroy all Flynt shire,
which was the kings, and carried all the people and cattle with him to the
Dyffryn Cloyd now called Ruthyn land. Which thing when the king understood, he
levied an army in have, and came to succor his castles and people as far as
Ruthlan, and after he had lain there three days, and could do no good, he
returned to England, where he gathered another army of chosen men, through all
his dominions, as England, Normandy, Aniow, Gascoine, and Gwyen; sending for
succors from Flanders and Brytaine, and then returned toward Northwales,
minding utterly to destroy all that had life in the land, and coming to
Croes Oswalt called Oswaldstree, encamped there. On the contrary side, prince
Owen and his brother Cadwalader with all the power of Northwales, and the lord
Rees with the power of Southwales: and Owen Cynelioc, and the sons of Madoc
ap Meredyth with the power of Powys: and the two sons of Madoc ap Ednerth,
with the people betwixt Wye and Seauerne, gathered themselves together, and
came to Corwen in Edeyrneon, purposing to defend their country. But the king
understanding that they were so nigh, being wonderful desirous of battle, came
to the river Ceireoc, and caused the woods to be hewn down. Whereupon a
number of the Welshman understanding the passage, unknowing to their captains
met with the kings ward, where were placed the piked men of all the army, and
there began a hot skirmish, where diverse worthy men were slain on either
side, but in the end the king wanne the passage, and came to the mountain of
Berwyn, where he lay in camp certain days, and so both the armies stood in
awe each of other: for the king kept the open plains, and was afraid to be
intrapped in straits; but the Welshman watched for the advantage of the place,
and kept the king so straightly, that neither forage nor victual might come to
his camp, neither durst any soldiour stir abroad. And to augment these
miseries, there fell such rain, that the kings men could scant stand upon
their feet upon those slipperie hills. In the end the king was compelled to
return home without his purpose, and that with great loss of men and
munition, besides his charges. Roger Houeden.
Therefore in a great choler he caused the pledges eyes (whom he had received
long before that) to be put out: which were Rees and Cadwalhon the sons of
Owen, and Cynwric and Meredyth the sons of Rees and other.

Ger. Dor. Rad. Cogeshall. Hol. page 408.
I find also written by diverse, that in the assieging of a bridge the king was
in no small danger of his life: for one of the Weshmen, shooting directly at
him, had persed him through the body, if Hubert de S. Clear constable of
Colchester (perceiving the arrow coming) had not thrust him self betwixt the
King and the same arrow, whereby he saved his master and died himself for him
presently. Although Polydor (writing the history out of the same authors) do
conceal the same.

Then after long consultation, the king came the third time toward Northwales,
intending to have his army conveyed by sea, and to land in some convenient
place of the country, and so he came to Chester, and there lay a certain
time, till all his navy was gathered together, as well hired ships of Ireland
as his own, and upon the sudden he brake up his camp, and gave both ships and
men leave to depart. The same year Rees prince of Southwales laid siege to the
castle of Aberteiui, and wan it, and made it flat with the ground, and
likewise wan Cilgerran and rased it. At which time he took prisoner Robert the
son of Stephen (his coosen germane, son to Nest his aunt, who after the
death of Gerald had married Stephen constable) and so returned home with great
honor and rich spoil. About the same time died Lhewelyn son to prince Owen a
worthy gentleman and of great towardness. In the year ensuing the Flemings
and Normanes came to Westwales with a great power, against the castle of
Cilgerran (which Rees had fortified) and laid siege to it, assaulting it
diverse times: but it was so manfully defended, that they returned home as
they came, and shortly after they came before it again, where they lost many
of their best men, and then departed again. The same year Owen prince of
Northwales laid siege to the castle of Basygwerke, which the king had
fortified, and in short time wan the same and rased it. Girald, Came.
About the same time Dermot the son of Murchart was chased out of his dominion
in Ireland, and went to Normandy to king Henry for succor. Also Iorwerth
Goch was spoiled of his lands in Powys, by Owen Cyuelioc the son of Gruffyth ap
Meredyth lord of Powys, and by Owen Vachan second son to Madoc ap Meredyth:
which lands they divided betwixt them, so that Owen Cyuelioc had Mochnant above
Rayader, and Owen Vachan Mochnant beneath Rayader. This year there was an
earthquake in Northfolke and Suffolk. At this time king Henry married Geffrey
his son to Constance the only daughter and heir of Conan Earl of Richmond
and duke of Brytaine.

1167
In the year 1167. Owen prince of Nothwales, Cadwalader his brother, and Rees
prince of Southwales brought an army to Powys against Owen Cyuelioc, and wan
all his lands, and chased him out of the country, and gave Caereneon to Owen
Vachan the son of Madoc ap Meredyth, to hold of prince Owen; and the lord
Rees had Walwern, because it stood within his country. But within a while
after, Owen Cyuelioc returned with a number of Normanes and Englishmen to
recover his country again, and laid siege to the castle of Caereneon, and
winning the same, burned it to the ground. Also the same year, the aforesaid
princes Owen, Rees and Cadwalader, laid siege to the castle of Ruthlan, which
the king had lately built and fortified, which the garrison defended manfully
and worthily; yet the princes would not depart until they had won it, which
they did at two months end, and then rased it. Afterward they gat the castle
of Prestaryn and destroyed it, and then brought all Tegengl to Owens
subjection, and returned home with much honor. In the year following Conan the
son of prince Owen slew Vrgeney Abbot of Lhwythlawr, and Lhawthen his nephue.
At this time Henry duke of Saxony married Mawd king Henry's daughter. Then
also the nobles of Poitiew rebelled against king Henry, upon hope of the
French kings aid, and slew William Fitzpatrike Earl of Salisburie: then the
king created William his son Earl in his steed. Also the Brytaines of
Armorica rebelled against king Henry; wherefore he destroyed a great part of
the country. The next year Henry the kings eldest son did homage to the
French king for the Earldom of Aniow, and the stewardship of France, which
belonged thereto: and Geffrey did his brother homage for the dukedom of
Brytaine. Then the king made a great ditch or trench betwixt France and
Normandy, to defend the country from sudden incursions and thieves. And this
year Robert the son of Stephen constable was released out of his coosins the
lord Rees his prison, Giral. Camb. Expug. Hib.
and was sent to Ireland with a great power to succor Dermot son to Murchart,
who landed at Lochgarmon and wan it, and so went forward.

Girald. Came. Vat Hist. Hol. in his history of Ireland.
This Robert Fitzstephen, Moris Fitzgerald his brother, and their nephues Robert
Meyler, and Raymond, with an army of Welshmen under the conduct of Richard
Strangbow Earl of Strigule, were the chief captains and dooers in the
conquest of Ireland, when it was first reduced under the subjection of the
crown of England: of whom the Fitzgeralds, Fitzstephens and Fitzmoris are
descended, of whom Giraldus writes at large in his history of Ireland.

In the year 1169. Meyric ap Adam of Buelht was murdered in his bed, 1169
by Meredyth Bengoch his coosen germane. It is like that the bones were laid a
good way a sunder in the measuring.
Also this year there were found the bones of a giant cast up by the sea, of
such length, that his body seemed to contain fifty foot in height. At this
time the king caused his son Henry to be crowned king of England by the
Archbishop of York. Also this year Owen Gwyneth the son of Gruffyth ap Conan
prince of Northwales passed out of this world, after he had governed his
country well and worthily 32. years. This prince was fortunate and
victorious in all his affairs, he never took any enterprise in hand but he
achieved it. He left behind him many children gotten by diverse women, which
were not esteemed by their mothers and birth, but by their prowes and
valiantness. First he had by Gladus the daughter of Lhywarch ap Trahaern ap
Caradoc, Iorweth drwyndwn (that is, Edward with the broken nose,) Conan,
Maelgon and Gwenlhian: by Christian the daughter of Grono ap Owen ap Edwyn, he
had David, Roderike, Cadwalhon Abbot of Bardsey, and Angharat wife to Gruffyth
Maylor: he had besides these Conan, Lhewelyn, Meredyth, Edwal, Run, Howel,
Cadelh, Madoc, Eneon, Cynwric, Philip and Riryd lord of Clochran in Ireland, by
diverse women, of whom Run, Lhewelyn, and Cynwric died before their father: of
the rest you shall hear hereafter.

David ap Owen.
David the son of Owen Gwyneth.
AFTER the death of Owen, his sons fell at debate who should inherit after
him, for the eldest son borne in matrimony, Edward or Iorwerth Drwyndwn, was
counted unmeet to govern, because of the maime upon his face. And Howel who
took upon him all the rule was a base son, begotten upon an Irishwoman.
Therefore David gathered all the power he could, and came against Howel, and
fighting with him slew him, and afterward enioied quietly the whole land of
Northwales, until his brother Iorwerths son came to age, as shall hereafter
appear. Madoc ap Owen Gwyneth.
Madoc another of Owen Gwyneth his sons left the land in contention betwixt
his brethren, and prepared certain ships with men and munition, and sought
adventures by seas, sailing West, and leaving the coast of Ireland so far
north, that he came to a land unknown, where he saw many strange things. This
land must needs be some part of that country of which the Spaniardes affirm
themselves to be the first finders since Hannos time; H. Lhoyd.
for by reason and order of Cosmographie, this land, to the which Madoc came,
must needs be some part of Noua Hispania or Florida. Whereupon it is manifest,
that that country was long before by Brytaines discovered, before either
Columbus or Americus Vesputius lead any Spaniardes thither. Of the viage and
return of this Madoc there be many fables fained, as the common people do
use in distance of place and length of time rather to augment than to diminish:
but sure it is, that there he was. And after he had returned home and declared
the pleasant and fruitful countries that he had seen without inhabitants; and
upon the contrary part, for what barren and wild ground his brethren and
nephues did murder one another: he prepared a number of ships, and got with
him such men and women as were desirous to live in quietness, and taking leave
of his friends took his journey thitherward again. Therefore it is to be
presupposed, that he and his people inhabited part of those countries, for it
appears by Francis Loves, that in Acusanus and other places, the people
honored the cross: whereby it may be gathered that Christians had been there,
before the coming of the Spaniards. But because this people were not many,
they followed the manners of the land, they came unto, and used the language they
found there.

This Madoc arriving in that Western country, unto the which he came, in the
year 1170. left most of his people there: and returning back for more of his
own nation, acquaintance and friends, to inhabit that fair and large
country, went thither again with ten sails, as I find noted by Gutyn Owen.
Gutyn Owen.
I am of opinion that the land, whereunto he came, was some part of Mexico: the
causes which make me to think so be these.

1 The common report of the inhabitants of that country, which affirm, that
their rulers descended from a strange nation, that came thither from a far
country: which thing is confessed by Mutezuma king of that country, in his
oration made for quieting of his people, at his submission to the king of
Castile, Hernando Curteis being then present, which is laid down in the
Spanish Chronicles of the conquest of the West Indies.

2 The Brytish words and names of places, used in that country even to this
day, do argue the same: as when they talk together, Da. Ingram.
they use this word Gwrando, which is, Hearken or listen. Also they have a
certain bird with a white head, Sir Hu. Gilb. discovery.
which they call Pengwin, that is, white head. But the Island of Corroeso, the
cape of Bryton, the river of Gwyndor, and the white rock of Pengwyn, which be
all Brytish or Welsh words, do manifestly show that it was that country
which Madoc and his people inhabited.

The same time Elianor the kings daughter was married to Alfonsus king of
Castil. Also Richard Strangbowe Earl of Strigul went to Ireland without the
kings leave, and married the daughter of Dermot king of Dublyn: wherefore the
king seized all his lands in England to his own hands, and Dermot died
shortly after, and was buried at Ferna. About the end of this year, Thomas
Becket Archbishop of Canturburie was slain. The year ensuing, Rees prince of
Southwales came with great power to Powys, and subdued Owen Cyuelioc the Lord
thereof, and took pledges of him, and so returned home with much honor. Then
the king called his nobles to consult about the enterprise of Ireland, which
had been before determined to be taken in hand. Girald. Came. in Hist. Hibera.
To this consultation came messengers from Richard Strangbowe Earl of Strigule
Marshall of England: to deliver to the kings hands the city of Dublyne and the
town of Waterford, with such other towns as he had by the right of his wife:
whereupon the king restored to him again his lands in England and Normandy,
and made him steward of Ireland, and so it was concluded for the kings going to
Ireland. When the king was in his journey toward Ireland, the Lord Rees came
to the king, who received him to his peace, and confirmed unto him all that he
had. Then Rees promised the king toward his conquest of Ireland 300. horses
and 400. Oxen, and gave him 14. pledges. Then the king came to Southwales, and
entering Caerlheon upon Vske took the town from the Lord thereof Iorwerth ap
Owen ap Caradoc, keeping the same to his own use. Wherefore Iorwerth departed
from the king, and calling to him his two sons Owen and Howel, whom he had
begotten by Angharat the daughter of Vchtryd bishop of Landaff, and his sister
son Morgan ap Sitsylt ap Dyfnwal, gathered a number of men, and upon the
kings departure entered the country, spoiling and burning as they went, and
took the town of Caerlheon, and destroyed it, save the castle which they
could not get. But the king kept on his iornie to Penbrooke, and there he gave
Rees all Caerdigan, Stratywy, Arustly and Eluel. Then Rees being at Aberteiui,
which he had won from the Earl of Gloucester and fortified of late, came from
thence to Penbrooke in the calends of October, and spoke with the king, and
returned again the day after, and then chose out of the horses, which he
caused to be brought thither for the king 86. and made them to be brought to
Penbrooke, and presented them to the king, who chose out of the same 36. of the
best, and sent the rest back again with great thanks. The same day the king
went to Saint David, and offering there, dined with the bishop David, the son
of Gerald, coosen german to Rees; whither Richard Strangbowe Earl of
Strigule came from Ireland to speak with the king, and after dinner the king
returned to Penbrooke. Within a while after, the king being at the white house,
rendered to Rees Howel his son, who had been long for pledge with him: and
then also he gave him day for the other pledges, and for his tribute till his
return from Ireland. Girald. Came. Vat. History. Matt. Paris. page 168.
The next day, being the morrow after the feast of S. Luke the Evangelist,
the king took shipping there, and had fair passage to Ireland, and so landed
at Dublyne, where he lay quietly that winter. The Christmasse following,
Henry the young king kept a solemn feast, where William S. John procurator of
Normandy, and William Fitzhamon Seneshall of Brytaine, and 110. besides, were
made knights. In the year 1172. there fell a great plague among the kings
soldiers in Ireland, 1172
by reason of the change of the air and victuals, and therefore the king
returned and landed in Wales in the passion week, and remained in Penbrooke on
Easter day, and the day following, and on tuesdaie took his journey toward
England. Then the lord Rees met with him at Talacharn, to do his duty. The
king as he passed from Cardyf by the new castle upon Vske, sent for Iorwerth
ap Owen ap Caradoc to come and speak with him, under safe conduct to him his
sons and friends, meaning to conclude peace with him, and so to quiet all
Wales. Whereupon Iorwerth took his journey toward the king, and sent word to
Owen his son being a lusty young gentleman, to meet with him by the way;
but as he came at his fathers commandment, the Earl of Brystowes men (hearing
of it) came forth of the new castle upon Vske, and laid wait for him by the
way (being under the kings safe conduct, and trusting to his promise) and
suddenly set upon him, and murdered him traitorouslie and cowardly, being
unarmed and having but a few in his company. Which thing when his father heard
by some of his men that had escaped, he was very sorry, and returned home with
all his friends, and his son Howel, and would never afterward trust neither
the kings promise nor any Englishmans: but forthwith gathered all the power
and friends that he could make, and without mercy destroyed all the country
with fire and sword to the gates of Hereford and Gloucester, to avenge the death
of his son. Then the king made the lord Rees chief Justice of all Southwales
by commission, and took his journey to Normandy. In the same year died
Cadwalader ap Gruffyth ap Conan prince of Northwales; who had by his wife Alice
the daughter of Richard Clare Earl of Gloucester, Cunetha, Radulph, and
Richard, and by other women he had Caduan, Cadwalader, Eneon, Meredyth goch and
Cadwalhon. Toward the end of this year Sitsylt ap Dyfnwal and Ieuan ap
Sitsylt ap Riryd got the castle of Abergevenny upon the sudden, and took the
kings garrison prisoners: and the year ensuing was the fairest winter that
ever was seen. At this time there fell a variance betwixt the two kings of
England, Matt. Paris. page 169.
the father and the son, and there cleaued to the son the Queen his
mother, and both his brethren Geffrey and Richard, and the Earl of Chester,
and William Patrick, with the three sons of the Earl of Mellent. Camerarius
de Tancquervilla, Valeran de Hibera, Gilbert de Regularijs, Simon de Montfort,
This Ralph was uncle to the Queen.
Radulph de la Haie, Hugh de S. Maura, and the French king, with the Earl of
Flanders gave the young king aid, who took Hugh Lacie, and Hugh Beauchamp in
the castle of Vernoyle, Matt. Paris. page 169.
yet the elder king was not discouraged, who had Almanes and Brabanters to his
soldiers. Hol. page 437
Also Rees prince of Southwales sent to him Howel his son with a goodly
company of men to serve him, and the king was very glad and sent the lord
Rees great thanks. King Henry overthrew his enemies diverse times, and took
Radulph de Fulgerijs and the Earl of Chester prisoners, but William Patricke
and Haftulph de Hilario escaped. Also the Earl of Leycester and Hugh de nouo
Castello (as they began a stir in England) were taken at Bury by the elder
kings soldiers* and committed to prison. In this mean time Iorwerth ap Owen
brought his power against Caerlheon, and they of the town fought with him,
whom he overthrew, and took many prisoners of them, and wan the town, and
laid siege to the castle, which was yielded him forthwith in exchange for his
prisoners. Then also his son Howel brought all Gwentis Coet (the castle
only excepted) to his subjection, and took pledges of the inhabitants of the
country. Also at this time David ap Owen Gwyneth prince of Northwales made
war against his brother Maelgon, which kept the I Will of Mon or Anglesey, and
brought his people over Menai, (for so that arm of the sea is called which
separateth that I Will from the maine land) and chasing his brother out of the I Will
to Ireland, brought all the I Will to his subjection. Also he expelled all his
brethren and coosens out of Northwales, and took all their lands to himself,
and taking his brother Maelgon as he came from Ireland, kept him in close
prison: then Conan his brother died.

1175
In the year 1175. Howel the son of Iorwerth ap Owen of Caerlheon took his
uncle Owen Pencarn prisoner, and putting out his eyes gelded him, least he
should beget children which should inherit Caerlheon and Gwent. But God
provided a punishment for him, for upon the saturdaie following there came a
great army of Normanes and Englishmen before the town, and wan it, with the
castle; manger Howel and his father, who was not privy to his sons lewd
deed. Matt. Paris. page 174.
Also this year the elder king came to England: then William king of Scots,
and Roger de Mobbray were taken prisoners at Alnewike by the Barons of the
North, Fabian, par. 7. cap. 238.
as they came to destroy England in the quarrel of the young king: therefore
the elder king put them in safe keeping with the Earl of Leycester, receiving
Hugh Bygod Earl of Northfolke to his peace, and so returned to Normandy with a
great army of Welshmen, H^l. page 437.
which were sent him from David prince of Northwales, to whom the king gave
his sister Emme in marriage: then the king sent the Welshmen over the river of
Seen, to cut away the victual which came to his enemies camp: wherefore the
French king came to a parlee, and shortly they concluded a peace, so that all
the brethren desired the father forgiveness. Also at this time David prince of
Northwales (being bold of the kings affinity) did imprison his own brother
Roderike in boltes, because he desired part of his fathers lands. In the year
following, both the kings came to England, and the Scottish king was set at
liberty, who became liegeman unto king Henry, and swear fealty to him with
all the lords of Scotland spiritual and temporal, and delivered the king the
towns of Rocksburgh and Berwicke, and the castle of Maidens. Hol. page 440.
Shortly after died Reginald Earl of Cornwall base son to king Henry the
first, The Herolds books say that he died without issue.
and the king seized his lands in England, Wales and Normandy to himself, for
John his yoongest son, save a small portion which he left to his daughter.
Also about the same time died Ralph Earl of Kyme, and Philip his son was
created in his steed. Shortly after there died also William Earl of Arundell
at Wauerley, and was buried at Wyndham, whereof he was patron. This year also
Rees prince of Southwales came to the kings court at Gloucester, and brought
with him such lords of Southwales as had offended the king, to do him homage,
which pleased the king wo^derfullie, whose names were these; Cadwalhon ap Madoc
of Melyenyth, Reeses coosen germane, Eneon Clyt of Eluel, Eneon ap Rees of
Werthrynion, which two had married two of his daughters, G^rul. Camb.
Morgan ap Caradoc ap Iestyn of Glamorgan, Gruffyth ap Iuor ap Meyric of
Senghennyth, Sitsylt ap Dyfnwal of higher Gwent, which three had married his
sisters: and Iorwerth ap Owen of Caerlheon, whom the king received all to his
peace, and restored to Iorwerth ap Owen Caerlheon again: and so they returned
home with great joy. 1176
But shortly after William de Bruise lord of Brechnock desired Sitsylt ap
Dyfnwal, Hol. page 439.
Geffrey his son, and a great number of the worshipfullest men of Gwent land
to a feast at the castle of Abergeuenny (which he had received of them by
composition) and they mistrusting no harm came thither; but he like a traitor
and murderer had a great number of armed men within the castle, which fell
upon this lord and the rest, and without mercy slew them all, and forthwith
went to Sitsylts house (being not far thence) and took his wife, and slew
Cadwalader his son before his mothers face, and destroyed the house, and this
was a lamentable day to all the land of Gwent, and a lesson for all men to
take heed of their enemies.

Matt. Paris. page 176.
This William lord Bruise having the Welshmen within his castle of Abergeuenny,
to seek a quarrel propounded unto them certain articles, to be by them kept
and performed: and among other things, that none of them should at any time
carry about them in their iournies, either bow or sword: for the observing of
the which he would have had them to be sworn, which they refused to do:
whereupon he falling out with them, called his men which were ready for that
purpose and caused them all thus to be murdered: and when that deed was done
(to cloak his treason with some reasonable excuse) he caused it to be reported
abroad, that this he did in revenge of the death of his uncle Henry de
Hereford, whom they on Easter even before had slain.

In Northwales Roderike brake his brothers prison, and escaping came to
Anglesey, where all the country received him for their lord, because they
abhorred the ingratitude of the prince, who unnaturally disinherited all his
brethren and coosens, upon boldness of his brother in law the king. This
Roderike also was received as lord and prince in all the country above the
river of Conwey. Then prince David fled over Conwey, and there remained for a
time. This year died Cadelh the son of Gruffyth ap Rees and brother to the lord
Rees, after long sickness, and was buried honorably at Stratflur. The next
year died David Fitzgerald bishop of Meneuia, and Piers was installed bishop
in his place. This year the lord Rees prince of Southwales made a great feast
at Christmas in the castle of Aberteiui, A feast.
which feast he caused to be proclaimed through all Brytaine long before, and
thither came many strangers, which were honorably received and worthily
entertained, so that no man departed discontented. And among deeds of arms and
other shows, Rees caused all the poets of Wales, (which are makers of songs
and recorders of gentlemen's petegrees and arms, of whom every one is
entitled by the name of Bardh, in Latin Bardus) to come thither, and provided
chaires for them to be set in his hall, where they should dispute together, to
try their cunning and gift in their faculties, where great rewards and rich
gifts were appointed for the ouercomers; amongst whom they of Northwales wan
the price, and among the Musicians Reeses own household men were counted best.
Shortly after, Eneon Clyt and Morgan ap Meredyth were both slain by treason
of the Normanes which inhabited the marshes.

At this time the lord Rees did build the castle of Rayder Gwy, Casts Rayder
Gwy.
that is to say, The fall of Wye: for the river Wye falls there over a great
and a high rock. At that time the sons of Conan ap Owen Gwyneth made war
against him. 1179
Then also Cadwalhon, Matt. Paris. page. 186. Hol. page 453.
brother unto Owen Gwyneth, and uncle to David and Roderike, who had fled to
the king for succor, as he was conveyed home by the kings men, to enjoy his
patrimony, was cruelly murdered by the way, and found those whom he hoped
to be his help and friends, to be in deed traitors and butchers. And about
this time, Ione the daughter of king Henry the elder was married to William
king of Sicile. Matt. Paris, page. 222. Matt. West. page. 66. Io. Cast. Ran.
Cest. lib. 7. cap. 27.
This year the bones of noble king Arthur and Gwenhouar his wife were found in
the I Will of Aualon, (that is to say, the I Will of Aples) without the Abbie of
Glastenburie, fifteen foot within the earth, in a holow elder tree, and over
the bones was a stone and a cross of lead, All the writers here alleged, do
affirm this to have been about ten years after this time.
with a writing turned toward the stone, wherein were engraven these words.
Hic iacet sepultus inclytus rex Artburus in insula Aualonia. The bones were of
marvelous bigness, and in the scull were ten wounds, of which one was great, and
seemed to be his deaths wound: the Queens hair was to the sight fair and
yellowe, but as soon as it was touched it fell to ashes. This grave was found
by means of a Bardh or Poet, whom the king heard at Penbrooke declare in a
song the worthy acts of that noble prince, and the place of his burial. H.
Lhoyd.
Therefore let William Paruus and Polydore Virgil, with their accomplices, stop
their lieng mouths, and desist to obscure and darken the glistering fame and
noble renown of so invincible and victorious a prince, with the envious
detraction and malicious slander of their reproachful and venomous toongs,
thinking that they may cover with the cloud of oblivion, and bury in the pit
of darkness those noble acts and princely deeds by their wilful ignorance
and dogged envy, whereof the trumpet of fame has sounded, not only in
Brytaine, but also through out all Europe. But remitting the discovering and
blazing of their cankered minds toward the honor and fame of the Brytaines,
to such as can better paint them in their colors, I will return to my matter.
King Henry the elder forsook his wife for certain considerations, and kept
her in prison many years. Girald. Came. Hol. page 456
And about this time, Ranulph de Poer with a great number of Gentlemen, was
slain by certain young men of Gwent land, in revenge of their lords death.

Girald. Came.
This Ranulph de Poer, was Shirife of Glocestershire, or (as Giraldus notes) of
Herefordshire, whose death the same author seems to impute unto himself for
his cruel and unreasonable dealing against the Welshmen. Hol. pa. 460.
But the king took the same very greeuouslie, who being sore incensed against
them, assembled a mighty army, and came with the same unto Worcester, meaning
to invade the enemies countries. But the Lord Rees ap Gruffyth, fearing the
kings puissance thus bent against him and his countrymen, came by safe conduct
unto Worcester, where submitting himself, he swear fealty to the king, and
became his liegeman, promising to bring his son and nephues unto him for
pledges. But when according to his promise he would have brought them, they
(remembering how the other pledges before were used) refused to go with him, and
so the matter rested for that time.

1183
And the year 1183. Henry duke of Saxony being banished his country, came to
king Henry his father in law to Normandy. Matt. Paris. page 189.
Also this year Henry the young king died, and was buried at Roane. 1184
The year ensuing, the duke of Saxony came into England, and his wife was
brought to bed of a son which was named William. About this time William de
Mandeuile Earl of Essex went to Flanders with an army to succor the Earl,
against the Earl of Henald or Henagow. Shortly after, Matt. Paris. page. 192.
Matt. West. page. 58. Hol. page 462.
John the kings yoongest son was dubbed knight, and took his journey to
Ireland. At which time Hugh de Lacie lord of Meth was slain by a sickman. Then
John returned home from Ireland at Christmas next following. Also Howel ap Ieuaf
lord of Arustly died, and was buried at Stratflur. And the year 1186. 1186
died Geffrey duke of Brytaine, the kings third son, Matt. Paris. page 192.
leaving behind him a daughter and his wife great with child of a son, which
afterward was named Arthur.

Matt. Paris. page, 192.
At this time Mawd the Empress died, which was daughter to king Henry the
first, wife to Henry the fourth Emperor of Almaine; then to Geffrey
Plantagenet Earl of Aniow, and mother to the most noble king Henry the
second: upon whose toombe this Epitaph was written.

Ortu magna, viro mayor, sed maxima partu,
Hic iacet Henricifilia, sponsa, parens.
Also this time Cadwalader son to the Lord Rees was slain privily in
Westwales, and buried in the Tuy Gwynn. The next year Owen Vachan the son of
Madoc ap Meredyth was slain in the castle of Carrecgona hard by Oswaldstree
in the night time, by Gwenwynwyn and Cadwalhon the sons of Owen Cyuelioc: and
shortly after Lhewelyn son to Cadwalhon ap Gruffyth ap Conan, who was
murdered by the Englishmen, was taken by his own brethren, and had his eyes
put out.

1187
About the year 1187. Baldwine Archbishop of Canturburie, having in his
company Giraldus Cambrensis Archdeacon of Brechnock, Ran. Cest. lib. 7. cap.
24.
visited Wales, being the first Archbishop of Canturburie that ever visited
that country: whom the Clergy of Wales began to resist, Giral. Camb. in
Itin. Came.
alleging the liberties and privileges of their Metropoliticall Church of S.
David's, but they prevailed not. In this visitation (which is described in
writing by the said Giraldus in his book which he calls (...) or Itinerarium
Cambriae) he procured and exhorted as many as ever he could to take the cross
and to vow the viage against the Saracens: whereunto he persuaded many of the
nobles of Wales, as appears by the said Giraldus.

Also this year Maelgon son to the lord Rees brought his power against
Tenbye, 1188
and by plain force wan the town, and spoiling the same burned it to ashes.
This lord was fair and comely of person, honest and just of conditions;
beloved of his friends, and feared of his foes, against whom (especially the
Flemings) he achieved diverse victories. In the year 1189. 1189
Henry the second surnamed Curtmantel king of all Brytaine, duke of Gascoine
Gwyen and Normandy, passed out of this transitory life, and was buried at
Fonteuerard, and after him Richard his son was crowned in his place, who
received homage of William king of Scots, Matt. Paris. page 208. Matt. West.
page. 63.
and delivered him again the castle of Maidens or Edinburgh, Roksburgh and
Berwicke, which king Henry had long kept. Also this year, the lord Rees
gathered all his strength, and wan the castles of Seynclere, Abercorran, and
Lhanstephan, and brought all the whole country to his subjection, taking
Maelgon his son, in whom remained all the hope of Southwales, whom he kept
in prison. In the year following, Rees did build the castle of Cydwely, and
Gwenlhian his daughter died, the fairest and goodliest woman in all Wales.
Matt. Paris. page, 208.
About this time king Richard made the bishop of Durham Earl of Northumberland
for a 1000. pound, and afterward he said in jest that he had made a young Earl
of an old bishop. Shortly after king Richard took his journey to the holy
land to make against the enemies of Christ's faith. Matt. Paris. page. 210.
Matt. West. page 65.
Then the bishop of Elie the kings Chanceler and Uicegerent made a great ditch
about the town of London. At this time Gruffyth Maylor lord of Bromfield a
noble man and a wise, and one that in liberality passed all the lords and
noble men of his time, died and was buried at Myuot; he had by his wife
Angharat the daughter of Owen Gwyneth prince of Northwales, a son called
Madoc, who succeeded his father in that part of Powys called Powys Vadoc. About
the same time diverse noble men of England died at Acon, Matt. Paris. page 217.
as Henry Earl of Leycester, the Earl Ferrers, Ranulph de Fulgerijs, Ranulph
de Alta ripa. In those days William Marshall, Geffrey Fitzpeter, Hugh Bardulf
and William Briwer, were the nobles that bare most rule in England in the
kings absence. Then also Rees prince of Southwales wan the castle of Dynevowr,
and Owen his son died at Strata florida or Stratflur. About this time king
Richard wan the kingdom of Cypres, and gave it to Gwido king of Jerusalem,
upon condition that he should release to Richard his claim of Jerusalem, which
he did. Then the king being at Cyprus married Berengaria the daughter of the
king of Nauarra. Shortly after Maelgon the son of the lord Rees escaped out
of prison, where his father had kept him a long time. But the lord Rees gat the
castle of Lhanhayaden and the country about. At that time Gruffyth ap Cadogan
died.

Then king Richard, after he had achieved (with his nobles, the Earl of
Leycester, Bartholomew Mortimer, Matt. Paris. page 231. Matt. West. page. 66.
Randulph de Malo leone, N. de Furnevale, Roger de Lacy, William de Stagno,
Hugh de Neuella, William de Porcell, and Henry Duch his standardbearer) many
worthy deeds of arms against the infidels, in his return homeward through
Austrich was taken prisoner by Lupold the duke thereof, Or sold him rather.
who presented him to Henry the Emperor, and he kept him until he had paid
him 200000. marks for his ransom, laieng to his charge that he had spoiled
the I Will of Sicilie in his viage toward the holy land. The same year Roderike
the son of Owen Gwyneth by the help of Gothrike king of Man, entered the I Will
of Mon, and brought it to his subjection: but before the end of the year the
sons of his brother Conan chased him out of the I Will, and got it themselves.
At this time Maelgon the son of Rees prince of Southwales laid siege to the
castle of Stratmeyric, and wanne it. Also Howel (surnamed Says, that is to
say, Saxon or English, because he had served in England) son to the said
prince Rees gat the castle of Gwys upon the sudden, and took Philip de Gwys,
his wife, and his two sons prisoners therein. Then because he had more
castles than he could well defend, he determined to raze the castle of
Lhanhayaden: but the Flemings having understanding thereof, gathered all their
strength, and came thither the day appointed to raze the castle, and set
fierslie upon the men of Howel and Maelgon, and slew many of them, putting
the rest to flight. Nevertheless, they gathered a great power shortly after,
and came thither again, and rased the castle to the ground, without any let
or stay. Upon this, Anarawd the son also of prince Rees (moved with filthy
ambition and covetousness of lands) took his two brethren Howel and Madoc
prisoners (under the color of freendship) and put out both their eyes.

1194
In the year 1194. king Richard came into England, and being at dinner in his
little hall of Westminster, Matt. Paris. page. 236. Matt. West. page. 69.
hearing that the French king besieged Vernoyle, he swear that he would never
turn his face till he had fought with him, if he did abide, and caused the
wall to be broken before him, and so passed to Normandy, and receiving his
brother John to mercy raised the siege: for the French king fled as soon as
he heard of king Richards coming. This year Maelgon son to prince Rees gave
his brother Anarawd the castle of Stratmeyric for his prisoners, whom he set
at liberty. Then Rees himself did reedifie again the castle of Rayader Gwy:
and his own sons laid wait for him, and took their father prisoner, fearing
least he would revenge their cruel and unnatural deeds: but by the means of
Howel his son which was blind, he escaped out of his son Maelgons prison,
and took the castle of Dineuwor which Maelgon kept, and destroyed it. Also
the sons of Cadwalhon ap Madoc of Melyenyth wan the castle of Rayder Gwy,
and fortified it for themselves.

At this time Lhewelyn the son of Iorwerth Drwyndwn, who was the eldest son
of Owen Gwyneth prince of Northwales, remembering his right and title to his
inheritance of Northwales (although his father had been disinherited by his
brother David) called together his friends by his mother (which was Marred the
daughter of Madoc ap Meredyth prince of Powys) and also drew to his side his
coosins the sons of Conan ap Owen Gwyneth, and so challenged the rule of
Northwales, and entered the country, to whom the people willingly yielded, and
took him for their lord: and so without bloodshed he received all Northwales
to his subjection, except three castles which his uncle David kept by force of
Englishmen, in whom was all his trust, because of his wife Emme aunt to the
king of England. And thus David lost his land, and Lhewelyn began to rule, in
the year of our Lord, 1194. 1194


Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth.
Lhewelyn the son of Iorwerth, the son of Owen Gwyneth, called Leolinus
Magnus.
AFter that Lhewelyn, the son of Iorwerth had gotten the rule of Northwales
to himself, as right inheritour thereof, Roger Mortimer came with a great
power to Melyenyth, Casts. Cymaron.
and built the castle of Cymaron, and so brought that country to his
subjection, and chased away the two sons of Cadwalhon ap Madoc Lords of the
country. About the same time Rees and Meredyth the sons of Prince Rees
(being two lusty gentlemen) gathered together a number of wild heads of the
country, and came to Dineuowr, and got the castle from their fathers
garrison, and afterward they went to Cantre Bachan, where the whole country
received them gently, and delivered the castle to their hands. Wherewith their
father was sore displeased, and laid privy wait for them, and by treason of
their own men (which were afraid any further to offend their lord and prince)
they were taken and brought to their father, who kept them in safe prison.

The year ensuing, Matt. Paris. page 237. Matthew. West. page. 69.
there was a combat appointed betwixt the French king with five knights with
him, and king Richard with five other, which should end all controversies: of
which fight king Richard was glad, but the French king like a snaile drew in
his horns and forsook the battle. And in Wales prince Rees gathered a great
army, and laid siege to the town and castle of Caermarthin, and in short
time wanne them both, spoiling and destroieng the same, and then returned with
great booty. Then he lead his said army to the marches before the castle of
Clun, which after a long siege, and many a fierce assault, he got and burned
it, and from thence he went to the castle of Radnor, and likewise wanne it; to
the defense whereof came Roger Mortimer and Hugh de Say, with a great army of
Normanes and Englishmen well armed and tried soldiers. Then Rees, which had
won the castle, determined not to keep his men within the walls, but
boldly like a worthy prince, came into the plain besides the town, and gave
them battle, where his men (although for the most part unarmed, and not
accustomed to the battle) declared that they came of Brytaines blood (whose
title the noble Roman Emperors did so much desire, as a token of manhood and
worthiness) choosing rather to die with honor in the defense of their country,
than to live with shame, did so worthily behave themselves, that their enemies
forsook the field, with great loss of their men, whom Rees pursued till the
benefit of the night shadowed them with her darkness, and forthwith he laid
siege to the castle of Pain in Eluel, and gat it. Thither came William de
Bruise the owner thereof, and made peace with Rees, of whom he received the same
castle again. Ger. ^or.
Not long after, the Archbishop of Canturburie (whom king Richard had
substituted his lieutenant in England) came with an huge power toward Wales,
and laid siege to the castle of Gwenwynwyn, Matt. Park. page, 138.
at the poole; but the garrison defended the hold so manfully, that he lost
many of his men, and could do no good. Therefore he sent for miners, and set
them on work to undermine the walls; which thing when the garrison understood,
and knowing that their enimes were three to one, they were content to yield up
the castle, upon condition that they might depart with their armor freely:
which offer the Archbishop took, suffering them to pass quietly, and
fortifieng the castle again strongly to the kings use, and placing therein a
garrison for the defense thereof, returned to England. But immediately
Wenwynwyn or Gwenwynwyn laid siege to it again, and shortly after received it
upon the same conditions that his men had given it up, and kept the same to his
own use.

The next year after there was a great and a terrible plague through all the
I Will of Brytaine and France, of the which died a great number of nobles, beside
the common people. And the same year the fourth day of May, Hol. page 534.
Rees the son of Gruffyth ap Rees ap Theodor prince of Southwales died, the
only anchor, hope and stay of all that part of Wales, as he that brought
them out of thraldom and bondage of strangers, and set them at liberty, and
had defended them diverse times in the field manfully, daunting the pride and
courage of their cruel enemies, whom he did either chase out of the land, or
compelled by force to live quietly at home. Marwnad.
Woe to that cruel destiny that spoiled the miserable land of her defense and
shield, who as he descended of noble and princely blood, so he passed all
other in commendable qualities and laudable virtues of the mind; he was the
ouerthrower of the mighty, and setter up of the weak, (...) poetica. Ran
Cest. lib. 7. cap. 31.
the ouerturner of the holds, the separator of troops, the scatterer of his
foes, among whom he appeared as a wild boar among whelps, or a lion that for
anger beats his tail to the ground.

In praise of this prince there is a long discourse in the Brytish book after
the manner of the Welsh poets, whose worthy commendation is laid down at
large by Ranulph Monk of Chester in the seventh book of his History
entitled Polychronicon the 31. chap. and Grafton in the life of Richard the
first, Ri. Grafton, in his chronicles of England.
page 92.

This prince had many sons and daughters, as Gruffyth who succeeded his
father, Cadwalhon, Maelgon, Meredyth and Rees; and of the daughters one called
Gwenlhian was married to Ednyuet Vachan, who was ancester to Owen Theodor or
Tuder that married Queen Catharine the widow of king Henry the fifth, and the
rest were married to other lords in the country. After the death of Rees,
Gruffyth his son subdued all the country to himself, and enioied it in
peace, until Maelgon his brother (whom his father had disinherited) made a
league with Gwenwynwyn the son of Owen Cyuelioc lord of Powys, who both
together levied a number of men, and came suddenly upon Gruffyth at
Aberystwyth, and slaieng a great number of his men took him prisoner, and so
recovered all the country of Caerdigan, with the castle. Thus Maelgon having
taken his brother sent him to be imprisoned with Gwenwynwyn, who in despite
delivered him to the Englishmen. Then Gwenwynwyn gathering a power, entered
Arustly, and subdued the same to himself.

Also about that time there was great war in Northwales, for David ap Owen of
late prince, came with a great army as well Englishmen as Welshmen, purposing
to recover the land again; but Lhewelyn his nephue, who was the right
inheritor of the same, and then in possession thereof, came boldly and met
him, and gave him battle, and putting his people to flight took him prisoner
and kept him in safety, and afterward enioied the country quietly. Toward
the end of this year, Owen Cyuelioc lord of the higher Powys died, and left
his land to Gwenwynwyn his son, after whom that part of Powys was called
Powys Wenwynwyn, for a difference from the other called Powys Vadoc, being the
possession of the lords of Bromefield. At this time also died Owen the son of
Gruffyth Maylor lord of Bromfield, and Brychtyr the son of Howel ap Ieuaf,
likewise Maelgon the son of Cadwalhon ap Madoc lord of Melienyth. About the
same time Trahaem Vachan (a man of great power in the country of Brechnock) as
he came to Lancors to speak with William Bruise lord thereof, was suddenly
taken, and (by the lords commandment) tied to a horse tail, and drawn
through the town of Aberhodny or Brechnock, to the galowes, and there
beheaded, and his body hanged up by the feet three days. This cruelty
showed upon no just cause, made his brother his wife and his children to flee
the land. The year ensuing Maelgon the son of prince Rees, after he had
imprisoned his elder brother, got his castles of Aberteiui and Stratmeyric:
also the youngest son of prince Rees wan the castle of Dyneuowr from the
Normanes.

The summer following Gwenwynwyn intending to extend the limits of Wales to
their old meers, 1198
gathered a great army, and laid siege first to the castle of Pain in Eluel,
which was of the possessions of William de Bruise: making a proclamation that
as soon as he had won the castle, he would burn all the whole country to
Seauerne without mercy, in revenge of the murder of Trahaern Vachan his
coosen. But because he lacked engines and miners, he lay three weeks at that
castle, and the murderers sent for succors to England: whereupon Geffrey
Fitzpeter lord chief Justice of England gathered a great power, Hol. page 537.
Matt. Paris. page 259.
and ioining with him all the lords Marchers came to raise the siege. And
because the fortune of the battle is variable and uncertain, he sent first to
Gwenwynwyn to have a treaty of peace concluded: but he and such as were with
him would in no wise condescend to peace, whose answer was that they would at
that journey revenge their old wrongs. Whereupon the English lords did first
enlarge. Gruffyth the son of prince Rees of Southwales, whom they knew to be
an enemy to Gwenwynwyn, which Gruffyth gathered a great power, and joined with
the English lords, and so they came toward the castle, against whom
Gwenwynwyn came very stoutly, and there began a cruel battle with much
slaughter on either part; but at the last the Englishmen gat the victory, and
Gwenwynwyn lost a great number of his men, among whom were Anarawd son to
Eneon, Owen ap Cadwalhon, Richard ap Iestyn, and Robert ap Howel; also Meredyth
ap Conan was then taken prisoner with many more. H. Lhoyd. Matt. Paris. page
259.
Matthew Paris says, that this battle was fought before Mawdes castle, and
that of the Welshmen there were slain 3700. and after this victory the
English lords returned home with much honor. And forthwith Gruffyth son to
prince Rees recovered by force and good will of the people all his land, saving
two castles Aberteiui and Stratmeyric, which his brother Maelgon by the aid of
Gwenwynwyn had wrongfullie taken from him. Then his brother Maelgon (fearing
his displeasure) took a solemn oath before noble and religious men, which were
about to make peace betwixt them; that if his brother Gruffyth would give him
pledges for the assurance of his own person, he would deliver him by a day the
castle of Aberteiui: whereupon Gruffyth did so. But as soon as Maelgon got the
pledges, he fortified the castle, and manned it to his own use, and sent the
pledges to Gwenwynwyn, who hated Gruffyth to the death, there to be kept in
prison. But shortly after, by Gods help they brake the prison and escaped
home.

In the year 1199. 1199
Maelgon son to prince Rees laid siege to the castle of Dynerth, and getting
it, slew all the garrison which his brother Gruffyth had left to defend it. But
at the same time Gruffyth wan the castle of Cilgerran, and fortified it. Matt.
Paris. page 261. Matt. West. page. 75.
This year, as king Richard did view the castle of Chaleus in the country of
Lenuoyle, he was stricken with a quarrel and sore wounded, whereof he died the
ninth of April, and left by his testament John his brother inheritor of all his
lands, having no respect to his brother Geffreys son Arthur duke of Brytaine,
who being the son of the elder brother was his right heir. Matt. West. page.
92.
Then this John, surnamed Without land, was crowned king of England with great
triumph: wherefore the French king forth with made war against him, to whom
Arthur duke of Brytaine cleaued, thinking thereby to obtain the crown of
England. Also the king of Scots by means of Hugh Bygod came to York, and
openly swear fidelity to the king of England.

The year after, Gruffyth son to Conan ap Owen Gwyneth a noble man died, and
was buried in a moonks cowle at the Abbey of Conwy, H. Lhoyd.
and so were all the nobles (for the most part) of that time buried: for they
were made to believe by the moonks and friars, that that strange weed was a
sure defense betwixt their souls and hell, how so ever they died. And all this
baggage and superstition received they with moonks and friars a few years
before that out of England. For the first Abbey or friar house that we read of
in Wales, since the destruction of the noble house of Bangor, which sauored not
of Romish dregs, was the Tuy Gwyn, built the year 1146. and after they
swarmed like bees through all the country: for then the Clergy had forgotten
the lesson that they had received of the noble Clerk Ambrosius Telesinus, who
writing in the year 540. when the right Christian faith (which Joseph of
Aremathia taught at the I Will of Aualon) reigned in this land, before the proud
and bloodthirstie moonke Augustine infected it with his Romish doctrine, in a
certain Ode has these verses: Taliefin. In those days the Brytaines refused
the doctrine of Augustine as erronius and corrupt.
Gwae'r offeiriad bid
Nys angreifftia gwyd
Ac ny phregetha:
Gwae ny cheidw ey gail
Ac of in vigail,
Ac nys areilia:
Gwae ny theidw ey dheuaid
Rhae bleidhie, Rhufeniaid
A'i ffon gnwppa.


Which may thus be Englished almost word for word.

Woe be to that priest yborne,
That will not cleanly weed his corn
And preach his charge among:
Woe be to that shepherd (I say)
That will not watch his fold alwaie,
As to his office does belong:
Woe be to him that does not keep
From Romish woolues his sheep
With staff and weapon strong.
And because no man should doubt of them, I have set them here as they were
written by him that made them. Whereby it may be proved, that the Brytaines the
first inhabiters of this realm did abhor the Romish doctrine taught in that
time, which doctrine (I am sure) is little amended now in the church of Rome:
and that may be to us a mirror to see our own folly, if we do degenerate
from our forefathers the ancient Brytaines in the sincerity of true religion,
as we do in other things.

This year Maelgon ap Rees, seeing he could not well keep Aberteiui, of very
spite to his brother and hatred to his country, sold it to the Englishmen for
a small sum of money, being the keie and lock of all Wales. The same year
Madoc the son of Gruffyth Maylor lord of Bromfild did build the abbie of
Lhanegwest, called in English commonly Vale crucis. This year also king John
made peace with the French king, and Arthur duke of Brytaine his nephue, Matt.
West. page 78.
and married Isabel daughter and heir unto the Earl of Angolisme, which was
before assured unto Hugh de Brune Uicount of Carce: wherefore the said Hugh
forsook king John, and became his enemy.

This Hugh Brune Earl of March and Turyn had this Isabel to wife after the
death of king John, by whom he had issue William de Valence, who in the right
of Ione his wife daughter and heir of Warren Montchensey, and of Ione the
eldest daughter and one of the heirs of William Earl Marshall and Penbrooke,
was Earl of Penbrooke, as in this history hereafter does appear.

The year 1201. 1201
Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth prince of Northwales, being a lusty young man, banished
out of the land his coosen Meredyth the son of Conan ap Owen Gwyneth
suspected of treason, and seized the Cantref of Lhyyn and Euyonyth to his own
hands, which were Conans land. Then shortly after, Meredyth the son of
prince Rees was slain at Carnwilhion by treason, whose elder brother Gruffyth
seized upon his castle in Lhanymdhyfri and all his lands. This Gruffyth was a
wise and discreet gentleman, and one that was like to bring all Southwales to
good order and obedience, who in all things followed his fathers steps, whom
as he succeeded in government, so he did in all martial prowes and nobility
of mind; but cruel fortune, which frowned upon that country, suffered him not
long to enjoy his land. 1202
This prince died upon S. James day ensuing, and was buried at Stratflur with
great solemnity; he left behind him a son called Rees as right inheritor of
Southwales, whose mother was Mawd the daughter of William de Bruise. Matt. West.
page 78.
Also this year died Arthur duke of Brytaine at Roane not without suspicion of
poison ministered by his uncles means, who caused his sister Elianor to be
conveyed to England, and to be kept in prison miserably in the castle of
Brystow as long as she lived. Then the French king got all Normandy, saving
Roane and two castles, by treason of the Normanes, who hated John to the death.
The next year after that, certain lords of Wales got the castle of
Gwerthrynion, which was Roger Mortimers, and made it plain with the ground.

Then Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth prince of Northwales calling to memory his estate
and title, and how all the other princes by the ordinance of Roderike the
Great, and after by the laws of Howel Dha, ought of right to acknowledge the
king or prince of Northwales as their liege lord, and hold their lands of him
and of none other; notwithstanding that, of late years by negligence of his
predecessors they had not used their accustomed duty: but some held of the
king of England, other ruled as supreme powers within their own countries.
Therefore he called a Parliament of all the lords in Wales, which for the most
part appeared before him, and swore to be his liegemen: but Gwenwynwyn lord of
Powys would not come thither, nor take the oath of allegiance. Which
disobedience the prince declared to all his lords, and they all thought that it
was meet that Gwenwynwyn should be constrained by force to do his duty, or
else to leese his lands. Yet one of his lords named Elise ap Madoc would not
agree to hurt Gwenwynwyn in any case, but departed away suddenly: then
Lhewelyn came with an army to Powys; but by the means of certain learned
men, Gwenwynwyn and the prince were made friends, and Gwenwynwyn became the
prince his liegeman, He had need to use a caution in this oath, for he was
sworn before to the king of England. H. Lhoyd.
and confirmed that both by oath and writing. Then Lhewelyn remembering how Elise
ap Madoc had served him, seized upon all his lands, and Elise fled the
country, but afterward yielded himself to the princes mercy, who gave him
the castle of Crogen, and seven towneships withal. And here I think it not
unmeet to declare the cause why the Englishmen use to call the Welshmen
Crogens, as a word of reproach and despite: but if they knew the beginning, they
should find it contrary. For in the viage that king Henry the second made
against the Welshmen to the mountains of Berwin, as he lay at Oswestree, a
number of his men that were sent to try the passages, as they would have
passed Offas ditch at the castle of Crogen, at which place there was and is at
this day a narrow way through the same ditch, for that ditch appears yet to
this day very deep through all that country and bears his old name. These
men, I say, as they would have passed this strait, were met withal, and a
great number of them slain, as appears by their graves there yet to be
seen, Adwy'r bedhev.
whereof the strait bears the name. Therefore the Englishmen afterward not
forgetting this slaughter, used to cast the Welshmen in the teeth in all their
troubles with the name of Crogen, as if they would signify unto them thereby,
that they should look for no favor but rather reuengment at their hands:
which word in process of time grew to be taken in another signification.

Now when Lhewelyn had set all these parties in good order, he returned to
Northwales, and by the way fortified the castle of Bala in Penlhyn. About the
same time Rees son to Gruffyth ap Rees (by right prince of Southwales) got
the castle of Lhanymdhyfri upon Michaelmas day. Matt. Paris. page. 279. Matt.
West. page 79.
This year king John lost all Normandy, with Aniow, Main and Poytiers; and
Hugh Gurnaie, Robert Fitzwater and Sayer de Quincie, who had a great part of
these countries under their rule, delivered all up to the French king at the
first summon; yet Roger Lacie kept his castles as long as he had any hope of
succors. Matt. Paris. page 276. Polydor virg. lib. 15.
About this time there was in England one called Simon de Thurnay, a great
divine and philosopher, who diverse times made his aduaunt, that he knew all
that was to be known, and suddenly he fell to such ignorance that he cold
nether read nor understand one letter in the book.

Ran. Cest. lib. 7. cap. 33. Fabian.
About this time Lhewelyn prince of Wales took to wife Ione the daughter of
king John, by Agatha the daughter of Robert Ferrers Earl of Derby, with whom
the said king gave him the lordship of Elsmere in the Marches of Wales.

The year next ensuing the foresaid Rees ap Gruffyth ap Rees got the castle
of Lhangadoc, 1204
and fortified it to his own use; but shortly after Maelgon his uncle with
his friend Gwenwynwyn came with a strong power before the castle of
Lhanymdhyfri and wan it, and from thence they removed to Lhangadoc, got the
same likewise, suffering the garrison to depart. From thence Maelgon went to
Dinerth, and finished the castle which he had begun there. About this time
David son to Owen Gwyneth, after that prince Lhewelyn (his nephue) had set
him at liberty, fled to England, and got an army to restore him to his
ancient estate in Northwales, but all in vain; for his nephue met him and
overthrew him in the way, then he returning to England, for very sorrow died
shortly after. The next year to this, Howel the son of prince Rees, being
blind, was slain at Cemaes by his brother Maelgons men, and buried by his
brother Gruffyth at Stratflur. Although this Maelgon in those days bare all
the rule in Southwales, yet his brother Gruffyths sons Rees and his brethren
wan from him the chief defense of all his country, to wit, the castles of
Dyneuowr and Lhanymdhyfri. Then William Marshall Earl of Penbrooke laid siege
to the castle of Cilgerran and wan it. Not long after, Maelgon ap Rees hired
an Irishman to kill Gadiuor ap Griffri, whose four sons Maelgon took and put
them to death. These were toward gentlemen, and came of a noble stock: for
their mother Susanna was daughter to the said Howel ap Rees by a daughter of
Madoc ap Meredyth prince of Powys. The year 1205. 1205
Maelgon did build a castle at Abereneon. At that time there came such
abundance of fish to Aberystwyth, as the like was never seen before. Within
the next three years after, the French king got many towns in Gwyen. In
those days there fell a great debate in England between the king and the
clergy about the election of the Archbishop of Canturburie: in so much that
the year 1208. 1208
the Pope denounced all England accursed, and no service was used in any
church within England. Hol. page 566. and 570.
This year the king did banish out of the land William de Bruise with his wife,
for displeasure that he bare to his son, and seized their lands to his own
hands, which William with his said wife and son fled to Ireland, and there
remained for a while. This man was of great power in the Marches of Wales, but
extreme cruel and unjust. The same year Gwenwynwyn came to Shrewesburie to
speak with the kings council, and was there detained prisoner, whereupon
prince Lhewelyn conquered all his country, with all the towns and castles
therein, and kept the same to his own use. Which when Maelgon ap Rees
understood, and that Lhewelyn would make his voyage to Southwales, he overthrew
his castles of Aberystwyth Stratmeyric, and Dynerth, which he before had
fortified, despairing to be able to withstand the prince: but the prince kept
on his journey to Aberystwyth, and built the castle again, and fortified it,
and seized to his own hands the Cantref of Penwedic, and the land betwixt Dyui
and Aeron, which he gave to Maelgons nephues the sons of Gruffyth ap Rees,
and so returned home with great joy. Within a little after Rees Vachan son to
prince Rees laid siege to the castle of Lhangadoc, and wan it, not regarding
his promise and league with the sons of his brother Gruffyth ap Rees,
forgetting how worthily they had served him in his necessity. Therefore
as soon as they heard of this, both Rees and Owen came before the said castle
and wan it by assault, and slew or took prisoners all the garrison, and then
burned the castle to the earth.

The year 1210. 1210
king John made a voyage to Ireland, Matt. Paris. page 307.
with an army of great power, and wanne the country of Conacht, and took
Cathol their prince prisoner.

Matt. Paris. page. 303.
In this voyage of King John toward Ireland, as he was in his journey in the
borders of Wales, there was one taken and brought before him, who had killed a
priest. The officer desired to understand the kings pleasure what he would have
done to him; Let him go, says the king, for he has slain mine enemy. The
churchmen of those days persecuted king John with book, bell and candell, and
therefore he little regarded the loss of some of them.

Also he spoiled Hugh de Lacie Lord of Meth of his castles and lands, and took
William de Bruise the yoonger, and Mawd de Saint Valerike his mother, and
brought them both to England with him, and caused them cruelly to be famished
in the castle of Wyndsor.

Matt. Paris. page 303.
The cause of the kings displeasure taken against this William de Bruise, Lord of
Brecknock, as Matthew Paris reports the same, was this. When the Pope had
excommunicated the realm of England. The king fearing a further inconvenience,
took pledges of such of his nobles as he suspected would make any stir
against him, and sending his messengers to the said William de Bruise, demanded
his sons for pledges. Then Mawd the wife of the said William, (more malipart
than manerlie, taking the word out of her husbands mouth) answered roundly,
that the king, who had shamefullie slain Arthur his nephue, whom he ought
rather to have kept and preserved, should have none of her children. These
words being by the messengers signified unto the king, put him in such a heat
against the said Lord, that he sent certain soldiers to take him; whereupon
he his wife and children were feign to fly into Ireland to save their lives;
Idem. pa. 308
where the said Mawd and her son were now taken: but the father escaped and
fled into France, where he died afterward, as the same author says.

This year the Earl of Chester reedified the castle of Dyganwy, which stood
upon the sea shore, East of the river Conwy, which prince Lhewelyn had before
destroyed. Also he fortified the castle of Treffynnon or S. Wenefride. Then
prince Lhewelyn entered the Earls land, and destroyed a great part thereof,
and returned home with a great spoil. Also Rees Vachan son to prince Rees
fearing prince Lhewelyn, who defended his nephues the sons of Gruffyth in
their right, went to the king for succors, which he received with good will,
and by their aid he laid siege to the castle of Lhanymdhyfry. Now when the
garrison saw no hope of succors, they desired that they might depart bag and
baggage, horses and all, and so they did. Likewise Gwenwynwyn, whom the king
held in prison, was set at liberty, and the king fearing the princes power,
sent an army with him, by whose means he received all his country again in
short space. Maelgon also, when he heard the same, came to the kings court, and
became the kings man, who returning home with a great number of Normanes and
Englishmen, joined to them all the power he could make in Wales; and contrary
to the oath that he had made to his nephues Rees and Owen, began to spoil their
country, and coming to Cantref Penwedic, encamped at Cilkennyn, and lay
there all night consulting upon his voyage. In the mean time his nephues
hearing this, having but a small power, not above 300. of chosen men, came and
lodged hard by, unknowing to their enemies. And when they understood by their
spies that all was in quiet in Maelgons camp, and how that his men mistrusting
nothing behaved themselves carelessly, these two lords prosecuted boldly the
enterprise which they had taken in hand, and peaceably entering the camp, did
come where they thought Maelgon lay, and or ever they were espied they gave
alarm, and slew a great number before they awoke: and the rest hearing the
noise, half amazed, by means of the darkness escaped away, thinking some
great power had been there. But Maelgons men defended them manfully, until
such time as their lord had gotten upon his feet, and escaped away by
benefit of the night. Then his nephue Conan ap Howel and his chief counselor
Gruffyth ap Cadogan were both taken, and Eneon ap Caradoc with a great number
more slain.

About this time Gilbert Earl of Gloucester fortified the castle of Buelht,
where a little before he had lost many of his men. This year also Mawd de
Bruise wife to Gruffyth ap Rees died, and was buried in a moonks coule in
Stratflur by her husband.

1211
The next year ensuing king John had many complaints made unto him by the
Marchers, Matt. Paris. page 307. Matt. West. page. 89.
upon prince Lhewelyn, how he entering their country burned and spoiled all as
he went, and slew their men. Wherefore the king gathered a great army through
all England, and called to him such lords and princes of Wales as held of him,
as Howel ap Gruffyth ap Conan ap Owen Gwyneth, whom Lhewelyn had banished:
Madoc ap Gruffyth Maylor lord of Bromfield, Chirke and Yale: Meredyth ap
Rotpert lord of Cydewen: Gwenwynwyn lord of Powys, Maelgon and Rees Vachan the
sons of prince Rees, rulers of Southwales. With this great army he entered
into Northwales by Chester, minding to destroy all that had life within that
country. Then the prince hearing of all this preparation against him, as well
of his own countriemen as others, commanded all such as inhabited the Inland
or Middle country (which is now part of Denbigh and Flynt shires) to remove
all their goods and cattels to Snowden hills for a time. And so the king came
along the sea coast to Ruthlan, and so passed over the river Clwyd, and came to
the castle of Teganwy, and there remained a while: but Lhewelyn cut off his
victuals behind him, so that he could have none from England, and there cold
not a man scatter from the skirmishes unfought withal: where the Northwales
men always, both for the advantage of the straits and knowledge of the places,
had the upper hand. At the last the English soldiers were glad to taste
horse flesh for pure need. Then, when the king saw no remedy, he returned
home in great rage, leaving the country full of dead bodies. 1212
In August next ensuing he returned again with a great army, Matt. Paris,
page. 309. Matthew. West. page. 91.
and the lords before named with him, and entered into Wales, at
Blanch-monasterie now Oswestree, whereof John the son of William Fitzalan was
lord. At this time the king passing the river of Conwey, encamped there by the
river side, and sent part of his army with guides of the country to burn
Bangor: who did so, taking Rotpert the bishop prisoner, who was afterward
ransomed for 200. hawks. Then the prince seeing all England and Wales against
him, and a great part of his land won from him, thought it best to entreat with
the king. And thereupon he sent Ione his wife the kings daughter to her father
to make a peace, who (being a discreet woman) found the means that upon
pledges given for safe conduct the prince came to the king, and made peace with
him, and did him homage. Then giving him pledges, he promised unto him toward
his charges 20000. heads of cattle and forty horses. Moreover he granted to
the king the Inland for ever: whereupon the king returned to England with great
triumph, after that he had brought all Wales under his subjection, saving Rees
and Owen the sons of Gruffyth ap Rees. Therefore at his departure he gave
strait commandment to Foulke Vicount of Caerdyff (called Warden of the
Marches, a cruel tyrant, but yet well loved of the king) to take an army with
him, that he ioining with Maelgon and Rees Vachan, might compel the aforesaid
sons of Gruffyth to obeie him.

Matt. (...). page 311. Matt. West. page. 99.
This Foulke or Falcasius de Breant, a Norman borne and a bastard, being a
cruel and a wicked man, was called by king John to his aid against the Barons,
who used himself cruelly toward them, for which cause she said king gave him
in marriage Margaret de Riparijs an inheritrice of great possessions.

This Foulke calling unto him Maelgon and Rees came to the Cantref of Penwedic:
then the young lords seeing no remedy, sent to him for peace and safeconduct to
pass to the court, which he granted them. When they came to the court, upon
their submission to the king, with the gift of all their lands betwixt Aeron
and Dyui, they were received of him very gently, and courteously entreated,
and after they had done him homage, they returned home again. Then Foulke
before his departure out of the country, fortified the castle of Aberystwyth,
and manned it to the kings behoof. But within a while Maelgon (as he was very
unconstant) and Rees Vachan repented them of the peace they had made with the
king, and thereupon laid siege to the castle of Aberystwyth, and getting the
same destroyed it. When their nephues Rees and Owen saw that their uncles had
broken the kings peace, they made a road unto Maelgons country, and slew a
great number of his men, and returned with a rich booty.

The next year prince Lhewelyn, being not able to abide the displeasures which
the garrisons that the king left in his nephues castles in Northwales did to
his people, called to him Gwenwynwyn from Powys, Maelgon ap Rees from
Southwales, Madoc ap Gruffyth Maylor from Bromfield, Meredyth ap Rotpert from
Cydewen, and opened to them this miserable case, how they which were wont to
have a prince of their own nation, now (by their own wilfulness) were
brought in subjection to a stranger, and declared also unto them, how that if
they would agree among themselves, they might defend their ancient estate
still; which thing they all promised to do, and swore fealty to prince
Lhewelyn, and forthwith gathered an army, and wan all the castles saving
Ruthlan and Dyganwy: then coming to Powys, Casts Mathraual.
they laid siege to the castle which Robert Vepont had made at Mathraual. But
when the king was informed of all this, he levied an army, and came thither to
raise the siege, and after caused the castle to be rased, and then returned
home, having greater matters in hand between him and his nobles. Then being at
Notingham, Matt. Paris. page. 309.
and hering how the prince of Wales destroyed all the Marches, he caused the
pledges which he had received the last year to be hanged, as Howel the son of
Cadwalhon, Madoc the son of Maelgon, Hol. page 573.
and others, to the number of 28. striplings. Also Robert Vepont did hang at
Shrewesburie, Rees the son of Maelgon not being yet seven years of age, and
so cruelly murdered the innocent, to revenge the offenses of others.

In the mean while that the king remained at Notingham, Hol. page 574. Matt.
Paris. page. 309.
he received letters from the princess of Northwales his daughter, declaring
that his nobles had conspired with the French king against him, and for proof
thereof she alleged, that Robert Fitzwater, Eustace de Vescy, and Stephan
Ridell were secretelie fled into France, and that the French king prepared an
army to come to England, under the color that the king was a rebel from the
church, for that he would not condescend to the bishop of Romes requests.

The year 1213. 1213
Innocentius Pope of Rome did release prince Lhewelyn, Gwenwynwyn, and Maelgon,
This is not Euangelium pacis. Ex fructibus eorum cognosceuseos.
of those oths that they had made to king John, and willed them under the
pains of cursing to annoie and trouble him all that they could, as the enemy
of the church. Whereupon forthwith Lhewelyn received all the Inland country,
which to this time was in the kings hands. But within a little after, the king
by the persuasion of Pandulph the legate, granted the Pope his request, and
obtained absolution at his hands, and releasement of the interdiction upon
performance of his promises. Matt. Paris. page. 318.
Then king John hearing how the French king was in Flanders, and had a great
navy at Dam, purposing to bring the Earldome into his subjection, Annal. Fland
Iac. Meyri. lib. 8. Hol. page 578.
sent William de Longaspata Earl of Salisburie, Reginald Earl of Boleyn, and
Hugh de Noua villa or Neuill thither with a great navy, who overthrew the
Frenchmen, and returned home with great spoil. Shortly after king John sailed
to Rochell, where the Earl of those marches, and Geffrey de Landanamo were
reconciled to him.

Hol. page 586.
The year following, king John made peace with the French king, for five years.
Then Rees son to Gruffyth ap Rees, which was heir to prince Rees, seeing he
could have no part of his fathers lands, but that his uncles did keep all from
him by force, made his complaint to the king. And the king pittieng his estate,
sent to Foulke Vicount of Caerdyff (warden of the marches) and to the steward
of Hereford, commanding them to take all Stratywy from Rees Vachan (whom other
call Rees Gryc) unless he would let his nephues enioie the castle of
Lhauymdhyfry, with the territory belonging thereto. And they sent to Rees to
know his mind, who answered them stoutly, that they should not have one foot
of land of him. Therefore Foulke gathered a great army, and met with young
Rees at Talhwynelgain, where he looked for him with a number of men, that he
had gotten in Brechnock, and thence they marched in three battelles toward
Dyneuowr, of which, young Rees lead the first, Foulke the second, and Owen
brother to Rees the third. Then Rees Vachan came boldly and gave them battle,
where in the end he was put to flight, with the loss of a great number of his
men. Then he went straight, and manned the castle of Dineuowr, and burned the
town of Lhandeilo vawr, keeping himself in the wild and rough places: then
his enemies laid siege to the castle of Dyneuowr, and at the first assault,
they wanne the first ward, so that they of the garrison were feign to take the
Koxe for their defense, and defended the same manfully; but they without made
engines to cast in great stones, and began to undermine the walls in such
sort, that the captain fell to that composition, that if he were not succored
by the next day at noone, he would deliver up the castle, upon condition that
all his men might depart with their armor and weapons, and so they did, for
they had no succors. Afterward they brought the Cantref Mawr to their
subjection. Then Rees Vachan removed his wife and children to his brother
Maelgons country, and leaft the castle of Lhauymdhyfry well fortified and
manned. After the departure of Foulke, young Rees came with an army of
Welshmen and Normanes to Lhauymdhyfry; but before they were encamped, the
captain delivered up the castle, the garrison departing with their lives. And
shortly after Rees Vachan was taken at Caermarthyn, and committed to the kings
prison.

The Brytish book of the Abbeie of Stratflur does in this place set down the
earnest repentance of king John, of all the extremities that he had used
against the churchmen, and how that he called home again such of them as were
either expelled, or voluntarily went out of the realm, and restored to them
all such things as his officers had taken from them. At what time also he made
the kingdom of England tributarie to the church of Rome, to be holden of the
Pope, yielding and paieng unto him the sum of a thousand marks yearly for
ever.

At this time prince Lhewelyn laid siege to the castle of Dyganwy, and
Ruthlan, and wanne them both, so that he leaft the king neither hold nor
castle within his land.

1215
In the year 1215. king John with the Earls of Chester and Derbie took the
cross, Matt. Paris. page 339.
but the rebellion of his barons staid his journey; for they required of him
certain ancient laws and customs to be kept, which he denied to do.
Therefore they were confederate with Lhewelyn prince of Wales, that he should
stir upon his part, and they would upon theirs: Matt. Paris. page 340.
then gathering an army, they appointed Robert Fitzwater captain, and came to
Bedford, where William Beauchamp received them into the castle, and from
thence they went to London, and were there ioifullie received. Then the king
levied a power, with William Marshall Earl of Penbrooke, and laid siege to the
castle of Rochester, which was manfully defended three months by William de
Abbineto, but at the last it was taken by force. And at that time there were
taken with the said William, William de Lancaster, William de Emmford, Thomas
de Moletun, Quince Gyfford, Odinel Bobi, and Odinel de Albineto, whom the king
sent to the castle of Corff to be imprisoned sure. At this time the Pope
curssed all such as made war against king John.

There is a bull of excommunication among the Records kept in the tower against
Lhewelyn prince of Wales, and others, for making war against king John being
under the protection of the church of Rome. Thus the Pope can blow hot and cold
out of one mouth. A little before he released prince Lhewelyn, the Barons and
all the commons of the realm from their oath of obedience and subjection to
king John, commanding them upon pain of curse to make war against him: and
now having brought his purpose to pass, he cursseth them for doing of that
which he commanded. So the Pope sets at variance kings and princes at his
pleasure to work his own commodity, and when the same is brought about, he
cursseth them with book, bell, and candle, if they without consideration of
their own greefs will not agree again when he will: whereas fire being kindled
is not easily quenched, and hatred once stirred up between princes, and
grown by displeasures to open war (wherein many are slain, other taken, and
the most spoiled and undone) is not so soon put off with a Mandamus from
Rome, and shaking of hands at the Popes pleasure.

Nevertheless prince Lhewelyn levied an army and came to Shrewesburie, which
town and castle were delivered to him without any resistance, and there he
remained a while. In the mean time Giles de Bruise bishop of Hereford (and
chief of this conspiracy) son to William de Bruise, sent his brother Reynold
to Brechnock, and all the people received him as their lord, and so he got all
his castles without gaine-saieng of any man, to wit, Abergeuenny, Penkelhy,
Castelh Gwyn (or the White castle) Grosmont and the I Will of Cynuric. But when
the bishop came thither himself, they delivered him the castles of Aberhodny,
Hay, Bnelht, and Blaynlhyfny, and he to strengthen himself in that country
promised castle Pain, Clune with all Eluel, to Walter Vachan the son of
Eneon Clyd. In the mean time of this, young Rees son to Gruffyth ap Rees and
Maelgon his uncle were made friends, and went both to Dyuet, where they
recovered all the land to themselves saving Cemais, and overthrew the castle
of Arberth and Maynclochoc. Then Maelgon and Owen brother to Rees went to
Northwales to prince Lhewelyn, and did to him homage: and young Rees gathered a
great power and came to Cydwely, and brought it with all Carnwylheon to his
subjection, and rased the castle there, and likewise the castle of Lhychwr.
From thence he lead his army to the castle of Hugh de Miles at Talybont, and
having taken the same by force, slew a great number of the garrison. Then the
day after he took his journey to Senghennyth, where the garrison which lay
there burnt the town, and departed. Therefore Rees laieng siege to the castle
of Ystymlhwynarth, got the same the next day following, and burned it and the
town also, and so he got all the castles of Gwyrland within three days after,
and then returned home with victory and triumph. At this time Rees Vachan (or
Rees Gryc) uncle to young Rees, and son to the lord Rees was set at liberty
by the king, leaving his son and two other pledges for him. This year also
two Abbots were consecrated bishops, Iorwerth of S. David's, and Cadogan of
Bangor. Giles de Bruise bishop of Hereford by the Popes commandment went and
made peace with the king, and died in his return homeward at Gloucester, whose
inheritance descended to his brother Reginald, who married the daughter of
prince Lhewelyn.

Shortly after Lhewelyn prince of Northwales came with a great army to
Caermardhyn, and laid siege to the castle, which was yielded unto him the
fifth day after, which he rased to the ground, and so he did with the castles
of Lhanstephan, S. Clear, and Talacharn. From thence he went to Caerdigan, and
winning the new castle in Emlyn, he subdued Cemaes, and got the castle of
Trefdraeth, (called in English Newport) and rased the same to the ground. Then
the garrison, which kept the castle of Aberteiui delivered the same unto him
upon S. Stephens day: and the day after he had the castle of Cilgerran, from
whence he returned to Northwales with great honor and triumph. In the which
viage these lords accompanied him, to wit, Howel ap Gruffyth ap Conan, Lhewelyn
ap Meredyth, Gwenwynwyn lord of Powys, Meredyth ap Rotpert, Maelgon and Rees
Vachan the sons of prince Rees, Rees and Owen the sons of Gruffyth ap Rees,
and the power of Madoc ap Gruffyth Maylor lord of Bromfield. The winter after
was the fairest winter that ever was seen.

The year following the prince went to Aberteiui, to make an agreement betwixt
Maelgon and Rees Vachan sons to prince Rees on the one side, and their
nephues young Rees, and his brother Owen the sons of Gruffyth ap Rees on the
other side: where he divided Southwales betwixt them after this manner: to
Maelgon he gave three Cantrefs in Dyuet Gwarthaf, Penlhwynoc, Cemaes and Emlyn,
with the castle of Cilgerran: two in Stratywy, Hiruryn and Malhaen and Maenor
Bydvey, with the castle of Lhanymdhyfry, and two in Caerdigan Gwynionyth and
Mabwyneon to young Rees and Owen his brother he gave the castle of Aberteiui,
and the castle of Nant yr arian (or silver dale) and three Cantrefs in
Caerdigan withal. And to Rees Vachan otherwise called Rees Gryc, the castle
of Dyneuowr, the Cantref Mawr, and the Cantref Bachan (except Hiruryn and
Mydhuey and the Comotes of Cydwely and Carnwylhion) This division being
accomplished, the prince returned homeward, to whom by the way it was signified
that Gwenwynwyn (contrary to his oath and bonds in writing) had forsaken him,
and became again the kings subject, which grieved the prince very much, and
therefore he sent unto him bishops and Abbots to move him to remember his oath
and promise, and his pledges given to the prince, and to show him his own
hand, and thereupon to see if he would come again, and to promise him the
princes favor; but he would in no case hear of reconciliation, wherefore the
prince entered into Powys with fire and sword, and subdued the country to
himself: whereupon Gwenwynwyn fled to the Earl of Chester for succors, and
there remained for a while.

Matt. Paris. page. 377.
At this time Lewys son to the French king being called by the Barons of
England, landed at Tenet, who receiving to his hands all the holds by the
way, came to London, and there received homage of the Barons, and from thence
went toward Winchester where king John was, and by the way got the castles of
Rygat, Guilford, and Fernam, then coming to Winchester received the same with
the castle. Whereupon king John fled to Hereford in the Marches of Wales, and
sent to Reynold Bruise and to prince Lhewelyn, desiring freendship; but they
would not hear him. Therefore he destroyed the castle of Radnor and Hay and
came a long to Oswestree, which town being of the possessions of John
Fitzalans, he burned to the earth, and departed from thence northward, leaving
power as he went, in whose company were William de Albemarle the Earl of
Gloucester, Philip de Albineto, John Marshall, Foulke de Breant a noble good
soldiour, to whom the king gave in marriage the daughter of the Earl Rivers
with the castle of Bedford, William Earl of Salisburie the kings brother,
William Briwer, Walter Espec. Also he appointed governors of the North, Hugh
Baliol, and Philip Halcots. He made governors of the city of York, Robert de
Veipont, Geffrey Lucy, and Bryan de Lysle. Upon the other part Lewys coming
from Winchester, took the castle of Odyham and came to London with great
triumph, where Geffrey Maundeuile Earl of Essex was slain by misfortune
running at the tilte. And the Lords that maintained the quarrel were these:
William Earl VVaren, William Earl of Arundell, William Earl of Salisburie,
who forsook the king at the end, William Marshall the yoonger, William de
Maundeuile, Robert Fitzwater, William Huntingfield all southern men, and
Robert de Rose, Peter de Bruise, and Richard Percie northern men. Matt. Paris.
page. 383.
And all this while Hubert de Burgh kept the castle of Dover worthily to the
behoof of the king. But as king John was making preparation at Newerke, he
fell sick and died, and lies buried at Worcester.

Matt. Paris, page. 386.
After the death of king John, Rondle Earl of Chester, William Marshall Earl
of Penbrooke, William Earl Ferrers, Matthew. West. page. 104.
Philip de Albineto, and John Marshall crowned Henry his son king of England
at Gloucester. In the mean while Lewys besieged the castle of Dover, but all
in vain. Then returning to London, where the city was delivered him, he
proceeded and wan the castles of Hartford and Berkamstede. Whereupon there was
a truse concluded betwixt both princes for a while, then Lewys returned to
France. This year Howel ap Gruffyth ap Conan died, and lies buried at Conwey.

1217
The year 1217. many of the nobles of England forsook Lewys, whom they had
called in before, and contrary to their oath came to king Henry, as William de
Albineto lord of Bealwere besides Notingham, who was imprisoned in Corff, and
William Earl Warren, William de Albineto Earl of Arundell, William longa
Spata Earl of Salisburie, William Marshall the younger, and William de
Cantilupo. Then Lewys shortly after landed at Dover with a great army, and
laid siege to the castle, but he could do no good: from thence he went and
encamped before the castle of Windsore, and when he cold not get it, Matt.
Paris. page 395. Matt. West. page. 104.
he took his journey to Lincoln, whither the army of king Henry came
against him, where a cruel battle was fought, wherein Lewys was put to
flight, and a great number of his nobles taken, as Saere Quincy Earl of
Winchester, Henry de Bohune Earl of Hereford, Gilbert de Gaunt Earl of
Lincoln, Robert Fitzwater, Richard Montfytchet, Gilbert de Clare, William
Mowbraye, William Beuchamp, William Mandit, Aemer Harcourt, Roger de Crescy,
William de Coluile, William de Rosse, Robert Rippeley, and there were slain
Simon de Vescy, Hugh de Roch, Reynald Crescy constable of Chester, Matt. Paris.
page. 398.
Gerald de Furneuale, and many other. Also Hubert de Burgh captain of Dover,
Henry de Turberuile, and Richard Sward gave the French navy (whereof Eustace
a moonke was captain) an overthrow.

In this mean time, Reynald de Bruise did agree with the king, unknowing to
prince Lhewelyn, and contrary to his promise. Wherefore young Rees and Owen
his sisters sons (seeing that he in whom they trusted most deceived them) rose
against him, and wanne all Buelht from him saving the castle. But when the
Prince heard of this agreement, he was sore offended withal, and coming with
an army to Brechnock, Brecheinoc was the whole country or lordship of
Brechnock: Aberhodny the chief town.
he laid siege to the town of Aberhodny, where the burgesses of the town came
to him, and by means of young Rees, the Prince taking 100. marks and five
pledges of them, raised his siege, and took his journey over the black
mountains toward Gwyr, where he lost much of his cariages. And as he camped
at Lhangruc, Reynald Bruise came to him with six knights in his company, and
desired his father in law of pardon for his offense, who receiving him gently,
did not only forgive him, but also gave him the castle of Senghennyth, and
Reynald committed the same to the custody of Rees Vachan. Lhewelyn after he
had set all things in good order in that country marched to Dyuet, and being
at Cefn Cynwarchan, the Flemings sent to him to desire peace, but the Prince
would not grant them their request. Then young Rees was the first that passed
the river Cledheu to fight with them of the town. Whereupon Iorwerth bishop of
S. David's with all his clergy came to the Prince to desire peace to the
Flemings, which after long debating was thus concluded.

Articles of peace between prince Lhewelyn and the Flemings.
First, that all the inhabitants of Ros and the land of Penbrooke should become
the princes subjects, and ever from thencefoorth take him for their liege Lord.
Secondarilie, that they should pay him a 1000. marks toward his charges,
before Michaelmas next coming. Thirdly, that for the performance of these,
they should deliver forthwith to the Prince twenty pledges of the best in all
the country: which things they did. Then the prince, after he had brought all
Wales to his subjection, returned to Northwales with much honor. Shortly
after, there was a peace concluded betwixt the king and Lewys the French kings
son. Whereupon the king promising the barons all their requests, Lewys
returned toward France. The barons pacifieng France and England, do conspire
against Wales.
Then shortly after, William Marshall Earl of Penbrooke got the town of
Caerlheon, and made war against the Welshman, whom contrary to their
promise the barons leaft out of the conclusion of peace.

The barons were very glad of the freendship and aid of the prince of Wales,
to serve their turn. But now in the general conclusion of the peace,
contrary to their oath and promise, they reserve out Wales to keep them play
withal, hoping to get some more land thereby. Therefore let men take heed how
they build upon Turne-seruing Freendship.

Whereupon Rees Vachan rased the castle of Senghennyth, and all the castles he
had in his custody in that country, and banished all the Englishmen that
dwelled there with their wives and children for ever, and divided the country
to the Welshmen, who have kept it unto this day.

The year ensuing, prince Lhewelyn put his garrisons in the castles of
Caermardhin and Aberteiui. Then young Rees (by the princes consent) went to the
king and did him homage for his lands. At this time William Earl of Arundell,
Rondell Earl of Chester, William Ferrers Earl of Derbie and Bryan Lisle took
their voyage toward the holy land.

In the year following, Rees Gryc son to prince Rees married the daughter of
the Earl of Clare; and John de Bruise married Marret the daughter of prince
Lhewelyn. At that time William Marshall the elder died, leaving after him five
sons and five daughters, which daughters were thus married. Mawd to Hugh
Bygod, Ioane to Warren de Mount Chensey; Isabell to Gilbert de Clare; Sibill to
William Earl of Derbie; and Eua to William de Bruise, betwixt which five all
his great inheritance was after divided, for all his sons died without issue,
and were every one after another Earls of Penbrooke.

The year 1220. 1220
Lhewelyn prince of Wales lead an army to Penbrooke against the Flemings, who
contrary to their oath and league had taken the castle of Aberteiui, which
castle the Prince wanne and destroyed, putting the garrison to the sword,
rased the castle, and went thence to the land of Gwys, where he rased that
castle, and burned the town. 1221
Also he caused all Hauerford to be burned to the castle gates, and destroyed
all Ros and Daugledhau: and they which kept the castle sent to him for truse
till May, which was concluded upon conditions, Hol. page 619. Matt. Paris.
page 416. Matt. West. page 110. and 111. Caste^h Trefaldwyn.
and so he returned home. Also this year certain lords of Wales besieged the
castle of Buelht, which was Reynalds de Bruise. Therefore the king came with an
army to the marches, and raised the siege, and came as far as Mountgomerie,
and built a new castle there. As William de Albineto Earl of Arundell, Henry
de Bohune Earl of Hereford, and Sayer de Quincie Earl of Winchester were
coming home from the holy land, they died by the way. The year following
there fell a great dissension betwixt prince Lhewelyn, and Gruffyth his son:
for this Gruffyth enioied the Cantref of Merionyth without his fathers consent,
and therefore his father sent for him to come unto him, but he would not come:
therefore the Prince swear that he would be revenged upon him and his accomplices
for that dishonor, and then came with a great army to Merionyth: but his son
fearing not the father, got his people in the field ready to abide the
battle, but as they were in fight, there was a peace concluded, and Gruffyth
yielded to his father, and cried him mercy. Then Lhewelyn although he forgave
his son his offense, yet he took Merionyth and Ardydwy from him, and
building a castle there, returned home again. At this time young Rees
forsook prince Lhewelyn, because Aberteiui was not delivered him (as the
promise was at the dividing of Southwales) and went to William Marshall Earl
of Penbrooke: therefore Lhewelyn came to Aberystwyth, and seized the castle
and all that territory to his own use. Then young Rees hearing this went unto
the king to complain upon the Prince, and the king sent for the prince to
Shrewesburie, and made him and Rees friends; the prince promising to deal with
Rees for Aberteiui as he had done with Maelgon for Caermardhin. This winter
John de Bruise by the consent of prince Lhewelyn fortified the castle of
Senghennyth: at that time also Isabell the kings mother married the son of Hugh
de Brune Earl of March, without making the king privy thereto.

William de Fortibus Earl of Albemarle about this time made an insurrection in
Lincolneshire, Matt. West. page. 111.
which was soon appeased: then the king seized into his hands certain honors
and castles that diverse men kept in their possessions without just cause: as
Foulke de Breant kept the Earldoms of Northampton, Oxford, Bedford and
Buckingham, with the castles and holds. Peter de Malo lacu, the castles of
Corff, and Shirburne with Somersetshire, and Dorcestershire, and the liberties
and forests. Philip de Mark, the castles of Peke and Notingham,
Notinghamshire and Derbyshire. Gigelard de Siconia kept Windsore and Odhiam,
which for the most part the king received to his hands. Hol. page 619.
Also Hubert de Burgh was created Earl of Kent, and chief Justice of England,
who took to wife the king of Scots sister. The year after, young Rees son
to Gruffyth ap Rees departed out of this world, being a lusty gentleman, and
endued with many notable virtues, and was buried at Stratflur, whose
inheritance Lhewelyn divided between his brother Owen, and his uncle Maelgon.

The year after Christ's incarnation 1223. 1223
William Marshall came from Ireland, Hol. page 622.
and landed at S. David's with a great army, and shortly after laid siege to
Aberteiui and got it, and from thence marched to Caermardhin, and likewise got
the same.

Matt. Paris. page 423. Matt. West. page. 114.
Lhewelyn prince of Wales, at what time William Marshall Earl of Penbrooke
prosecuted the wars in Ireland against the kings enemies there, took by
force two castles in Wales belonging to the said Earl, putting all his men
which kept the same to the sword, and fortifieng the same with a garrison of
his own men in either of them, departed home again: whereof when the said
Earl was advertised, he returned from Ireland with all speed, and recovering
his castles again, used the same courtesy toward Lhewelyns men that he had
showed to his: and then entering further into the Princes country, destroyed
all before him as he went.

These news coming to Lhewelyns ears did sore offend him: whereupon he sent
Gruffyth his son with a power of men to stay the Earl for passing further.
Then Gruffyth went to Cydweli, and understanding that the Burgesses of the
town meant to betraie him, burned the town, churches, Matt. Paris. page 423.
and all to the earth. Then William Marshall passed the river Tywy at
Caermardhin, where Gruffyth met with him, Matt. Paris says, that the Earl had
the victory, and that there were slain and taken of the Welshmen 9000.
persons.
and gave him battle, which was very doubtful and endured until night, and
then either party withdrew themselves, and the river betwixt. And after they
had laien so certain days, Gruffyth for lack of victuals (for his men which
were about 9000. persons) returned back, and the Earl went to Cilgerran, and
began to build there a very strong castle. Then receiving letters from the
king to come and speak with him, he went to the court by sea, and left his
army to continue the work he had begone. Then the king and the archbishop of
Canturburie being at Ludlowe sent for the Prince, and would feign have agreed
him and the Earl: but it would not be, and so they departed. And when the
Earl would have passed to Penbrooke by land, with the strength of the Earl
of Derby, and Henry Pygot lord of Ewyas, the Prince sent his son to keep the
passage at Carnwylhion, and he himself came as far as Mabedryd. Which when the
Earl understood he returned back to England, and the Prince went to
Northwales. Matt. Paris. page. 425. and. 427. Matthew. West. page. 115.
Certain of the barons also misliking the rule of Hubert de Burgh conspired
against the king and him: as Randulph Earl of Chester, William de Fortibus
Earl of Albemarle, John constable of Chester, Foulke de Breant, Hugh de Veteri
ponte, Bryan Lysle, Patrike de Malo lacu, Philip Mark, and William lord de
Cantilupo. But the matter was appeased, Matt. Paris, page. 428. Matt. Paris,
page. 439.
and the king got the castle of Bedford by long siege, wherein was William de
Breant brother to Foulke. About this time died William de longa Spata Earl of
Salisburie. The year following, Sarancus de malo Leone delivered Rochell to the
French king. Also Foulke de Breant was at this time banished England, and came
to such poverty that he begged from door to door. The year 1226. 1226
Rees Vachan son to Rees Gryc did take his father prisoner, and would not set
him at liberty till he had delivered him the castle of Lhanymdhyfri. At this
time died Meredyth archdecon of Caerdigan, son to prince Rees, 1228
and was buried by his father at S. David's. The year following king Henry came
with a great army to Wales as far as Ceri, Matt. Paris, page 468.
and encamped there, and upon the other side prince Lhewelyn called to him all
the power of Wales, and encamped not far off, and there were diverse great
skirmishes, and chiefly upon one day the most part of both armies was in the
field, and a great number slain of the kings men. At which time William de
Bruise son to Reynald was taken prisoner, who offered for his ransom the
country of Buelht, and a great sum of money beside: then there was a peace
concluded between the king and the Prince, whereupon the Prince came to the
king, and did honor him, but not as his king and lord, and every party
returned home.

Matt. Paris. page. 468.
This history is somewhat otherwise laid down by Matthew Paris, which I have
thus translated out of the same author.

Matt. West. page. 124.
About the same time, those soldiers which lay in garrison in the castle of
Mountgomery, went out with some of their neighbors to amend a certain passage
in the high way, leading through a great wood thereby, where the Welshmen were
wont to rob and slaie such as traveled that way: and coming to the place,
with their axes and other weapons began to fell the trees, and to cut down the
bushes; whereby the way might be enlarged. Which thing when the Welshmen
understood, they came with a great power, and setting upon their enemies,
compelled them to take the castle for their defense, (certain being slain on
both sides) and then casting a trench about the same, laid siege unto it. This
being quickelie certified unto Hubert de Burgh chief Justice of England, to
whom a little before the same castle and honor was given: the king himself
with convenient speed coming raised the siege, and when his whole army came
to him, (for few soldiers came with him thither) he went to the said wood,
which was very large, being five miles in length, and by reason of the thick
growth of the same very hard to be stocked: howbeit the king caused the same
with great diligence and travel to be asserted and consumed with fire. Then
leading his army further into the country, he came to an abbeie of white
moonks called Cridia, being a refuge for the Welshmen to fly unto, which he
caused to be burnt to ashes; where Hubert de Burgh (to whom the place seemed
very fit for fortification) having the assent of the king, caused a castle to
be builded. But or ever the work was finished, many were slain on both
sides: and William de Bruise a noble warrior, who went out to make provision
for the army, was taken by the Welshmen, and cast in prison: and diverse other
went out for the like purpose, whereof one being knighted a few days before,
seeing some of his fellows in danger and like to be distressed, rushed boldly
into the midst of his enemies, killing many about him, who in the end with
many other of the kings men was there slain. Many also of the kings (...)
soldiers being confederate with prince Lhewelyn, did very faintlie defend his
cause with whom they came thither. Whereupon the king wanting necessary
provision, and perceiving the double dealing of some of his own men, was
constrained to conclude a dishonorable peace with the Welshmen, giving his
assent that the castle, which with so great expenses of men and money was now
almost finished, should be rased at his own charges, taking of prince Lhewelyn
three thousand pounds toward the same. The peace being thus confirmed both
parties departed homeward. So the king of England, after that he had bestowed
three months in the building of the said castle, and disbursed an infinite
sum of money in vain, leaving William de Bruise one of his nobles in the
Princes prison, returned home with great slain of his honor. The name also
which Hubert the chief Justice had given to the castle at the beginning of
the building, calling it Huberts folly, Stultitia Huberti.
did now move many to laugh at the thing, who seeing that costly and
sumptuous building, to be made equal with the ground, said that Hubert was a
prophet and more than a prophet. Thus far out of Matthew Paris.

Shortly after this, there fell a great variance between the king and Richard
Earl of Cornwale his brother, where great partaking was on either side. These
lords held with Richard, Randulph Earl of Chester, William Marshall Earl of
Penbrooke, Gilbert Earl of Gloucester, William Earl Warren, Henry Earl of
Hereford, William Earl Ferrers, and William Earl of Warwick. But this debate
was soon taken up and finished, the king and his brother being made friends.
In the year 1230. 1230
Henry made a journey to France, to recover again that which his father had
lost: Matt. Paris. page 485.
from whence he returned back again without doing any good. At this time
Lhewelyn the son of Maelgon died in Northwales, and was buried at Conwey.
Prince Lhewhelyn caused William Bruise to be hanged, Matt. Paris. page 488.
Matt. West. page 128.
being (as it was reported) taken in adultery with his wife, who was the
sister of king Henry. Also Gilbert of Clare Earl of Gloucester died, whose
wife afterward married Richard Earl of Cornwale, and the king gave the
wardship of his son to the Earl of Kent. Likewise Maelgon son to prince
Rees died at this time, and was buried at Stratflur, whose patrimony young
Maelgon his son inherited after his father. 1231
The year ensuing, William Marshall Earl of Penbrooke died, and Richard his
brother enioied his inheritance.

Hol. page 638. Matt. Paris. page 492.
This year the king lead a great army to Wales, and after he had remained in
the Marches a while, he returned to England, and left Hubert de Burgh Earl of
Kent with his army to defend the Marches, and he by spies understood where
certain Welshman entered the Marches to spoil, and set upon them by
Mountgomery, and slew a great number of them. Matt. West. page. 131.
Then the Prince being therewith sore offended gathered an army, and to revenge
his men, entering the Marches with fire and sword, slew all that withstood him,
and burned the castles with the garrisons without mercy: and first the castle
of Mountgomery, for the Earl withdrew himself for fear. Then the castle of
Radnor, Aberhodni, Rayader Gwy, and so he went through Gwentland to Caerlheon,
and after long fight and loss of many of his men, got the town, and left
nothing therein but ashes. The like he did with the castles of Neth and
Cydwely. Matt. Paris. page 492.
Therefore the king caused the Prince to be denounced accursed, and came to
Hereford with a mighty army, and sent a great number of his nobles with the
most part of his army to Wales, who using the direction of a friar of Cymer,
met with a number of Welshmen, which at the first encounter fled, whom the
Englishmen followed to the straits, where the ambushments lay, which fell upon
them and slew a great number of the best soldiers, and the rest escaped with
fleeing. Matt. Paris. page, 493.
Therefore the king would have burned the house of Cymer, but the Prior paid
300. marks, and the king returned to England after he had built the castle of
Mawd. In the mean time of this, Maelgon the son of Maelgon ap Rees laid
siege do Aberteiui and got the town, and destroyed it to the castle gates,
slaieng all the inhabitants. And shortly after he returned with his coosen
Owen son to Gruffyth ap Rees, with certain of the Princes captains, and
brake down the bridge upon the river Teiui, and laid siege to the castle, and
with engines and mines threw down the same, and then returned home with much
honor. Matt. Paris. page 502.
The next year to this, prince Lhewelyn entered into England, and returned with
a rich spoil of goods, cattle, and men. Therefore the king feased a subsidy
to subdue the Welshmen. Hubert de Burgh was at this time accused upon certain
articles, Hol. page 640 Matt. Paris. page 507.
and committed to prison. Randulph Earl of Chester and Lincoln died the same
year, and John his sister son (by the brother of the Scottish king) was
Earl of Chester after him, Hol. page 622.
who took to wife the daughter of prince Lhewelyn: and an other of his nephues
had the Earldome of Lincoln. Also Ephraim bishop of Lhanelwy died. About the
same time John de Bruise falling off his horse, his foot sticking fast in the
sturope and the horse tail, was drawn by his own horse till he died
miserably. The summer following Richard Earl of Cornwall fortified the
castle of Radnor, which the Prince had lately destroyed.

Shortly after that, Prince Lhewelyn came with an army to Brechnock, and
destroyed all the towns and castles in the country: and lay a month at the
siege of the castle of Brechnock, but yet went without it, and burning the
town, returned homeward with a great booty. In his journey by the way he
burned the town of Clunn, and recovered all the country called Dyffryn
Teueidiat (which was of the possession of John Fitzalan) but he cold not get
the castle. 1233
After that he overthrew the Reddecastell in Powys, Matt. West. page. 134.
Matt. Paris. page. 517.
and burned the town of Oswestree, and so came home. About this time Richard
Marshall Earl of Penbrooke fell at debate with the king, Matt. Paris. page 518.
who with Hubert de Burgh that brake out of the castle of Devises came to
Wales, and joined with the Prince against the king.

Matt. West. page. 137.
Matthew of Westminster does write, that Hubert de Burgh then prisoner in the
castle of Devises, being admonished that Peter bishop of Winchester purposed
to famish him in the said castle, escaped over the wall and took sanctuary;
out of the which he was violently taken by the keepers of the castle: but by
the means of the bishop of Sarum (within whose diocese the same was) he was
restored again to the sanctuary, and within a while after fetched away by a
power of armed men, being the friends of the Earl Marshall, and brought into
Wales, where he joined himself to the kings enemies.

Then the Earl with Owen ap Gruffyth ap Rees came to Meneuia or S. David's, and
killed and spoiled all the kings servants and friends within the town. Also
Maelgon and Rees Gryc, with the power of the prince joined with them, who in
that viage wanne all these castles, Caerdyff, Abergeuennie, Pencelhy,
Blaynlhefyni, and Bwlch y Dinas, which they rased all, saving Caerdyff. Then
the king gathered a wonderful great army as well Flemings, Normanes, and
Gascoines, as Englishmen, and entered Wales, thinking to destroy the whole
country, and encamped at Grosmont, where the Earl with the power of Wales
encamped hard by him. And as the kings men would have entered further they were
met withal, and lost 500. horse, whereupon the king had advise to return
home, and so he did. After whose departure the Earl with the power aforesaid
lay before Caermardhyn three months; but it was so manfully defended that
they could not come by it. And at last there came in the kings ships, and
manned and victualed the town afresh, wherefore they raised the siege and
departed. Within a while after Rees Gryc son to the lord or prince Rees died
at Lhandeilo vawr, and was buried honorably besides his father at S. David's.
Then Maelgon Vachan son to Maelgon ap Rees finished the castle of Trefilan
which his father had begone.

Matt. Paris. page. 518.
The Earl Marshall understanding that the bishop of Winchester had with a
thousand marks of money won from him to the kings part the Earls of Chester
and Lincoln, made a firm league with Lhewelyn prince of Wales, and other
nobles of that country, swearing among themselves, that none of them should
grow to any agreement with the king without his confederats. Whereupon the
king sent to Flanders and other countries beyond the sea for aid: to whom
Baldwyn Earl of Gysnes came with a great army to Gloucester. Also many
Poictouins came to him by the procurement of the said bishop, who was that
countrieman himself.

1231
In the year of Christ 1234. John lord Monumetensis a noble warrior, captain
of the kings army, being made Warden of the Marches of Wales, levied a power,
and came against the Earl Marshall and the Welshmen: but when he had once
entered Wales he came back in post, leaving his men for the most part slain
and taken behind him.

Matt. Paris. page 526. Polydorus virg. lib. 16.
This history is laid down by Matthew Paris after this manner. About the feast
of S. John Baptist, John of Monmouth a noble and expert warrior, who was with
the king in his wars in Wales, gathered a great army, meaning to invade the
Earl Marshall at unawares; but he being certified of the same, hid himself in
a certain wood, by the which lay the way of his enemies, Fallere fallentem
non est fraus.
intending to deceive them, who went about to serve him after the same sort.
When the enemies therefore came to the place where the ambush was, the Earl
Marshals army gave a great shout, and so set upon their enemies being
unprovided, and suddenly put them all to flight, slaieng an infinite number of
them as well Poictouins, as other. John of Monmouth himself escaped by flight,
whose country with the villages, buildings, and all that he had therein the
Earl Marshall did spoil and destroy with fire and sword, and left him
nothing at all, and then returned with rich spoils.

Afterward, Matt. Paris. page 527.
in the week after the Epiphanie, Lhewelyn prince of Wales together with the
Earl Marshall ioining their powers, and entering the kings land, destroyed all
with fire and sword, from the confines of Wales unto the town of Salop, which
they also took, and burnt a great part thereof, and then returned with great
spoils. The king of England, being all this while with the bishop of
Winchester at Gloucester, little regarding war, who for want of sufficient
strength for the war, durst not meet his enemies in the field, but being
ashamed of the matter, departed toward Winchester, leaving the Marches to be
destroyed by the enemies, as any man might see.

The same year Richard Earl of Penbrooke, Matt. Paris. page 533.
by the counsel of Geffrey de Marisco went with an army to Ireland, where he
was slain in fight by treason of his own men, after whom his brother Gilbert
inherited his lands.

In that time the king sent the Archbishop of Canturburie, Matt. Paris, page.
540.
with the bishops of Rochester and Chester, to entreat with prince Lhewelyn
for to make peace with the king, but they returned without doing of any good.

Matt. Paris.
Matthew Paris says this. The king at this time going to meet Edmond
Archbishop of Canturburie, and the other Bishops which he had sent to conclude
a peace with Lhewelyn prince of Wales, came to Woodstocke, where being
certified of the death of the Earl Marshall (by certain messengers which came
from Ireland) he fell into great weeping and sorrow for the death of so
valiant a knight: affirming withal, that he had not least his peer behind him
in the realm. A peace concluded betwixt Lhewelyn and king Henry.
From thence he went to Gloucester, where the said Archbishop and bishops
coming to him, declared the treaty and form of peace taken between him and
the said Lhewelyn: yet nevertheless upon this condition, that the noble men of
England, which were confederates with the said Lhewelyn, and by evil counsel
were exiled, should first be reconciled to the king, whereby the said peace
might be more firm and stable. Moreover the Archbishop said, that with much a
do they had brought the matter to that pass, adding sometimes threatenings on
the kings behalf with his clergy, to the which threatenings the said Lhewelyn
is reported to have answered, that he more regarded the kings almsdeeds, and
his godly behavior, than he did fear his war with all his clergy. The
barons called home and pardoned.
Then the king (who wished peace with all his heart) caused by his letters all
the nobles that were outlawed, to be called again unto him to Gloucester, the
sundaie before the Ascension day next following, to have their pardons, and to
receive their inheritance which the king had seized into his own hands. Then
Hubert de Burgh Earl of Kent came to the king and obtained his favor, whom
the king reverently imbrased and kissed.

Prince Lhewelyn also this year set Gruffyth his son at liberty, whom he
had kept in prison six years for his disobedience. At the same time died
Robert Fitzwater, who as Matthew Paris says, H. Lhoyd. Matt. Paris.
had a stone about his neck of such virtue, that he could not die as long as
it was there. Also Roger de Somerie died; and Cadwalhon ap Maelgon of
Melienyth. The year after died Owen son to Gruffyth ap Rees, being a noble
Gentleman, and very well beloved, and was buried by his brother Rees at
Stratflur. King Henry about this time took to wife the second daughter of the
Earl of Province called Elianor. And Frederike the Emperor married Isabel
sister to king Henry. The year after, Madoc the son of Gruffyth Maylor lord
of the lower Powys or Bromfield, Chirke, and Yale, a man very just and
merciful, died and was buried honorably at the abbie of Lhan Egwest, or Vale
Crucis, which he had built, and leaft behind him a son named Gruffyth to
inherit his lands. Also Owen ap Meredyth ap Rotpert of Cydewen departed out of
this world. The same year Gilbert Earl of Penbrooke by treason got the castle
of Morgan ap Howel, called Marchen, and fortified it very strong for fear of
the Prince. Then the Earls of Cornwall and Penbrooke took the cross. 1237
The next spring died Ione daughter to king John, princess of Wales, and was
buried upon the sea shore within the I Will of Anglesey, at Lhanuaes, as her
pleasure was, where the Prince did build a house of barefoote Friars over her
grave. Then also died John Scot Earl of Chester without issue, therefore the
king seized that Earldome to his own hands.

Because the Earls of Chester were men of great possessions in Wales, and had
much war with the princes of Northwales, I think it convenient for the
better understanding of this history, to lay down a brief Catalog of the
descents of the same Earls in order, from the conquest to this John Scot which
was the last of them.
HVgh Lupus the son of Richard Earl of Auranges Abonica, and of Margaret the
daughter of Harlowine a noble man in Normandy, who married Arlet the daughter
of a burgess in Falois, which was also mother to William Conqueror, came to
England with the said Conqueror, and was by him created Earl of Chester, and
swordbearer of England, with these words: Habendum and tenendum dictum
comitatum Caestriae sibi and haeredibus suis, ita libere ad gladium sicut ipse
rex totam tenebat Angliam ad coronam; that is, To have and to hold the said
county of Chester to him and his heirs by right of the sword, so freely as
the king held the realm of England in the right of the crown. Hugh being
established in the possession of the Earldome, with most large privileges and
freedoms, ordained under him (for the better government of the said county)
four Barons, Four barons
to wit: The first, Halton.
Nigell or Neal his coosen Baron of Halton, Constable and Marshall of Chester,
by condition of service to lead the Uauntgard of the Earls army when he
should make any journey into Wales; so as the said Baron should be the foremost
in marching into the enemies country, and the last in coming back: of him
the Lacyes Earls of Lincoln descended. The second, Nantwich.
Piers Malebanke Baron of Nantwich. The Third, Malpas.
Eustace Baron of Malpas. The fourth, Warren Vernoun Baron of Shipbrooke.
Shipbroke.
This Hugh Lupus converted the church of S. Werburgh to an Abbeie: and died An
1102. after he had ruled that Earldome forty years leaving issue behind him
Richard, Robert Abbot of Bury, and Otuell tutor to the children of king Henry
the first.

Richard Lupus the son of Hugh Lupus, being the second Chester after the
Conquest, was but seven year old when he was Earl, he married Mawd the
daughter of Stephen Earl of Bloys Charters and Champaigne, being the sister of
king Stephen; he with his brother Otuell after he had been Earl of Chester
xvij. years was drowned at Godwinsands coming from Normandy with the
children of king Henry the first, in the year of Christ. 1120.

Randulph Meschines alias de Bohun, the son of John de and of Margaret the
sister of Hugh Lupus, succeeded Richard in the Earldom of Chester as coosen
and next heir of blood to him, being the third earl of Chester after the
conquest: he married Mawd the daughter of Aubrey de Vere Earl of Gisnes, by
whom he had issue Randulph surnamed Vernounes (because he was borne at Vernoune
castle) and died An. 1130. after that he had been Earl about eight years.

Randulph Bohun his son succeeded his father being the Chester after the
Conquest, who married Alicia the daughter of Robert Earl of Gloucester base
son to king Henry the first, by whom he had issue Hugh Cyuelioc (so called
of that country of Powys wherein he was borne) and died An. 1158. When he had
been Earl nine and twenty years.

Hugh Bohun alias Keuelock or rather Cyuelioc, being the Chester after the
Conquest, married Beatrice the daughter of Richard Lucie lord chief Justice of
England, by whom he had issue Randulph, and four daughters; Mawd married to
David Earl of Anguis and Huntington lord of Galloway: Mabill married to William
Daubney Earl of Arundell: Agnes married to William Ferrers Earl of Derby, and
Hawys married to Robert Quincy a Baron of great honor, who was in her right
after her brothers death Earl of Lincoln, and after him she was married to sir
Warren Bostock. This Hugh was Earl of Chester 28. years, and died about the
year 1182.

Randulph Bohun alias Blandeuill, so called, because he was Powys, in a town
named Album monasterium, succeeded his father being the sixth Earl of Chester
after the Conquest: who was also Earl of Lincoln, as coosen and next heir
unto William Romare Earl of Lincoln, the second brother of Randulph Meschines
the third Earl of Chester after the Conquest. He was thrice married, first to
Constance the daughter and heir of Conan Earl of Brytaine and Richmond, being
the widow of Geffrey the third son of king Henry the second, and the mother of
Arthur Earl of Brytaine: from whom afterward he was divorced, and then married a
lady named Clemence daughter to the Earl Ferrers: after whose decease he
took to his third wife Margaret daughter to Humfrey de Bohun Earl of
Hereford, Essex, and Constable of England. Nuerthelesse he never had issue by
any of those his wives, and therefore the Earldom of Chester and his lands
in Northwales after his death descended to John surnamed Scot, his sister
Mawdes son by David Earl of Anguis and Huntington. The manor of Barrow with
500. pound lands came to Mabill: the Earldome of Lincoln to Hawyse: the
castle and manor of Chartley and (as I think) his possessions in Powys to
Agnes. This Randulph achieved many enterprises against Lhewelyn prince of
Wales, but one time meeting with the said Prince, and being too weak to
encounter with him, he was driven to retire back to the castle of Ruthlan,
wherein the said Prince besieged him: whereupon he was feign to send to Roger
Lacie Constable of Chester, to come to his succors in that extremity. Lacie
calling his friends unto him, requested them to make as many men as they
could, and to go with him, to deliver the Earl out of the danger of his
enemies: at whose request Ralph Dutton his son in law, being a lusty youth,
assembled together all the plaiers, musicians, and merry companions within the
city (being then the Fair time) and came to the Constable, who forthwith went
to Ruthlan, raised the siege, and delivered the Earl from danger. In
recompense of which service, the Earl gave unto his Constable diverse freedoms
and privileges, and granted unto the said Dutton the ruling and ordering of
all the plaiers and musicians within that county, which his heir enioieth
even to this day. This Earl builded the castles of Charteley and Beeston, and
the abbie of Dalacrosse. He died about the year of Christ 1232. when he had
been Earl 51. years.

John Scot was in the right of Mawd his mother the eldest Randulph Blandeuile,
the seventh Earl of Chester, he had great wars with Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth
prince of Wales; but in the end peace being made betwixt them, the Earl for
further confirmation of the same, married Jane the Princes daughter,
nevertheless he died without issue, leaving four sisters his heirs. Margaret
married to Alan de Galawey, by whom she had a daughter named Derngold, the
mother of John Baliol king of Scotland: Isabel married to Robert Breux: Mawd,
who died without issue, and Alicia married to Henry Hastings; to the which
sisters the king gave other lands, and took the said Earldome into his own
hands, Quia noluit tam praeclaram dominationem diuidi inter colos.

In the year 1237. 1237
Lhewelyn prince of Wales, called all the Lords and Barons of Wales before him
to Stratflur, and there every one of them swore to be faithful subjects, and
did homage to David Lhewelyns son.

Matt. Paris. page. 584. Matt. West. page. 154.
At this time Lhewelyn prince of Wales, being impotent (by reason of a palsy
which had taken him) and sore vexed and disquieted by his son Gruffyth, sent
Ambassadors to the king, to signify unto him, that for as much as his years
were now welnigh spent, he was desirous to lead the rest of his days in peace
and quietness: and therefore purposed now to submit himself to the government
and protection of the king of England, and that he would hold his lands of him:
promising withal, that when soever the king should stand in need of his aid,
he would be ready to help him with men and money, to the uttermost of his
power. There were sent as mediators in this behalf, the bishops of Hereford
and Chester, who traveled about the same, with the good liking of many of the
nobles of Wales, although some openly gainsaid them, and in no case would
accept any such peace.

Matt. Paris, page. 584.
Then the said David took from his brother Gruffyth, Arustly, Ceri, Cyuelioc,
Mowthwy, Mochnant, and Caereneon, H. Lhoyd. Matthew. West. page. 154.
and let him only enjoy the Cantref of Lhyyn. This Gruffyth was the elder
brother and a lusty gentleman, but yet base borne. The summer following, the
Earl of Cornwale, and William de longa Spata the yoonger took their viage
toward the holy land, and Simon de Monteforti fled from France to England, to
whom the king gave the Stewardship of England, with the Erledome of Leicester.
Matt. Paris. page 703. Matt. West. page. 154.
This time David son to prince Lhewelyn did contrary to his oath, take his
brother Gruffyth (being in safeconduct with the bishop of Bangor) upon whose
promise he was content to speak with his brother, and imprisoned him in the
castle of Crickieth. The year after Christ's incarnation 1240. 1240
Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth the most valiant and noble prince, which brought all
Wales to his subjection, and had so often put his enemies to flight, and
defended his country, enlarging the meares thereof further than they had been
many years before, passed out of this transitory life, and was honorably
buried at the Abbeie of Conwey, after he had governed Wales well and worthily
fifty and six years. This prince left behind him one son called David
begotten upon his wife Ione daughter to king John of England, by whom also he
had a daughter called Gladys married to six Ralph Mortimer. Also he had another
son called Gruffyth, whom his brother wrongfullie kept in close prison as
long as he lived, as shall be hereafter declared.

David ap Lhewelyn.
David the son of Lhewelyn.
David to whom all the Barons in Wales had made an oath of fidelity, took the
government of Wales after his father, who within a month after came to the
king to Gloucester, and did him homage for the principality of Wales, and also
all the Barons of Wales did the king homage for their lands. But forthwith the
Englishmen began to trouble the Welshmen after their accustomed use, for
Gilbert Marshall came with an army and fortified the castle of Aberteiui. At
this time Earl Warren died. The year ensuing the king came with a great army
to Wales, and many noble men yielded to him, because they hated David,
betraier of his brother and accursed of the Pope.

Matt. Paris. page 764.
When Richard bishop of Bangor saw that David dealt so hardly with his brother
Gruffyth, contrary to his faithful promise made unto the said bishop, he
excommunicated him, and then withdrawing himself out of Wales, made a grievous
complaint to the king upon David, most instantly requesting the king to
deliver Gruffyth out of prison, least the rumor of that fact being notified in
the court of Rome, and other countries out of the realm, should be some stain
of the kings honor, if he should not withstand such outrageous and wilful
dealings. The king therefore greatly blaming David his nephue for the abusing
of his brother in such sort as he did: requested him with most pithie
persuasions to set his brother at liberty, as well for the saving of his own
credit and fame, as also for the avoiding of the said excommunication, and
other imminent dangers which might ensue of that matter. To the which request
of the king, David answered plainly that he would not deliver his brother out
of prison: affirming constantly, that if his brother were enlarged, the
country of Wales would be in great disquietnes. Whereof when Gruffyth was
certified, he sends privily to the king, promising that if he would
forcibly deliver him out of his brothers prison, he would hold his lands of
him, and pay him two hundereth marks yearly: offering not only to be
sworn upon this, and to deliver pledges for performance thereof, but also to
aid the king to bring the rest of the Welshmen to his subjection. Further,
Gruffyth Lord of Bromfield did assure the king of aid, if he would come to
Wales with an army, to chastise David for his falsehood and injury used
toward his brother. Moreover, the bishop of Bangor (being more desirous to be
revenged upon David in an other man's matter, than careful to feed his flock
in discharge of his own duty) sent to Rome, and there followed the matter so
hard, that the Pope excommunicated David: which excommunication was denounced
accordingly, and his land interdicted. Now king Henry being allured with
these promises on Gruffyths behalf, leauied a puisant army to go into Wales;
straightly commanding by his writs all such as ought him service in time of
war, to give their attendance upon him ready with horse and armor at
Gloucester the first day of August following, to set forward against his
enemies. Whither the king came at the day appointed, and from thence went to
Salop, and remained there fifteen days.

During the kings abode at Salop, Matt. Paris. page, 841.
diverse noble men were great suitors unto him in the behalf of Gruffyth, as
Ralph lord Mortimer of Wigmore, Walter Clifford, Roger de Monte Alto steward of
Chester, Maelgon the son of Maelgon, Meredyth ap Rotpert lord of Cydewen,
Gruffyth ap Madoc lord of Bromfield, Howel and Meredyth the sons of Conan ap
Owen Gwyneth, and Gruffyth the son of Gwenwynwyn lord of Powys. These wrought
so with the king, that there was a league concluded between him and Senena the
wife of the said Gruffyth, in the behalf of her husband lieng then in his
brothers prison, according to the articles comprised in this charter following.

Conuenit inter dominum Henricum tertium regem Anglorum illustrem ex vna part,
Articles agreed upon between the king, and the wife of Gruffyth.
and Senenam vxorem Gryffini, filij Leolini, quondam principis Northwalliae,
quem David frater eius tenet carceri mancipatum, cum Owino filio suo, nomine
eiusdem Gryffini ex altera, etc.

Articles of agreement between Henry the third of that name, king of England
of the one party, and Senena the wife of Gruffyth, the son of Lhewelyn,
sometimes Prince of Northwales, whom David his brother deteineth in prison,
with Owen his son, in the name of the said Gruffyth of the other party.

IN primis, the said Senena undertakes, that the said Gruffyth Gruffyth and
Owen his son to be delivered from the prison wherein they are kept, and will
stand to the judgment of the kings court, whether by law he ought to be
imprisoned or no.

Gruffyth and his heirs will stand to the judgment of the kings court, for
and concerning that portion of the inheritance of the said Lhewelyn his father,
which of right ought to appertain unto him.

Senena undertakes for the said Gruffyth and his heirs, that the said
Gruffyth and his heirs shall yield and pay yearly to the king for the same
lands, the sum of three hundredth marks. Whereof the first third part to be
paid in money, the second in kine, and the third in horses, by the estimation
of indifferent men, and the same to be paid yearly at Michaelmas and Easter
by even portions, by the hands of the Shirife of the county of Salop for the
time being.

Senena undertakes further for the said Gruffyth and his heirs, that they and
every of them shall observe the peace against the said David, and suffer him
quietly to enjoy such portion of his fathers inheritance as to him shall be
found to be due.

Senena does further undertake for the said Gruffyth her husband and his
heirs, that in case any Welshman hereafter shall happen to rebel against the
king, they at their own costs and charges shall compel the said offender to
make satisfaction to the king for his disobedience.

Senena will deliver unto the lord the king, David and Roderike her sons for
pledges, with prouiso that if the said Gruffyth and Owen or either of them
shall happen to die before their delivery out of the said prison, it shall be
lawful for the said Senena to have one of her sons released, the other
remaining with the king for pledge.

Senena has sworn upon the holy Evangelist, that the said Gruffyth her
husband and his heirs, and every of them shall accomplish and perform all
the premises on their behalf; and further undertakes that the said Gruffyth
her husband, upon his delivery out of prison, shall take the same oath.

Item the said Senena in the name of the said Gruffyth her Hereford and
Lichfield, so that the said bishops or either of them at the kings request
shall compel the said Gruffyth and his heirs to observe all and singular the
premises on their behalf, by sentence of excommunication upon their persons,
and interdiction upon their lands.

Lastly, the said Senena both undertake and promise ( bona) to see and procure
the full performance of all the premises, and that the said Gruffyth her
husband and his heirs shall allow and perform the same, and thereof shall
deliver his instrument in writing to the king in form aforesaid. To this
charter both parties put their seals, Gruffyth and Senena to that part which
remained with the king, and the king to that part which remained with Senena.

Moreover, for the sure performance of these articles, the said Senena, for and
in the name of her husband, put in for pledges the aforenamed noble men, to
wit, Ralph Mortimer, Walter Clifford, Roger de monte alto, etc. Who bound
themselves by their several writings obligatorie to the king, in manner and
form following.

Omnibus hoc scriptum visuris Rogerus de monte alto Senescallus Cestriae
Salutem: Sciatis quod ego me constitui plegium, etc.
TO all and singular to whom this writing shall come, Roger de monte alto
Steward of Chester sends greeting: Know ye that I have constituted my self
pledge for Senena the wife of Gruffyth the son of Lhewelyn, sometimes prince
of Northwales, and have undertaken for her to our sovereign lord Henry king
of England, that the said Senena shall accomplish and perform all and singular
those covenants and articles, agreed upon between our said sovereign Lord and
the said Senena, for and concerning the deliverance of the said Gruffyth her
husband and Owen his son out of the prison of David his brother, and the
portion of inheritance due unto the said Gruffyth, which the said David keeps
from him by force. In witness whereof to this present writing I have put my
seal, Dated at Salop, the mundaie before the feast of the Assumption of the
blessed virgin Marie, in the 25. year of the reign of the said King.

The like charters were made by every one of the other noble men pledges, who
bound themselves with the like words. Further, such of the said lords which
favored Gruffyths cause, as were out among themselves were now made friends, as
Morgan ap Howel lord of Kery, and Sir Ralph Mortimer which before were at
variance. Matt. Paris. page. 842.
Whereupon David being driven to extremities, having most of the nobilities of
Wales against him: David in great perplexity being ouermatched.
especially Gruffyth ap Madoc lord of Bromfield, favored him not, who being a
man of great wisdom and power was entirely loved of the king. Again, the
sentence of excommunication and the interdiction of his land did not a little
vex him. But the kings presence with so puisant an army did so move his
spirits, that he could not be quiet, till he had sent to the king to desire
peace, with this submissio^ following.

The Charter of the Articles of David's submission to the King.
Omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesentes literae peruenerint David filius
Leolini salutem. Sciatis quod concessi domino meo Henrico regi Angliae
illustri, etc.
TO all Christian people to whom these David the son of Lhewelyn sends
greeting. Know ye that I have granted and promised to deliver unto the lord
Henry the noble king of England, Gruffyth my brother with his son and heir
whom I keep in prison, and all other prisoners, who by occasion of the said
Gruffyth lie in durance.

Item I shall stand to the judgment of the kings court, Gruffyth ought to be
detained prisoner or no, as also for and concerning the part of the inheritance
of the said Lhewelyn my father, claimed by the said Gruffyth according to the
custom of Wales: so that the peace be maintained between me and the said
Gruffyth.

Item I and the said Gruffyth, and either of us shall hold Capite,
acknowledging him chief lord thereof.

Item I shall restore unto Roger de monte alto Steward Chester, his land of
Montalt or Mould, with the appurtenances.

Item I shall likewise restore to all other Barons, all such John king of
England, and the said Lhewelyn prince of Wales my father, saving the right of
all covenants and grants by writing, to be reserved unto the judgment and
determination of the kings court.

Item I shall give and restore unto our sovereign lord the king all his
charges in this present usage laid out.



John his father had, and which the said lord the king of right ought to have,
especially of all the noble men of Wales: and if the king shall set at
liberty any of his captives, the possessions of that man shall remain to the
king.

Elsiner with the appurtenances shall remain to the lord the king and his
heirs for ever.

Wales, any of the subjects of England, outlawed or banished by the said lord
the king, or his barons of Mercia.



In witness whereof to this present writing I have put my seal: Dated at
Alnet by the river of Elwey, in the feast of the decollation of S. John
Baptist, in the 25. year of the reign of the said king.

For the observations of these articles, the said prince David and Ednyuet
Vachan were sworn. Also the said prince David submitted himself to the
jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Canturburie, and of the bishops of London,
Hereford, and Couentrie, for the time being. That all, or one of them whom the
king shall appoint, may excommunicate him, and interdict his land upon breach
of any the said articles. And thereupon he procured the bishops of S. Bangor,
and S. Asaph to make their charters to the lord the king, whereby they granted
to execute and denounce all sentences, as well of excommunication as of
interdiction sent from the foresaid Archbishop, bishops or any of them.

The said David also sent privily to the king, to desire him that he would
suffer him being his nephue, and the lawful heir of Lhewelyn his father, to
enjoy the principality of Wales rather than Gruffyth, which was but a bastard,
and no kin unto the king. Giving him withal to understand, that in case he
did set Gruffyth at liberty, he should be sure to have the war renewed.
Whereupon the king knowing these things to be true, and understanding also that
Gruffyth was a valiant stout man, and had many friends and favorers of his
cause, inclined rather to assent unto David's request than otherwise to be in
danger of further troubles, and therefore willingly granted the same.

Shortly after David sends his brother Gruffyth unto the king, and other
pledges for himself, for performance of the said articles, which the king sent
forthwith to the tower of London, there to be safely kept, allowing to
Gruffyth a noble a day for his finding. Man. Paris. page. 765.
And within few days after Michaelmas, prince David came to the kings court
and did his homage, and swore fealty, who for so doing, and in that he was
the kings nephue, was sent home again in peace. When Gruffyth saw how althings
went, and that he was not like to be set at liberty, he began to devise ways
and means to escape out of prison.

Wherefore deceiving the watch one night, he made a long line of hangings,
Matt. Paris. page. 830.
couerings, and sheets, and having gotten out at a window, let down himself
by the same from the top of the tower: but by reason that he was a mighty
personage and full of flesh, the line brake with the weight of his body, and
so falling down headlong of a great height, his neck and head was driven into
his body with the fall: whose miserable carcass being found the morrow after,
was a pitiful sight to the beholders. The king being certified thereof,
commanded Gruffyths son to be better looked unto, and punished the officers
for their negligence.

Then the king fortified the castle of Dyserth in Flyntshire. Also the king
gave to Gruffyth son to Gwenwynwyn lord of Powys his inheritance: and to the
sons of Conan ap Owen Gwyneth their lands in Merionyth. Then shortly after,
Gilbert Marshall Earl of Penbrooke was slain by misfortune fighting at the
Turnay at Hereford. The bishop of Bangor came to the court to sue for the
deliverance of Gruffyth son to prince Lhewelyn, but the king knowing him to
be a man of great courage, would in no wise grant him liberty.

The year after, king Henry went to France with an army to succor Hugh de
Brune his father in law, meaning also to recover some of that which his father
had lost: but all in vain, for the people favored the French king, therefore
having lost a great number of his men, amongst whom was Gilbert de Clare, he
returned home again. Maelgon Vachan about this time fortified the castle of
Garthgrugyn, John de Mynoc also fortified the castle of Buelht, and Roger
Mortimer the castle of Melyenyth. The summer following, the king began to
trouble the Welshmen very sore, and to take their lands by force without just
title or rightful cause. This year died Hugh de Albineto Earl of Arundell,
whose inheritance was divided betwixt his four sisters. Whereof Isabel the
eldest had married John Fitzalan lord of Oswalstree and Clun, whose son named
also John Fitzalan was in the right of the said Isabel his mother created Earl
of the Earldom of Arundell, in the which house it remained to our time.
Within a while after, Rees Mechylh son to Rees Gryc of Southwales died. This
year prince David sent to Rome to complain to the Pope, how the king of
England compelled him unjustly to hold his lands of him. Therefore the Pope
sent to the abbots of Aberconwy and Cymer a commission to enquire of this
matter.

Records, An. 29. Henry. 3.
After the death of Gruffyth, king Henry in the 29. year of his reign (as
appears by the records in the tower) entitled his eldest son Edward to the
principality of Wales: which thing when David understood, he put himself in
armor to defend his inheritance and right, Matt. Paris. page 880.
and knowing himself not able to withstand the kings force, he sent to Rome
with great gifts to the Pope, complaining as is here mentioned; and declaring
withal, that Lhewelyn his father had least him and the principality of Wales
under the protection of the church of Rome. His suit therefore to the Pope was,
that he would accept of the same, and that David and his heirs might hold it
of the church of Rome, yielding and paieng yearly out of the same the sum
of five hundredth marks, for payment of which sum he bound himself and his
successors by solemn oath and writing executed accordingly. Which offer Pope
Innocentius (ex super abundanti gratia) accepted: Quia ecclesia Romana nunquam
claudit gremium talia offerentibus, and thereupon granted his letters of
commission to the abbots aforesaid, to release David from his oath of allegiance
to the king of England, and to inquire of the whole estate of the matter, and
to certify him of the same. These commissioners taking upon them the
authority, directed their Mandat to the king of England, commanding him to
appear before them at Creythyn in the church of Lhangustenyn in the vigil of
S. Agnes next coming, to answer in the premises. Whereupon the king laughing
at the presumption of these abbots, being greatly offended with the Pope for
his insatiable greedines, (...) Romans Curiae.
sent to Rome, and with greater sums of money quieted all things again: so
that the Pope made his gain at both hands. See Matthew Paris, page. 840.

Then prince David gathered all his strength to be revenged of the wrongs which
the Earls of Clare and Hereford, with John de Monmouth, and Roger de Monte
Alto, and other Marchers did to his people. Whom all the lords in Wales obeyed,
and took for their sovereign, saving Gruffyth son to Gwenwynwyn and Morgan ap
Howel: which two shortly were compelled to obey also. Wherefore the prince
entered the land of March; spoiling and destroieng a great part thereof, with
whom the said Earls fought diverse times: and sometimes the one and sometimes
the other had the uictorie. The year ensuing the Marchers and the Welshmen
met, Matt. Paris. page. 884.
not far from Mountgomery where was a cruel fight, and 300. of the Welshmen
slain, and a great number of Englishmen, among whom there was slain a noble
knight called Hubert Fitzmatthew. Whereupon the king being weary of these
domestical troubles, Matt. Paris. page, 891.
gathered a huge army of Englishmen and Gascoynes, and entered Northwales,
intending to destroy the country: but the Prince met with his people in a
straict, and fought with them, and put them to flight. There the king lost a
great number of his most worthy soldiers and nobility, Matt. Paris. page 927.
and the most part of all his Gascoynes, therefore seeing he cold do no good,
he sent for the Irishmen, which landed at the I Will of Mon or Anglesey, and
spoiled a great part thereof, till the inhabitants of the I Will gathered
themselves together and met with them, being laden with spoil, whom they
chased to their ships: then the king manned and victualed his castles, and
returned to England.

Of this viage a certain noble man, being then in the kings camp, wrote thus
to his friends about the end of September, 1245.

The king with his army lies at Gannock, Matt. Paris. page 924.
fortifieng of that strong castle, and we lie in our tents thereby, watching,
fasting, praieng, and freezing with cold: we watch for fear of the Welshmen,
who are wont to invade and come upon us in the night time. We fast for want of
meat, for the halfpenie loaf is worth five pence. We pray to God to send us
home again speedily, we starve for cold wanting our winter garments, and
having no more but a thin linen cloth betwixt us and the wind. There is an
arm of the sea under the castle where we lie, whereto the tide comes, and
many ships come up the haven thither, which bring victuals to the camp from
Ireland and Chester. This arm of the sea lies betwixt us and Snowdon, where
the Welshmen abide now, and is about a slight shoot over when the tide is in.
There came to the mouth of that haven a certain ship from Ireland with
victuals to be sold, upon mondaie before Michaelinas day, which being
negligentlie looked unto, was set on dry ground at the low ebb on the further
side of the water, over against the castle: which thing when the Welshmen saw,
they came down from the hills and laid siege to the ship being now upon dry
ground: whereupon we on the other side beholding the same, The lords of
Bromfield and Powys held with the king in all these wars.
sent over by boats three hundredth Welshmen of the borders of Cheshire and
Shropshire, with certain archers and armed men to the rescue of the said ship.
Then the Welshmen withdrew themselves to their accustomed places in the rocks
and woods, whom our men followed as far as two miles, being a foot, because
they brought no horses over with them, and slew many of them. But our men in
their return being ouergreedie and covetous, spoiled the abbey of Aberconwey,
and burned all the houses of offices belonging to the same. Which doings caused
the Welshmen to come together, who like desperate men set upon our soldiers
being laden with spoils, and slew a great number of them, following the rest
to the waterside, of whom some gat to the boats and so escaped, and some cast
themselves into the water, and were drowned, and such as they took they hanged
or headed every one. In this conflict we lost many of our men, specially of
those that were under the conduct of Richard Earl of Cornewal, as Sir Alan
Buscell, Sir Adam de Maio, Sir Geffrey Estuemy, and one Ramond a Gascoine, whom
the king greatly fansied, and diverse other, beside a hundredth of common
soldiers. In the mean time Sir Walter Bisset worthily defended the said
ship, until the tide came, and then came away with the same manfully,
wherein there were threescore tons of wine beside other provision, etc. Many
other things are contained in the said writing, of the hard shifts that were
made in the kings camp for victuals, and the great dearth of all things that
were to be eaten.

This year died Walter Marshall Earl of Penbrooke and Anselme his brother
without issue, whose inheritance descended to their five sisters.

To the intent the reader may understand to whom the lands and lordships in
Wales of the Earl Marshall and Penbrooke came: I thought it convenient here so
lay down how these five sisters were bestowed.

1 Ione the eldest married Warren Mountchensey, whose daughter and heir named
also Ione was married to William de Valence, half brother to king Henry the
third, who in her right was Earl of Penbrooke, whose two daughters (after the
death of Ayme^r de Valence) were his heirs, to wit: Isabel married unto John
lord Hastings and Abergeuenny, whose daughter named Elizabeth married Reynold
lord Gray of Ruthyn, to the which family afterward the inheritance fell: and
Ione married to John lord Common, who had issue Elizabeth married to Richard lord
Talbot: and Ione married to David Earl of Athell. 2 Mawd the second daughter of
the Earl Marshall and Penbrooke was married to Hugh Bygod Earl of Northfolke,
father of Ralph Bygod, whose daughter and heir Isabel was married to Sir
Gilbert Lacy, who had issue Margerie and Mawd his daughters and heirs:
Margerie married to John L. Verdon, of whom the Earl of Shrewesburie and the
Earl of Essex are descended. Mawd married Geffrey Geniuill father to Peter
Geniuill, whose daughter and heir was married to Roger Mortimer lord of Wigmor,
and the first Earl of March. 3 Isabel the third daughter of the Earl Marshall
and Penbrooke was married to Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, of whose issue
mention is made before page 129. and after his death she was married to Richard
Earl of Cornwall, and king of the Romans. 4 Sibylla the fourth daughter was
married to William Ferrers Earl of Ferrers and Derby. 5 Eua the fifth daughter
was married to William Bruise, lord Bruise of Gower.
Likewise many nobles died without issue male at this time, Matt. Paris. page.
930.
as the Earl of Arundell, the Earl of Chester, the Earl of Essex, the Earl
of Huntington, and diverse others.

In the beginning of the year 1246. 1246.
David prince of Wales, Matt. Paris. page 933.
after he had gotten the love of his subjects, and achieved many notable
victories, passed out of this life, and was buried at Conwey by his father,
after he had ruled Wales five years, leaving no issue of his body, to the
great discomfort of the land.

Lhewelyn ap Gruffyth.
Lhewelyn and Owen the sons of Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn.
WHen all the Lords and Barons of wales understood of the death of the prince,
they came together, and called for Lhewelyn, and Owen Goch, the sons of
Gruffyth son to prince Lhewelyn brother to David, as next inheritors, (for they
esteemed not Roger Mortimer son to Gladys sister to David, and right
inheritor by the order of law) and did them homage, who divided the
principality betwixt them two. Then the king hearing of the death of the
prince, sent one Nicholas de Miles as Justice of Southwales to Caermardhyn, and
with him in commission Meredyth ap Rees Gryc and Meredyth ap Owen ap Gruffyth,
to disinherite Maelgon Vachan of all his lands: wherefore the said Maelgon fled
to the princes to Northwales for succor, with Howel ap Meredyth (whom the
Earl of Clare had by force spoiled of all his lands in Glamorgan) against
whom the king came with a great army, who after he had remained a while in
the country, and cold do no good, returned home again. This time died Ralph
de Mortimer, who had married Gladys dhu daughter to prince Lhewelyn and sister
to David: whose inheritance descended to Sir Roger Mortimer his son, who also
should of right have been prince of Wales.

The Prince of Northwales was the superior Prince of all Wales, to whom the
other princes of Southwales and Powys did pay a certain tribute yearly, as
appears by the laws of Howel Dha, and in diverse places of this history: and
was the right heir of Cadwalader, as is evident by all writers, whose line of
the heir male from Roderi Mawr ends in this David the son of Lhewelyn, the
son of Iorwerth, the son of Owen Gwyneth, the son of Gruffyth, the son
of Conan, the son of Iago, the son of Edwal, the son of Meyric the son
of Edwal Voel, the son of Anarawd, the son of Roderi Mawr, the son of
Esylht, the daughter and sole heir of Conan Tindaythwy, the son of Roderike
Molwynoc, the son of Edwal Ywrch, the son of Cadwalader the last king of the
Brytaines.

Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth, Prince of Northwales, father to David married two wives,
whereof the first was Ione, the daughter of king John, by whom he had issue
David and Gladys. His second wife was Eua the daughter of Foulke de Breant, by
whom he had no issue. David succeeded his father in the principality of Wales,
and died without issue: after whose decease the right of the inheritance
descended and fell to his sister of the whole blood Gladys, the wife of Ralph
lord Mortimer of Wigmor, who had issue Roger Mortimer, of whom mention is made
in this place, Peter John a Friar preacher, and Hugh lord of Chilmersh..

Roger Mortimer lord of Wigmor (and by right of inheritance Prince of Wales)
married Mawd de Bruise daughter of William de Bruise lord of Brechnocke, by whom
he had issue Edmond, Roger lord of Chirkeland, William and Geffrey: and two
daughters, Margaret married to the son of the Earl of Oxenford, and Isabel
married to John Fitzalen Earl of Arundell. This Roger died An. 1282. and was
buried in the abbie of VVigmor.

Edmond Mortimer lord of VVigmor married Margaret Fendles, and had issue Roger,
John slain in a Turnie at Worcester, Edmond, Hugh and Walter; and two
daughters, Mawd married to Theobald lord Verdon, of whom the Earl of
Sherewsburie and the Earl of Essex are descended: and Ione who died without
issue. He lies buried in the said abbie at VVigmor.

Roger Mortimer lord of Wigmor married Ione the daughter and heir of Sir Peter
Geniuill, and had issue Edmond Mortimer lord of Wigmor, Sir Roger Mortimer, and
Geffrey lord of Cowich, called in stories Comes Iubinensis; and seven
daughters: Catharine married to Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick: Ione
married to James lord Audely: Agnes countess of Penbrooke: Margaret married to
Thomas lord Berkeley: Mawd married to John Charleton lord Powys: Blanch married
to Sir Peter Graunson knight: and Beatrice married to Edward son and heir of
Thomas Brotherton Earl Marshall, and after his death to Thomas de Bruise. This
Roger Mortimer escaped out of the Tower, and fled into France, and afterward
returned again with Queen Isabel the wife of king Edward the second, and
Edward the prince her son, by whom (after the putting down of the said king)
he was created Earl of March, and was afterward attainted.

Edmond Mortimer lord of Wigmor, This Elianor had issue by the Earl Bohune,
who inherited her part afterward.
married Elianor William de Bohune Earl of Northampton one of the daughters
and heirs of Bartholomew Badelsmer, lord of Leedes in Kent, and by her had
issue Roger, and John who died without issue. He died in the castle of
Ludlowe, and lies buried in the said abbie of Wigmor.

Roger Mortimer lord of Wigmor was by king Edward the third An. Regni sui. 29.
restored to the Earldom of March, and all his grandfathers inheritance,
honors and possessions, the said attaindour being repealed and made void. He
had issue by Philippa his wife, the daughter of William Mountague Earl of
Sarum, Edmond Earl of March, and died at Roueraie in Burgundy, the 26. of
February, Anno. 1359. whose bones were afterward translated to the abbie of
VVigmor.

Edmond Mortimer Earl of March and lord of Wigmor Philippa the daughter and
sole heir of Leonell duke of Clarence, in whose right he was Earl of Vlster,
he had issue Roger, and Edmond that was taken by Owen Glyndoure; and two
daughters, Elizabeth married to Sir Henry Percy knight son and heir to
Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland; and Philippa married first to John
Hastings Earl of Penbrooke, and after his death to Richard Earl of Arundel,
and last to John lord S. John. He died in the city of Cork in Ireland, An.
1381. and lies buried in the said abbie of Wigmor.

Roger Mortimer Earl of March and Vlster lord of Wigmor, Trym, Clare, and
Conaght, married Elianor the eldest daughter and one of the heirs of Thomas
Holand Earl of Kent, by whom he had issue Roger and Edmond, who both died
without issue; and two daughters, Anne married to Richard Plantagenet Earl of
Cambridge; and Elianor Countess of Deuon, who died without issue.

The said Richard and Anne had issue Richard duke of York, and Isabel married
to Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex, of whom the Earl of Essex now living is
descended.

This Earl of Rutland was slain in the battle of Wakefield by the lord
Clyfford.
Richard Plantagenet duke of York married Cicilie the daughter of Ralph Neuill
Earl of Westmerland, and had issue Edward the fourth king of England, Edmond
Earl of Rutland, George duke of Clarence, and Richard duke of Gloucester,
afterward king of England by the name of Richard the third; and three
daughters, Margaret married to Charles duke of Burgundy, Elizabeth married to
John de lapoole duke of Suffolk, and Anne married to Henry Holand duke of
Excester, and after to Sir Thomas Saintleger knight.

Edward the fourth king of England married Elizabeth the daughter and one of the
heirs of Richard Wooduile Earl Rivers, and had issue king Edward the fifth,
who died without issue, and Elizabeth married to king Henry the seventh, and
mother to king Henry the eight of famous memory, father to the QVEENES
Majesty that now is: who by lineall descent is the right inheritrice of the
Principality of Wales.

By these Petegrees it is evident, that the title which Owen Glyndoure
pretended to the principality of Wales was altogether frivolous: for he was
not descended of the house of Northwales by his father, See before, page. 213.
but of a yoonger brother of the house of Powys: whose portion by inheritance
is laid down by me in the description of the lordship of Powys before, page
213. which was but a very small thing. There be diverse gentlemen even at this
date in Wales, which are come of the house of Northwales lineallie: but I know
none which are lawfully descended of Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth, called by Matthew
Paris, Leolinus Magnus, but such are come out of the house of Mortimer, in the
which house by order of descent the right of the inheritance lies.

Matt. Paris. page 938.
About this time Harold king of Man came to the court and did homage to king
Henry, and he dubbed him knight. The summer following, Rees Vachan son to Rees
Mechyl got the castle of Carrec Cynnen, which his mother of mere hatred
conceived against him, had delivered to the Englishmen. The Abbots of Conwey
and Stratflur made suit to the king for the body of Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn,
which he granted unto them, and they conveyed it to Conwey, where he was
honorably buried. Then also William Ferrers Earl of Derbie and his wife
died, being either of them a hundredth years of age. Not long after, William de
longa Spata Earl of Salisburie was slain in the holy land, leaving one
daughter behind him, married to Henry Lacy Earl of Lyncolne. The same time
likewise died Gladys daughter to prince Lhewelyn, and wife to Sir Ralph
Mortimer in the castle of VVyndsore. The year next following was so dry, that
there fell no rain from the eleventh day of March, to the Assumption of our
lady. In the year 1254. 1254
there arose a great debate between the princes of Wales: for Owen could not
be content with half the principality, but got his yoonger brother David to
him, and they two levied a great power to disinherite Lhewelyn, who with his
men met with them in the field, and after a long fight gave them an overthrow,
where he took them both prisoners, and then seized all their lands into his
own hands, enioieng alone the whole principality of Wales.

The year ensuing, all the lords of Wales came to prince Lhewelyn, and made
their complaints to him with weeping eyes, how cruelly they were handled by
prince Edward and others of the nobles of England, their lands being taken from
them by force: and if at any time they did offend, they were punished with
extremity, but where they were wronged they found no remedy. Therefore they
protested before God and him, that they would rather die in the field in
defense of their right, than to be made slaves to strangers: whereupon the
Prince pitieng his estate and theirs, determined together with them, utterly
to refuse the rule of the Englishmen, and rather to die in liberty than to
live in thraldom, shame and opprobrie. And gathering all his power, first
recovered again all the Inland country of Northwales, and afterward all
Merionyth, and such lands as Edward had usurped in Caerdigan, which he gave to
Meredyth the son of Owen ap Gruffyth, and Buelht he gave to Meredyth ap Rees,
chasing away Rees Vachan out of the same, and so honorably divided all that
he wan amongst his Barons, that he kept nothing to himself but the perpetual
fame of his liberality. Then also he recovered Gwerthryneon from Sir Roger
Mortimer. The summer following prince Lhewelyn made war against Gruffyth ap
Gwenwynwyn (who served the king) and wan all Powys from him save the castle of
Pole, and a little of Caereneon and the land by Seauerne side.

Rees Vachan ap Rees Mechylh meaning to recover his lands again, obtained of
the king a great army, where of one Stephen Bacon was captain, and came to
Caermardhyn by sea, and marching from thence toward Dyneuowr, laid siege to
the castle: but the princes power came with his coosins to raise the siege;
where there was fought a bloody battle as ever was fought in Wales of so
many men, and in the end the Englishmen were put to flight, and lost of their
men above 2000. soldiers, from thence the princes army went to Dyuet, and
burned all the country, and destroyed the castles of Abercorran, Lhanstephan,
Maenclochoc, and Arberth, and then returned home with much spoil. 1256
And forthwith not being able to abide the wrongs that Geffrey Langley
Lieutenant to the Earl of Chester) did to them, Matt. Paris. page. 1251.
the Prince entered the Earls lands, Ibid. 1252. Tho. Walsh. Hypodigma page 61.
and destroyed all to the gates of Chester on either side the water. Whereupon
Edward the Earl fled to his uncle, (who was then chosen king of Romans) for
succor, and returning back with an army, durst not fight with the Prince,
Matt. Paris. page. 1253.
who had 10000. armed men, every one sworn to die in the field (if need
required) in the defense of their country, yet Gruffyth ap Madoc Maelor,
commonly surnamed lord of Dinas Bran (which is a castle standing upon a very
high mountain, of situation impregnable in the lordship of Chirke) forsook
the Prince, and served the Earl with all his power, Matthew. West. page. 277.
which Earl was counted a cruel and unjust man, having no regard to right,
promise, or oath.

The next year prince Lhewelyn seasing to his hands Cemeys, and making peace
betwixt Rees Gryc and Rees Vachan his brothers son, got the castle of
Trefdraeth or Newport, with all Ros saving Hauerford. Then destroieng the
country in his way toward Glamorgan, he rased the castle of Lhangymwch, and
returning to Northwales, met with Edward Earl of Chester by the way, Matt.
Paris. page 1260.
whom he caused to retire back, and then destroyed the lands of the said
Gruffyth lord of Bromfield. Therefore the kings of England and Almaine wrote to
him gently, to depart home, which he refused to do; but dividing his army
into two battles, in every of the which (as Matthew Paris says) there were
1500. footmen, and 500 horsemen well appointed. Whereupon Edward sent to the
Irishmen to come to his succors: Matt. Paris. page. 1268.
whereof the Prince being certified, made ready his ships, and sending them to
the sea, with sufficient power, to resist the coming of his enemies that way,
prevented him: so that the Irishmen were overcome and sent home with great
loss. Matt. Paris. page. 1271.
Wherefore the king with his son (being in a great rage) gathered all the
strength of England, from S. Michaels Mount to Twede, and came to Northwales as
far as Teganwy: but the Prince caused all the victuals to be removed over the
river of Conwey, and kept all the straictes and passages so narrowly that the
king was compelled to retire to England with great loss.

Then prince Lhewelyn calling to him all the power of Southwales, came to the
marches, where Gruffyth Lord of Bromfield yielded himself to him, (because the
king could not defend his lands) and seasing to his own hands all the lands in
Powys, Matt. Paris. page 1272.
he banished the lord Gruffyth ap Gwenwynwyn, and wanne the castles of Gilbert
de Clare Earl of Gloucester, where also he gave the Englishmen an overthrow,
and slew a great number of the worthiest soldiers and such as the king loved
well. Therefore the king called his strength to him, and sent to Gascoine and
Ireland for succors, Matt. Paris, page. 1275. and 1276.
and then coming to Wales in harvest time, destroyed all the corn that was
in his way: yet he went not far beyond Chester, but returned back without
doing any notable act, for God (as Matthew Paris says) defended the poor
people, Matt. Paris. page. 1274. Matt. Paris. page. 1279.
that put their whole confidence in him. The lord James Audeley (whose daughter
Gruffyth lord of Bromfield had married) brought a great number of horssemen
from Almaine, to serve against the Welshman, who with their great horses and
unaccustomed kind of fight overthrew the Welshman at the first encounter.
Wherefore the Welshman shortly after minding to revenge that displeasure,
made road into the said lord Audleys lands, where the Almaines set upon them,
pursuing hard such as fled to the straits, who (using that flight for a
policy) returned again so suddenly and so fearslie upon the Almaines, that
they being not able to retire upon the sudden were almost all slain. At this
time there was great scarsitie in England of beefes and horses, whereof they
were wont to have many thousands yeerelie out of Wales, and all the marches
were made as a desolate and desert place. The next spring all the nobles of
Wales came together, and swear to defend their country to the death, and
never to forsake one another, and that upon pain of cursing; but shortly
after Meredyth ap Rees of Southwales not regarding his oath served the king.
Matt. Paris, page. 1287.
Then the king called a Parliament for a subsidy to conquer Wales, when he
had so many losses, and of late all the country of Penbrooke burnt and
spoiled, 1258
where the Welshmen had found salt plentifully which they lacked. Matt. Paris.
page. 1288.
In the which Parliament William de Valentia accused the Earls of Leycester
and Gloucester, as the workers of all this mischief: whereupon the Parliament
broke without the grant of any subsidy.

Ibidem, page, 1294 and 1297. Matt. West. page. 277.
Again shortly after, the same Parliament by prorogation was holden at Oxford,
where the king and Edward his son were sworn solemnlie to obeie the laws
and statutes of the realm, but the kings brethren Gwy and William with Henry
son to the king of Almaine, and John Earl Warren forsook the oath, and
departed away. And there the lords of Wales offered to be tried by the law
for any offense they had committed against the king unjustly: Matt. Paris.
page 1301. To this Patrike the lordship of Cydweli was given, if he could win
the same and keep it. Matt. Paris. page 1307.
but Edward would not hear of it, but sent one Patrike de Canton as Lieutenant
for the king to Caermardhin, and with him Meredyth ap Rees, and this Patrike
desired to speak (upon peace) with the princes council. Whereupon the prince
meaning good faith, sent his brother David whom he had set at liberty, with
Meredyth ap Owen and Rees ap Rees to Emlyn to entreat with them of peace, but
Patrike meaning to entrap them, laid an ambushment of armed men by the way,
and as they should have met, these men fell upon the Welshmen, and slew a great
number of them, but the lords which escaped raised the country forthwith,
Matt. West. page 278.
and followed Patrike and slew him and the most part of all his men. And after
this, the Prince desirous of peace and quietness to redeem the same, and to
end all troubles and to purchase the kings good will, offered the king 4000.
marks, and to his son 300. and to the Queen 200. to have peace, but the
king answered; What is this to our losses? and refused it.

It appears by the Records in the Tower, that about this time, to wit, An.
43. H. 3. There was a commission to William bishop of Worcester, John Mansel
treasurer of York the kings Chaplain, and Peter de Montfort: to conclude a
peace with the Welshmen: but it is like that there was nothing done to any
effect in that behalf, for the war continued still. Matt. West. page 284.
Notwithstanding, I find by Matthew Westminster that there was a certain truce
agreed upon between the king and the Welshmen for a year. page 287.
I read also in the same author, that the bishop of Bangor was this year about
Michaelmas sent from Lhewelyn the prince, and all the Barons of Wales, to the
king to desire peace at his hands, and to offer unto him the sum of 16000.
pound for the same, so that he would grant the Welshmen to have all their
matters heard and determined at Chester, as they were wont to have, and to
suffer them to enjoy the laws and customs of their own country: but what
answer the bishop brought again, the said author makes no mention.

The year 1260. 1260
prince Lhewelyn destroyed the lands of Sir Roger Mortimer, because he
contrary to his oath maintained the kings quarrel, and took from him all
Buelht, saving the castle which the Princes men gatte by night without
bloodshed, and therein much munition, and so after the Prince had passed
through all Southwales, he returned to his house at Aber, betwixt Conwey and
Bangor. The year following died Owen ap Meredyth lord of Cydewen. And this
summer certain of the Princes men took upon a sudden the castle of Sir Roger
Mortimer in Melienyth, and slew the garrison, taking Howel ap Meyric the
captain thereof, with his wife and children, and the princes Lieutenant came
and destroyed it: then Sir Roger Mortimer hearing this came with a great
strength of lords and knights to Melienyth, where the Prince came also, and Sir
Roger kept himself within the walls of the broken castle, and sent to the
prince for license to depart without hurt. Then the prince having his enemy
within his danger, took compassion upon him, because he was his coosen, and
suffered him to depart with his people without hurt. From thence the prince
went to Brechnocke at the request of the people of that country, which swore
fidelity unto him, and so returned to Northwales.

Matt. Paris. page 1333. Tho. Walls. Hypodig. page. 63.
Prince Lhewelyn being confederate with the Barons against the king, destroyed
the Earldome of Chester, and rased two of Edwards castles, Tygannwy and
Diserth, and thither came Edward and did nothing to speak of. This year John
Strange the yoonger being Constable of Montgomery came with a great number of
Marchers by night, through Ceri to Cydewen: which thing when the country men
understood, they gathered themselves together, and slew 200. of his men, but he
escaped with the rest back again. Shortly after, the Marchers and the
Welshmen met besides Clun, where the Englishmen had the victory, and slew a
great number of Welshmen. At this time David the princes brother (whom he had
set at liberty) forsook him, and succored his foes with all his power. Then
Gruffyth ap Gwenwynwyn got the castle of Molde and rased it. At this time died
Meredyth ap Owen the defender of Southwales The year ensuing king Henry lead
a great army toward Wales, 1268
and by means of Orobonus the Popes legate, Matt. Paris. page 1341. Matt.
West. page. 347.
there was a peace concluded betwixt the king and the Prince at the castle of
Montgomery upon Calixtus day, for which peace the prince gave the king 30000.
marks, and the king granted the prince a Charter, to receive from thenceforth
homage and fealty of all the nobility and Barons of Wales saving one: so that
all the foresaid Barons should ever after hold of the prince, as their liege
lord; and he to be called and written from thenceforth prince of Wales. And in
witness of this, the king put his seal and hand to the said Charter, which
was likewise confirmed by the authority of the Pope. The year after this died
Grono ap Ednyuet Vachan, a noble man and chief of the princes council. In the
year 1270. 1270
died Gruffyth lord of Bromfield, and was buried at Vale Crucis.

Here ends the Brytish copy.
That which follows unto the death of this Prince was collected by Humfrey
Lhoyd Gentleman.
AT this place leaves the Brytish book, H. Lhoyd.
and writes no further of the end of this prince, but leaves him at the
highest and most honorable stay that any prince of Wales was in, of many
years before: the writer (peradventure) being abashed or rather ashamed to
declare the utter fall and ruin of his country men, whereunto their own
pride and discord did bring them, as it does evidently appear to him that
searches out their histories. But I intending to finish the history during
the government of the Brytaines, have sought out in other Chronicles written in
the Latin tongue, specially in the Chronicle of Nicholas Trivet (who wrote
from the beginning of the reign of king Stephen, to the coronation of Edward
the second) and such other, as much as I could find touching this matter. The
year 1270. 1270
John Earl Waren slew Alan Le Souch lord chief Justice in Westminster hall.
The year following Edward with his brother Edmund went to the holy land, where
at Acon he was in danger to be slain by a villain (under the color of
delivering of a letter) who gave him five wounds with a knife.

1272
And the year 1272. died Henry king of England, and Edward his son coming
from the holy land, two years after was crowned at Westminster king of
England, 1274
to which coronation the prince of Wales refused to come, Tho. Walsh.
although he was sent for, laieng for his excuse that he had offended many
noble men of England, and therefore would not come in their danger, without he
had for pledges the kings brother, with the Earl of Gloucester, and Robert
Burnell chief Justice of England, wherewith the king was sore offended, but he
dissembled his displeasure for that time.

King Edward could never brook prince Lhewelyn, sithence the time that he was
driven to slight by him, at their meeting in the marches, whereof mention is
made before, page 321. On the other side, Lhewelyn liked no better of the king
than the king did of him. Again those noble men, which for their disobedience
were disinherited by Lhewelyn, were received and entertained of king Edward:
which things caused the Prince to fear some evil practice by those and other
such as hated him, if he should have been at the kings coronation to do his
homage and fealty, according to the writ directed unto him in that behalf: as
appears by an instrument sent by the said Prince to Robert Kilwarby,
Archbishop of Canturburie, the Archibishop of York, and other bishops sitting
then at their convocation in the new Temple at London, Anno. 1275. Wherein the
causes of this war are contained: which instrument it self (as it was then
sent) is extant at this day, written in parchment with the Princes great seal
thereunto appendant, which I have seen and copied out of the original
verbatim, being then in the custody of Thomas Yale doctor of law, of late
Deane of the arches (a great searcher and preserver of the antiquities of
Wales) which I thought convenient here to lay down for the fuller
understanding of this history.

Reuerendissimis in Christo patribus ac D.D. Roberto Dei gratia Archiepiscopo
Cantuar. totius Angliae Primati, and Archiepiscopo Eborum, ac eorum
Suffraganeis, etc.
TO the most reverend fathers in Christ and Lords, Robert by the grace of God
Archbishop of Canturburie, primate of England, and the Archbishop of York, and
their Suffraganes, being now together at London in council: their devout son
Lhewelyn Prince of Wales and lord of Snoudon, greeting with due obedience,
reverence, and honor in all things. Be it known to your reverend Fatherhoods,
that where heretofore contention and discord (whereof war followed and long
continued) arose betwixt the king of noble memory Henry king of England of
the one party, and us of the other party: the same contentions and strife
were at the last appeased by authority of the sea Apostolic, and means of the
reverend father lord Otobonus, Deacon and Cardinal of S. Adrian Legate into
England: as it appears in the form of treaty and peace betwixt the said
king, and Edward his first begotten son, lord Edward now king of England, and
their successors on the one party: and us and our successors on the other
party, by the corporal oaths of both parties assured. Which form of peace
was committed to writing by the said Legate, with the seal of the said king,
and the seal of the said lord Edward now king, and with our seal also. In the
which peace it is contained amongst other things (which you do well know as we
believe) that we and our successors should hold of the king and his successors
the principality of Wales. So that all Welsh Barons should hold their Baronies
and lands of us and our successors in Capite, and should do homage and fealty
to us and to our heirs (one Baron excepted) for the which we and our
successors should do homage and fealty to the lord the king and his
successors. It is further contained in the same peace, that neither the said
king nor his successors, should receive any of our enemies, nor any running
away from us, or our successors, nor should help or maintain any such
against us or our successors. The which all are contained in the form of
peace, the tenor whereof the reverend Fathers of Strata Florida, and Aberconwey
bearers hereof can show you.

But see reverend Fathers, the lord Edward now noble king of England, after the
said peace takes into his hands certain Barons lands of Wales, of which they
and their ancestors have been long possessed, and keeps a Baronie in his
hands which should be ours by the form of peace: other Barons of our land
being from us fugitives, running to him, he keeps, helps and mainteineth;
as David ap Gruffyth, and Gruffyth ap Gwenwynwyn, who purposed our death and
destruction. Notwithstanding that since their departure they have robbed within
our land, committed slaughter, and burning of houses, and do still daily
commit the like against the peace aforesaid: and although we have often sent
our greefes and complaints by our solemn messengers, to the said noble lord
Edward, as well before he was king, as since, yet unto this day he never did
any redress therein. Also that which is more perilous, he called us unto a
place (not to us safe) amongst our deadly enemies, our fugitives and felons
and their spies and murderers, to do him homage and fealty: to the which
place we can no ways come without danger of our body: especially seeing our
enemies above said be in that place at the kings table, and sometime in
counsel, and openly brag themselves. And though lawful and reasonable
excuses were alleged by our messengers, before the king and his council, why
the place was not safe nor indifferent, yet he refused to allow or appoint any
other place indifferent for us to do our homage and fealty: which we were and
are ready to do unto him, in any safe place by him to be appointed, if he
will appoint any: and to perform the other articles of the peace concluded
and sworn. And for that it pleased him not to come to any place, where we
could with safety do him homage, we were suitors to him, to send any from him
to receive our oath and homage, until it pleased him to appoint a place, where
we shall do our homage to him personally, the which thing he utterly denied
to do.

We therefore beseech your Fatherhoods earnestly, that it please you to
consider what danger should happen to the people both of England and of Wales,
by reason of the breach of the covenants of peace above said: if now wars and
discord should follow, which God forbid: attending and calling to remembrance
the prohibition of the holy father the Pope lately in the council at Lions,
that no war should be moved amongst Christians: least thereby the affairs
of the holy land should be neglected: that it would please you also to help
with your counsel with the lord and king, that he would use us and order us
according to the peace agreed upon, the which we will no way infringe. And if
he will not harken to your counsel therein (which God forbid) that you will
hold us excused, for we will no ways as much as in us lies procure the
trouble or disquietnes of the Realm. And if it may please you to give credit
to our messengers (which we do send to the king at the day by him unto us
appointed) to allege our lawful excuses in those things, which they by mouth
shall on our part show unto you: resting to do your will and pleasure, if it
please you to write again. Dated at Talybont the 6. day of October, An. 1275.

Shortly after, the king came to Chester, willing the Prince to come thither
and do him homage, which when the Prince detracted to do, the king gathered
an army to compel him thereto.

The year following, the countess of Leycester, 1277
wife to Simon Montfort (which remained at a Nunrie in Montargis in France)
sent her daughter to Wales to marie the Prince, Tho. Walsh. page. 6. Matt.
West. page 364.
as it was agreed betwixt them in her fathers time, and with her came her
brother Aemerike, and a goodly company: who fearing the coast of England,
kept their course to the Isles of Sylle, where by chance they met with four
ships of Bristowe, which set upon them and took them, and brought them to the
king, who entertained the lady honorably, sending her brother to be kept
prisoner in the castle of Corff, from whence he was removed to the castle of
Shirburne. Tho. Walls. page. 6.
Then the king prepared two armies, whereof he lead one himself to Northwales,
as far as Ruthlan, and fortified that castle. And the other he sent with
Paganus de Camurtijs a worthy soldiour to Westwales, who burned and destroyed
a great part of the country. And this year it rained blood in diverse places in
Wales. The year ensuing the lords of Southwales came to the kings peace, and
did him homage, and delivered the castle in Stratywy unto the kings lieutenant
Paganus de Camurtijs. Matt. West. page, 365. Tho. Walls. page. 7.
Then the prince understanding this, and seeing that his own people had
forsaken him, sent to the king for peace, which was agreed Cantreds should
remain to the king and his heirs for ever, which Cantreds I think were
these: Cantref Ros, where the kings castle of Teganwy stood: Cantref Ryuonioc
where Denbigh is: Cantref Tegengl where Ruthlan stands: and Cantref Dyffryn
where Ruthyn is. Item that the lords Marchers should quietly enjoy all the
lands that Wales. N. Trivet.
Item that the prince should pay yearly for the I Will of Mon or Anglesey 1000.
marks, which paiement should begin at Michaelmas then next ensuing, and that
also he should pay 5000. marks out of hand, and if the Prince died without
issue the I Will should remain to the king and his heirs. Item that the England
every Christmas to do the king homage for his lands. Item that Wales should
hold their lands of the king saving five in Snowdon, who should acknowledge the
Prince to be their lord. Item that Wales, without imprisoning, disinheriting,
or time of deliverance determined; and also the king to choose twenty within
Northwales, which should take their oaths with the Prince to perform all these
articles: and if the Prince should swerve from any of them, and being thereof
admonished would not amend and redress the same, they should forsake him and
become his enemies. The Prince was also bound, Wales: of whom David had long
served the king, N. Trivet. Tho. Walls. page. 7.
whom the king had made knight contrary to the manner of Wales, and had given
him in marriage the daughter of the Earl of Derby, whose first husband was
lately deceased: to whom the king gave Denbigh in Northwales, and a 1000.
pound lands therewith. His other brother Roderike was lately fled to England
out of prison: and Owen the third was delivered at this composition.

N. Trivet. Hol. page 787.
This peace was concluded in the kings absence, who appointed one of his
Commissioners, to wit, the lord Robert Tiptoft to take an oath for him, and
authorized the said Robert, Anthony Beke, and William de Southampton Prior
provincial of the Friars preachers, Commissioners nominated on his behalf, to
receive the like oath of the said Lhewelyn: for whose part Theodor or Tuder ap
Ednyuet and Grono ap Heilyn were Commissioners.

N. Trivet. Tho. Walsh. page. 8.
At this time the king builded a castle at Aberystwyth, and returned to England
with much honor: unto whom the people granted a subsidy of the twenty part of
their goods toward his charges in this war. 1278
The year following, the marriage was celebrated at Worcester betwixt Elianor
daughter to Simon Montfort and prince Lhewelyn, Matt. West. page. 367. Tho.
Walsh. page 8.
where the King and the Queen, and the most part of the nobility of England
were present. Also the year after, Roger Mortimer set up at Killingworth a
round table for a hundredth knights, to be exercised in the feats of arms, and
thither resorted many knights from diverse countries. N. Trivet.
At this time the king of Scots did his homage to king Edward, and obtained the
kings letters that his succors in the last wars of Wales were not done by
the name of service, N. Trivet. Polydo. li. 17.
but of good will. And at this time a general inquisition was made, how and by
what title every man held his lands and liberties, and the first that was
called was the Earl VVaren, who drawing out an old sword said, By this warrant
mine ancestors wanne their lands, and by this I do and will hold mine. And
all the Barons applied to this answer, and the Quo warranto was no more talked
of.

The peace concluded between the prince of Wales and the king of England did
not long continue, by reason of the severe and stricte dealing of such officers
as the king appointed rulers in the Marches and the Inland country of Wales:
who hunting after their own gains oppressed the inhabitants, burthening them
with new exactions contrary to the customs of the country; and also showing
themselves too much affectionate in matters of controversy between party and
party, especially when any Englishman had to do in the matter: which poling
and parcialitie did altogether alienate the hearts of the people from the king
of England, so that they had rather die than live in such thraldom. Whereupon
assembling themselves together, they so moved David lord of Denbigh to be at
unity with prince Lhewelyn, and to take pity upon their affliction and
misery, that he being agreed with his brother, became their captain.

Not long after David lord of Denbigh being reconciled to his brother the
Prince, 1281
upon condition he should never after serve the king of England as he had done
before, but become his utter enemy, laid siege to the castle of Hawarden, and
took Roger Clifford (a noble knight) slaieng all that resisted, and after
spoiling all the country, he with his brother the Prince laid siege to the
castle of Ruthlan, the king hearing of this hasted thither with a great army
to raise the siege, then the Prince retired back with his army. Also the same
time Rees the son of Maelgon, and Gruffyth ap Meredyth ap Owen, with other
noble men of Southwales, took the castle of Aberystwyth, and diverse other
castles in that country, spoiling all the kings people that inhabited there
abouts. Therefore the king sent the Archbishop of Canturburie to talk with the
Prince and his brethren, which returned without doing any good; and by the
kings commandment denounced them and all their accomplices accursed.

This Archibishop here mentioned was John Peckham, who was sent from king
Edward to prince Lhewelyn, as this author thinks: but he himself affirms,
that he took that enterprise in hand of his own motion, contrary or beside
the kings mind: to the which assertion of his Nicholas Trivet and Thomas
Walsingham seem to agree. His whole doings in this matter are to be found in
the records of Canturburie, the copy of the which records being collected, and
for the most part translated out of Latin into English by Doctor Thomas Yale,
chanceller to that worthy prelate of reverend memory Matthew Parker
Archbishop of Canturburie (whose careful search, painful travel, and
chargeable setting out of the antiquities of this land, every man that loves
his country cannot choose but commend and thankefullie accept and take in good
part) I thought necessary here to set down for the laieng open of the truth
to the view of all men, which* heretofore was either maliciously concealed, or
negligentlie omitted by all the writers of this history.

1281
Articles sent from the Archbishop of Canturburie, to be intimated to Lhewelyn,
Prince of Wales, and the people of the same country.
Because we came to those parts for the spiritual and temporal health of them
whom we have ever loved well, as diverse of them have known.

2. That we come contrary to the will of our Lord the king, whom our said
coming (as it is said) does much offend.

3 That we desire and beseech them* for the blood of our lord Jesus Christ,
that they would come to an unity with the English people, and to the peace of
our lord the king, which we intend to procure them so well as we can.

4 We will them to understand, that we cannot long tarry in these quarters.

5 We would they considered, that after our parting out of the country, they
shall not perhaps find any that will so tender the preferring of their cause,
as we would do, if it pleased God (with our mortal life) we might procure
them an honest, stable and firm peace.

6 That if they do contemn our petition and labor, we intend forthwith to
signify their stubbernes to the high bishop, and the court of Rome: for the
enormitie that many ways happens by occasion of this discord this day.

7 Let them know, that unless they do quickelie agree to a peace, that war
shall be aggrauated against them, which they shall not be able to sustain, for
the kings power increases daily.

8 Let them understand that the realm of England is under the special
protection of the sea of Rome: The greater cause the more love.
that the sea of Rome loves it better than any other kingdom.

9 That the said sea of Rome will not in any wise see the state of the realm
of England quail, being under special protection.

10 That we much lament to hear that the Welshmen be more cruel then
Saracens: for Saracens, when they take christians they keep them to be
redeemed for money. But (they say) that the Welshmen by and by do kill all
that they take, and are only delighted with blood, and sometime cause to be
killed them whose ransom they have received.

11 That whereas they were ever wont to be esteemed, and to reverence God and
Ecclesiastical persons, they seem much to revolt from that devotion: moving
sedition and war, and committing slaughter, and burning in the holy time.
Which is great injury to God, wherein no man can excuse them.

12 We desire, that as true christians they would repent, for they cannot long
continue their begun discord, if they had sworn it.

13 We will that they signify unto us, how they will or can amend the trouble
of the kings peace, and the hurt of the common wealth.

14 That they signify unto us how peace and concord may be established: for in
vain were it to form peace, to be daily violated.

15 If they say that their laws or covenants be not observed, that they do
signify unto us which those be.

16 That granting it that they were injured, as they say, (which we no ways
do know) they which were Judges in the cause might so have signified to the
kings maiestrie.

17 That unless they will now come to peace, they shall be resisted by decree
and censure of the church, besides war of the people.

The answer of the Prince Lhewelyn, to the above written Articles.
Reuerendissimo in CHRISTO Patri Domino Iohanni, dei gratia Cantuar.
Archiepiscopo, totius Angliae Primati, suus humilis and deuotus filius Lhewelyn
Princeps VValliae and Dominus Snowden, salutem and filialem dilectionaem, etc.
CVm omnimoda reuerentia, submissione, and honor, sanctae paternitati vestrae,
pro vestro labor quem intollerabilem assum sistis ad praesens pro dilectione
quam erga nos and gentem nostram geritis, omni qua possumus deuotione
regratiantes vobis assurgimus: and eo amplius, quod contra domini Regis
voluntatem venistis. Caeterum, quod nos rogastis, vt ad pacem domini Regis
veniamus, scire debet vestra sanctitas, quod ad hoc prompti sumus, dummodo idem
dominus Rex pacem debitam and veram nobis and nostris velit obseruare. Adhaec,
licet gauderemus de mora vestra in Wallia, tamen per nos non eritis impediti,
quin pax fiat, quam in nobis optamus per vestram industriam magis quam alterius
alicuius roborari, and speramus: necper Dei gratiam erit oportunum propter
nostram pertinaciam aliquid scribere domino Papae. Net vestras paternas preces
ac graves labores spernimus, sed ea amplectimur omni cordis affectu, vt
tenemur: nec erit opus, quod dominus Rex aggrauet contra nos manum, cum
promptisimus sibi obedire, iuribus nostris and legibus (vt praemittitur)
reseruatis. Et licet regnum Angliae sit curiae Romanae specialiter subiectum
and dilectum, tamen cum dominus Papa necnon and curia Romana audierint, quanta
nobis per Anglos mala sint illata: viz. Quod pax prius firmata, non fuit nobis
seruata, nec pacta: deinde Ecclesiarum vastationes, combustiones, and
Ecclesiasticarum personarum interfectiones, Sacerdotum, viz. and inclusorum and
aliarum religiosarum personarum passim, mulierum and infantium vbera sugentium,
and in vtero portantium, combustiones etiam hospitalium and aliarum domorum
religiosarum, homicidiorum in coemiterijs, Ecclesijs and super altaria, sicut
expressius eadem in alijs rotulis conscripta vobis transmittimus inspicienda.
Speramus in primis quod vestra pia and sancta paternitas clementer nobis
compatietur, necnon and curia supradicta. Nec per nos regnum Angliae
vacillabit, dum (vt praemissum est) pax debita nobis fiat, and seruetur. Qui
vero sanguinis effusione delectantur, manifestum est ex factis: nam Angli nulli
hactenus sexui vel aetati seu languori pepercerunt, nulla Ecclesiae, vel loco
sacro, detulerunt, qualia, vel similia Wallenses nunquam fecerunt. Super omnia
autem, quod vnus redemptus fuit interfectus, multum dolemus, nec occisorem
manutenemus, sed in syluis vt latro vagatur. De eo quod incoeperunt guerram
aliqui tempore indebito, illud ignorauimus vsque ad praesens factum: and tamen
ipsi asserunt, quod nisi in eo tempore hoc fecissent, mortes and captiones eis
imminebant, nec audebant in domibus se fidere, nec nisi armati incedere, and
sic praetimore tali tempore id fecerunt. De eis vero quae facimus contra
dominum, vt vere Christiani per Dei gratiam poenitebimus; nec erit ex part
nostra, quod bellum continuetur, dum simus indemnes, vt debemus: ne tamen
exhaeredemur, and passim occidamur, oportet nos defendere vt valeamus. Cum vero
iniuria and damna hinc inde considerentur, and ponderentur, parati sumus
emendare pro viribus quae ex part nostra sunt commissa; dum de praedictis
iniurijs and damnis nobis factis and alijs emenda nobis fiat. Et ad pacem
firmandam and stabiliendam similiter sumus prompti: quando tamen Regalis charta
and pacta inita nobis non seruantur, sicut nec hucusque sunt obseruata, non
potest pax stabiliri: nec quando nouae and inauditae exactiones contra nos and
nostros quotidie adinueniuntur: vobis autem transmittimus in rotulis damna and
iniurias nobis illatas, non secundum formam pacis prius factam. Quod autem
guerrauimus, necessitas nos cogebat: nam nos and omnes Wallenses eramus adeo
oppressi, suppeditati, spoliati, and in seruitutem redacti per regales
Iusticiarios and Balliuos, contra formam pacis and omnem iustitiam, non aliter
quam si Sarraceni essemus vel Iudaei. Et saepe domino Regi denunciauimus haec,
sed nullam emendam habere potuimus, sed semper mittebantur Iusticiarij and
Balliui ferociores, and crudeliores. Et quando illi erant satiati per suas
iniustas exactiones, alij de nouo mittebantur, ad populum excoriandum, ita,
quod populus malebat mori quam viuere: nec oportet contra nos militiam
ampliorem conuocare, nec contra nos moueri sacerdotium, dummodo nobis fiat pax
and seruetur modis debitis, vt superius est expressum. Nec debetis sancte pater
omnibus verbis credere aduersariorum nostrorum, sicut enim nos factis
oppresserunt and opprimunt, ita and verbis defamant, nobis imponentes quae
volunt; ipsi vobis saepe sunt praesentes and nos absentes, ipsi opprimentes and
nos oppressi, and ideo, propter dominum, fidem eis in omnibus non adhibeatis,
sed facta potius examinetis. Valeat Sanctitas vestra ad regimen Ecclesiae per
tempora longa. Data apud Garth Celyn in festo Sancti Martini.

To the most reverend Father in Christ, the lord John by gods grace Archbishop
of Canturburie, Primate of all England, his humble and devout son Lhewelyn
prince of Wales and lord of Snowdonsendeth greeting.
WIth all reverent submission and honor we yield our most humble and hearty
thanks unto your fatherhood, for the great and grievous pains which at this
present for the love of us and our nation you have sustained: and so much the
more we are beholden unto you, for that besides the kings pleasure you would
venture to come unto us. In that you request us to come to the kings peace, we
would have your holiness to know that we are most ready and willing to the
same, so that our lord the king will duly and truly observe and keep the
peace toward us and ours. Moreover, although we would be glad of your
continuance in Wales, yet we hope there shall not be any delaie in us but that
peace (which of all things we most desire and wish for) may be forthwith
established, and rather by your travel and procurement than by any other man's:
so that it shall not be needful to complain unto the Pope of our wilfulnes:
neither do we despise your fatherhoods requests and painful travel, but with
all hearty reverence according to our duty do accept the same. Neither yet
shall it be needful for the lord the king to use any force against us,
seeing we are ready to obeie him in all things, our rights and laws (as
aforesaid) reserved. And although the kingdom of England be under the special
protection of the sea of Rome, and with special love regarded of the same:
yet, when the lord the Pope and the court of Rome shall understand of the great
damages which are done unto us by the Englishmen, to wit, the articles of the
peace concluded and sworn unto, violated and broken, the robbing and burning
of churches, the murdering of ecclesiastical persons, as well religious as
secular; the slaughter of women great with child, and children sucking their
mothers breasts: the destroieng of hospitals, and houses of religion, killing
the men and women professed in the holy places, and even before the altars: we
hope that your fatherhood, and the said court of Rome will rather with pity
lament our case, than with rigor of punishment augment our sorrow. Neither
shall the kingdom of England be in any wise disquieted or molested by our
means (as is affirmed) so that we may have the peace duly kept and observed
toward us and our people. Who they be, which are delited with bloodshed and
war, is manifestly apparent by their deeds and behavior: for we would live
quietly upon our own if we might be suffered, but the Englishmen coming to
our country did put all to the sword, neither sparing sex, age or sickness,
nor any thing regarding churches or sacred places, the like whereof the
Welshman never committed. That one having paid his ransom was afterward
slain, we are right sorry to hear of it, neither do we maintain the
offender, who escaping our hands keeps himself as an outlaw in the woods and
unknown places. That some began the war in a time not meet and convenient,
that understood not we of until now: and yet they which did the same do
affirm, that in case they had not done as they did at that time, they had
been slain or taken themselves, being not in safety in their own houses,
and forced continually for safeguard of their lives to keep themselves in
armor: and therefore to deliver themselves from that fear, they took that
enterprise in hand. Concerning those things which we commit against God: with
the assistance of his grace, we will (as it becomes Christians) repent and
turn unto him. Neither shall the war on our part be continued, so that we be
saved harmless and may live as we ought: but before we be disinherited or
slain we must defend our selves as well as we may. Of all injuries and wrongs
done by us, we are most willing and ready (upon due examination and trial of
all trespasses and wrongs committed on both sides) to make amends to the
uttermost of our power: so that the like on the kings side be performed in like
manner toward us and our people: and to conclude and stablish a peace we are
most ready: but what peace can be established when as the kings charter so
solemnlie confirmed, is not kept and performed? Our people are daily oppressed
with new exactions: we send unto you also a note in writing of the wrongs and
injuries which are done unto us contrary to the form of the peace before
made. We have put our selves in armor, being driven thereunto by necessity:
for we and our people were so oppressed, trodden underfoot, spoiled, and
brought to slavery by the kings officers, contrary to the form of the peace
concluded against justice, none otherwise than if we were Saracens or Jews:
whereof we have often times complained unto the king, and never could get any
redress: but always those officers were afterward more fierce and cruel
against us. And when those officers through their rauine and extortion were
enriched, other more hungry than they were sent afresh to flea those whom the
other had shorn before: so that the people wished rather to die than live in
such oppression. And now it shall not be needful to levy any army to war
upon us, or to move the prelates of the church against us, so that the peace may
be observed duly and truly, as before is expressed. Neither ought your holy
fatherhood to give credit to all that our adversaries do allege against us: for
even as in their deeds they have and do oppress us, so in their words they
will not stick to slander us, laieng to our charge what likes them best.
Therefore, for as much as they are always present with you, and we absent from
you, they oppressing, and we oppressed, we are to desire you even for his sake
from whom nothing is hid, not to credit men's words but to examine their deeds.
Thus we bid your holiness farewell. Dated at Garth Celyn, in the feast of S.
Martine.

Certain greefes sent from Lhewelyn, to the Archbishop: translated word by
word out of the records of the said Archbishop.
WHere that it is contained in the form of the peace, concluded as follows.

1 If the said Lhewelyn will claim any right in any lands occupied by any
other than by the lord the king, without the said four Cantreds, the said lord
the king shall do him full justice, according to the laws and customs of
those quarters or parts, where the said lands do lie. Which article was not
observed in the lands in Arustly, and betwixt the waters of Dyui and Dulas, for
that when the said Lhewelyn claimed the said lands before the lord the king at
Ruthlan, and the king granted him the cause to be examined according to the
laws and customs of Wales, and the advocates of the parties were brought in,
and the Judges which vulgarly they call Ynnayd, before the king, to judge of
the said lands according to the laws of Wales. And the defendant appeared and
answered so, that the same day the cause ought to have been fully determined
according to the appointment of our lord the king. Who at his being at
Gloucester, had assigned the parties the said day: and though the same cause
was in diverse places often heard and examined before the Justice, and that the
lands were in Northwales, and never judged but by the laws of Wales, neither
was it lawful for the king but according to the laws of Wales to proroge the
cause; all that notwithstanding he proroged the day (of his own motion)
contrary to the said laws. And at the last the said Lhewelyn was called to
diverse places, whither he ought not to have been called: neither could he
obtain justice, nor any judgment, unless it were according to the laws of
England, contrary to the said article of the peace. And the same was done at
Montgomery, when the parties were present in judgment, and a day appointed to
hear sentence, they proroged the said day contrary to the foresaid laws:
and at the last the king himself at London denied him justice, unless he
would be judged according to the English laws in the said matter.

2 All injuries, trespasses and faults on either part done, be clearelie
remitted unto this present day. This article was not kept; for that as soon
as the lord Reginald Gray was made Justice, he moved diverse and innumerable
accusations against the men of Tegengl and Ros, for trespasses done in the
time of king Henry: when they bare rule in those parties, whereby the said men
dare not for fear keep their own houses.

3 Where as it was agreed that Rees Vachan ap Rees ap Maelgon shall enioie his
possessions, with all the land which he now holds, etc. After the peace
concluded he was spoiled of his lands of Geneu'rglyn which he then held, with
the men and cattle of the same.

4 Also our lord the king grants, that all tenants holding lands in the four
Cantreds, and in other places which the king holds in his own hands, shall
hold and enioie the same, as freely as they did before the time of the wars,
and shall use the same liberties and customs, which they used before.
Contrary to this article, the lord Reginald Gray has brought many new
customs against the form of peace aforesaid.

5 All controversies moved, or to be moved betwixt the Prince and any other,
shall be decided after the law of the marches (if they have their beginning in
the marches) and after the laws of Wales, such as in Wales have their
beginning. Contrary to this article, the king does and sends Justices to
Anglesey, who presume to judge there the men and subjects of the Prince:
setting fines upon them, contrary to the laws of Wales, seeing neither this
nor any like was ever heard in times past; imprisoning some, outlawing others,
when the Prince is at all times ready to do justice to all men that complain
upon any of his men.

6 Where it is in the peace, that Gruffyth Vachan should do homage to the king
for the land in Yale, and to the Prince for the land in Ederneon, the kings
justices brought the lady of Maylor, into all the said lands of Edeyrneon. The
knowledge of which cause only pertained to the Prince, and not to the said
Justices: and yet for peace sake, the Prince did tolerate all this, being at
all times ready to minister justice to the said Lady.

7 And though the said Prince submitted himself unto us and our will, yet we
nevertheless will and grant, that our will in no case goo further, than is
contained in those articles. Contrary to this article, gold was exacted for
the Queens works at every payment made to the King: which gold was never
demanded in time of king Henry, or any other king of England. Which gold yet
for quietness sake the Prince paid, though it were not spoken of or mentioned in
the peace. And now further it is exacted for the old Queen the kings mother
that now is (for the peace concluded with king Henry) 2000. marks and a half:
and unless it be paid, the king threatens to occupy the goods and lands of
Lhewelyn and his people, which he could find in his realm; and sell men and
beasts until the said sum were paid.

8 Item when the king invited the Prince to his feast at Worcester, promising
with very fair words, that he would give his kinsewoman to him to wife, and
enrich him with much honor: nevertheless when he came thither, the self same
day they should be married before Mass, the king required a bill to be sealed
by the Prince; containing amongst other things that he would never keep man
against the kings will, nor never maintain any, whereby it might come to
pass, that all the Princes force should be called from him. The which letter
sealed, he delivered the king by just fear, which might move any constant
man; yet was not this contained in the peace, whereas the conclusion of the
peace was, that the king should require nothing that was not contained in the
same.

9 Item where in the said peace all customs be confirmed to the said Prince,
as his ancestors of long and daily observed custom have received to their
own use, all wrecks happening upon his own lands: the Justice of Chester took
a distress of the Prince for goods of shipwrecke received by him before the
wars, contrary to the form of the said peace. By the which all trespasses
of either side were remitted; and contrary to the customs before said: and if
in case it were forfeited, yet he took such a distress, fifteen pounds of
honey, and many horses, and imprisoned his men. And this he took of the
Princes own proper goods, and further took booties of Bagiers which came to
Lyrpoole with merchandise, and never redeliuered the same, until he had taken
so much money for the same, as it pleased him.

10 Item when certain men of Geneurglyn had taken certain goods of some of
their neighbors of Geneurglyn, when they were in the dominion of the prince in
Meyreon, the kings men of Lhanbadarn did take away the said goods out of the
said dominion of the Prince: and when the Prince his men came thither, and
asked the cause why they took the said preie: the kings men killed one of
them, and wounded other, and the rest they did imprison, neither could the
prince get any justice for the said goods to this day.

11 And where it is contained in the peace, that all things committed in the
Marches, should be redressed in the Marches; yet the kings men would no where
hear the princes men, but put them in the castle of Lhanbadarn: which is
against the peace before said. In these articles and diverse others, the king
stands sworn to the prince, and to his people. And although the prince as
well by himself as by his people, have often requested the king to cause the
said peace to be kept, yet was it in no point kept, but daily the kings
Justices do more and more heap injuries and griefs upon the people of those
parts. So that it cannot be blamed, if the Prince did assent to them that first
began the wars, seeing the oath which the lord Robert Typtost swear for the
king, was kept in no point: and cheeflie seeing the Prince was forewarned, that
he should be taken so soon as the king came to Ruthlan, as he had been in
deed if the king had come thither after Christmasse, as he purposed.

These greefes following were done by the king and his officers, to the lord
David ap Gruffyth.
WHen the said David came to the lord Edward then Earl of Chester, and did him
homage, the said lord Edward did give by his letters patents to the said David,
two Cantreds, Dyffryncluyd, and Ceinmeyrch, with all the appurtenances:
afterward when he was made king he confirmed the said gift to the said David,
and gave him possession of them. Then afterward Guenlhian Lacy died, who held
some towns in the said Cantreds for term of life: which after her decease
apperteined to David, by force of the foresaid grant, which towns yet the king
took from him, contrary to his letters patents.

2 Item, when the said David did hold of the lord the king the villages of Hope
and Eston in Wales, of the which he ought to answer no man, but according to
the laws of Wales, yet the Justice of Chester caused the said David to be
called to Chester, at the suit of one William Vanable an English man: to
answer for the title of the said villages. And although the said David did
often and instantly desire him the said Justice not to proceed against him
injuriously in the county of Chester, where he was not bound to answer by
the form of the peace: yet he plainly denied him to be judged either in Wales
or after the laws of Wales.

3 Item, the said Justice of Chester to the injury of the said David, did cut
down his wood of Lhyweny, and his woods at Hope, as well by the dwellers of
Ruthlan, as others: and yet the said Justice had no jurisdiction in those
parts. And not being contented to get timber there, for building, as well for
Ruthlan as other places in the country, but also destroyed the said woods,
sold it, and carried it into Ireland.

4 Item, where the said David took certain outlawes and rouers in the woods,
and caused them to be hanged: yet the said Justice accused David to the king,
for succoring and mainteining the thieves aforesaid: which was not like to be
true seeing he caused them to be hanged.

5 Item, it is provided in the peace, that all Welshmen in their causes should
be judged after the laws of Wales. This was in no point observed with the said
David and his people. Of these foresaid greefs the said David required often
amends, either according to the laws and customs of Wales, or of special
favor: but he could never obtain any of them both at his hands. Further, the
said David was warned in the kings court, that as soon as Reginald Gray should
come from the court, the said David should be taken and spoiled of his castle
of Hope, his woods should be cut down, and his children taken for pledges: who
seeing he had taken much pains and peril for the king in all his wars as
well himself as his people, both in England and in Wales, and had lost
therebie the most part of the nobility of his country, and yet nevertheless
could obtain neither justice, amends, nor favor at his hands, having such
great wrongs offered unto him, and fearing his own life and his childrens, or
else perpetual prison, being enforced, as it were against his will, began to
defend himself and his people.

Greefs and injuries offered by the king and his officers to the men of Ros.
THis is the form of peace, which the king of England did promise the men of
Ros before they did him homage, which he promised them to observe inuiolablie.
That is to say, the king should grant to every of them their right and
jurisdiction, as they had in time of king Henry, according as the said men do
report that they had in the time of king Henry.

2 Item the lord the king did promise the said men, that they should have
justice in their suits: after granting of the which articles, the said men did
homage to the king. And then the king promised them with his own mouth
faithfully to observe the said articles. This notwithstanding, a certain
noble man passing by the kings hie way, with his wife in the kings peace, met
certain English laborers and Masons going to Ruthlan where they did then
work: who attempted by force to take away his wife from him, and while he
defended her as well as he could, one of them killed the wife, and he who
killed her with his fellows were taken: and when the kindred of her which was
slain required law at the Justice of Chesters hands (for their kinswoman) they
were put in prison, and the murderers were delivered.

3 Item, a certain man killed a Gentleman who had killed the son of Grono ap
Heilyn and was taken: but when certain of the kindred required justice before
the Justice of Chester, certain of them were imprisoned, the offender set at
liberty, and justice denied to the kindred.

4 Item, certain Gentlemen claimed some lands, and offered the king a great
piece of money, to have justice by the verdict of good and lawful men of the
country (then the lands being adjudged to the claimers) Reginald Gray took
the same lands, corn, goods, and all upon the ground, so that they lost their
lands, money, corn and cattle.

5 Item, it is our right that no stranger should cut our woods without our
leave: yet this notwithstanding there was a proclamation at Ruthlan, that it
should be lawful for all other men to cut down our woods, but to us it was
forbidden.

6 Item, where diverse honest men had lands of the gift of the said David, the
Justice takes the said men's lands away.

7 Item, when any comes to Ruthlan with merchandise, if he refuse whatsoever
any English man offers, he is forthwith sent to the castle to prison, and
the buier has the thing, and the king has the price: then the soldiers of
the castle first spoil and beat the party, and then cause him to pay the
porter, and let him go.

8 Item, if any Welshmen buie any thing in Ruthlan, and any English man do
meet him, he will take it from him, and give him less than he paid for it.

9 Item, the king contrary to his promise made to the men of Ros, has given
the territory of Maynan, Penmayn and Lhysuayn.

10 Item, certain Gentlemen of the Cantred of Ros bought certain offices, and
paid their money for the same: yet the Justice of Chester took the said
offices from them without cause.

11 Item, Grono ap Heilyn took to farm of Godfrey Marliney, See this article
again page 359.
the territory of Maynan and Lhysuayn, for the term of four years: yet
Robert de Cruquer with horses and arms and four and twenty horssemen, came
to vex the said Grono, so that he had no safe going, neither to Ruthlan nor
Chester, without a great garrison of his kindred and friends.

12 Item, certain Gentlemen were arrested for trespasses done before the
wars and imprisoned, and could not be delivered until they had paid xvj.
marks, which was contrary to the peace concluded.

13 Item, our causes ought to be decided after the custom of our laws; but
our men be compelled to swear against their consciences, else they be not
suffered to swear: furthermore we spent three hundredth marks in going to the
king for justice in the foresaid articles. And when we believed to recover full
justice, the king sent to our parties the lord Reginald Gray, to whom the king
has set all the lands to farm, to handle the men of the said Cantreds as it
pleases him: who compelled us to To swear by his hand whereas we should
swear by the hand of the king.
swear in his name, whereas we should swear in the kings name. And where the
kings cross ought to be erected, he caused his cross to be erected, in token
that he is the very true lord: and the said lord Reginald at his first coming
to those parts of Wales, sold to certain servants of the king, offices for lx.
marks, which the said servants bought before of the king for xxiiij. marks:
which offices ought not to be sold at the choice of the lord.

14 Item, the king gave Meredyth ap Madoc a captaineship for his service,
Reginald Gray took it from him: neither could he get any remedy at the kings
hands for the same.

15 Item, one of the council of the said Reginald, Cynwrie Vachan told us by
mouth, that as soon as the said Reginald Gray returned to Wales, he would take
xxiiij. men of every Cantered, and either behead them or imprison them
perpetually.

16 Item, whereas we paid our taxes and rents in old money half a year before
the coming of new money, they enforced us to pay new money for the old.

These greefes and the like, the said Reginald offered us, and threatened that
if we would send any to the king to complain he would behead them: and when
we sent any to the king, he could never speak with the king, but spent us
much money in vain. For which greefes we believe our selves free before God,
from the oath which we have made to the king.

These greefes following, the king and his Justices offered to Rees Vachan of
Stratywy.
AFter that the said Rees gave the king his castle of Dyneuowr, sithence the
last peace, the said Rees then being in the tent of the lord Pain de Gadersey,
at the same time there were slain six Gentlemen of the said Reeses men, for
whom they never had amends, which was to him great grief and loss.

2 Item, John Gifford claimed the said Reeses inheritance at Hiruryn, and the
said Rees requested the law of his country of the king, or the law of the
county of Caermardhen, in the which county the ancestors of the said Rees
were wont to have law; when they were of the peace of the Englishmen, and
under their regiment: but the said Rees could have no law, but lost all his
lands. They would have had him to answer in the county of Hereford, where none
of his ancestors ever answered. Further in the lands of the said Rees were such
enormities committed, which do most apperteine to the state ecclesiastical:
that is to say in the church of S. David, which they call Lhangadoc, they made
stables, and played the harlots, and took away all the goods of the said
church, and burning all the houses, wounded the priest of the said church
before the high altar, and left him there as dead.

3 Item, in the same country they spoiled and burnt the churches of Dyngad,
Lhantredaff, and other churches in other parts: they spoiled their chalices,
books, and all other ornaments and goods.

These be the greefes which the king and his Justice gave to Lhewelyn ap Rees
and Howelap Rees.
AFter that a form of peace was concluded betwixt Henry then king of England,
and the prince of Wales, the said king granted and confirmed by his charter to
the said Prince the homage of the said noble men, so long as they stood friends
with the prince, according to the said gift and confirmation: but Edward now
king disherited the said Gentelmen of their lands, so that they could not have
their own lands, neither by law nor by favor.

These be the greefes done by the Englishmen, to the sons of Meredyth ap
Owen,
AFter that the King had granted the Gentelmen their own inheritance of
Geneurglyn and Creuthyn, he contrary to the peace disherited the said
Gentelmen: denieng them all laws and customs of Wales, and of the county of
Caermardhyn.

2 The said king in his county of Caerdigan by his said Justices compelled the
said Gentelmen to give judgment upon themselves: where their predecessors
never suffered the like of Englishmen.

3 The said Justices of the king have taken away the courts of the noblemen
in Wales, and compelled the people to satisfy before them for trespasses: when
as they ought to have satisfied by the said nobles.

4 When a wrecke happens upon any of the grounds of the noble men, whose
ancestors had wrecke, they should have the same: yet the king forbids them,
and the said king by color of that shipwrecke contrary to their custom and
law did condemn them in eight marks, and took away all the goods of the
shipwrecke.

5 That none of our men of the county of Caerdigan dare come amongst the
Englishmen, for fear of imprisonment: and if it had not been for fear of
hurt, the nobles would never have stirred.

The complaints of the noble men of Stratalyn, of the wrongs and greefes done
to them, by Roger Clifford, and Roger Scrochill deputy to the said Roger
Clifford: contrary to the privilege, justice and custom of the said noble
men, as they say and prove.
WHen the said Rogers compelled the said men of Stratalyn to give them (to have
their customs and privileges) twenty marks starling, and after the paiement
of the money, they brake by and by after this sort, to put upon twelve men
according to the laws of England, which was never the manner nor custom of
the said country.

2 Item, Madoc ap Blethyn was condemned in four marks unjustly, contrary to
the laws and use of the country.

3 Item, Grono Goch was likewise condemned in five marks and twelve beasts,
contrary to the custom of the country.

4 Item, the said Rogers took the lands of the men of the country as forfeit:
and for one foot of a stag found in a dogs mouth, three men were spoiled of
all that they had.

5 Item, Ithel ap Gwysty was condemned in a great sum of money, for the fact of
his father done forty years before.

6 Item, the said Rogers laid upon us the finding of all the English soldiers,
whereof before there was but one half.

7 Item, we were given to master Maurice de Cruny, and were sold to Roger
Clifford: which was never seen in our parents time.

8 Item, the widow of Robert of the Mowld asked of the king the third part of
the land in the Mowld in ward: whereas it was judged before the king, that the
said lands were never given in ward.

These be the Articles of greefes done to the men of Penlhyn, by the constable
of Henry Chambers of the white Abbie, and his men.
CYnwric ap Madoc was spoiled by them in time of peace, of eight pound, four
oxen, corn the work of one plough for two years, and to the value of three
pound, of three of his men, and they had the worth of xvj. pound for the said
eight pound, and did beat him besides: which was more wrong, for then he was
the princes constable at Penlhyn. And all the cause that they pretended to make
this spoil, was only that they said they had found four and twenty sheafes
of tyth in the house of a servant of the said Cynwric.

2 Item, Adam Criwr was condemned in eight shillings eight pence, and a mare,
price twenty shillings, and was taken and beaten, for that he had taken the
stealer of that mare, and brought him bound with him, the which thief was
forthwith delivered.

3 Item, Iorwerth ap Gurgeneu was condemned in four pound, for that he had
escaped out of their prison in time of the wars, and was found in the said
town in the time of peace, and this is directly against the peace concluded
betwixt the king and the Prince.

4 Item, Caduan Dhu servant to the constable of Penlhyn was condemned, because
he would not receive the old money for new.

5 Item, Gruffyth ap Grono the Princes man was spoiled of an ox, price eleven
shillings eight pence, and after that the constable had plowed with the said
ox seven months, he paid to the said Gruffyth for the said ox, three
shillings four pence.

6 Item, two servants of one named Y Bongam were spoiled of two pounds, for
that they took a thief that robbed them by night, and yet the thief was
delivered.

7 Item, Eneon ap Ithel was taken, beaten, and spoiled of two oxen, price four
and twenty shillings and two pence, for this cause only, that the said oxen
went from one street to an other in the town.

8 Item, Guyan Maystran was spoiled of his money, because a certain merchant
of Ardudwy owed them certain things, and yet the said merchant was not of
their bailiwicke.

The greefes of Grono ap Heilyn.
A Tenant of Grono ap Heilyn was called to the kings court without any cause:
then Grono came at the day appointed to defend his tenant, and demanded
justice for him, or the law which the men of his country did use: all this
being denied, the said tenant was condemned in seven and twenty pound, j.d.
ob. Then the said Grono went to London for justice, which was promised him, but
he could never have any, where he spent in his journey fifteen marks.

2 A certain Gentelman was slain, who had fostered the son of Grono ap
Heilyn, and he that killed him was taken and brought to Ruthlan castle: then
the said Grono and the kindred of him that was slain asked justice, but some
of them were imprisoned, and the killer discharged. Then Grono went again to
London for justice which the king did promise him, but he never had any, but
spent twenty marks.

3 The third time Grono was feign to go to London for justice in the premises:
where he spent xviij. marks, vj.s. viij.d. And then likewise the king promised
him that he should have justice: but when he certeinelie believed to have
justice, then Reginald Gray came to the country and said openly, that he had
all doings in that country by the kings charters: and took away all
Bailiwicks, which the king had given the said Grono and sold them at his
pleasure: then the said Grono asked justice of the said Reginald, but he could
not be heard.

4 The said Grono took to farm for four years of Godfrey Marliney, Maynan
and Lhysfayn, then Robert Cruquer came with his horses, and arms to get the
said lands by force, and for that Grono would not suffer him to have the said
lands before his years came out, he was called to the law, and then the said
Reginald Gray came with xxiiij. horssemen, to take the said Grono. And for that
they could not that day have their purpose, they called Grono the next day to
Ruthlan: and then Grono had counsel not to go to Ruthlan. Then they called him
again to answer at Caerwys, but the said Grono durst not go thither, but by
the conduct of the bishop of S. Asaph, for that Reginald Gray was there and his
men in harness.

5 For these greefes for the which he could get no justice, but labor and
expenses of liiij. marks and more, and for that he durst not in his own
person go to the court, he sent letters, one to the king, an other to his
brother Lhewelyn, to signify to the king that he should loose all the favor
of the country, if he kept no promise with them, and so it came to pass,
because the men of Ros and Englefild could get no justice, the king neglecting
the correction of these things, lost the whole country.

Humbly shows to your holiness, lord Archbishop of Canturburie, primate of
all England, the noble men of Tegengl: that when the said noble men did their
homage to the lord Edward, king of England, the said king promised them to
defend them and their goods; and that they should use all kind of right,
privilege, and jurisdiction, which they did use in time of king Henry, of the
grant of the said king, whereof they were after spoiled.
FIrst they were spoiled of their right and privileges and customs of the
country: and were compelled to be judged by the laws of England, whereas the
tenor of that their privilege was to be judged according to the laws of Wales
at Tref Edwyn, at Ruthlan, and at Caerwys, and the best men of the country
were taken, because they desired to be judged at Tref Edwyn, according to the
tenor of their privileges, by the laws of Wales.

2 Whatsoever one Justice does, his successor does reuerse the same: for in
David's cause Reginald Gray revoked that, which his predecessor confirmed and
allowed.

3 If he do take any Gentleman of the country, he will not let him go upon
suertie, which he ought to do.

4 If any Gentleman be brought to the castle of the Flynt, upon small
accusation, and his cattle withal; they can neither be delivered, nor have
delaie, until they give the constable an ox, and until they pay three pound
fees to Cynwric for the having of the delaie.

5 Reginald Gray gave the lands of the men of Merton to the Abbot and covent of
Basingwerke, against the laws of Wales and the custom of the country, and
contrary to the form of the peace betwixt prince Lhewelyn and the king; that
is to say, xvj. Caratatasterrae.

6 The noble and best of the country be injured for that the king builded the
castle of Flynt upon their ground: and the king commanded the Justices to give
the men as much and as good ground or the price. But they are spoiled of their
lands, and have neither other lands nor money.

7 Reginald Gray will not suffer men to cut their own wood, until he have
both money and reward, and until they pay for it also; but permits others
to cut it down freely, which they ought not to do by the laws and customs
of Wales.

8 Where the men of Cyrchynan covenant with the king to give the king half a
meadow, of condition the king should not suffer the woods to be cut down, Howel
ap Gruffyth being present: yet Reginald Gray has broken the same, permitting
every man to cut their woods, and spoil them also of their medowe.

9 The son of Cynwric ap Grono was taken at Ruthlan, and put in prison
without any cause at all: neither would the kings officers deliver him,
unless he would redeem the gage of a certain woman, for the which he was
constrained to pay much more than the pawn lay for.

10 When the bailiffe of Ruthlan was at a feast, Hicken le Maile wounded a
Gentleman cruelly in the presence of the said bailiffe: by the occasion of
which wound, Hicken was condemned in eight pound, and when he which was hurt
would have demanded the said eight pound, he was put in prison with Hicken.

11 The messengers of Reginald Gray attempted an absurdity not heard of,
requiring the people of the country to plow his ground, and sow the same: and
the messengers were Cynwric Says and Hicken Lemayl, and the said Cynwric swear
openly before the whole company, that unless all men should plow Reginald
Grayes ground, they should shortly repent it: then the people feared much, as
in that case any constant man would fear.

12 The heirs of Tegengl bought their offices for xxx. marks of the king. But
afterward Reginald Gray spoiled them of their offices and money, against the
laws and customs of England.

13 Seven Gentlemen were wrongfullie killed by the Englishmen, but as yet the
parents of the Gentlemen can have no amends: and though the offenders were
taken, yet the said constable let them go without punishment.

14 The constable of Ruthlan kept two of the kings soldiers in prison, for
that they took an Englishman, who had wounded a man.

All these things contained in these articles are contrary to the privilege,
liberty and right of the said men, and contrary to the laws and customs of
Wales: neither dare the inhabitants send their complaints to the king for fear
of Reginald Gray (which fear any constant man might have) because the said
Reginald Gray said openly, that if he could come by any such their
messengers, he would cut off their heads, as it is certeinelie told us by one
of his counsel: further neither tongue can express, nor pen can write, how
evil the men of Tegengl have been ordered.

Humbly complains unto your lordship, my lord Archbishop of Canturburie
Primate of all England, Lhewelyn ap Gruffyth ap Madoc.
Lhewelyn ap Gruffyth ap Madoc, of the constable of Oswaldes Cross, the king
and of the men of that town, who have spoiled the said Lhewelyn of the third
part of a town called Lhedrot, and his fathers house without any law, or
right, or custom of the country. Further the said Constable and his accomplices
have against the laws and the custom of the country spoiled the said
Lhewelyn of the common and pasturage, which he and his predecessors have had
and used time out of mind: and further condemned the said Lhewelyn for the said
pasture in lxx. marks. And further the king of England granted certain
letters to a bastard called Gruffyth Vachan of Cynlhaeth, to law with the said
Lhewelyn for his whole lordship and possessions; by the occasion of the which
letters, the said Lhewelyn has spent two hundredth pound of good money.

Also the said Constable compelled the said Lhewelyn to send two of his
Gentlemen to him, whom when they came to him he caused to be hanged, which
Gentlemen ought not by right to have been hanged, whose parents had rather
have given him three hundredth pound.

Afterward the said Constable imprisoned threescore of the men of the said
Lhewelyn (no cause alleged) but that a certain Page spoke a word: who could
not be delivered out of prison, until every of them paid ten shillings.

When the men of the said Lhewelyn came to the said town to sell their oxen,
the said Constable would cause the beasts to be driven to the castle: neither
would he restore the beasts nor money for them. Further, the said Constable
and his men took away the cattle of the said Lhewelyn from his own ground,
and did their will with them.

Further the kings Justices compelled the said Lhewelyn, contrary to the law
and custom of Wales, to deliver to the sons of Encon ap Gruffyth, a certain
town which both he and his ancestors ever had held. The said Constable took
the horse of Lhewelyns Bailiff: when the said Bailiff owed him nothing, who
could never get his horse again, nor any satisfaction for it.

Furthermore when the said Lhewelyn should have gone to a town called
Caerlheon to appear there as he was appointed, the sons of Gruffyth ap
Gwenwynwyn, and the soldiers of Roger Strainge, by the counsel of the said
Roger, took the said Lhewelyn and his men, and imprisoned them, to their great
damage; which the said Lhewelyn would not for 300. pound starling, who could by
no means be delivered, until they had found sufficient suerties.

The Archbishop receiving these and other articles, came to the king, and
requested him to consider these wrongs, and to cause amends to be made, or at
the least excuse the Welshmen having so just cause of grief. Who answered that
the Welshmen were to be excused: yet he said he was ever ready to do justice
to all them that complained. Whereupon the Archbishop besought the king again,
that the Welshmen might have free access to his Grace to declare their
greefes, and to seek remedy: the king answered they should freely come and
depart, if it should seem that by justice they deserved to depart.

The Archbishop hearing this, went and came to the Prince of Wales in Snowdon,
that he might move him and his brother David, and the other company to submit
themselves: whereby he might incline the king to admit them. Which after much
talk and conference with the Archbishop, the Prince answered that he was
ready to submit himself to the king, reserving two things: that is to say,
his conscience, which he ought to have for the rule and safeguard of his people:
Conscientia de salute populi.
and also the decency of his state and calling. Which answer the Archbishop
brought, 2. Decorum.
and reported to the king. At the which the king said, that he would not any
other treaty of peace, than that the Prince and his people should simply
submit themselves. But the Archbishop (knowing well that the Welshmen would not
submit themselves but in the form aforesaid, or in other form to them
tolerable and of them liked) requested the king, that he might have conference
in this matter with all the noble Englishmen then present: who after such
conference agreed all to these articles following. The which articles the
Archbishop did send in writing to the Prince, by John Wallensis.

These are to be said to the Prince before his council.
FIrst that of the four Cantreds and the lands by the king given to his
nobles, and the Isle of Anglesey, he will have no treaty of.

2 Item, of the tenants of the four Cantreds if they will submit themselves,
he purposes to do as becomes a kings majesty: and we verelie believe he
will deal with them mercifully, and to that end we will labor and trust to
obtain.

3 As touching the lord Lhewelyn we can have none other answer, but that he
shall submit himself simply to the king: and we believe certeinlie he will
deal mercifully with him, and to that end we travel all we can, and verelie
believe to be heard.

These following are to be said to the Prince in secret.
FIrst, that the nobility of England have conceived this form of favorable
peace, that the lord Lhewelyn should submit himself to the king: and the king
should honorably provide for him a thousand pound starling, and some honorable
county in England. So that the said Lhewelyn would put the king in quiet
possession of Snowdon: and the king will provide honorably for the daughter of
Lhewelyn, according to the state and condecencie of his own blood, and to
these they hope to persuade the king.

2 Item, if it happen that Lhewelyn marry a wife, and to have by her any
heir male, they trust to entreat the king, that the same heir male and his
heirs for ever shall have the same thousand pound and county.

3 Item, to the people subject to the said Lhewelyn the king will provide, as
becomes their estates and condition, and to that the king is well inclined.

These are to be said to David brother to Lhewelyn in secret.
FIrst, that if for the honor of God ( Iuxta debitum crucis assumptae) he will
go to the holy land, he shall be provided for according to his degree; so that
he do not return, unless he be called by the king: and we trust to entreat
the king, to provide for his child.

2 And these things we tell our selves to the Welshmen, that a great deal
greater peril does hang over them, than we told them by mouth when we were
with them: these things which we write seem grievous, but it is a great deal
more grievous to be oppressed with arms, and finally to be rooted out,
because every day more and more their danger does increase.

3 Item, it is more hard to be always in war, in anguish of mind, and danger
of body, always sought and besieged, and so to die in deadly sin, and
continual rancor and malice.

4 Item, we fear (whereof we be sorry) unless you do agree to peace, we most
certeinlie will aggrauate the sentence Ecclesiastical against you for your
faults: of the which you can not excuse your selves, whereas ye shall find
both grace and mercy, if you will come to peace.

And send us your answer of these in writing.

Reuerendissimo in CHRISTO Patri ac Domino Iohanni, dei gratia Archiepiscopo
Cantuar. ac totius Angliae Primati, suus in Christo debitus filius, Lhewelinus
Princeps VValliae, Dominus Snowdon, salutem.
CVm desiderijs beneuolentiae filialis, ac reuerentijs multimodis, and
honoribus Sancte Pater, sicut vosmet consuluistis, ad gratiam Regiam parati
sumus venire: sub forma tamen nobis secura and honesta. Sed quia forma consenta
in articulis and nos missis, nec secura est, nec honesta, prout nobis and
concilio nostro videtur, and de quamultum admirantur omnes: quod plus tendit ad
ruinam and destructionem nostram, and populi nostri, quam ad nostram
securitatem and honestatem, nullo modo possumus consensum nostrum in eam
praebere; sivellemus, aluque nobiles and populus nobis subiectus nullo modo
consentirent, ob indubitatam destructionem and dissipationem, quae inde eis
possit euenire. Tamen supplicamus vestram sanctam paternitatem, quatenus ad
reformationem pacis debitae, honestae, and securae (ob quam tot labores
assumpsistis) provide laboretis: collationem habentes ad articulos quos vobis
mittimus, in scriptis. Honorabilius est and magis rationi consentaneum vt de
domino Rege teneamus terras in quibus nos habitamus, quam nos exhaeredari, and
eas tradere alijs. Datae apud Garth Celyn.

To the most reverend Father in Christ, the lord John by gods grace Archbishop
of Canturburie, and Primate of all England, his obedient son Lhewelyn prince
of Wales and lord of Snowdon sends greeting.
MOst heartily with all reverence and honor we are content and ready holy
father as you have counseled us, to submit our selves unto the kings Grace, so
it be in that form that shall be safe and honest for us: but because that
form of submission contained in the articles which were sent unto us, is
neither safe, nor honest, as we and our council do think (at the which
articles all men do marvel:) tending rather to the destruction of us and our
people, than any security and honest dealing, we may in no wise yield our
assent unto it, and if we should so do, our nobles and people would not agree
to the same, knowing the mischief and inconvenience that is like to ensue
thereof. Nevertheless, we beseech your holy fatherhood, that for the
reformation of a decent, honest and firm peace (for the which you have taken
so great pains) you do circumspectly provide, having respect unto the
articles which we send unto you in writing. It is more honorable for the king
more agreeable to reason that we should hold our lands in the country where we
dwell, than that we should be disinherited, and our lands given to other men.
Dated at Garth Celyn.

The Answers of the Welshman.
FIrst, though the lord the king will have no treaty of the four Cantreds the
lands that he gave his nobles, nor the Isle of Anglesey: yet the Princes
council will no peace to be made, unless treaty be had of them. For that the
four Cantreds be of the more tenure of the Prince, where always the Princes
of Wales had more right, since the time of Camber the son of Brutus: so that
they be of the principality of Wales. The confirmation of the which the Prince
obtained by Octobonus the Popes legate in England, by the consent of the king
and his father: as it does appear by the letters patents. And more just and
equal it is, that our heirs do hold the said Cantreds of the king for money
and used service, than the same to be given to strangers, which abuse the
people by force and power.

2 All the tenants of all the Cantreds of Wales altogether do say, that they
dare not submit themselves to the king, to do his pleasure. First, for that
the king kept neither covenant, nor oath, nor grant by charter from the
beginning, to the Prince or his people. Secondly, for that the kings men do
cruelly exercise tyranny toward the Church and Churchmen. Thirdly, that
they be not bound to any such matter, seeing they be the Princes tenants: who
is ready to do used and accustomed service, and to obey the king, with and by
the said service.

3 To that which is said, that the Prince should simply commit himself to the
kings will, it is answered, that none of us all dare come to the king, for the
causes aforesaid, we altogether will not suffer our Prince to come in that
manner.

4 Item, where the great men of England would procure a provision of a thousand
pounds a year in England: let it be answered, that such provision is not to be
accepted, for that it is procured by them, who go about to disinherit the
Prince to have his lands in Wales.

5 Item, the Prince ought not to dismiss his inheritance, and his predecessors
in Wales, since the time of Brutus, and confirmed by the sea apostolic, as is
aforesaid, and to take lands in England, where he knows neither tongue,
manners, laws nor customs, wherein he shall be soon trapped by his neighbors
the Englishmen, his old malicious enemies, whereby he should lose the land too.

6 Item, seeing the king goes about to deprive him of his ancient inheritance,
it is not like that he would suffer him to possess lands in England, where he
claims no right; seeing that the Princes lands in Wales of his own
inheritance is but barren and untilled, it is less like the king would suffer
him to enioie good fertile ground in England.

7 Item, the Prince should give the king possession of Snowdon for ever. Let it
be answered, that seeing that Snowdon is of the appurtenances of the
principality of Wales, which the Prince and his predecessors held since the
time of Brute (as it is before said) his council will not suffer him to
renounce that place, and to take in England a place less due unto him.

8 Item, the people of Snowdon do say, that although the Prince would give
the king possession of it, yet they would never do homage to strangers: of
whose tongue, manners, and laws they should be ignorant. For so they should be
for ever captiued and cruelly handled, as the Cantreds have been by the kings
bailiffes and other the kings men handled more cruelly than Sarracens, as it
does well appear by the notes of their greefes, which the men of the Cantreds
sent to you holy father.

These are to be answered for David, the Princes brother.
WHen he is disposed to see the holy land, he will do it for Gods sake
uoluntarilie, not by such inforcement against his will: for he intends not to
go on pilgrimage after that sort. Because he knows enforced service not to
please God; and if he hereafter shall for devotion see the holy land, that is
no cause for ever to disinherit his offspring, but rather to reward them.

And for that neither the Prince nor his people, for country nor for gains,
did move war, inuading no man's lands, but defending their own lands, laws,
and liberties; and that the king and his people of inueterate hatred, and for
covetousness to get our lands inuading the same, moved war: we therefore see
our defense is just and lawful, and herein we trust God will help us, and
will turn his revenge upon destroiers of churches; who have rooted up and
burned churches, and taken out both all sacraments and sacred things from them,
killing preests, clerks, religious, lame, dombe, deaffe, yonglings sucking
their mothers paps, weak and impotent, both man and woman, and committing all
other enormities, as partly it appears to your holiness. Wherefore God
forbid that your holiness should fulminate sentence against any, but such as
has done such things. We who have suffered all these things at the kings
officers hands, do hope at your hands remedy and comfort: and that you will
punish such church robbers and killers, who can defend themselves no ways,
least their impunitie because and example for others to do the like. Uerie
many in our country do much marvel that you counseled us to leave our own
land, and to go to an other man's lands among our enemies to live: for seeing we
cannot have peace in our own land, which is our own right, much less should
we be quiet in an other man's, amongst our enemies. And though it be hard to
live in war and peril, harder it is to be utterly destroyed and brought to
nothing: especially for christians, seeking else nothing but to defend our
own, being by necessity driven thereunto, and the greedy ambition of our
enemies.

And your holiness told us, that you had fulminated sentence against all that
for hatred or gains do hinder the peace. And it appears evidently who do
war for these causes, the fear of death, the fear of imprisonment, the fear
of perpetual prison, the fear of disinheriting, no keeping of promise,
covenant, grant, nor charter, tyrannical dominion, and many more like compel
us to be in war, and this we show to God and to your lordship, desiring your
godly and charitable help.

Furthermore, if any in England have offended the king (as many do offend
him) yet none of them be disinherited: so if any of us have offended the king,
let him be punished and make satisfaction, as he may, without exhereditating.
As we trust in you, we pray you holy Father to labor to this end. If they
lay to us that we break the peace, it appears evidently that they and not
we break the same, who never kept promise, nor covenant, nor order, made any
amends for trespasses, nor remedy for our complaints.

Thus far out of the records of John Peckam Archbishop of Cant. written about
three hundredth years past, which are extant this day to be seen.
When the Archbishop could not conclude a peace, N. Trivet.
he denounced the prince and his accomplices accursed: then the king sent his
army by sea to the I Will of Mon or Anglesey, Hol. page 791.
which they manne, and slew such as resisted them, for the chiefest men served
the king, as their oath was, so they came over against Bangor, where the arm of
the sea called Menay (which divides the I Will from the maine land) is narowest,
and the place called Moel y donn, and there made a bridge of boats and plankes
over the water, Cor. Tacitus in vita Agricolae.
where before Julius Agricola did the like, when he subdued the I Will to the
Romans, and not betwixt Man and Brytaine, as Polydor Virgil ignorantly
affirms. This bridge accomplished, so that threescore men might well pass
over in a front, William Latimer with a great number of the best soldiers, and
Lucas Thany steward of Gascoyn with his Gascoynes and Spaniards (whereof a
great number were to come to serve the king) passed over the bridge, and there
saw no stir of enemies: but as soon as the sea began to flow, down came
the Welshmen from the hills, and set upon them fiercely, and either slew or
chased them to the sea to drown themselves: for the water was to hie, that
they could not attain the bridge, saving William Latimer alone, whose horse
carried him to the bridge, and so he escaped.

Hol. page 791.
There were slain and drowned at this time many worthy soldiers: and amongst
other this famous knight Sir Lucas de Thany (here named) Robert Clifford, Tho.
Walls. page. 11.
Sir William Lindsey, and two Gentlemen of good account, that were brethren to
Robert Burnell then bishop of Bath. There perished in all thirteen knights,
Chro. Dunst.
seventeen young Gentlemen, and to the number of two hundredth footmen, which
happened upon S. Leonards day. Thomas Walsingham writes, that the king lost in
this viage a little before this, Tho. Walls. ibidem.
fourteen ensigns, at which time the lord William de Audeley, and the lord
Roger Clifford the yoonger, and many other were slain, and the king himself
was driven to take the castle of Hope for his safeguard.

In the mean time was the Earl of Gloucester and Sir Edmund Mortimer with an
army in Southwales, where were many that served the king, and there fought
with the princes friends at Lhandeilo Vawr, and gave them an overthrow, wherein
on the kings side young William de Valence his coosen germane, and four
knights more were slain. And all this while the Prince destroyed the country
of Caerdigan, and all the lands of Rees ap Meredyth, who served the king in all
these wars. But afterward the prince separated himself from his army with a
few, and came to Buelht, thinking to remain there quietly for a while, and by
chance as he came by the water Wy, Matt. West. page. 370. N. Trivet. Tho.
Walls. page. 10.
there were Edmund Mortimer, and John Gifford with a great number of soldiers,
and either party were abashed of other. Edmund Mortimers men were of that
country, for his father was lord thereof. Then the prince departed from his men,
and went to the vallie with his esquire alone, to talk with certain lords of
the country, who had promised to meet him there.

Then some of his men seeing their enemies come down from the hill, kept the
bridge called Pont Orewyn, and defended the passage manfully, till one
declared to the Englishmen where a foord was a little beneath, through the
which they sent a number of their men with Helias Walwyn, who suddenly fell
upon them that defended the bridge in their backs, and put them to flight. The
princes esquire told the Prince (as he stood secretly abiding the coming of
such as promised to meet him in a little grove) that he heard a great noise
and cry at the bridge: and the prince asked whether his men had taken the
bridge, and he said, Yes. Then (said the Prince) I pass not if all the power
of England were upon the other side. But suddenly behold, the horssemen about
the grove, and as he would have escaped to his men, they pursued him so hard
that one Adam Francton ran him thorough with a staff being unarmed, Prince
Lhewelyn slain.
and knew him not, and his men being but a few stood and fought boldly, ever
looking for their Prince, till the Englishmen by force of archers mixed with the
horssemen wanne the hill and put them to flight. And as they returned, Francton
went to spoil him whom he had slain, and when he saw his face, he knew him
very well, and stroke off his head, and sent it to the king at the Abbie of
Conwey, who received it with great joy, and caused it to be set upon one of the
highest turrets of the Tower of London.

This was the end of Lhewelyn, beetraied by the men of Buelht, who was the last
Prince of Brytaines blood; who bare dominion and rule in Wales. So that the
rule and government of the Brytaines ever continued in some place of Brytaine,
from the first coming of Brutus, which was in the year before Christ's
incarnation 1136. to the year after Christ 1282. by the space of 2418. years.

Shortly after that the King had brought all the country to his subjection,
the country men themselves brought to him David the Princes brother, Thom.
Walls. page 12.
whom he kept in Ruthlan castle, and after put him to death at Shrewesburie.
Then the king builded two strong holds in Northwales, the one at Conwey, and
the other at Caernaruan. When Rees Vachan hard how all things went, he yielded
himself to the Earl of Hereford, who at the kings commandment sent him to
the Tower of London, to be imprisoned there. And so the king passed through all
Wales, and brought all the country in subjection to the crown of England to
this day.

Thus ends the History of the Brytish Princes.
The Princes of Wales of the blood royal of England: collected for the most
part out of the Records in the Tower.
Edward of Caernaruon.
KIng Edward, albeit he had brought al Wales under his subjection: and by a
statute made at Ruthlan, An. 12. Ed. 1. incorporated and united the same unto
England: in the which statute there be many good laws concerning the division
of Wales into counties, and concerning diverse offices and officers, and
concerning trial, and concerning the divisions of actions, and the form of
many writs, and the proceeding therein, much like to the laws of England: yet
he could never win the good will of the common people of the country to
accept him for their Prince, and to be obedient unto such officers as he should
appoint to govern them, unless he would remain himself in the country
among them. Neither could he bring them to yield their obedience to any other
Prince, except he were of their own nation: for the Welshmen having experience
of the government of the English officers, and knowing that the king would rule
the country by his deputies, cold not abide to have any Englishman to be
their ruler: who oftentimes upon the kings motion answered, that they were
content to take for their Prince any man, whom his Majesty would name, so
that he were a Welshman, and none other answer could he ever get of them, by
any means. Whereupon the king sent for Queen Elianor out of England in the
deep of winter being then great with child, to the castle of Caernaruon: and
when she was nigh to be brought to bed, the king went to Ruthlan, and sent for
all the Barons and best men in all Wales, to come to him, to consult concerning
the weal public of their country. And when they were come, he differred the
consultation, until he was certified that the Queen was delivered of a son:
then (sending certain lords to the christning of his child, and informing them
how he would have him named) he called the Welshmen together, declaring unto
them, that whereas they were oftentimes futers unto him to appoint them a
Prince, he now having occasion to depart out of the country, would name them a
Prince, if they would allow and obey him whom he should name. To the which
motion they answered that they would so do, if he would appoint one of their
own nation to be their Prince: whereunto the king replied, that he would name
one that was borne in Wales, and could speak never a word of English, whose
life and conversation no man was able to stain. And when they all had granted
that such a one they would obey, he named his own son Edward borne in
Caernaruon castle a few days before.

Then the king having the country at his will, gave whole lordships and towns
in the midst of Wales unto English lords: as the lordship of Denbigh, to
Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln: the lordship of Ruthyn, to the lord Reginald
Gray second son to John lord Gray of Wilton: and other lands to many of his
nobility.

This Henry Lacy lord of Denbigh was the son of Edmund Lacy, The lordship of
Denbigh.
the son of John Lacy lord of Halton Pomfret, and Constable of Chester, who
married Margaret the eldest daughter and one of the heirs of Robert Quincy Earl
of Lincoln, the said Henry married Margaret the daughter and sole heir of
William Longspee Earl of Sarum, and had issue Edmund and John which both died
young, of whom the one perished by a fall into a very deep well within the
castle of Denbigh, and a daughter named Alicia married unto Thomas Plantagenet
Earl of Lancaster, who was in the right of his said wife Earl of Lincoln and
Sarum, lord of Denbigh, Halton, Pomfret, and constable of Chester. After the
death of the said Thomas, king Edward the second gave the lordship of Denbigh
to Hugh lord Spencer, Earl of Winchester: after whose death the same lordship
was given by king Edward the third, Anno Regni sui primo, as appears of
Record to Roger Mortimer Earl of March, with diverse other lordships in the
Marches, in performance of the kings promise while he remained in France with
his mother, for the provision of a thousand pound lands of a reasonable extent
for the said Roger, as soon as by Gods grace he should come to the possession
of the crown and kingdom of England. Within few years after, the Earl of
March being attainted, the said lordship of Denbigh was given by the same king
to the lord Montagu Earl of Sarum: but shortly after An. 29. Ed. 3. it was
restored again with the Earldome of March to the Mortimers, in the which house
the same remained until the whole inheritance of the Mortimers came with a
daughter to the house of York, and so to the crown: as appears before, page
317. And now of late it was given by the Queens Majesty that now is, An.
Regni sui. 6. to the right honorable Robert Earl of Leycester, who was then
created Baron of Denbigh: H. Lhoyd.
it is counted now one of the greatest and best lordships in England.

The lordship of Ruthyn continued in the possession of the Grayes, until in
the time of king Henry the seventh, George Gray Earl of Kent and lord of
Ruthyn passed the same upon some bargain to the king, and now it is of the
possession of the right honorable the Earl of Warwick.

There came the same time with king Edward to Northwales diverse Gentlemen, who
grew afterward to be men of great possessions in the country, whose posterity
do enjoy the same to this day.

Rees ap Meredyth served the king in all these wars, who did the Prince most
hurt of all men: and was in great hope of goodly preferments at the kings
hands: whom after the overthrow of the Prince the king made knight, and fed
with many fair and good words. After that, he and all other his countriemen
and neighbors had submitted themselves to the government of the king of
England: Hol. page 796.
it happened that the lord Pain Tiptoft, warden of the kings castles nigh unto
Reeses country, and the Lord Alan Plucknet the kings steward in Wales, called
the said Rees, as they did all other of the country to the kings court,
whither he refused to come, alleging his ancient privileges and liberties with
the kings promises: but the said officers proceeded according to the law
against him: 1289
whereupon a great variance arose between the said Pain Tiptoft, and the said
Sir Rees ap Meredyth, so that sundry skirmishes were foughten betwixt them,
and men slain on both sides, to the great disturbance of the country. The
king hearing of these things (being then beyond the seas) wrote unto Rees ap
Meredyth, requiring him to keep the peace till his return: at what time he
promised to reform all things in due and reasonable order: but Rees would not
give over the enterprise which he had begun. Whereupon the king sent to the
Earl of Cornwall, Tho. Walls. page. 15.
whom he had leaft his lieutenant in the realm during his absence, to send an
army of men into Wales, to withstand the disordered attempts of the said Rees.
Who went into Wales himself, and overthrew Reeses castle of Drofolan: but by
undermining and reuersing the walls of the said castle, with the fall
thereof, the Baron of Stafford and the lord William de Monchency, with many
other knights and Esquires, were oppressed and bruised to death. Afterward
Robert Tiptoft lord deputy of Wales gathered an army, and meeting the said
Rees after the slaughter of 4000. of his people, Tho. Walls. page 20.
discomfited and took him. Who about Michaelmas following, at the kings going
into Scotland, was had to York, and there condemned and executed.

Not long after, 1293
the king wanting money, there was a great subsidy granted toward the
maintenance of the wars in France, about leuieng of the which there was much
adoo in diverse places: but especially the Welshmen, which were never wont to
be acquainted with such contribution, stormed against it: Matt. West. page. 395.
so that they took one of their own captains named Roger de Puelesdon, who
at the kings commandment gathered the said subsidy, and hanged him with
diverse other, and afterward headed the said Roger. Whereupon the king being
sore offended for the death of the said Roger, whom he greatly favored, and
hearing that the Welshmen began to stir against him in diverse places: for the
Westwales men had chosen Maelgon Vachan for their captain, and destroyed all
Caerdigan and Penbrooke, and returned with rich spoils: they of Glamorgan and
the South parts, took one named Morgan for their leader, and driving the Earl
of Gloucester out of the country, they restored to the said Morgan again those
possessions which the ancestors of the said Earl by force and great wrong had
taken from the said Morgans predecessors. The Northwales men had set up one
Madoc being of the kindred of the last Lhewelyn slain at Buelht, who gathering
a great power came to Caernaruon, and slew a great number of Englishmen which
were come thither to the Fair, and spoiled the whole town: then (I say) the
king called back his brother Edmond Earl of Lancaster, and Henry Lacy Earl
of Lincoln and lord of Denbigh, who had an army ready to pass into Gascoyn.
Hol. page 810.
These Earls came toward Northwales, and as they approached near unto the
castle of Denbigh upon S. Martyns day, the Welshmen with great force
encountered them, and giving them battle, drove them back, and discomfited
their people.

Then the king himself came to Wales, and kept his Christmas at Aberconwey,
where Robert Wynchelsey archbishop of Canturburie came unto him and did his
homage, and then returned home. The king as he passed further into the
country, lost much of his carriages, which the Welshmen took, being laden
with vittell and provision for the army: so that the king and his people
endured great penury, and was constrained to drink water mixed with honey, and
eat very gross and course meat, where he was very like to have been
distressed, had not the other part of his army come unto him in time.

While the king remained in Snowdon, N. Trivet. Tho. Walls. page. 27.
the Earl of Warwick hearing that a great number of Welshmen were assembled
together, and lodged in a vallie betwixt two woods, chose out a company of
horssemen, with certain crossebowes and archers, and coming upon the Welshmen
in the night, compassed them round about, who pitching the ends of their
spears, and turning the points against their enemies, stood at defense so to
keep off the horssemen. But the Earl having placed his battle so, that ever
betwixt two horssemen there stood a crossebow, a great part of the Welshmen,
who stood at defense in manner aforesaid with their spears, were overthrown
and broken with the shot of the quarrels, and then the Earl charged the residue
with a troop of horssemen, and bare them down with such slaughter, as they
had not sustained the like loss of people (as was thought) at any time before.

After this the king builded a strong castle within the I Will of Anglesey, and
called the same Buemarish: Beumarish built.
and so putting all things in quietness, and punishing such as had put to
death Roger de Puelesdon, he returned home with his army. But Madoc within a
while after leauieng an army of men came to Oswestrie, where the people
yielded unto him: and meeting with the lord Strange with a company of Marchers
not far from Knookine, overthrew him, and spoiled his country miserably,
and shortly after he gave the Marchers another overthrow. But for all that the
lord Marchers nothing dismayed at this mischance, gathered a great power anew,
and met Madoc as he was coming toward Shrewesburie upon the hills of Cefn
Digolh not far from Caurs castle, where after a long fight the said Madoc
was taken, and his men discomfited and put to flight. Then he was sent to the
Tower of London, there to remain in perpetual prison. There be some which
affirm, that Madoc was not taken, but rather after many adventures and
sundry conflicts, when the Welshmen were brought into an issue of great
extremity, the said Madoc came in, and submitted himself to the kings peace,
and was received upon condition, that he should pursue Morgan till he had taken
him and brought him to the kings prison: which was done, and so all things in
those parties were set in rest and peace, and many hostages of the chiefest of
the nobility of Wales were delivered to the king, who sent them to diverse
castles in England, where they were safely kept almost to the end of the
wars that followed with Scotland.

In the 29. year of king Edward the first, Edward prince of Wales came to
Chester, where he received the homage of the freeholders of Wales, as: Henry
Earl of Lancaster did homage and fealty for Monmouth. Reginald Gray for
Ruthyn. Fulke Fitzwarren for his lands in Wales. The lord William Martin for
his lands in Cemaes. Roger Mortimer for his lands in Wales. Henry Lacy Earl
of Lincoln for the land of Ros and Ryuoneoc in Wales. The Homage done to
Edward Prince of Wales, out of the Records.
Robert lord Mount alt for his land in Wales. Gruffyth lord of Poole for the
lordship of Powys. Sir Gruffyth Lhoyd knight. Tuder ap Grono of Anglesey. Madoc
ap Tuder Archdeacon of Anglesey. Encon ap Howel of Caernaruon. Tuder ap
Gruffyth. Lhewelyn ap Ednyuet. Gruffyth Vachan the son of Gruffyth ap
Iorwerth. Madoc Vachan Denglfield. Lhewelyn bishop of S. Asaph. Flint. Engl.
Master Richard de Puelesdon. This man (as appears by the Records in the
Tower) was made Sheriff of Caernaruon shire during his life, with the stipend
of forty pound starling yearly, An. 12. Ed. 1.


Gruffyth ap Tuder.

Ithel Vachan.

Ithel ap Blethyn, etc.

The lord Richard de Sutton Baron of Malpas did homage and fealty to Edward
Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester for the said Baronie of Malpas, Apud
Ruthlan 27. Die Aprilis, An. supra dicto.

Anianus or Eneon bishop of Bangor, and David Abbot of Maynan, did homage and
fealty to the said Edward Prince of Wales, Apud Conwey 28. Aprilis An. supra
dicto.

Lewys de Felton the son of Richard de Felton did homage and fealty to
Edward Prince of Wales, for the lands which the said Richard held of the prince
in Maelor Saesneg.

John Earl Warren did homage and fealty to Edward prince of Wales, in the
chapel of the lord John de Kirkbie, sometime bishop of Elie, at London 25.
die Iulij, An. 30. E. 1. for the lordships of Bromfield and Yal.

The same John Earl Warren swore fealty unto the said Prince for the lands in
Hopdale.

The lord Edmund Mortimer the first day of November, An. 30. Ed. 1. in the
house of the bishop of Elie at London, did homage and fealty to Edward prince
of Wales before his council, for his lands of Cery and Cydewen.

About the year 1322. 1322
one Sir Gruffyth Lhoyd knight gathered a great number of Welshmen, Hol. page
863.
and took diverse castles in Wales, which were kept by the people of the lord
Mortimer the elder. He took also the castles of Mould, Chirk, etc. The keepers
whereof (coming to Prince Edward at Shrewesburie who then was king of England)
submitted themselves to him, and were shortly after sent to the Tower of
London.

Edward of Windsor.
THe same year being the fifteenth of the reign of king Edward the second,
Hol. page 869.
Edward de Windsore the kings eldest son was in a parliament holden at York
created prince of Wales and Duke of Aquitane.

Edward of VVoodstoke surnamed the black Prince.
EDward borne at Woodstoke, son and heir to king Edward the third, was
created Prince of Wales the twelfe day of May, in the xvij. year of his
fathers reign, when he was fourteen years of age, who in time grue to be
the flower of chivalry of all Europe. He took John the French king prisoner,
at the battle of Poytiers, and died, his father yet living, the eight of
Iulie, in the xlvj. year of his age, and the fifty of his fathers reign: a
prince of such excellent demeanor, so valiant, wife, and politic in his
doings, that the very and perfect representation of knighthood appeared most
lively in his person: for such was his towardness, or rather perfection in
princely government, that if he had lived and atteined the crown, every man
judged that he would surely have exceeded the glorious renown of all his
ancestors.

Richard of Burdeuxe.
RIchard the son of Edward, Prince of Wales, was after the death of his
father created Prince of Wales, at Hauering at Bower, the 20. day of November
in the 50. year of king Edward the third his Grandfather, he was after the
death of his said Grandfather, king of England, by the name of king Richard the
second.

Henry of Monmouth.
HENRY of Monmouth, son and heir to Henry the fourth, king of England, was
the fifteenth day of October in the first year of the reign of his father at
Westminster created Prince of Wales: who was after king of England, by the name
of king Henry the fifth.

In the time of king Richard the second there was one Owen ap Gruffyth Vachan
descended of a yoonger son of Gruffyth ap Madoc lord of Bromfield. This Owen
was first a student at the laws of the Realm, and became an utter barrester,
or an apprentise of the law (as they term him) and served king Richard in
great credit and favor; between whom and the lord Gray of Ruthyn happened
some discord about a piece of commons, lieng between the lordship of Ruthyn,
and the lordship of Glyndourdwy, whereof Owen was owner, and thereof took his
surname of Glyndour. During the reign of king Richard, Owen was too hard for
the lord Gray, being then a seruitour in court with king Richard, (with whom he
was at the time of his taking by the duke of Lancaster in the castle of Flynt)
but after that king Richard was put down, the lord Gray being now better
freended than Owen, entered upon the said commons: whereupon Owen having many
friends and folowers in his country (as those that be great with Princes
commonly have) put himself in armor against the lord Gray, whom he meeting
in the field overcame and took prisoner. This was the very beginning and the
cause of Owens rising and attempts. Upon the taking of the lord Gray, and
spoiling of his lordship of Ruthyn, many resorted to Owen from all parts of
Wales, some thinking that he was as well in favor now as he was in king
Richards days: some other putting in his head, that now the time was come
wherein the Brytaines through his means might recover again the honor and
liberties of their ancestors. These things being laid before Owen by such as
were very cunning in Merlins prophesies and the interpretations of the same
(for there were in those days, as I fear there be now, some singular men
which are deeply ouerseene in those mysteries, and hope one day to meet
velvet upon London bridge with their bows) brought him into such a fools
paradise, that he never waieng what title he might pretend nor what right he
had, proceeded and made war upon the Earl of March, who was the right
inheritour as well to the Principality of Wales, as appears before page 315.
as to the kingdom of England, after the death of king Richard being descended
of the elder brother next to Edward prince of Wales father to king Richard. Of
which stir and rebellion there insued much mischief to the Welshman. For
the king conceiving great hatred against them, The unreasonable laws of K.
Henry 4. against the inhabitants of Wales. See the books of statutes.
showed himself a manifest oppressor of all that nation, making rigorous laws
against them, whereby he took in a manner all the liberties of subjects from
them, prohibiting all Welshman to purchase lands, or to be chosen or received
to be citizens or burgesses in any city, borough, or market town, or be
received or accepted to any office of Mayor, Bailiffe, Chamberlain,
constable, or keeper of the gates, or of the jail, or to be of the counsel of
any city, borough or town, or to bear any manner armor within any city,
borough, or market town. And if any suit happened between a VVelshman and
any Englishman, it was by law ordained that the Englishman should not be
convict, unless it were by the judgment of English Justices, and by the
verdict of whole English burgesses, or by inquests of English boroughs and
towns of the Seigniories where the said suit lay: also that all English
burgesses that married VVelshwomen should be disfranchised of their liberties.
No congregations or meetings in counsel was permitted to the Welshman but by
license of the chief officers of the same Seigniorie, and in the presence of
the same officers. That no victuals or armor should be brought into Wales
without the special license of the king or his counsel. That no VVelshman
should have any castle, fortress, or house defensive of his own or of any
other man to keep. No VVelshman to be made Justice, Chamberlain, Chancellor,
Treasuror, Sheriff, Steward, Constable of castle, receiver, eschetor,
coroner, nor chief forester, nor other officer, nor keeper of the records, nor
lieutenant in any of the said offices in no part of Wales, nor of the
counsel of any English lord, notwithstanding any patent or license made to
the contrary. That no Englishman, which in time to come shall marie any
VVelshwoman, be put in any office in Wales, or in the Marches of the same.

These with other laws both unreasonable and vnconcionable (such as no prince
among the heathen ever offered to his subjects) were ordained and severely
executed against them. Neither was it any reason that for the offense of one
man and his accomplices, all the whole nation should be so persecuted, whereby
not only they that lived in that time, but also their children and posterity
should be brought to perpetual thraldom and misery: for these laws were not
ordained for their reformation, but of mere purpose to work their utter ruin
and destruction. Which does evidently appear, in that they were forbidden to
keep their children at learning, or to put them to be apprentises to any
occupation in any town or borough of this realm. Let any indifferent man
therefore judge and consider whether this extremity of law, where justice it
self is mere injury and cruelty, be not a cause and matter sufficient to
withdraw any people from civility to barbarism.

Edward of Westminster.
EDward the only son, and heir of king Henry the sixth borne at
Westminster the thirtith day of October in the 31. year of the reign of his
father, was created prince of Wales, and Earl of Chester, by authority of
parliament at Westminster the 15. day of March in the 32. year of the said
king his father. This prince was afterward of such towardness, that he became
skillful in the knowledge as well of martial affairs, as of matters of
government and laws of the realm, he was murdered at Teukesburie.

Edward of Westminster.
EDward the eldest son of K. Edward the 4. borne in the sanctuary at
Westminster, his father being expelled out of England in the 49. year of king
Henry the sixth, was by authority of parliament created prince of Wales, and
Earl of Chester, the 26. day of June, in the eleventh year of the reign of
his father king Edward the fourth, and was afterward king of England by the
name of king Edward the 5. who was made away by the wicked practice of his
uncle Richard duke of Gloucester, who usurped the crown after him.

John bishop of Worcester (as appears by records of the town Hall of Salop,
Ioh. Bishop of Worcester.
bearing date the tenth day of April in the 18. year of king Edward the
fourth) was president of the L. Princes counsel of the Marches of Wales: who
together with the lord Anthony Earl Rivers, uncle and governor to the said
Prince, sat in the town hall aforesaid, and made certain ordinances for the
weal and tranquillity of the said town.

King Edward the fourth using much the faithful service of the Welshmen, meant
the reformation of the estate of Wales, and the establishing of a court within
that Principality, and therefore he sent the bishop of Worcester, and the
Earl Rivers, with the prince of Wales to the country, to the end he might
understand how to proceed in his purposed reformation. But the troubles and
disquietnesse of his own subjects, and the shortness of his time suffered him
to do little or nothing in that behalf.

Edward.
EDward the only son of king Richard the third, being a child of ten
years of age, was the four and twentieth day of August, in the first year of
the reign of the same king created prince of Wales.

Arthur.
ARthur the son and heir of King Henry the seventh, was upon the feast day
of S. Andrew, in the fifth year of king Henry the seventh his father, created
Prince of Wales. About this time king Henry the seventh, who by his
grandfather Owen Tuder descended out of Wales, Owen Tuder
being aided by the Welshmen in Bosworth field, which came thither under the
conduct of Sir William Standley then L. of Bromfield, Yale and Chirckland,
knowing and pitieng their thraldom and injuries, took order to reform the
same, and granted unto them a charter of liberties, whereby they were released
of that oppression, wherewith they were afflicted by laws (as I have laid
down before) more heathenish than christian. And here I can not pass, but
must something answer the reproachful and slanderous assertions of Johannes
Bernardus, Pontus, Heuterus and others, who go about to abase the noble
parentage of the said Owen this kings grandfather, following more their own
affectionate humors, than any good proof or authority, for if they would
read that noble work of Matthew Paris, they shall find in page 843. of the
printed book, that Ednyuet Vachan one of his ancestors was the chiefest of
counsel to Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth, otherwise called Leolinus Magnus, and to
David ap Lhewelyn, Princes of Wales, as appears before page 306. They may
also find in the records of the tower, in an. 29. Ed. 1. in the general homage
done to Edward Caernaruon, first Prince of Wales of the English blood, that
Tuder ap Grono another of the ancestors of the said Owen, did his homage among
the nobles of Wales, as appears in the said records. Further the said Owens
grandmother, the wife of Tuder ap Grono, was Margaret the daughter of Thomas
the son of Elianor, which was the daughter of the county of Bar, by Elianor
his wife, daughter to Edward the first, king of England.

Besides all this, there was a commission at this time directed from king
Henry the seventh, to the Abbot of Lhan Egwest, Doctor Owen Poole chanon of
Hereford, and John King, harold, to make inquisition concerning the parentage
of the said Owen, who coming to Wales, traveled in that matter, and used the
helps of Sir John Leyaf, Guttyn Owen Bardh, Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn ap Euan
Vachan, and others in the search of the Brytish or Welsh books of petigrees,
out of the which they drew his perfect genelogie from the ancient kings of
Brytaine and the Princes of Wales, and so returned their commission: which
return is extant at this day to be seen.

After that about the seventeenth year of king Henry's reign, William Smith
bishop of Lincoln.
Prince Arthur went again to Wales, being newly married, with whom the king
sent Doctor William Smith, which was afterward bishop of Lincoln, to be
president of his counsel, appointing him other wise and expert counselors, as
Sir Richard Poole his kinseman, Prince Arthurs councelers.
which was his chief chamberlain, also Sir Henry Vernon, Sir Richard Crofts,
Sir David Philip, Sir William Vdall, Sir Thomas Englefield, Sir Peter Newton,
etc. But before the year ended, this noble Prince, after that he had been
married to the lady Catharine his wife, the space of five months, departed
out of this transitory life, at Ludlowe castle, the second day of April in
the said year of his fathers reign, and with great funeral solemnity was
buried at Worcester.

Henry duke of York.
Henry duke of York, brother unto Prince Arthur, was after the death of the
Prince, the 18. day of February, in the 19. year of the reign of king
Henry the seventh his father, created Prince of Wales, and was afterward king
of England, by the name of king Henry the eight. The said William Smith Bishop
of Lincoln, was L. President of his council, who continued in that office,
until the fourth year of this kings reign; and was the first L. President
that is named in the records of that court: he was founder of Brasenose college
in Oxenford.

In the fourth year of this noble king Henry the eight, Geffrey Blyth Bishop
of Couentrie and Lychfield was sent into Wales to be L. Geffrey Blyth
President of the princes council, where he continued until the 16. year of
the same king.

Marie.
THe lady Marie, daughter to the same king Henry the eight, by the Princess
Catharine Dowager, the widow of Prince Arthur, was Princess of Wales. And in
the seventeenth year of king Henry's reign, John Voiseie, John Voiseie.
Bishop of Excester, was sent by the king to be L. President of the council of
the said Princes in the marches of Wales, where he continued until the 25.
year of the same king. I. Hoker in Catalogo Episc. Exon.
This Bishop was Doctor of the laws, and very well learned and wise, and in
great favor with the king, who sent him sundry times in embassages to
foreign Princes: and now he had the government of the kings only daughter
lady Marie Princess of Wales. Of all the Bishops in the land he was counted
the courtlikest; and the best Courtier: and although he was well reported of
for his learning, A courtly Bishop.
yet was he better liked for his courtlike behavior, which in the end turned
not so much to his credit, as to the utter ruin and spoil of his church: for
of xxij. lordships and manours, which his predecessors had, and least unto him
of a goodly yearly revenue, he leaft but three, and them also leased out.
And where he found fourteen houses well furnished, he leaft only one house
bare and without furniture, and yet charged with sundry fees and annuities: by
means whereof that bishopric, which sometimes was counted one of the best,
is now become in temporal lands one of the meanest: and a place scarce leaft
for the Bishop to lay and rest his head in: yet nevertheless he was a great
fauorer of learned men, and specially of divines, whom he preferred in his
church above all others. He was very bounteous and liberal unto all men, but
specially unto courtiers, unto his own kindred and countrymen. Upon many he
bestowed, unto the confusion of some of them: and upon other he spent much, by
building of a town named Sutton Colshull where he was borne, which he procured
to be incorporated and made a market town: and set up therein making of
kersies, but all in the end came to small effect.

ELIZABETH.
ELIZABETH daughter to King Henry the 8. was in a Parliament begun the 15. day
of January, in the 25. year of the reign of her father, declared Princess
and inheritrice of the crown of England, with all the dominions to the same
belonging in default of issue male of the body of the said king Henry.

Row. Lee, bishop of Couentrie and Lichfield.
Rowland Lee bishop of Couentrie and Lichfield was in the 26. year of king
Henry the eight, sent to be Lord President of the kings majesty's Counsel in
the marches of Wales: in whose time the principality and country of Wales was
by Parliament incorporated and united unto the kingdom of England, and all the
inhabitants thereof made equal in freedoms, liberties, rights, privileges,
laws, and in all other respects, to the natural subjects of England, and all
inheritances were made of English tenure to descend without division or
partition after the manner of England. Also the laws, statutes, and ordinances
of the realm of England, were commanded to be executed and put in practice
within the contrie and principality of Wales, and none other. And to the end
the said laws should be duly put in execution, the whole dominion of Wales
together with the lordships marchers bordering upon the same, was divided into
xiij. shires or counties, wherefore xij. made four circuits, to the which
circuits there were several Judges appointed, who should administer justice to
the inhabitants of every of the said shires twice in the year. The first
circuit was the three shires of Eastwales, Eastwales.
Denbygh, Flynt, and Mountgomrie, wherein the Justice of Chester keeps
sessions twice in the year, hearing and deciding all titles, trespasses,
variance and misdemeanors within the country.

The Justice of Northwales does the like in the three shires of Northwales,
Northwales.
Anglesey, Caernaruon, and Meryonyth, which do make the second circuit.

The third circuit are the three shires of Westwales, Westwales.
Caerdigan, Caermardhyn, and Penbrooke, where the Justice of that country
keeps his sessions every year twice.

The three shires of Southwales, Southwales
Radnor, Brechnocke, and Glamorgan do make the fourth circuit, in the which
the Justice of Southwales does keep sises twice every year. And because all
matters as well of law as of equity are heard and determined in these
circuits, the same do continue six days in every of the shires aforenamed.

Monmouthshire does follow the common order of the shires of England,
Monmouth shire.
suing all original writs out of the high court of chancerie. In all these
shires there were appointed Shirifes, Justices of peace, Crowners, and all
other officers accordingly, as they are in England.

Further for the keeping of the country in continual obedience, The Court in
the marches of Wales.
and the controlling of the outrage of wilful and unruly persons; there was
ordained a President and counsel to remain within the dominion and
Principality of Wales, with all officers appertaining to the same. Which
President and council have power and authority to hear and determine, by
their wisdoms and discretions, such causes and matters as are assigned to them
by the Kings or Queens of England for the time being. And certeinlie (let men
imagine what they will) this house was it, The necessity of the court in the
Marches.
that (after great hatred and persecution, whereof disobedience and rudenes
followed) reduced the country of Wales to quietness, obedience and civility:
by authority whereof not only great outrages are appeased, the offenders
punished, and the wilful brideled: but also the quiet and obedient subject is
protected and defended from injury, so that he may possess his own in
quietness. Wherein this Bishop Rowland Lee and his associats did notable good
service. And surely there have been of the same house very wise governors
and men of great credit; namely Nicholas Heath Archbishop of York and Lord
Chancellor of England: Thomas Young Archbishop also of York: John Whitgift now
Archbishop of Canturburie; and diverse other, of whom I am to speak hereafter.

Prince Edward borne
In the 29. year of king Henry the eight, prince Edward his son was borne at
Hampton court on S. Edwards even being the 12. of October, who because the
principality of Wales was now by statute (as I said before) incorporated to
the crown and kingdom of England, being under the same laws and
jurisdiction, was none otherwise Prince of Wales than under the general title
of England: as the king his father was king of England, and under that name K.
of Wales as a member of England; neither do I read of any other creation or
inuestiture that he had to that principality, therefore I thought it not
convenient to make any special title of him after the said statute. He
afterward succeeded his father in the crown of this realm by the name of king
Edward the sixth.

The said Rowland Lee died L. President in the xxxiiij. year of King Henry
the eight and lies buried at Shrewesburie. After him Richard Sampson R.
Sampson.
bishop of Chichester was removed to Couentrie and Lichfield and appointed
Lord President of Wales, in the xxxv. year of king Henry the eight, and so
continued L. President until the end of the 2. year of the reign of king
Edward the sixth.

John Sutton alias Dudley Earl of Warwike and knight of the noble order of the
garter, John, Earl of Warwike.
was in the third year of King Edward the sixth appointed Lord President of
Wales, in the which office he continued until the fourth year of the same
king. He descended out of Wales by a daughter of the Lord Powys, for he was the
son of Edmund, the son of John a yoonger son of John Lord Dudley, the
son of John Lord Dudley, the son of John Lord Dudley, the son of John Lord
Dudley, the son of John Sutton Baron Dudley, who married Isabell the daughter
of sir John Charlton Lord Powys who descended of Hawys the daughter and heir
of Owen ap Gruffyth Lord Powys, who was linealie descended of Blethyn ap Convyn
Prince of Wales, mentioned before page* 103.

This noble man was made knight being very young, by Charles Brandon Duke of
Suffolk, for his good service done at Montededier in France, Anno 15. Hen. 8.
He was sent Ambassador to the Emperor, Anno 26. Hen. 8. After the death of
the Uicount Lisle his father in law, he was created Uicount Lisle and warden
of the frontiers and marches of Scotland, Anno 33. Hen. 8. He was chosen to be
fellow and companion of the order of the Garter the fifth of May, An. 35. Hen.
8. In the first year of K. Edward the sixth, he was created Earl of Warwike,
and in the fifth year of the same king, Duke of Northumberland. He was also
Earl Marshall high admiral of England L. great master and President of the
privy council, and further entitled lord Basset and Tyesse.

The next year after, William Herbert, knight of the noble order.
that is in the fourth year of Edward the sixth, William Herbert knight of the
noble order of the garter, was appointed L. President of Wales, and continued
until Michaelmas, in the first year of Queen Marie. After whom Nicholas
Heath Bishop of Worcester was sent to be L. President of Wales, Nicholas Heath,
Bishop of Worcester.
and continued there until the third year of the same Queen, and then was
removed to be Lord Chaunceler of England, being then elected Archbishop of
York. W. Herbert Earl of Penbrook.
At which time the said William Herbert was again made L. President of Wales,
and so continued until the sixth year of the same Queen. He descended of
William Herbert, created Earl of Penbrooke by king Edward the fourth, who was
the son of Sir William Herbert, who married Gladys the daughter of Sir David
Gam, which Sir William was the son of Thomas Herbert, the son of Gwilim ap
Ienkyn, lineallie descended of a noble man called Herbert Fitzhenrie,
chamberlain to king Henry the first. This noble man lived in great credit and
estimation with king Henry the eight, king Edward the sixth, Queen Marie, and
Queen Elizabeth, and was by every of the said Princes employed in matters of
great importance, and for his good and faithful service greatly honored: as
appears in an Epitaph fixed upon his toombe in the Cathedral church of S.
Paul in London, which I thought good here to lay down.

Perpetuae pietati Sacrum.
GVliel. Herberto Penbrochiae comiti, equiti aurato praenobilis ordinis
Anglici: Henr. viij. R. Acubiculis: Edoard. vi. R. equitum magistro: Walliae
praesidi. Tumultu occidentali cum Russello and Graio Baronibus paribus
auspicijs summae rerum praeposito: Mariae Rae. contra perduelles, ac
expeditione ad Augustam Veromanduorum bis, totius exercitus duci: bis summo in
agro Caletum, Limitum praefecto: Elizab. Rae. officiorum seu Magno Regiae
Magistro. Pariter and Dominae Annae ex vetiista Parrorum gente oriundae, Sorori
Catharinae Rae. Henr. viij. R. vi. matrimonio coniunctae, ac Marchionis
Northamptonij: Prudentissae. foeminae, pietatis, religionis, probitatis
omnisque auitae virtutis retinentissae fidiss. Comitis coniugi: Henr. F. ac
comes, Pp. chariss. sibi ac suis moerens. P.

Obijt aetatis An 63.
Obijt salutis An 1569.
Liberis relictis ex prima.
Henrico Pemb. Comite.
Edoardo Equite Aurato.
Domina Anna Baroni Talbot nupta.
Secunda coniuge superstite, Georgio Salopiae comite genita, inisigni praeter
antiquum probitatis decus, virtute foemina.

In the sixth year of Queen Marie, Gilb. Bourne.
Gilbert Bourne Bishop of Bath and Wels was sent to be lord President of Wales,
and so continued until the death of the same Queen.

In the first year of Queen Elizabeth, I. Williams L. Williams of Them.
Sir John Williams L. Williams of Them, was sent L. President into Wales, and
died L. President the same year in the castle of Ludlowe, and lies buried at
Them, in the county of Oxenford: where he of his good and virtuous
disposition toward the good and godly education of the youth of his country,
and maintenance of the poor, founded by his last will and testament a Grammar
school and an Almeshouse, to have continuance for ever, and leaft certain
yearly revenues in lands and money, for the maintenance of the same. And for
the ordering conueieng and assuring of the premises to the uses aforesaid, he
constituted and ordained executors of his said last will and testament, among
other Robert Doylie of Merton in the same county Esquier, and William Place of
Lurgyshall in the county of Buckingham Gentleman, who purchasing other lands
for that purpose to the yearly value of 57. pounds, two shillings five pence,
sued out the mortmaine and enfe offed the Warden and Scholars of new College in
Oxenford, and their successors of the premises to the use above mentioned.

The foundation of the School is of one head Schoolemaister to be appointed by
the said Robert Doylie and William Place or the longer liver of them for their
life time: and afterward by the said Warden and Scholars of new College and
their successors for ever: who has yeerelie for his stipend the sum of xxvj.
pounds xiij. shillings iiij. pence. And one usher to be likewise appointed as
the master is, who shall have for his stipend yeerelie the sum of xiij. pounds
vj. shillings viij. pence both which stipends are to be paid quarterly by even
portions.

The almeshouse is founded to have five almsmen and one almeswoman, who have
yeerelie toward their maintenance the sum of 7. pounds 4. shillings, and a
new gown every fourth year.

There is also allowed for the keeping of the toombe of the said lord Williams
8. shillings yeerelie, and for keeping clean of the watercourse 4. shillings.

Henry Sidney, knight of the noble order.
Henry Sidney knight, after the death of the L. Williams of Them in the
second year of the Queens Majesty that now is, was sent to be L. President
of Wales. This knight is descended by the heirs make lineallie of Sir William
Sidney, who came out of Aniowe into England with Henry Fitzempresse, and was
afterward chamberlain to the said Henry when he was king of England, and
descended out of Wales by his mother Anne the daughter of Anne, the daughter of
William Clement, the son of John, the son of William, the son of William,
the son of Ienkyn Clement, who married the daughter of Conan, the son of
Meredyth, the son of Gruffyth, the son of the lord Rees Prince of
Southwales, of whom mention is before page 249. which Rees was the son of
Wenlhian, the daughter of Gruffyth ap Conan Prince of Northwales. The mother
likewise of the same John or Ienkyn Clement, was Cicilie the daughter of Sir
Gruffyth Lhoyd knight, the son of Rees, the son of Gruffyth, the son of
Ednyuet Vachan, chief counselor and steward to Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth Prince of
Wales, of whom Matthew Paris makes mention, page 843. who also was the
auncestor of Owen Tuder, the Grandfather of king Henry the seventh, of whom I
have written before.

In the third year of king Edward the sixth, he was made knight by the king:
and was sent Ambassador to the French king, when he was but xxij. years of
age. In the time of Queen Marie he was treasurer of Ireland, and lord Justice
there, where he so used himself, that he gat great commendation of all the
inhabitants of that country. Anno. 1564. he was chosen Knight of the noble
order of the Garter.

He has now continued L. President of Wales about xxiiij. years, of the which
he served in Ireland eight years and six months, being there three several
times lord deputy general of that country. He repaired the castle of
Ludlowe, which is the cheifest house within the marches, being in great decaie,
as the Chapel, the court house, and a fair fountain, from the which by
several cocks the offices of the house are served with water. Also he erected
diverse new buildings within the same castle, as a fair new porters lodge:
large chambers for the keeping of the records of that court: and other
convenient lodgings for such commissioners to lie in as are called thither for
to give attendance in that service.

Tervyn.

An admonition for the reading of the Brytish words.
IT is to be noted, that the letter [c] in all Brytish words has always the
sound of the English [k] except it be joined with [h:] for [ch] is counted but
one consonant, which has the sound of the Greek [ch] and never of the English
[ch.] I have also used [dh] for the Brytish [dd] and [lh] for the [ll.] The
single [f] has the sound of [v] consonant. [R] in the beginning of a word is
to be pronounced with an aspiration. The rest of the letters agree with the
English pronountiation.

Certain words passed in this impression are thus to be amended.
PAge 26. Line 7. put out, and Cornwall. page 88. line 26. read, Caradoc the
son of Rytherch ap Iestyn. page 96. line 21. Peuensey ibidem line 23. Sheppey.
page 104. line 31. Portascyth. page 122. line 10. Aberthaw. page 131. line 5. and
25. Cydwely. page 155. line 25. for of, read and. page 166. line 30. for Riryd,
read Madoc. page 168. line 29. for thy, read his. page 188. line 30. Richard of
Clare and. page 197. line 16. Hugh son to the Earl. page 211. line 31. for
Anarawd read Meruyn. page 254. line 17. for theidw, read cheidw. ibidem line
18. for Rhae, read Rhac. page 329. line 15. primat of all. page 357. line 6. ap
Gwystyl. page 395. line 7. whereof.

A Table containing the principal matters, places, and persons in this book.
This letter (D) signifies the description. The figures note the page.
A.
ABercynfric, 150. Aberstraw (D) 6. destroyed by the Irishmen, 62. Abergeuenny
(D) 20.289. Aberheidol, 220. Aberlhech, 154. Aberlhiennawc, 155. Aberlhychwr
Castle, 203. Aberystwyth castle built, 169.336. taken, 337. Adelarde, 8.12.
overcome by the Brytaines, 14. ioineth his power with Ethelbald, 15. Adelstane
K. of England, 50. Aedan ap Blegored, 74. he is slain, 83. Aedan the son of
Melht, 38. Alan K. of little Brytaine, 1. Alans whence they came, 39. Alclyd
destroid by ye Danes, 34. Alfred K. of England, 33. loves and gets about
him learned men, ibidem. translateth the Brytish laws into the Saxon tongue,
42. his Epitaph, 43. Alfwyen disinherited, 49. Algar Earl of Chester, 99.
Almarus Earl of Deuon, 76. Anarawd the son of Roderike, 37. he dies, 45.
Anarawd ap Gruffyth ap Rees slain, 196. Armorica, 2. Arnulph the son of
Roger Mountgomery, 151. Lord of Dyuet, 154. rebelled against K. Henry the
first, 157. he departs the land, 159. Arthurs bones found, 238. Arthur Prince
of Wales, 390. Aruon (D) 8. Asser archbishop of Wales, 44. Avanc (D) 21.
Augustine moonke, the Apostle of England, (D) 15.254.
B.
BAldwin archbishop of Canturburie visits Wales, 241. Bardh, Beirdh, (D)
15.191 Beda, 15. Belin ap Elphin, 14. Bernard Newmarch, 148.151. Beumarish
built, 381. Blethyn ap Conuyn, 103. he is slain, 111, Brecheinoc Brechnock (D)
20. spoiled by the Danes, 42.148.277.288. Brochwel Scithroc (D) 15. his
dwelling place, 22. Bryth destroyed Ireland, 13. Brytaine divided between the
sons of Brutus, (D) 1. Brytaines are spoiled of their country by the Saxons,
5. they abhorred the Romish religion, 255. three remnants of them yet remaining
(D) 4. Brytish language now spoken in Wales (D) 4. Brytaine Armorike and the
kings thereof, 2. Buelht (D) 20.277.280. Burgundians whence they came, 39.
C.
CAdelh prince of Southwales, 35. he dies, 44. Cadelh the son of Gruffyth ap
Rees. 201.202. sore wounded by the Flemings, 203. Cadiuor ap Colhoyn, 119.
Cadogan ap Blethyn, 152.155 157. he makes a great feast, 163. charged with his
sons lewdnes, 168. he is slain, 171. his children, 182. Cadwalader goes to
Brytain Armorike, 1. admonished by an angel, 3. goes to Rome and dies, 5.
Cadwalader ap Gruffyth ap Conan he dies, 232. Cadwalhon ap Ievaf, 67.
Cadwalhon ap Meredyth, 71. Cardyffbuilt, 116. taken, 289. Caereneon (D) 12. and
14. the castle built, 205. Caer Gay (D) 9. Caerlheon ar Dhowrdwy or Chester,
27. a catalog of the Earls, 294. Caermardhyn (D) 18. taken, 178. destroyed,
193. the castle builded again, 198. taken again, ibidem. 247. Caernarvon
castle built, 374. Cambria, Cambry, Camberaec (D) 2.3.4. the country divided
into shires and circuits, 395. the good service of the people to the K, of
Englland. 175.235. they are left out of the conclusion of peace, 278. they
offer to be tried by the law, 324. punished extremely, but when they
complain they have no redress, 161.320. abused by ye Kings officers, 350.
Camdhwr, 113. Caradocus lancaruan, 206, Caradoc king of Northwales slain, 20.
Caradoc the son of Rytherch ap Iestyn, 88. Caradoc ap Gruffyth ap Rytherch,
104.113. Caredigion, (D) 17. Carrec Cynnen castle, 319. Carrec Houa castle,
219.241. Castor See Avanc. Celhy Tervawc, 153. Celynnoc vawr destroyed, 65.
Conan Meriadoc, 2. Conan Tindaethwy, 17. Conan Nant Niuer, 32. Conan ap Howel
slain, 74. Conan ap Sitsilht, 88. Conan the son of Iago, 89. Conan Earl of
Richmond received to be Duke of Brytaine, 205. Congen king of Powys, 29.
Conwey, 38. the castle built, 374. Costenin Dhu slain, 65. Crogen castle,
257. Crogens a nickname whence it comes, 258. Cudred king of wests
overcomes the Brytaines* 15. Cnuedha Wledic, (D) 14. his sons give names to
diverse countries in Wales which remain to this day, (D) 14. Cydwely (D) 18.
spoiled, 152 the castle built, 242.272. Cymer, 287. Cynvael castle, 200.
Cynwric ap Rywalhon, 112.
D.
DAniel Archdeacon of Powys, 187. Danes came to England, 20. they bend their
force against Wales, 34. whence they came, 39. they destroy saint David's, 45.
they are murdered, 76. David ap Owen Gwyneth, 221.227. takes his brother
Maelgon, 234. he marries Emme the kings sister, 235. put out of the government
of Wales, 245. taken prisoner by his nephew, 250. comes again, against
Lhewelyn, and being vanquished dies for sorrow, 259. David ap Lhewelyn, 298.
takes his brother prisoner, ibidem. takes the government upon him, 299.
excommunicated, 300. refuses to deliver his brother out of prison, ibidem. he
submits himself to the king, 304. he complains to the pope upon king
Henry, 308. makes the principality of Wales tributarie to the church of
Rome, 309. puts king Henry's army to flight, 310. he dies, 313. David ap
Gruffyth, 319. forsakes his brother, 326.335.350. his answer to the kings
offer, 370. he is taken and put to death, 374. David Fitz Gerald bishop of
Meneuia, 201.237. Denbigh (D) 10. the owners of it sithence the David ap
Gruffyth, 377. given to Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, 377. Dial Rodri, 38.
Dinerth, 45. Dinevowr (D) 6. and 17. the castle won, 269. Donwalhon Prince
of Stratclwyd, 64. Dyffryn Clwyd, (D) 10. Dyganwy (D) 10.262.267.326. parcel
of the possession of ye Earl of Chester, (D) 10. Dyuet (D) 17. destroyed by the
Danes, 65.71. given to Arnulph, 154. then to Iorwerth ap Blethyn, 158. thirdly
to Saer, 159. fourthlie to Gerald, 161.272.
E.
EGbert King of England being the first of the Saxons, 25. he entered into
Wales, 24. he changes the name of Brytaine into England, 25. his wars
against the Danes, 27. he dies, ibidem. his wife hated the Brytaines, and
caused the king to use them hardly, ibidem. Elife ap Madoc, 257. his lands
taken from him saving Crogen, and 7. towneships, ibidem. Edelfled, 44.47.48.
Edgar king of England spoileth Northwales, 61. dies, 64. Edmund K. of England,
51. he is slain, 58. Ednyuet Uachan, 249.306. Edwal Yoorch, 7.9. Edwal Uoel,
46. he is slain, 51. Edwal ap Meyric, 72. slain, 73. Edwal Uachan, the son of
Edwal Uoel slain, 65. Edward the elder, 43. he takes London and Oxford from
his sister, 44. he disinheriteth his sisters daughter, 49. dies, 50. Edward
the Martyr, 64. Edward the Confessor, 92. Edward Earl of Chester, 319
retireth, 321. comes to Wales, 326. goes to the holy land, 328. crowned king
of England, ibidem, he comes to Chester, 333. his offer to the Prince,
364.365. his offer to David, ibidem. he brought al Wales to his subjection,
374. he gives the lands of the Welshmen to the noble men of England, 377.
Edward Caernarvon, 376. takes homage of the freeholders of Wales, 382. Edward
of Woodstoke, 384, Edward of Westminster, 388. Edward of Westminster, 389.
Edward son to K. Richard the third, 390. Edward the sixth, 396. Elizabeth
Princess, 394. Eneon ap Owen ap Howel Dha, 65, he is slain, 66. Eneon ap
Cadiuor, 119. England and Englishmen, 25. driven out of the country of
Senghennyth, 279. they do oppress the Welshmen, 337. Easter not kept by ye
Brytains at the time appointed by the church of Rome, 17.18. Esylht the
daughter and heir of Conan, (D) 16.22.24. Ethelwulphs genelogie, 29. he was
bishop of Winchester, 32 Ethelbald married his mother in law, 32. Evneth ye
son of Bledred, 41.
F.
FAmine in Southwales, 71. Fermael the son of Edwal, 18. Flemings came to
Dyuet, 163. they desire peace, 277.279.
G.
GAlfrid Arthur bishop of Lhanelwy, 203. Gauelford, 25. Geffrey Blyth bishop of
Couentrie and Lichfield, 392. Geffrey Langley, 321. Genelogies esteemed among
all nations, 31. Gerald de Windsore steward of Penbrooke, 154. Gilbert
Strangbow Earl of Strigule, 169.172. Gladys daughter to Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth,
298. Gwaith y dinas newydh, 47. Gwaynyttyd, 113. Gwent (D) 19. spoiled by the
Danes, 42. Gwenwynwyn lord of Powys 250. gets again the castle of Poole,
248. lays siege to the castle of Pain in Eluel 251. discomfited, 252.
detained prisoner by the Counsel 260. released of his oath of obedience to the
king by the pope, 267. Gweythen, 32. Gwyneth See Northwales. Gilbert De
Humfreuile, 125. his heirs, 134. Glamorgan (D) 19. spoiled, 71. won from the
Welshmen, 122 Goths whence they came, 39. Grono ap Owen ap Edwyn, lord of
Tegengl, 172. Grono ap Ednyuet vacha^, 327. Gruffyth ap Madoc slain, 49.
Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht, 90. he is slain, 101. Gruffyth ap Conan
comes to Anglesey, 112. he warreth against Trahaern ap Caradoc, 113. ioineth
with Rees ap Theodor, 114. obteineth the principality of Northwales, 115. he
makes peace with king Henry the first, 174. dies, 190. his statute to
reform the abuses of minstrels, 191. Gruffyth ap Rees ap Theodor, 175. puts
himself in armor against the king, 176. he takes the town, of Caermardhyn,
178. he dies, 190. Gruffyth ap Trahaerne ap Caradoc, 162. Gruffyth Maylor L.
of Bromfield, 242. Gruffyth ap Rees taken by his brother Maelgon, and sent to
prison, 250. set at liberty, 252. he dies, 256. Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn ap
Iorwerth, 280 goes with an army against William Marshall, 282.292. disquieteth
his father, 297. valiant and courageous, 298.307. imprisoned by his brother,
ibidem. great suit to the K. for his inlargment, 301. delivered to the K. and
sent to the tower, where seeking to escape he brake his neck, 307. Gruffyth
lord of Dinas Bran, 293.300.304.321.327. Gurmond (D) 15.6. Gwgan ap Meyric, 34.
H.
HAsting the Dane, 39. Henry the first K. of England, 157. he comes into
Wales, 173. again, 184. he is in danger to be slain, 185. he dies, 188.
Henry the second king of England, 204. he comes to Wales, 206. put in danger
of his life, 207. he makes peace with the lords of Wales, 208. comes to
Southwales, 209. again, 219. he comes to Northwales, 221. lies encamped at
Berwyn, 222. in danger to be slain, ibidem. he goes the Ireland, 230.
returns from Ireland again, 232. forsakes his wife, 239. he dies, 241.
Henry, the third king of England, 276. comes to wales and builds a castle
at Mountgomerie, 280. comes again with an army to Wales, 283. again, 289.
marieth, 293. comes again to Wales, 299. called to appear before the Abbots
of Aberconwy and Cymer, 309. he comes again to Wales, 310. he and the Earl
of Chester come to Wales, 322. comes to Montgomerie and makes peace with the
prince, 326. he dies, 328. Henry Lacy lord of Denbigh and Earl of Lincoln,
377. Henry prince of Wales, 392. Henry Sidney knight of the order, 400. Howel
the brother of Conan Tindaethwy, 22. King of man, 25. Howel Dha prince of
Southwales, 45. prince of al Wales, 52. his laws, 53. he went to Rome, 54, he
dies, 58. Howel ap Ieuaf, 62. uses his brother Meyric cruelly, 63. rules
Northwales, 64. he is slain, 66. Howel ap Edwyn, 88. he is slain, 93. Howel
ap Grono, lord of Stratywy Cydewen and Gwyr, 159. he is traiterouslie slain,
161. Howel ap Ithel lord of Ros and Ryuonioc, 183. Howel ap Owen Gwyneth a
valiant captain, 199. Howel ap Ieuaflord of Arustly, 240. Hubert de Burgh
keeps the castle of Dover, 275. gave the French navy an overthrow, 277.
some of the Barons conspire against him, 283. owner of Montgomerie, 284. his
folly, 285. committed to prison, 288. escapes out of prison, 289. reconciled
to the King, 292. Huganus lord of Westwales, 47. Hugh Lupus Earl of Chester,
151.155. he dies, 157. Hugh de Montgomerie Earl of Salope, 155. he is slain,
156. Hugh Earl of Chester wins Mehenyth, 197. Hugh Lacy, 151.
I.
IAgo ap Edwal, 59.62. Iago ap Edwal, 87. Iestyn ap Gurgant lord of Glamorgan,
119. Ieuaf ap Edwal, 59.60.70. Igmond comes to Anglisey, 41. John king of
England made Knight, goes to Ireland and returns again, 240. lost
Normandy, Aniow, Main and Poytiers, 258. goes to Ireland, 261. goes to
Wales, 264. and again, 265. makes his kingdom tributarie to the Pope, 270.
he destroieth the Marches of Wales, 275. he dies, 276. John le Fleming, 125.
his heirs, 136. John de Cremona a Cardinal, 186. John Scot Earl of Chester,
288.293. John of Monmouth, 290.310. John Peckam Archbishop of Canturburie, 338.
John Uoisye bishop of Excester, 393. John Sutton alias Dudley Earl of Warwike,
397. John Williams L. Williams of Them, 399. Ionaual the son of Meyric, 67.
Iorwerth Drwyndwn, 227. Iorwerth ap Blethyn, 157.158. condemned and cast into
prison, 160. set at liberty, 167. slain cruelly, 170. Iorwerth ap Owen ap
Caradoc lord of Caerlheon upon Usc, 230. wan Caerlheon again, 234. obtained the
kings favor, 236. Joseph of Aremathia, 12. Ithel K. of Gwent, 29. Iuor the
son of Alan, 7. Iuor the son of Ednerth ap Cadogoan, 154.
K.
KEntwine K. of Westsex, 8. Kenulph K. of Wests. 16. he destroieth Wales, 25.
L.
LHanbadarn destroyed by the Danes, 71. Lhanvaes, 293. Loegria Lhoeger, 1.
Lhechryd, 117. Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht, 83.84. Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth, 245. takes
his uncle David prisoner, 250. calls a parliament, 257. marieth Ione the
daughter of King John, 259. makes peace with K. John, 265. released by the
Pope of his oath of allegiance to the K. of England, and commanded to war
against him, 267. he wins Ruthlan and Dyganwy, 270. excommunicated by the
Pope, 271. he wins Shrewesburie, ibidem. goes with an army to Southwales,
273. also to Brechnocke, 277. leads an army to Penbrooke, 279. comes to
the K. at Shrewesburie, 281. destroieth all the marches to Southwales, 287.
enters into England, 288. comes with an army to Brechnocke, ibid. takes
the town of Salop again, 291. concludes peace with K. Henry the third, 292.
calls all the Lords and Barons of Wales together, 297. he dies, 298.
Lhewelyn ap Gruffyth chosen Prince of Wales, 314. divided the principality
between him and his brother Owen, ibidem. entered the Earl of Chestersland,
321. causes the Earl to retire, ibid. destroieth the Erldom of Chester, 326.
makes peace with the K. 326. refuses to come to K. Edwards coronation, 328.
excuses himself to the Archbishops, 329. makes peace with K. Edward, 334. he
is married, 336. his answer to the Archbishop of Canturburie, 340. his answer to
the kings offer, 366. he is slain, 374. Lhywarch ap Owen, 69. Lhywarch ap
Trahaern, 164.169.171. Lhyyn destroyed, 65. Locusts destroy Ireland, 42.
Lumbards whence they came, 39.
M.
MAdoc ap Riryd, 164.166.172. Madoc ap Meredyth ap Blethyn, 210. Madoc ap Owen
Gwyneth, 227. Madoc ap Gruffyth Maylor, 255.293. Madoc coosen to Prince
Lhewelyn, 380. discomfiteth Edmund the kings brother, and H. Lacie Earl of
Lincoln, ibid. taken and sent to prison, 381. Maelgon Gwyneth, 2. Maelgon ap
Rees, 242. escapes out of prison, 243. wins the castle of Strat meyric,
ibid. his inconstancy, 266. dies, 286. Maelgon the son of Maelgon,
287.289.290.308.315.380. Magedawc, 16. Manaw, (D) 14.5. Marie princess of
walls, 393. Mathraual (D) 6. and 11.267. Mawd the empress comes to England,
195. she dies, 240. Meneuia (D) 18. destroyed, 114. spoiled, 154. the sea made
subject to the sea of Canturburie, 160. spoiled, 289. Merdhin or Merlin, 4.
Meredyth ap Owen, 69.71. he dies, 73. Meredyth ap Owen ap Edwyn prince of
Southwales, 103. he is slain, 110. Meredyth ap Blethyn, 157.158 taken by his
brother Iorwerth and sent to the kings prison, 159. he escapes out of prison,
162. Meredyth ap Gruffyth ap Rees lord of Caerdigan and Stratywy, 204.
Meriadoc, 2. Merionyth, (D) 9. Meruyn Urych, 22.24. he is slain, 28. Meyric
the son of Arthpoel, 85. Miles Fitzwater Earl of Hereford, 148. Moon (D) 6.7.
destroyed, 29.65.69.71. Monks and Freers lately received in Wales, 253. Mooren
of cattle in Wales, 69. Morgan of Glamorgan, 380.382. Morganwc, (D) 19. See
Glamorgan. Mont Paladour, 5. Montgomerie, 152.280. Murcasteth, 173.
N.
NIcholas Heath bishop of worcester, 397. Normans whence they came, 39. Tithed
and put to death, 92. they destroy Dyuet, 110. Northwales described, (D) 6.
descended three times to a woman, (D) 13.
O.
OFfa K. of Mercia, 18. his ditch, 19 (D) 5. he drove the welshmen beyond the
ditch, ibid. Oswestrie castle built, 201. the town burnt, 288. Owen ap
Iorwerth traitorouslie slain, 232, Owen ap Meredyth, lord of Cydewen, 325.
Owen Tuver, 390.391. Owen the son of Howel Dha, 58. Owen the son of Dyfnwal,
71. Oliver, De S. John, 125. his heirs, 136. Owen ap Edwyn, 155. he dies,
160. Owen ap Cadogan takes away Geralds wife, 163. flies to Ireland, 165.
pardoned and called home again, 170. submits himself to K. H. 1.174. he
goes with the King to Normandy and is made knight, 175. he is slain, 182.
Owen Gwyneth, 188.193. he burns Caermardhyn, 193. takes the castle of
Moulde, 199. builded a castle at yal, 201. wanne the castle of Basingwerke,
223. makes war upon Owen Cyuelioc, 224. wanne the castle of Ruthlan, and all
Tegengl, ibid. he dies, 225. Owen ap Gruffyth, 314.334.
P.
PAganus de Turberuile, 125 his issue and heirs, 132. Parliament when it first
began, 182. Penant Bachwy, 173. Penbrooke, (D) 18. the castle built, 154. the
same castle built again, 163. Peter le Soore, 125. his heirs, 135. Polydor
Uirgil reprehended. (D) 23. Poole taken by the Archbishop of Canturburie, 248.
the castle overthrown, 288. Powys, (D) 11.35. the partition of it, 211.
Priests forbidden to marry, 162. Prophesies causes of much hurt, 5.
Pwlhgwitie, 113.
Q.
Quo Warranto, 336.
R.
RAdnor destroyed, 71. Rees ap Owen ap Edwyn, 111. he obtains the rule of
Southwales, 112. he is slain, 113. Rees ap Theodor Prince of Southwales, 113.
he joins with Gruffyth ap Conan, 114. overthrew and put to flight the
children of Blethyn ap Convyn, 117. overcomes his enemies at Lhandydoch, 119.
he is slain, ibid. Rees ap Gruffyth called the lord Rees, 204. makes peace
with the King, 208. lays siege to Caermardhin, 210. did his homage to the
King, 220. makes war upon the Earl of Clare, ibid. wanne the castle of
Aberteiui and Cilgerran, 223. came with a power to Powys, 230. came to the K.
at Penbrooke, 231. comes to the court, 235. his feast, 237. he wanne the
castles of S. Clear, Abercorran and Lhanstephan, 242. likewise the castle of
Dineuowr and Lhanhayaden, 243. taken prisoner by his sons, 244. he takes
Caermarthin, Ciun, Radnor, the castle of Pain in Eluel, 247. he dies, 249.
Rees ap Meredyth knight, 378 Reginald de Sully, 125. his heirs, 135. Reginald
Graylord of Ruthyn 377. Richard de Granuile or greenfeeld, 125. his issue, 131.
Richard de Syward, 125. his heirs, 134. Richard Belmersh bishop of London,
sent to be warden of the Marches of wales, 160.164. Richard 1. K. of England,
241. goes to the holy land, 242. wins Cyprus, 243. he is taken prisoner,
243. returns to England, 244. he dies, 253. Richard Marshal Earl of
Penbrooke, 286, 288. in leage with Lhewelyn Prince of wales, 290. he goes to
Ireland and is slain, 291. Richard of Burdeux, 385. Richard Sampson bishop of
Couen, and Lich. 396. Robert Fitzhamon, 119. his Conquest in wales, 124. his
twelve knights, 125. his own portion of Glamorgan, 127. his Petegree and
heirs, 128. Robert S. Quintine, 125. his heirs, 134. Robert Sitsylt, 141. his
issue and descents, 142. Robert de Belesmo Earl of Salop rebelleth against K.
H. 1.157. he forsakes ye land, 159. he is taken and imprisoned, 171. his
cruelty, ibid. Robert Fitzstephen a chief captain in the conquest of
Ireland, 225. Roderike Molwynoc, 14. driven from the west country to
Northwales, 16. Roderike the great, 28. he is slain, 35. Roderike ap Owen
Gwyneth, 237.243. Roger Montgomerie Earl of Salop, 151. he fortified
Montgomerie castle, 152. he is slain, 153. Roger de Berkrolles, 125. his
heirs, 135. Roger Earl of Clare obtains of the king such lands in wales as
he could win, 208. Roger Mortimer right heir to the principality of wales,
314.315.316. Rollo came to France, 37. Rowland Lee Bishop of Couentrie and
Lichfield, 394. Run the son of Meredyth counterfeited by a Scot, 85. Ruthlan
(D) 10. the castle the palace of Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn prince of wales, 100.
fortified by king Henry the second, 207. belonging to the Earl of Chester,
267. Ruthyn (D) 10. the lordship, 378. Rydcors castle built, 153. Rytherch ap
Iestyn rules Southwales, 87. he is slain, 88. Rythmarch Archbishop of S.
David's, 156. Rywalhon ap Convyn, 103. he is slain, 109.
S.
SAyson Saysonaec, (D) 4. Saxons whence they came, 25. they spoil the
Brytaines of their country, 6. their seven kingdoms, 26. Sibertus K. of
Essex, 11. Sigebert K. of Westsex, 16. Simon de Thurnay, 258. Strat Alyn, 356.
Strat Clwyd spoiled, 58. Strat Marchelh, 214, 217. Strat Tywy, 152. Stephen
Constable of Aberteiui, 189. Sulien bishop of S. David's, 110. he forsakes his
bishoprike, 113. he is compelled to take his bishoprike again, 114. he
forsakes his bishoprike again, 116. he dies, 118. Switzers whence they came,
39.
T.
TAlaeth, 35. Taliefyn, (D) 15, 254. Tegyd, (D) 9. Theodor the son of Belin,
16 Theodor Mawr, 66. he is slain, 72. Trahaern ap Caradoc, 112. he is slain,
114. Thurstan abbot of Glastenburie, 116.
V.
VAndals whence they came, 39. Uchdred ap Edwyn ap Grono, 154. Urgeney ap
Sitsylht, 114.
W.
WAllia, wales, (D) 2.3.4. See Cambria. Walter Steward, 97. Walter bishop of
Hereford, 165. Walwern castle, 219. Walweys sepulcher found, 116. Westwales
destroyed, 65. Woolues destroyed in Wales, 61. William Conqueror comes to
England, 107. he overcomes Haroald, and is crowned K. of England, 108. he
enters Wales with an army, 115. he dies, 116. William Rufus, 117. he comes
with an army into Wales, 153.155. he builded Westminster hall, 156. he is
slain, 157. William de Londres, 125. his heirs, 131. William Stradling, 137.
his heirs, ibid. William Brusus traitorous fact, 236.260. hanged, 286. William
Marshall Earl of Penbrooke, 279. to whom his great living in England, Wales
and Ireland descended, 312. William Smith bishop of Lincoln, 391. William
Herbert Earl of Penbrooke, 398.
Y.
YAl, (D) 11. the castle built. 201. the castle taken and burnt, 208. Yarthyr
the son of Mervyn, 60. Ynyr the cosen of Iuor, 7. Ysbys, 152.
FINIS.
1584



Imprinted at London by Rafe Newberie and Henry Denham.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


