A CASKET OF JEWELS and precious PEARLS. Set forth in a FUNERAL Sermon,
Preached in Heckfield Church, at the Burial of a Religious young Gentleman,
Mr. Barnabas Creswell, Son of Mr. Thomas Creswell Esquire, By NATHANAEL
CANNON, Batchelar in Divinity.

August. de Temp. Ser. 49. Dies noster Dominus Christus non facit occasum.
LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Nathanael Newbery, at the Star under St. Peter's
Church in Cornehill, and in Pope's Head Alley. 1625.

To the Worshipful and Christian yoakefellowes, Mr. John Stamp, and Mirs.
Jane Stamp his Wife, Nathaniel Cannon wishes true Comforts, external,
internal, and eternal.
TO you Both, as partners in loss, and lamentation, I tender this Treatise,
and yet I am to speak unto you two, who are but one, apart, concerning this
business.

Sir, he called you Father, by a course of Law, and yet with conscience
declared himself a very child.

For if obedience, reverence, and daily diligence might beget love, then needs
must he be a beloved Son, who was all this to you for conscience sake.

To you, (his dear Mother) he was a right Barnabas; which is by
signification, a Son of Consolation, of which you had no small measure, both
from his life and death.

He honored you, you loved him; he comforted you, you tendered him; and this
was the mutual intercourse betwixt you, until GOD took him from you.

As for my self, who at his Funeral read the Lecture of our mortality,
besides the many bands of Christianity, wherewith all the faithful are linked
and conjoined together, there are other especial motives to make you and yours
near and dear to me.

For first you were a good Instrument under GOD, both to comfort and counsel
me in that calling whereunto the Lord has appointed me.

Secondly, you, and that worthy Gentleman, my Brother, Master Creswell, who is
fallen asleep, were not wanting to me and mine, but made your house unto us,
as the house of Onesiphorus was unto Paul, a place of great refreshing, 2 Timothy
1.16. Now as the Prophet says unto the Sunamyte, who had provided a Chamber, a
Table, a Stool, and a Candlestick for the man of God, 2 Kings 4.13. thou have
been careful for us, but what may I do for thee? so say I, what shall be done
for you by me? Surely, unless it be in the course of my calling, to pray with
you, and for you, and sometimes as God offers occasion to present some part of
my poor labors unto you; lo this is all, I can do nothing else.

Wherefore let me pay my debts unto you after this manner; and the rather, for
that you both, with diverse others have desired, that this Sermon, Preached at
the Funeral of this faithful servant of God, and dear Son of yours might see
the light.

Yet let me not rob you (loving Brother) of your desires in making this your
especial request, that he whom you had imprinted in your heart, might be put
in Print at your instance; which is done by way of Dedication to you, and her
who is a part of you, my dear Sister.

Here shall you take a view of the Saints, and of their condition, who are the
precious Jewels locked up in the Casket of this Scripture.

Doubtless your Child was one of these, a rich Diamond, whose ground being
Christ, must needs have the light both of grace and glory.

Remember therefore, ( Jobs giver and taker) which Text he quoteth in the case
of Children, God gives, says he, and God takes, blessed be the name of the
Lord, Job 1.21.

If you will bless him, he will bless you; our least submission, brings great
consolation.

Yield Sister, yield; and God grant you the true comfort of those branches yet
in being.

God bless them, and make his face to shine upon them, that they may live to
do worthily in Ephrata, and be famous in Bethelem, Ruth 4.11.

Amen, Amen. Subscribed by your loving Brother in the Lord Jesus Christ,
Nathanael Cannon.

Text.
PSALM. 116. Verse 15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his
Saints.
THE whole world in her full age is but a Kalnder^ of years and days, as for
Man, (...), that little world, he brings his years to an end as it were a tale
that is told; Nam vita nostra similes est Rotae, says (Zanchius) upon the
fourth to the Philippians, our life, says he, is like a wheel; modo in
suprema, modo in infima part versamur; sometimes says he, we are rising,
sometimes falling; now we are at the very top and height of our comforts, and
by and by, down again in the depth of our sorrows; at length in the
transition of this whirling wheel, that life that erst was all aloft, shall
with one gasp, lay it self all along: What shall we say to this? the Heavens
do many times grow black and cloudy, and yet clear again; the earth moves
not at all, yet has his being; the Seas, they ebb and flow, but have
returns; yea, the very plants and trees let fall their lease, but keep their
life, for as Job 14. observes, There is hope of a tree though it be cut down,
yet by the scent of water it may bud and sprout forth again; but as for man,
the man of earth, for so he is rightly called, as (Chrysostom) observes in his
12. Hom. in Genesis Homo recte terra apellatur, quia prorsus est terrenus: he may
well be called earth, that is so earthly. Alas, this man, as Job notes, falls
sick and dies; gone he is, with a nunquam rediturus, the eye that has seen
him, shall see him no more; Orimur and morimur, we live, we dye, Sic transit
gloria mundi.

We need not turn our books to prove this point, for in Gods standing
Library, which is the world, there are two Lieger Books, the one liber
Creaturarum, the book of the Creatures, the other, liber Scripturarum, the
book of the Scriptures, in both these volumes it is written, that Death has a
Habeas-Corpus for us all: As for that of the Creatures, it speaks unto us in
the matter of our mortality, as the Prophet David does in the 19. Psalm,
touching Gods glory, One day tells another, and one night certifieth another and
there is neither speech nor language under the heavens, but the voice of Gods
glory is heard amongst them; so verily, one day tells another, and one night
certifies another, and there is neither speech nor language under the heavens,
but the voice of death is heard amongst them. As for that of the Scriptures, we
know that all Scripture is given by inspiration from God, and is profitable to
teach as the Apostle witnesses, 2 Timothy 3.16. Each leaf does read a lecture
to our life, teaching us so to live the life of the righteous, that we may die
the death of the righteous; yet notwithstanding we may say of the Scriptures
as the Apostle does of the stars, 1 Cor. 15. one star, says he, differs
from another in glory; so doubtless, one Scripture may give more light unto a
matter then another, and one Scripture may yield more comfort against death
then another; which being granted, then let me say for this Text, that it does
so prepare, or rather resolve the faithful, so perfume their graves, which
are, their beds, Esaias 57.2. that they knowing themselves to be the Saints and
Servants of God, and the spirit of God bearing witness unto theirs, that they
are his, Romans 8.16. Yea, his dear darlings and precious Jewels, they then
feel that comfort whereof the Apostle speaks, Romans 14.8. whether they live or
dye they are the Lords, and they apprehend their advantage in Christ Jesus, who
as the Apostle says, is advantage to him both in life and death, Phil. 1.21.
This makes the Saints with old Simeon, ready to cry, Lord now let thou thy
servant depart in peace according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy
salvation: Now the Saints have the same object to look upon, and the same
subject to speak on; and must not they then be precious, who shall be heirs
of salvation? Such honor have all the Saints, of whose happy state and
condition, my Text here speaks.

Let me therefore say thus much of this portion of Scripture, that it is very
seasonable for the occasion, and very suitable to his person that here lies
before us, of whom I doubt not to pronounce him the faithful St. and servant
of Jesus Christ; and therefore precious in the sight of God.

Now come we to the work we have in hand, that so we may see how this Text
takes place in point of Coherence with tha rest of the Psalm.

The voice of Thanksgiving does with a spiritual trumpet soundforth the
praise of God in this Psalm, wherein ( David who was the sweet Singer of
Israel) has many notes of thankful remembrance for the manifold deliverances
that GOD had vouchsafed unto him; but more particularly he instances in that
mercy that the Lord showed in keeping him from Saul, who hunted after his life
in the desert of Maon: And in the 3. verse, he tells us that when the sorrows
of death had compassed him round about, then he began to lay hold on God,
assuring himself that neither Saul, nor any of his argents, should either
catch or kill him without that divine permission which did watch over him: and
there fore he will put his life into the hands of God, and upon that very
ground, he will set up his rest: which he does in the 7. verse, Return O my
soul unto thy rest; and because they are unworthy of future blessings, who are
not thankful for former, he therefore comes in the 12. and 13. verses with
his quid retribuam Domino? what shall I render to the Lord for all his mercies?
then the cup of salvation must be mentioned, and the vows must be paid:
making my Text the reason of all this; Because the Lord will take such care,
both of the bodies and souls, of the lives and deaths of his Saints, that
whether he preserve them from the hands of Tyrants, or else suffer them to be
evil entreated or persecuted, that so God may be glorified, this shall be
surely imprinted in the hearts of the faithful, that they are right dear and
precious in the sight of God. And thus much shall suffice for the Analysis of
the whole Psalm, and the particular sense and meaning of the Text it self.

Now it remains, that we take the Text asunder, and note unto you the
diuident Branches thereof:

1 Observe the disp^sition of the Saints themselves, that so their corruption,
may put on incorruption; and that in their earthly peregrination, they may
pass from the Kingdom of Grace, to the Kingdom of Glory.

2 Observe the Acceptance of the Saints with God: to earthly men, they are but
mean, base, and contemptible, in the sight of this world; but in the sight of
God, right dear and precious; and as they value David's life in the 2 of Sam.
18.3. thy life, say they, is worth ten thousand of ours: So indeed, one
faithful Servant of the Lord, is worth ten thousand others in the sight of
God, for they are precious in his sight.

1 Ratione praetij, by reason of the price that was paid to redeem their
souls withal, and that was, the precious blood of Jesus Christ, as the
Apostle witnesses, 1 Pet. 1 Chap. Verse 19. Potens non perdet, says a Father,
quod pecunia emebat, A great man will not loose that which he purchases with
his money, Nec Christus perdet quod sanguine emebat, then may we be sure that
Christ will not loose that which he purchased with his blood: that precious
blood.

2 Ratione tituli, they are precious by reason of their title that God has
given them, they are called the Saints of God. What greater honor can there
be? Crowns and Scepters comes short of this, unless they be within the
compass of this: Herauldry has no such scutchions: Christianity has the best
Coat; the Crest or helm, it is salvation it self, Ephesians. 6.17. and therefore
no marvel though Theodosius the Emperor did prefer his Christianity before
his Crown, Mallem me esse Christianum quam Imperatorem.

3 Ratione proemij, precious they are by reason of the reward laid up for
them; they have precious promises made to them, as Saint Peter says, 2 Pet.
1.4. They labor not in vain, as the men of this world do: Doubtless man,
says David, disquieteth himself in vain, he heapeth up riches, and cannot
tell who shall gather them: But as for the Saints, when they have finished
their course, there is laid up for them a crown of glory; yea, for all them
that love the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 4.8. Lo thus have we
looked upon the Tree and the Branches, the Text and the parts; now let us gather
the fruit thereof, beginning first with our first Branch, which is the
Dissolution of the Saints.

There is a hedge made about Job the just, which does much trouble the Devil,
insomuch that Satan cannot come at him, Job 1.10. nor yet the gates of hell
prevail against him, what is this but Gods providence which watches over the
righteous, and so protects that a hair falls not from their heads without it;
Whereupon it is that Chrysostom cheares up the hearts of the faithful thus,
Si sic custodiantur superflua tua in quanta securitate est anima tua? If says
he, the hairs of thy head and the least part of thy body be so kept, in what
safety is thy soul preserved?

And yet notwithstanding this keeping out of Satan, by the moundes of Gods
mercy, yet we have no quare impedit against death, nothing keeps it out; for
the very Saints who are so dear in the sight of God, even they must dye: the
sentence is irreuocable, all the children of Adam are within compass of it,
for in him, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15. in Adam al men dye. Here then let
us erect our first pillar from this first point.

The very hieres of salvation, amongst others, Proofs of the Doctrine


There is a statute upon the lives of all flesh, statutum est omnibus mori,
says the Apostle, Heb. 9.27. it is appointed for all men to dye and after
comes the judgment: Not only Ahab, who sells himself to commit wickedness,
1 Kin. 22.37. nor Ierobeam who makes Israel sin, 2 Kin. 14.20. nor Demas, who
forsakes God to follow the world, 2 Timothy 4 10. but faithful Abraham,
righteous Noah, just Job, Godly Dorcas, yea Lazarus the friend of Christ shall
fall asleep. We will look somewhat particularly upon some of these instances
and begin with Dorcas, of whom we read, Acts 9. verse 36. and 37. the holy
Ghost reports the place where she dwelt, Ioppa: this woman was by profession,
a Disciple; that is, a follower and scholar of Christ Jesus: then look into
the fruits of her profession, which is all in all: the Text says, that she
was full of good works, she did abound in them, and yet this good and godly
Matron falls sick and dies: Lazarus who is styled the friend of Christ, falls
asleep; a gentle and comfortable expression of our death, John 11.11. Abraham,
whom God will make a Secretary to his intentions, because he is so careful to
bring up his family in the fear of God, Genesis 18.19. even this Father of the
faithful shall fall asleep, and yield up the spirit in manus Domini, into the
hands of that God that gave it, Genesis 25.8. What shall I say of old Isaac, the
Patriarchs, of Moses, Aron, Joshua, Samuel, Daniel, and the rest; all which
are gone down into the grave, notwithstanding their gifts and graces from
above? Let not this seem strange, whereby that any should take upon them to
dispute with God, and to ask, then what is the difference betwixt Saints, and
sons of Belial, seeing all must dye? Perchance the question will arise, as
sometimes the Spouse of Christ is put to it, Cant. 5.9. who when she had
spoken at large, concerning the royal dignities of her Bridegroom, the
question is asked; What is thy beloved more then another beloved, that thou do
so extol him? So it may be said, what privilege have the Saints above others,
seeing they must dye as well as others? The Solution of this proposition will
rather show it self in Reasons, for the Saints dissolution, then in any other
kind of disputations.

The first Reason why they should be dissolved as well as others, is vt
originalis corruption destruatur; namely, that our sinful nature and original
corruption might be destroyed, which cannot be so long as we live upon earth:
we shall have those Reliquia peccati, those remnants of sin about us do
what we can: velis nollis i^^^a fines, habitabit Iebuseus; do what we can,
this Iebusite of corruption will dwell within us: It is an Inmate which will
not be removed, until the house of our earthly body be pulled down, 2 Cor.
5.1.2.

Yea all those (Romish pennances) of scourgings or superstitious inflictions,
gives no purgations for it, no not the strict and restrictiue course of the
faithful who by abstinence endeavor to bring down their bodies, and by prayer
to raise up their souls, yet notwithstanding whilst life lasts, this sinful
nature of ours remains: I deny not, but with a magis and a minus these
blessed means, will take away through Gods blessing the exuberancy of it, as a
father well observes, Subiugari potest, exterminari non potest, and in this case
we may content our selves with the answer that God gives Rebecca in the 25.
of Genes. she begs of God to know what is the reason of that extraordinary
struggling and striving in her body, and God tells her she has two manner of
people within her, for so she had Jacob and Esau, so have we the flesh and
spirit striving within us, Gala. 5.17. and will not give over, till we give
over; and therefore it is expedient for the Saints to dye, that so they might
be rid of this sinful nature, which they shall never be whilst they live.

A second Reason why they should dye as well as others, is, vt fides
exerceatur, that our faith might be exercised in the apprehension and
application of those spiritual and precious promises made over to the
righteous; for the Definition of Faith tells us of a great work that faith has
to do; Faith, says the Apostle, is the substance of things hoped for, and the
evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. Now then that our Faith may at length
have the fruition of those things that it has believed, there shall be an end
of the life of the believer, that so possession may be had of all those
tenants that Faith formerly held: but shall we always believe, and not enjoy
what we have believed? this then must be by the cessation of life; that is, of
this life, that so we may inherit life everlasting, and then our faith
cease, and we possess what has been hoped for.

A third Reason why the Saints should dye, vt perfectio obtineatur, we are in
via, in the way to heaven, but we are not yet in patria, we look for that
house which is not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1.
Now this we cannot have on earth; for this cause the Saints shall dye in the
Lord, which is a blessed thing; for then they rest from their labors, Revel.
14. and then comes our perfection. We are now the Sons of God, says the
Apostle, but it appears not what we shall be, 1 Ioh. 3. our knowledge, love,
and other fruitions being here but in part, 1 Cor. 13. but there we shall know
perfectly, and obtain perfection, when this corruption has put on
incorruption, and not before, 1 Cor. 15. Down therefore must the earthly
Tabernacles of the Saints, before we come to that haven, and heaven, prepared
for us, Math. 24.

These things then thus contracted, let the Doctrine be applied and enlarged in
the Uses of it.

The 1. use of this point, is as a voice to call upon the faithful, that
seeing they must be dissolved, and yet not when, nor where, nor how, is known
unto us; let them be such in their conversation, that they may be ready for
their dissolution; thus Job, the just waits for the day and hour, All the
days of my appointed time, will I wait, until my changing shall come, Job
14.14. and old Jacob makes this his breathing-stoppe: And the 49. of Genesis
he blesses, and blesses his children, and grows fainter and fainter, and
then like a swounding man, who takes something still to revive him; so does
he, O Lord, says he, I have waited for thy salvation; this fetched life in
him as it were, and revived, even the remembrance of salvation: thus the
righteous live as not afraid to dye, as old Pollicarpus tells his tormentors,
according as Eusebius stories it unto us: I am this day, says he, fourscore
years old, and I have hitherto served my God: O blessed age, and time well
spent in the service of God: for, let us not think to dye the death of the
righteous, unless we live the life of the righteous; our conversation then
must be in heaven, Phil. 3. and we must live here in this world, even as the
Fishes do in the Sea; who though they live in the salt and brackish water, yet
they are fresh; So though we live in the midst of a wicked world, yet must
we be fresh and free from the common pollutions of this wicked world: Then
shall we not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, as the ungodly do, for they put
too their whole strength, they draw sins together, and pull them as it were
with cartropes, Esaias. 5.18 Let the Saints make ready for the coming of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and cry with them, Lord Jesus come quickly, Come quickly
Lord Jesus.

The 2. use belonging to this point limits our lamentations; I would not have
you ignorant, says the Apostle, concerning those that fall asleep, that the
sorrow you take be not like theirs that have no hope 1. These. 4.13. no, this
were to show that we preferred earth before heaven, and the comfort and joys
of earth, before heaven. We can tell directly what our means and sollaces are
here on earth, but no eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor tongue can tell
the joys that God has prepared for them that love him 1. Cor. 2.9. Now this
limitation for our mourning is not a prohibition to forbid all mourning, for
not to be moved at all, is to show a hard heart, less tender then the brutish
creatures, for they will bleate, and moan after one another; but it is the
excess of mourning that is condemned, as Bernard observes, Non culpamus
lachrymarum effectum, sed excessum, not the matter so much as the manner is
sometimes to be reproved: and surely when Passion settles, then shall we see
the evil of this violence; and when religion sends arguments after the dead,
as Noah put forth the Dove upon the abatement of the waters, then do we, or
may we find all that labor lost, for they are not lost that are gone before,
Non sunt amissi, sed praemissi: and Jobs restaurations may confirm this unto
us, for of all that the ( Caldeans and Sabeans took from him he had it double
restored, but for his children, just so many as before; and why not children
twofold? because the children were not lost, but at the resurrection should
then appear. With this then I will close up this first point, and so come to
the second.

2 Part of Division, The Saints acceptance; they are precious in the sight of
God. When Samael was persuaded that amongst Ishaies sons the goodliest should
have had acceptance, and so bin King: God tells him, that he looks not as man
does, on the countenance, or person, but on the heart, 1 Samuel 16.7. thence
comes our acceptance with God, and for that God will regard us, and for
nothing else; with him there is no respect of persons, Acts 10. until we come
to fear him, love, and obey him; O then he loves us dearly, then are we
precious in the sight of God. And hence may we gather toward a second point of
Doctrine, teaching us, that the Lords regard toward us is as our hearts are
toward him: if we fear him, love him, and delight in him, then will he
delight in us; we shall be precious and dear to him.

To this the Scriptures do accord, and to begin with that of the 37. Psalm. 37.
Verse, Mark the upright man, and behold the just, the latter end of that man
shall be peace: as who should say, such men are worth the marking. Again, when
God will declare whom he will grace or worship, Honorantes honorabo, they that
honor me, I will honor them, 1 Samuel 2.30. and as for them that despise him,
he regards them not, or as the last translation has it, lightly esteems
them: the Lord regards our lowliness and humility, and will advance the humble
and meek, as the blessed Virgin in her Magnificat, Luke 1.48. He regards the
lowliness of his handmaid: these are the precious people in the sight of God,
so precious, that if any shall hurt or iniure them, it is a battery against God
himself; for so says the Prophet, He that touches you, or hurts you,
touches the apple of Gods own eye, Zach. 2.8. Has not Saul who afterward is
Paul, the question, to the same purpose? Acts 9. Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? as who should say, I feel the stripes, and bear the reproaches done
against them. O that men thought upon this as often as they are thorns in the
sides of Gods servants, as often as they play upon them for their profession!
Now in all these places we see what tender care God takes, how dear they are
to the LORD; but of all places that of the 25. of Matthew 40. where the usage of
his Saints is recited; O come ye blessed of my Father, etc. when I was sick
you did visit me; naked, clothe me, hungry, feed me; O Lord, say they, we
never saw thee thus; in as much as you have done it to one of these little
ones, you have done it to me.

We will stay here my Brethren, and make use of this.

Shall these that are so precious in the sight of God, be other wise in our
eyes? All my delight is in the Saints, says David: and surely it is one of the
marks of the man that shall have place in the holy mount, even to make much of
them that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15. The contrary unto this the Apostle
reproues, Iam. 2. when he would not have us to have the graces of God in
respect of persons; we honor riches, and make an Idol of earthly pomp, but
as for the Saints and Servants of God, we rather expose them to reproach, then
make them near unto us: but because the subject in hand points unto the grave;
I will return unto a Use that shall speak the same language.

Are the righteous the only men with God,

First, we dye not totally, it is but the body that is struck down, the soul
is immortal; which like the Dove, could find no rest for the soale of her
foot, until she returned unto the Arc again, Genesis 8. so verily, there is
no true rest for the soul of man, until it return to that God that infused
it.

Secondly, we dye not perpetually; we shall be put into the dark house for a
time, but there is a day, a blessed day, even the day of the resurrection, and
then comes that conjunction, and reunion of both again; now then death cannot
prevent or alter that marriage day: for as the Apostle says, What shall
separate us from the love of Christ Jesus? shall afflictions, shall
Principalities, shall powers, shall things present or things to come, shall
life or death? no, nothing shall remove us from the lone of Christ Jesus, Romans
8.39.

Thirdly, the sting and poison of death is taken away, (Christ Jesus) like a
triumphant Conqueror, has subdued: Consu^matum est, it is finished, and the
debt paid, and the handwriting that was against us, fastened to his Cross,
Colos. 2.14. now then put it to the question, why shall we fear to dye?

I deny not, but nature has trembles in the very best of us until we overcome
it by grace and divine meditations: we do at death as Moses did with his rod,
who when he saw it turned into a serpent, primo intuitu, he started from it,
but afterward goes near unto it, takes it up, and makes use of it; so we
indeed at the first, until we see death disarmed, start from it, but
afterward finding that Christ has gotten victory over the grave, and that
the sting is gone as the challing shows Hosea 13. then with Moses we draw near
and surrender into the hands of the Lord being but tenants at will; then we
can take the rod and make good use of it as he did. Exodus 9.4.

As for those that fear to dye notwithstanding these comforts, if we should
enter into their reasons they must needs be dreadful, as

First, either they have not tasted of the life to come, and so are loathe to
change this present life; or else they have not dyed aforehand, that is,
considered of death before it came; or else thirdly, they have carried their
bane, evil consciences, about them. We will take view of these reasons by
themselves.

For the first of them, their not tasting of the life to come; indeed their
case is miserable, for they live only in body and cannot say with the Apostle,
I live by Faith in the Son of God, Galat. 2.20. These men must have their
souls beaten out or driven out of them, as we find of the hypocrites estate
in the 27. of Job, What hope has he, says the Text, when God shall beat out
his soul? Indeed such men sing loath to depart; for here was their bliss,
and to be taken from hence, being aliens and strangers from the life of God,
Ephesians. 4. alas, what shall they do. As for those that have not dyed before
hand, it must needs be as terrible to them: how many greets and re-greets
pass betwixt God, and the souls of the faithful? Paul desires to be
dissolved and to be with God, which is best of all, Phil. 2. and the blessed
Apostle tells us, that by the rejoicing that he has in Christ, he dies daily, 1
Cor. 15. He numbers his days, and so, that he may apply his heart unto
wisdom, as David prays, Psalm 90. this spiritual Arithmeticke is a good
knowledge, but the profane and carnal men, desires to meet with no such
reckoning: this not dying aforehand, makes many so bebinde-hand with
repentance; but let Hadrian the Emperor be an example unto them; it is storied
of him, that death coming, and he not expecting, and when the divorce betwixt
the body and soul was to be executed, he cries out, as amazed, O aminula,
vagula, blandula, quae nunc abibis in loca? O my poor soul, whether art thou
going? Does he ask of his hopes then, when the partition was to be made? A
poor soul indeed, for all his Empire: If therefore we would not be
surprised, let us be prepared.

Now last of all, which is not least of all, but rather worst of all, comes
they, who are loath to dye, because they carry their bane about them; and that
is, an evil conscience, this puts them upon the rack, and tortures all parts;
this makes their case like unto the struck Dear, the arrow she has at her
heart, and yet skips up and down, but carries that about her, that will
dispatch her: so is it with an evil conscience, well they may skippe up and
down, but they have that at the heart of them, that will make all
uncomfortable: and no marvel, for a wounded spirit, who can bear? says
Solomon: This gave, as Folydore Virgill observes, King Richard the third, more
wounds in his dream, the night before, then he had the next day in the field:
Well, let us all labor, pray, and endeavor for good consciences, this makes a
continual feast; this sends us with boldness to the throne of grace, Hebr. 4.
In a word, this will make us both in life and death, fit for CHRIST JESUS,
whose we are, and not our own, and therefore ought to glorify God both in
our bodies and souls, which were redeemed with the precious blood of JESUS
CHRIST, through whom we have redemption, even the forgiveness of our sins,
Ephesians. 1.7. And thus much shall suffice to be spoken for our instruction, who
are in our way toward God, now a word or two of him who is already gone to GOD.

The Testimony of him that lived and dyed in the Faith of Christ Jesus.
WE do read of the Patriarchs and others, that after their deaths, they
were embalmed, Genes. 50.2. but this Gentleman embalmed himself alive; I
speak it according to the sense of Solomon, Eccles. 7.1. A good name, says
he, is as a precious ointment; many sweet odours belongs unto it, which time
can neither wash nor waste away; Nam virtus post funera viuit. Thus did this
hopeful young Gentleman follow the tracke of the Elders, who by Faith obtained
a good report, Heb. 11.2. Demetrius like it was with him, of whom Saint John
speaks largely in his third Epistle: Demetrius, says he, has a good report
of all men; yea, and of the truth it self. If any that knew not this person,
would press the reason of his commendation, answer will be made, that if
sincerity in his Re^igion, industry in his Vocation, and affability in
Conversation might give their voices, it will be no sin to say, this was a
gracious youth.

And first for his Religion: He was not with Agrippa, almost a christian, nor
yet with Laodicea lukewarm in his profession, but found in all true tenants of
the faith, worshipping that one and only God, from whence salvation comes to
men.

As for his Vocation, with a diligent hand and faithful heart he went about
it; his gain therein was godliness, which the Apostle says is great gains,
if men be content with that they have, 1 Timoth. 6. Surely he was content for
peace-sake to passeby his profits many times, and to end matters at home, for
the preventing of further inconveniences that might arise in point of law.

If all that were toward the law had the same heart, surely that calling would
have a great part of that blessing which CHRIST pronounces, Beati pacifici,
Blessed are the peacemakers Mat. 5 For surely the law is good and surely
(...), which comes of (...), to distribute, or dare suum cuique, to give to
every one that which is his, had a good ordination: and therefore they shall
do well, who have other men's causes to follow, to remember that one day, their
own cause shall come before the Judge: This young Lawyer did so, being tender
in his conscience, and upright in the causes he undertook.

As for his Conversation, it was such that all that knew him did desire him:
for he had matter, and apprehended things with good judgment, and then the
manner of his converse was so affable as that he found favor wheresoever he
came, which is the blessing promised, Pro. 16. When a man's ways do please the
Lord, he will make his enemies to be his friends: In a word he was to his
dear mother, a right Barnabas; that is, a Son of consolation, for so the
word signifies; he was gratiou, with men, and precious with God, he did live
the life of the righteous, and did dye the death of the righteous; he is gone
before, and we shall follow: In which progress let us end.

FINIS.

